HEAVEN OPENED.

WHEREIN THE COVNSAILE OF GOD CONCERNING man's Salvation is yet more clearly
manifested, so that they that have eyes may come and see the Christian
possessed and crowned in his heavenly Kingdom: Which is the greatest and last
benefit we have by Christ Jesus our Lord.

Come and see.

First, written, and now newly amended and enlarged, by Mr. William Cowper,
Minister of Gods word.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham for Thomas Archer and are to be sold at his
shop in Pope's Head Palace.

1611.

TO THE MOST SACRED, CHRISTIAN, TRVELY CATHOLIC, AND mighty Prince JAMES,
King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc.
SIR, The Apostle S. Paul, that Act. 9. 15.
chosen vessel of God, and his ambassador, sent forth into the world to bring
in the house of Iapheth into the tents of Sem, Genesis 9. 27.
having in his peregrination (undertaken for preaching) from Jerusalem unto
Illyricu, seen Romans 15. 19.
the most pleasant parts of the world, and in an ecstasy transported from earth
into the third heaven, seen also 2 Cor. 12.
the pleasures of Paradise, as one who knew both, not by naked speculation but
experience, gives out his judgment of both, that the most excellent things of
this world Philip. 3. 8.
were but dung, in respect of the Lord Jesus, and that whatsoever pleasure on
earth may delight the eye or ear 1 Cor. ^. 9.
of man, is by infinite degrees inferior to those, which God has prepared for
his children: and therefore passing by both the pleasures of life, and terrors
of death, he fixed his eyes steadfastly upon that prize of the high calling of
Philip. 3. 14.
God; forgetting all other things, he became careful only of this one, so to
run, and fulfill his course with joy, that Act. 20. 24.
he might obtain that crown. This as he had learned 1. Cor. 9. 25.
like a good disciple in the school of Christ, so like a faithful Doctor does
he here deliver it unto others, letting us see, that the only comfort of a
Christian on earth consists in this, to know that his name is written in heaven
in the book of life: which as in this treatise he confirms unto us by the
inseparable commixion of the lincks of the golden chain of salvation,
specially of our calling, with our election, and glorification, so he endeavors
to draw the hearts of all the children of God toward it, as that maine and
only point, wherein true peace and joy is to be found, and without which all
other comforts in the world; yea, Luke. 20. 20
though it were superiority over all the Angels of darkness in hell, and all
the bodies of men on earth shall be Job. 16. 2.
found in the end but miserable comforters.

I may truly say, what I have found in experience, that this the Apostles most
comfortable treatise, to such as can Come and see, shall not only be as the
top of Pisgah Deuteronomy. 34,
to Moses, out of which he saw the promised Canaan, but that also the man
effectually called, shall hear in it, the testimony of the heavenly oracle,
speyking to his heart, as clearly as the Angel did unto Daniel, that he is a
Dan. 9. 13.
man beloved of God, elected an heir of grace and glory. And therefore having
resolved to make common for the use of others, those comfortable meditations,
which it pleased God, out of this excellent treatise to communicate unto me, I
was also after long haesitation emboldned to present them to your Majesty, not
as of mind to bring by them any good unto your Highness, but begging to them
from your sacred name favorable protection. For I humbly acknowledge, that
from so base a mind as mine is, nothing can proceed worthy so great a
Majesty as God has made you, not so much in regard of those famous Kingdoms
over which your Highness stretches out your Scepter, as of those gifts of
government, by which ye rule. Your Highness having received from God cum
Diademate, diuinum oleum, and cum Sceptro oculum. Kingly authority with
Christian wisdom, sacred Majesty with singular meekness, being so evident
in your Highness, that by them the worst sort of your Majesty's subjects have
been wonderfully convinced, the better sort confirmed to fear you as their
King, to love you as their Father: A conquest, above which no greater can be,
Cum amari, coli, diligi, maius sit imperio. And this is it, which has overcome
in me all contrary fears, arising of the conscience of my weakness, that
when your Highness great wisdom, shall perceive in these labors my great
infirmities, yet your Majesty of your rare meekness will favorably censure
them. Even the stars which are obscured in presence of the sun, are
profitable in his absence to give light to the earth, and howsoever any light
that is in these discourses, shall under your Highness eye be indeed but
darkness, yet if with your Highness favor they be allowed to give such
glimmering light as they have unto others, it shall be no small comfort unto me,
and my greatest thankfulness shall be declared in my daily prayers unto the
Lord God for your Majesty, that the name of Jacobs God may defend you from all
evil, and the Lord may send you help out of his Sanctuary in all your need,
according as he has done. Psalm. 20. 1.
O King, beloved of God, hated of none but for Gods sake, Psalm. 21. 1.
keep still your heart in the love of God, and his truth, Rejoice in the
strength of your God; and fear not Psalm. 56. 4.
what flesh can do unto you. Is it not the Lord, who Psalm. 18. 43.
set your Highness on the throne, to be a feeder of his people Israel? Is it
not the Lord who has delivered your Majesty from the contentions of the
people, and secret snares of your cursed enemies? though the Archers Genesis 49.
23.
grieved you, hated you, and shot at you, were not the hands of your arms
strengthened by the hands of the Genesis 49. 25.
mighty God of Jacob? Is it not the almighty, who has blessed your Majesty
with heavenly blessings from above, with blessings of the depth that lies
beneath, with blessings Psalm. 21. 3.
of the breast and womb?

Sir, let his liberal blessings wherewith the Lord your God has prevented
you, be so many obligations binding Psalm. 18. 50
your Highness to honor the Lord, who has honored Genesis 12. 1.
you. Let his fore past manifold deliverances be as so many confirmations, that
if your Majesty rest in him, and Psalm. 68. 20.
not in man, he will still be a buckler unto you. Let Abaddon the King of the
Locusts that Romish usurper rage, Revel. 9. 11.
Unto the Lord belongs the issues of death. Can Balaam curse, where God has
blessed? yea can Satan Numb. 23. 8.
hurt the man, who is hedged by the Lord? Let the Job. 1. 10.
Ambassadors of new Babel, more shameless than Sennacherib 2 Kin. 18.
his Rabsache, rail at good king Ezekiah ruling in Jerusalem, the Lord has
yet a hook for his Esa. 37. 39.
nosethrils, and a bridle for his lips. Do not the eyes of the Lord behold the
whole earth, to show himself strong with them that are strong, and of a
perfect heart 2 Chr. 16. 9.
toward him? Therefore fear not their fear, but sanctify Esa. 8. 12.
the Lord God of hosts, let him be your fear, and he shall be a Sanctuary unto
your Majesty. Count it a part Psalm. 69. 9.
of your high glory, and no small matter of your Majesty's joy, that with Christ
you bear this piece of his cross, Psalm. 21. 7.
that the rebukes of them who rebuke the Lord, are fallen upon you? and trust
still, O King, in the Lord, and in the mercy of the most High, and so your
Majesty shall never fall. Long may your Highness live and reign over us, as
a faithful servant to your God, and a happy King of many blessings to your
people.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject and daily Orator William Cowper, Minister
at Perth.

HEAVEN OPENED.
ROMANS 8. VERSE 1. Now then there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
THE FIRST PART OF THE CHAPTER Containing comfort against the remanents of
sin in the justified man.
My help is in the name of the Lord.
THE whole Scripture is given by divine 2. Tim. 3. 16.
inspiration, and is profitable to teach, improve, correct, and instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect A
commendation of holy Scripture. Ambrose. off. lib. 1. cap. 32. Basil in aliquot
scripturae locos.
unto all good works. It is a banquet of heavenly wisdom, says Ambrose,
Conuiuium sapientiae, singuit libri, singula sunt fercula. It is compared by
Basil to an Apothecaries shop, in which are so many sundry sorts of
medicaments; that every man may have that which is convenient for his disease.
Nullus enim est hominum morbus, cui scriptura praesens remedium non suppeditet:
Cyp. de duplici martirio.
for there is no sickness of man, whereunto the scripture furnishes not a
present remedy. And yet as among the works of God, there is a difference, and
some of them more Some books of holy Scripture meeter for us, then others are
August. de temp. s^r. 4^.
clearly then others declares the glory of God, so it is also among his holy
writs, they breathe all out one truth by a most sweet harmony, diuinae enim
lectiones ita sibi connectuntur, tanquam vna sit lectio, quia omnes ex vno ore
precedunt: yet ye shall ^inde that in some of them the Lord comes near unto
us, as it were, with the face of a man, talking familiarly unto us; in others
again he mounts high above us, as it were with the wings of an Eagle. And the
Lord has le^t it free, to delight our selves most in those places of holy
Scripture, wherein for our estate we have most edification, and to seek in
this Apothecarie shop of that sweet Sam^ritan the Lord Jesus, pharmaca morbo
nostro conuenientia, such medicines as are meet for our malady.

Among all the books of the old Testament, most frequent Why among the
Epistles this to the Romans is first. Ierom. Epist. ad Paulm.
testimonies are brought by our blessed Savior and his holy Apostles, out of
the book of the Psalms* Jerome called it a treasury of all learning: And
among all the Epistles of the Apostles, no marvel this to the Romans have
the first place, not that it was first written, but because above the rest, it
contains a most perfect compend of our Christian faith. And this middle
Chapter thereof has in it an Abridgement of all these comforts and
instructions, (one excepted) which otherwise are dispersed throughout the whole
Epistle, and is (so to call it) a pleasant knot of the garden, and Paradise of
God, and therefore shall it not be unprofitable for us, by Gods grace, to
delight our selves for a while in it.

As for the connection of this Chapter with the former, Two parts of this
Chapter, the first contains comfort against sin: The second, comfort against
the cross.
we are to know that it is a conclusion of the foregoing Treatise of
Justification. Wherein the Apostle summarily collects the excellent state of a
Christian, justified by faith in Christ Jesus* declaring it to be such, that
there is no condemnation to him, that nothing, were it never so evil is able
to hurt him, yea by the contrary, that all things work for the best unto him.
And because there are only two evils which grieve us in this life, to wit,
sin that remains in us: and affliction that follows us in the following of
Christ. Against both these the Apostle furnishes the justified man with strong
consolations. Comforts against the remanents of sin, we have from the 1.
verse to the 18. Comforts against our afflictions, we have from the midst of
the 18. verse, to the 31.

That this is the very purpose and order of the Apostle, is This order of the
Apostle is manifest out of his own conclusion.
evident out of his own conclusion, set down from the 31. verse, to the end:
wherein he draws all that he has spoken in this Chapter to a short sum,
containing the glorious triumph of a Christian over all his enemies. The
triumph is first set down generally, verse 31. What shall we then say Romans 8.
31.
to these things, if God be with us, who can be against us? etc. This general
incontinent he parts in two, there is (says he) but two things may hurt us,
either Sin, or Affliction. As to Sin, he triumphs against it, verse 33. and
34. Who shall verse. 33. 34.
lay any thing to the charge of God his chosen? it is God that justifies, who
shall condemn? It is Christ, who is dead, or rather, who is risen again, who
is also at the right hand of God, and makes request for us. As to Affliction,
he triumphs against it, from the 35 to the end, Who shall separate us from
ver. 35.
the love of Christ? shall tribulation, anguish, or persecution? shall famine,
nakedness, or peril? yea, shall death do it? or that which is much more,
shall Angels, principalities, or powers do it? No, In all these things we are
more then Conquerours, through him that loved us. Thus does the Apostle like a
faithful steward in the house of God, take by the hand the weary sons and
daughters of the living God, that he may lead us into the Lords winesellers,
there to refresh and stay us with the slagons of his Wine, to comfort us with
his Cant. 2. 4.
Apples, to strengthen us with his hid Manna, and to make us Cant. 5. 1.
merry with that Milk and Honey which our immortal husband Jesus Christ,
has provided for us, to sustain us, that we saint not through our manifold
tentations that compass us in this barren wilderness.

We come then to the first part of the Chapter: wherein Subdiuision of the
first part.
the Apostle keeps this order First, he sets down a general proposition of
comfort, belonging to the justified man. Secondly, he subioynes a confirmation
thereof. Thirdly, he explanes his reason of confirmation: and fourthly, applies
it; first by commination of them who walk after the flesh: secondly, by
consolation of the godly against the remanents of the flesh: thirdly, by
exhortation of both not to walk after the flesh. In the proposition again set
down, Verse 1. first, he points at the comfort; Now then there is no 1
Proposition.
condemnation: secondly, he sets down a limitation, restrayning this comfort;
to them who are in Christ: thirdly, he subioynes a clearer declaration of
those persons who are in Christ, to wit, they walk not after the flesh, but
after the spirit.

Verse 1. [ Now then.] This is a relative to his former discourse, Coherence of
this Chapter with the former.
and is (as I have said) a Conclusion, inferred upon that which goes before.
Seeing we are justified by Faith in Jesus Christ, and are now no more under the
Law, but under Grace; seeing we are buried with Christ by Baptism into his
death, that like as he was raised from the dead by the glory of his Father, so
we also should walk in newness of life, having received that spirit of
Christ, whereby we fight against the Law of sin in our members, which
rebelleth against the Law of our mind: seeing it is so, we may be sure that
the remanent power of sin in us, shall never be able to condemn us.

We see then that these words contain the Apostles glorying The Apostles
former lamentation turned into a triumph.
against the remanents of sin, the sense whereof, in the end of the last
Chapter made him burst out into a pitiful lamentation, and cry; O miserable
man, who will deliver me from the body of this death? but now considering the
certainty of his deliverance by Jesus Christ, he rejoices and triumphs.
Wherein for our first lesson, we mark the diversity of dispositions, to which
the Children of God are subject in this life sometime so full of comfort that
they can not contain themselves, but must needs break forth into glorious
reioycings: at other times so far dejected in mind that their joy is turned
into mourning; and this arises in them from the variable change of their sight
and feeling. The Disciples on mount Tabor, seeing the bright shining glory of
Christ were ravished with joy, but incontinent Math. 17. 2.
when the cloud ouershadowes them, they become afraid. If the Lord let us feel
his mercies, we are alive, but if he hide his face, and set our sins in
order before us, we are Psalm. 50. 21.
sore troubled. As the troubles we have in this life are not without comforts;
Blessed be God the Father of our Lord 2. Cor. 1. 3.
Jesus, the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, who comforts 1. Pet. 1.
3.
us in all our tribulation: so our joy, says Saint Peter, is not without
heaviness, the one arising of the knowledge of that undeserved inheritance
reserved for us in heaven: the other of our manifold tentations, to which we
are subject here upon earth; it is these vicissitudes and changes which wrought
in David such different dispositions, as appears in him, in the Book of the
Psalms, and which all the godly may by experience find in themselves.
Pascimur Bernard.
hic and patimur: for here we are so nourished with the comforts of God, that
we are nurtred with his crosses. It is the Lords dispensation, and we are to
reverence it, resting assured that the peace and joy which once the Lord has
given us may be interrupted, but can never utterly be taken from us: the Lord
who will not suffer the rod of the wicked for ever Psalm. 125. 3.
to lie upon the back of the righteous, least they put out their hand to
wickedness, will far less suffer his own terrors continually to oppress
our consciences, least we faint and despair: Hose. 6. 2.
though he wound us, he will bind us up again, after two days he will revive
us, and we shall live in his sight; Weeping may abide in the Evening, but joy
shall come in the Morning. The chosen vessel of God shall not always lament,
and cry woe is me, sometime the Lord will put a song of thanksgiving into his
mouth, and make him to rejoice: thus, de aduersis and Chrisost. in Mat. ^om.
prosperis admirabili virtute vitam Sanctorum contexuit Deus. The life of a
Christian may be compared to a web, so meruailously mixed and wouen of
comfort and trouble, by The life of a Christian is a mixed web, wrought of
trouble and comfort.
the hand of God, that the long thread thereof, reaching from the day of our
birth to the day of our death, are all of trouble, but the weft interiected
with manifold comforts. And this have we marked upon the coherence of the
beginning of this Chapter, with the end of the former.

Now in these words it is to be observed, the Apostle says Papist wrongfully
collect here, that there is no sin, or damnable act in them who are in Christ.
not, there is no sin in them who are in Christ; but he says, there is no
condemnation to them: he has confessed before that he did the evil which he
would not, and that he saw a law in his members rebelling against the law of
his mind, but now he rejoices in Christ, that sin in him is not able to
condemn him. It is then a false exposition of these words, which is made by
Caietane and Aquinas: Nihil Aquinas, Caietane, on this place.
est damnabile in illis qui sunt in Christo, nullus actus quo mereamur damnari:
that in them who are in Christ there is nothing worthy to be damned, no act
that merits damnation: for the Apostle condemns these motions of sin, which
he found in himself, as evil and repugnant to the Law of God: and if the holy
Apostle was not ashamed to confess this of himself, what blind presumption
is this in them to exempt themselves, or others from such motions, as are
worthy to be damned? we shall still confess our guiltiness, there remains in
us of our own which the Lord might condemn, if he would enter into judgment
with us, and shall so much the more praise his mercy, who has delivered us
from condemnation: and further comfort then this the Apostles words do not
afford unto us, (...). There is no judgment, no sentence to be given against
them who are in Christ. Surely our righteousness in this life, consists rather
in the remission of sins, then in the perfection of virtue. Ne quis sibi,
quasi innocens placeat, cum Cyprian orat. dom.
innocens nemo sit, and se ext^ll^ndo plus percat, instruitur and docetur,
peccare se quotidie, dum quotidie pro peccatis iubetur orare: that no man
(says Cyprian) should flatter himself as though he were innocent, when as
indeed no man is innocent, and so by extolling himself should perish: so much
the more he is instructed and taught that he sins daily, while as every day
he is commanded to pray for remission of sins; but this error we shall God
willing further improve hereafter.

In the mean time for our comfort let us consider, that Reasons why the Lord
suffers sin to remain in the justified man. Aug. in Joan. tract. 41.
albeit the Lord, when he justified us, might have utterly destroyed the life
of this sinning sin in us, yet for weighty causes has he suffered some life
thereof to abide in us for a time: the first is, for the exercise of our faith,
Peccata quorum reatum Soluit Deus, ne post hanc vitam obsint, manner tamen
voluit ad certamen fidei; these sins (says Augustine) 1 For the exercise of
our Faith. 2. Tim. 2. 5.
the guiltiness whereof God has loosed, that they should not hurt us in the
life to come, he will have to remain for the exercise of our faith. No man is
crowned, except he strive as he ought, and therefore the Lord who has prepared
for us a Crown, and has put upon us his complete armor, has also suffered
some enemies to remain, against whom we may fight, for the trial of our
faith, patience and perseverance, even as the Cananites were left in the Land,
that the Lord by them might prove the Israelits, whether or not, they would
keep the way of the Lord to walk in it.

Secondly, some life of sin is left in us for our instruction, that we may
know the better how far we are obliged 2 For our instruction, that we may
know what benefit we have by Christ.
to Gods mercy, and how excellent is that deliverance which we have by Jesus
Christ. Nulla quidem est condemnatio his qui sunt in Christo, tamen ad
humiliandos nos peccatu^ adhuc patitur viuere in nobis, and grauiter nos
affligere, vt Bernard.
sentiamus quid gratia nobis praestet, and semper ad illius auxilium
recurramus. It is true indeed (says Bernard) that there is no condemnation to
them who are in Christ, yet for our humiliation the Lord suffers sin to live
in us, and oftentimes afflict us, that we may know the benefit we have by
Grace, and make our recourse for help unto it continually. And indeed, except
by experience we felt how powerful sin is of it self to overrule us, we
could never have known that vile bondage and servitude of sin, under which
we lay by nature, nor that excellent Grace of Christ, by which we have gotten
deliverance. And therefore so often as we are troubled with our inhabitant
corruption, we are to consider that if the remanents of the old man breed in us
such strong and restless tentations, how would it tyrannize over us if it were
living in the full vigor and strength thereof? that so we may praise and
magnify that saving Grace of the Lord Jesus, which has freed us from so
intolerable a tyranny.

Thirdly, the Lord has done this for his own greater 3 For the greater glory
of God, and Satan's greater confusion.
glory, like unto those Victors in battle, who albeit they may, yet will not
put all their enemies to the edge of the sword: some of them they take
Captives, and reserues for a while alive against the day of triumph, to be put
then to death, to their greater shame, and the greater honor of their Josh. 10.
23.
Conquerors. When Joshua had discomfited those five Kings who made war
against Gibeon, he would not slay them in the battle, but enclosed them in a
Cave, that the battle being ended he might put them to death in sight of all
his people: and then for their further confirmation, he caused his Captains
and chief men of war, to tread upon the necks of those Kings, to assure them
that after the same manner the Lord should subdue all the rest of their enemies
under them. And so our Captain and mighty conqueror, the Lord Jesus, has by
himself obtained unto us victory over all our enemies, those Kings which
besieged Gibeon are turned to slight, those inordinate affections, which held
us Captives before, are now by his power captiued of us, they are closed up
within us (as in a Cave) where they remain with some life, but restrained of
their former liberty and power: and we rest assured, that when the battle
shall be finished, our Lord Jesus shall altogether spoil them of their life:
The God of peace shall shortly tread Satan under Romans 16. 20.
our feet. Then Goliath being overcome, his Army of the Philistines shall
fly, and no inordinate desire shall be left within us. Thus we see how the
Lord permits his enemy to live and will not (fully) torment him before the
time: it is not because he wants power to subdue him, sed vt ^o magis Ciril.
Catech. 8.
confundatur, but that so much the more he may confound him. When as all the
warriors of God, as well those who are to come in the last age of the world,
as those who were in the forefront of the battle, have foughten against him,
and overcome him, then shall the Lo^d Jesus put all his 1. Cor. 15. 25.
enemies under his feet. Yea, even now in the very time of the conflict is
Satan wonderfully confounded in this, that How Satan is daily confounded in
the godly.
notwithstanding the Serpent keep his sting, yet there is no deadly power in
it. This uncircumcised Goliath has that same sword in his hand by which he has
slain many one, the Lord permits him also to strike the Christian man
therewith, but he sees himself, it is in vain. O how does he return ashamed
and confounded, when having gotten leave to shoot out his sting, and to strike
with his accustomed sword (of sin) those whom he hates unto death, he
perceiues that for all he can do, there remains in them a seed of life which
cannot be destroyed?

But that the greatness of this benefit which we have Christians are not
exempted from the condemnatory sentence of men.
by Jesus Christ, may the better appear, let us see what a condemnation this
is, from which we are delivered. In the Scriptures there is ascribed to man a
judging, by which he absolueth or condemns; there is also ascribed to God a
judging, by which he absolueth or condemns. As for man's condemnation* we are
not exempted from it. Daniel condemned for a Rebel: Joseph condemned for an
Adulterer: Io^ condemned of his friends for an Hypocrit: our Savior condemned
for an Enemy to C^sar: his Disciples condemned and judged worthy of stripes,
stand as so many examples to confirm us, that we faint not when we are
condemned of men: yea, with the Apostle we must learn to pass little for man's
judgment, and strive in a good conscience to be approved of God: for sure the
Lord will not pervert judgment, it is far from the Judge of all the world to
do unrighteously: he will at the last plead the cause of his Servants, and
bring their righteousness to light.

This condemnation then from which we are delivered, But from the condemnatory
sentence of God.
is the sentence of God th righteous Judge, by which finding man guilty of
sin, for sin, he adiudgeth him unto eternal damnation: from this all they,
who are in Christ are delivered: He that believes in him who sent John. 5. 24.
me has everlasting* life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has
passed from death to life. In this condemnation Three sundry times the Lord
keeps against the wicked in the process of their condemnation. Psalm. 50. 5.
the Lord proceeds at three sundry dyats against the wicked. First, he
condemns them in the Court of Conscience. Next, in the day of their
particular judgment. Thirdly, in the day of general Judgment. First, (I say)
the Lord holds a Justice Court against the wicked in his own Conscience: For
the Lord judges the righteous, and him that contemn^th God every day. After 1
The first is kept against them in the Justice Court of their own Conscience.
sin committed by him, there arises in his Conscience accusing thoughts, and
there is a sentence within him, given out against him. The Apostle speaks it
of Heretics, one sort of wicked men; and is it true in them all, they sin,
being damned of their own selves, (...), by themselves Judgment is given out
against themselves: which sentence albeit every wicked man do not mark, the
voice of their disordered affections sometime being so loud, that they hear
not the condemnatorie voice of their Conscience, so clearly as it is
pronounced, yet do they hear as much, as makes them inexcusable, and breeds
in them a certain fear and terror, which is but a forerunner of a more
fearful judgment to come, which howsoever in time of their security they
labor to smoother, and quench by external delights, yet at the length
affection shall be silenced, and Conscience shall pronounce sentence against
them with so shrill a voice that their deafest care shall hear it. This, I
have marked, that we may learn not to esteem lightly the Judgment of our
Conscience, but that so often as we are condemned by it, we may make our refuge
to the throne of Grace to seek mercy; For if Conscience condemn 1. Ioh. 3.
20.
us, God is greater then the Conscience, and will much more condemn us.
Ascendat itaque homo tribunal mentis suae, Aug. hom. 50
si timet illud, meminerit, quod oportet eum, ante tribunal Christi exhiberi.
Let therefore a man (says Augustine) go up to the tribunal of his own mind
(in time) if he fear it, let him remember that he must be presented before a
greater tribunal.

The second time of judgment, which the Lord keeps 2 The second is kept
against them in the hour of death.
against the wicked, is in the hour of death: wherein the Lord does not only
repeat their former sentence of condemnation, and that in a more fearful and
judicial manner, but proceeds also to execution; adiudging their bodies
(until the day of last judgment) to the prison of the grave, to underly that
curse pronounced on man for his Apostasy, and condemning their spirits to be
banished from the presence of God, and cast into utter darkness. Let not
therefore the wicked man nourish himself in sin, with a vain conceit of the
delay of judgment: wherefore will thou put far from thee the evil day?
what, suppose the day of general judgment were not to come for many years,
is not the day of thy particular judgment at hand, unto which thou shall be
drawn suddenly, and perforce, in the midst of thy deceiving imaginations thou
shall be taken away in an hour wherein thou thought not to dye, more miserable
than that rich glutton, who having stored his head with false conclusions,
dreaming of many days to come, when he had not one, was that same day taken
away to judgment? And this shall move us the more, if we do remember, that
such as we are in the day of death, such shall we be found in the day of
judgment. In quo enim quemque Aug. epist. ad Hesych.
inuenerit suus nouissimus dies, in hoc cum comprehendet mundinouissimus dies,
quia qualis in die isto quisque moritur, talis in die illo iudicabitur; and
every man in the last day shall be judged to be such as he is when he dies. It
would waken us all more carefully to think upon our end, that so we might
prepare our selves for this second dyat of judgment.

But the third dyat of judgment shall be most fearful, 3 The third dyat
shall be kept against them in the day of general judgment.
when all the wicked being gathered together in one shall be condemned in that
high and supreme court of justice, which the Lord shall hold upon all that
ever took* life; then shall the full measure of the wrath of God be powered upon
all those who are not in Christ Jesus, both in soul and body they shall be
punished with everlasting perdition. This judgment shall be most equitable:
for when that Ancient of days, shall sit down upon his white throne, before
whose face heaven and earth shall flee away, and Dan. 12. 6.
when the Sea, and the Earth, has rendered up their dead, then the books shall
be opened, according to which he shall Revel. 10. 8.
proceed unto judgment. And the books are two: the This judgment shall
proceed, by the books of Law, and Conscience.
book of the law, which showed to a man what he should do; and the book of
Conscience, which showed him what he has done; by those shall the wicked man
be judged, and he shall not be able to make exception against any of them:
against the book of the law, he shall be able to speak nothing: for the
Commandments of the Lord are Psalm. 19. 9.
pure, and righteous altogether. And as for the book of conscience, thou can
not deny it, the Lord shall not judge thee by another man's conscience, but by
thine own; that book thou have had it always in thine own keeping, who then
could falsify it? neither is any thing written in it of things thou have done,
but that which thine own hand has written, how then can thou make any
exception against it?

Thus the books being opened, the judgment shall How the wicked shall be
convicted by the book of the Law.
proceed in this manner. The Law shall plead for transgression of her
precepts, requiring that the wicked may be put to death, for their most
unreasonable disobedience, her commandments for number being but ten, and so
not burdenable to the memory; for understanding, plain, written in the heart
of every man; ^or equity not contradictable: for the Law craves nothing of
man, but that which by the holiness of his nature, received by Creation, he
was able to perform; neither does the law command any thing profitable to God,
who gave it, but unto man who received it. And for holiness, every precept of
the law, when God proclaimed it on mount Sinai, was assisted with a thousand of
his Saints, as witnesses of the holiness thereof: all these circumstances do
aggrauate the weight of that judgment which the law shall give out against the
transgressors thereof. Then from the Law judgment shall proceed How they shall
be convicted by the book of conscience.
to Conscience; and Conscience shall witness against them of their
transgressions against every precept of the law; wherein they shall be so
clearly convinced, that their particular sins with the circumstances
thereof, time, and place, though now they have cast them behind their backs,
shall then be set in order before them; and so justly every manner of way shall
judgment go out against them. Eliphaz spoke it faslie to Job, thy own mouth
and not I Job. 15. 6.
condemns thee; but most justly shall the ruler of the world lay it upon the
wicked, out of thy own mouth I judge thee, Luke. 19. 22.
O thou evil and unfaithful servant, the voice of thine own conscience, and
no other shall condemn thee

And as this condemnation will be most righteous, so This judgment shall also
be most terrible.
shall it be also most fearful, not only in regard of the manner of the
Lords proceeding in that last judgment, but chiefly in regard of that
irreuocable sentence of damnation, Exodus 19. 16.
which shall be executed without delay. The Law Moses trembled for fear at the
giving of the law, what will the wicked do at the execution thereof?
was given with Thunders and Lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount,
with an exceeding loud sound of the Trumpet, so that all the people were
afraid; yea so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I fear and quake. The
laws of mighty Monarchs are executed with greater terror* then they are
proclaimed; what then shall we look for, when the God of glory shall appear,
to judge the world according to his law? the Heavens shall pass away with a
Revel. 6. 14.
noise, the Elements shall melt with heat, the Earth with the works which are
therein shall be burnt up, the Archangell shall blow a Trumpet, at the voice
whereof the dead shall rise. If Moses the servant of the Lord, quaked to hear
the first Trumpet, how shall the wicked, condemned in their own conscience
tremble, and quake to hear the second? Then shall the Kings of the Earth, and
the great men, and the Reu. 6. 15.
rich m^n, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, hide themselves in
the Dens, and among the rocks of the Mountains: (for what strength is there
in man, who is but stubble, to stand before a consuming fire?) and or ever
their doom be given out, they shall cry Mountains and Rocks fall upon us,
and hide us from the presence of him that sits on the Throne: but when they
shall hear that fearful sentence, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared Mat. 25. 41.
for the Devil and his Angels; O how shall the terror thereof confound their
spirits, and press them down to the bottom of hell! O fearful sentence! (
depart from me) what shall the creature do, when the Creator in his wrath
commands it to depart, and by his power banishes it from his presence? O man
will thou consider in time, who shall receive Remembrance of this last
judgment, is a preservative against sin.
thee when God casts thee out from his face? or who shall pity and be able to
comfort thee, when God shall persecute thee with his wrath? assure thy self
every creature shall refuse her comfort to thee, if a drop of cold water might
be a relief unto thee thou shall not get it. Happy therefore are they who in
time resolve themselves with Peter, Lord whither away shall we go from thee,
thou have Math. 10.
the words of eternal life? For they who do now go a whoring from the Lord,
wandering after lying vanities, shall in that day receive this for a recompense
of their error, Go to the Gods whom ye have served. Your whole life was but a
Iud. 10. 14. Math. 25. 41.
turning back from me, now therefore depart from me, and whither? into fire:
and what fire? everlasting fire: and with whom? with the Devil and his Angels:
thou have forsaken me, thou have followed them, go thy way with them, a
companion of their torment. O fearful sentence! Quae Augustine.
cum ita sint been nobis^um ag^r^tur, si i^m nunc sic nos paeniteret super
malis nostris, q^om^do tunc sine vllo remedio paenitebit. It were good
therefore, says Augustine, if now all men could so repent of their sins, as
it is certain in that day they shall repent without any remedy, for then the
wicked will shed tears abundantly, but they shall be fruitless.

And if all this cannot waken thee to go to the Lord The day before the last
judgment Mercy shall be offered, but none after it.
Jesus upon the feet of faith and repentance, that in him thou may be
delivered from this fearful damnation, yet remember that seeing this
judgment is supreme and the last, from which will be no recalling, most
foolish art thou, if in time thou do not foresee and provide, how thou may
stand in it. Now if thy conscience condemn thee, thou may get if thou seek
absolution in Christ, but in that day if the Lord condemn thee, thou shall
never be absolved; the day before the Trumpet sound, mercy shall be preached to
the penitent and believers by the Gospel, but from the time that once the
sentence is given out, there shall never be more offering of mercy; the door
shall be closed, though the wicked cry for mercy, and with Esau seek the
blessing with many tears, yet shall they never find it.

Of all this now it is evident, what an excellent benefit By Christ we have
deliverance from this threefold condemnation.
we have by Jesus Christ, in that we are delivered from this threefold
condemnation. For first, being justified by faith, we have peace with God in
our consciences, that holy spirit of adoption testifying unto us that our
sins are forgiven us: whereof arises in our heart an unspeakable and glorious
joy, which joy notwithstanding cannot be full nor perfect until the former
sentence of our absolution be also pronounced, in the other two judgments,
that in the hour of death we hear that joyful sentence, Come to me thou
Mat. 25. 21.
faithful servant, etc. This night thou shall be with me in paradise. Mark.
23. 43. Math. 25. 34.
Come, and inherit the kingdom prepared for you. Till then our peace is not
always without perturbation, our joy Yet our peace and joy are not perfect in
this life, and why.
not without heaviness, nor our confidence without fear; yea in our best
estate we live under expectation of a better. For the judgment of conscience,
suppose it be divine, yet it is not supreme nor absolutely perfect, because the
light we have to inform conscience is but in part. If thy conscience be evil
and accuse thee, it cannot accuse thee of all the evil which is in thee, for,
if our conscience condemn us, 1. John 3. 20.
God is greater then our conscience, and will much more condemn. Deus scit in
nobis qu^d ipsi nes(...)s. God knows Aug. in Joan. tract. 42.
that in us which we know not our selves. And if thy conscience be good, and
excuse thee, yet can it not bear record of all the good which God by the
Spirit of Grace has wrought in thee. And therefore for our comfort may we
turn that sentence, if our conscience excuse us, God is greater then our
conscience, and will much more excuse us. And hereof it comes, that our
conscience can neither have perfect nor perpetual rest in this life, because
(as is said) it depends and looks always for that supreme and absolutory
sentence of the highest Iudicator: yet so much assurance have we, and that
upon most certain grounds, (whereof we will speak God willing hereafter) as
makes us in our greatest tribulations to rejoice, under the hope of the glory
of God.

And herein has the Lord magnified his marvelous mercyes toward us, in that
he has not only set us free A great comfort, that the Christian knows before
hand the sentence to be pronounced upon him.
from condemnation, but has also forewarned us, before we come to judgment,
that we shall not be condemned. Yea, so tender a regard has the Lord of us,
that in his last and supreme Court, sentence of absolution shall first be
pronounced upon his children, before that sentence of condemnation be given out
against the reprobate, that the Godly finding themselves in surety, should not
be discouraged to hear the fearful reiection of the wicked Let us not
therefore be afraid, when so it shall please the Lord to remove us out of this
earthly Tabernacle, seeing that before ever we go, we know our sentence.
Pharaoh his Butler was not afraid Genesis 40 13.
to go before his Judge, because Joseph foretold him that he should be
restored to his office; and may not we with greater boldness go before our
King, seeing we are forewarned that he will restore us unto a more happy
estate, then that which we lost in Adam?

This we have spoken of the glorious deliverance which But how glorious this
deliverance ^s, we shall best know when we shall be set on mount Sion.
the justified man has in Jesus Christ: our best knowledge is but in a part,
and we are not able to speak of these mercies of our God according to their
excellency, The Lord is able to do unto us above all that we can ask or
think: The Christian may look for much more to be given him through Christ,
then any thing that ever he heard, or has conceived in his own mind. When
Lot was compelled to Genesis 14.
go out of Sodom by the Angels (he considered not, how merciful the Lord was
unto him) and therefore lingered, and prolonged the time, but being thrust out
of Sodom by the Angel, and set upon the mountain which the Lord had assigned
to him for a place of refuge unto him, then no doubt considering the greatness
of that judgment which the Lord had executed upon Sodom, the smoke whereof we
may well think he saw with Abraham the next morn, mounting up like the smoke
of a Furnace, then no doubt, he was moved in his heart to magnify the Lords
mercy toward him: and if in Zoar, where he was still in fear, he
acknowledged that his life had been precious in their eyes who were sent to
deliver him, much more may we think he was thankful (at the first) on the
mountain, when he saw their fearful confusion, and his marvelous
preservation. It is even so with us, we are yet in Sodom, which shortly will
be burnt up with fire, the Lord does daily send his Angels to us, warning us to
escape for our life, but alas, we prolong the time, we delay to turn to the
Lord, loath we are to go out of Sodom, and all because we know not (with the
Apostle) the terror of that day, but surely when 2, Cor. 5. Reave.. 11.
the Lord shall set us on mount Sion, among those thousands which follow the
Lamb, and we shall see the smoke of the damned ascending continually; when we
shall stand at the right hand of the Lord Jesus, and shall hear that fearful
sentence pronounced on the wicked, and see the speedy and terrible execution
thereof, the earth opening incontinent to swallow them, then shall we perfectly
know how greatly the Lord has magnified his mercies toward us, in delivering
us from so fearful a condemnation.

Last of all, as this is the happy estate of them who are in How miserable are
they who are not in Christ?
Christ, that now there is no condemnation for them, so is it the contrary
miserable estate of the damned: do what they will, every action of their life
makes out the process of their most just condemnation, for to the unclean all
things are unclean, yea, even their consciences are defiled, and Tit. 1.
their prayer is abominable and turned into sin, but thanks be to God through
Jesus Christ, who has delivered us from this most unhappy condition.

To them who are in Christ.] Albeit the former mentioned Deliverance by Christ
pertains not unto all men, only to them who are of the household of Faith.
deliverance from the wrath to come be most comfortable, yet this which is
subioyned should waken every man to take heed unto himself, when we hear that
this deliverance is limited and restrained only to them who are in Christ. It
is true, that by the offense of one man the fault came on all to condemnation,
but by the obedience of one all are not made righteous, only they who receive
the abundance Romans 5.
of grace, and gift of righteousness shall reign in life through one Jesus
Christ. As therefore we have received within our selves by nature the sentence
of death, knowing that we are borne heirs of the wrath of God by disobedience,
so wisdom craves that we never rest nor suffer our eyes to sleep, nor our
eyelids to slumber* but that we should recount our former sins in the
bitterness of our heart, and water our couch with tears in the night, and call
upon the Lord without ceasing in the day continually, until we find that we
are translated from darkness to light: taken out of nature and planted in
Christ, and that first sentence of absolution be pronounced to our conscience
by the spirit of adoption, go thy way, thy sins are for given thee. For the
Math. 9. 2.
Apostle uses here this limitation of the comfort to certain persons, thereby
to declare that it appertains not unto the remnant of the world. When the
original world was As none were saved without the Arc, the family of Lot, and
house of Rahab. Genesis 7. 33. Genesis 19. 16. Josh. 2.
overwhelmed with waters, none were saved but such as were in the Arc: when
Sodom was burnt with fire, none were saved but those of the family of Lot:
when Jericho was destroyed, none were preserved but such as were in the Family
of Rahab, all these are figures shadowing unto us, that when the Lord shall
come to cut down the wicked with the sword, or hook of his justice, to cast
them for ever into the wine press of his wrath, salvation shall belong only
to those who are of the household of faith, even that whole family whereof God
in Jesus Christ is the Father: which number is indeed exceeding small, if they
be compared with the remnant and great multitude of the world: therefore let
not their evil example deceive us, but remembering the kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, let us cast away these Mat. 11. 12. Heb. 12. 2.
burdens and impediments, specially this sin which hangs so fast on, that
we may enter in time into the Ark of GOD, and Family of Rahab, that so we
may be saved.

We have here then first to observe a certain distinction A threefold
distinction of mankind.
of mankind, whereof some are in Christ; these are vessels of honor reserved
to mercy; others out of Christ, and these are vessels of dishonor, ordained
unto wrath. This 1 Made in God his eternal counsel.
distinction is first made in God his secret counsel, electing some, and
leaving others according to the good pleasure of his will, and this is only
known unto himself. It begins 2 Made in this life by effectual calling, of
those who are chosen Revel. 3. 12.
first to be manifest, when the Lord by effectual calling seperates his Elect
from the children of wrath and disobedience, and then it is known but properly
and truly of those only who are effectually called: for that new name, which
the Lord gives, none knows but they who have received it By the judgment of
charity confirmed by the seen effects of grace in another, thou may conclude
that he is called, but by assurance of Faith, thou may only be certain of
thine own particular salvation. But this distinction 3 Shall be made most
manifest in the day of general judgment.
shall be most clearly manifested in the last day, when the Lord shall gather
all the children of his good will together, at the right hand of Jesus Christ,
then shall he declare unto all the world, who they are that are his: the
wicked shall see the righteous, and be vexed with horrible fear when they
shall see that such as they had in derision have their portion among the
Saints. Let it not therefore be sufficient unto us, that out of the general
mass of mankind we are gathered to the fellowship of the Church visible, but
let us examine how we are in the barn sloore of the Lord Jesus, whether as
chafe or corn, for a day of winnowing will assuredly come, wherein the Lord
shall gather his good corn into his garner, and the chafe shall be cast out
into unquenchable fire.

It is again to be marked, that the Apostle having found If we seek comfort
of deliverance from the wrath to come, we must go out of our selves and seek
it in Christ.
in himself matter of death, which he humbly confessed in the end of the last
Chapter, does now go out of himself, and rest in Jesus Christ, before he can
find any comfort through deliverance from death, teaching us, that if we
seek comfort, we must go out of our selves, and seek it in Christ. Surely a
great cause of these manifold doubtings, fears, and unquietness of mind,
wherewith the godly are often troubled, is that they seek in themselves
grounds and warrants of their salvation; as though the Lord could not save
them, unless there be in them such a disposition, as in every point should be.
This is one of Satan's subtle stratagems, to draw thee from Christ and make
thee to rest upon thy self: if once he obtain this at thy hands, and thou
suffer that Serpent to creep in between thee and thy surety, and divert thy
heart from reposing steadfastly upon Christ, that not content to seek
supplement of thy wants in him thou seek perfection in thy self, it shall be
an easy thing unto thy adversary to disquiet thee, and shake thee too and
fro, like a reed shaken with the wind, with distrustful cogitations.

I confess indeed, it is most needful unto salvation, that Yet we must
find in our selves infallible marks of Salvation.
thou find in thy self the infallible signs and tokens of thy effectual
calling and ingrafting into Christ, but to think that because thou find them
not in perfection, or find beside them a remanent sinful corruption of thy
nature, that therefore thou can not be saved, is as much, as to think thou
can not be saved unless thou be thine own Savior. Learn therefore from
the holy Apostle, that how ever in thy self thou be worthy to dye, yet give
this glory to Jesus Christ, that he is thy Savior, be strong in him, keep thy
consideration and confidence upon him. If Satan charge thee with thy sins,
fly thou to Christ's merits; if he object to thee thine evil actions,
remember thou Christ's innocent sufferings; and for every thing wherewith he can
charge thee, go thou to Jesus thy advocate, to be answerable for thee. So did
Bernard, who in the hour A notable comfort arising of Christ's twofold right to
the kingdom.
of his death, being presented (as he thought) before the Lords tribunal, and
sharply accused by his adversary for his sins, he goes out of himself and
runs to Christ. I grant indeed, says he, that (as thou obiectest unto me)
I am unworthy, and by no deeds of mine can I merit eternal life, yet I know
the Lord Jesus has a double right to the kingdom of heaven, one by heritage,
and another by conquest, the first is sufficient for himself, the second for
me, ex cuius dono iure illud mihi vendicans, non confundor. Bernard.
And indeed except it had been to give it to poor penitent and believing
sinners, what needed our blessed Savior to have conquered that kingdom, which
was his own before by heritage? Thus are we only sure when we cast the anchor
of our souls within the veil upon that Rock which is higher then we, Jesus
Christ.

To them that are in Christ.] The Apostle you see changes the manner of his
speech: when he spoke of the power The Apostle excludes not himself from that
natural misery whereunto others are subject.
of sin remaining in our nature, he spoke of it in his own person, but when
he speaks of our deliverance by Jesus Christ, he speaks of it in the person
of others. Thus the Apostle by an holy wisdom does order his speech for the
comfort of the children of GOD: for least that other weak Christians might be
discouraged by reason of their sins, he speaks of remanent sinful
corruption in his own person, to declare that none, no, not the holy Apostles
are exempted from it. Of deliverance again he speaks in the person of others,
least any should think that the Neither excludes he others from that mercy
which he himself has received.
grace of Christ were restrained only to such singular persons, as holy
Apostles, and were not also extended to others. Commonly these who are of such
a tender Conscience, makes exception of themselves; as if the comfort of other
Christians belonged not to them: the Apostle therefore includes within the
communion of this benefit all whosoever, Pastors, people, learned, unlearned,
poor, rich, weak and strong, providing that they be in Jesus Christ. Men who
are truly godly, in the matter of misery chiefly condemn themselves:
therefore the Apostle calls himself the chief of all sinners; but they never
exclude others 1. Tim. 2. 15.
from the same communion of mercy: I know, says the Apostle, that there is
laid up for me a crown of glory, and 2. Tim. 4. 8.
not only for me, but for all them who love the second appearing of the Lord
Jesus.

It is far otherwise with natural men, blinded with Naturalists blinded with
presumption do far otherwise.
presumption, they extol their own righteousness above others, and in their
conceit with the proud Pharisee, condemns every other man as a greater sinner
than himself; they carry in their bag two measures, by the one they take to
themselves, making much of the smallest good, which is in them; by the other
they give, setting that by for light, which is most excellent in another. Our
Savior properly expresses their corrupt judgment, when he compares it to the
light of the eye, which can see any other thing better than it self, and can
epsy a moat sooner in another, than a beam in it self. After this manner
hipocrites look out, curiosi ad Aug. confess. lib. 10.
cognoscendum vitam alienam, desidiosi ad corrigendum suam: curious searchers
of the life of others, careless correcters of their own. Men's peracute
perspiciens alienos errores, tarda Basil. hexam. hom. 9.
est ad proprios cognoscendos defectus: the mind that sharply looks to the
faults of others, does but slowly consider her own defects: but let us learn
by the precept of our blessed Savior, and practice of this holy Apostle,
rather to look to our selves, searching out our own sins, then neglecting our
selves to p^attle vainly of the sins of other men.

That are in Christ.] But now to come to the matter. The Our union with Christ
expressed by five similitudes in holy Scripture.
spirit of God in holy Scripture expresses our union with Christ, by five
sundry similitudes: first by a marriage, wherein Christ is the husband, and we
the spouse. Secondly, by a body, whereof Christ is the head, and we the
members. Thirdly, by a building or house, wherein Christ is the foundation or
ground stone, and we the upper building upon him. Fourthly, by the similitude
of ingrafting, wherein Christ is compared to the Vine, and we to the branches
grafted into him. Lastly, by the similitude of feeding, wherein Christ is
compared to the food, and we to the body which is nourished.

As for the similitude of Marriage: the strongest bands of As Eve was to Adam,
his wife his sister, and his daughter, so are we unto Christ.
conjunction that ever was between two creatures, was between Adam and Eve,
for Eve was his Wife, his Sister, and his Daughter: his Wife being joined with
him in marriage by God, she became one flesh with him: she was his Sister, made
immediately by the hand of that same Father who made Adam, and that without
Adams help: she was also his Daughter, for of him she was made, bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh. All these ways are we alyed unto Jesus Christ;
we are his spouse in respect of that mutual contract and covenant which is
between us, he has married us to himself in righteousness, judgment,
mercy, and compassion. We are his Sons and Daughters in respect of
regeneration, which is our new creation: we are also his brethren and sisters
in respect of the spirit of adoption, by whom we acknowledge God the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ to be our father also in him, and his son Jesus to be
our elder brother.

Yet is our alliance with Christ so near, that all these Yet this expresses
not our alliance with Christ and therefore other similitudes are used.
whereof we have spoken cannot express it, and therefore ye shall sinde, that
there is not a way, by which in nature two things are made one, but from it the
spirit of God borrowes similitudes, to declare how Christ and we are one in
him, as the branch in the tree; we are of him, as Eve was of Adam; we are of
him, as the house is built on the foundation; we are one with him and that many
manner of ways; one with him, as brother with brother, as husband and wife, as
the body and the head; as meat and that which is nourished: what marvel then
considering all these, that the Apostle with boldness breaks out in this
glorious triumph, there is no condemnation to them who are in Christ? seeing we
are in him, as branches in the tree, it is not possible that we can wither or
decay for want of the sap of Grace so long as he does retain it, and that
shall be for ever: seeing we are built on him like an house upon a sure
foundation* what storm can over blow us? let the wind rise, and the rain
fall, we shall not be overthrown, because we are the building of God,
standing upon a sure foundation: seeing we are his spouse, who can have action
against us? our debts fall to be paid by our husband, he lives to make answer
for us: seeing we are his conquered inheritance, who will take us out of his
hand? My sheep can no man take out of my hand (says our blessed Savior.)
Most happy then and John. 10. 28.
sure is the estate of all those who are in Christ Jesus.

But leaving other similitudes, let us consider that this In the similitude of
ingrafting four things considered.
phrase to be in Christ, is borrowed from planting or ingrafting. Our Savior
uses this same similitude, John 15. And in it we have these things to consider.
First, who is the stock, or root: secondly, who are the grafts or branches
ingrafted: thirdly, what is the manner of the ingrafting: fourthly, some
comforts and instructions arising hereof.

The root or stock whereinto this ingrafting is made, is Jesus Christ: called
by himself, the true Vine: by the Apostles, 1 The stock or root. John. 15.
1. Romans 11. 17. Isaiah. 11. 1.
the true Olive: by the Prophets, the root of Iesse, and the righteous branch:
this root that great husbandman the eternal God prepared to be as a stock of
life, wherein he ingrafts all of Adams lost posterity whom he has concluded
to save, to the praise and glory of his mercy. After that in the fulness of
time God had sent him into the world, clad with our nature, and he had done the
work for which he came, the Lord laid him in the grave, and as it were set him
in the grave, but at once like a lively root he sprang up, and rested not till
his branches spread to the uttermost ends of the earth, and till his top mounted
up unto heaven, for there now he sits and reigns in life, who before was
humbled to death.

The branches or graftes ingrafted in him are of two 2 The branches whereof
some are only externally ingrafted these may be cut off. Romans 11. 22.
sorts: first, all the members of the Church visible, who by external Baptism
are entered to a profession of Christ, baptized with water, but not with the
holy Ghost: this kind of ingrafting will suffer a cutting off, if thou
continue not in his bountifulness, thou shall also be cut off. For they have
not the sap of grace ministered to them from the stock of life, but are as dead
trees* having leaves without fruit, they have 2. Tim. 3 5.
a show of Godliness, but have denied the power thereof. These are no better
then Esau, who lay in the same womb with Jacob, borne and brought up in the
same Family of Isaac, which was the Church of God, marked also with the same
sacrament of Circumcision: Nam sicut ille ex legittima matter natus gratiam
superbe spreuit, and reprobatus est, ita qui in Aug. de bap. cont. Donatist
lib. 10. cap. 10.
vera Ecclesia baptizantur, and gratiam De^ non amplectuntur, cum Esauo
reijciuntur. For as he being borne of a lawful Mother, proudely despised
Grace, and was cast off, so they who are baptized into the true Church of God,
and embrace not the grace of God, shall be rejected with Esau; neither shall it
avail them, that by an external kind of ingrafting, they have been adjoined
to the fellowship of the visible Church.

The other sort are they who beside the outward ingrafting, Others internally
ingrafted and to these belongs this comfort.
whereof we have spoken, are also inwardly grafted by the holy Ghost in Jesus
Christ, in such sort that Christ is in them, and they in Christ, and can say
with the Apostle, Now I live, yet not I any more, but Christ Jesus lives in
me; these have in them that same mind which was in Jesus, the Gal. 2. 20.
only sure argument of our spiritual union with him: for if any man have not
the spirit of Christ, the same is not his, and they who are quickened and ruled
by his spirit, are assuredly his.

As for the manner of the ingrafting, it is spiritual, wrought 3 The manner of
the ingrafting, it is made by the word and spirit.
by the holy Ghost, who creating faith in our heart by hearing of the Gospel
makes us to go out of our selves, and transire in Christum, and so to rely
upon him* that by his light we are illuminated, by his spirit we are quickened,
by the continual furniture of his grace we persevere, and increase in
spiritual strength; in a word, so we live that in our selves we dye. Every
lamp of the golden candlestick has his Zach. 4.
own pipe, through which these two olives, that stand with the ruler of the
whole world, empty themselves into the gold, that is, every member of the
Church of Christ receives grace from that fullness of Grace which is in him,
through the secret conduits of the spirit, whereby he causes us to grow, and
preserves our souls in life.

Though he be in heaven and we on earth, no distance Distance of place stays
not our union with him.
of place can stay this union: for seeing the members of the body howsoever
scattered through sundry parts of the world, so far that many of them have
never seen others in the face, are notwithstanding knit together by the band
of one spirit, into one holy communion, why should it be denied, but that the
head and members of this mystical body, are also one by the same Spirit?
suppose the head be in heaven, and the members on earth: or what need is there
to enforce for effecting of this union, such a corporal presence of Christ in
the Sacrament, as cannot stand with the truth of Gods word?

Now the comforts that arises unto us of our communion 4 Comforts arising of
this our union with Christ.
with Christ are exceeding great: for first we have with him a communion of
natures; he has taken upon him ours, and has communicated his nature unto us.
Of the first (after a sort) all mankind may glory, forasmuch as Christ took
not on the nature of Angels, but the nature 1 Communion of Natures.
of man, yet if there be no more the comfort is small, yea the condemnation of
man is the greater that the Lord Jesus came unto man, in man's nature, and man
would not receive him. But as for the godly, let them rejoice in this, that the
Lord Jesus has not only assumed our nature, but also made us pertakers of the
divine nature: before he assumed 2. Pet. 1 4.
our nature, he sanctified it, and now having by his own spirit joined us to
himself, we may be out of doubt he shall not cease till he has sanctified us.

It is a notable comfort that the work of our perfect A notable comfort, the
Lord who sanctified our nature that he might assume it, will also sanctify us
seeing he has united us to himself. Phil. 1. 6.
sanctification is not left unto us to do, the Lord Jesus has taken it into
his own hand to perform it, what then shall hinder it? I am persuaded that he
who has begun this good work in you, will perform it, against the day of
Jesus Christ. He who at his pleasure turned water into Wine; he who made the
bitter waters to become sweet; he who makes the wilderness a fruitful land,
and the barren woman to become the mother of many children; in a word, he who
calls things which are not, and causes them to be, is he notable to make
sinners become Saints? or shall he not perfect that work of the new creation
which he has begun in us? As for man he may beget children but cannot renew
their nature; he may marry a Wife, but cannot change her conditions, no more
than Moses, qui Aethiopissam duxit Ber. ser. de mutatione aquae in vinu^.
sed non potuit aethiopissae mutare colorem: who married an Ethiopian woman,
but could not change her color. But the Lord Jesus has so loved his Church,
that he shall make it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle. He Ephesians. 5. 27. Ezech. 16. 6.
found us polluted in our own blood, naked and bare, but he has washed us
with the water of regeneration: he has anointed us with his oil; and covered
our filthy nakedness with his excellent ornaments, and by his spirit of grace
he changed us from glory to glory into his own image.

Let this be unto thee (O man of God) a fortress against A fortress against
infidelity, we have seen the one, Christ made like us, let us be leeue the
other we shall be like him.
thine infidelity, by that part which thou see already done, learn to
believe that which yet is undone. Is God become man? has the God of glory
appeared in the shape of a servant? has he been crucified, dead, and buried
in thy nature? be thou strengthened in Faith, give glory unto God, think it not
impossible that the Lord can make thee, who is but the son of man, the son
of God; that of a servant he can make thee a freeman; that from the grave he
is able to raise thee unto glory, and cloth thee who art mortal and
corruptible, with the garments of incorruptibilitie and immortality. It is a
harder thing (says Chrisostom) in our judgment that God should become man,
than that man should be made the son of God: cum ergo audicris quod filius
De^ factus sit filius Adae, and filius Abrahae, dubitare Chrisost. in Mat. hom.
2.
iam define quod and tu quies filius Adae, futurus sis filius Dei: a notable
prop for our weak Faith; we see that the son of God is become the son of
Adam, and the son of Abraham, why then will we distrust, that we who are the
sons of Adam shall also be made the sons of God?

Secondly, we have in Jesus Christ a communion of 2 By our union with Christ we
have communion of goods.
goods: he has taken upon him our sins, and the punishment thereof, he was
wounded for our transgressions, and the chastisement of our peace was l^yd upon
him, and has again communicated to us his righteousness and life; he has not
only given to us himself for our Savior, but also whatsoever is his we may
challenge as ours, by his own free gift. As the body which is senseless in it
self, enioyes the benefit of senses in the head, and reioyces therein as in
her own: so we by our union with Christ enjoy as ours all that is his, though
in our selves we have no light, nor life, nor righteousness, We who have no
good of our own enjoy all good in our, head.
by which we may stand before God, yet in him we have all these. In the
corporal marriage there is a communion of goods, so long as the one is rich
the other cannot be poor: how much more houlds this true in the spiritual
Psalm. 23. 1.
marriage? seeing the Lord is our Shepherd, what then shall we want? the Lord
Jesus who is rich unto all that calls upon him, is our husband; ipse nobis
factus est omnia, he himself unto us is become all things: he is a
propitiation for our sins; he is the light by whom we are translated from
darkness, he is life to quicken us that were dead in trespasses; he is the way
wherein we must walk; he is the door by which we must enter; he is the
garment which we must put on; he is the food whereupon we must live; all these
and many more names (says Cyrill) are attributed to Christ, to assure us though
in our selves we be void of all good, yet in him we shall be enriched with all
spiritual graces needful for us.

And thirdly we have by our union with Christ a communion 3 By our union with
Christ we have a communion of estates. Zech. 2. 8.
of estates, he is touched with a compassion of all our infirmities, in all
their troubles he was troubled: he that touches you touches the apple of mine
eye. In our natural body (says the Apostle) if one member suffer, all suffers
with it, much more is it so in the spiritual: if the foot in the natural 1.
Cor. 12. 26.
body be trod upon, the head complains, why hurt you me? Aug. s^r. 4^.
as if the injury were done unto it, but this feeling is far more lively in the
mystical body: if Saul persecute the members in Damascus, the head in heaven
shall cry Saul, Saul, why Act. 9. 4.
persecutest thou me? Oh that on the other part we were so lively and feeling
members under our head, that every prejudice to the glory of God, done by man,
might grieve us more than if it were done unto our selves. Such was David's
feeling affection, that he protests the rebuke of them who rebuked the Lord
fell upon him. Mine eyes (says he) gush out rivers of tears, when I see how
the wicked will not Psalm. 119.
keep thy law. But alas, the want of this sympathy with the head, and
remanent members, euedently shows that this spiritual life is but weak in us.

Last of all, by our ingrafting in to Christ, we have this By our union with
Christ we are made sure of perseverance.
comfort that we are sure of the benefit of perseverance, and that because (as
the Apostle says) we bear not the root, the root bear us, our salvation
depends not upon us (for that were an unsure foundation) it depends upon him,
because we are in him, we grow and increase, yea, the older we be in Christ,
the more we fasten our root and flourish, for they who are planted in the
Courts of the Lord flourish in Psalm. 146.
their old age and bring forth fruit: and whereas other branches may be pulled
away from their stock, either by violence of wind, or force of the hands of
men, or at least consumed by length of time, it shall not be so with them who
are in Christ, they keep not him, but are kept by him: because I am not
changed, therefore ye are not consumed, O ye sons of Jacob: but as to those
who are not planted in Jesus, be who they will, they shall be pulled up, they
shall not continue in honor. The Princes of the earth, their breath shall
decay, they shall return to their earth, and their thoughts shall Esa. 40. 24.
perish, the Judges thereof shall be made as vanity, as though they were not
planted, nor sown, or as if their stroke took no root in the earth. The Lord
shall blow upon them, and they shall wither, the whirlwind shall take them
away like stubble. O silly glory of worldlings! which dies to them oftentimes
before themselves, at least with them: their beauties consumes when Psalm. 49.
14.
they go from the house to the grave, and their pomp does not descend after
them. Only happy and sure is the estate of that man who is in Christ: neither
life nor death, things present nor things to come shall separate him from the
love of God.

Now the lessons of instruction are chiefly two: first is They who are planted
in Christ should be humble, the root bears them, not they the root.
a lesson of humility; seeing it so that in Christ we have life let us be
humble in our selves, forasmuch as that which we have, we have of another, so
taught the ancient fathers agreeable to holy scripture, eleauen hundred years
before us: which I mark the rather to point out the agreement in one truth
between us and the Fathers of the primitive Church. Ita sunt in vite palmites:
vt illi nihil conferant, sed inde accipiant, Consil. 2. Arausicanu^ ex Carranza
vnde viuant, sic quippe vitis est in palmitibus, vt vitale subministret illis,
non sumat ab ijs, ac per hoc and manentem in se habere Christum, and manner in
Christo, discipulis prodest, non Christo: the branches are so in the vine that
they give nothing unto it, but receives from it that sap of grace whereby they
live, but the vine is so in the branches that it ministers life unto them, and
receives nothing from them: that therefore Christ abides in us, and we in him,
is profitable to us, who are his Disciples, but not unto himself. Thus they
learned from our Savior, who in his speech to his Disciples denies that man is
able to do any good thing without him: as the branch can bear no fruit except
it abide in the root, no more can ye, except ye abide in me, for without me ye
are able to do nothing. And that which is subioyned does yet more humble us,
praeciso palmite potest de viua radice Ibidem.
alius pullulare, qui autem praecisus est non potest^ sine radice viuere:
though a branch be cut off from the root, another may spring out, but the
branch which is cut off cannot live, without the root it withers, and is meet
for nothing but the fire: he that falls away from Christ shall perish like a
withered branch, but the Lord Jesus shall not want another who shall grow up in
him; we stand by faith, let us not Romans 11. 16.
be high minded but fear.

The second is a lesson of thankfulness, we who profess They who are planted
in Christ bear fruit so soon as they are planted.
that we are in Christ should be fruitful in good works, herein) says our
Savior) is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit. There is such a
lively power in this stock of life, that they who are planted in him flourish
incontinent. Proof hereof we have in Lidia, and in the Thief crucified with
Christ, and converted by him. Arons rod was no sooner changed from a withered
stick into a flourishing tree* then he is from a barren malefactor into a
fruitful professor; for see what a fruit he bears in an instant, he
confesses his own sins, he rebukes the sins of his companion, he gives
a good testimony unto Christ, and earnestly prays that Christ would remember
him, when he comes into his kingdom. Alas how may this make us ashamed, who so
long have professed Christ, but has not been fruitful in good works. The
Psalmist compares a godly man to the Palm tree, which (as Pliny writes)
grows by the waters side, and in moist places, and is in Summer and winter
both flourishing and bearing fruit. But the wicked and carnal professors of
this age are become worse than that fig tree which Christ cursed, for it had
leaves albeit no fruit: but they (as Jerome complaynes of the shameless
sinners in his time) have cast away the very leaves also; an evident token that
they were never planted in Christ Jesus, they have done nothing in their lives
to glorify God, and may look as little to be comforted by him in their
deaths: but of this we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter.

Who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit] Albeit By flesh is meant
our natural corruption, and how works of the flesh are done by spirits.
the comfort of our deliverance by Christ be exceeding great, yet least it
should be usurped of those to whom it belongs not, the Apostle as he has
before restrained it to them who are in Christ, so here he gives us an evident
mark whereby we may know them, to wit, that they are such as walk not after
the flesh but after the Spirit. Where before we enter into the doctrine, it is
necessary we know what the Apostle means by the word, flesh. Among many
significations which it has in holy Scripture, it is here used to express the
whole sinful corruption of our nature, repugnant to the Law of God, not only
carnal actions done in the members of the body, but also sinful motions and
affections. Diabolus enim cum sit spiritus, agit tamen opera carnis: for Satan
notwithstanding he be a spirit, yet does Aug. de ciui. dei. lib. 14.
he the works of the flesh: and the Apostle reckons out pride, envy, and such
like, among the works of the flesh. Gal. 5. 22.
This may serve to beat down the presumptuous conceits of those who proudly
justify themselves, and think themselves free from sin, because they are
clear of the carnal action; as if the word of God did condemn sin in the
branch only, and not in the root also.

This corruption of our nature for three causes is expressed For three causes is
our sinful corruption expressed by flesh.
by the name of flesh: first, because it is propagated from man to man in the
seed of flesh: secondly, because it is executed in our earthly and carnal
members: thirdly, because it is nourished strengthened and augmented by outward
and fleshly objects, and so by this name our corruption is distinguished from
the corrupt nature of apostate Angels, which is not propagated, nor nourished,
nor executed as Ephe. 6. 12.
ours is, and therefore called by the Apostle, Spiritual wickedness.

By the spirit here again I understand that new and spiritual By the spirit
is meant the new disposition of the whole man wrought by spirit.
disposition which the Spirit of God works in our mind, will, and affections,
comformable to the law of God. Whereof it is evident that all our motions,
affections and actions before the Spirit of Christ sanctify and reform us,
are flesh, and not Spirit: and again, that even the Christian after his
ingrafting into Christ, has remaining in him while he dwells in the body,
some carnal and sinful corruption, which notwithstanding they allow not,
cherishes not, follows not, they walk not after it, but rather endeauours all
that they can to weaken and suppress it.

Here then, first is reproved that error of the Papists, This place
erroneously expounded by Papists.
who writing on this place, expound these words after this manner, there is no
damnation, that is no damnable thing, no act that deserves to be condemned.
The Apostle says not here, there is no flesh, that is, no sinful corruption,
in them who are in Christ, but he says, they who are in Christ walk not after
the flesh. To maintain this error, they uphold They maintain that
concupiscence without consenting to it is no sin. Aquinas.
another, for Thomas Aquinas writing on this place, says; Primus motus
concupiscentiae adulterij non est peccatum, quia actus est imperfectus, sed si
accesserit consensus, tunc est actus perfectus and peccatum, The first motion
(says he) of the lust of adultery is not sin, because it is an imperfect
act, but if consent be given unto it, then it is a perfect act, Coster Enchi.
and is sin. Coster in his little Enchiridion affirms that concupiscence
proceeds from sin and tends unto sin, but is not sin, which he labors to
express by this similitude: he that hears (says he) another man speaking
filthy language, and consents not unto it, but rather is angry at it, and
reproues it, sins not, but merits a greater reward: even so, when our
concupiscence sends out any sinful motion, if we consent not unto it we sin
not. And the Fathers of that counsel of Trent, which have as many curses as
Canons, have decreed in this manner: this concupiscence which sometime Con.
trident.
the Apostle called sin, the holy Synod declares that the Catholic Church
did never understand it to be called sin because it is truly and properly
sin in the regenerate, but because it comes from sin, and inclines to
sin.

Now because this is a mother error which brings forth Their error disprooued.
and strenghthens many other errors, we will shortly disprove it by Scripture,
reason and antiquity. In the end of 1 By Scripture.
the last Chapter, the Apostle condemns the motions of concupiscence for
sin, even when consent is not given unto them: for he protests of himself
that he resisted these motions of sin, but was oftentimes sore against his will
captiued by them, he condemns them as evil, albeit he gave no consent unto
them: for the Law (as I have said) does not only condemn sin in the branch,
but also in the root: there shall not be in thee an evil thought against the
Lord thy God.

And this is also confirmed by reason. Consent in it own 2 By Reason.
nature is a thing indifferent, if that whereunto I consent be good my consent
is good, but if it be evil my consent is evil: if the first motion of sin
be not an evil thing in it self (as they say) then it is not an evil thing
to consent unto it: for that which is not evil in it self, by my consenting
cannot become evil. It is not then the consent following, that makes the
preceding motion to be evil, but it is the preceding evil motion, that
makes the subsequent consent evil. Now as for Coster his similitude, it makes
plainly against Costers similitude makes against himself.
himself: for it is true indeed, that he who hears evil spoken and
reproues it, is worthy of praise; but it is also true, that he who spoke the
evil has sinned: even so, albeit we do well when we consent not to the
motions of concupiscence in us, yet concupiscence is not the less to be
condemned, because it has sent out into the ear of our soul that voice of a
filthy desire, which is not agreeable to Gods most holy Law.

And of this same judgment with us are also the ancient By ancient Fathers.
Fathers. Cum concupisco, quamuis concupiscentiae assensum non praebeam, sit
tamen in me quod nolo, and quod etiam non vult Aug. ser. 5.
Lex. When I lust (says Augustine) albeit I consent not to my lust, yet that
is done in me which I will not, and which also the law will not. And again,
desiderium tuam tali debet Aug. ser. de Temp. 45.
esse ad Deum, vt omnino non sit ipsa concupiscentia cui resister^ oporteat,
resistis enim, and non consentiendo vincis, sed melius est hostem non habere,
quam vincere: thy desire should in such sort be upon God, that there should not
be in thee at all, so much as concupiscence which has need of resistance: for
thou resists, and by not consenting thou ouercommest, but it were better not to
have an enemy then to overcome him. With him agrees also Bernard. Genus illud
peccati quod toties Bernard.
nos conturbat, reprimi quidem potest, and debet per gratiam Dei
(concupiscentias loquor and praua desideria) vt non regnet in nobis, nec demus
membra nostra arma iniquitatis peccato, and sic nulla est damnation his, qui
sunt in Christo, sed non eijcitur nisi in morte. That kind of sin (says he)
which so often troubles us, (Concupiscence, and evil desires, I mean) may and
should be repressed by the grace of God, so that it reign not in us, and that
we give not our members weapons of unrighteousness to sin; and that way
there is no damnation to them who are in Christ, yet it is not cast out but in
death. Thus does Bernard clearly agree with us in the exposition of this
place. Of all which is evident, that the motions of concupiscence are evil and
sinful; even when they are repressed, and no consent given unto them.

But now leaving further improbation of this error, we come to observe such
instructions, as are given us in these A holy conversation is an infallible
token of our union with Christ. Bernard.
words* And first we see that a godly conversation is recommended unto us as an
infallible mark of our spiritual ingrafting into Christ Jesus: Sicut enim
corporis vitam ^x motu dignoscim^s, ita si^^i vitam ^x bonis operibus: for as
the life of the body is discerned by moving, so the life of Faith is known by
good works. We esteem that body dead or at least near unto death which is not
able to move nor do any action pertaining to a natural life, and so may we
think that soul dead in sin, which walks after the flesh, having no
delight nor power to execute any spiritual action. It is not then a naked
profession of Christianity which will prove us to be in Christ; profession
without the power of Godliness, will help thee no m^re then change of garment
Profession of Christ in profane men is like Iosaphats garment on Achab.
helped wicked Achab in the company of good Iosaphat, for through it the arrow
of Gods vengeance pierced him, among the thousands of Israel; and all the
pretenses of men who work iniquity shall not in that last day save them from
that fearful sentence, depart from me I know you not. Let the carnal
professors of this age hearken to their doom before hand, which assuredly they
shall hear at the last, if they go on still in their sins. Let us not be
deceived; fearful is that sentence, No unclean thing, none that works
abomination Revel. 21. 17.
shall enter into that heavenly Citi^^ and such have we ben all, but blessed
are they who are washed, sanctified and justified 1. Cor. 6. 11.
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. The bastard
Christians of our time have learned by the light of the word to put good works
out of the chair of merit, and justly, for Jesus Christ only should sit in
that chair* but have not yet set them down in their own place; for though
they be not meriters of eternal life^, yet must they be thy witnesses to
prove that thou art in Christ; by thy works, not by thy words, shall thou be
judged in the last day. Of this has our Savior ^orewarned us, and therefore
does the Apostle counsel us, Make sure your calling and 2. Pet. 1. 10.
Election by well doing. If any man be in Jesus let him become a 1. Cor. 5. 17.
new creature. For if we say that we have fellowship with God 1. John. 1. 6.
and walk in darkness, we do but lie.

Satan has two strong arms, whereby he wrestles against Satan's two arms,
Desperation and Presumption.
man, if with the one, which is Desperation, he cannot thrust thee down unto
hell, then shall he prease with the other to mount thee on the chariot of
presumption, that so he may send thee away posting to damnation, puffed up with a
false conception of mercy, when as in the mean time thou have no warrant that
the mercy of God in Christ does appertain to thee. This presumption (says
Bernard) Commonly Satan tempts with Presumption.
is infidelis f^ducia, it seems unto them who are swelled therewith a strong
Faith: if you talk with them they will tell you they are most sure of
salvation, and that they never doubted thereof, yet in very deed it is but a
faithless confidence, whereby Satan does miserably deceive them; for he
cares not suppose all thy days thou hold a general conceit of mercy, so
that he find by thy fruits that thou art not in Christ. Let us beware of this
presumption, let us not proclaim peace to our selves, when there is no peace,
neither bless our selves in that state of life wherein God will curse us, but
in fear and trembling work out our own salvation, making our Faith manifest
by good works: for the best argument to prove that we are in Christ, is this,
that we walk not after the flesh.

And that we may yet more be moved to fly the lusts They dishonor Christ
highly, who say they are in Christ, and walk after the flesh.
of the flesh, let us consider how the Apostle oppones these two as contraries,
which cannot consist together, to be in Christ, and to walk after the flesh.
It cannot therefore but be a great dishonouring of Christ, when they who
profess by word, that they are his, do by their wicked deeds deny him: for
the evil life of a professor, in effect gives out this false testimony
against Christ, that there is no power in his death, no virtue in his
resurrection, no renewing grace to sanctify those who are his. Turks and
Pagans who plainly deny him, do not derogate so much from the glory of Christ,
as do profane professors of his name: tolerabilius enim lingua qua^ vita
mentitur, the lie (says Augustine) Aug. contra Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 21.
which is made by the tongue, is more tolerable then that which is made by the
life: where the tongue professes Christ, and the heart is given to impiety,
this is not professio, sed abnegatio Christi, a profession, but a denying of
Christ.

It is a great sin to bear false witness against our neighbor, but a
greater sin to bear false witness against the Lord. Every creature in their
kind gives a true testimony unto God, the heavens declare his glory, the
earth, and all that therein is sets forth his goodness, yea the little Emmet
proclaims his providence: he must be a provident father, that has put so
great providence in so small Only apostate Angels and men bear false witness
against God.
a creature: only apostate Angels and men are false witnesses against the
Lord. Satan lies sometime against his mercy: as when he says to the penitent
and believing man, God will not forgive him: sometime against his justice, when
he bears the wicked in hand that God will not punish him; sometime against his
providence, when he would persuade the afflicted that God cannot deliver them.
And as for the Apostate man, he is also a false witness against God, he
calls himself the child of God, and behold he carries the image of Satan;
as if the Lord begat children to another image and not to his own. Certainly
An evil life of a professor sai^^ in effect, there is no virtue in Christ.
the sinful life of one professing Christ, is a public testimony, falsely
proclayming to the world (as I have said) that there is no virtue in Christ,
and that he is such a Savior as can neither sanctify nor save from sin such
as are his; a fearful blasphemy.

All Christians are not honored with the second martyrdom, A godly life is
the first martyrdom, without suffering for Christ which is the second,
martyrdom is not acceptable to him.
that is, to be Christ's witnesses by suffering of death for his truths sake;
yet all are bound by a godly life to be witnesses of his saving and renewing
power, showing forth his marvelous virtue, who has translated us from
darkness into his light. Tota vita martyrium esse debet, hoc est testimonium
deo reddere, etc. the whole life of a Christian should be a martyrdom, that
is, a continual witnessing of Cyp. de duplici martirio.
the truth of God: and this is so necessary that without it the second
martyrdom, that is, the testimony which thou bear to the truth of God by
shedding of thy blood, is worth nothing; it auailes not to give thy body to be
burnt in the fire, unless that first thou mortify thy earthly members, and by
reasonable service offer up thy body a lively and Col. 3 5. Romans 12. 1.
an acceptable sacrifice to God. And hereunto also tends that which he
subioynes. Efficacius est vitae quam linguae testimonium, habent etiam opera
suam linguam, etc. The testimony of the life is more effectual than the
testimony of the tongue: works have also their own language, yea and their
own eloquence, though the tongue be silent: therefore our blessed Savior in
the Gospel says, the works which the Father has given me to do, the same
works John 5. 36.
that I do bear witness of me. Like as ( Cyprian says) good works
professes that there is a God, so evil works say in their own kind that
there is no God, nor knowledge of the most high. Thus it is a most fearful
sin for them to walk after the flesh, who professes that they are in Jesus
Christ.

For no sin can be committed of them without horrible Sins of men
professing Christ are not committed without sacrilege.
sacrilege: every work of the flesh, though done by a Pagan is a
transgression of Gods law, which shall be punished unto death: but the same
committed by Christians are not only sins, but sacrilegious sins, and that
of the highest degree: then came the sins, of Belshazar to the Dan. 51.
hight, when to all his former sins he joined the abuse of those vessels
which were holy: to have drunk intemperatly for the honor of his Idol in any
vessel, was a fearful sin, but to do it in the vessels dedicated to the
honor of the true God was a double sin: Yet is this sacrilege More
fearful than Belshazars.
small, if it shall be compared with thine, who professing Christ, lives
profanely: he abused dead vessels of gold and silver, but thou erects a temple
for the living God in a temple for Idols: thou defilest the sanctuary of God
with all uncleanness: those vessels which by Baptism the mark of God, were
separate and sealed to his holy service, thou abusest to the service of Satan:
by profession thou art militant under the banner of Christ, wearing his badge,
but by action art a servant to his adversary: like as Judas thou do kiss
Christ with thy mouth, and with thy hand thou betrayest him. Let carnal
professors look to him, and they may see that a more fearful judgment
abides them than the open enemies of Christ Jesus, himself became his own
executioner. Neither Caiphas, nor Pilate, nor the false witnesses, nor the
people, who cried, crucify, Judas punished sooner than Caiphas.
were so suddenly judged as Judas: let men therefore learn either to make
their lives in some measure answerable to their Christian profession, or else
if they will walk after the flesh, let them leave off any more to usurp the
Christian name.

We have here further to learn, that it is not an easy A Christian life
cannot be led without a battle.
work to lead a Christian life, but most hard, considering that it cannot be
led without a continual battle between two parties, the Flesh and the
Spirit: of so contrary a disposition, that the flesh lusts always against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; it is not possible we can walk after
the one (the Spirit) unless continually we resist the other (the flesh.) And
this battle is so proper to the Christian, In natural men there is also a
battle, but not between the Flesh and the Spirit.
that none in the world can fight it but he only. It is true that in men
unregenerate there is a battle between Reason and Affection; Reason
oftentimes refusing that for some worldly respect which Affection commands:
and in like manner, a battle between a natural conscience, and natural
affection; an example whereof we have in Pilate, the light of his conscience
forbidding him to condemn Christ, natural affection, fear of Caesar,
compelling him to do the contrary. But these battles in the unregenerate are
not battles between the flesh and the spirit, but between flesh and flesh:
for in an unregenerate man there is nothing but flesh; it being true in them
all which is spoken of those in the original world: I will strive no more with
man for he is Genesis 6. 3.
but flesh. But in the Christian the contrary parties are, the new man and the
old, the flesh and the spirit, nature regenerate fighting against nature
unregenerate, with such restless oppositions, that there shall be no perfect
peace, till the one have extinguished the other, the life of the one being the
death of the other. Only happy are they who in this life are exercised in this
battle; these are the good soldiers of Jesus, for whom is prepared the
Crown. As for others who fight it not, though they be at quietness within
themselves, yet their peace is wicked and perverse; their being in them an
agreement of all their powers to rebel against God: Vbi enim non est bellum,
ibi pax peruersa, Aug. ser. 12
where there is not this Christian battle, there is a miserable peace, the end
whereof out of doubt, shall be more miserable perturbation: what hope can those
vvretches have, that at length, they shall overcome, and obtain the Crown,
who have never done so much as begin to fight?

But to return, the difficulty of this Christian battle The difficulty of
the Christian battle wherein it appears.
appears the more, if we consider that it is without intermission, that our
adversary is not external, neither such as stands always upon circumstances of
time and place, and exterior objects to i(...)ugne us, but being internal and
domestike inuades us with restless assaults, even then when the outward
occasion serves not. The flesh (says Bernard) Bernard.
is an enemy, hostis quem nec fugere possumus, nec fugare, circumferre illum
necesse est, which we can neither fly, nor yet chase away from us, a
necessity lies upon us to carry it about with us, we cannot fly from it. Non
enim post nos, sed Ambrose de paeniten. lib. 1. cap. 14.
in nobis nos sequitur, for it follows us (says Ambrose) not after us but in
us. A besieged City is sooner betrayed by secret enemies within, then
suppressed by open enemies without; it is not the plain battle ordered before
us, which we have so much to fear, as the trains and secret ambushments of
our adversary; if we overcome his power, which is within us, his forces shall
be soon enfeebled which is without us. O, what need have we therefore in all
the actions of our Seeing there are in us two parties, let us help that which
we would have to prevail.
life to walk circumspectly? we have need of eyes within, and without us,
that we may discern the inward desires of the Spirit, from these of the Flesh;
and may look rightly on those outward objects which may cherish the one, and
suppress the other. In a battle between two, every man assists that party,
which he would saine have to be victorious; for the help of the one, (says
Basil) is the overthrow Basil. sermon. 2. de iciunio.
of the other: so is it in this combat between the Flesh and the Spirit; the
Flesh being strengthened by outward allurements and carnal exercises quenches
the Spirit, and brings it in subjection, but the more the body be subdued by
moderate discipline, the stronger waxes the man of God. Happy were we if our
care were continual to strengthen the one by all spiritual exercises, that
we might daily weaken the other.

For the greatest perfection whereunto we can attain in Our best estate in
this life is sighting.
this life, is to fight against these lusts of the Flesh, which fight against
our souls. Our life, says Job, in the earth is a warfare. Bellum est, non
triumphus, it is a battle, not a triumph (says Augustine:) though after many
particular victories August. de temp. ser. 45.
the Lord put that voice of triumph many times in our mouths, thanks be to
God, who always makes us to triumph 2. Cor. 2. 14.
in Christ Jesus, yet let us remember, that incontinent we must fight again;
so long as we are in this mortal body wherein the Flesh lusts against the
Spirit, we cannot be free from carnal and evil desires: if thou dissemble
not, thou shall always find within thy self some thing which has need to be
resisted: for our sinful superfluities (says Bernard,) Bernard.
are such, putata repull^^ant* effugata redeunt, and reaccenduntur extincta,
that being cut off they spring out again, chased away they return again,
being quenched they are kindled again. Velis, nolis, intra sines tuos
habitabit Iebusaeus, will thou, nill thou, the Iebusite shall dwell within thy
borders: Subiugari potest, exterminari non potest, he may be subdued, but
cannot be rooted out.

And this again do we mark for the comfort of weak Christ's members militant
and triumphant, are not to be tried by one rule.
consciences; it is Satan's subtlety, whereby commonly he disquiets many,
that because carnal corruption is in them, he would therefore bear them in
hand that they are none of Christ's. In this he plays the deceiuer, he tries us
by the wrong rule when he tryes us by the rule of perfect sanctification, this
is the square which ought to be laid to Christ's members triumphant in heaven,
and not to those who are militant here upon earth: Sin remaining in me will
not prove that therefore I am not in Christ, (otherwise Christ should have no
members upon earth) but grace working that new disposition which nature could
never effect, proves undoubtedly that we are in Christ Jesus.

Let this therefore be our comfort, that albeit there be in There is fleshly
corruption in the Christian militant, but he follows it not.
us a fleshly corruption, yet thanks be to God we walk not after it, that is,
we follow not willingly the direction and commandment thereof. It is true, and
alas we find it by experience, the regenerate man may be led captive (for a
time) to the law of sin: he may be pulled persorce out of the way of Gods
commandments, wherein he delights to walk, and compelled to do those things
which he would not, yet even at that same time he disclaymes the government of
the flesh, mourning and lamenting within himself that he should be drawn from
the obedience of his own Lord and governor, the spirit of Jesus.

And indeed it is worthy to be marked that what ever Any service the Christian
gives to sin, is thrown out by oppression, like that which Israel gave to
Pharaoh.
service the regenerate man gives unto sin, it is like the service that
Israel gave to Pharaoh in Egypt, thrown out by oppression, and therefore
compelled them to sigh and cry unto God: but the service which the regenerate
man gives to the Lord, is voluntary, done as unto his most lawful superior,
with gladness, joy and contentment of mind. Happy is that man who can make
this reply to his spiritual adversary, when he is challenged of his sins.
It is true (O enemy) that I have done many things by thy entisement, yet
herein I rejoice, that whatsoever service I have done to thee, it is now
through the grace of God the matter of my grief, but the weak service I have
given unto God, is the matter of my joy.

Moreover, in this Metaphor of walking, we are taught, That our life is called
a walking, teaches us four things.
that as the walking of the body is a moving from one place to another, so the
Christian life is a continual moving of the heart from one thing to another,
that is, from sin to 1 The life of a Christian is a removing from evil to
good. Isai 1. 16. 17. Luke. 16. 13. 2. Tim. 2. 19.
sanctification: departing from our selves that we may draw near unto God:
both these are comprised by Esaias, Cease to do evil, learn to do good. Our
progress in this journey is not made, pedibus, sed affectibus, by motion of
our feet, but of our affections, but the beginning thereof is a departing from
evil. No man can serve two Masters: he who will draw near to the Lord and
call upon his name, must depart from iniquity. Sicut in gradibus, etc. in the
going Basi. in Psa. 1.
up of a staire (says Basil) the first step raises a man from the earth, and
then he goes up by degrees till he come where he would be; so is it in our
own conversion, principium perfectionis ad Deum, est discessus a malo, the
beginning of our journey to God, is a departure from evil. This I mark Many
bastard Christians have never yet risen from evil, far less removed to good.
for the wakening of those upon whom the Lord Jesus has called, but they have
not yet with Lazarus risen out of the grave; nor with Matthew forsaken their
receipt of custom; yea, have not so much as with the man sick of the palsy
risen out of their bed (of security) far less have begun with David to run
the way of the Lords Commandments: they have not learned to forsake evil,
much less to follow that which is good: the Lord has called upon them, but
they have not gone one foot from their old sins: been ambulant pedibus, sed
malc moribus: their feet are straight, but their manners are exceeding
crooked: they make no progress forward toward the Lord of Sion; they delight
to abide still in Babell and Egypt, working without rest, But dies in the same
state wherein they were borne.
but their labor is unprofitable. Ambulant in circuitu, they walk as in a
circle, the center whereof is Satan, the circumference sundry sorts of sins,
beyond which they walk not: from one of these the wicked walks about to
another, in such sort, that incontinent they return to the same; they weary
themselves in the way of iniquity, but are still in the same place at their
going out of the world wherein they came into it; that is, as they were borne
in sin, so they die in sin, their miserable life not being a walking in the
way of Godliness, but a wallowing in one and the self same puddle of sin.

But leaving them, let us mark for our instruction in this 2 So long as we
are here, we are not at the end of our journey and therefore should not rest.
1. King. 197. Theoph. in 2. episl. ad Cor.
Metaphor of walking, that we are not yet where we should be; we have not
attained to the end of our journey: therefore every day should we gird up our
loins, remembering that warning which the Angel gave to Eliah, as most
pertinent unto us, Arise, and walk, thou have yet a great i^urney to go. Of
the Children of God (said Theophilactus) quid un sunt in patriae, quidam in via
ad patriam, some are at home in their own Country, some are in the journey
homeward; but woe be to them who are neither in their own Country, neither in
the way unto it: we are not therefore to settle our selves here, as if we had
no further to go, but must walk Psalm. 84. 7. Basil. tom. 1.
forward through this valley of tears, from strength to strength, till at last
we appear before the face of God in Sion. Adhuc in Aegipto detin^mur,
promissionis terram n^ndum cap. vlt.
sortiti sumus, quomodo igitur cantabo canticum dominian terra aliena? we are
still detayned in Egypt, we have not ye^ obtained the land of promise, how then
shall I sing the songs of the Lord in a strange land? we are not yet past the
red sea, not the vaste wilderness, nor the fiery Serpents, what shall we do,
but water our couch night and day with tears and with fear and trembling walk
on the rest of the way which yet is before us? 3 Seeing our life is a walking,
take heed we keep the right way.


Thirdly, seeing we are in a journey, let us take heed that we keep the
way, otherwise our life shall be a wandering from God, not a walking toward God,
the way is Christ; I am the way: if we abide in it, we shall walk with God
as Enoch did; before God as Abraham did; toward John. 14. 6.
God as David did. O happy turn, wherein Christ is both the end, the way, and
the guide. Eamus post Christum, quia Ber in paruis Sermonibus Sermon. 23.
veritas, per Christum, quia via, ad Christum, quia vita. Let us walk after
Christ, because he is the truth; let us walk in Christ, because he is the way;
let us walk toward Christ, because he is the life. If ye look to the
companies of men in the world, ye shall see some in stead of following Christ,
flying from him, Qui enim male facit, odit lucem, for he who does evil hates
the light: Others where they should follow him, run before him, not waiting
upon his light and direction in matters of his worship, follows their own
spirit, doing that which is good in their own eyes, they run with zeal, but
not in the right way.

And we have so much the more to take heed unto the For he that walks after
the flesh, shall at length encounter with death.
way, because every man's course declares what kind of man he is, whether
carnal or spiritual, and what will be his end: he that sows to the flesh,
of the flesh will reap corruption, but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of
the Spirit reap life everlasting. I am persuaded there is no man among Gal. 6.
us, who will not say he would be at the best end, which is eternal life; but
here is the wonderful folly of men, the proposed end of their pilgrimage
whereat they would be is heaven, but the way wherein they walk, is the way
that leads close into hell. Who will not esteem him a fool, who in word
says his journey is toward the South, and yet for no man's warning will
refrain his feet from walking toward the North? but more foolish is he, who
professing himself a Pilgrim travailing toward heavenly Jerusalem, keeps
notwithstanding a contrary course, having his back upon heaven, and his face
toward hell; walking not after the Spirit, but after the Flesh. O pitiful
blindness and folly! how many witnesses of God have forewarned thee in thy
life, all crying to thee with a loud voice, this way wherein thou walk (O
sinful man) is the way of death? he who lives after the Flesh, shall dye
assuredly; yet will thou not return, nor change the course of thy life, to
walk after the living God, that thou may be saved?

And having once found the right way which may lead Three profitable helps of
a godly life.
us unto God, let us strengthen our selves to walk in it, by those three most
notable helps of a godly life, delivered to us by David, in three verses of
119. Psalm. Verse. 57. O Lord Psalm. 119.
I have determined to keep thy word. 58. I have made my supplication in thy
presence with my whole heart. 59. I have considered my ways and turned my
feet unto thy testimonies. 1 Determination.
Determination is the first; it is a good thing by settled resolution 2
Supplication.
to conclude with thy self that thou will live godly. Supplication is the
second; except by continual prayer our determination be confirmed, and
strengthened by grace from God, our conclusions which we take to day shall
vanish 3 Consideration.
to morrow. Consideration is the third; and it is profitable to reduce us
again into the way of God, so often as of weakness we wander from it,
contrary to our first determination. These are the three helps to keep our
heart in the way of God, so necessary that if without them we do any work,
it is not possible but we shall be snared. And therefore as in a ship which is
ready to sail, so soon as the sails are hoysed up, presently some skillful
Mariner starteth to the rudder: so every morning, wherein we rise from our
rest, and make our selves ready to go forward in our pilgrimage; let us first
of all take heed unto the heart, for it is the rudder of the whole body; let us
knit it unto God by this threefold cord, whereof I have spoken: so shall our
ways be ordered aright, and we shall make a happy progress every day in that
way which leads to eternal life. By determination we begin to keep a good
course. By supplication we continue in it. By consideration we see whether we
be right or wrong: if we be out of the way, consideration warnes us to return
again into it. Happy is that man in whose life one of these three is always
an actour. 4 Our life should be a daily progress in godliness.


And fourthly, by this Metaphor of walking, that in our Christian conversation,
there should be a continual progress in godliness. For as in walking (says
Basil) the steps of the feet by a mutual strife among themselves are changed,
in such sort that the foot which now is hindmost is foremost next, continuing
always this motion, till we come to the place of our rest: so should there be in
the Christian such a continual promouing of his heart toward God, that the
affection which this day is behind, coldest in the love of God, slowest to
obey him, should the next day be made foremost. In hac enim vita non progredi,
est regredi, cum nihil Bern. ser. de ordine, etc.
adhuc in eodem statu permaneat, for in this life nothing stands in one
state, it is most certain that he that goes not forward goes backward: yet I
would not so be understood as if the Christian had not his own fainting and
falling in the way of godliness; yet blessed be God, who keeps our souls in
life: we so ^aint that we revive, we so fall that we rise again; of our
former follies we learn to be wise; of the experience of our weakness we
gather strength, we walk the more warily, because so often we have stumbled
and fallen; of our sins we make vantage: verus poenitens semper est in
dolor, and timore, he who is truly penitent walks always in sorrow and fear;
in sorrow, because be has fallen so often; in fear, least he should fall
again. And thus much concerning the general proposition.

Verse 2. For the law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, has
freed me from the law of sin, and of death.
HItherto we have heard that general proposition 2 Confirmation of his
Proposition.
of comfort, belonging to the Christian. Now follows the Confirmation thereof,
he has said, there is no condemnation to them wh^ The Apostle confirms his
general proposition.
are in Christ, Now he proves it. There is in Christ Jesus a lively working
power, which ^reeth all that are in him from the law of sin, and of death;
therefore to them who are in Christ there can be no condemnation: for we being
freed from sin, what can condemn us? How Christ has freed us from the law
of sin, he explaines in the next two verses: there is in sin a twofold law,
that is, a twofold power; first, a commanding power; secondly a condemning
power: but in Christ there is a law, that is, a power of the lively spirit, or
a lively spiritual power, delivering us from them both. For first from the
condemning power of Showing how we are delivered both from the commanding and
condemning power of sin.
sin he shows we are delivered by the merit of Christ's death, and suffering
in the flesh, whereby he has condemned sin: which merit imputed to us that
are in him; does so free us, that sin has no force nor power to condemn us
in judgment, and this he handles in the third verse. Secondly, he shows how
we are delivered from the commanding power of sin, by the lively virtue of
Jesus Christ, which being communicated unto us quickneth us, and makes us to
begin to fulfill the righteousness of the law, so that refusing to walk after
the flesh, we endeavor to walk after the spirit, and this he handles in the
fourth verse: showing that the end why Christ has condemned sin in his
flesh, is that he might sanctify us to the obedience of his holy law,
whereunto at the last he shall make us fully conformable. Thus you see how that
former ground of comfort is confirmed unto us, howsoever by nature we were
under the law of sin, and consequently under damnation, yet now by Christ we
are freed from all law of sin, and so freed also from condemnation.

The phrases used here by the Apostle, makes his purpose Phrases used by the
Apostle expounded.
seem to be the more obscure, therefore will we first explane them. This
phrase, the spirit of life in Christ, is more significant than that well it can
be expressed in so few effectual terms. The Apostle was sent a Doctor to the
Gentiles, yet does he labor earnestly to convert the Jews; for both their
edifications he so tempers his style, that speaking to the Gentiles in the
Grecian language, he keeps the Hebrew phrase, which as I said makes his
speech appear the harder. The spirit of life in Christ, then, is no other
thing but the life of Christ, like that Revel. 11. 11. Again, the law of the
spirit of life in Christ, is no other thing but that forcible working lively
power which is in Christ: for it is customable to the holy Apostle to use the
word law to express any thing, wherein there is a commanding or working
power; so he has ascribes a law to sin, a law to his members, a law to
death, and now very properly he oppones unto them a law of the spirit of life
in Christ: which is more lively and powerful to save, to free, and to quicken,
then any law that has contrary power, can be able to destroy, captive, or slay
them who are in Christ.

Thus the words being expounded, the first lesson will arise Our adversaries
Satan, sin, and death, are strong, but our Savior is stronger.
out of the Apostles manner of speech, who ascribing to sin and death a law,
which may condemn and destroy, ascribes to Christ a more powerful law, to
justify and preserve. Most sure then is our estate who are in Jesus Christ,
for there is a power in our Lord, which shall bring every contrary power of man
and Angel in subjection to him: Comfort.
that tyrant sin has indeed oppressed and ouer-ruled many a one, but our
Lord Jesus the valiant conqueror has a mighty power able to disanull the law
of sin: and Satan is that strong one who by nature possesses the heart of
man, as his own house, but Jesus is that stronger one, who will dispossess
him and cast him out of the hearts of all such as are his: The God of peace
shall shortly tread Satan under our feet, and therefore suppose we be weak in
Romans 16. 20.
our selves, yet we will rejoice in the strength of the Lord Jesus.

Secondly, we learn here that without Christ we lived In what a vile bondage
we lived by nature
in a vile servitude and bondage, of all servants those are in worst case who
are sold, and of those who are sold, they are worst who must do service in
prison, and of them who are in prison, most lamentable is their estate who are
chayned and bound in prison, yet such servants were we by nature before Christ
made us free, we were not only the servants of sin, and sold under sin,
as witnesses the Apostle, but more also we were, as says Esaias, captiued and
bound with chains in prison, the Iaylour whereof is infidelity: for we were
all shut up under unbelief, a Iaylour so strait and tyrannous, as permitted
us not so long as we were in his keeping, so much as to lift up our head, or
look up to heaven for deliverance from him from whom only comes our help.
Our oppressors in this bondage, are Satan and Sin, and sins of so many
sorts, as do miserably distract the soul. Pride one while usurping dominion
over us; Avarice another while vendicating a seat to her self with power to
command us; Concupiscence most commonly challenging us to do her service, as
our sovereign. Sic certant in me de me ipso cuius potissimum esse videar, thus
Ber. hom. 4.
do they strive within me (says Bernard) about me to which of their dominion
I should appertain. That which he confessed of himself, all the Godly may
feel in their own experience, innumerable are those tyrants that strive among
themselves, but all of them strive against us to have domination over us, but
indeed these are uncouth Lords, and such as can claim no title nor right over
us, we are the workmanship of God, the redeemed of the Lord, and are bound to
do service to none but to him alone. O Lord therefore come down and possess
thine own kingdom, erect a throne to thy self in our hearts, that thou by
thy Spirit may reign in us as our King, and make us free from these tyrants
that would oppress us.

But that we may the better perceive how abominable Three things to be
considered in this bondage.
this servitude is, let us out of the Apostles words mark these three things:
first, how this dominion is tyrannical: secondly, how the commandments of
these tyrants are all wicked: and thirdly, are all deadly; these three he
touches shortly, when he says that Christ has freed us from the law of sin
and death. First then, he ascribes unto sin How a Law is ascribed unto sin.
a Law, not as if sin proceeded by a Law, (properly so called) or that there
were any lawfulness in sin, but only to point out the tyranny thereof: for
as Rulers ordained by God have their own Laws by which they govern their
Subjects in justice, so has also tyrannous usurpers their own commandments,
to the obedience whereof they enforce such as are under them. And this tyrranny
the Apostle here ascribe unto sin.

A tyrranny lawless, and most intolerable: for where 1 Sin is such an
intolerable tyrant as never suffers his Subjects to rest.
as any other oppressor will sometime give rest to such as are under his
bondage. Even in Egypt under Pharaoh, the Israelites had license to refresh
themselves with meat, and drink, and sleep; this spiritual oppressor gives no
rest to his miserable captives, but whether they eat, or drink, or sleep he
always exacts the service of sin from them, so that he does in such sort lie
in wait to snare the children of God, Vt faciat aliquando dormientibus, quod
non potest vigilantibus, August. ser. de temp.
that sometime he does that unto them when they are a sleep, which by no
means he is able to do when they are waking. And if so he do to the Saints,
what marvel if he turmoyle the mind of his Captives incessantly with
unclean cogitations? When Satan had once put it into the mind of Judas to
betray Jesus, did he suffer him to rest till he had performed it? no indeed,
he permitted him not so much as to eat his meat, but hastened him from the
Table to accomplish his sin he had intended: and Ammon being once entised to
defile his sister Thamar, was so vexed that his flesh melted away, and his
mind had no rest. O how intolerable oppressors are man's inordinate
affections where they have dominion over him! ^lye (therefore says the
Apostle) the lusts of thy youth: noisome lusts, they 1. Pet. 2. 11.
sight (says Saint Peter) against thy soul, they are enemies 2. Tim. 2. 22.
to our peace, and to calling upon the name of the Lord with a pure heart.
Libido est furiosa domina si semel te comprehenderit Amb. de fuga seculi cap. 4.
nec die nec nocte sinet te requiescere: Lust said Ambrose, is a furious
mistress, who if once she comprehend thee, shall not suffer thee to rest
neither night nor day.

Secondly, in this servitude, all the Commandments are always unlawful: the
most unreasonable tyranny that 2 All the commandments thereof are unlawful.
ever was, sometime has had a reasonable command, but the Law of sin
commands and enforces always the transgression of the Law of God. Sore was
Israel oppressed when they were compelled in Egypt to work in brick and clay,
a service unseemly in a holy people made free by the Lord, but was it
comparable to Satan's tyranny which he exercised over us when we were strangers
from the life of God, through the ignorance that was in us? and not content
with the evil he has done us, still he usurps over us, even now when the
Son has made us free. The Lord put in our minds to know how slavish and
unreasonable Satan's bondage is, that our hearts may be confirmed to resist
him. 3 They are all deadly.


Lastly, the commandments of this tyranny are all deadly, for the Law of sin
subiecteth to the Law of death, the commanding power of sin, if we yield
unto it, delivers Iam. 1. 13.
us unto the condemning power of sin: for sin, when it is finished brings
out death. And herein Satan bewrayes himself to be a shameless and
faithless traitor* not only he promises life, when his purpose is to
inflict death, but where first he entises man unto sin, he does next accuse
man to God for those same sins which man has done by his entisement. Be
assured of this, thou who art led captive of Satan to do his will, that he
who now without ceasing is a tempter of thee to sin, shall shortly after this
be a tormenter of thee without intermission, because thou have sinned.

And if this cannot yet move us to become weary of A threefold godly
meditation profitable to make us weary of the service of sin.
this bondage let this threefold meditation help us. Consider first what we
have been: secondly, what we hope to be: thirdly, what even now we may be in
regard of the present occasion, and we shall see that it is most unseemly 1 If
we consider what we have bin by creation.
for us to live any more servants to so unkindly, unreasonable, and
intolerable Masters. Remember first thy original glory, O thou man of God,
thou were made to the image of God, invested in this dignity to be Lord, and
ruler over the creatures* Animales O homo principatu decoratum, Basil. hexam.
hom. 10.
vt quid seruis affectionibus? quamobrem tuam ipsius dignitatem abijcis, teque
ipsum seruum peccat^ constituis? quare te ipsum facis capt^^u^ diaboli?
Princeps creaturarum consti^^t^s es, and dignitatem naturae tuae proijcis. O
man thou art a creature adorned with princely power (by thy first creation) why
then seruest thou affections? why do thou cast away thine own dignity, and
makes thy self a captive of Satan? thou wast placed Lord of the creatures,
thou wast appointed to rule over the fish of the Sea, and every beast of the
field, what shame is it then that thou should be ouer-ruled with those
beasts which are within thee?

Secondly, consider what thou hopest to be after this 2 What we hope to be
after this life.
life, do thou not hope to reign as a King in the heavens, and will thou now
live as a slave to Satan upon earth? Is any man crowned except he s^riue as he
ought? or does he receive the prize, who runs not the race? or can he
obtain the victory, who never wrestled? why then fightest thou not? why
runnest thou not? why beginnest thou not to reign in earth as a king over thy
lusts, seeing thou hopest to reign as a king in heaven in glory? Do not
deceive thy self, that crown is for conquerours not for captives. Non sperare
potest regnum coelorum* cui supra propria membra regnare Ber. de persecutione
sustine^da. cap. 11. 1. John. 3. 2.
non donatur: he cannot look for that heavenly kingdom, to whom it is not
given to reign over his own earthly members. We know that when Jesus shall
appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, and he that
has this hope in himself, purges himself even as he is p^re. Certainly, if
the Lord through Grace prepare thee not for his Heavenly Kingdom, thou can
never say with a warrant, that the Lord has prepared that kingdom for thee.

And thirdly, the consideration of the present occasion 3 What presently we may
be.
should waken us to go out of this house of bondage, for now the Son of God
offers to make us free, a Prince of greater power, is content to enter into
confederacy with us, he promises to restore us to all the privileges we
lost in Adam; yea to give us much more than ever we had in him, and shall we
neglect so fair an occasion? When Cyrus king of Persia proclaimed liberty to
the Jews to go from Babell, the place of their captivity, homeward to
Jerusalem, it is said, that all those went forward whose spirit God had raised
up: and now when the Lords anointed proclaymes liberty to the captives, and
the opening of the door to them that are in prison, I know that none shall
follow his calling but such whose spirit the Lord has raised up; the rest
being miserably blind, delight to lie still in captivity; thinking their
bondage liberty. The Lord give us grace that we may discern the time of our
visitation, that with David we may advance our eyes toward the Lord, who has
begun to pluck our feet out of the not, and that still we may lift up, and
stretch out our hands unto him, till he have delivered us fully from the power
of the enemy.

This being spoken of the bondage, we are now to consider Our deliverance from
this bondage is to be ascribed unto Christ only. Heb. 13. 9. Revel. 7. 1^.
Isai. 42. 8.
that our deliverance from it is here ascribed to Jesus Christ. Thy perdition
is of thy self O Israel. But our salvation belongs to the Lord, and to the
Lamb that sits upon the throne. Let no man therefore be so unthankful as to
ascribe any part of this glory to another, my glory will I not give to another,
says the Lord: the glory of a temporal deliverance God will not give it unto
man; he would not save Israel under Gideon, with thirty two thousand, and
why? least Israel should vaunt against the Lord, and say my right hand has
done it. Or ever he entered his people Israel into the land of Canaan, he
forewarned them that they should not say it was for their righteousness, and
will he then think ye; give the praise of this most notable deliverance to
the Creature? No the whole book of God witnesses that it is not for our
righteousness, but for the praise of the glory of his rich mercy, that we are
entered into heavenly Canaan. Did Peter, James and John help the Lord Jesus, in
that agony which he suffered in the garden? no surely, be bad them watch with
him and pray, but when he was sweating blood, they were sleeping; when he was
buffeted in Caiphas hall, did not Peter deny him? when he went to the Cross,
did not all his disciples forsake him? and those who loved him most dearly,
did they not stand a far off from him? Certainly he alone troad the
winepresse of the wrath of God, he alone bare the punishment of our sins in
his blessed body on the Cross: to him therefore alone pertayneth the glory of
our salvation.

As for the persons to whom this deliverance pertaines, Mercies of god showed
upon others should confirm us if we repent, to look for the like to our
selves.
the Apostle names himself among them, has freed us; not to exclude, but
rather to confirm all others who are in Jesus Christ. For he confesses of
himself that he was received to mercy, for this end, that God might show upon
him an example of long suffering, to them who shall in time to come believe in
him unto eternal life: therefore it is that he speaks of this deliverance in
his own person, for the confirmation 2. Tim. 1. 16.
of others, who having been before, as he was, notorious sinners, are now
become such as repents, and believes. And indeed every example of GODS mercy
showed unto others, should serve to strengthen us. Audient^s Christum non
horruisse confitentem latronem, etc. when we Bernard.
hear (says Bernard) that the Lord Jesus abhorred not the penitent Thief on
the Cross; that he despised not the sinful Cananitish woman, when she made
supplication; nor the woman taken in Adultery; nor him that sat at the receipt
of Custom; nor the Publicane, when he sought mercy; nor the Disciple that
denied him; neither yet the persecuter of his Disciples: in odore horum
vnguentorum ^urramus post cum, in the sweet smell of these ointments, let us
run after him.

Always we see that the Apostle does speak unto others Preachers not
pertakers of that mercy, which they
of a deliverance obtained by Christ, as being also pertaker thereof himself.
As he was a Preacher of Christ, so he was a follower of Christ, he beat down
his body by discipline, least that preaching unto others he should have been
a pronounce to others, are most miserable.
reprobate himself: and therefore he now speaks as one who is sure that he
also has his portion in Christ. Otherwise what comfort can it be, either to
Preacher or professor to speak of that life and grace, which comes by Christ
Jesus, they themselves in the mean time being like to that miserable Atheist
Simon Magus, to whom Peter gave out that fearful sentence, thou have neither
part nor fellowship in Acts. 8. 21.
this business, or like those Priests in Jerusalem in the days of Herod, who
directed others to Bethleem by the light of the word, to worship Christ, but
went not themselves; or those builders of Noah's Arc, who helped to build a
vessel for preservation of others, but perished in the deluge themselves; or
like Bilhah and Zilpah, who brought forth and nourished free men unto Jacob,
but remained themselves in the state of bond women? from this unhappy
condition the Lord deliver us, and make us partakers of that mercy and grace,
whereof he has made us Preachers and professors.

From the Law of sin and death.] Here the Apostle shows from what it is
that we are delivered. David says, many deliverances gives the Lord to his
anointed: he spoke Psalm. 18. 51.
it of himself, and it is true of all the Children of God. By a great
deliverance he saved Noah in the deluge; Lot in the burning of Sodom; Israel
out of Egypt; Joseph in the prison; Daniel in the den; the three Children in
the sierie furnace, but all these are small if they be compared with this
deliverance from sin and death.

Where first we learn how the Apostle conioynes these Sin and death God has
conjoined, who shall separate them?
two, sin and death: if we be delivered from the first we shall also be
delivered from the second; but if we abide in the first we shall be sure not
to escape the second: if therefore Satan say unto us as he did to our first
Parents though y^u eat^ ^f this forbidden tree ye shall not dye; let us
answer him, he has proved already a shameless liar, and we are not any more
to credit him: that same penalty lies upon every sin, which was laid upon
the first, if ye do it, ye shall die. God has conjoined them, and who shall
separate them? though the Lord speak not instantly to every sinner, as he did
to Abimelech, behold thou art but dead, because Genesis 20. 3.
of this sin, yet is it true of every sin, when it is finished it brings
out death. So soon as Jonas entered into the Sea (says Chris. hom. 5. ad popu.
Ant.
Chrysostom) the storm rose, to teach us that Vbi peccatum, ibi procella,
where there is sin, specially committed with rebellion, there will not fail
to arise a storm of the wrath of God.

It is true indeed, the sinner in committing of sin does What a deceiuer
Satan is in tempting to sin.
not perceive this, being blinder than Balaam, he walks on in an evil course,
and sees not the sword of Gods vengeance which is before him, but imagines
always to reap some good either of profit, or pleasure, by committing of sin:
for these are Satan's two baits, under which he couers his deadly hooks. It
is therefore a point of singular wisdom to decerne between the deceit of
sin present, and the fruit of sin to come, between that which Satan
promises, and that which we find in experience performed. He promised to our
Parents that they should be made like unto God, but in very deed he made them
miserable like himself. And if thou will also observe that which thou find
in thy own experience, what fruit have thou of a Romans 6. 11.
sin, when thou have committed it? does not darkness arise in thy mind,
heaviness in thy heart, terror, fear, and accusing cogitations in thy
conscience? Every man may find it, who list to mark it by more then a thousand
experiences in himself, that Satan is a shameless deceiuer; yea, more
deceitful then Laban, who promised to give to Jacob Genesis 34.
beautiful Rahel, but in the dark he gave him bleare-eyed Leah: be assured he
will change thy wages, promise thee one thing, and pay thee with another. As
Hamor spoke to his Sichemites, so does Satan to his blind-folded Citizens, he
persuaded his people that if they would be circumcised, all Jacobs substance
and cattle should be theirs: but indeed the contrary ensued, for the goods of
the Sichemites befell to the house of Jacob, and they themselves perished by
the sword. Let us therefore beware of the inuenomed tongue of the Devil,
mentitur, vt fallat; vitam pollicetur, vt perimat: Cypr. lib. 1. Epist. 8.
he lies that he may deceive, he promises life, that he may inflict death: say
he what he will, let us believe the word of the Lord, confirmed by doleful
daily experience, the wages of sin is death. God has knit them together, and
who shall separate them?

So often then as Satan by the deceit of sin would beguile Sin seems sweet,
but the fruit thereof is bitter.
thee, remember that though sin seem to be sweet, the fruit thereof is
exceeding bitter: if thou fear not sin, fear that end whereunto sin
leads thee, dulce peccatum, sed amara mors, sin is sweet, but death is
bitter: remember that the wages which Satan promises and man would have, he
shall not get; but the wages which God threatens, and man would not have,
shall assuredly be paid him: for this is the misery of those who walk in
their sins, illud propter quod peccant, hic dimittunt, and ipsa peccata Aug.
hom. 42.
s^cum portant, that for which they sin, they leave it behind them, and
carry their sins away out of the world with them. So that in the end, when
they shall gather the profit of all their former sins into a sum, they
shall find no other, but that foretold by the Apostle, What profit Romans 6. 21.
have ye now of all those things whereof ye are ashamed? surely there is no
fruit but shame and death to be plucked from the forbidden tree of sin.

But here it may be objected by the weak conscience Comfort for the godly who
are troubled with the tentations of sin.
of the godly, how can this comfort be ours, that we are freed from sin, who
find our selves so continually assaulted; yea oftentimes oppressed of sin?
For answer, let us mark that the Apostle says not we are fully freed from
sin in this life, but we are freed from the law of sin, that is, both from
the commanding and condemning power thereof. Sin does not now reign in our
mortal bodies as before, neither has it power any more to detain us under
death. But as for the temptations of sin, there is no sort of men more
troubled with them, then they whom God has begun to deliver from the Law of
sin: for Satan being impatient of his loss, seeks daily to recover his
former dominion From the time that once the Gibeonites made peace for
themselves with Joshua, all the rest of Joshua. 9.
the Kings of Canaan made war against them: and so soon as we enter into a
covenant with the Lord Jesus Satan shall not fail the more hereely to assault
us, seeking to recover his old possession; yet if as the Gibeonits did, we send
speedily messengers to our Iehosua, to show him how we are troubled for his
sake, he shall not withdraw his helping hand from us.

Our deliverance from sin is begun now, but not Our begun deliverance from
sin, the Lord shall perfect. 1. Cor. 1 8. Phil. 1. 6.
perfected, but we know that our God is faithful, by whom we are called, he
shall also confirm us to the end. Even he who has begun this good work in
us, will perform it until the day of Christ. As the Angel who delivered
Peter out of prison, appeared to him with a shining light in the dark prison,
smote him upon his side, and wakened him out of his sleep, made his chains to
fall from him, and caused him to arise and follow him, went still before him,
to lead him in the way through all impediments, and departed not from him till
he had entered him within the City of Jerusalem: so the spirit of our Lord
Jesus, who has once come down upon us in this prison, and has lightened our
darkness, wakened us out of our dead security, and loosed the chains of our
sins wherewith we were bond, shall abide continually with us, governing us
with his light and truth, till he have entered us within the ports of heavenly
Jerusalem. Blessed be the Lord, where before we were the captives of sin, now
the course of the battle is changed, sin is become our captive, through
Christ, it remains in us not as a commander, but as a captive of the Lord
Jesus: it is true, the boltes of sin are yet upon our hands and feet to
admonish us of our former miserable thraldom: we draw as yet the chains of
sin after us, which makes us indeed go forward the more slowly, but are not
able to detain us in that bondage, wherein we lay before.

And as concerning our deliverance from death, we are How we are delivered
from death both first and second.
to know that death is twofold: the first, and second: the first is a
separation of the soul from the body: the second is a separation of them both
from the Lord. Mors prima Aug. de ciuit. dei. li. 21. ca. 3
pellit animam nolentem de corpore, mors secunda detinet animam nolentem in
corpore. The first death expels the soul against the will out of the body, the
second death compels the soul against the will to abide in the body: for unto
the greater augmentation of their pain, as they were companions of sin, so
shall they be compelled to abide companions of punishment.

This second death has three degrees, the first is when Second death has
three degrees.
the soul by sin is separated from the Lord: the second is, when the body by
the power of that curse due to sin, is turned into dust and the soul is sent
to hell: the third is, when both soul and body being joined together again in
the resurrection, shall be banished from the presence of the Lord, and cast
into utter darkness. And it is called the second death, because it is executed
upon the wicked after their first death, otherwise the first death that ever
came into the world, was the first degree of the second death. Mors Aug. de
verb. Apost. ser. 33.
animae praecessit, anima deserente Deum, and mors corporis sequ^ta est, anima
deserente corpus, deseruit Deum volens anima, and coacta est deserere corpus
nolens, the death of the soul went before, the soul departing from God, and
the death of the body followed the soul, departing from the body, How
Christians are exercised with terrors of conscience, which in the own nature
are forerunners of the second death.
the soul departed from God willingly, and therefore is compelled unwillingly
to depart out of the body.

Now from both these deaths we are delivered by the Lord Jesus, for our souls
being freed from sin, are reconciled with God, and so exempted from that
wrath which is to come. For, albeit the dear children of God be sometime
exercised with inward terrors of conscience, which in their own nature are
forerunners of these pains prepared for the wicked, and are as the smoke of
that fire which afterward shall torment them: yet unto the godly their nature
is changed, they are sent unto them, not to separate them from the Lord, but to
draw their hearts nearer unto him, and to work in them a greater conformity
with Christ.

And as for the first death, we are so delivered from it, The nature of the
first death changed to the Christian.
that albeit in the own nature it be the Center of all miseries, and a
fearful effect of Gods curse on man for sin, yet to the godly the nature
thereof is also changed, so that now it is not the death of the man, but the
death of sin Amb. de bono mort. cap. 4.
in the man: mors est scpultura vltiorum, death (says Ambro^) is the burial
of all vices. As the worm which is bred in the tree, says Chrysostom, does
at last consume it: so death which is brought out by sin, does at the length
consume and destroy sin in the children of God. Finally, death is the
progress and accomplishment of the full mortification of all our earthly
members, wherein that filthy flux of sin is dried up at an instant. It is a
voluntary sacrificing of the whole man, soul and body to the Lord, the
greatest and highest service we can do to him in the earth: for where in the
course of our life we are continually fighting against our inordinate lusts and
affections, to bring them in subjection to Christ, by death as it were with one
stroke they are all smitten and slain, and the soul is offered up to God in a
sacrifice of full and perfect obedience.

Verse 3. For that that was impossible to the Law, in as much as it was weak,
because of the flesh, God sending his own Son, in the similitude of sinful
^^^sh, and that for sin, condemned sin in the flesh.
THE Apostle having set down in the first 3 Explication of the confirmation.
Here follows an explication of the confirmation of his general proposition.
Verse a Proposition of Comfort, belonging to them who are in Christ, and
confirmed it in the second, he proceeds now to the explication of the
Confirmation: declaring how it is that Christ has freed us from the law of
sin; and first, he shows how Christ has freed us from the condemning power
of sin, in this verse: namely, that he taking upon him our nature, and
therewithal the burden of our sins, has condemned sin 1 He shows how we
are freed from the condemning power of sin. The law could not save us.
in his blessed body, and so disanulled it, that it has no power to condemn
us. And this benefit he amplifies, showing that by no other means we could
obtain it: for where without Christ there is but one way for men to come to
life; namely, the observance of the law, he lets us see it was impossible for
the law to save us: and least it should seem that he blamed the law, he
subioynes, that this impotencie of the Law to save us, proceeds from our
selves, because that we through fleshly corruption which is in us cannot
fulfill that righteousness which the law requires.

This impotencie of the Law appears by these two Impotencie of the law to
save us appears in two things.
things: first, it craved that of us which we had not to give, namely, perfect
obedience unto all the Lords commandments, and that under pain of death:
which albeit most 1 It craves that which now our nature cannot give.
justly it be required of us, considering that by creation we received from God
a nature so holy, that it was able to do the law, yet now by reason of the
deprauation of our nature, drawn on by ourselves, it is impossible that we
can 2 It gives not that which our estate now craves.
perform it. Secondly, the law could not give that unto us whereof we stood
in need, namely, that the infinite debt of transgressions, which we had
contracted should be forgiven unto us: this I say the law could not do, for
the law commands obedience, but promises not pardon of disobedience; yea,
rather it binds the curse of God upon us for it. And again, we stood in need
of a supernatural grace to reform deformed nature, and this also the law
could not do, it being a doctrine that shows us the way to life, but
ministers not grace unto us to walk therein; but all these which the law could
not do, Jesus Christ by whom comes grace and life, has done unto us.

Where first we have to mark the pitiful estate of those Miserable blind
are they who seek li^e in perfect observance of the Law.
who seek life in the observance of the law, which here the Apostle says is
impossible for the law to give: they seek life where they shall never find
it. The Apostle in another place calls the law the ministry of death and
condemnation; and that because it instantly binds men under death for every
transgression of her commandments, so that he who has eyes to see what an
universal rebellion of nature there is in man unregenerate to Gods holy law;
yea, what imperfections and discordance with the law are remanent in them who
are renewed by grace, may easily epsy the blind presumption of those that
seek their lives in the ministry of death. Yet so universal is this error,
that it has Yet such are all the children of Adam by nature.
ouergone the whole posterity of Adam, nature teaching all men who are not
illumina^ed by Christ, to seek salvation in their own deeds, that is, to
stand to the covenant of works. But the supernatural doctrine of the
Evangelist teaches us to transcend nature, to go out of our selves, and to
seek salvation in the Lord Jesus, and so to use the law, not that we seek life
by fulfilling it, which here is impossible, but as a schoolmasters to lead us
unto Christ, in whom we have remission of our sins, sanctification of our
nature, acceptance of our imperfect obedience; benefits which the law could
never aford unto us.

Inasmuch as it was weak because of the flesh.] The Apostle does in such sort
ascribe to the law an impotencie to save us that he blames not the Law, but
the corruption of The impotencie of the law comes not of the law which is good,
but of our own corrupted nature.
our fleshly nature, being not able to fulfill that righteousness which the
law requires: yea as the Apostle has taught us before, so far is our nature
perverted by our Apostasy from God, that we are not only unable to do that
which the good and holy law of God requires, but also we become worse by the
law: for by the commandments of the law, sin reuiues in our nature, and takes
occasion by the law to become more sinful, and so like a desperate disease it
conuerts that medicine which is ministered to cure it into a nourishment and
confirmation of the sickness it self. It is Our nature becomes worse by the
law.
the nature of contraries, that every of them intends the self to expel
another; whereof it comes that there is greatest cold in the bosom of the
earth, even then when the Sun with greatest vehemency shines on it to
califie and heat it: even so our corrupted nature does never show it self more
rebellious and stubborn, than when the law of God begins to rectify it. As
an unruly and untamed horse, the more he is spurred foreward the faster he
runs backward: so the perverse nature of man, nititur semper in vetitum, is
so far from being reformed by the law, that by the contrary, sin that was
dead without the law, is revived by the law, and takes occasion to work in us
all manner of concupiscence. The Apostle is not ashamed to confess that he
found this in his own person; Augustine also examining Aug. lib. 2. confess.
cap. 4.
his former sinful life, does hereby aggrauate his corruption, that in his
young years he was accustomed to steal his neighbors fruit, not so much for
love of the fruit, for he had better at home, as for sinful delight he had to
go with his companions to commit evil: so that where the law should have
restrained his sinful nature, it was so much the more provoked to sin by the
law. Let therefore the Semipelagians of our time say to the contrary what they
will, let them magnify the arm of flesh, to diminish the praise of the grace
of God, and dream that man's nature unregenerate can bring forth merits of
congruitie or works of preparation, yet does the Lord herein greatly abase
man, when he tells him, that not only he cannot do that which the law
requires, but that also the more he is commanded the more he repines, until
Grace reform him.

God sending his own Son.] The Apostle proceeds and How Christ has done
that which the law could not.
let us see how the Lord by Christ has wrought that salvation which the law
could not. Wherein first it is to be marked, that the Apostle says not, we
sought from the Lord a Savior, but that the Lord sent him unto us unrequired.
Surely neither man nor Angel could have ever thought of such a way of
Salvation, the Lord has found it out himself in his incomprehensible
wisdom: a way so to save man, that the glory both of his mercy and justice
shall be saved also. Most properly therefore is he called, Pater non
iudiciorum, sed misericordiarum, Father not of judgments, but of mercies, for
both the purpose, and the Why God is called father of mercy not of judgments.
means of our salvation are from himself, he has found causes without him,
moving to execute his justice, he has been provoked thereunto by the
disobedience of apostate Angels, and men; but a cause moving him to show mercy
is within himself, this praise is due to God, it is the greatest glory that
can be given unto him. Abominable therefore is that error of foreseen
merits by which the adversaries do what they can to obscure the praise of the
bright shining glory of Gods mercy.

His own Son.] Jesus Christ is called Gods own How Christ is Gods own son.
Son, to distinguish him from all others who are his sons by adoption,
only Christ is the Son of God by nature, by that divine inutterable
generation, whereof, Esaias says Who can express it? Thus is he Gods own
son, that is, Esaias.
coeternall and coessentiall, begotten of the Father before all time, by the
full communication of his whole essence unto him in a manner that* cannot be
expressed. And in the fullness of time he became man, God being manifested in
the flesh, and in regard of his humane nature, which was conceived of the holy
Ghost, and united in a personal union with his divine, he stands in the title
of Gods own son, after so singular a manner, that he admits no companion.

The last of these two, the Apostle makes the first point Christ's divine
generation a great mystery. 1. Tim. 3. 16.
of the mystery of Godliness. God manifested in the flesh, wherein he bridles
our curiosity, for if his manifestation in the flesh, that is, his incarnation
be a mystery, that goes beyond our understanding, what shall we say of his
divine generation? a mystery to be indeed adored, not to be enquired, an
article proposed to be believed, not to be disputed. The Arrians seeking to
search out this unsearchable mystery with natural reason, by infinite degrees
more foolish then if they had presumed to number the stars of heaven, or
measure with their fist all the waters in the Sea, they stumbled Man's curiosity
restrained from searching it.
and fell, being never able to comprehend, how the son that was begotten should
be coeternall and coessentiall to the Father who begot him: therefore the
worthy Fathers of the primitive Church to repress the presumption of these
arrogant spirits, drew them down from the dangerous speculation of these high
mysteries far above their capacity, to consideration of things which are in
nature. Si in Creatura genitum inueniri potest, coaeuum genitori, an non aequum
August.
est concedas posse ista in creatore coaeterna inueniri? if in things created,
that which is begotten may be found equal in time to that which begat it, why
should it be denied that in the Creator, the begetter, and begotten are equal
in eternity? When a candle (says Augustine) is first lighted, at once there
are two things, the fire and the splendour, or light: if it be enquired whether
the fire come from the light, or the light from the fire, all men will agree
that the splendour or light comes from the fire: but if again it be demanded
which of them is first or last in time, it cannot be determined. But wherefore
shall we use these similitudes? as the Creator is above the creature, so is
that mystery above all the secrets of nature; no similitude can be found in
nature so much as shadow that most high and supernatural mystery: yet is the
endeavor of these godly fathers commendable, who have labored to bring down
men to the exercising of their wits in things which are below, like unto
themselves, leaving curious inquisition of higher secrets, which as I have
said, are to be received with faith, reverenced with Rom 11. 20.
silence, not searched out by curiosity. O man, be not high minded but fear.
Christ came like a sinful man, but without sin.


In the similitude of sinful flesh.] We must not so understand these words,
as if Jesus had only the similitude of a natural body; no he was very man,
made of the seed of David, he has taken our flesh indeed, yet was he not a
sinful man, but separated from sinners. A holy One, from the first moment of
his conception, conceived of the holy Ghost. A stone cut out of the mountain
without hands. The Dan. 2. 45. Cant.
Flower of the field, that grows without man's labor or industry. 1. Cor. 15.
The second Adam, very man as was the first, but not begotten of man. So then
the word ( similitude) is not to be joined with the word ( Flesh) but with the
word ( sinful.) He took on man's nature without sin, yet subject to those
infirmities, mortality and death, which sin brought upon us, he appeared like
a sinful man, being indeed without sin; in the shape of a Servant, content
to be made inferior not only to Angels, but to men of the vilest sort; sold
for thirty pieces of silver; not so worthy to live as Barrabas; ranked with
Thieves on the Cross, and reputed as a Worm of the earth: thus being void of
all sin, yet was he handled as a sinner and most wicked malefactor.

Wherein we are to consider so far as we may, though How dearly the Lord
loved us, perceive by the price he has given for our ransom.
we cannot comprehend it, that wonderful love which the Lord has showed us in
this work of our salvation, how dear and precious our life has been in his
eyes, perceive by the greatness of that price which he has given for us, for
who will give much for that whereof he esteems but little? it was not with
gold nor silver nor any corruptible thing, that the Lord has redeemed us, but
with the precious blood of his own Son Jesus, as of a Lamb unblemished and
unspotted. If David considering the goodness of God toward man in the work of
creation, fell out into this admiration, O Lord what is man that thou art
mindful of him, Psalm. 8.
or the Son of man that thou do visit him? how much more have we cause so
to cry out, considering the riches of God, his wonderful mercies showed us in
the work of redemption. It was a great kindness which Abraham showed to Lot,
when he hazarded his own life and the lives of his family to recover Lot out
of the hands of Chedarlaomer, but not comparable to that kindness which our
kinsman, the Lord Jesus, has showed unto us, who has given his life to
deliver us out of the hand of our enemies. The Lord shed abroad in our hearts
more and more abundantly the sense of that love, that we may endeavor to be
thankful for it, by this threefold duty, first of thanksgiving: secondly, of
service: thirdly, of love toward those who are beloved of him.

As for the first, our life should be a continual thanksgiving, Our
thankfulness again should be testified by this threefold duty.
and worshipping before him, who has loved us, and washed us from our sins
in his blood. When the children of Israel had passed the red sea, suppose they
had a vast wilderness between them and Canaan, yet they praised 1 Continual
thanksgiving.
God with a song of thanksgiving, and the Lord appointed an yearly remembrance
of that benefit. If smaller mercies are to be remembered with thanksgiving, what
shall we think of the greater?

As for the second, which is service: Zachary teaches 2 Service.
us that for this end God has delivered us from all our enemies, that all our
days we should serve him in righteousness Luke. 1. 74.
and holiness: the reason why the Israelites bound 2. Sam. 19. 9.
themselves to give subjection and obedience to David, was that he had
delivered them from the hand of the Philistines, the same reason Ezra used to
the Jews returned from captivity, to make them obedient to the Lord, Seeing
thou O Ezra. 9. 13.
Lord has given us such deliverances, shall we return any more to break thy
Commandments? but much more should it bind us to do service to our Lord
Jesus: seeing he has made us free by his blood, shall we again make our
selves the servants of sin? The Lord never showed a greater Professors
convinced that serve him not.
mercy on man, then this, that he gave his son Jesus Christ unto the death
for us, and there can be no higher contempt done to God by man, then if after
so great a love showed us, we shall still refuse to be his servants: much will
be required of him, to whom much is given, those Gentiles to whom the Lord
revealed himself in goodness only as their Creator, because they did not
glorify him, the Apostle says that the wrath of God was revealed from heaven
upon them, and what wrath then may thou look for, to whom the Lord has
manifested himself in mercy also, as thy Redeemer in Christ, and yet thou will
not glorify him? thou receiuest not him whom thy Father has sent unto thee,
neither will thou live unto him that gave himself to dye for thee, but by thy
wicked life thou crucifiest again the Son of God, and treadest under thy
feet the blood of the new covenant: certainly Sodom and Gomorrha shall be in
an easier estate in the day of judgment, then the wicked of this generation.
For in this last age the Lord has spoken to us by his Son, he has none
greater to send after him: those laborers of the vineyard that slew the
Servants of the great King, were not for that instantly punished, but when the
Son came, and they had murdered him also, then was their judgment no longer
delayed. It was not written for the Jews only in whom it was first
accomplished, but for us also, to whom the Father in this last age has sent
his own Son, and by whom he has spoken unto us from himself, if we
despise him there remains no more but a violent looking for of judgment.

The third duty is, that for Christ's sake we love unfeignedly Love to those
whom he has bidden love for his sake.
those whom he has recommended unto us: our goodness cannot extend unto the
Lord, neither have we him walking with us upon earth, that we may minister
unto him, may wash his feet, and anoint his blessed body with precious
ointments, therefore should our delight be upon those his excellent ones that
are upon earth. When Jonathan was dead, David for Ionathans sake showed
kindness to Mephibosheth: our Jonathan is not dead, he lives, and reigns in
heaven, yet can we not declare our kindness to himself, let us seek some
Mephibosheth, some of Christ's little weak and impotent children, of whom he
has said, what ye do to one of these little ones for my sake, is done to me:
and let us show kindness unto them, for the great love which the Lord Jesus
has showed unto us.

And that for sinne] These words contain the end of Christ came* to destroy
sin, cursed are they who nourish it.
Christ's manifestation in the flesh, which is, that in our nature he might
bear the punishment of our sins, satisfy the justice of God, and so abolish
sin. Sanit John makes this clear, when he says, that he appeared to destroy
the works of the devil, that is, sin: for sin being removed there is
nothing in man, but the workmanship of God. By this it is evident how highly
they offend God, who abuse the death of Christ, to nourish themselves in their
sin, being the bolder to commit sin, because Christ dyed for them: surely
this is to turn the grace of God into wantonness. The Lord came to abolish
sin, not to nourish it, 1. Pet. 3. 18.
Christ once suffered, the just for the unjust (not that we should still abide
unjust) but that he might bring us to God. Thou therefore who continuest
unjust, may say, as thou have heard, that there is a Savior come into the
world, but can not say in truth, that there is a Savior come to thee. For
where Christ comes, he works that work for which he came, namely, he
destroys the work of the devil, that is, he enfeebles, and abolishes at the
last the power of sin.

Condemned sin.] Sin by a metaphor is said to be condemned, How Christ has
condemned sin.
for as thy who are condemned are deprived of all the liberty, power, and
privileges they had before, and have no more any place to appear in
judgment, so has the Lord Jesus disanulled sin that it has now no power to
command and condemn us: he has spoiled principalities and powers, and
triumphed over them in the Cross, Colos. 2. 24.
and has nailed unto it the obligation of ordinances which was against us, and
so sustulit illam quasi authoritatem peccati, Ambrose in hunc locum
qua homines detinebat in inferno, has taken away that power and authority of
sin, whereby it detained men under damnation. This has he done most
lawfully, and in judgment, as we shall hear, bearing our sins in his
blessed body on the Cross, he has suffered that punishment which the law
required to be inflicted on man for sin, and that in the flesh, that is, in
the same nature of man which had offended.

For, this word of Condemnation imports a just, and lawful Two head or chief
justice Courts holden by God.
proceeding of a Judge in judgment: which that we may the better understand,
let us consider that there are two general and head justice Courts, which the
Lord has set unto men, the one is holden already, the other is to be holden: 1
In the first the sins of all Gods elect are condemned.
in the first the sins of all the elect are lawfully condemned, that
themselves may be absolved; in the second the persons of all the reprobate
shall be justly condemned. In the first by the ordinance of God the Father, our
sins were laid upon the back of Jesus Christ, and a law imposed to him which
was never given to any other, neither Angel or man, to wit, the law of a
Mediator, that he should make up peace between God and man; love God in such
sort, that he should by suffering preserve the glory of his Fathers justice,
and yet make manifest the glory of his mercy; that he should love his brethren
in such sort, that he should take the burden of their transgressions upon him,
which as by the Father it was enjoined unto him, so did he willingly undertake
it. And therefore having our sins imputed unto him, he presented himself for
us upon the Cross as upon a pannell before the Judge, to vnder-lye the law,
which craved that our sins should be punished to the death. The decree
according to the law is executed, death, yea an accursed death, as the
punishment of sin, is laid upon Christ: whereupon there follows of equity
an absolution of all those for whom the Lord Jesus suffered as Cautioner, their
sin is condemned and made of no force to condemn them hereafter. The other
general justice court 2 In the second the persons of all the wicked shall be
condemned.
will be holden in the last day, wherein all flesh must appear before the
Lord, as their superior: and in that supreme and last Court of justice shall
be condemned the persons of all those whose sins were not condemned before in
Christ Jesus, only therefore blessed are they who are in Christ: He that
hears my words, and belieues in him that sent me, has Ioh. 5. 24.
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from
death to life.

And lastly, we may observe here what a powerful Savior Christ did greatest
works when to man's judgment he was weakest.
we have, when to the judgment of man he was weakest, then did he the
greatest work that ever was done in the world: he was powerful in working of
miracles in his life, but more powerful in his death; for then he dar^ened the
Sun; he shook the earth; he made the rocks to cleave; he rent the vale of
the temple a sunder; and caused the dead to rise: Mortuum Caesarem quis metu^t?
sed morte Cyp. de duplici m^rtirio.
Christi quid efficacius, if Caesar be once dead who will fear? Christ even
when he is dead, is terrible to his enemies: nothing can be more effectual
then his death. By it he did a greater work than was the creation of the
world; by it he brought in new heavens; and a new earth; by suffering death he
destroyed him who had the power of death; when he was condemned of man, he
condemned sin that it should not condemn man: passus est vt infirmus,
operatus vt fortis, August. de temp. ser. 7. Macar. hom. 11.
he suffered as a weak man, but wrought as a strong one. ^icut serpens mortum,
etc. As that Serpent without life (erected by Moses in the wilderness)
overcame the living Serpents that stung Israel: so the Lord Jesus by suffering
death has slain that serpent that living in us had stung us Chris. hom. 2. in
Math.
unto death. Hic vides mortem morte peremptam maledictum maledicto extinctum,
and per quae Diabolus iam antea valebat, per ea ipsa tyrannidem ipsius esse
destructam: here thou see (says Chrysostom) death slain by death, and the
tyranny of Satan destroyed by those same means, by which before most of all
he prevailed.

O wonderful work! surely the weakness of God is Christ a powerful
Savior, stronger then Sampson, yea, stronger then that strong one.
stronger then man: he is that strong One indeed, stronger then Sampson. When
the Philistines thought they had him sure within the ports of Azzah, he arose
at midnight, and took the doors of the gates of the City, and the two
posts, and carried them away with the bars thereof on his shoulders up to the
top of the mountain, which is before Judge. 16. 1.
Hebron; but our mighty Conqueror and deliverer, the Lord Jesus, has in a
more excellent manner magnified his power: for being closed in the grave,
clasped in the bands of death, and a stone rolled to the mouth of the grave,
the Sepulcher sealed, and guarded with soldiers, he rose again the third day
before the rising of the Sun; he carried like a victor the bars and posts of
death away, as upon his shoulders; and upon the mount of Olives he ascended on
high leading captivity captive.

Like as therefore we received before great comfort Christ's power yields us
great comfort.
through the consideration of Christ's incomprehensible love toward us, so is it
now confirmed by the meditation of his power. Let Satan boast like Rabsache,
that the Lord 2. Reg. 18. 35.
is not able to deliver Jerusalem out of his hands, he is but a blasphemous
Liar, the Lord will rebuke him, and will shortly tread Satan under our feet:
it is the curse of the wicked, he shall be oppressed, and there shall be none
to deliver Deuteronomy. 28. 29.
him, but blessed be the Lord who has provided a strong deliverer for us, who
certainly shall set us free from our enemies, and destroy all the oppressors
of our souls. Psalm. 143. 12.
Glory therefore be unto him for ever.

Verse 4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.
THe Apostle having taught us in the former 2 Here follows the second member
of the explication, wherein he shows how we are delivered from the commanding
power of sin. Ephesians. 5. 26.
verse, how the Lord Jesus has freed us from the condemning power of sin, does
now let us see how we are freed also from the commanding power of sin; for he
sets down this to be the first, and nearest end of Christ's death in respect of
us, the renouation of our nature, and conformity thereof with God his holy law:
which he expresses more clearly in another place, when he says, that Christ
gave himself to the death for his Church, that he might sanctify it, and make
it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinckle, or any such
thing, but that it should be holy and without blame. This is the end which
Christ has proposed unto himself, and whereof he cannot be frustrate, as he
has begun it, so he shall finish it, he shall conform us to the law, the
righteousness thereof shall be fulfilled in us, there shall not be left in our
nature so much as a sinful motion or desire, but he shall at the last present
us pure and without blame to his Father.

This righteousness of the law, I understand to be that How the ri^hteousnesse
of the law is fulfilled in us.
perfect obedience to the Commandments thereof, which the law requires,
flowing from the perfect love of God and our neighbor: and it is fulfilled in
us two manner of ways: first, by application or imputation of Christ's
righteousness unto us, he is our head and we his members, and are so united
with him, that now we are not to be taken as sundry but as one body with him.
By virtue of the which communion it comes to pass, that that which is ours is
his, and that which is his, is ours, so that in our head we have fulfilled the
law, satisfied Gods justice for our sins. Secondly, it will be fulfilled in
us by our perfect sanctification, though now we have but begun obedience and in
part, the Lord Jesus at the last shall bring it in us to perfection.

The Jesuits of Rhemes in their marginall notes on this The Jesuits collect
here that the Law is fulfilled in this life.
Verse, collects a note which the word here renders not unto them. We see (say
they) that the Law, which is Gods commandments, may be kept, that the keeping
thereof is justice, and that in Christian men that is fulfilled by Christ's
grace which by the force of the Law could never be fulfilled: that the law may
be fulfilled, and also shall be fulfilled by the grace of Christ* who has
delivered us from the Law of sin, is evident This place proves no such thing.
out of the Apostles words, we confess it, and are comforted in it: this is an
end which Christ has proposed unto himself; that he may make us perfectly
answerable to that holiness which the Law requires, and in his own good time
he shall bring it to pass: but that the Law is fulfilled of men in this life,
cannot be proved, neither out of this place, nor any other place of holy
Scripture. Damnatum est peccatum, non extinctum: Sin is condemned (says
Caietane, Caietane.
one of their own) but not extinguished.

And hereunto beside infinite testimonies of holy Scripture, That the law is
not fulfilled in us, nor by us in this life is proved. Amb. de paeniten. lib.
1. cap. 6.
agrees also the suffrages of pure antiquity. Non dicit familia tua sana sum,
medicum non requiro, sed sana me Domine, and sanabor. It is not (says Ambrose)
the voice of thy family, I am whole, and needs not a Physician, but heal me,
O Lord, and I shall be healed, Tu audes Nouatiane mundum te dicere, qui etsi
operibus mundus esses hoc solo verbo i^mundus fieres. Ambrose spoke it to the
Nouatian Heretics of his time, and it may be sitly turned over to the
Jesuits of our time: Dare thou O Jesuit call thy self Ierem. 17.
clean and holy? Albeit thou were clean in regard of thy works, this one word
were enough to make thee unclean. With him also agrees Augustine: Sunt quidam
inflati vtres Aug. de verb. Apost. ser. 29.
spiritu elationis pleni, non magnitudine, ingentes, sed superbiae morbo
tumentes, vt audeant dicere inueniri homines absque p^ccato. There are some
(says he) like unto vessels blown up with wind, filled with a hautie
spirit, not solidly great, but swelled with the sickness of pride, who dare be
bold to say, that men are found in earth without sin? Of such as these he
demands in that same place: Interrogo te, O Ibidem.
homo sancte, just, sine macula, oration ista, dimitte nobis debita nostra,
fidelium est, an catechumenorum? certe regeneratorum est, immo filiorum, nam si
non est filiorum, qua front dicitur Pater noster quies in coelis, vbi ergo
estis, O iusti, sancti, in quibus peccata non sunt? I demand of thee (O man)
thou who A question for Papist^.
art just and holy, this prayer, Forgive us our sins, whether is it a prayer
to be said by Catechists only, or to be said also of such as are believers and
converted Christians? surely it is the prayer of men regenerated, yea, it is
the prayer of the Sons of God, for they call God their Father in heaven;
where then are ye, O ye just and holy ones, in whom are no sins? If the
regenerate and sons of God have need to crave remission of sins, what are
ye who say ye have no sin? If we say we have no sin, we lie, and the truth
is not 1. Ioh. 1. 9.
in us, and our blessed Savior to let us see how far we are from doing that
which we should do, says: When ye have Luke 17. 10.
done all that ye can do, yet say ye are unprofitable Servants. Where
because they have a silly subterfuge, that albeit we were never so righteous,
yet for humilities sake, we should say we are unprofitable: I answer them, as
Augustine answered the same objection in his time, propter humilitatem Aug. de
verb. Apost. ser. 29.
ergo mentiris, then for humilities sake, thou lie; but it is certain,
Christ never taught man to lie for humility: this is but a forged falsehood of
their own.

And to join the third witness with the former two. Bernard who lived in a
very corrupt time, yet retained this truth, Quis melior Propheta? de quo dixit
Deus, inueni virum Ber. in annu^. Mariae.
secundum cor meum, and tamen ipse necesse habuit dicere Deo: Ne intres in
iudicium cum seruo tuo: who is better then the Prophet David? of whom the Lord
said, I have found a man after mine own heart, yet had he need to say, Lord
enter not into judgment with thy Servant. And again, Sufficit Ber. in Cant.
Sermon. 23.
mihi ad omnem iustitiam solum habere propitium, cui soli peccaui: non peccare
Dei iustitia est, hominis iustitia indulgentia Dei. It suffices me for all
righteousness to have him only merciful to me whom I have only offended, to be
without sin is the righteousness of God, man's righteousness is Gods
indulgence, pardoning his sin: we conclude therefore with him. Vaegenerationi
huic miserae, cui sufficere videtur Ber. ser. cont. vitiu^ ingrati.
sua insufficientia, immo inopia tanta, quis enim ad perfectionem illam, quam
Scripturae tradunt, vel aspirare videtur? woe to this miserable generation, to
whom their own insufficiency seems sufficient, for who is it that has so
much as aspired to that perfection, which the holy Scripture commands us?

But to maintain their error, they enforce these places Places of scripture
wherein godly men are called Saints and righteous, makes not for their error
of perfect observance of the Law.
of holy Scripture, wherein mention is made of innocence, justice, and
perfection in the Godly, whereupon they simply infer that the Law is
fulfilled. Their paralogismes shall easily be discovered, if we keep
Augustines rule: when the perfection of any man is mentioned, we must consider
wherein, for a man may be righteous in comparison of others, so Noah was a
righteous man in comparison of that generation wherein he lived, yet was he
not without sin. A man may be also so called in comparison of himself, the
Lord judging a man according to that where unto the greater part of his
disposition is inclined: for the Lord does repute and account his Children not
after the remanents of the old man, but according to the new workmanship of his
grace in them; whereof it comes to pass, that albeit in a great part they be
sinful, yet the Lord gives unto them, the names of Saints and righteous men.

Again, in handling of the Apostles words, Philippians 3. In what sense Godly
men are called perfect in holy Scripture.
let us as many as are perfect be thus minded: he moves the question, seeing
the Apostle has said immediately before, that he was not perfect, how does he
now rank himself among those who are perfect? how agrees these two* that he
is perfect, and not perfect? He answers, the Apostle was perfect, secundum
intentionem, non secundum peruentionem, August. in Psalm. 38.
that is, perfect in regard of his intention and purpose, not in regard of
prevention, and obtaining of his purpose. And hereunto agrees that of Bernard,
Magnum illud electionis Ber. in Cant. sermon. 49.
vas perfectum abnuit, perfectum fatetur, that great chosen vessel of election
graunts profection, that is, a going forward, but denies perfection, for (...)
is not only he who has come to the end, but he also who is walkeing toward
it; we are so perfect in this life that we are yet but walking to perfection:
therefore says Ambrose, Apostolus Ambros. in Romans cap. 8. ver. 9.
aliquando quasi perfectis loquitur, aliquando quasi perfecturis, hoc est
aliquando laudat, aliquando common^t: the Apostle speaks unto Christians
sometime as unto men that are perfect, othertimes as unto men who are to
perfect that which is required of them, that is, sometimes he praises them for
the good they have done, and otherwhiles he admonishes them of the good they
have to do. We conclude therefore with Augustine, perfectio hominis est,
inuenisse se Aug. de temp. scr. 49.
non esse perfectum, this is the pefection of man to find he is not perfect.

And as for that place of Saint Luke, where it is said that How Zachary and
Elizabeth walked in all the commandments of God. Luke. 1. 6.
Zachary and Elizabeth walked without reproof in all the Commandments of
God, because the Jesuits of Rhemes in their observations would wrest it to
confirm their error, we will shortly make it manifest. That it makes not for
them, Augustine has two reasons, whereby he proves out of that same Scripture,
that Zachary was not without sin, first, because he was a Priest, and was
bound to offer as well for his own sins, as the sins of the people. Secondly,
in that the Evangelist says, he walked in the commandments of Heb. 5. 3.
God, it is an agreement, that as yet he had not attained to the mark: to the
which we may add the third out of that same place, the dumbness inflicted
upon him for his misbeleeuing, evidently proves he was not so perfect as to be
without sin. Beside this, he customably distinguishes between peccatum and
crimen, sin and a crime, that is, some grievous offense that gives slander,
and is worthy of crimination. Sanctorum hominum vitam inueniri posse dicimus
Aug. Enchi.
sine crimine, we affirm that the life of holy men may be found without a
crime. And again, nunc been viuitur si sine crimine, sine peccato autem, qui
se viuere existimat, non id agit vt peccatum non habeat, sed vt veniam non
accipiat: now men live well if they live without crime, but he who thinks he
can live without sin, does not thereby make himself free of sin, but
debarres himself from the pardon of his sin. And so much for refutation of
their error.

Now for our instruction we mark again here, that seeing The end of Christ's
death is our sanctification, therefore it should not be abused to give liberty
to sin.
the end of Christ's death is our sanctification, it cannot be but a mocking of
the son of God, and a treading of his holy blood under the unclean feet of
men, to make the death of Christ a nourishment of sin: let such thoughts be
far from us, that we should take liberty to sin, because we have a
Savior: this is to make Christ a minister of sin, and as was said, to build
up that which Christ came to destroy. O thou who love the Lord Jesus, be it
far from thee to take pleasure in that which made his blessed soul heavy unto
death, let us never nourish that life of sin, which was the cause of the death
of Christ, but let us daily cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, and grow up 2. Cor. 7. 1.
unto full holiness in the fear of God.

For albeit, by Christ we be delivered from the curse of Christ has freed us
from the curse of the law, not from the obedience thereof. Romans 6. 15. Romans 7.
12. Romans 5. 17.
the Law, yet are we not exempted from the obedience thereof. In respect of the
one, the Apostle said, We are not under the Law but under Grace: in respect of
the other, he has said that the Law is good: and our Savior protests he came
not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, both in himself and his members,
not only by righteousness imputed, but also inherent. For the law stands to us
a rule of our life, we love the holiness thereof, and strives to conform our
selves unto it: iustificati enim amics leges efficiuntur, for men when Ambrose
in Romans cap. 8. Romans 7. 22.
they are justified, become lovers of the law, which before they hated. So that
hereby we are to try whether we be in Christ, if we delight in the law of God,
if we be grieved when our sinful nature trangresses the precepts thereof, if
we find a begun harmony between our affections, actions, and her
commandments, by these and the like effects may we know that in Christ we are
justified.

Lastly, we have this comfort, that seeing our sanctification We are sure our
begun sanctification shall be perfected.
is an end which the Lord Jesus has proposed unto himself, we may be sure he
shall attain unto it. In the first creation what he commanded was done, he
made light to shine out of darkness, no impediment could stay that work of the
Lord: so is it in the second creation, neither Satan's malice, nor the
deceitful allurements of the world, nor the sinful corruption of our own
nature, shall stay that work of our perfect sanctification, which the Lord
Jesus has not only begun, but also taken upon him to accomplish.

Verse 5. For they who are after the flesh, savor the things of the flesh, but
they who are after the spirit, savor the things of the spirit.
HItherto we have heard the proposition of comfort, 4 Application of his former
doctrine, containing first a Commination of the wicked, wherein is declared
their miserable state who walk after the flesh.
the reason of confirmation and explication thereof. Now because the Apostle
restrained that comfort to those who walk after the spirit, not after the
flesh: now in this third member of the first part of the Chapter, he subioynes
an exhortation. Wherein by sundry reasons he disswades us from walking after
the flesh, and exhorts us to walk after the spirit: wherein he keeps this
order. First he oppones these two, to walk after the flesh, and after the
spirit, as contraries: which cannot consist. He lets us see the miserable
estate of them who walk after the one, and illustrates it by the happy estate
of those who walk after the other, and then concludes that they who are in the
flesh cannot please God, verse. 5 6. 7. 8. Secondly he comforts the godly, least
that they considering the remanent fleshly corruption which is in them, should
be discouraged with his former conclusion, verse 9. 10. 11. And thirdly he
subioynes the exhortation by sundry reasons dissuading us from walking after
the flesh.

First then the Apostle oppones the disposition of a carnal and spiritual man
as contraries, which may not consist: the carnal man savors carnal things,
that is, he understands Two sorts of fleshly things which the natural man
savors.
no other, he likes no other, he inclyneth to no other: For the word which he
uses in the original is tran^ferred to all the faculties of the soul, reason,
will, appetite and sense, and whatsoever is in him is all carnally affected:
and these carnal things which he savors are of two sorts: the first are
absolutely evil, to wit, the sinful lusts of corrupt nature: the second are
those carnal things which pertain to this life, not simply evil of their
own nature, but in regard of their abuse they become evil to the wicked.
First because they seek them in the first place, which is due to God and
things heavenly. Secondly, because they are bound to them with a slavish and
immoderate affection. Thirdly, because they seek them for wrong ends, to make
them servants unto their lusts. In a word, they do so walk after these
carnal things, that they go a whoring from God, they seek their portion in
this present world, having neither hope to look for, nor heart to follow those
things which are above.

Yea, of so contrary dispositions are the spiritual and the carnal man, that
look what is the rejoicing of the one is a weariness to the other: surely
there is no greater difference between the natural man and the bruit beast,
than is The life of the Christian and carnal man as different as the life of
the brut beast and the carnal man.
between the spiritual man and the natural: for the beast cannot conceive
nor understand the excellency of that spiritual life whereby the Christian
lives, and is not so much as touched in his affection with a desire thereof.
Give unto the beast those things whereunto the nature thereof is inclyned, it
craves no more; give unto a natural man the vain pleasures of sin, and
perishing things of this earth, he cares not for the pearls of the kingdom of
heaven. It is true the spiritual man knows how miserable the life of the
natural man is, because he lived once that life himself, but the natural man
cannot know what the life of the Christian man is.

And here we have occasion to consider more deeply The fearful and perverse
estate whereinto man is come by falling from God.
of that fearful estate wherein Satan did cast us by the means of sin,
and of that joyful benefit of restitution we have by the Grace of our Lord
Jesus. The casting of Adams body out of Paradise was a small loss, if it be
compared with the down throwing of his soul from all heavenly disposition.
The Grecians considering the workmanship of man's body, compared him to a tree
inuerted, his head and hair resembling the root being vpmost, his hands and
feet that grew from it as branches being down most, and therefore they called
him (...), a creature inuerted or turned up side down; but if we shall look
to the perverted estate of the soul of man, shall we not see there a more
pitiful change? the heavenly mind is become earthly, he that walked with God
for the similitude of his nature, is now become a companion of Beasts, the
soul which fed before upon heavenly Manna is now fed with the husks of
akecornes, meeter for swine then for men, that is, it savors only carnal
things, meeter for beasts of the earth, then men who are the generation of God.
As Jeremy lamented the desolation which the sins of Israel had brought upon
them, so may we lament that fearful estate, whereinto we are fallen by our
Apostacy. O how is Lament. 2. 1. and 4. 2. 7. 8.
the beauty of Israel cast down from the heaven to the earth? how are the
Noble men of Sion comparable to fine gold, esteemed as earthly pitchers? her
Nazarites that were purer then snow, and whiter then milk, now their visage is
blacker then the coal: where is that glorious image wherewith man was
beautified by his creation? how is his light turned into darkness? how is he
covered with shame in stead of glory? his visage is withered, his beauty cast
down from heaven to earth. The body made of earth stands upright, and can
look to heaven, the soul which is from above, has forgotten her original,
is crooked to the earth, and like a Serpent creeping on many feet, so walks
it after the dust with all her affections, favoring only those things which
are carnal. This is man's miserable estate by nature. The Lord open our eyes
that we may see how far we are fallen by our apostacy, how deadly we are
wounded, that in time we may make our recourse to the Physician of our souls,
who now offers by Grace to restore us.

But to return: this diversity of dispositions in the man The diverse
disposition of the Christian and carnal man flows from the diversity of
their generations. John. 3. 6.
natural and spiritual, the Apostle designs to flow from the diversity of
their generations, they who are after the flesh, that is as our Savior
expounds it, that which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: so then the cause why
they are carnal and savors only the things of the flesh, is because they are
only pertakers of a carnal generation. Every creature, as ye may see, has an
inclination to follow the own kind, some lives in the earth, some in the
water, every one of them by instinct of that nature which they received in
their generation following so earnestly their own kind, that a contrary
education cannot make them to forsake it. The Foul whose kind is to live in
the waters, though she be brought up under the wings of another damme, whose
kind is to live on the earth, so soon as she is strengthened with feathers,
forsaking her education, follows her kind: so also in every man the
disposition of his affections and actions is answerable to the nature of his
life If he have no more but a natural life, his cogitations, counsels,
resolutions, and actions are only carnal, but if he have also a spiritual
life, then shall he be able to mount above nature, having an inclination to
heavenly things, for every one who is risen with Jesus, seeks those things
which are above.

Now this difference of their dispositions, flowing from The contrary
disposition of the christian and carnal man appears.
their different kinds, shall appear the more clearly if ye compare the
affections, words, and actions of the one with the other. And first to begin at
the understanding, it is certain 1 In their understanding.
that the natural man understands not those things which are of God. Let Jesus
Christ speak to natural Nicodemus of regeneration, and Nicodemus shall
conceive that John 3. 4.
he speaks of a natural generation. Let Paul speak before Agrippa of the
heavenly vision, and Festus shall count him Act. 26. 24. Genesis 19.
a fool. Let Lo^ speak to his Sons in Law of the judgment to come upon
Sodom, and they shall esteem him as a mocker: thus Naturalists can neither
understand the words of mercy nor judgment, to be allured with the one, or
terrified with the other, for he minds only earthly things; but as for the
spiritual man, he has received that new mind, whereby he knows him that is
the true one: he is endued 1. John. 5. 20.
with new senses, whereby he perceiues things which are excellent, Aug. de
verb. Apost. ser. 17.
habet enim oculos interi^res, quibus videt iustitiae lumen, he has those
natural eyes whereby he sees the light of righteousness.

And if from the understanding we proceed to the affections, 2 In their
affections.
whereupon can the natural man set his affections but upon those things which
his understanding commends for good: for every man has his heart inclined to
that which according to his knowledge he thinks best for himself. The
Gadarens will prefer their Swine before Christ, and naturalists Math. 8.
make more of their smallest earthly commodities, than of those things which
are above at the right hand of God; but the Christian accounts the testimonies
of the Lord sweeter unto him then all the treasures of the worldlings: he finds
more joy in the lightsome countenance of God, then in all abundance of Wheat
and Wine; the best things of this earth he accounts but doung; the pleasures of
the world are loathsome unto him, her glory is despised in his eyes, habet Aug.
ibid.
enim olfactum interius, de quo dixit Apostolus Christi bonus odor sumus Deo in
omni loco, estque verbum illi odor vitae ad vitam: for he has that internal
sense of smelling, whereof the Apostle speaks, we are unto God the sweet
savor of 2. Cor. 5. 15.
Christ in every place: this makes the word of God unto him the sweet favor of
life unto life, habet etiam gustatum interius, quo nouit gustare and vid^re
quam suauis sit Dominus, and he has also that interior sense of tasting,
whereby he can taste and consider how gracious the Lord is.

Now touching their language, it is also framed according 3 In their speaking.
John. 3. 31.
to their understanding and affections, for out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks; he that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaks earthly
things, but the spiritual man has learned from his Lord to speak of those
things which appertain to the kingdom of God, and delights with Act. 1. 3.
Psalm. Judge. 12.
David to tell what God has done unto his Soul. As the Ephraemites by their
tongue were known from the Gileadites; so the language of men ordinarily tells
what country men they are, whether Burgesses of Babell, or of the heavenly
Jerusalem. Speculum mentis plerunque in sermon refulget. Ambr. offic. lib. 1.
cap. 18. Cyp. lib. 1. epist. 3.
The speech (says Ambrose) is commonly a glass, wherein the mind is
represented. De ^re and verbis suis vn^squisque proditur, and v^rum Christum in
cord suo, an Antichistum habeat loquendo detegitur, every man's speech (says
Cyprian) does soon bewray what he is, and by his speech is discovered whether
he have Christ or Antichrist in his heart. Qui in Christum credunt, linguis
loquuntur nouis, and vetera Ber. in ascen. dom. de Euan lectione ser. 1.
recesserunt de ore eorum, they who believe in Christ speak with new tongues,
old things are departed out of their mouths.

The same is to be said in like manner of their hearing, 4 In their hearing.
for the Christian delights to hear of those things, whereof he delights to
speak. It is a pain to him to hear profane language, which to a carnal man
is a pastime: he that is godly like Lot, his soul is vexed when he hears a
Sodomite speak. To a godly man (says Job) the eat is the taster Job. 12. 11.
of the soul, as the mouth tastes meat for the belly, and sends none down
into it, but that which is approved: so the ^are of the wise tastes words, and
delights in no speech but that which is poudered and good for edifying. It is a
very godly saying of Augustine, spirituales nec tormentis Aug. de temp Ser. 54.
separantur a Christo, carnales vero etiam otiosis fabulis separantur, no
torments can separate spiritual men from the love, remembrance, and meditation
of Christ, but carnal men forgo the remembrance and meditation of Christ for
idle and unprofitable fables.

And lastly, as concerning their actions: the natural man 5 In their doing.
has no pleasure in spiritual exercises of divine worship; set him to any
other work he does it with some dexterity and cheerfulness, but bring him
to a spiritual work there he faints and languishes, it is a weariness unto
him to hear the word of God, in every spiritual exercise he is like a
creature out of the own element, which has no contentment: whereas the
Christian by the contrary loves the word of God more than his appointed food,
and delights most in those exercises which are meetest to edify him in Christ.
Thus the spiritual man has a mind to know Christ, his affections set upon
Christ, his talk is of Christ, his actions are toward Christ, and Christ in
the end shall he enjoy to his everlasting comfort.

Verse 6. For the wisdom of the flesh is death, but the wisdom of the
spirit is life and peace.
THE Apostle having set down the contrary The miserable estate of them who
walk after the flesh described.
dispositions of the Carnal and Christian man, does now shortly describe the
misery of the one, and happiness of the other. The carnal man has not only
his will and affections set upon evil, but also that which is best in him, his
wisdom and understanding, are so far perverted, that it yields unto him no
fruit but death. In the soul of man are two chief faculties, the
Understanding and the Will. The understanding should be the governor and
directer of the Counsels and actions of man, the Will should be the follower,
accomplisher, and executer thereof; but now is man's nature so corrupted, that
either reason which should rule is over ruled by the will, or at least the
crooked is led by the blind, that is, a blinded In the soul of a carnal man
the blind leads the crooked.
understanding directs the crooked will and perverse affections a wrong way;
and what marvel then if both fall into the ditch? for where the eye which is
the light of the body is darkened, how great must be the darkness of the
whole man? and seeing the understanding faculty of the soul gives no counsels
nor conclusions but such as are deadly, what can the will and affections do,
but run headlong unto the ways of death?

This is that increase of knowledge, which we have gotten The most excellent
knowledge of the natural man brings out death.
by our Apostasy from God, this is the fruit we have plucked from off the
forbidden tree, we have a wisdom, which brings out death: the most excellent
knowledge whereunto the quickest engines could ever attain by the light of
nature, profited them not unto salvation. Lactantius compared all learning of
the Philosophers to a liuelesse body wanting a head, in seeing they were blind,
in hearing they heard not, understanding they understood not, while they
professed themselves to be wise they became fools. Rom 1.
As the senses be in the head, so all spiritual understanding Neither natural
nor moral philosophy could profit men to salvation.
of the way of life is in Christ Jesus, by natural philosophy they attained
to the knowledge of the creatures, but learned not to know the Creator; by
natural reason they learned to discern the sophistry of men, but not to
resist the sophistry of Satan. By practice also of Moral philosophy they
attained to a show of those virtues which they called cardinal, to a show I
say, but as for true Prudence, Justice, Temperance and Fortitude, they attained
not unto them: without faith it is impossible to please God, neither can there
be without it any thing which deserves the name of virtue, quid enim illis cum
virtulibus, qui Dei virtutem Christum ignoram? for what have they to do with
virtue who are ignorant of Christ, the virtue and power of God?

All the light that is in nature is like to the sight of blinded Naturalists
are all blind like Sampson.
Sampson, for as he without a guide could not find one pillar of the house; no
more can natural understanding find out so much as one of the articles of our
faith: nascimur vniuersi vi^ ciuitatis prorsus ignari, we are all borne
altogether ignorant of the way that leads to the City of Wisest among them
cannot prevent cheir miserable end, more then Achitophel, far less the wrath
to come.
God; (...), as the Apostle calls us, without a mind to know any thing
pertaining to our own salvation. Whatsoever wisdom man has without grace,
may lead him forward to evil, but cannot teach him to eschew evil.
Achitophell was counted wise in his time, and his wisdom and counsel as the
Oracle of God, but he had no wisdom to 2 Samuel 17.
sore-see nor prevent his miserable end, he hanged himself in his impatiencie:
yet is the wit of Naturalists in our time no better than his, they are wise in
their own eyes, and glories within themselves, that by their subtle wits they
have gone through dangerous courses, wherein others have fallen; yet they know
not their end, neither are sure that the politic devise wherein they have
placed their confidence shall not at length be a snare to themselves. Therefore
the spirit of God vouchsafes not upon the men of this world the style of wise
men, but calls them wise with a restriction, they are wise (says Jeremy) to
do evil. Wiser Ier^. 4. 22. Luke. 16. 8. Compared to Howlets. Basil hexam.
hom. 8.
(says our Savior) in their own generation than the children of God. Basil
properly compares them unto Howlets, which see something in the night, but
nothing in the day: such are worldlings, they have some understanding of the
works of darkness, but no judgment how to approve themselves to the light of
God: wise to compass things present, but careless for those which are to come.

Where if it be demanded why then does the Apostle attribute wisdom to them
who walk after the flesh? it is answered, Prudentia dicitur cum res stulta
sit, quia sic ipsis videtur, it is called wisdom because so it seems to them
The carnal man and the Christian either of them judges other to be foolish.
who have it, albeit in very deed it be foolishness. The judgments of the
carnal and Christian man are so different, that either of them esteems
another foolish, but the one judges with a warrant, the other not so: the
spiritual man discernes all things; he sees by the light of God, that the 1.
Cor. 2. 15.
wisdom of worldlings is folly, but the natural man so rests on the conceits
of his own mind, and has such liking of the course of his own life, that it
seems strange to him the Christian runs not with him into the same excess
of riot: 1. ^^t. 4. 4.
therefore he speaks evil of him, and disdaines him as a fool; yea, the
preaching of the Gospel he accounts foolishness, no marvel then he esteem
them fools who order their lives according unto it. When our Savior preached
and Ioh. 8. 48.
wrought miracles among the Jews, they said he was possessed, and had a Devil.
When the Apostles filled with the holy Ghost, preached to every Country people
in their Acts 2. 13.
own language, they were judged to be full of new wine, as if wine taught them
to speak languages which they never learned, and did not rather spoil them of
the use of their mother tongue; so quick are Naturalists in discerning the
works of the holy Ghost.

But as for the judgment of the carnal man which he But the Christian judges
according to knowledge, so does not the carnal man.
gives out either of the person or actions of the spiritual man, we are not to
regard it, because his light is darkness; but the spiritual man discerns
all things, and judges of the miserable estate of the natural man with light
and understanding. Festus may judge wrongfully of Paul, but Paul will not
change his state with Festus, nay not with Agrippa. Every controversy will be
decided one day, both the wise and the foolish Virgins shall be known in their
ranckes: then shall Naturalists change their judgment, and confess that these
were wise men, whom before they had condemned for Fools: for if they be wisest
who see farthest before them (as before we spoke) and can provide for the
longest time, it is out of doubt that only the Christian is a wise man who
prouides for the eternity to come. A prudent man sees the plague before hand,
and hides himself, but the fool goes Pro. 27. 12.
on, and is snared.

But the wisdom of the spirit is life and peace.] This wisdom is our renewed
understanding by the grace of Christ, called the wisdom of the Spirit,
because it is reformed, and of new created by the Spirit, who has made us that
were darkness before, now to be light in the Lord. The effects of this
wisdom are life and peace, such as natural men neither know nor have; they
cannot know them. Though the most spiritual and powerful Teacher should The
unhappy estate of them who walk after the flesh described.
discourse to a natural man of that life and peace, yet should he not be able
to conceive it: for as in nature those things which are discerned by taste,
cannot be known unless they be tasted; so it is not possible that the value
of spiritual things can be discerned of him who has no spiritual senses:
Basil. exhort. ad Bapti^. The life of carnal men is but death.
quod sensus omni sermon sit essicatior.

What then, shall we think they have no life who have not this wisdom of the
Spirit? none indeed, for that life which they live, the holy Spirit calls it
a death. Though a natural man should live Methushalems years, a quiet and Job
21 9. Psalm. 73. 5. ^. Tim. 5. 6. Ephesians. 4. 18.
peaceable life without fear, though the rod of God come not near him, And he
be not in trouble as other men, yet while he lives in pleasures he is but dead,
A stranger from the life of God through the ignorance that is in him: Yea no
carcass of flesh from which the life is departed, is so abominable in the
eyes of man as is that Soul in the eyes of God, which is not quickened by his
spirit. And beside this, so silly a thing is the life of man in it self, that
viuendo decrescit, by living August. de temp. ser. 24 5
it wears away; and when it continues longest, non vita longa, sed long
aaegritudo est, yet it is not a long life, but a long lingering disease; while
we seek to entertain it by daily nourishment, quotidianis medicamentis
fulcimus morbum nostrum, we do no other thing but strengthen our disease by
daily medicaments: let us therefore become weary of it in time, and seek our
life in Christ; then begin we to live when we are quickened by his spirit unto
immortality, till then we have neither life nor health.

And as for the other effect of this wisdom, which is Carnal men have not
the peace of God. Esaias. 57. 21.
peace, they have it not who are not in Christ, There is no peace to the
wicked, says my God: a meek, quiet, and peaceable Spirit they have not. As the
waves of the Sea are stirred with every wind, so are their minds perturbed
through the tumultuous desire of their variable affections. And as for peace of
Conscience, which arises of the sense of Gods mercy toward us in Christ: how
can they have it whose life is a continuance in inimitie with God? for
righteousness and Psalm. 85.
peace do kiss one another: where there is no righteousness how can there be
peace? Pax est haereditas Christianorum, August. de temp. scr. 200
peace is the heritage of Christians. The wicked have their own carnal
security, they bless themselves in their heart when the word of the Lord does
curse them, but the false conclusions of peace and safety which they have laid
in their own hearts, shall not preserve them from that sudden destruction,
which (as travail upon a woman with child) shall come upon them: their
security is like the security of Jonas, who slept most soundly when he had
most cause to Their security is like the security of Jonas.
watch and pray, for the Lord was pursuing him as a fugitive servant, the
officers of God gathered about him to lay hands on him, the winds commoued
against him, the raging waves of the Sea refusing all other satisfaction,
offered by the Mariners, rolled with violence about the Bark wherein he was,
determining not to rest till they apprehend him, all his companions were afraid
and compelled to cry every man to his God, only Jonas was sleeping. What
think ye? was this true peace? no indeed, but false security. It fares even
so with the wicked, the Lord stands offended with them, the heavens above
closed upon them, hell beneath opened to receive them, Satan the devouring
Lion hungring for them, waiting when they shall be given him for a pray; but
they are eating, drinking, making merry in the depth of a dead Conscience, but
certainly their security will end in a fearful wakening, they shall be
taken out of their bed of ease wherein they lie, and shall be cast into that
bottomless deep of the wrath of God, wherein their worm shall never dye, and
their fire shall never be quenched.

But to leave them and return to the Christian, it may A Christian has peace
with God, and himself, and his brethren, but not perfect in this life.
be demanded, how is he pertaker of peace? whose crosses are so continual as
his? who more exercised with inward terrors then he? Is not his battle
without intermission? where then is his peace? To this I answer, we have
indeed peace with God, with our selves, and our Christian brethren, but our
peace is not perfect, Pax nostra ex disiderio Greg. moral. in lob. lib. 6.
creat^r^s inchoatur, ex manifesta autem visione persicitur, a begun peace we
have, arising of that fervent desire we have toward our God: but it is the
manifest vision and clear sight of God that must perfect it: we attain to the
beginnings of this peace, cum mentem Deo, and m^nti carnem subi^gamus, when we
subdue the mind to God, and the flesh to the mind; but it cannot be perfect,
quamdiu men's ignoratione caecatur, and carnis suae impugnatione concutitur, so
long as the mind is darkened with ignorance, and disquieted with the assaults
of the flesh. And to the same purpose, says Augustine, Est nobis pax aliqua,
quia condel^ctamur Aug. in Joan. tract. 77.
Legi Dei secundum interiorem hominem, sed non plena, quia videmus aliam legem
in membris nostris repugna^em legi mentis nostrae: we have some peace within
our selves, when we find that our inward man delights in the Law of God, but
it is no perfect peace, because we see another Law in our members rebelling
against the law of our mind: neither can our peace with our brethren here be
perfect, cogitationes Ibidem.
cordis nostri inuicem non videmus, and quaedam de nobis, quae non sunt in
nobis, vel in melius in^^cem, vel in deterius opinamur; thus have we a peace
but not perfect, not without interruption.

Yet our comfort stands that how ever our peace be interrupted Inward and
outward troubles may interrupt our peace, but cannot take it away.
by outward troubles and inward terrors of conscience, yet it cannot be taken
from us. Albeit no trouble for the present be sweet, yet it works in us good
effects: by it we are made more humble, more fervent in prayer, more abundant
in tears, the hard heart by this holy hammer of God being made soft: so that
sanctified trouble by the Lords wonderful working becomes a mean to establish
our peace. Corda electorum aliquando concussa melius Greg. moral. in lob. lib.
2.
solidantur, the hearts of the elect are best settled after they have been
shaken with crosses. All the children of God sindes this by experience, that
their inward troubles are preparatiues to inward consolations: as he who goes
to build a house, the higher he intends to raise it, the deeper he lays the
foundations thereof; so the Lord humbles them lowest with their terrors, to
whom he purposes to communicate the highest measure of his consolations. As his
sufferings 2. Cor. 1. 5.
abounds in us, so shall our consolation abound through him, we will therefore
that peace which we have in Christ, and which he has left us, none shall be
able to take from us.

Verse 7. Because the wisdom of the flesh is inimitie against God: for it is
not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can it be.
THe Apostle proceeds, and gives the reason why he called the wisdom of the
flesh, death: because it is inimitie with God. He proves it is inimitie with
God, because neither is it, nor can it be subject unto the law of God.

Of this manner of reasoning used by the Apostle we Our life stands in peace
with God.
first learn, that our life consists in our peace with God, and that our death
is procured by our inimitie with him. Compare sinful Adam, with innocent Adam,
and this shall be made manifest: so long as he stood at peace with God, he
lived a joyful life, familiar with his maker: but from the time he began the
inimitie by transgression of the commandment, not only was the presence of
God (joyful to him before) terrible now, but he became such a terror to
himself, that it was a death to him to live in that state of life. Oh that
always we could remember this, that we cannot offend the Lord, unless we
slay our selves: all our rebelling against the Lord, is but a kicking of our
heel against the prick, the loss is our own, we deprive our selves of life,
but cannot spoil the Lord of his glory.

It is written of the Stdonians, that when Herod intended How foolish man is
when he entertaines inimitie with God.
war against them, they made friendship with Blastus, Hereds Chamberlain,
and besought him to make peace for them: the reason was because their lands
were nourished by the King, therefore they were not able to bear his inimity.
Alas that we cannot be as wise in a greater matter, both our lands and our
selves are nourished by the King of heaven, we are not able to endure his
anger: if he please he can make the heaven above us as brass, and the earth
beneath us as iron; if he take his breath out of our nosthrils we fall like
clay to the ground and are turned into dust: how then is miserable man so
bewitched, that he dares live in that state of life which is inimitie with
God? Do ye provoke the 1. Cor 10. 22.
Lord unto anger, are ye stronger than he? No, no, assuredly if thou walk on
in thy sins, the Lord shall crush thee Psalm. 29.
with a Scepter of iron, and break thee in pecces like a Potters vessel, so
unequal shall thou find the match, if thou Psalm. 50. 22.
contend with thy Maker: Oh consider this ye that forget God, least he tear
you in pieces, and there be none to deliver. Shall the Sidonians entreat for
peace when Herod proclaymes war, and shall man continue in inimitie, when God
from heaven proclaymes his peace? far be it from us, that we should so do.
Away with this wisdom of the flesh, which is inimitie with God.

Perceive again how the spirit of God in such sort describes No good in man's
nature before it be renewed, against the Semipelagians of our time.
the nature of man vnrenued by Grace that no good is left in it, out of which
the Semipelagians of our time, may draw their works of preparation or merits
of congruitie, for where as in the Soul of man there are but two faculties:
the Understanding and the Will, the spirit of God so describes his
Understanding, that not only he says, the natural man understands not the
things that are of God, but as if that were not sufficient to express man's
miserable estate, he adds, neither indeed can he understand them, because A
mind that neither sees nor can see. 1. Cor. 2. 14. A will that neither is
subject to God nor can be.
they are spiritually discerned. And again, his will he so describes it,
that it is not subject unto the Law of God, and he adds this (neither indeed
can it be.) What more can be said to abase the natural pride of man, he has
such a mind as neither understands nor can understand the things of God, he
has such a will as neither is subject, nor can be subject to the Law of God?
This is the judgment of Gods spirit concerning the corruption of our nature,
we set it against the vain opinion of all those, who to magnify the arm of
flesh, and the merits of man, dreams of a good in our nature without grace,
which cannot be found in it.

Neither let any man inferring more of the Apostles The praise of Gods power
and grace is the greater, because it reformes nature it being so far
perverted.
speech then himself concludes, think it impossible that our rebellious will
should be made obedient: the Apostle takes not away this hope from man, only
he denies that nature is able to do it. Nature without grace may increase the
inimitie, but cannot make reconciliation: but that which is impossible to man,
is possible to God. The nature of beasts, birds, and creeping things has been
tamed by the nature of man (says Saint James) but the tongue of man, though
Iam. 3. 7.
the smallest member in the body, yet so unruly an evil, that no man is able
to tame it. We cannot change one hair of Mat. 5 36.
our head, to make that white which is black, far less can we change our
hearts to make them holy which are unclean. What then shall we be out of all
hope? that which we are notable to do, shall we think it shall never be
done? Let us not so conclude, though no man can tame the nature of man, the
Lord can. Paul who was a ravening Wolf in the Evening, the Lord made a
peaceable Lamb in the Morning. Naturalists have written that the blood of the
Goat causes the hard Adamant to break, but the holy Scripture has more
surely taught that the blood of Jesus has virtue to turn a stony heart into
a soft: where it pleases the Lord of stones to raise up children unto Abraham.
There is nothing colder than Ice, yet says Augustine, it is melted and made
warm by the help of fire. A thorny ground (says Cyril) being well manured yet
becomes fertile, Ciril. catec. 2 Psalm. 107.
and the Lord (says the Psalmist) turns a barren wilderness into a fruitful
land: he rayses the dead; he makes the blind to see; and the lame to walk; he
causes the Eagle to renew Psalm. 103.
his youth; shall we then close his hands, and think it impossible for him to
make the sinner, conceived and borne in sin, to cast the old slough of
nature, and become a new creature?

And this have I marked to keep us from that presumptuous Judge not rashly of
any man's reprobation.
judging as to conclude any man's reprobation, because of this present
rebellion, thou know not what is in the council of God, though in regard of
his conversation for the present he be a stranger from the life of God. And
again for our selves, that we may magnify the mercy of the Lord our God, who
has done that unto us by grace, which nature could never have done, that is,
has made our rebellious hearts subject to his holy law, and we are sure he
will also perform that good work which he has begun in us.

The word which the Apostle uses here to express The rebellion of the wicked
against God, exempts them not from his dominion.
man's natural rebellion, (...), notes such a rebellion of man's corrupt nature,
as is not subject according to order: we are not to think that any rebel were
he never so stubborn, can exempt himself from subjection; do what he can he
bides under the Lords dominion; but a natural man (says the Apostle) gives
not orderly subjection unto God. Jeroboam shook off the yoke of his lawful
Lord, and Rehoboam was notable to control him. But let man repine as he will,
can he cast off the yoke of the Lord? No, no if man refuse to declare his
subjection by an humble submission of his spirit to the Lords obedience, the
Lord for all that shall not lose his superiority, but shall declare his power
upon man by controling him; he shall bruise him like an earthen pitcher with a
scepter of iron, that refuses to bow his heart under the scepter of his word.
Let the wicked cry in the pride of their nature, we will break the bonds, and
cast off the y^ake of the Lord, yet has he Psalm. 2.
them fast bound in chains, go where they will, his hand is stretched over
them, and they shall not be able to eschew it.

O foolish and most unhappy condition, wherein man How miserable the wicked
are, who being subject to God by necessity refuse voluntary subjection. Psalm.
18.
lives, rebelling against the will of his Superior, and it profits him not,
for by no means can he exempt himself from his power, surely all the vantage
that the wicked reapes by repining against the Lord, is that they multiply more
sorrows upon their own head, for with the froward the Lord will show himself
froward, he will walk stubbornly against them who walk stubbornly against him,
and add seven times more plagues upon them. As the Bird snared in the grin,
the more she struggleth to escape, the more she is fastened; so the wicked the
more they rebel the hardlier are they punished; the faster they fly from the
hand of Gods mercy the sooner they fall into the hand of his justice.

It is further here to be observed, that the Apostle says, carnal wisdom ^^
(...)ties with God, the word he uses Nature unregenerate does not only sin,
but multiply sins.
(...), is in the plural number, otherwise it could not agree with the
Substantive (...): whereof we learn how our nature not renewed by grace, does
not only sin, but multiply sins and transgressions against the Lord. O how
this should humble us, that we have not only sinned, but also multiplied
sins. If any one sin be enough to condemn man, in what estate does he
stand, who has gathered against himself such a heap of transgressions, more
in number then the hairs of his head? If Adam for one transgression Psalm. 40.
12.
fled away from Gods presence, what marvel if horrible fear and perturbation
possess the sons of Adam, who have multiplied against the Lord so many
transgressions? If the earth once cursed for Adams sin, was cursed the second
time for Caine his sin, how often is it cursed Genesis Heb. 2. 2.
now? If judgment grow like wormwood and every disobedience and transgression
has it own just recompense of reward? what a treasure of wrath has man now
stored up against himself, who has multiplied so many sins against the Lord?
An arm of the body once broken (says Augustine) August. de temp. ser. 58.
is not restored without pain and dolor to the patient, but if it be after
broken, it is hardlyer cured: a Conscience once wounded, is confounded at the
light and presence of God, what then shall be to them who have wounded
themselves so often to death, and stabbed through their souls with innumerable
transgressions?

Let no man therefore flatter himself because his sins Though our sins were
never so small, this should humble us, that they are many, for in any thing
many smales make a great.
are small, but let him be humbled and mourn, considering that they are many.
It may be thou art not guilty of the grosest actual sins, shall this
diminish thy contrition? Is there any thing smaller then a pickle of sand? yet
many of them collected become a heavier burden then man is able to bear; and
drops of water though they be small, yet if they be multiplied becomes great
rivers: It is not always the great waves of the Sea that ouerturneth the ship,
but the drop that sipes in at the leake shall sink her also if it be
neglected: let us not then neglect to purge our souls because we are not
stained with gross sins, considering that the smallest sins often
multiplied are weighty enough to press down our souls to the lowest hell,
if we go not to Christ to be eased of our burden.

And last we learn here, that the cause of inimitie between Cause of inimitie
between God and man, is in man.
God and man, is not in God but in man, who will not rank himself in the
room of a subject, and give to the Lord the place of a commander, there is no
question between the Lord and man but this only, whose will should be done:
the Lord craves that man should subject himself to the will of God, but man
aspires to make his own will the rule of his actions. In this miserable estate
lives man not renewed by grace, he has set up within himself a will contrary
to Gods most holy will, Woe be to him that strives Isay. 45. 9.
with his maker. If the will of God be not done by us, assuredly it shall be
done upon us. De his qui faciunt quae Miserable is that man who maintains a
contrary will to Gods will. Aug. de cor. and gra. ca. 14.
non vult, facit ipse quae vult, the Lord (says Augustine) in a marvelous
manner does his will on them, who do that which he will not; and therefore
woe shall be unto all which are opposite to God his most holy will. Quid tam
paenale quam semper velle, quod nunquam erit, and semper nolle quod nunquam non
erit? what greater punishment can there be then this, evermore to desire that
which never shall be, and always to dislike that which for ever shall be? a
wicked man shall never obtain that which he desires, but shall suffer for ever
that which he dislikes. For remedy of this rebellion our Savior has taught us
daily to pray, thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen^ so we pray, and
the Lord give us grace that we may practice it, that in every action of our
life, denying our selves, we make look to our heavenly Father, enquire for his
will and follow it, saying with our blessed Savior, not my will, O Lord, but
thine be done. Mat. 26. 39.


Verse 8. So then they that are after the flesh, cannot please God.
HEre the Apostle concludes the miserable estate of them who walk after the
flesh: affirming He concludes the miserable estate of them who walk after the
flesh.
that do what they will they cannot please God. To be in the flesh, sometime
is taken in a good part, for it is all one with this (to live in the body,) but
here it is taken in an evil part: for to be in the flesh, and to be in Christ,
are opposite one to another, so that to be in the flesh, is to be in the state
of nature unregenerate. a stranger from the grace of Christ: and the phrase is
very significant, for it imports an universal thraldom of man's nature unto
the lusts of the flesh. That speech of the Apostle to Simon Magus, I see that
thou art altogether in the Act. 8. 23.
gall of bitterness, signifies much more than if he had said, the gall of
bitterness was in him: and the spirit of God, when he says that man is in his
sin, or in the flesh, does thereby What it is to be in the flesh.
express a far greater corruption of his wretched nature, then if he did say
that sin and fleshly corruption is in him.

Syricius Bishop of Rome, expounds this place of married Syricius expounds this
of the state of marriage wrongfully.
persons, affirming that they are in the flesh, and so cannot please God,
flatly against the Apostles own commentary, for he wrote this Epistle to the
godly Romans, among whom were many married persons, such as Aquila and
Priscilla, whom afterward he commends for godliness, and of whom he says,
verse 9. ye are not in the flesh, because the spirit of God dwells in you: so
does the Apostle expound it himself, and therefore the Pope is but a perverse
interpreter of the Apostles mind, and his favorers are but seducers, who will
have us to seek out of the box of his breast the true sense and meaning of
all scripture.

Always leaving them, let us mark again here the miserable The best actions
of wicked men please not God.
estate of such as are strangers from Christ. What an unhappy condition is
this, that a man should live in that state of life, wherein do what he will he
cannot please God? Let Cain sacrifice with Abel, the Lord shall not accept Genesis
4. 5. Genesis 27. 38. Heb. 12. 17. Gen 32. 26. Hos. 12. 4. Luke 18. 11. Luke 16.
it; let Esau his tears seeking a blessing from his father, be shed as
abundantly as Jacobs were, when he sought a blessing from the Angel, yet
shall he not prevail, he shall not be blessed; let the Pharise pray in the
Temple with the Publicane, he shall not go home justified; and for worldly
glory let him be never so high among men, he is but abomination unto God, yea
oftentimes worldlings to whom Psalm.
waters are wrung out of a full cup, are counted blessed and happy, yet is
it but ignorance that maks men account much of them that are despised in the
eyes of God. Ideo malus Aug. in Joan cap. 7. tra. 28.
foelix putatur, quia quod sit foelicitas ignoratur, for this cause is an evil
man counted happy, because men know not what happiness is. But what ever men
be thought of by others either for his show of Godliness, or his show of
worldly glory: under which two shadows, the most part of men deceive the
remanent; it is certain that he only is blessed, with whom the Lord is
pleased. If the tree be not good, it cannot bring forth good fruit, and if the
person be not Godly, his actions cannot be acceptable unto God. It is in Christ
Jesus only that the Father is well pleased, except we be in Christ neither can
our persons nor actions please the Lord. The Lord translate us yet further out
of this unhappy estate of nature, the Lord root us and ground us in Christ
Jesus, and stablish us to abide in him for ever.

Verse 9. Now ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, because the Spirit of
God dwells in you: but if any man has not the Spirit of Christ, the same is
not his.
THE Apostle having discoursed of the miserable The second part of his
application contains consolation for the godly and that twofold.
estate of them who walk after the flesh, does now turn him toward the godly,
to comfort them, least they should be discouraged with that remanent carnal
corruption which they find within themselves, he shows them, that what he
has spoken of the unhappy condition of carnal men, does no way 1 Consolation
against the remanents of carnal corruption that are in us.
concern them, for they are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit. In this verse
the comfort is first set down, and then a caution annexed unto it; the comfort
is for the weak Christian; the Caution for the presumptuous professor: the
Apostle so terrifies the wicked, that he reserues comfort for the Godly, and he
so comforts the Godly, that he confirms not the wicked in their sins. No
sort of men are sooner moved with the sharp speeches of the word of God, then
are the children of God. He has said before, thy who are in the flesh cannot
please God, least this should terrify the Godly, he subioynes: but as for you,
ye are not in the flesh, for the Spirit of God dwells in you. Again no sort
of men are more ready to appropriate unto themselves the comforts of God, then
they to whom they belong not, and therefore for their saks the Apostle
subioynes the Caution: If any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is
not his.

Where first we may learn that the word of God The word of God should so be
handled, that it be applied.
ought so to be handled and received, that it should be applied to the comfort
of those who are the sons of consolation, and to the conviction of others:
the Apostle does now ye see apply his former doctrine, letting them to whom he
writes see the comfort and admonition which out of it rises unto them: so
ought we always to handle and hear the word of God, as considering what is our
part and interest in it, for this word is written for us, and does so nearly
concern us, that as Moses says, It is our life: it gives sentence either
with or against every man that hears it, being to the one the savor of life,
to the other the savor of death. When John the Baptist preached that word of
judgment, Now the axe is laid to the root of the tree, every tree Math. 3. 10.
that brings not out good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the fire,
his hearers so received it, as a word which touched them nearly, and therefore
both People, Publicanes, and Soldiers came to him and asked, What shall we
do Luke 3. 10. 12. 14
then? So the Jews in like manner asked Peter being pricked in their hearts at
the hearing of his Sermon, What shall Act. 2. 37.
we do then? the same was the voice of the Iaylor to Paul and Silas, and it
should be the voice of every man as often as Act. 16. 30.
he hears the word of God condemning his sins, What shall I do then, that I
may be saved? As meat brought to the table cannot nourish unless it be applied
to the mouth, and from thence sent down into the stomach: so the word of God
cannot profit us unless we so hear it: vt traijciatur in viscera quaedam
animae nostrae, and transeat in affectiones Bernard.
nostras, that it be sent into the bowels of our soul, and enter into our
affections. If in this manner thou receive the word of God, out of doubt thou
shall be saved by it, but in this is the fail, that most part of men hear the
word of God* as they would hear an Indian story, or some other such discourse
as did not concern them: whereof it comes that at this day, after long
planting and watering, there is so small a spiritual growth in grace and
godliness among us.

Now for the words* ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, How the
Apostle gives judgment of others that are spiritual.
that is, as ye heard it before expounded, ye are not carnal men, but
spiritual. Here it is to be enquired seeing no man knows the things of a man
but the spirit of a man, how could the Apostle know that these Romans were
spiritual? Was not Eli deceived in judging of Anna? she sought 1. Sam. 1.
the Lord in the affliction of her spirit, and he judged that she had been a
wicked woman: and may not godly men be deceived on the other extremity, to
think well of them who are evil indeed? I answer, the Apostle does here
write unto a Church and a public fellowship or company of men, separate from
the remanent of the world by the heavenly vocation, called to be Saints, and
therefore might undoubtedly write unto them as unto Saints, and spiritual men,
it being always most sure that where the Lord gathers by his word a Church, he
has always in the midst thereof a number that belong to the election of grace.

But to proceed further, and to see how far we may go A threefold judgment,
first of our selves by faith, secondly by fruits, thirdly by revelation.
in judging of a private man, we must know that first there is a judgment of
faith; secondly, a judgment of fruits; thirdly, a judgment of extraordinary
revelation. By the first we can only judge our selves, and know our own
salvation, according to that of the Apostle, prove your selves if ye be in the
faith, know ye not your own selves, how that Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? By the judgment of 2 Cor. 13. 5.
fruits we may also proceed and judge of others, according to that rule of our
blessed Savior, Ye shall know them by their fruits, no man gathers grapes of
thorns or figs of thistles. Every good tree brings forth good fruit, and a
corrupt tree Math. 7. 16.
brings forth evil fruit. These first two are common to every Christian, the
judgment of fruits being helped by the judgment of Charity. Concerning the
third, Simon Peter knew by extraordinary revelation, that Simon Magus was
Acts. 8.
a reprobate, a child of perdition: by it the Apostle Paul knew that the same
unfeigned faith dwelt in Timothy, which 1. Tim. 1. 5.
dwelt before in his grandmother Lois, and in his mother Eunice: and by it John
the Evangelist knew that the Lady, 2. John. 1. 1.
to whom he wrote was an elect Lady; but as for us we are not to presume the
election or reprobation of any man by such extraordinary revelation.

Again we have to mark for our comfort, how the Comfort that the Lord calls
them spiritual in whom remained carnal corruption.
Apostle calls them spiritual men, in whom notwithstanding remained fleshly
corruption. The judgment of the Lord and Satan are contrary: there is in you
(says the deceiuer to the weak Christian) fleshly corruption, therefore ye
are carnal: there is in you (says the Lord through my grace) a spiritual
disposition, therefore ye are spiritual* Satan is so evil that his eye sees
nothing in the Christian, but that which is evil: the Lord is so good, that
he sees no transgression in Israel, he judges not his children by The Lord
esteems of his children according to his new grace in them, not after their
corruption.
the remanents of their old corruption, but by the beginnings of his renewing
grace in us. One dram of the grace of Christ in the soul of a Christian, makes
him more precious in the eyes of God, than that any remanent corruption in him
can make him odious: therefore is it that the Lord gives unto them the names of
his beloved, his servants, his 1. Ioh. 3. 9. 1. Ioh. 1. 8.
Sons, his Saints, who are so only in part and by a beginning. Both these
are true, he that is borne of God sins not, and again, if we say we have no
sin we deceive our selves: Augustine.
Illud ex primitijs noui hominis, istis ex reliquijs veteris, the one we have
of the first fruits of the new man, the other of the remanents of the old man.
Let us therefore be so continually displeased with our inhabitant corruption,
that we despair not, nor be discouraged, neither let us so complain of our
sins that we become false witnesses against the grace of God which is in us. If
there were nothing in us but that we have by nature, our estate were most
miserable, but seeing beside nature there is in us a new workmanship of grace,
from the which the Lord accounts us new and spiritual men, we have (thanks be
to God) matter of comfort.

As Satan is a liar in denying the name of spiritual men Papists will have
none called spiritual men but their Clergy.
to men regenerate, so his supposts, adversaries of the truth of Christ, are
lying deceivers and unjust robbers, when they restrain this name to such as
are of their Clergy, which here the Apostle makes competent to every man in
whom the spirit of Christ dwells. Spiritual^m non facit vestis, locus, Ferus.
^fficium, opus, sed Spiritus, it is neither garment (says one of their own)
nor place, nor office, nor external work, that makes a man spiritual, but
the holy Spirit, dwelling in him.

Because the Spirit of God dwells in you.] He subioynes The spirit of God where
he dwells, works; where he works he works not in vain, therefore they cannot
but be spiritual in whom he dwells.
here the confirmation of his former comfort, he has said unto them: ye are
not in the flesh, he proves it, the Spirit of God dwells in you, therefore ye
are not in the flesh, nor carnal, but spiritual. The necessity of the
consequence depends upon this midst, that the spirit of God where he dwells is
not idle but works; where he works, he works not in vain, but effectuates that
which he intends, he transformes them in whom he dwells into the similitude of
his own Image, he is compared to fire that gives light even to them who are
far of, and heat to them who are near hand, but transchangeth those things
into the nature of fire, which are cast into it, with so marvelous a virtue,
that iron which is cold by nature being put into the fire becomes hot and
burning: so does that holy Spirit illuminate every one who comes into the
world, but he changes all those in whom he dwells, he transformeth them into
his own similitude, and endueth them with an holy and heavenly disposition,
then his argument is sure, the Spirit of God dwells in you, therefore ye are
not carnal, but spiritual.

In the end of the last Chapter the Apostle said, that Strange that two guests
of so contrary natures, as sin and the holy spirit should dwell in one man.
Romans 7. 17. The soul of man regenerate compared to the house of Abraham.
sin dwells in the man regenerate, it is not I but sin that dwells in
me, and here he says that the spirit of God dwells in the man regenerate:
this is strange that two guests of so contrary natures, should both at one time
have their dwelling in man. I compare the soul of man regenerate to the house
of Abraham, wherein there was both a free woman Sarah, and a bond woman Hagar,
with their children. Ismael the son of the bond woman, borne after the flesh,
is older and stronger then Isaac, the son of the free woman, borne after the
spirit, that is, according to the promise; he disdaines little Isaac as
weaker, and persecutes him, yet the comfort of Isaac is, that though Ismaell
dwell in the house of Abraham for a while, he shall not remain: the son of
the bond woman shall be cast out, and shall not inherit the promise with the
son of the free woman: such a house is the soul of a Christian, there
dwells in it at one time both old nature and new grace, with their children:
the old man at the first being older and stronger than the new man, does
persecute him, and seeks by all means to oppress him, but at the last he
shall be cast out.

This Metaphor of dwelling, does also yield unto us exceeding Marvelous that
the inhabiter is larger than the habitation.
great comfort: in all other habitations the lodging is larger than the
inhabiter, but this is marvelous that the lodging here is so little and the
inhabiter so great: that infinite majesty, whom the heaven of heavens cannot
contain, who has the heaven for his throne, and the earth for his footestoole,
has chosen for his dwelling and place of rest, the soul of him that is poor,
contrite, and trembles at his word. A wonderful mercy, that the highest
majesty should so far dimit the self, as that passing by all his other
creatures, he should make choice of man to be his pleasant sanctuary.

From this it is evident that this dwelling does design The spe^iall glory of
a Christian is, that God dwells in him.
some special presence of God with his own children which he shows not unto
others, it is true he is present in every place, bounded within no place; he
contains all things, vncontayned of any; where he dwells not as a Father,
there he sits as a Judge, and is a terror: which manner of way the damned are
continually vexed with his presence, but in the Christian he dwells as a master
in his own family, as a Father with his children, quickening, ruling, and
preserving them, and providing for them Worldings may match Worldlings may
exceed him in worldly gifts, but cannot match him in this.
the Christian in external gifts, but cannot compare with him in this
internal glory, though without he be but an earthen vessel, yet has he
within an heavenly treasure, for he is the habitation of God, in whom the Lord
dwells by his spirit. It was Benjamin his glory, that the Lord should dwell
between his shoulders; and the glory of Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. 33. 12.
that there the Lord dwelt, between the Cherubins; but most of all the glory
of a Christian, that the Lord dwells between the secrets of his soul: let
worldlings rejoice in their outward privileges, and in their presumptuous
minds leap like the mighty mountains, esteeming themselves high as mount
Basan, yet this is the glory of a Christian, that God delights to dwell in him.

Let us therefore make much of them who fear the Lord, They should be honored
in whom Christ dwells. Dan. 6.
though in regard of their outward estate, they were never so base, we should
not be ashamed to do them honor for his sake who dwells in them. Darius
preferred Daniel, because the spirit was excellent in him; and Pharaoh honored
Genesis 41. 42.
Joseph because the Spirit of God was in him, yea the Angels are content to be
Servants and Ministers to them who fear the Lord, they honored Shepherds for
Christ's sake with their presence, which they did not unto King Herod for all
his glory, and shall not we delight in Gods excellent ones upon earth? surely
he shall dwell in the Tabernacle of God, in Psalm. 15.
whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honors them who fear the
Lord. Hereby we know that we are translated from death to life, because we
love the brethren.

Not only does this Metaphor of dwelling import a familiar The Metaphor of
dwelling imports a continuance of gods presence with his children.
presence, but also a continuance thereof, for he soiournes not in us as a
stranger that lodges for some days, or Months in a place, but has settled his
residence to dwell in us for ever: how ever by temporal desertions he humble us,
yet shall he never depart from that soul, which once he has sanctified to be
his own habitation: and this comfort Three arguments to prove that the
regenerate are sure of perseverance in Grace.
is confirmed to us by most sure arguments. The first is taken from the nature
of God, He is faithful (says the Apostle) by whom we are called to the
fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, he will confirm us to the end,
that we may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus. And again, (says 1
From the nature of God who begets us.
he) I am persuaded that he who has beg^n this good work in you, will
perform it, until the day of Christ. That word which the Lord spoke to Jacob,
stands sure to all his posterity, I will not forsake thee till I have
performed that which I Phil. 1. 5. 6.
promised thee. The covenant of God is perfect and everlasting, and therefore
with David will we give this glory unto God, that he will perform his promise
toward us, and bring forward his own work in us to perfection. The 2 From the
nature of that life communicated to us. Romans 6. 9.
second argument is taken from the nature of that life which Christ
communicates to his members, it is no more subject unto death, We know that
Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more. This life I say is
communicated to us, for it is not we that live, but Christ that lives in us.
And the 3 From the nature of that seed whereof we are begotten. 1. Pet. 1. 23.
How the spirit of God is said to depart from Saul.
third is taken from the nature of that seed whereof we are begotten, for as
the seed is, so is the life that comes by it: now the seed (says the Apostle)
is immortal, we are borne of new not of mortal seed, but immortal, our life
therefore is immortal.

But against this is objected, that the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul,
and that which David prays, take not thine holy Spirit from me. To this I
answer, that the spirit is taken sometime for the common and external gifts
of the spirit, such as are bestowed as well upon the wicked as upon 1. Sam. 16.
14.
the godly, as the gift of Prophecy, government* working Psalm. 51. 11.
miracles, and such like, and these once given may be taken again: in this
sense it is said, that God took the spirit that was upon Moses, and gave it
unto the seauentie Elders, and so also it is said that the spirit of God
departed from Saul, there it is put for the gift of government: sometime
again it is taken for the special and internal gift of sanctification: this
spirit once given is never taken away, for this gift and calling of God is
without repentance, that is, they never fall under reuocation.

To the second, when David says, take not thine holy spirit How David prays
that God would not take from him his holy Spirit.
from me, and restore me again to the joy of thy salvation: this imports not
a full departure of Gods spirit from him, otherwise he could not have prayed;
but that his sin had diminished the sense and feeling of that operation of
the spirit in him which he was wont to feel before: and so is it with others
of Gods Children, that either the neglect of the spiritual worship, or the
commission of some new sins does so impair the sense of mercy in them, that
to their judgment the spirit of God has justly forsaken them. This I confess
is a very heavy estate, and more bitter to them that have felt before the
sweetness of Gods mercy than death it self, yet even in this same estate
wherein no comfort is felt, let patience sustain men, let them learn to put
In spiritual desertions we must distinguish between that which is, and which
we feel. Esa. 6. 13.
a difference between that which they feel, and that which is, and remember
that this is a false conclusion, to say, the spirit of grace is not in thee,
because thou can not feel him, for as there is a substance in the Oak or
Elm even when it has cast the leaves, so is there Grace in the heart many
times when it does not appear, and these desertions which endure for a while,
are but means to effectuate a nearer communion, (...), etc. he turns Chri.
in Mat. hom. 14.
away from thee (says Chrysostom) for a short while, that he may have thee
for ever with himself.

Now it remains that we consider of those benefits we What great benefits
comes to the soul by the dwelling of Christ's spirit in us.
have by the dwelling of Christ's Spirit in us, and of the duties which we owe
again unto him. The benefits are many and great, Si enim tanta sit vis anim^
in massa terrae sustinenda, mouenda, impellenda, quanta erit vis Dei in anima,
quae natura agilis est mouenda? for if the soul be of such force to give life
and motion to this body which is but a mass of earth, what shall the spirit of
God do unto our soul which naturally is agill? the wonderful benefits that
the body receives by the dwelling of the soul in it, may lead us some way to
consider of those great benefits which are brought unto the soul by the
dwelling of the spirit of GOD in us.

But of many we will shortly touch these two only: the 1 He repaires the whole
lodging of soul and body.
first is, that where this holy spirit comes to dwell, he repaires the lodging;
man by nature being like unto a ruinous palace, is restored by the grace of
Christ. This reparation of man is sometimes called a new creation, sometimes
regeneration, and it extends both to soul and body: as to the soul, the Lord
strikes up new lights in the mind restores life to the heart, communicates
holiness to the affections, so that where before the soul was a habitation
for unclean spirits, lying under the curse of Babel, the ^im and Zijm Isai.
13. 21. What ugly guests dwelt in us before he came to possess us.
dwelling in it, the Ostriches lodging, the Satires dancing, the Dragons
crying within her palaces, that is, defiled with all sorts of vile and
unclean affections, the Lord Jesus has sanctified it to be a holy habitation
unto himself. And as to the reparation of our bodies, it consists partly in
making all the members thereof weapons of righteousness in this life, and
partly in deliverance of them from mortality and corruptibility, which shall be
done in the day of resurrection; which for the same cause is called by our
Savior the day of regeneration, for then shall he change our mortal bodies,
and make them like unto his own glorious body: thus by his dwelling in us have
we the reparation both of our souls and bodies.

The other benefit we enjoy by his dwelling in us, is the 2 He prouides all
necessaries where he dwells. Iren. cont. val lib. 4. cap. 28.
benefit of Provision; where he comes to dwell, he is not burdenable after the
manner of earthly Kings. but his reward is with him: for he has not chosen us
to be his ^a^itation for any need he has of us, sed vt haberet in quem
collocaret ^ua beneficia, but that he might have some on whom to bestow his
benefits, non indige^ nostr^ ministerio vt domini seruorum, sed sequimur ip^um
vt homines lumen sequuntar, nihil ipsi praestantes, sed beneficium a lumine
accipientes, he has no need of our service, as other Lords have need of
their servants, but we follow him as men follow the light, giving nothing to
it, but receiving a benefit from it.

It falls commonly out that where men of mean estate Not like kings of the
earth who often times are burdenable to them with whom they lodge. Aug. de verb.
Apost. ser. 15.
receive to lodge those that are more honorable, they disease themselves to
ease their guests, but if thou receive this rich spirit of the Lord to lodge,
non angustab^ris sed dilataberis, thou shall not be straited but shall be
enlarged, says Augustine: he knew the comfort he reaped by this presence of
GOD, and therefore could speak the better thereof unto others; quando hic non
eras angustias patiebar, nunc implesti cellam meam, and non me exclusisti, sed
angustiam meam, when thou Lord dwelst not in me, much anguish of mind
oppressed me, now thou have filled the cellers of my heart, thou have not
excluded me but excluded that anguish which troubled me. In a word, the
benefits we receive by him, do not only concern this life, but are
stretched out also to eternal life. David comprises all in a short sum, the
Lord is a light and defense, he will give grace and glory, and no good thing
shall be withholden from them that Psalm. 84. 11.
love him.

The greater benefits we have by the dwelling of Christ What duties of
thankfulness we owe to our Lord who dwells in us.
in us, the more are we obliged in our duty to him. O how should that house be
kept in order, wherein the King of glory is resident? what daily circumspection
ought to be used that nothing be done to offend him? not without cause are
these watch-words given us, grieve not the spirit, quench Ephesians. 4. 30. 1. These.
5. 19.
not the spirit. There are none in a family, but they discern the voice of the
master thereof, and follows it, they go 1 That we discern the voice of our
Master and obey it. Math. 8. 9.
out and in at his commandment: if he say unto one Go, he goes, if to another
Come, he comes: if the Lord be our master, let us hear every morning his
voice, and enquire what his will is we should do, with a promise to resign
the government of our hearts unto him; for it is certain he will not dwell
where he rules not: as he will admit no unclean thing within his holy
habitation, so will he not dwell with the uncircumcised in heart; the Lord will
not take a wicked man by the hand, nor have fellowship with the throne of
iniquity. If holy men when they see brothels Macar. hom. 12.
abhor them, and goes by them, how much more shall we think that the most
holy Lord will despise and pass by their souls which are polluted, rather
like to the filthy stews of Sodom, than the holy sanctuary of Sion, for the
Lord to dwell in?

And if hereby the weak conscience be cast down, reasoning That every day we
sweep and water his chamber with the besome and tears of repentance. Zach.
13. 1.
within it self, alas how can my beloved dwell with me, who am so polluted and
defiled? remember that the more thou art displeased with thy self, the more
thy Lord is pleased with thee: for thy daily pollutions he has appointed
daily washings, in that fountain which he has opened to the house of David
for sin and for uncleanness. Sweep out thy sins every day by the besome of
holy anger and revenge, and water the house of thy heart with the tears of
contrition, quoniam sine aliquo vulnere esse non possumus, medelis Cyprian.
spiritualibus vulnera nostra curemus, seeing we cannot be without some wounds
of Conscience, let us daily go to the next remedy, that with spiritual
medicines we may ^ure them, chasting our selves every morning, and examining
our selves upon our bed in the evening.

And again, seeing we are made the Temples of the That in his Temple there
want not morning and evening sacrifice.
holy Ghost, there should be within us continual sacrifices offered unto God
of prayer and praising, together with a daily slaughter of our beastly
affections. Among the Israelites, Princes were known by the multitude of their
sacrifices which they offered unto God, but now they who sacrifice most of
their unclean affections, are most approved as excellent Israelites of the
Lord, who can best discern an Israelite. From the time the Lord departed from
Ierusalems Temple, the daily sacrifice and oblation ceased, and where there is
not in man, neither prayer nor praising Macar. hom. 28.
of God, nor mortification of his beastly lusts, but the spiritual Chaldeans
has come in, and taken away this daily sacrifice, it is an evident argument
that the Lord dwells not there.

Last of all, let us mark here that the Apostle says Bastard professors
lodges this holy spirit in a wrong room. Ephe. 3. 17.
this dwelling of the spirit is in us, it is not without us, the kingdom of
God is within us, if he dwell he will dwell in our hearts by says, for he
himself requires the heart. As for them who lodge him in their mouths by
professing him, in their eyes by advancing them to heaven, in their hands by
doing some works of mercy, and not in their hearts, these are carnal men, not
spiritual, pretend what they will: hipocrites who draws near the Lord with
their lips, but their hearts are far from him, accursed deceivers who having
a male in their flock, vows and sacrifices a corrupt thing unto the Lord:
which I do not speak as if I did condemn the outward service done in the
body to the Lord, providing it flow from the heart. Ye are bought with a
price, 1 Cor. 6. 20.
therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, for they are Gods.

And this also is to be marked for the amendment of two Humble gestures of the
body in public exercises of divine worship prophanly scorned by some.
sorts of men among us, who are in two extremities: we have some who are become
scorners of the grace of God in others, neither can they be humbled themselves
in the publik assemblies of the Saints, nor be content to see others express
their inward motion by outward humiliation, they sit down in the throne of
God, and condemns others for hypocrisy, not remembering that the sin of
hypocrisy is to be reserved to the judgment of God, who only knows the
heart, and that those same things which they mislike in their brethren, the
Lord has allowed in others. The Apostles precept commands us to lift up to
the Lord pure hands in prayer. David's practice teaches us to advance our eyes
to the Lord: shall not thy brother lift up his hands and his eyes to the Lord?
shall he not sigh to God, nor mourn in his prayers like a Dove, as Ezekiah
did, but thou incontinent wilt tax him of hypocrisy? We read that Jacob
sought a blessing from the Lord with tears, and obtained it: Esau sought a
blessing from his father with tears and crying, and obtained it not: were the
tears of Jacob the worse, because Esau also shed tears? Judge not least thou
be judged, the judgment of Hypocrisy (as I have said) belongs to the Lord.

On the other extremity are they who think they have Superstitiously abused
by others.
done enough when they have discharged some outward exercises of religion,
though they take no pain to sanctify the heart to works of divine service. On
the Saboth they come to the house of God, they bow their heads like a bulrush
with the rest, they pray and praise the Lord in the external forms with the
rest of the congregation, but considers not whether or no they come into the
temple by the motion of the Spirit, as Simeon did, if they pray and praise the
Lord with prepared hearts as David did; neither try they when they go out
whether or no they have met with the Lord, found mercy, and returns home to
their houses justified as the Publican did. It is true we are to glorify God
with our bodies because they are his, but most of all with our spirits, because
God is a spirit, he loves truth in the inward affections, and delights to be
worshipped in spirit and truth.

We are called by the Apostle, the Temples of God. Seeing we are the temples of
God we should be more beautiful within, then without.
Salomons Temple the further in was the finer: in the outward Court stood an
Alter of brass, whereupon beasts were sacrificed: in the inward Court was an
Altar of gold, whereupon incense was sacrificed; but the Sanctuary or most
holy place did far exceed them both, in it was nothing but fine gold, in it
the Lord gave his Oracles from between the Cherubins, in it stood the Arc of
the covenant, wherein was the Tables of the Law. And so indeed the Christian
ought to be holy without, his looks, his words, his ways should all declare
that God dwells in his heart, he should have engraven, as it were, in his
forehead, Holiness to the Lord, as Aaron had, but much more Exodus 28. 36.
should he be holy within: between the secrets of his Soul should the Lord
have his residence, and in his heart the testimony of God, which is the word of
God should dwell plentifully.

But as for the wicked, they are either compared to open But the wicked are
compared sometime to open, and sometime to painted Sepulchers.
sepulchers, their mouth being like that gate of the Temple called Shallecheth,
out of which was carried all the filth of the Temple; the abomination of their
heart being made manifest by their mouth, or then in their best estate they are
compared to painted Sepulchers, beautiful without Math. 23. 27. Psalm. 32. 2.
but within full of ro^tennesse, having a show of godliness, wanting the power
thereof, but the man is blessed in whose heart John 1. 47. Romans 2. 29.
there is no guile: he is a Nathaniell indeed, a true Israelite who is one
within, whose praise is not of men but of God.

But if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his.] The
comfort being ended, now follows the Caution. The secondary great question in
religion is this, who are Christians?
Every man (says Solomon) boasts of his own goodness, but the Lord (says
the Apostle) knows who are his. As the first great question in Religion is
concerning the Savior of the world, Art thou he who is to come, or shall Math.
11. 3.
we look for another? so the second is concerning them who are to be saved:
if the judgment be referred to man: now every man among us accounts himself a
Christian: If judgment be sought from the Lord, here he gives one answer for
all: If any man have not the Spirit of Christ the same is not his.

Albeit among men there be an allowable difference of A sovereign rule whereby
Christians of all estates must be tried.
estates, yet concerning Christianity, both King and Subject, rich and poor,
learned and unlearned comes all to be tried by one rule. It is a common thing
among men to esteem somewhat more of themselves for the privilege of their
estate, wherein they excel others; but the Apostle destroys the pride of all
their glory with one word, If any man; so he speaks without exception: be what
thou will beside; were thou never so noble, never so rich, never so learned, if
thou have not the Spirit of Christ thou art none of his, all the privileges of
men without Jesus are nothing, that which is high among men is abomination to
God. Man in his best estate is altogether vanity, the glory of flesh is but as
the flower of the field: the Spirit of the Lord judges of all the glory of man
as the pomp of Agrippa, Acts. 25. 23.
he came down says Saint Luke, (...) it is all but fantasy and vanishing
shows: nothing commends us to God, but this one, to have the spirit of Christ
dwelling in us. Christ and his Spirit are not sundred.


Again we see here that Christ and his Spirit cannot be sundred, except men
will crucify again the Son of God. Let no man therefore say that he has
Christ, unless he have the Spirit of Christ. As he is not a man who has not a
Soul, so he is not a Christian who has not the Spirit of Christ: no man
counts that a member of his body, which is not quickened by his spirit; no
more is he a member of Christ, who has not the Spirit of Christ: 1 John. 4.
13.
hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us
of his Spirit. And as Christ and his spirit are not sundred, so cannot the
spirit be sundred from the fruits of the Spirit: now the fruits of the Spirit,
are Love, Joy, Gal. 5. 22. 23. 24
Peace, Long suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance.
If the Spirit of Christ dwell in us, and if we live in the Spirit, let us
walk in the Spirit: this is the conviction of carnal professors, that while
they say the spirit of Christ is in them, they declare none of his fruits in
their conversation: but to insist somewhat more in this same purpose.
Operations of the spirit are twofold.


We are to know, that the effects and operations of the Spirit are twofold: the
one is general and common operation which he has in the wicked, for he
illuminates every 1 External, common to all men. John 1. 1 Cor. 12. 3.
one who comes into the world. Neither can any man say, that Jesus is the
Lord but by the Spirit: every spark of light, and portion of truth be it in
whom it will, flows (out of doubt) from this holy Spirit. That Caiaphas and
Saul can Prophecy, that Judas can Preach, all is from him: but of this manner
of operation is not here meant, for this way he works in the wicked, not for
any good to them, but for Intern 2 proper all and godly. to the
the advancement of his own work. The other kind of the holy Ghosts
operation is special, and proper to the godly, by the which he does not only
illuminate their minds, but proceeds also to their hearts, and works this
threefold effect in it, Sanctification, Intercession, and Consolation.

First, he is unto them a spirit of Sanctification, renewing Three effects
wrought by the special operation of the spirit in the godly.
their hearts by his effectual grace* he first rebukes them of sin, he
wakens their conscience with some sight of their iniquities, and sense of that
wrath which sin has deserved: whereof arises heaviness in their hearts,
sadness in their countenance, lamentation in their speech, and such an 1
Sanctification.
alteration in their whole behavior, that their former pleasures become
painful unto them, and others who knew them before wonders to see such a
change in them. From this he proceeds and leads them to a sight of Gods mercy
in Christ, he inflames their hearts with a hunger and thirst for that mercy,
and works in their hearts such a love of righteousness, and hatred of sin,
that now they become more afraid of the occasions of sin, then they were
before of sin it self: this resistance made to the temptations, this care to
eschew the ocasions of sin, is an undoubted token of the spirit of Christ
dwelling in thee.

This is the first operation of the spirit, but it is not all, he proceeds yet
further by degrees: for the kingdom of God is as if a man should cast seed
into the earth, which grows up and we cannot tell how, first it sends out the
blade, secondly the ears, and then the corns; so proceeds the kingdom of God
in man by degrees. In the second place the holy spirit becomes to the godly a
spirit of Intercession, so 2 Intercession.
long as we are bound with the cords of our transgressions we cannot pray, but
from the time he once loose us from our sins, he opens our mouth unto God,
he teaches us to pray not only with sighs and sobs that cannot be expressed,
but also puts such words in our mouths as we our selves who spoke them are not
able to repeat again.

And thirdly he becomes unto them the spirit of Consolation, 3 Consolation.
if he be unto thee a sanctifier, and intercessor, he shall not fail at the
last to be thy comforter: if at the first after that thou have sent up
supplications, thou find not his consolation descending upon thee, be not
discouraged, but be the more humbled; for alas our sins shortens his arm,
Math. 26.
and the hardness of our hearts holds out his comforts: we must fall down
with Marie, and lie still washing the feet of Christ with our tears, before he
take us in his arms to kiss us with the kisses of his mouth; and if we find
these effects of his presence going before, humiliation of our heart, and the
grace of prayer, we may be out of all doubt that his consolations shall follow
after.

Of this it is yet further evident, against all those who That a Christian who
has Gods spirit knows that he has him.
deny that the Christian may be sure of his salvation, that he who has the
spirit of Jesus knows that he has him, as he who has life feels sensibly
that he has it, and is able truly to say, I live: so he who has the spirit
of Jesus knows by feeling that he has him, and is able to say in truth,
Christ lives in me. Know ye not (says the Apostle) Gal. 2. 20. 2 Cor. 13.
5. And therefore may be sure of salvation, is proved by three names given to
the holy spirit.
that Christ Jesus is in you, except ye be reprobates?

This shall be further confirmed by considering those three names which are
given to the holy spirit, from his operation in us: he is the Seal, the
Earnest, the witness of God: the use of a Seal is to confirm and make sure.
One of these two therefore must the Papists say, that either none are sealed by
the holy Spirit, or else they must confess, that 1 He is Gods Seal.
they who are sealed are sure. If they say that none are sealed by his Spirit,
they speak against the manifest truth of God, grieve not the holy spirit, by
whom ye are sealed against Ephe. 4. 30.
the day of redemption. And if they deny that they who are sealed by him are
sure of that salvation which God has promised, and he has sealed, they
blaspheme, calling him such a seal as makes not them sure who are sealed by
him: he who has the seal of a Prince rests assured of that which by the seal
is confirmed to him: and shall not the seal of the living God, the Spirit of
promise, confirm that man in the assurance of salvation, who has received
him? Neither is he only the seal of God, but he is also the earnest of 2 Gods
earnest 1 John 5. 10.
our inheritance and the witness of God, he that believes in the son has
a witness in himself: what will the adversary of Christian comfort say to
this? if ye say that there are none to whom Gods spirit witnesses mercy from
God, ye speak against the Apostle, the spirit bears witness to our spirit
that we are the sons of God: or if ye say that those Rom 8. 16.
who have this testimony of the spirit are not sure of mercy, 3 Gods witness.
ye blaspheme as before, and speak yet manifestly against the Apostle, who
says that the witnessing of this spirit unto our spirit, makes us to cry Abba
father. But we will speak more of this hereafter.

But now to conclude this verse: seeing he who has not the spirit of Christ
is none of his, whose then shall Sin causes the Lord to deny his own
creatures.
he be? certainly he is the vassal of Satan; the Lord shall deny him, the
Lord shall disclaim him, as not belonging to him: depart from me ye workers
of iniquity, I know not whence you are. O the bitter fruit of sin! which
Luke 13. 27.
causes the Lord to deny that creature to be his, which once he made to his
own image. Let us therefore hate our sin unto death, let us in time make
have to depart from iniquity, which shall at the last draw on that sentence
upon the wicked, depart from me. The Lord deliver us from it through Jesus
Christ.

Verse 10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin: but the
Spirit is lif^ for righteousness sake.
HItherto has the Apostle comforted the Christian 2 Consolation against the
fruit of sin, specially against death, whereunto we are subject.
against the remanents of sin: now he comforts him against the fruits and
effects of sin which he finds in himself. The godly might have objected,
ye have said before the fruit of carnal wisdom is death, are we not subject
unto death, and so of the fruits and effects of sin? what can we judge but
that we are carnal? To this he answers, first by a confession, it is true
that the body is dead because of sin, but if Christ be in you, the spirit
through his righteousness is endued with life: ye are not therefore so much to
conclude, that ye are carnal because death through sin is entered into your
bodies, as to confirm your selves in this, that life through the
righteousness of Christ is communicated to your soul; and so the sum of his
comfort will be this, the death whereunto you are subject, is neither total
The death whereunto we are subject, is neither total nor perpetual.
nor perpetual: that it is not total, he declares in this verse, for it
strikes not upon the whole man, but upon the weakest part of man, which is his
body, as for his most excellent part, which is his soul, it is partaker of a
life that is not subject unto death. That it is not perpetual he declares in
the next verse, our bodies shall not bide for ever under the bands of death,
the spirit of Christ that now dwells in them* shall at the last raise them up
from death, and cloth them with immortality and incorruptibility.

If Christ be in you.] Before the Apostle bring in his comfort, The Comforts of
God are not common to all men indifferently. Mat. 10. 12. 13.
he permits a condition: to teach us, that the comforts of God belong not
indifferently unto all men he who is a stranger from Christ, has nothing to
do with these comforts. When our Savior commanded his Disciples to proclaim
peace unto every house they came to; he foretold them, it should abide only
with the sons of peace: he forbad them in like manner to give those things
which were holy unto dogs, or to cast pearls before Swine. This Math. 7. 6.
stands a perpetual Law to all Preachers, that they presume not to proclaim
peace to the impenitent and unbelieving, but as Iehu spoke to Iehorams
horseman, What have thou to do with peace? so are we to tell the wicked, who
walk still 2. Kin. 9. 18.
on in their sins, that they have nothing to do with that peace preached by
the Gospel.

Secondly, if we compare the former verse with thist we Christ dwelling in us
is by his spirit: no carnal presence required to make our union with him.
shall see that the manner of Christ's dwelling in his children is by his
Spirit. To make up our union with Christ, it is not needful that his humane
nature should be drawn down from heaven, or that his body should be every
where, as the Vbiquitaries affirm; or that in the Sacrament the bread should
be transubstantiate into his body, as the Papists imagine: his dwelling in us
is by his spirit, and our union with him is spiritual; neither yet by so
saying, do we divide his two natures, for they are inseparably united in one
personal union, which union does not for all that import that his humane
nature is extended over all, as his divine nature is. The heavens must contain
him, till he come again. Noli dubitare, ibi esse hominem Christum, vnde
venturus est: Act. 3. 21. Aug. epist. 57 ad Dardan.
Put it out of doubt, that the man Christ Jesus is in that place from whence he
shall come: Keep faithfully that Christian confession, He is risen from the
death, ascended unto Heaven, and sits at the right hand of the Father, and that
he shall come from no other place, but from Heaven to judge the quick and the
dead: and he adds that which the Angel said to his Disciples, this Jesus who
is taken up from you Act. 1. 11.
into heaven, shall so come as ye have seen him go into heaven, that is,
(says Augustine) in eadem carnis forma, atque substantia, cui profecto
immortalitatem dedit, naturam non abstulit: that is, in that same form and
substance of flesh, to the which he has given immortality, but has not taken
away the nature thereof. Secundum hanc non est putandum, quod vbique est
diffusus, vbique per id quod Deus, in coelo autem per id quod homo, according
to his nature we are not to think that he is in every place, it is true that
as God he is every where, but as man he is in the heavens: and this for the
condition.

Now to the comfort: we have by Jesus Christ a threefold The comfort of
Ethnikes ahainst death, not comparable to ours, and our courage inferior to
theirs.
comfort against death, whereof two only here are touched. The first that the
death whereunto we are subject is not total. The second, that the nature and
quality of our bodily death is changed. The third that it is not perpetual,
the body shall not for ever lie under death. The Ethnicks had also their own
silly comforts, but nothing comparable to ours. Nazianzen records that
Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, demanding of certain learned men, what kind of
death was without the bitter sense of pain, received this answer: there is no
death without dolor, but that death was most gentle which was brought on by
the Serpent Aspis: and namely that kind thereof which is called Hypnale: be
cause they whose flesh is enuenomed with the poison thereof do incontinently
sleep unto death: for which cause also she made choice of it. And Seneca
being by Nero to be executed to death, got it left to his own pleasure, (as
great favor showed unto him) to make choice of any death he pleased, he chose
to bleed to death in hot water. Others among them that offered themselves to
most fearful deaths, such as Curtius Regulus, and others, had no comfort to
sustain them, but a silly hope of immortal fame of their affection to their
country. It was (says Augustine) the silly comfort of the Gentiles: against
the want of burial, Coelo tegitur, qui non habet vrnam, and as comfortless is
the comfort of many bastard Christians, which stands only in a fair
Sepulcher, provided before hand for themselves, in an honorable burial,
commanded and expected of them before death, and in abundance of worldly things
which they leave to theirs behind them, all which as says the same Father,
viuorum sunt solatia non mortuorum, are comforts to them that live behind, but
no help to them who are dead. I note this, that considering the magnanimity of
these Ethnicks in suffering of death, notwithstanding the weak and small
comforts which they had to sustain them, we may be ashamed of our
pusillanimitie, who having from Christ most excellent comforts against death,
are afraid at the smallest remembrance thereof. An evident argument that
albeit Tit. 1. 16.
many pro^^sse him, yet few are pertakers of his power, life, and grace and
that many has him dwelling in their mouths in whose hearts he dwells not by
his spirit.

The body is dead] He says not the body is subject to Our bodies are not
only mortal but de^d.
death, but by a more significant manner of speech, he says, the body is dead.
There is a difference between a mortal body and a dead body: Adams body
before the fall was mortal that is, subject to a possibility of dying, but now
after the fall, our bodies are so mortal that they are subject to a necessity
of dying: yea, if we will here with the Apostle esteem of death by the
beginning thereof, our bodies are dead already. The Officers and Sergeants of
death, which are dolours, infirmities, and heavy diseases, has c^ased already
The Officers of death has bound us already.
upon our bodies, and marked them as lodgings, which shortly must be the
habitation of death, so that there is no man, who is not presently dead in some
part or other of his body. Not only is the sentence given out against us, thou
^rt dust, and to dust thou shall return* but is begun to be Genesis 3. 19.
executed: our carcasses are bound with cords by the Officers of death, and our
life is but like that short time which is granted to a condemned man, between
his doom and his execution; all which the Apostle lively expresses when he
says the body is d^ad. 1 Therefor should we live in the body under fear. 1.
Pet. 1. 12. Phil. 2. 12.


Whereof there arises unto us many profitable instructions: and first, what
great need we have (as we are commanded) to pass the time of our dwelling
here in fear, working out our own salvation in fear and trembling: seeing
our sins have cast us into the hands of the first death, shall we not cry
without ceasing, that we may be delivered from the power of the second? Alas it
is pitiful that man should so far forget himself, as to rejoice in the
time of his misery; to pass over the days of his mortal life in vanity and
wantonness, considering how the first death is already entered into his
carcass, nor foreseeing how he may be The pitiful security of carnal
profess^rs.
delivered from the second, but lives careless, like to the Apostates of the
old world, who in the midst of their sinful pleasures were suddenly washed
away with the waters of the wrath of God, and their spirits for disobedience
sent unto the prison where now they are: and like those Philistims, who
banqueting in the platform of their house of Dagon their God, having mind of
nothing but eating, drinking and sporting, not knowing that their enemy was
within, were suddenly overthrown, and their banqueting house made their
burial place: so shall it be with all the wicked, who living in a dead body
cares for nothing but how to please themselves in their sin: the pillar of
their Psalm. 58. 9. Psalm. 73. 19.
house shall be pulled down, destruction shall come upon him like a
whirlewind, and in a moment shall sudden desolation overtake them. 2 Death
entered into the body should repress our natural pride.


And let this same meditation repress in us that poison of pride, the first
sin that ever sprung forth of our nature, next to infidelity, and last in
rooting out. Will thou consider O man, that thou art but dead, and that thy
body be it never so strong or beautiful, is but a lodging of death? and what
cause shall thou have to wax proud for any thing Bernard.
that is in the flesh? quid tu superbis terra and cinis, si superbientibus
Angelis non pepercit deus, quanto minus tibi putredo and vermis? what have thou
to do to be proud O dust and ashes, if God spared not the Angels when they
waxed proud, will he spare thee who art but a rotten creature? yea Vermis
crastino moriturus, a worm that must dye to morrow. Au. ser. 21.
If so was done to an Angel (says Bernard) what shall become of me? ille
intumuit in coelo, ego in sterquilinio, he was pust up in heaven, and therefore
was cast down from the place of his abomination, if I wax proud lying in a
dunghill, shall I not be punished and cast down into hell? So often therefore
as corrupt nature stirs up the heart of man to pride, because of the flowers
of beauty and strength that grow out of it, let this humble thee; thy flowers
O man, cannot but wither, for the root from which they spring is dead already.

And lastly, is the body dead? then learn temperance and 3 Should learn us
temperance and sobriety.
sobriety: what avails it to pamper that carcass of thine with excessive
seeding which is possessed by death already? if men took the tenth part of
that care to present their spirits holy and without blame unto the Lord, which
they take to make their bodies fat and beautiful in the eyes of men, they
might in short time make greater progress in godliness then they have done:
but herein is their folly, Carnem preciosis rebus impinguant, etc. they make
fat their Bernard.
flesh with delicate things, which within few days the worms shall devour,
Animam vero non adornant bonis operibus, but beautifies not the Soul with good
works, which shortly is to be presented unto God. Let us refrain from the
immoderate pampering of this flesh, Meats are ordained for the belly, and the
belly for meats, but God will destroy them 1 Cor. 6. 13.
both.

We have here moreover discovered unto us, the shameless Satan's shameless
impudency discovered.
impudency of Satan, who daily tempting man to sin, promises unto him some
good by committing of it, as boldly, as if he had never falsified his promise
before. He promised to our Parents in Paradise, that if they did eat of the
fruit of the forbidden tree, they should become like unto God, but what
performed he? in stead of making man like unto God, he made him like unto
himself, yet as I said, so shameless is that lying Spirit, that he dare as
boldly promise vantage by committing of sin this day, as he did the first day
to Adam in Paradise, notwithstanding that we see through miserable experience,
that death because of sin is entered into our bodies. Is he not a deceiuer
indeed? that did first steal from us our birthright, and now would also take
from us the blessing: all those benefits we got by our first creation, he has
stolen them from us with his lying words, and now he goes about by lies also
to steal from us that blessing of restitution by Christ offered, and exhibited
unto us. Jacob justly complained of Laban, Genesis 31. 7.
that he had deceived him, and had changed his wages seven times, but more
justly may we complain of Satan, who innumerable times has beguiled us, he
has changed out wages, how often has he promised us good things, and behold
what evil is come upon us?

Happy were we if in all our temptations we did remember A good answer to be
given Satan in all his temptations to sin.
this and reply to Satan in this manner. The Lord rebuke thee, thou shameless
Liar from the beginning, with what face can thou speak that unto me, wherein
thou have been so often convinced by so manifold witnesses to be a manifest
Liar? Of the fruits of sins, which we have seen; we are to judge of the
fruits of sin which are not seen: if sin has made us so miserable in this
life, how miserable shall it make us in the life to come, if we continue in it?
This is that wisdom which the Apostle recommends to us in that worthy
sentence, happy were we if it were sounded continually in the ears of our
mind, as often as we Romans 6. 21.
are tempted unto sin, What fruit have ye then in those sins whereof now ye
are ashamed? He that will search within himself Seeing he has deceived us so
often, let us believe him no more. Judge. 16.
the fruit of his former transgressions shall easily perceive there is no
cause, why he should commit sin upon hope of any better fruit in time to
come. It was Sampsons destruction, that not withstanding he found himself
thrice deceived by Dalilah, yet the fourth time he harkned unto her deceitful
allurements: and it shall in like manner be the destruction of many, who
notwithstanding they have sound themselves abused by Satan in time past yet
will not learn to resist him, but gives place unto his lying entisements, and
are carried headlong by him into the ways of death: he was a lying Spirit in
the mouth of Achabs Prophets, to 1. King. 22.
draw him forward in a battle, promising him victory, in the which he knew
assuredly that he should dye: so is he a lying spirit in the hearts of the
wicked, promising unto them gain, glory, or pleasure, by doing those works of
sin, whereof he knows well enough they shall reap nothing but shame and
everlasting confusion.

Again, that we may yet see how foolish they are who How they who live in sin
are murderers of themselves. Psalm. 34. 21.
live still in their sins, we may mark here that they are murderers of
themselves, the malice of the wicked shall slay themselves, his own sin which
he has conceived, brought forth, and nourished, shall be his destruction.
Every man judges Saul miserable that dyed upon his own sword, but what better
are other wicked men? are not their sins the weapons by which they slay
themselves? Thus are they twice miserable: first because they are subject to
death: secondly, because they are guilty of their own death. Oh the pitiful
blindness of men, albeit in their life they fear nothing more then death, yet
do they entertain nothing better than sin which causes death. In bodily
diseases men are content to abstain even from ordinary food, where they are
informed by the Physician that it will nourish their sickness, and this they
do to eschew death, only herein they are so ignorant that notwithstanding
they abhor death, yet they take pleasure in unrighteousness, which brings on
death.

And lastly, seeing we are taught here that sin brings Strange death and
diseases comes upon men through the groth of their sins against God.
death upon the body, what marvel the Lord strikes the bodies of men by
sundry sorts of diseases, and sundry kinds of death, seeing man by sundry
sorts of sins prouokes the Lord unto anger? he frames his judgment
proportionable unto his sins. If ye walk stubbornely against me, and will
not obey me, I will then bring seven times more plagues Leuit. 26. 25.
upon you according to your sins. He has famine to punish intemperance, and
the abuse of his creatures; he has the devouring sword to bring low the pride
of man; he has burnings fevers and unclean consuming goutes to punish the
fiery and unclean lusts and concupiscence of man. If now the Lord after that
he has stricken us with famine and pestilence, come among us to visit us also
with unaccustomed diseases, what shall we say? but the despising of his former
fatherly corrections, and our stubborn walking against the Lord our God has
procured this unto our selves. Q^^^ mi^um in poenas generis humani crescere
iram dei, cum Cypri. ad Demet.
crescat quotidie quod puniatur? what marvel the wrath of God increase every
day to punish men, seeing that increases among men, which deserves that God
should punish it?

But there are two impediments which suffers not these Delay of judgment
confirms the wicked in evil, and it is the first impediment which stays them
from repenting at Gods threatenings. Deu. 29. 18.
warnings of God to enter into the hearts of men. The one is albeit they find
within themselves sins condemned by the word of God, yet the plagues
threatens against those sins has not light upon them. This is that root of
bitterness, whereof Moses warned Israel to beware: that they should not bless
themselves in their hearts, when God does curse them, thinking they shall
escape judgment, notwithstanding they do those things which God has
forbidden them. Solomon marked this to be a great cause of iniquity, because
judgment is not executed speedily upon the wicked, Eccles. 8. 11.
therefore the heart of the children of men is set within them to do wickedly.
But O man do thou not know that the judgment of God is according to truth
against all that commit such things? Why despisest thou the riches of his
bountifulness Romans 2. 4.
and patience? because the Lord holds his tongue and spares thee for a while,
think thou that he will spare thee for ever?

Every judgment of God executed upon another malefactor, But they who are
spared should learn wisdom by judgments executed upon others.
may tell thee that thou shall not escape, dies poenae nondum aduenit, the day
of punishment, of judgment, of retribution is not yet come: though in this
life the Lord should not come near thee, yet thy judgment is not far off,
and thy damnation sleeps not. Interim plectuntur quidam, quo caeteri
corrigantur, tormenta paucorum exempla sunt omnium: 2. Pet. 2. 3. Cyp. de
lapsis. sermon. 5.
In the mean time some are punished that the rest may be corrected, the
torments of a few are the examples of all. As the Lord Jesus set those eighteen
men, on whom the tower of Siloam fell, for examples to all the rest of the
people: Luke 13.
so every one punished before us stands up to us as a preacher of repentance,
and an example to warn us, that unless we repent, we shall perish in like
manner: Si nunc omne peccatum Aug de ciuit. Dei. cap. 8.
manifesta plecteretur poena, nihil vltimo iudicio r^^eruari putaretur, and si
nullum nunc peccatum puniret Deus, nulla Why some wicked men are punished in
this life and not others
putaretur esse prouidentia; If in this life every sin were punished with a
seen judgment, nothing should be reserved to the last judgment, and if no
sin were punished in this life, it might be thought there were not a
providence to regard it. The Lord therefore punishes some sins in this life,
to tell there is a God who judges righteously Psalm. 58. 11.
in the earth, other sins again in his wise dispensasion he punished not in
this life to assure all men that there is a judgment to come.

And least yet the wicked man should flatter himself by his escaping of
present judgment, let him remember It is a great judgment not to be corrected
by God. Hos. 4. 14.
that a sinner vvalking in his sins, is sore punished when he is spared: for
I pray thee, is not this a judgment threatened against the Apostate Israelites?
I will not visit your Daughters when they are Harlots, nor your Spouses when
they are Whores. Certe tunc magis irascitur Deus, cum non irascitur: Ber. in
Cant. hom. 42.
Certainly then is God most angry, when he seems not to be angry at all.
Misericordiam hanc nolo, for my own part (says Bernard) I will not have such
a mercy. Insignis poena est, and vindicta impictatis conniuere Deum, ac
indulgere pecc^ntibus, and non solum impunitatem, sed and longam concedere
prosperitatem: Philo. lib. de consus. linguarum.
It is a notable punishment and revenge of ungodliness* when God winkes, and
ouersees sinners, not only granting unto them impunitie, but also long
ptosperitie. It was good for me (says David) that the Lord afflicted me.
Psalm. 119. 71 Psalm. 73.. ^. Prou. 1. 32.
The wicked because they have no changes fear not God, And the prosperity of
fools destroy them. He is happily conquered and overcome (faith Augustine)
from whom the liberty of sinning is taken away, Nihil enim infoelicius
foelicitate peccantium, Aug. Marcellino Epist. 5.
qua poenalis nutritur impunitas, and mala voluntas velut interior hostis
roberatur; There is nothing more unhappy then the happy estate of a sinner,
whereby penal impunitie is nourished* and their wicked will as an inward and
domesticke enemy is strenthned: thus are the wicked fearfully plagued, when
they are most spared, when they are given up to their own hearts desire, and
their iniquity has dominion over them; when the Lord hedges not in their way
with thorns, but give them loose reins to go where they will to their own
destruction, this is terribilis lenitas and parcens crudelitas: from which
unhappy condition the Lord deliver us.

The other impediment that stays the Atheists of our 2 Impediment. Wicked men
repent not because they see the godly subject to the same outward evils which
come upon them.
time from profiting by the threatenings of God, is because they see the same
condition befalls to the godly, which is threatened to the wicked. Daniel
goes with the rest into captivity; Josias no less then the greatest sinners
among the people, is slain with the sword; Ezekias also stricken with
pestilence; and many godly ones among our selves fall under the same external
plagues, which are threatened against the wicked, therefore do they despise
Religion, and harden their hearts against the judgments of God. But herein
also are they pitifully blinded; for the godly and wicked differs far one
from another, even when they The actions and passions of the godly and wicked
different in one and the self same thing. Cyprian ad. Demet.
are both doing the same external actions. Cain and Abel sacrificing together;
the Publicane and the Pharisee praying together, yet are as far unlike one
another, as light and darkness: so when they suffer the same external
crosses; yet there is a wonderful difference between them, non idcirco vobis
aequales sumus, quia in isto adhuc mundo constituti, carnis incommoda vobiscum
pariter incurrimus. A very good answer for men of this world, who think they
are in no worse case then the Children of God: think not that we are in as
evil case as ye are, because that so long as we are in this world we are
subject to the same bodily incoueniences, for since punishment consists in the
sense of pain, it is evident that he is not partaker of thy punishment, who is
not pertaker of thy sorrow: manifestum est non esse participem poenae tuae,
quem non vides participem doloris tui. In that same affliction wherein the one
sees the wrath of God, the other feels the love of God; where the one
impatient of the yoke murmu^es, rages, and blasphemes the Lord, the other
possessing his soul in patience, rejoicing in tribulation, blesses the Lord.

But the spirit is life for righteousness sake.] Having granted The condition
being permitted the comfort is subioyned.
that our bodies are dead through sin, he now subioynes the comfort, that
our souls are endued with a life which comes not under death, through the
righteousness of Christ. Where first it comes to be considered, seeing every
man's soul is immortal and always living: what singular life is this, which
here the Apostle makes the comfort of a Christian? To this I answer, it is
true every man's soul is immortal, though the Atheist deny it, experience
proves Immortality of the Soul most certain.
it, the life of the soul depends not on the life of the body, for if it
were so, as the body decays the soul should decay also: for we see that even
in debilitate bodies the soul retains the own vigor, yea in the godly the
life of the soul shows the self strongest, when the life of the body is
weakest. Besides this no carnal, mortal nor corruptible thing, can at any
time content the soul to fill it: the body is soon satisfied with these
perishing things, in such sort that it craves no more, but as for the soul all
the delicate and pleasant things of this world cannot satisfy or content it.
Non esurientes animas, sed esuriem ipsam pascunt animarum they Bern. de
persecuquutione sustinenda. cap. 22.
feed not the hungry soul, but rather feeds and augments the hunger of the
soul. And lastly we see in experience that the soul now when it is within
the body has his own working and lively operation, even then when the body is
a sleep, and the senses thereof closed up; which also is also confirmed by
that conference which Sal^mon had with the Lord, when his body was sleeping;
beside many other. And hereof Tertullian concluded the immortality of the
Tertul. de resur. carnis.
Soul, ^e in somnium quidem cadit anima cum corpore, quomod^ in veritatem
mortis cad^t, quae nec in imaginem eius ruit? The soul does not fall a sleep
with the body, how then shall we think that it can verily die it self, which
cannot so much as fall under the shadow and similitude of death?

Thus the Atheist being put b^, the doubt still remains: A twofold immortal
life of the Soul, whereof the one is proper to the godly, the other pertaines
to the wicked.
Seeing every man's soul lives an immortal life, what comfort is this given
here to the Christian, that though his body be dead his soul is living? To
this I answer, there is a twofold life of the Soul, one of nature, another
of grace; by the one it liu^s for ever, by the other it l^ues for ever in
happiness; the one is common to all men the other is proper to the children of
God, an immortal happy life: they have it not of nature but of grace, as here
the Apostle says, through the righteousness of Christ communicated unto them.
As for that natural life of the soul, the spirit of God, as we said, accounts
it but a death, when they are living in the body he says, they are dead ^^
sin and trespasse^, and when Ephe. 2. 1.
they are gone out of the body, though they live, yet he calls their life but an
everlasting death: thus are the wicked miserable while they are in the body,
more miserable when they remove out of the body; therefore Solomon comparing
them among themselves, accounts them happiest that never Eccles. 4. 3.
have been.

Secondly, we see here that man is a creature consisting Man a compound
creature.
of a soul and a body: where first it is to be admired how two creatures of
such contrary kinds and qualities, as is the soul and the body, should
concur together to make up one man: and secondly, how this fearful
diuorcement is come between them once so straightly united by God, that where
the one is partaker of life, the other should be possessed by death. Most
marvelous of all the creatures both in regard of his two substances.


As for the first, the Lord has created man in such sort that he has made him
a compend of all his creatures: in respect of his body, he has some affinity
with earthly creaturs, because he was made to rule over them; and in respect
of his soul, he is a companion to the Angels: for this cause the Naturalists
called man a little world; and Augustine counted man a greater miracle than
any miracle that ever was wrought among men: where other creatures were
made by the simple commandment of God, before the creation of man the Lord is
said to use consultation: to declare says Basile, that the Lord esteems more
of man, than Basil. hexam. hom 10.
of all the rest of his creatures: neither is it said that the Lord put his
hand to the making of any creature, save only to the making of man; and this
also says Tertullian, to declare Tertull. de resur. carnis. As also of their
marvelous conjunction.
his excellency.

Yet is not man so marvelous in regard of his two substances, as in regard of
their conjunction Among all the works of God the like of this is not to be
found again, a Mass of clay quickened by the spirit of life, and these two
united together to make up one man. Commonly says Bernard, the honorable
agrees not with the ignoble, the strong ouergoes the weak, the living and the
dead dwells not together: Non Bern. in die natal. dom. sermon 2. This doctrine
known but not considered
sic in opere tuo d^mine, non sic in commixtione tua, it is not so in thy work
O Lord, it is not so in thy commixtion.

This is a doctrine commonly talked of, that man consists of a soul and a
body, but is not so duly considered, as it should. It is a fearful
punishment which by nature lies upon the soul, seeing she turned her self
willingly away from God, she is so far deserted of God, that she regards not
her self: though it be a very common proverb in the mouths of men, I have a
soul to keep, yet have thou such a soul as can teach thee to keep any other
thing better than it self: a fearful plague, that because as I have said the
soul continued not in the love of God, it is now so far deserted, that it
regards not the own self. This have I touched only to waken us, that we may
more deeply consider of that doctrine which men think they have learned and
know sufficiently already, namely, that man is a compound creature consisting
of a soul and a body.

But to return, seeing at the first these two, the soul and How that harmony
which was between the soul and body by creation, is now turned into
disagreement. Four estates of man's soul and body united.
body, were conjoined together by the hand of the Creator, and agreed together
in one happy harmony among themselves, whence comes this disagreement, that the
soul being pertaker of life, the body should be possessed by death? I answer we
are to consider these four estates of man's soul and body united. The first is
their estate by creation, wherein both of them concurred in a happy agreement
to serve their Maker. The second, is the estate of Apostasy, wherein both of
them in one cursed band conjoined fell away from God, the faculties of the
soul rebelling against God, and abusing all the members of the body as weapons
of unrighteousness to offend him. The third is the estate of grace, wherein
the soul being reconciled with God by the mediation of Christ, and quickened
again by his holy Spirit, the body is left for a while under the bands of
death. The fourth is the estate of glory, wherein both of them being joined
together again, shall be restored to a more happy life than that which they
enjoyed by creation. As for the first estate, we have lost it; as for the
second, the reprobate stands in it, and therefore miserable is their condition;
as for the third, it is the estate of the Saints of God upon earth; as for the
fourth, it shall be the estate of the Saints of God in heaven.

Let not therefore the children of God be discouraged, by Comfort, our estate
in this life is neither our last nor best estate.
looking either upon the remanents of sin in their soul, or the beginning of
death in their body, for why? this estate wherein now we are, is neither our
last, nor our best estate: out of this we shall be transchanged into the
blessed estate of glorious immortality, our souls without all spot or wrinckle
shall dwell in the body, freed from mortality and corruption, made like unto
Christ's own glorious body; which the Lord our God who has translated us out
of our second miserable estate into this third, shall not fail to accomplish
in his time.

Again it comes to be considered here, seeing by Jesus Christ life is restored
to the soul presently, why is it not also restored to the body? why is the
body l^st under the Our souls being quickened, yet our bodies are left under
death for four causes.
power of death, to be turned into dust and ashes? was it not as easy to the
Lord to have done the one as the other? To this I answer, that at any time
life should be restored to our bodies, is a mercy greater then we are able to
consider, if we will look to our des^ruing: that for a while he will have
them subjected to the power of death, the Lord in his wise dispensation, has
thought it good for many causes. First, for performance of his truth, (...) but
dust, Genesis 3. 21.
and to dust thou shall return. If man had dyed no manner of way, how should
the truth of GOD appear? and if that death due to man had not been inflicted
upon him, how 1 F^r reconciliation of Gods mercy and truth. Ber. in annu^. Mar.
ser. 1.
should his mercy been manifested? this controversy God in his marvelous
wisdom has settled: F^at mors bona, and habet vtraque qu^d petit, let death
become good, and so both his mercy and his truth has that which they crave,
for in the changing of the cursed nature of death, and making that temporal
which was eternal, does his mercy appear, and in the dissolution of man's body
into dust for a time, does his truth appear.

Secondly, the Lord has done it for manifestation of his 2 For the cleerer
declaration of Gods power.
own power, accounting it a greater glory to destroy sin by death, then by
any other means. Death is the fruit of sin, and the weapon whereby Satan
intended to destroy mankind, and so deface the glory of the Creator: but the
Lord cutteth off the head of this G^liah with his own sword, he turns his
vveapon against himself; by death he destroys that same sin in his children
which brought Chrisost. in Mat. hom. 2.
forth death. A marvelous conquest that Satan is not only overcome, but
overcome by the same means by which before he tyrannized over men. And
thirdly, the Lord 3 For our instruction that we may know what great mercy God
has showed upon us.
suffers our bodies to taste of death that we may the better consider that
excellent benefit which we have by Jesus Christ, for if the death of the
body (notwithstanding that the nature thereof is changed) be so fearful as
we see in experience, how miserable should we have been, if the Lord had
inflicted deserved death both of soul and body 4 For our conformity with
Christ.
upon us? And last, that we might be conformed to him who is the first borne
among many brethren, it behooves us by death also to enter into his kingdom.

For righteousness sake. This righteousness that brings The life our soul
has, flows from Christ's righteousness. Romans 5. 21 Hos. 13. 9 Reu. 7. 10.
life, is the righteousness of Christ, imputed to us by Grace, as i^ evident
out of that, As sin had reigned unto death, so might grace also raygne by
righteousness unto eternal life. Sin which causes death is our own, but
that righteousness which brings life is of Grace. Our perdition is of our
selves, but our salvation comes from the Lord and from the L(...) be that
sits upon the Throne. No preservative then against death but this
righteousness, it presently gives life unto our soul, and afterward shall
restore our dodyes from the power of the grave: such therefore as are the
children of wisdom, will be careful in time to be partakers This
righteousness is known by sanctification
of this Jewel. This righteousness has inseperably annexed with it
Sanctification; by thy sanctification try thy self, and see whether or no thou
have gotten life through the righteousness of Christ, deceive not thine own
heart in the matter of salvation, assure thy self so far forth thou do live,
as thou art sanctified. As health is to the body, so is holiness to the Soul: a
body without health falls out of one pain into another till it dye; and a Soul
without holiness is polluted with one lust after another till it dye. As the
Moon has lightlesse or more according as it is in aspect with the Sun: so
the Soul of man enioyes life less or more according as it is turned or
auerted to or from the Lord: thus let every man judge by his sanctification,
whether if or not he be partaker of that righteousness of Jesus, which
brings life unto the soul Miserable are those wicked ones who want, it they
are twice dead (says Saint Jude,) that is, Jude. ver. 12.
both in soul and body, not so much as a heavenly breath or motion is in them:
but we ought to give thanks unto God who has given a beginning of eternal
life unto us.

Last of all, there is here a notable comfort for all the Comfort, we have a
life which no death can extinguish.
children of God, that there is begun in us a life, which no death shall ever
be able to extinguish: albeit death invade the natural vital powers of our
bodies, and suppress them one after one, yea though at the length he break in
upon this lodging of clay, and demolish it to the ground, yet the man of God
who dwells in the body shall escape with his life: the Tabernacle is cast down
(that is the most our enemy can do) but he who dwelt in it remoues unto a
better: as the Bird escapes out of the snare of the Fowler, so the The prison
of the body being broken, the soul that was prisoner does escape.
soul in death slighters out and flies away with joy to her maker: yea
dissoluing of the body to the man of God, it is but the unfolding of the net,
and breaking open the prison wherein he has been detayned, that he himself
may be delivered. The Apostle knew this well, and therefore Phil. 1. 21.
desired to be dissolved, that he might be with Christ. As in the battle
between our Savior and Satan, Satan's head Genesis 3.
was bruised, and he did no more but tread on the heel of our Savior, so
shall it be in the conflict of all his members with Satan: by the power of
Lord Jesus we shall be more then conquerours, The God of peace shall shortly
tread Romans 16. 20.
down Satan under our feet: the most that Satan can do unto us, Manducet
terram meam, and dentem carni infigat, Amb. de poen. lib. 1. cap: 13.
conterat corpus, let him lick the dust, let him eat that part of me which is
earth, let him bruise my body; this is but to tread upon the heel, my comfort
is, that there is a seed of immortal life in my soul, which no power of the
enemy is able to overcome.

It is true that so long as we enjoy this natural life with Wicked men dye
either uncertain of comfort,
health of body, the loss that comes by the want of the spiritual life is not
perceived, no more then the defects of a ruinous house is perceived in time of
fair weather; but when thy natural life is wearing from thee, if thou want
the other, how comfortless shall thy condition be, when thou shall find in
thine own experience, thou had never more then a silly natural life,
which now is to depart from thee? In this estate the wicked either dye, being
uncertain of comfort, or then most certain of condemnation Those who are
strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance Ephesians. 4. 18.
that is in them, having no more but the light of nature, the best estate
wherein they can dye, is comfortless, if for want of light they know not that
wrath which is prepared for the wicked, and so are not greatly terrified, yet
far less know they those comforts which after death sustaines the Christian
that they should be comforted. The Emperor Hadrian, when he dyed, made this
faithless lamentation, Animula, vagula, blandula, quae nunc abibis in loca? O
silly wandering Soul, where away now will thou go? and that other, Seuerus,
proclaiming the vanity of all his former glory cried out, (...): I have been
all things and it profits me nothing: the one says, he found no comfort of
things that were before him; the other says, he found no comfort of things
that were behind: thus the wicked dye comfortless, good things to come they
neither know nor hope for, good things past profit them Or most certain of
condemnation.
not. Or if they have been such wicked men as by the light of the word have
known the will of their master, and yet rebelled against their light, they go
out of the body, not only comfortles, but certain of condemnation, having
received sentence within themselves, that they shall never see the face of God;
and such was the death of Judas: let us not therefore rest contented with the
shadow of this vanishing life; let us provide for that immortal seed of a
better life within us, which receives increase but cannot decay, it waxes
stronger the weaker that the bodily life is, but cannot be weakened, far less
extinguished by bodily death: he that finds it within himself shall rejoice
in death, he shall dye in faith, in obedience, and in spiritual joy,
Committing his Soul unto 1 Pet. 4. 19.
God as unto a faithful Creator, he rests in him whom he has believed, being
assured that the Lord will keep that, which he has committed unto him. The
Lord work it in us for Christ's sake.

Verse 11. But if the spirit of him who raised up Jesus from from the dead,
dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quick^n your
mortal bodies, because that his spirit dwells in you.
IT is a comfortable saying of the Apostle, If in 1 Cor. 15. 19.
this life only we had hope, of all men we were the most miserable: for it
does teach us that albeit in this life we have great comforts through Jesus
Christ, yet greater abides us in the life to come. And therefore the Apostle
contents not himself barely to make mention of such comforts as presently we
have, but he proceeds now to acquaint us with greater comforts, which
hereafter we shall enjoy. He has showed us that the death whereunto we are
subject is not total, for it strikes He has showed our death is not total,
now he shows that it is not perpetual.
only upon the basest part of man: Now he shows that it is not perpetual;
the body shall not be kept for ever under the bands of death, the spirit of
Jesus who now dwells in it, shall deliver it from the bondage of corruption,
raise it from the dust, and quicken it unto glory.

But if the Spirit, etc. We have here first of all to mark Every promise of
mercy is conditional.
again that the Apostles speech is not absolute, but conditional. All the
promises of comfort made in the book of God are conditional. This is a great
comfort, the Lord shall quicken your mortal bodies, but conditionally, that
his spirit dwell in you. Whom has the Lord promised to satisfy? such as
hungers for righteousness: whom has he promised to comfort? not the careless
nor wantons, but such as mourn: to whom has he promised forgiveness of
sins? not to the licentious livers, but to the penitent: to whom will he give
eternal life? not to the Infidels, but to such as If w^ like gods comforts,
let us take heed^ to the condition on which they are promised.
believe. If we esteem any thing of the comforts of God, let us take heed to
the condition, for except the condition in some measure be wrought in us, the
promise shall never be accomplished upon us. It were good for the men of this
age to consider this more deeply, who sleeping in presumptuous conceits of
mercy, think how ever they live, they shall be saved. In all the whole Bible
there is not one promise without an annexed condition. In the covenant between
God and man, there is a mutual stipulation: as the Lord promises something to
us, so he requires another thing of us: with what face can thou stand up and
seek that mercy which God has promised, who never endeuouredst to perform
that duty which God has required?

Again we have here occasion to consider those excellent The benefits we have
through the indwelling of the spirit in us are further declared. Gal. 2 20.
benefits which we have by the spirit of Christ dwelling in us, beside that
which we heard, verse 10. As if those were too little, he further does unto
us these great things: first, he gives life to the soul, and makes it in the
body to live the life of Christ, so that the Christian may say, Now I live, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me. Secondly, when Soul and body are sundred by
death, he leads the soul to live with God in glory, which is the second
degree of eternal life: and thirdly, he casts not off the care of the body,
but preserneth the very dust and ashes thereof till the day of the
resurrection, wherein he shall quicken it again, restore it to the own
soul, and glorify both, which is the third and last degree of eternal life.
Surely there was never a house hyre so well paid in the world, thou who sets thy
soul and body There was never a house hire so well paid.
as lodging for a short while here on earth, that he may dwell in it. O what
recompense have thou to look for? he dwells with the on earth, and thou shall
dwell with him in heaven, thou did lend him a lodging for a few years, and
he shall receive thee into his everlasting habitations, and thou shall be for
ever with the Lord.

Neither shall he show his mercy upon thy soul only, The holy spirit shall
keep the body wherein he dwelt, even when it is laid in the grave.
but as I have said, upon thy body also, it would seem that the Lord has
deserted it as a ^ontemptible thing, when it is laid down in the grave, but
be assured that he who dwelt in it will not leave it, nor cast off ^he care
thereof, no, not when it is turned into dust and ashes. Comfortable is that
which the Lord promised to Jacob, when he bad him go down to Egypt, Fear
not to go, for I will go down with thee, and I will bring thee up again. He
forewarned him that he should dye in Egypt, and that Joseph should close Genesis
46. 4.
his eyes, but he promises to bring up again his dead body unto Canaan. O
what a kindness is it, that the Lord will honor the dead bodies of his
Children. The praise of the O what a kindness?
conuoy of Jacobs corpse, the Lord will neither give it to Joseph, nor to
Pharaohs Servants with their Chariots, who in great number accompanied him, the
Lord takes it unto himself* I will bring thee up again (says the Lord,) the
like kindness and truth does the Lord keep for all the remanent? of his
servants. Is thy body consecrated? is it a vessel of honor, a house and
temple, wherein God is daily served? he shall honor it again, he shall not
leave it in the grave, neither cast off the care thereof, but shall vvatch over
the dust thereof, though it taste of corruption, it shall not perish in
corruption.

The holy Spirit who dwelt in the body, shall be unto it He is a holy balm
whereby the body shall be preserved immortal.
as a balm to preserve thee to immortality, this same flesh and no other, for
it (though it shall be dissolved into innumerable pickles of dust) shall be
raised again and quicned by the omnipotent power of this Spirit. It is a
pity to see by what silly means natural men seek the immortal
conservation of their bodies, and cannot obtain it: there is no help nature
may yield to prolong the death of the body but they use it, and because they
see that deat cannot be eschewed, their next care is how to keep it in the
grave longest from rottenness and corruption, and how when themselves are
gone, to preserve their names in immortal remembrance with the posterity:
thus by the very instinct of nature, are men carried away with a desire of
eternity, Worldings seek immortality the wrong way. Esaias. 55. 2.
but herein are they foolish, that they seek it the wrong way, they lay out
their silver but not for bread, they spend their labor, and are not satisfied,
immortality and life is to be sought there where the word of the Lord directs
us, let the Spirit of Christ dwell in thee, and thou shall live otherwise
though thou, were the greatest Monarch of the word, though all thy meat were
sovereign medicines, though thy body were laid in grave with as great
external pomp as worldly glory can afford to any creature, and thy flesh were
embalmed with the costliest ointments; these are but miserable comforts,
perishing preservatives, thou shall lie down in dishonor, and shall be raised
in greater dishonor to everlasting shame and endless confusion.

Now as we have these three degrees of eternal life by Life is first restored
to the soul and then to the body.
the Spirit dwelling in us, so are we to mark the order by which he proceeds
in communicating them unto us: first, he restores life to the soul; and
secondly, he shall restore life unto the body (says the Apostle) where the one
is done, be assured the other shall be done, the one is the proper end of his
first coming, therefore his Heralds cried before him; Beh^ld the Lamb of God
who takes away the sins John. 1. 29.
of the world: In his second coming shall be the redemption Phil. 2. 21.
of our bodies, when he shall appear he shall change our vile bodies, and
make them like to his own glorious body. Let this reform the prosperous care
of man; art thou desirous that thy body should live? be first careful that
life be communicated to the soul: for surely the redemption of thy body shall
not follow, unless the restitution of thy soul go before. O porte^ cor
nostrum conformari humilitati cordis Bern. de aduen. dom. sermon. 4.
Christi, priusquam corpus conformetur glorioso corpori eius, our heart must
first be conformed to the humility of Christ's heart, before that our body be
configurated to his glorious body, this is the first resurrection, blessed are
they that are partakers of it, for upon such the second death shall have no
power. But it is out of doubt qui non resurgit in anima^, resurget in corpore
ad poenam, he that rises not now in his soul from his sins, shall rise
hereafter in his body to judgment.

But now leaving the condition, to come to the comfort, he that raised up
Christ from the dead, says the Apostle, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies. What necessity is there here What necessity is here that he who raised
Christ shall also raise us?
that he who raised Christ shall raise us? yes indeed the necessity is
great, the head and the members of the mystical body cannot be sundred: seeing
the head is raised from the dead no member can be left under death: the Lord
works in every member according to that same mighty Ephe. 1. 29.
power, by which he wrought in the head; his resurrection necessarily imports
ours, seeing he arose not as a private man, but as the head of all his members,
full of power to draw the body after him, and to communicate that same life to
every member, which he has declared in himself: Christ is risen from the
dead, and is made the first fruits of them that 1 Cor. 15. 20
sleep: the first fruit is risen, the after fruit shall in like manner follow.
Vixit in coelum carnem nostram tanquam arhabonem and pignus t^tu^s summae illuc
quandoque ^redigendae: the Tertul. de resur. carn^^.
Lord Jesus has carried our flesh into heaven, as an earnest and p^edge of the
whole sum, which afterward is to be brought thither; he has not thought it
enough to give his spirit unto us here on earth, as the earnest of our
inheritance but to put us out of all doubt he has carried up our flesh into
heaven, and possessed it in the kingdom, in the name of all his members.

Who raised up Jesus from the dead.] Then we see that our Seeing our Lord was
among the dead let us not fear when God calls us to lie down among them also.
Lord was once among the dead but now is risen from them; let us not then be
afraid when God shall call us to lie down among the dead also* shall the
servant be ashamed of his Masters condition? or will the patient refuse to
drink that potion which the Physician has tasted before him? No, we must
follow our Lord through the miseries of this life, through the dolours of
death, through the horrors of the grave if we look to follow him in his
resurrection, in his ascension, to be amongst those hundred forty and four
thousand in mount Sion, who having his fathers name written in their
foreheads, follow the Lamb whersoeuer he go^th, Revel. 7
singing that new song which none can sing but they whom he has bought from
the earth.

When those women came to seek the Lord Jesus in the What comfort Christ's
resurrection gives us against death.
Sepulcher, all the fear they had conceived concerning Christ's death, the
Angels remoues it by sending them to meditate on the resurrection, why seek
ye him that lives, among the dead? he is not here but he is risen. We are
not Mat. 28. 5. 6
yet laid down among the dead, but or ever we go to the grave we have this
comfort, that the Lord by his power shall raise us out of it; where the head
grows through the members will follow. Per angustum passionis foram^n
transiuit Christus, vt latum praeberet ingr^ssum sequentibus membris: Our Lord
is gone through the narrow passage of death that he might make it the wider
and easier to all his members who are to follow him. We see by experience the
body of a man drownes not though it be under the water, as long as the head is
borne above: many of the members of Christ are here in this valley of death,
tossed too and fro in this sea of tribulation, with continual tentations yet our
comfort is we cannot perish, for our head is above and a great part of the body
living, and reigning with him in glory, there is life in him to draw forth out
of these miseries, all his members, and he shall do it by that same power, by
which he raised himself from the dead.

For we are taught here* that our resurrection is a work not to be done by
man, not the power of nature, but by Resurrection is a work of God and n^^ of
man.
the power of God: we are not therefore to hearken to the deceitful motions of
our infidelity, which calls in doubt this article of our Faith: we must not
consider the imbecillitie and weakness of nature, neither measure heavenly and
supernatural things, with the narrow span of natural reason, but as it is
Abraham's praise the father of the faithful, Romans 4. 19.
that when God promised him a son in his old age, he was not weak in faith,
he considered not his own body, which was dead neither the deadness of
Saraahs womb, but was strengthened in the faith, and gave glory to God, being
fully assured that he who had promised was also able to do it: so should we
sanctify the Lord God in our hearts, looking to the word and promise of the
everliving God, to Cyr. cate. 18.
whom those things are possible which are impossible unto us: for the Lord
(says the Prophet) has the whole earth in Isay. 40. 12.
his fist, and it is more easy to him to discern one pickle of dust from
another, then it is to any man having his hand full of sundry seeds, to open
his hand and gather every kind thereof into one by themselves, separate and
distinct from the rest. When thou hear (says Augustine) that the dead shall
be raised, suppose it be a great thing, yet count it no incredible thing, but
consider who it is that takes in hand to do it, ille suscitabit te qui and
creauit te, the Lord who created Aug. ser. 64
thee, he it is, that shall raise thee.

And for our further confirmation, let us consider how Resurrection confirmed,
by Scripture, by types, by practices of God in nature.
the spirit of God has taught this article of our resurrection in sundry
places of holy scripture, has shadowed it by types and figures, has cleared
it by examples, and last of all by the practice, and working of God in nature.
As for Scripture, both Prophets and Apostles as it were with one 1 Our
resurrection is confirmed by Scripture. Dan. 12. 13. Hos. 13. 14. 15.
mouths breathes out this verity. They that sleep in the dust (says Daniel)
shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame, and
perpetual contempt. I will redeem thee (says the Lord by Hosea) from the
power of the grave, I will deliver thee from death: O death, I will be thy
death, O grave I will be thy destrustiom. Patient Job in his greatest
extremity Job. 19. 25.
gave out this notable confession of his faith, I am sure that my redeemer
lives and he shall stand the last on the earth, and though after my skin
worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my flesh whom I my self shall
see and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me, though my reins are
consumed within me. And if we come to the new Testament, most clear is that
testimony of the Lord Jesus: The hour shall John. 5 28.
come in the which all that are in the grave shall hear his voice, and they
shall come forth that have done good, unto the resurrection of life: but they
that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation. The Apostles in
like manner bear witness to their Master: If in this life only we had hope
in Christ, of all men we were most miserable: but now is Jesus 1 Cor. 15. 19.
20. 21. 22.
risen from the dead, and was m^^^ the first fruits of them that slept. For
since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as
in Adam all lie, so in Christ all are made alive. And again, Behold I show you
a secret, we shall Ibid. 51. 52. 53.
not all sleep, but we shall al^ be changed. In a moment in the twinkling of
an eye at the last trumpet: for the trumpet shall blow, and the dead shall be
raised up incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put
on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. 2 Resurrection
confirmed by types and figures such as


The same is in like manner shadowed in holy Scripture by sundry types and
figures among which in Tertulian his judgment, the restitution of Jonas out of
the Whales belly, is one: albeit the belly of the Whale was more able to have
altered and changed the body of Jonas, by reason of the Jonas body.
great heat that is therein, then the belly of the earth could have been by
reason of her cold, yet is he restored the third day, as lively as he was
received. The same he thinks of that vision of dry bones, showed to Ezechiel,
which at Ezekiels bones. Chap. 38.
once ^t the word of the Lord was knit together with sinews, and covered with
flesh and skin: this was not only a prediction of the deliverance of Israel
out of Babell, but also a typical confirmation of the resurrection of our
bodies. Non enim figura de ossi^us potuisset componi, nisi id ipsum essibu^
Tertull. de resur. carnis.
(...)rum ess^t: for that figure of the bones could not have been made, if the
truth figured thereby were not also to be accomplished upon such bones:
Parabola de nullo non conuenit? what parable or similitude can be brought from
a thing which is not? We shall not read in all the book of God, that any
parable has been borrowed from that thing which never was, nor never will be.
Of this sort also is the flourishing of Aarons rod, in the judgment of
Cyril, Aarons rod. Numb. 17.
which being before a dry and withered stick, incontinent by the word of the
Lord flourished; he that restored to Aarons rod that kind of vegitatiue
life which it had before, will much more raise Aaron himself from the dead. Of
these figures shadowing the resurrection many more are to be found in holy
Scripture.

As for examples, in every age of the world, the Lord Examples of the
Resurrection. Genesis 5.
has raised some from the dead, to be witnesses of the resurrection of the
rest. Before the flood, he carried up Henoch alive into heaven, and he saw no
death: under the law, Elias was transported in a fiery chariot: and in the
last age 2 Kings. 2.
of the world, not only has our Lord, blessed for ever, risen from the dead
and ascended into heaven, as the first fruits of them, which rise from the
dead, but also by his power he raised Lazarus out of the grave, even after
that stinking rottenness had entered into his flesh: and upon the Cross, when
he seemed to be most weak he showed himself most strong; he caused by his
power many that were dead to come out of their graves, and to enter into the
City. Yea, his servant Peter by the power of the Lord Jesus, raised the
damsel Dorcas from death, and in the name of the Lord Jesus Act. 9. 40. Acts.
3.
made him that was lame of his feet to arise and walk: when we see such power
in the servant of Christ working in his name shall we not reserve the praise of
a greater power to himself?

And lastly, as for the practices of God in nature, we are 3 Gods working both
in our selves and the creature confirms the Resurrection. 1 Cor. 15.
not to neglect them, for the Apostle himself brings arguments from them to
confirm the resurrection. He first propones the question of the Atheist, how
are the dead raised up, and with what body come they forth? and then subioynes
the answer, O fool that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die, it
is sown in the earth bare corn, and God raises it with another body at his
pleasure: seeing thou beholdest this daily working of God in nature, why wilt
not thou believe that the Lord is able to do the like unto thy self? Qui illa
reparat quae tibi sunt necessaria, quanto m^g^s te reparabit, propter Ang. de
verb. Apost. ser. 34.
quem illa reparare dignatus est? Seeing the Lord for thy sake repaires those
things which are necessary to maintain thy life, will he not much more restore
thy self, and raise thee up from death unto eternal life?

And to insist in these same confirmations, which we may A twofold meditation
to confirm the resurrection.
have from the working of God in nature, both in our selves and in other
creatures: if either with Justin Martyr, we consider of how small a beginning,
or then with Cyril how of nothing God has made up man, we shall see how justly
the Apostle calls them fools who deny the resurrection of our bodies. The
Lord (says Justin Ma^tyr) of a little drop of man's seed, which (as Job says)
is powered out like 1 How of a little drop god made us that which now we are.
water, builds up daily this excellent workmanship of man's body: who would
believe that of so small a beginning and without form, so well a proportionate
body in all the members thereof could be brought forth? nisi aspectus sidem
faceret, were it not that daily sight and experience confirms Just. Mart.
apol. 2. ad Senate. Romans
it? why then shall it be thought a thing impossible to the Lord to reedifie
the same body, after that by death it has been dissolved into dust and ashes?
And again, if with 2 How God has made us of nothing to be that which now we
are.
Cyrill we will s(...) out our beginning and consider what we were this day
hundred year, we shall find that we were not: seeing the Lord of nothing
has brought out so pleasant and beautiful a creature, as thou art this day,
shall thou think it impossible to him an hundred years after this, o^ longer
or shorter, as it pleases him, to restore thee again, and raise thee from the
dead; qui potuit id quod non Ciril cate. 4
erat producere, vt aliquid esse; id quod iam est, cum ^eciderit restituere non
poterit? he that could bring out that which was not, and make it to be
something, shall we think that he cannot raise up again that which now is,
after that it has fallen?

Which of these two I pray thee, is the greatest and most It is easier to
restore one that has been, then to make one that never was.
difficult work in thy judgment (for unto the Lord every thing, that he will
is alike easy,) whether to make one who never was, or to restore again one
who has been? Doubtless to make a man in our judgment is a greater thing
then to raise him. In the work of creation the Lord made that to be which was
not, in the work of resurrection the Lord shall make that to be which was
before; the one thou beleeuest because thou see it daily done; the other thou
doubtest of, because it is to be done: but cease to doubt any more, and of that
which God has wrought in thee already that thou may see it, perceive that
which is to be wrought in thee, suppose it be not apparent: ex his quae in
Cyril.
te sunt, pers^ice ea quae non apparent: of ^ore-past works judge of that which
is to come that thou may learn to give glory to God, and trust in him who
gives life to them that are dead.

And if from our selves we proceed to other creatures, how Practices of God on
creatures without us, though they cannot beget faith, yet may they confirm it.
many proofs in nature shall we find to confirm the resurrection? the Trees
that dye in Winter, and loose both their leaves and fruit, are they not
restored again in the Spring? The day which is slain by the night, and buried
in darkness, as it were in a grave, is it not restored again in the morning?
The ancient Fathers send us to learn ^e same from the Phoenix. Many other
works of God in (...)re, though they cannot beget this faith in us, yet are
they profit^ble to help it where it is begun, and are strong witnesses in
their kind to reprove the infidelity of Atheists. But we have above all to
take heed to that most sure word of the Prophets and Apostles whereat we began,
and so to rest in it, that when it shall please God the day of our change shall
come, we may (after the example of our blessed Savior) commend our souls into
the hands of the Lord, and be content that our bodies like pickles of lively
seed be sown in the field of God, and set into the earth, as it were with Gods
own finger, that in his own good time they may spring up again to glory and
immortality: I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to
keep unto the last day that which I have 2 Timothy 2. 12.
committed to him. And this for confirmation of our resurrection. These same
bodies which now we have, shall be restored unto us the same in substance.


We have further this comfort, in that the Apostle says, the Spirit of God
shall raise up your mortal bodies, that our bodies wherewith now we are
clothed shall be raised up, and none other for them. Away therefore with that
vain opinion, that new bodies shall be created, and given to Gods Children in
the resurrection. The glory both of his justice, The justice of God craves that
so it should be.
mercy, and truth, craves that these same bodies and no other for them should
be restored: for every one must receive according to that which they have done
in the body, whether good or evil. Absurdam est and Deo indignum, vt haec
quidem Tertul.
caro lanietur, illa vero coronetur^ (...)nds not with the justice and truth of
God, that one bod^ (...)uld be torn in suffering, and another should receive
the crown* Shall the body of Paul be scourged, and an other for it be
glorified? shall Paul bear in his body the mark of Christ's sufferings, and not
bear in that same body the crown of his glory? shall the wicked in their body
work the works of unrighteousness, and shall an other body receive the wages
of their iniquity? It cannot be.

And that the glory of his mercy craves, that the same The mercy of God craves
also that so it should be.
body should be raised is also evident, for why? shall Satan give that wound
to man, which the Savior of men is not able to cure? shall the malice of the
Devil bring in that evil which the mercy of God cannot remove? shall the
first Adam slay the body by sin and shall not the second Adam give life unto
it by his righteousness? Can this stand with the glory of God, dimidium tantum
modo hominem restituere, Tertul.
to restore only the one half of man? As these same souls of ours which were
dead, and none other for them are quickened in the first resurrection: so these
same bodies of ours, and none other for them shall be raised from the dead in
the second resurrection, restituet Deus corpora pristina in Iren. cont. Valent.
lib 5.
resurrectione, non creabit noua. As those blind men (says Irenaeus) whom, as
we read in the Gospel, Christ cured, received no new eyes* but only sight to
the eyes they had before: and as that son of the widow, and Lazarus, rose in
those same bodies, wherein they did die: so shall the Lord in the resurrection
restore to us our old bodies, and not create new bodies to us; And this
vvarneth us that with great attention we are to use our bodies in most holy
and honorable manner in this life, seeing they are to be raised up as vessels
of honor and glory in the life to come.

Again, when the Apostle says, that the Lord shall raise Our bodies shall be
raised with new qualities.
up our mortal bodies, we are to know that so he calls them in respect of
that which they are now, not in respect of that which they shall be then. For
in the resurrection the Apostle teaches us in another (...)ce, that our bodies
shall be raised immortal, honourabl^ (...)rious, spiritual and impassionable.
First, I say the body shall be raised immortal, not subject any more to death,
nor diseases, nor standing in need of these ordinary helps of meat, drink, and
sleep, by which our natural life is preserved.

Secondly, our body shall be raised honorable, now it is 2 They shall be
honorable.
laid down in dishonor: for there is no flesh were it never so beautiful, or
beloved of man, but after death it becomes loathsome to the beholder; so that
even Abraham shall desire that the dead body of his beloved Sarah may be buried
out of his sight: but in the resurrection they shall be raised more honorable
then ever they were, they shall be redeemed from all their infirmities, every
blemish in the body that now makes it unpleasant, shall be made beautiful in
the resurrection, and every defective member thereof shall be restored Members
lame shall be restored.
to integrity: Membri detruncatio vel obtusio nonne mors membri est, si
vniuersalis mors resurrectione rescinditur, Tertul. de resur. carnis.
quanto magis portionalis? for the perishing of the member is no other thing
but the death of the member, if the benefit of resurrection cut off the
universal death of the body, shall it not also take away the portionall death
of a member in the body? if the whole man shall be changed to glory, shall he
not much more be restored to health? Out of all doubt the bodies of Gods
Children shall be raised perfect, comely, and every way honorable; hoc est
enim credere, resurrectionem integram credere.

Thirdly, the body shall be raised a glorious body, When 3 They shall be
glorious. Phil. 3. 21.
he shall appear, he shall change our vile bodies, and make them like to his
glorious body. They who convert many to righteousness shall shine like the
stars in the firmament: yea, the just, says our Savior shall shine like the
Sun in the firmament. A shadow of this glory we have in Christ's
transfiguration on mount Tabor, his face shined as the Sun, and Mat. 17.
his clothes were white as the light. Moses after forty days talking with God
on the Mount, came down with so bright a shining countenance, that the
Israelites might not behold him; what then may we think shall be the glory of
the children of God, when they shall be transchanged with the light of Gods
countenance shining upon them, not forty days only, but for ever and ever.
And if every one of their faces shall shine as the Sun in the firmament, O
how great light, and glory shall be among them all? and if their bodies shall be
so glorious, what shall be the glory of their soul? surely no heart can
conceive it, not tongue is able to express it.

Fourthly, our body shall be raised spiritual, which is 4 They shall be
spiritual.
not so to be understood, as if our bodies should loose a corporal substance,
and receive a spiritual substance, but then shall our bodies be spiritual, as
now our Spirits by nature are carnal: which are so called because they are
subject to carnal corruption, pressed down and carried away after earthly and
carnal things: so shall our bodies then be spiritual, because without
contradiction they shall obey the motions of the spirit: the body shall be no
burden, no prison, no impediment to the soul, as now it is; the soul shall
carry the body where it will without resistance: where now it is earthly,
heavy, and rends downward, it shall then be restored so lightsome and quick,
that without difficulty it shall mount from the earth, to meet our Lord in the
Air. As our head ascended on the mount of Olives, and went through the clouds
into heaven, so shall Acts. 1 11.
his members ascend, that they may be with the Lord, they shall follow the
Lamb where ever he goes. Let us believe it, and give glory unto God, for he
who is the worker of our resurrection, is also the worker of our ascension. If
the wit of man be able to frame a vessel of sundry metals that naturally
sinckes to the ground, to swim above in the water, how much more (says
Augustine) is God able to make our bodies to ascend upward and to bide above,
albeit in regard of their natural motion being heavy, they tend downward.

Fifthly, our bodies shall be raised impassionable, free I 5 They shall be
impassionable.
mean from such passions as may hurt or offend them, such as terror, fear,
or grief, but not from the passions of joy, for no sense of the body shall
want the own object of pleasure to delight it, and all for the greater
augmentation of our glory. Let us therefore yet again be admonished to use our
bodies in all holy and honorable manner upon earth, seeing the Lord has
concluded to make us so honorable in heaven, where otherwise thou that
defilest thy body with uncleanness, is it not a righteous thing with the Lord
to send thee to Gehenna, a valley of uncleanness? look for it assuredly if
thou continue filthy still, the Lord shall exclude thee out of heavenly
Jerusalem, thou shall not enter into his holy Reu. 21. 8.
habitation, but thy portion shall be with the unbelieving, with dogs, and with
the abominable, who shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone.

Last of all, seeing the Apostle ascribes the cause of our Resurrection of the
godly and wicked different.
resurrection to the spirit of Christ dwelling in us, it is to be enquired, how
then shall the wicked rise, in whom Christ never dwelt by his spirit? to this I
answer, that both the 1 In their causes, the one rises by the citation of God,
the other ^y virtue of their union with Christ.
godly and the wicked shall rise, but their resurrections shall be far
different in the cause, manner, and ends thereof: As for the cause, the godly
shall rise by the efficacy of that quickening spirit of Christ dwelling in
them, they shall rise by virtue of their union with their head the Lord Jesus,
as his members, receiving that promised life from him, for which they have
looked long, and in hope whereof they laid down their bodies willingly in the
grave: but the wicked shall rise by virtue of the powerful citation of God, by
the blast of his trumpet to appear in judgment, which they shall not be able
to eschew.

They differ again in the manner of their resurrection, 2 In the manner, the
one with joy, the other with fear and terror.
for the one shall rise with joy, the other with terror and fear, the wicked
shall no sooner look out of their graves, and see the face of the Judge
standing in the air, but at once shame and confusion shall cover them; that
day of the Lord shall be unto them a day of blackness and darkness. Their
souls as soon as they enter into the body shall be vexed with new horrible
fears, having experience of that wrath which already they have sustained out
of the body, the fear of that full wrath which they know in the last day is to
be powered upon them, shall wonderfully astonish them: glad would they be, if
they might creep into their graves again, Reu. 6. 16.
they shall wish that hills and mountains would fall upon them, and cover them;
but all in vain, because they did in the body that which they would, they
shall now by constraint suffer in the body that which they would not.

And thirdly, the ends of their resurrection are different; 3 In their ends,
the one to glory the other to shame, figured in Pharaohs two Servants.
the one shall rise to life, the other to shame, and of this it is evident,
that the resurrection of the wicked is no benefit to them, properly it is no
resurrection, no more then the taking of a malefactor out of prison to be
executed on the scaffold, can be called a delivery: for their resurrection is
to cast them out of one miserable condition into a worse, they are taken out of
the grave that they may be cast into the bottomless p^t of the wrath of God:
and this was properly figured in Pharaoh his two Servants* the Baker and Genesis
40.
Butler; both of them were taken out of prison, but the one to be restored unto
his Office, to minister before the King, the other to be executed unto death:
so shall both the godly and wicked come out of the grave, but the one to be
for ever with the Lord, to stand before his Throne ministering praises unto him,
and comforted with the fulness of joy which is in his face: the other to be
banished from Gods presence and sent to everlasting condemnation. And therefore
is it that in the sum of our faith, the Article of our Resurrection is put
between the Article of the remission Resurrection is a benefit when remission
of sin goes before it, and eternal life follows after it.
of sins, and that other Article of eternal life; to teach us that then
only the Resurrection of the body is a benefit, when remission of sins goes
before it, and eternal life follows after it, whereof the Lord of his great
mercy make us partakers through Jesus Christ.

Verse. 1^. Therefore Brethren ^ee are debtors not to the Exhortation.
flesh, to live after the flesh.
AS it is true concerning us, that a necessity lies What fruit we should
gather of the Apostles former doctrine.
upon us to preach, and woe will be to us if we preach not, so it is true
concerning you, that a necessity lies upon you to hear, and woe will be to
you if you hear not It is commanded to us that when we speak we should
speak as the Oracles of God, and it is also required of you, that ye receive
this word, not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God:
therefore take heed how ye hear, for as Moses said to the Israelites, so say
we unto you; It is no vain word concerning you, it is your life. Ye have
heard that maine proposition of Comfort, there is no condemnation to them which
are in Christ: ye have heard it confirmed, explaned, and applied: the
miserable estate of them who walk after the flesh has been showed unto you,
as likewise the happy estate of them who walk after the Spirit, and what
comforts the godly have both against the remanents, as also against the fruits
of sins* has been declared unto you. Examine your selves, and see how far
forth these comforts belong unto you. If ye be such as think with those
scornful men in Jerusalem, that ye have made a covenant with death, and it
shall not come near you, then go on in your security, and do that which is
good in your own eyes: but if ye find by experience that death is already
entered into your mortal body, be wise in time, see that thou have this only
sovereign comfort against death, the spirit of Christ dwelling in you:
otherwise (flatter your selves in your security as you will) miserable shall
your end be.

Now the Consolation being ended, the Apostle subioynes Consolation and
exhortation both necessary for us.
the Exhortation, both these two, consolation and exhortation, are needful for
us in the course of this life: the one to keep us that we faint not through
the remanents of sin left in us, and beginnings of death, which already have
seized upon us: exhortation again to stir us up when we linger in the way of
godliness. For it fares with us as it did with Lot in Sodom, the Angels
warned him of the imminent judgment, and exhorted him to escape for his life,
yet he delayed and lingered, he could not be gotten out of Sodom, till they
(as it were) violently thrust him out. And albeit, the Lord admonish us early
and late by his messengers of that wrath which is to come upon the children of
disobedience, and warn us in time to fly to the mountain of his salvation,
yet alas so loath are we to forsake our old sins, that the Lord is forced to
double his exhortation unto us, all which yet shall not avail us, if the Lord
^ay not the hands of his grace upon us, and by his holy Spirit make us obedient
to the heavenly vocation. Let us therefore take heed to the exhortations made
us by the Lord, and that so much the more* because it is most certain, that
the sweetness of Gods consolation shall not be felt of them who are not moved
with his exhortation. Contemplationis enim gustus non debetur, nisi obedientiae
mandatorum: Ber. ser. 46. in Cant.
the taste of Gods mercy by contemplation is only due to them who make
conscience of the obedience of his commandments.

Therefore. This particle is relative to the words preceding: Every benefit of
God is a new obligation binding us to serve him.
seeing it is so that by the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, we have such
excellent benefits, we are debt-bound not to live after the flesh but after the
Spirit. Of this we have first to learn, that every benefit we received from
God is an Obligation binding us debtors of service to God, for much shall be
required of him to whom much is given: there is no reason why the abundance of
Gods gifts either Gods benefits should not make us proud, for he who has
received most has the more debt lying upon him.
temporal or spiritual, should increase thy pride and carelessness, but
rather should make thee more humble and careful how to please him, considering
that the more thou have received, the more thou owe. When Daui^ forgetting
that he was the Lords debtor, began to live as his lust commanded him, the
Lord brought out against him his former benefits, as so many obligations to
convince him: I a^ ^oynted thee (says the Lord) King over 2 Samuel 12. 7. 8. 9.
Israel, I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, I gave thee thy Lords
house, and ^i^es into thy bosom, I gave thee in like manner the house of
Israel and Judah, an^ would moreover, if that had been too little have given
thee such and such things. Wherefore th^n have thou desp^sed my commandment
and done evil in my sight, forgetting that thou was bound and obliged to me?

This process of David's conviction stands for an example This is cleared in
the process of David's conviction.
to us all, to warn us that unless we make the benefits of God obligations
binding us to serve him, the Lord shall use them as arguments to prove that
judgment is due unto us, and the greater benefits the greater judgments: for
unto them that walk not worthy of the honor of good things, they have received
from God, (...). Chrisost. in Mat. hom. 4.
the greatness of honor shall be (...), the augmentation of their punishment.
And as this is true in temporal benefits, so much more in spiritual graces,
as they are more excellent then the other, so do they more bind us then the
other: both Israelites and Ethiopians are debtors to God, but the Israelite
more debt* bound than the Ethiopian for the Lord has not dealt with every
Nation, as with Israel. Hear this word, that the Lord pr^nounceth Amos. 3 1.
O ye Children of Israel, you only have I known of all the families of the
earth, therefore I will visit you for all you^ iniquities. May ye not see
here that the Lord most straightly does punish the sins of those to whom he
has been most beneficial when they become unthankful. The Gentiles who
received no more but the light of nature are convinced, because they glorified
not God, what then shall become of the bastard Christian, who has also
received the light of the Gospel, and yet does not glorify God? shall he not
much more be condemned? doubtles^e Sodom shall be in a better state in the day
of judgment than he. Let us therefore remember how the multitude of Gods
mercies toward us has made us many ways debtors of service unto him, that we
may endeavor in fear and trembling to perform it*

Brethren we are debtors. The Apostle you see inuolues Preachers should
practice that which they preach to others.
himself in the same obligation, acknowledging that he is debtor of that same
service, which he requires of others. Our blessed Savior pronounces a
fearful woe upon the Pha^ises, because they said heavy burdens upon the
people, and they themselves did not so much as touch them with the singer: the
same woe abides those Preachers who require those duties of the people,
whereof they are not practisers themselves. A Preacher may in a good
conscience require that thing of others, whereunto first of all he has bound
himself: as it is said of the Prince of Pastors, Acts. 1. 1.
that first he began to do, and then to preach. It becomes him (says
Tertul^ian) that commends a thing to others to Tertull. de patientia.
purchase authority to his commendation, by practice of the same thing
himself, ne dicta factis d^fi^i^ntibus erubescant, least otherwise words
without deeds be not able to hold up their face, but forced to blush for
shame: therefore also said Bernard, then shall thou make thy voice powerful
unto others, if thou make it known that thou have persuaded thy self of that
whereof thou would persuade others. Valid^^r Ber. in Cant. sermon. 59.
enim vox operis, quam oris, for the voice of the work is stronger than the
voice of the word. He that is not a seruent Disciple of Jesus Christ, shall
never be a faithful Doctor of the Church of Christ: and this for a warning for
Preachers. Calvin.


Debtors. Of this it is evident that the doctrine of grace Christ has freed us
from all other service that we might be bound to his own.
proclaims not liberty to men to live as they will, but rather binds them to
live godly: there can be no higher contempt done to the Lord than to turn his
grace into wantonness. Certainly the iniquities of Pagans does not half so
much offend him as the licentiousness of bastard Christians, who will sin the
more freely because Christ has suff^red for sin: they hear that a man is
not justified by good works, and Romans 3. 28.
therefore being deceived by Satan's Sophistry, they cease to do well, not
considering that good works must prove we are sanctified, and sanctification
must prove that we are justified. In the second verse the Apostle said that
Christ has freed us from the Law of sin, and here he says, that he has
made us debtors to righteousness: these are not contrary, they agree very well
together, he has loosed us from the service of all other Masters, that he
might bind us the more straightly to serve himself.

And indeed if Christ command us, as he ought, no He is a servant of
servants, who is not the servant of Christ Jesus. Ambrose.
other thing shall command us beside him; otherwise if we be not servants to
him, we shall be slaves to every thing beside him O quam multos d^minos habet
qui vnum non habet? O how many Lords has that man who has not Christ to be
his Lord? assuredly there is no thing which will not usurp superiority over
thee, who lives not as a bound servant to Jesus Christ: either thy belly shall
become thy God, and for a mease of pottage with Esau, thou shall sell thy
birthright and blessing, or a wedge of gold shall become thy confidence, and
thou shall not care for gain to loose a good conscience: or then some other
uncouth Lord who has no title to thee shall tyrannize over thee. Thus we see
that the Christian liberty we have by Christ, makes us free from the servitude
of sin, as the Apostle teaches us, and not free to commit sin, as the
carnal Atheist conceiues it.

But seeing we are debtors, let us see with what bonds we are bound, surely
the obligations are many, by which we are bound debtors to the Lord, but
specially now we We are bound to do God service by two great bands especially.
will shortly consider these two, Creation and Redemption. It is a principle
received among all men, that the fruit and vantage of a man's own workmanship
should redound to himself: who planteth a viney^rd, and eats not of the fruit
1 Creation. 1 Cor. 9. 7
thereof? or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the fl^ck^; No
man begets sons and daughters but he will be honored of them, he that hyreth
servants, requires service of them; yea Balaam will be offended if his beast
serve It is a shame that man craves that of his inferiors, which he gives not
to his superior.
him not according to his pleasure* this is the measure wherewith men mete unto
themselves, what reason then is there, we should refuse to do that duty un to
the Lord our Superior which we crave to our selves from our Inferirours? The
Lord has made us, we made not our selves; his hand has formed and shaped us:
the life we have we hold it of him; we can not abide a moment longer in this
house of our earthly tabernacle than the Lord thinks expedient, his will makes
the last day: yea as we said before, all our necessary maintenance for this
mortal life, is furnished out of his hand: seeing we our selves crave service
of those to whom we give the smallest things, shall we not much more give
service unto GOD, from whom we receive the greatest; 2 Redemption: here
consider first, that we are bought servants.


The other is the bond of Redemption. Wherein we are to consider these three
things: first, that we are bought: secondly, that we are sworn: thirdly, that
we have received wages before hand; all for this end, that we should serve
him. Ye are bought (says the Apostle) with a price, therefore 1 Cor. 9. 20.
glorify God in your bodies, and in your spirits, for they are Gods. And
again, we are redeemed, not with corrupt^ble things, as gould and silver,
from our vain conversation, but with the precious 1 Pet. 1. 1. 8.
blood of Christ, as of a Lamb unspotted and undefiled: we should not
therefore live as servants of men, far less That which cost Christ full
dear, men sels good cheap.
as servants of Satan and sin, but as servants of that Lord who has
redeemed us. Of all fools those are the greatest who sels their life for the
silly shadows of sinful pleasures, which Jesus Christ has bought with the
greatest price that ever was paid.

Not only are we bought to be Christ's servants, but also Secondly, Sworn
servants
we are sworn: for baptism as on the part of God, it is a seal of the
covenant of grace to confirm that promise of remission of sins, which God
has made to us in the blood of Jesus Christ: so on our part it is a solemn
resignation of our selves, and our service to the Lord, wherein we give up our
names to be enrolled among his soldiers and servants, swearing, binding, and
oblieging our selves to renounce the service of the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh: and this oath of resignation we have renewed so often as we have
communicated at his holy Table. Whereof it is evident that they who have given
their names to Christ, and yet live licentiously, walking after the flesh, are
for-sworne Apostates, guilty of persidie, and of foul apostafie and desertion
from Jesus Christ.

And thirdly, not only are we bought and sworn, but Thirdly, we have
received wages before hand for service to be done
we have received wages and payment in hand: which should make us ashamed if we
have so much as common honesty, to refuse service to the Lord, whose wages we
have received already. It may be said to every one of us, which Malachie in
the name of the Lord, spoke to the Levites of his time, who among you shuts the
door of the temple, or kindles a fire upon Mal. 1. 10.
my altar in vain? and who among us can stand up and say that he has done
service to the Lord for naught? Consider it when ye will, for every piece of
service ye have done to the Lord, ye have received wages, more then ten times?
who has called aright on his name, and has not been heard? who has given
thanks for benefits received, and has not found Gods benefits doubled upon
him? who has given alms in the name of the Lord, and not found increase? I
speak not now of rewards which God has promised us, I speak only of that we
have received already, the least of Gods mercies showed upon us already does
far exceed all that service that we poor wretches have done unto him: as
therefore we are content to receive the Lords pay, let us never refuse to give
the service of our bodies and spirits unto him.

But alas, is not this the common sin of this generation, But many receive
that from the true God, which they return not to him but sacrifice to Idols.
Hos. 2. 8.
to receive good things out of the hand of God, and with them to sacrifice unto
other Gods, to whom they owe no service at all. A horrible sacrilege, a vile
idolatry: for this the Lord complains of the Jews, they have received my
gold, and my silver, and made up Baal to themselves: and the same complaint
stands against the profane men of this age. The covetous man as riches
increase does he not set his heart upon them though with his tongue he deny
it? does he not say within himself, that which Job protested he would never
say to the wedge of Gold, thou art my confidence? The glutton when he has
received from God abundance of Wheat, Oil and Wine, though he know the
commandment, be not filled with wine wherein is excess, but be Ephesians. 5. 18.
filled with the Spirit, yet how often takes he in superfluous drink, and
spares not for love of it to grieve the Spirit, sacrificing to his belly as
unto God those things, which binds him to do service unto the Lord? thus
neither are the benefits of God returned to do honor unto him from whom they
come, but sacriligiously also abused to the making up of Baal, or some other
Idol abominable to God, for which it is most certain that the more wages
these Atheists have received for doing service to God, which they never did,
the more fearful plagues and stripes from God shall be doubled upon them.

Again; we mark here that there is a double debt lying A double debt lying
upon us, the one the debt of sin which we must seek to be forgiven, the
other the debt of obedience, which we must seek to perform.
upon us, the debt of sin, and the debt of obedience: we are freed of the
one by a humble seeking and craving of the remission thereof through Jesus
Christ, for the debt of sin the Lord Jesus has taught us daily to seek Gods
discharge, Lord forgive us our debts: and indeed as every day we contract some
debt, so it is great wisdom by daily repentance to sue the discharge of it:
for they who neglect to do it, their debt multiplies upon them, it stands
uncancelled in the register of God, written as it were with a pen of iron, and
the point of a Diamond, and they shall at length be cast into that prison for
non-payment, wherein will be weeping and gnashing of teeth for ever. But as for
the debt of obedience, whereof the Apostle here speaks, we cannot with a good
conscience desire the Lord to discharge it, nor exempt us from it, but we must
in all humility crave Grace of God, that we being enriched by him, who of our
selves are poor, may be able in some measure to pay and perform it.

Where if the weak Children of GOD object and say, A threefold comfort for
the godly for the debt of obedience.
how then can we but drown in this debt, seeing no day of our life we can
pay to the Lord that debt of obedience which we owe unto him? To this there is
given a threefold comfort, first the Lord deals with us as a loving liberal
1 The Lord to whom we owe it, gives us wherewith to pay it.
man deals with his debtor, who knowing that he has nothing of his own,
wherewith to pay him, and not willing to put him to shame, stops privately into
his hand, that which publicly again he may give unto him, so the Lord
conuaies secret grace into the hearts of his children, whereby they are in some
measure able to serve him: but as David protested, so may we all, whatsoever
we give unto the 1 Chronicles. 29. 14.
Lord, we have it of his own hand. Secondly, the Lord 2 He accepts for a time
part of payment.
our God is so gracious that he is content to accept part of payment at our
hand, till we be able to do better, if our faith be but like the grain of
Mustard-seede, yet if it be true, the Lord will not despise it; though our
repentance be not perfect and absolute; though our prayers be vveake; though
we cannot do the good that we would, yet the good that we do is accepted
at his hands through Jesus Christ. And thirdly, we have this comfort, that the
more 3 The more we pay of this debt the more we are able to pay.
we pay of this debt of obedience, the more we are able to pay. In other
debts it is not so: for if the more be paid out by him that is indebted, the
less remains behind unto himself, but here the more we pay, the richer we
are; the doing of one good work of service unto the Lord, makes us both more
willing, and able to do an other; the talents of spiritual Graces being of
that nature, that the more they are used the more they are increased: and these
should work in us a delight to pay that debt which we owe unto the Lord.

Last of all, we mark upon this word, that the good we Good works are debts,
therefore not merits
do is debt and not merit. When one of your servants (says Jesus) has done
that which he is commanded, will one of you give him thanks because he has
done that which was Luke 17. 7. 8. 9. 10.
commanded him? I believe not; he applies the Parable to his Disciples, and
in them to us all: so likewise when you have done all those things which are
commanded you, say that ye are vnp^^fitable Servants. Our Savior commands us
plainly to do well, but as plainly forbids all presumptuous conceit of our
merit when we have done well. To speak against good works is impiety, and to
presume of the merits of our best works is Antichristian pride. No man No
penman of the holy Ghost did ever use the word of merit.
led by the Spirit of Jesus, did ever use this word of merit; it is the proud
speech of the spirit of Antichrist, search the Scripture and ye shall see that
none of all those who spoke by divine inspiration, did ever use it: yea, the
Godly Fathers who have lived in dark and corrupt times, have always abhorred it.

If a man could live (says Macarius) from the days of The Fathers thought it
smelled of presumption. Mac. hom. 15
Adam to the end of the world, and fight never so strongly against Satan, yet
were he not able to deserve so great a glory as is prepared for us, how much
less then are we able to promerit it (that is his own word) who so short a
space are mil^tant here upon earth: Praetendat alter meritum, sustinere Ber. in
Psalm. qui habitat. Ser. 1.
se dicat ^stus diei, ieiunare bis in Sabbatho, mihi adhaerere Deo bonum est;
let another man (says Bernard) pretend merit, let him boast that he suffers
the heat of the day, and that he fasts twice in the Sabbath; it is good for me
to draw near the Lord, and put my hope in him: Meritum enim In Cant. ser. 61.
meum miseratio Domini, non sum plane meriti inops, quamdiu ille miserationum
non fuerit: for my merit is Gods mercy, I shall not altogether want merits as
long as he wants not compassion: And again, suffi^it ad m^ritam s^ire quod non
Sermon. 66.
sufficiant merita, this is sufficient merit, to know that merits are not
sufficient: this he makes more clear in that Sermon of his, de quad^uplici
debito: wherein he declares how man is so many ways debtor to the Lord* that
he cannot do that which he ought, why then shall any man say that he has
done enough, cum nec m^llissim^, imo nec minimae parti debitorum suorum valeat
respondere, seeing he is not able to De quadrupli^^ debito.
answer the thousand part, no, not the least part of that debt which he owes
unto God?

To live. We have heard that we are debtors: now have Our life should declare
whose Servants and debtors we are* Philem. verse. 19
we to see wherein we are debt-bound. We owe to the Lord not only those
things which are ours, but (as says Paul to Philem^n we owe him our selves
also. Every man's life must declare who it is whom he acknowledges for a
Superior, and unto whom he submits himself a debtor. Show me (says Saint
James) thy Faith by thy works, Iam. 2. 19. Mal. 1. 6.
show me (says Malachie) thy Father by thy Sonnely reverence toward him; let
me know thy master by thy obedience and the attendance thou give him. As
C^sar: money is discerned by his image and superscription, so the Christian is
known by his conversation: he walks after the Spirit, and by his deeds more
then by his words, he disclaimeth the government of the flesh. But surely as
Ch^is^stom^ complained of bastard professors in his time so may we in our time
of many to whom we are ambassadors An accusation of the careless Christians
of our time.
in Christ's name, we have more then cause to fear we have bestowed labor
upon you in vain: for I pray you, what part of your lives gives sentence for
you and proves that ye are Christians? shall we judge by the place which ye
delight Chrisost. in Math.
most to frequent; are there not many among you oftener in the Tavern then in
the Temple* silling your belly intemperately at that same time wherein the
Sons and Daughters of the living God, are gathered together into their
fathers house, to be refreshed with his heavenly Manna? Shall we judge you by
your garments? do they not in many of you declare the vanity of your minds? if
we estimate you according to your companions, what shall we think but that ye
are such as those are with whom ye delight to resort? ye sit in the seat of
scorners, if thou see a thief thou runst Psalm. 50.
with him, and art partaker with the adulterers. If we try you by your
language, ye shall be found uncircumcised Philistims and not holy Israelites:
for ye have learned to speak the language of Ashdo^, ye speak (as Micah
complained of Nihe. 13. 26. Micah. 7. 3.
the wicked in his time) out of the corruption of your soul, making your
throat an open sepulcher, ye send out the stinking breath of your inward
abominations, by your evil and unclean speeches ye corrupt the minds of the
hearers. And thus seeing every part of your life gives sentence against you* as
a cloud of many witnesses testifying that ye are unclean; what have ye to
speak for you, to prove that ye are Christians? shall your naked word be
sufficient to do it? no certainly, for against it the Lord Jesus has made
exception before hand, Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall Math. 7. 21.
enter into m^ kingdom: your works must be your witnesses, and your deeds must
declare who it is to whom ye acknowledge your selves servants and debtors.

Not to the flesh. Sometime the flesh signifies the body, It is a difficult
thing so to nourish the body, that we nourish not sin in the body.
and in that sense we are debtors unto it: for the covenant (says Bernard)
which the Lord has bound up between the soul and the body, is not to be
broke at our will, but at the Lords will; and in the mean time we are bound to
nourish it: but the flesh here is put for the sinful lusts of the flesh, and
so we are not debtors unto it: Take no thought Romans 13. 14.
for the flesh to fulfill the sinful lusts th^reof. But alas, the corruption
of our nature is so great, that without great circumspection we cannot nourish
the body, unless we also nourish sin in the body: many under pretense of
doing duty to the one fails in the other; so they pamper the body, that they
quench the spirit; overcome with gluttony they are not able to pray. We are
with the godly to keep a mean between these two extremities: as a ship if
it be ouerladed Discipline whereby we beat down the body would neither be too
strait, nor too remiss.
is easily overwhelmed by the water, or if it be too light and not ballassed is
easily driven out of the due course by the wind: as a horse if he be hungered
cannot serve his Master, or if fed above measure waxes insolent, and kickes
against his rider, so is it with the body; neither would it be so weakened that
it be not able to perform the works of Christian Ephra. Sir. lib. 1. cap. 9.
duty, neither yet so pampered that it become a burden to the soul, and an
impediment to spiritual exercises. But in this age we need not greatly to
admonish men of the one But most men fail in excessive pampering the body.
extremity, the debt men owes unto their bodies, is paid with a large measure,
and running over, it is not only served to necessity, but so ouercharged with
superfluity, that oftentimes it loathes and abhorres those aliements, by which
it lives; the soul in the mean time put to a sober diet, left famished,
without any morsel of heavenly bread, whereby it should be refreshed and
strengthened: whereof it comes that the lusts of the flesh wax strong, and the
life of the spirit wonderfully decays.

Though the other member of the opposition be not here Many Lords striving for
man's superiority, and to have man their servant.
expressed, yet it follows necessarily, we are debtors to the spirit. And so
we may gather of these words, how there are sundry Lords striving for the
superiority of man. The World with her pleasures allures man to follow her, but
pretend what she will, in truth her word is decip^^ra. The flesh would have
man a servant to her lusts, she wants not her baytes wherewith to beguile him,
but in truth her word is infi^iam. Satan strongest of the three usurpers,
superiority over man, he craves that man should fall down and worship him,
he wants not promises enough, fair in show, but in truth his word is
interficiam. Jesus Christ our lawful Lord he also calls upon us, and exhorts us
to serve him, he has life in the one hand, durable riches and honor in the
other, and in truth his word is r^ficiam, I will refresh you. Now in this
strife to whom shall we yield our selves, but unto him who cries reficiam? Let
us therefore say with David, O Lord no wight can make title to me but only
thou: all others that exact Psalm. 119. 94. But forsaking the rest, we should
yield our selves servants to Christ and why?
any service of us are but uncouth Lords, to whom we are not obliged* they are
but tyrants, striving to oppress us: C^rtant in me, de meipso, cuius
potis^^m^m esse videar, they strive (says Bernard) within me, about me, to
which of them chiefly I should seem to appertain: but O Lord Jesus I am
thine* I have no King but thou, come therefore and reign in me, and remove
these offenses out of thy kingdom: happy are they who can so render themselves
to the Lord, for in the hour of death, what is it that men craves more then
that the Lord Jesus should acknowledge them for his? who will not in that hour
beg that mercy at the hands of God, Lord receive my Spirit? but assuredly if
thou yield it not to him in life, when he requires it, he shall not receive it
from thee in death, when thou would tender it to him. ^he Lord grant that in
our whole lives we may acknowledge our selves as debtors of daily service unto
him, so shall the Lord in death welcome us as his faithful servants, and
receive us into his rest

Verse 1^. For if ye live after the flesh ye shall dye, but if ye mortify
the deeds of the body by the spirit, ye shall live.
THis word of the Lord pronounces before The Apostle stands here as a
messenger of mercy with a sword in his mouth to terrify men from the way of
death.
hand upon you who live after the flesh a condemnatorie sentence, ye shall
dye: which how ever ye esteem to be light when you hear it, yet ye shall
find it heavy when it shall be executed upon you To you again who mortifies
the deeds of the body by the spirit, there is here pronounced an absoluatorie
sentence, ye shall live: which in the end shall yield you comfort surpassing
all that the pleasures of sin, or gain of ungodliness, can afford unto you.
As that Cherubin therefore stood in the entry of Paradise with the blade Genesis
3. 24.
of a shaking sword, to keep Adam from the way of the Not like that Cherubin a
minister of justice to hold Adam out of paradise.
Tree of life: so the Apostle stands here between us and death, with a
sentence like a two edged sword in his mouth, to keep the sons of Adam as
far as he can from the way of death: the one stood as a minister of Gods
justice, the other stands as a messenger of mercy. The Lord has sworn by
himself, as I live, I desire not the death of a sinner, Ez^. 18. 32.
but that he should return and live: he iustifies his word by his Both the
word and deed of the Lord declares that he craves not the death of a sinner.
deed, in that in all ages of the world he has sent out messengers to warn
them to go by the way of death: so that now if any man perish it is because he
stops his ears at the warning of the watchman of God: for thou can not say
but Moses and the Prophets, Jesus Christ and his Apostles and Preachers, have
met thee in the way of thy sin, and warned thee many a time, by the word of
the Lord, that if thou walk on that way, thou shall assuredly dye, where thou
passing by them all, rushest headlong after the lusts of thy flesh, and so thou
perishest, and thy blood shall be upon thine own head.

As the Apostle to the preceding exhortation annexed an argument a debito, from
that which we are bound to do, so now he subioynes another argument, partly a
damno, from the loss we incur if we do it not, in these words, if ye
live after the flesh, ye shall dye, and partly a commodo, from the vantage we
shall reap if we do it, in these words, if ye mortify the deeds of the
body by the spirit, ye shall live. If we were such men as we should be, the
former exhortation That the spirit of God uses threatenings, is an argument of
our rebellious nature.
taken from honesty and duty were sufficient to move us, but in that the
spirit of God does also threaten us with death, is an evident argument of the
froward rebellion of our nature. The word of GOD is compared not only to
milk, but also to salt: we have need of the one because of our infancy, that
being nourished therewith we may grow, and because of our corruption we have
need to be The word should be used as milk to some as salt to others
seasoned with the other: to both these ends should Preachers use the word of
GOD, to some as milk for their nourishment, to others as salt for their
amendment.

But these are the times foretold by the Apostle, wherein But now men cannot
abide the rebuke of Gods word. 2 Timothy 4. 3. Amos. 5. 10. 1 King. 22. 8.
the itching ears of men cannot abide wholesome doctrine, they hate him that
rebukes in the ga^e, as Achab hated Micaiah to the death, because he
prophesied no good unto him, that is, he spoke not according to his fantasy,
but warned him faithfully of the judgment which afterward came upon him: so
the hearers of our time can abide no teachers but such as are after their own
lusts; but alas, they are foolish, for are not my words good to him that walks
uprightly Micah. 2 7. Aug. ser. 1.
(says the Lord.) Aduersarius est nobis, quamdiu sumus and ipsi nobis, quamdiu
tu tibi inimicus es, inimicum habebis sermonem De^; the word of God is an
adversary to none, but such as are adversaries to themselves, neither does it
condemn any but such as assuredly shall be condemned of the Lord, unless they
repent. Stop thine ear as thou will Zach. 7. 11.
from hearing of the threatenings of the word, yet shall thou not stop that
judgment which the word has threatened against thee. There is a cry that will
come at midnight, and will waken the dead, but blessed are they who in time are
wakened out of the sleep of their sins, by the cries of the watchmen of
God, for undoubtedly a fearful and painful consumption shall torment them
for ever, who now cannot suffer that the salt of the Word should bite their
sores to cure them.

The opposition made here by the Apostle, warnes us Either we must slay sin, or
sin shall slay us.
that a necessity lies upon us to mortify our sinful lusts, it stands upon
our lives, unless we slay sin, sin shall not fail to slay us. It is like
a Serpent in our bosom, which cannot live but by sucking out that blood
whereby we live: here is a wholesome preservative against sin, if at every
occasion we would carry it in our mind, we would make no doubt to put sin
to the death, that our selves might live. For alas, what pitiful folly is
this, we hate them that pursues our bodily life, we eschew them by all bodily
Aug. detemp. sermon. 29.
means, we hate the oppressors that spoil us of worldly goods: only we
cannot hate Satan to the death, who seeks by sin to spoil us of eternal
life.

That same Commandment which was given to Adam Every sin is to us the
forbidden Tree.
and Euah, if ye eat of the forbi^den Tree, ye shall dye, is in effect here
given to us all: if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die, let us not make an
exception where God has made none: every sin to us is as that forbidden Tree
to Adam if we meddle with it, we shall find no better fruit then that which
Men seek on it that fruit which they shall not find, and find on it that
fruit which they would not have.
Adam found on it before us; there is a fruit which man seeks upon the Tree
of sin, and he shall not find it, to wit, profit, or pleasure, and there is
another fruit which God has threatened, and Satan says it grows not on the
Tree of sin, but man assuredly shall find it. Bitter death growe^ upon the
pleasant Tree of sin, for the wages of sin is death, albeit there came no
word from the Lord to teach this, former experience may confirm it: for what
fruit have we this day of all our former sins, but a guilty conscience which
breeds us much terror, accusing thoughts, and anguish of Spirit?

It is therefore a point of great wisdom to discern between Great wisdom
to discern between the deceit of sin, and fruit of sin
the deceit of sin, and fruit of sin: before the action, Sin is In^micus
blandien^, a slattering and laughing enemy: in the action, it is dulc^
venenum, sweet poison, but after the action, it is Scorp^opungens, a pricking
and biting Serpent. He that would rightly discern the face of sin, when it
stands before him to tempt him, let him look back to the tail of a sin
which he has committed already, and of the sting which that sin has left
behind it, let him learn to beware of the smiling countenance of the other,
which will no less wound him the second time unto death, if so be he embrace
it. Most properly may the pleasures of sin be Sinful lusts compared to the
stream of Jordan.
compared to the streams of the river Jordan, which carries away the fish
swimming and playing in it, delighted with such pleasures as are agreeable to
their kind, even till it deuolue them into the salt sea, where incontinent they
die: even so in the wicked inordinate concupiscen^^ is as a forcible stream
which carries away with it impenitent men, playing and delighting themselves
in their lusts, till at length they fall into that lake, which burns with
fire and brimstone, out of the which there is no redemption for them.

The perishing pleasures of sin are paid home with And to the l^custs with
woman's hair, Lions teeth, Scorpions tail. Basil. in verb. Mos. attend tibi.
everlasting perdition, it is done in a moment, but when it is finished it
brings out death, and breeds the Worm that will never dye: paruum ad horam
peccatum, longaeua autem est ex ^o, and aeterna verecundia: it is the devouring
Locust of the bottomless pit, which has hair like a woman, teeth like a
Lion, and a tail like a Scorpion: miserable are they who are blinded with it;
they may sleep in their sin, but their Cirill. catech. 2.
damnation sleeps not, though their heads be laid down, like the Kine of
Bashan to drink in iniquity like water, yet 2 Pet. 2. 3.
their judgment is not far off, and they are but like unto Oxen fed for the
slaughter.

We perceive here further, that every man's state and condition in this life,
is a prediction of that state and condition which abides him when this life is
gone: He that sows Gal. 6. 8.
to the flesh, of the flesh shall reap corruption: but he that sows to the
Spirit, shall reap immortality and life. As no This life is a thorow-way or
middle passage, either to heaven or hell.
man comes either to a Palace, or a Prison, but by the entry thereof, so no
man goes either to heaven or hell, but by the way thereof. A wicked life is as
a thorow-way to that prison and place of darkness; he who goes on in it
without returning shall out of all doubt, when he has passed the pathway
enter into the prison: and a godly life is the very way to heaven, he that
walks in it, pers^uering to the end, shall enter at last into that Palace of
Glory, which is the Paradise of God. Solomon says, that where the Eccles. 11.
3.
tree falls there it lies, and experience teaches us that it falls to that side
on which the branches thereof grow thickest, if the greatest growth of our
affections and actions spring out after the Spirit, out of doubt we shall fall
to the right hand, and shall be blessed: but if otherwise thy affections grow
downward, and thou walk after the flesh then assuredly thou shall fall to the
left hand, and die in sin under the curse of God.

But seeing they who walk after the flesh are dead already, They who live in
sin are dead, and yet a worse death abides them in hell.
how says the Apostle they shall dye? To this I answer, both are true,
presently they are dead, and yet a more fearful death abides them. That they
who live in their sins are dead already we shewde before: for sin is that
unto the soul of man, which fire and water are to the body, that is to say,
an unkindly Element, in the which it cannot live, but certainly a more
fearful death abides them, which the spirit of God calls the second death,
wherein they shall not only live deprived of life, wanting all sense, yea and
all hope of the mercy of God but shall also feel the full measure of his wrath
due to their sins powered out upon them. Now albeit they be dead in sin, and
deprived of the favor of the Creator, yet the vain comforts of the creatures
does so betwitch and blind them, that they know not how wretched and miserable
they are, but when the last sentence of damnation shall be pronounced upon
them* they shall not only be banished from the presence of God into
everlasting perdition, where the fire of the Lords indignation shall
perpetually torment them, but also the comfort of all Gods creatures which now
they have shall fo^sake them. The least degree of their punishment shall be a
fearful The least degree of their punishment shall be a fearful famine of
all worldly comforts. Joel. 1. 12. Reu. 18. 14.
famine of worldly comforts, The Pomegranat Tree, the Palm Tree, the Apple
Tree, shall wither, The Apples after which now their soul lusts shall depart
from them, they shall find none of them: yea, if a cup full of cold water
might comfort them, it shall not be given unto them: thus you see how they are
dead, and yet a more fearful death abides them.

Therefore the spirit of God to express the fearfulness Why that second
death is called a wrath, and a wrath to come.
of that second death, he calls it a wrath, and gives it these two titles:
first, he calls it a wrath prepared by God. Solomon says, the wrath of a
King is the messenger of death, what then shall we say of the wrath of God?
Secondly, he calls it a wrath to come, to teach us that it far exceedes all
that wrath that we have heard or seen. The drowning of the original world,
the burning of Sodom, a great wrath, but nothing comparable to the wrath which
is to come.

Beside this, both the place, the universality, and the eternity The place of
the damned shows the greatness of their judgment. Reu. 21. 8. Esa. 30. 33.
of their punishment serves to let us see, if we look to them how horrible
this death is which here is threatened against them who live after the flesh As
for the place, it is called the winepr^ss^ of the wrath of God, the lake that
b^rnes with ^ire and brimstone, Tophet prepared of old, deep and large, the
breath of the Lord, like a river of brimstone, ^oth kindle it. It is that great
deep which the damned spirits themselves abhor, they know it to be the place
appointed for their torment, all that they crave was only that the Lord would
not send them thither to be tormented before the time. It is called (...), a
place wherein is no light to see, therefore Jude called it blackness of
darkness, and our Savior called it utter darkness: Jude verse 6. Mark. 9.
48. 1 Pet. 3. 19. Math. 5. 22.
there is in it a burning fire, but without light, a gnawing worm without
rest. Saint Peter calls it a prison, and our Savior calls it Gehenna, for the
horrible scrieches of them who are burnt in it and the vile and stinking
filthiness wherewith it is replenished.

And as for the v^^uersality of their pain. It is certain The vn^^uersality
of it: Nothing in man shall be without pain, and all Gods plagues shall concor
to punish him.
that as every thing in them sinned so every thing in them shall be punished.
No power of their soul, no member of their body shall be free from that wrath:
Surely it should astonish man to consider this; for if now any one of Gods
ordinary plagues inflicted upon any one member of the body be so insufferable,
how intolerable will that pain be? he who now is payned with the toothache,
takes some comfort when he sees another tormented with the collicke, and he
also if he see another burnt up with Anthonies fire, bears his own cross the
more patiently, because he sees a greater laid upon another. No man in this
life suffers all things; one cries with the Shunamites son for excessive
dolor, alas my head, my head: another with Antiochus* my belly: the third with
Asa, my feet, my feet: but what are all these comparable to that pain
wherein head, and belly and feet yea the whole man shall be racked upon the
torments of Gods wrath, and that not with one plague only but with manifold:
for as all the waters of the earth run into the great Ocean, so all the
plagues of God shall concur and meet together in hell for the punishment of
the damned.

But yet the eternity of that pain does still increase the The eternity of it.
horror thereof, there shall be no end of their punishment. their fire shall
never be quenched, their worm shall never dye, they shall seek death as a
benefit, and shall not find it. The fire of Sodom was ended in a day; the
deluge of water that drowned the original world, lasted but a year; the
famine that plagued Egypt lasted but seven years; the captivity of Israel
was ended in seauenty years; but this wrath of GOD upon the damned shall
endure for ever and ever. Thus we see what a horrible death the Apostle
threatens here, while he says, if ye live after the flesh ye shall dye. The
Lord give us wise and understanding hearts, that we may ponder it according to
the weight thereof, and it may be to us a lively voice of God, to provoke us to
slay from that fearful wrath which is to come.

But if yet mortify, etc. Here follows the other member In the most
regenerate there is some thing that needs to be mortified.
of the argument, taken from the great vantage we receive by mortifying the
lusts of the body, if we do so we shall live. Here also we have first to
consider that albeit the Apostle affirmed before, verse 9 that these godly
Romans were not in the flesh, yet now he exhorts them to a further
mortification of the lusts of the flesh, which were superfluous if there were
nothing in them that needed to be mortified: then we see clearly, which we
may also feel in our selves, that so long as we live in the body, there is
ever some remanent life of sin, which we have need to mortify and put out.
In this battle we must sight without intermission, till we have gotten the
victory: for who can say that he has in such sort ^ut away his superfluities,
that there remaynes nothing in him which has need of reforming: believe me
when they are cut off they spring, when they are chased For out of the stony
rock springs noisome weeds.
away they return, when they are once quenched they kindle again, except thou
dissemble, thou shall always find within thy self something that has need to
be subdued. There is nothing hard^r, (says Cyrill) than the Rock, yet in the
Cyril.
seames and clifts thereof the noisome weed fasteneth her root, and springes
out: and albeit there be no man in the world stronger than a Christian, yet is
he oftentimes buffered by Satan; and sin which has fastened their root in
him sends out her inordinate motions and affections, against which he has
need to fight continually.

But here it is inquired, how does the Apostle require That which God works in
us he call^^ it our work.
this of them, that they should mortify their lusts; lies it in the power of
man to do it? To this I answer, first that as man gave life to sin, so is
he bound to put out the life thereof, upon no less pain than condemnation,
and therefore justly is it required of him. Secondly, these same good works
which the Lord works in us, he is content to asscrib^ them to us, and calls
them ours. Of our selves we Phil. 2. 12.
must say with the Apostle, we are not sufficient of our selves Therefore we
should be humble and give God the glory
to think so much as a good thought, our sufficiency is of God, and it is he
who works in us both the will and the deed: so he works in us that he makes
us through his grace willing workers with him: through him that strengthens us
we are able to do all things, and therefore the praise of all the good we
can do should be ascribed unto God. When David had offered to God abundance of
silver and gold, and other mettels which he had prepared for the house of God,
he concludes in the humility of his heart, what am I O Lord, and what is my
people, that we should be 1 Chro^. 29. 14
able to offer willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee, and of
thine own hand have we given thee. But much more when we do any work of
sanctification, for the building of our selves up into a spiritual Temple to
the Lord our God, we may say, O Lord all the good we can do is of thee, and
of thine own hand we have given back unto thee, for except thou Lord had
given unto us grace, we should never have given to thee obedience.
Presumptuous opinion of Merit damned.


Let therefore the presumptuous conceit of Merit yet again be far from us,
seeing the good which we do is debt, and is done also by the spirit of the
Lord in us, let us reserve the glory thereof unto him. Quaere d^na mea, non
Aug. de verb Apost. sermon. 2
m^rita tua, qu^a si ego quae^er^m m^rita tua, non v^nires ad dona mea: seek
my gifts (says Augusti^e, speaking in the name of the Lord) not thy merits,
for if I should seek the merits, thou should never be pertaker of my gifts.
When the Apostle Sant Paul had reckoned out how he 1 Cor. 15. 10.
had labored more abundantly in the work of the ministry, then all the
rest of the Apostles he subioynes as it were be correction, yet not I, but the
grace of God in me: learning us when we have done all the good we can to be
humble in our selves, and give the glory to God: if he promise us a crown,
nihil aliud coronat nisi dona sua* he crowns Aug. hom. 14
no other thing but his own gifts: if by promise he binds himself a debtor
unto us to give us a reward, debtor factus Aug de verb. Apost. ser. 14.
est nobis, non aliquid a nobis accipiendo, sed quod ille pl^cuit promittendo,
he is become a debtor unto us, not by receiving any thing from us, but by
promising freely to us that which pleased him: and therefore when we are
exhorted to mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, let us first turn
this and the like of the precepts into prayers, that the Lord would enable us
by grace to do that which he commands us, and then when in some measure we
have done it, that we return the praise and glory to the Lord. A trial of our
Mortification.


Mortify, etc. Seeing the first part of our sanctification is called
mortification, we are to consider how in this word there lurkes a rule, whereby
every man may try how far forth he has profited in sanctification, we see
by experience that the nearer a man draws to death, the less motion is in
him, but after he is once dead he moves not at all; present him pleasant
objects, they delight him not, praise him, yet he is not puffed up, speak
evil of him, yet he is not offended: even so is it with the spiritual man,
the greater progress he makes in sanctification, the motions of* sin are ever
the weaker in him, the pleasures of the world moves him not as they were wont
if thou prais^ him, the breath of thy mouth cannot lift him up, if thou offend
him the more he is mortified, the less he is grieved. As a man (says Basil^)
being dead is separate from those with whom he was conversant before, so he
who is mortified is instantly sundred in his affections from those who before
were his familiar companions in sin: yea, those actions wherein he delighted
before, are a grief unto him now, it is a vexation of his soul to hear and
^^e the unrighteous deeds of the wicked, which were wont to be unto him the
matter of his sport and laughter.

Therefore does he wish, and so should we, that we might Death to sin takes
not life away but restores it.
always die this kind of death, foelix m^rs quae alienum facit hominem ab hoc
saecul^, certainly it is a happy death which alienates, and turns away the
heart of man from the love of this world. Bona mors quippe vitam non aufert*
sed transfert in melius, for it is a good kind of death, which does not take
life away, but changes it into a better. But alas how far are we from this
spiritual disposition? does not the angry countenance of one in worldly
authority terrify us? the disdainful words of men do they not put us out of
the state of patience? if the world flatter us are we not puffed up? if she
frown upon us, are we not cast down? and this our great weakness proceeds
only from the strength of sin in us: this lets us see what cause we have to
be humbled, considering that having lived long in this time of grace, yet have
we profited little in the mortification of our sinful lusts and affections.

Again, out of this same word of Mortification, we learn that the work
of our Sanctification, is a work of difficulty, not accomplished without
labor, pain, and dolor, Sanctification is a work of difficulty, for it is a
birth, a death, a circumcision, etc.
for it receives these three names, as to be called, Mortification,
Regeneration, and Circumcision. As no birth, no death, no cutting off the flesh
can be without dolor and sorrow; so the conversion of a sinner is not wrought
without inward pain and sorrow. The Infant that has laid but nine Months in
the womb of the mother, is not delivered without great pain, suppose she
conceived it with pleasure: and shall thou think to part with sin, which in
thee was conceived with thee, and which since so often thou have nourished with
pleasure, and not to prove the dolours of the New Birth? No assuredly. In the
work of man's conversion, there is the contrite spirit, the humbled heart, the
mourning weed, the melting eye, the pale countenance, the voice of
lamentation; let not such as feel them, if they find therewith a sundring of
their affections from their old sins, be troubled; for these are but the
dolours of their new birth; and for others who know not these inward
humiliations and wrestlings of the Children of God, they have just cause to
suspect themselves, that they have not so much as the beginnings of
Mortification, Regeneration, and spiritual Circumcision.

By the Spirit. Nature will not destroy our sinful lusts, The knife by which
beastly lusts are slain to be sacrificed.
they are mortified by the Spirit of Christ, and therefore we are to nourish
and entertain this Spirit, by the means before prescribed. As those Beasts
which were sacrificed to God under the Law, were first slain by the knife of
the Leuite, and then offered to God upon the Altar; so the Lord Jesus must
mortify our affections by the power of his word and Spirit, before they can be
presented acceptable sacrifices to Mac. hom. 1.
the Lord our God.

Ye shall live. As I spoke of death which is threatened, so Temporal life is
not the recompense of righteousness, and why? 1 Cor. 15. 19.
speak I of life here promised: this temporal life cannot be the recompense
of righteousness, for it is common both to the Godly and the wicked. If in
this life only we had hope, of all men we were the most miserable, but the
life here promised is eternal life, the beginning whereof presently we enjoy
by the Spirit of our Lord, who has quickened us, so that we may say, now I
live, yet not I, but Christ Jesus Gal. 2. 20.
lives in me, the accomplishment thereof we look for hereafter. Thus has
the Apostle set before us both life and death, he has showed us the way how we
may eschew the one, and attain to the other: the Lord grant that according to
his counsel we may make choice of the best.

Verse 14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God.
IN this Verse the Apostle subioynes a confirmation He proves the l^st part of
his preceding argument.
of his preceding argument: in the last part thereof he has said, If ye
mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit ye shall live: now he proves
it. They who mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, or they who are led
by the Spirit of God, (for these phrases are equivalent) are the Sons of God,
therefore they must live; the necessity of the consequence is evident of that
which follows, the Sons of God are the Heirs of God, heirs annexed with
Jesus Christ, and the heritage whereunto they are borne is eternal life,
therefore of necessity they must live.

Here first we have to consider what action and operation The operation of the
Spirit is either universal, extending to all his creatures,
of the spirit this is, which distinguishes the Sons of God from other men.
The operations of the Spirit are diverse; he has an universal operation, by
which he works in all his creatures, conseruing, leading, and directing them
to his own determined ends, for in him every thing that is, has the being,
living, and moving, as every creature is made by God, so is it ruled and led by
the Spirit according to his appointment.

He has again a more special operation in man, and this is also diverse: for
first all skillful and cunning working Or special, and this is manifold
of Artificers is a certain operation of the Spirit: therefore is it that
Beza^eel is said to be filled with the Spirit of God, Exodus 31.
and these cunning men to whom the Lord directs Moses, Cunning working of
Artificers is of him. Exodus 28. 2. Gifts of government are of him.
for the making of Aarons holy garments glorious and beautiful, are said there
to be filled of the Lord by the Spirit of wisdom: but this is not his
operation whereby the sons of God are discerned. Secondly, all gifts of
government are of the operation of this Spirit: in this sense it is said, that
the Spirit of the Lord came upon Saul, when of a common man, God made him a
kingly man, meet for government; and so also God took off the Spirit which
was upon Moses, and communicated it to the seauentie Elders. Thirdly,
prophesying and preaching is an operation Prophesying and preaching are also of
him. Numb. 24. 1. 1 Cor. 12.
of the Spirit, therefore says Moses of Balaam, when he prophesied, that the
Spirit of God came upon him: and the Apostle teaches us that there are
diversities of gifts, but one and the same Lord; diversity of administrations,
but the same Spirit; diversity of operations, but God is the same who works
all in all: for to one is given by the Spirit, the word of wisdom, to another
the word of knowledge, to another the gift of healing, to an other the
operation of great works, but none of these are the operations whereby the
Sons of God are to be discerned; seeing all these he works also in the
wicked.

We are therefore more particularly to consider how is And these former are
common to the wicked, but he has a singular operation in the godly, whom he
leads.
it that this Spirit leads the Sons of God: the ancient Fathers expresses
it in two words, he leads us m^nendo and monendo, that is, by informing our
mind with his admonitions; and inclining our hearts with his motions: for the
holy spirit leads us not like unto blind men, who are led by their guide a
way which they know not themselves, but he opens our eyes, and lets us see a
far off our heavenly 1 Monendo. by informing their minds.
Canaan, and Jerusalem which is above, for he that never saw the Lord, how can
he follow him, or how can he forsake the doung of the earth, who has no eyes
to discern those excellent things which are above? This illumination of our
mind is the first beginning of our salvation, therefore the Apostle praying
for the Ephesians craves, that the Ephesians. 1. 18.
Lord would lighten the eyes of their understanding, that they might know the
hope of their calling, and the riches of that glorious inheritance prepared for
the Saints. He prays also for the Philippians, that they may abound more and
more in knowledge, and in all judgment, whereby they may discern things that
are excellent. And for the Collossians, that they may be filled with the
knowledge of the will of God, and of spiritual understanding, teaching us also
to remember it in all our prayers, as a most necessary petition.

And after that the spirit of God has opened the eyes of 2 Mouendo by alluring
their hearts.
his children, and carried them up with Moses to the top of Pisgah, that is, by
heavenly contemplation given them some sight of Canaan, then he also moves
their hearts, making them cheerful, willing, and resolute to walk toward it,
for he draws us not against our wills, but makes us willing to follow him. It
is true he gives also to the wicked some taste of the joys of the life to
come, but he changes not their hearts; they have some new sights of it, but
retain their old affections, they like it also, but will not redeem it so
dear (as they think) as with the loss of their carnal pleasures in this
life: but to the godly with the new mind, he gives them also a new heart, he
inflames them with so fervent a love of those things which he had letten them
see, that they are content to renounce the world, and accounts her best
things to be but doung, so they may obtain the Lord Jesus, and be made
partakers of the high prise of the calling of the Saints of God.

And beside this, he does in such sort conduct us that he 3 By removing al
impediments out of the way which may hinder us to follow him.
remoues every impediment out of the way which may hinder us: when he carried
his people Israel by his strength to his holy habitation, O what impediments
was in the way I the red Sea, the waste Wilderness, the river Jordan, Pharaohs
horsemen and chariots pursues them behind, to draw them back again; seven
mighty nations of the Canaanits are gathered before them to resist them and
hold them out of Canaan, but the shepherd and leader of Israel steps over all
these impediments, as if they had not been in the way, and places his people in
the mountain of his inheritance: and afterward when he concluded to bring his
people from Babell homeward to Canaan, he prepared a way for them in the
Wilderness, he commanded the mountains to be made low, and the valleys to be
exalted, he commanded the crooked to be straight, and the rough places to
become plain, and it was done. This is for our comfort, the Lord Comfort.
who has taken us by the hand to lead us into his holy habitation, shall
remove all impediments that are before us; though Satan like a Lion spoiled of
his pray snatch after us, though he double his tentations upon us, and with
manifold afflictions compass us though terrible death and the horrible grave
stand before us, threatening to swallow us by the way, yet shall we see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, and over all our enemies shall
be more than conquerors, through him that loved us, and has taken us into his
own hand, to lead us to that inheritance which he has prepared for us.

For it is manifest, that both the beginning, progress, and The beginning
progress and perfection of our salvation is from him.
perfection of our salvation is ascribed to the spirit of God in holy
scriptures: when we were dead in sin he quickened us, when he had quickened us,
he gouernes and leads us, and works continually in us till he perfect us.
Thus is he the Heb. 12. 2.
author and the finisher of our faith, and all the glory of our salvation is
his: as we cannot begin to do well without him, so we cannot continue in well
doing without him: if he lead us not, we wander from him, and weary our selves
in In that we can not walk without a guide, we are warned that we are but
babes. Acts 8. 30. 31.
the way of iniquity.

It should serve to humble us, that we are pointed out here to be but babes
and children, such as cannot go by our selves, unless we be led by another.
As that Eunuch answered Philip, when he asked, understand thou what thou
read? how can I (says he) understand without a guide? so may we answer the
Lord when he commands us to walk in his way, how can we O Lord that are but
children and It is good religion to turn Gods precepts into prayers. Psalm. 43.
3. Psalm. 143. 10.
newborn babes, walk in thy way without a guide? It is a point of good
religion, to turn the Lords precepts into prayers: Send out Lord thy light and
thy truth, let them lead me, let them bring me into thine holy mountain, and
to thy tabernacles. Let thy good spirit lead me unto the land of
righteousness. When the Lord threatened that he would no more go before the
Children of Israel, to lead them as he had done, Moses took it so deeply to
heart, that he protested he would not go one foot further except the Lord
went with him: and certainly if we knew the manifold inconveniences,
whereinto we shall fall if the Lord forsake us, we would never enter our feet
into that way, wherein we saw not the Lord going before us in mercy to lead us.

Our life on earth should be ordered as was the life of We ought to follow our
guide as Israel did the Lord in the wilderness.
Israel in the wilderness, the Lord went before them by day in a cloud, by
night in a pillar of fire: when the cloud removed, they removed, what way so
ever it went, they followed, where the cloud stood, they camped: thus the
Lord led them by two and forty stations, forty years in the wilderness,
though Canaan was not far from them, yet they entered not into it till the
Lord directed them. The Lord has in like manner (praised be his name for it)
brought us out of the land of our bondage; he might if he had pleased long ere
now have entered us into our Canaan, but it pleases him for a time to exercise
us, and to have us vvalking up and down this Wilderness. Let us possess our
hearts with patience, and reverence the Lords dispensation: in the mean time,
take heed that the Lord go before us, that his word shine unto us, as a
lantern to our feet, and that his holy spirit be our guide to lead us in this
righteousness: then shall we be sure of a happy end of our journey, when we
live not as we list, but under the government of the holy Spirit; when our
rising and lying down, our resting and removing, and all the actions of our
lives are governed by his direction.

As many as are led by the spirit. If all were led with the All that profess
Christ are not led by his spirit.
spirit of God, the Apostle would not use this distinction: so many and no more
are the sons of God, as are led by the spirit of God. The name and dignity
of the sons of God does not belong to all men who are the Lords by creation,
nay not to all those who are his by profession: As in the Arc of Noah there
was a cursed Cham and a blessed Sem, as in the school of Christ a traitorous
Judas, and a beloved John, so are there many in this mixed fellowship of the
visible Church, who by outward profession, pretends the styles and privileges
of the sons of God, but are not of the Israel of God, belongs not to the
adoption. Think it not therefore sufficient that ye are gathered to the
fellowship of the visible Church, but consider what place ye do possess in
it. I wish from my heart that none among us all were in this barne-floore of
Christ like unto chafe, for it will be cast out, and burnt with unquenchable
fire; but that we may all be found to be that good Wheat, which shall Math.
3. 12.
b^ gathered into the Lords garner: it is indeed a great benefit that we are
brought to the fellowship of the visible church, which is (so to call it) the
out^ermost chamber of the house of God, but only blessed are they who are led
by the spirit farther in, to that secret chamber, where God shows his familiar
presence, and unto which none are admitted, but they who are of the communion
of Saints.

And as for them who are not led by this spirit of grace, What spirit leads the
wicked. Esaias 29. 10. Hos. 4. 10.
it is certain they are miscarried by another Spirit. Concerning their mind,
the spirit of slumber couers their eyes that they cannot see, and concerning
their heart it is misruled by the spirit of fornication, which causes them to
err, and go a whooring from God: thus are they led not as (...), brought to
the Lord in a peaceable manner, whereof I have spoken, but as (...), driven
violently and carried away from the Lord, ouerhaled with the fury of their
affections, snared of the Devil, and taken of him at his will, Acts 7. 51.
Esaias 63. Ezech. 13. 3.
resisting the holy Ghost, yea vexing the holy spirit of the Lord. O miserable
and unhappy condition, fearful is the vvoe that lies upon those who follow
their own spirit: let us therefore take heed to our selves, our ways will
declare what spirit is our governor. What made Caleb and Joshua trust in the
Lord, and rest on his word, when all Israel murmured against him, provoked him
to anger, and compelled him to swear that they should never enter into his
rest? what made them constant in so great a desertion? the Lord declares it
himself, but there was another spirit in Numb. 14. 24.
my servant Caleb, says the Lord. Certainly they who are led by the spirit of
the Lord will wait upon him, and follow him, albeit all the world should
forsake him: but as for those who wanders from the Lord in the way of
iniquity, their deeds makes it manifest they are led by the spirit of error.

Last of all, we learn here that all the sons of God are All the sons of
God are partakers of his spirit.
pertakers of his spirit, there is but one song among all those thousands
triumphant in heaven that follows the Lamb, and there is but one spirit in
all these militant upon earth, that follows the Lord. Earthly fathers were
they never so wise and holy, do not always beget wise and holy children,
regenerate Adam has wicked Caine for his eldest son, faithful Abraham has
faithless Ismael, godly Isaac brings out profane Esau, religious Ezekiah
begets idolatrous Manasses, but the Lord our God whom so ever he begets he
communicates unto them his own spirit, and transformes them into his own
Image: and therefore they are convinced to be shameless liars who in their
deeds, show forth the image of Satan, and yet glories in word that they are
the Children of God; they are bastards, and not the sons of God, for it
cannot be that the Lord should beget children to any other image but unto his
own.

Verse 15. For ye have not received the Spirit of bondage to fear again, but
the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father.
THe Apostle to strengthen this former argument, A threefold operation of the
Spirit in the Sons of God.
sets down a short description in this and the subsequent verse, of a
threefold operation which the spirit makes in them whom he leads: for first,
he is unto them a spirit of bondage, working fear: secondly, he is a Spirit
of Adoption, working love through the sense of Gods mercy, for he not only
makes them whom he leads the Sons of God, but intimates unto their spirits
Gods love toward them, which otherwise was unknown unto them: and thirdly,
he is a Spirit of intercession, making us to go with boldness to the throne of
grace, and call upon God as upon our Father. Of the which the first part of his
argument is made clear, that they who are led by the spirit of GOD are the
Sons of God, yea, by the testimony of the Spirit they themselves know that
it is so, and therefore in most homely and humble manner acknowledge him for
their Father. This the Apostle propones in such a manner that he applies it
particularly to the godly Romans, unto whom he writes, Ye have not (says
he) received again the Spirit of bondage unto fear, as ye did in the time of
your first conversion; ye have proceeded further, and have experience of his
other operations, then ye felt him casting you down with the sight of your
sins, but now ye feel him comforting you and raising you up with the sense
of Gods love and mercy toward you in Jesus Christ.

The spirit of God is called a Spirit of bondage unto fear, Why in his first
operation he is called a spirit of bondage to fear.
not as if he had made them in whom he works slaves or bondmen, but because
in his first operation he rebukes them of sin, in whom he works, and lets
them see that bondage and servitude under which they lie, which works in them
an horrible fear, but in his second operation he is a spirit of Adoption,
making them free who were bound before; comforting them with the sight of Gods
mercy, whom before he terrified with the sight of their own sins, to the
one he uses the preaching of the Law, which discouers our disease; to the
other the preaching of the Gospel, which points out the Physician. As the
proclayming By the preaching of the Law he discouers sin and wrath due to it,
which causes fear. Mat. 3. 10.
of the Law wrought a terror in their hearts who heard it, so does the
preaching thereof: for who can hear himself accursed and condemned by the
mouth of GOD, and not tremble? John the Baptist began at the preaching of the
Law, Now is the ax^ laid to the root of the tree, every tree that brings not
forth good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the fire: then he
proceeded and poynted out the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world; by the first he prepared a way to the second: for his Auditors being
cast down in themselves with the threatening, enquired earnestly what shall
we do then that we may be saved? and were glad to hear of a remedy. It is
out of doubt, that they who are not touched with a remorse for their sins,
nor a fear of the wrath to come; and into whose hearts never entered that
care, what shall I do that I may be saved? have not known as yet so much as
the very beginnings of salvation.

We are not then to think here, that the Apostle is He is not here comparing
the godly under the Law with the godly under the Gospel.
comparing the Godly under the Gospel, with the Godly under the Law, but he
is comparing the Godly under the Gospel with themselves; their second
experience of the operation of the Spirit with the first: it is true that once
(says he) ye received the Spirit of bondage working fear, this was his
first operation in you, but now ye have experience of another, and are made
partakers of a more excellent operation, he is become unto you a Spirit of
Adoption, by whom ye call upon God as upon your Father.

For the Godly under the Law were partakers of this same spirit of Adoption,
which we have received, and were For they under the Law had the same covenant
of grace, that we have. Romans 10. 5.
under the same covenant of Grace, but it was exhibited to them under types and
figures: for the covenant of works, whereof this was the sum, Do and live,
being broken and dissolved in Paradise through Adams transgression, incontinent
the Lord binds up with man the other Covenant of Grace whereof this is the
sum, believe and live. All the Rom 1. 0. 8.
godly Fathers before and under the Law looked for life in that blessed seed
of the woman, Jesus Christ, whom they believed was to be manifested in the
flesh, and so they were saved: but as I said, they had this covenant signified
under legal ceremonies and shadows, which were to be abolished at the coming
of the Lord Jesus, as now they are and in this respect the Apostle in that
Epistle to the Hebrews calls it an old Cou^nant, which was to be disanulled,
not in regard of the substance but of the manner of the exhibition thereof, for
all they who have been saved from the beginning, are saved even as we are,
even by faith in Jesus Christ, but as for that manner of exhibition by which it
was proposed to the Fathers, it is now abolished. And this for understanding of
the words.

For ye have not received. It is here to be observed, that the We are
receivers of the spirit, God the giver.
Apostle calls us receivers of the Spirit of adoption, for it warns us that
God is the giver, and that therefore we should be humble in our selves, and
magnify his rich mercy toward us, for what have thou O man, which thou have
not 1 Cor. 4. 7.
received? and herewithall we are admonished to account much of those means
by which the Lord communicates his spirit unto us. The Lord might have
illuminated the The Lord gives his Spirit by the ministry of his word
mind of that Eunuch by the mediate working of his own Spirit and made him
understand that Scripture which he was reading without an Interpreter, but it
pleased him to do it by the ministry of Phillip: he might in like manner
have Acts. 8.
communicated his holy Spirit to Corn^lius and his friends, but he would not
do it but by the ministry of Peter, he commanded therefore Cornelius to send
for him to Ioppa, Acts. 10.
where it is very worthy of marking, that in the very time of Peter's preaching,
the holy Ghost fell upon the hearers: for it should move us to reverence the
ordinance of God. It has pleased the Lord by the foolishness of preaching to
save 1 Cor. 1. 21.
so many as believe, and so many shall believe as are ordained unto eternal
life. Be content therefore to receive salvation by such means as God in his
wisdom has concluded to give it, think not that ye can be contemners of
the word, and partakers of the spirit: if ye be desi^ous to receive this
spirit of adoption, reverence this ministry of the word, by which the Lord
communicates his spirit to such he will save.

To fear a^aine, etc. It is here to be enquired, seeing none Gods adopted
children are not exempted from all sorts of fear.
of the children of God lives on earth without fear, how is it the Apostle
says we have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again. That
distinction of servile and filial fear, (by the one whereof the wicked fear
God for his judgments, and the godly for his mercies,) will not resolve this
doubt, for the godly also fears God for his judgments, my Psalm. 119.
flesh trembles for fear because of thy judgments: otherwise the threa^nings
of Gods word were not to be used to Gods children, if they were not to be
feared. We are therefore to Five sorts of fear.
consider that there are five sorts of fear mentioned in the book of God. The
first, is a natural fear: the second, a carnal fear* the third, ^ servile
fear: the fourth, a filial fear: the fist, a D^abolicall fear.

The natural fear is one of the affections of the soul* 1 A natural fear
created by God; Adam was endewed with it in the state of innocence, and our
blessed Savior wanted it not, of whom it is written, that when he entered into
the garden he began to be afraid. As for carnal fear, the object whereof is
flesh, 2 A carnal fear.
or at least that which flesh may do, it is a great enemy to godliness, and
therefore our Savior forbids it, fear not Mat. 10. 28.
them who are able to kill the body, but fear him who is able to cast both
soul and body into hell fire: yet are the dearest of Gods children subject
unto it. This fear made Abraham deny that Sarah was his Wife; made Peter deny
that Christ was his Lord; this fear made I^nas refuse to go to N^niuie, and
made that worthy Prophet ^amu^^ unwilling to anoint David, for he feared least
Saul should slay him: yet are they so subject unto it* that the fear of God at
length ouercomes in them. The third so^t is servile fear, the object whereof 3
A servile fear.
is the judgments of God only: and this is proper to the wicked, they fear
the plagues of God, but so that they love their sins, and hates and abhorres
every one that does snibbe or restrain them in the course of their sins. The
4 A filial fear.
fourth is filial, so called because it is proper to the sons of God; they
do not only fear him for his judgments, but love him and fear him for his
mercy: mercy to with thee Psalm. 130. 4.
O Lord, that thou may be feared. As for the D^abolicall fear, 5 A
D^abolicall fear.
Saint James says, the Devils know there is a God, therefore they fear and
tremble; they have received within themselves James. 2. 19.
the sentence of damnation, they know it shall never be recalled they seek no
mercy, nor shall they obtain it: and the servile fear of the wicked shall at
the last end in this desperate fear of the damned finding themselves
condemned, without all further hope of mercy, they shall tremble and fear
continually.

Of this it is evident that the fear whereof here he speaks From what sort of
fear we are exempted?
is the first part of filial fear, namely, a fear of that punishment which
is due to sin, and to the godly is an introduction to work in them fear of
God for his mercies, conjoined with love: so then his meaning is clear, albeit
in the time of your first conversion, you were stricken with a fear of that
wrath which is the recompense of sin, yet now the spirit of adoption has not
only released you of that fear of damnation, which you conceived at the
first, through the knowledge of your sins, but has also made you certain of
salvation, and assured that God is become your Father in Christ Jesus.

In the wicked the fear of Gods wrath once begun increases daily, till it
proceed as I spoke, to that desperate fear of the damned, but in the godly
the fear of Gods In the godly fear prepare^ a place for the perfect love of
God, and then departs it self.
judgments is but a preparation to the love of GOD, fear shall not always
abide in their hearts, for when God shall crown them with his mercies, and his
love in them shall be perfect, then perfect love casts out fear: therefore
Augustine compares the fear of Gods judgments in the godly to a Needle, that
goes through the ^eame, and prepares in it a place for the thread, which is to
rema^^e: so does the fear of Gods judgments go through the secret seames of
the heart, and prepares a place for the love of God, which shall abide and
continue for ever in the godly, when fear shall be away. The Lord at the first
deals hardly with Mat. 15.
his children, as our Savior dealt with the woman of C^naan, whom he comforted
at the last; and as Joseph entreated his brethren roughly, whom at the last for
tender compassion he embraced with many tears: but all these terrors and
fears wherewith GOD humbles his own are but preparatiues to his consolations;
at the length he shall make it known to them* that he is their loving father:
as for the wicked, though they have not suffered from their youth the terrors
of God, it is because they are reserved for them.

Neither are they even now exempted from their own But in the wicked fear of
wrath once begun increases till it proceed to desperate fear.
fears, for albeit there were none to reprove them, their own consciences
sends out accusing thoughts to terrify them; and if at any time they shall
hear the word of God faithfully and with power delivered unto them, then do
they much more tremble and fear: for the word strengthens the conscience to
accuse and terrify them, but fear is both the first and last effect it works
in them; and therefore is it that being so often disquieted with hearing of the
word, as Foelix was with the preaching of Paul, they are no more desirous to
hear it but rather hates it and abhors it, because it testifies no good unto
them, more then Micaiah did to Achab, and so they never attain to this other
operation of the spirit, they are not transchanged by hearing, into the
similitude of the sons of GOD, neither receives that comfort which comes by
feeling the love of God in Jesus Christ.

The spirit of Ad^ption, Adoption is either natural or Adoption is either
natural or spiritual.
spiritual; the spiritual Adoption is either of a whole Nation, and so the
Apostle says that the Adoption pertained to the Israelites, because the Lord
chose them to be a peculiar people to ^i^selfe; or then it is of particular
men, and so it is a benefit belonging to the children of GOD only; What
natural Adoption is.
and of it speaks the Apostle in this place. Natural Adoption the Lawyers
define it to be, ^ctum leg^^imum ^^itantem naturam, repertum ad little s^latium
qui liberos non habent, A lawful act imitating nature, sound out for the
comfort of them who have no children of their own: but spiritual adoption
differs far from it, for it is a lawful act, not How the spiritual Adoption
excels above the natural.
imitating, but transcending nature, found out by the Lord our God, not for the
comfort of a Father that wants children, but for the comfort of children that
wants a Father. We being by nature miserable orphans, having no Father to
provide for us, it pleased the Lord our God to become our Father in Christ, and
to make us by Adoption his sons and daughters, not for any benefit he
receives of us, for nothing can accresse, by the means of any creature, to
that most high and all-sufficient majesty, S^d vt haberit, in quem sua
benefi^ia coll^caret, but that he might have some, upon whom to bestow his
benefits, for the declaration of the glory of his rich mercy.

Yet both the Adoptions agrees in this, that they flow The natural gives to
the Adopted the privileges of a son.
from the pleasure and good will of him who is the adoptant, and that they
give to him, who is adopted the privileges of a Son, which by nature he has
not, but where the natural adoptant cannot change the nature of that man whom
he has adopted to be his Son, no more then Moses, qui Aethiopissam duxit,
sed non potuit Aethiopissae mutare colorem, who married an Ethiopian woman,
but could not change the Aethiopians color: but the Lord our God, were we
never so black, if he marry us he shall make us beautiful; if by the grace
of Adoption he make But the spiritual gives also the new nature and conditions
of a Son.
us his sons, by the grace of Regeneration he shall also make us new
creatures; all the sons of GOD are made partakers of the Divine nature. Take
heed therefore unto your lives and conuersations, for if ye go on to spend
the remanent of your days after the inordinate lusts of the flesh, and walk
on in gluttony and drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness, in adultery, in
strife and envy, in couctousnesse, and such other works of uncleanness,
wherein many among you do yet continue, we must say unto you that ye have not
God for your Father, but ye are of your father the Devil, because ye do his
works: except we see in you the Image and superscription of God, and that ye
have engraven in your conversation, as Aaron Exodus 28. 36.
had upon his frontlet, Holiness to the Lord, we cannot bless you in the name
of the Lord, nor acknowledge you for such as are his by Adoption.

And of this again we mark that the sons of God The Sons of God after
their receiving the Spirit of Adoption know that God is their Father.
know most certainly that God is become their heavenly Father; for in this
they are taught of God by his own spirit to acknowledge him and call upon him
with boldness as upon their Father. It is therefore a vile error which that
most comfortless religion of the Papists renders to them who seek comfort in
it, that no man in this life can know whether he be beloved or hated of God,
nor can have any certain knowledge of his own salvation, except it be by
extraordinary revelation; we improued it at length in the ninth verse. It is
true natural children may be ignorant of their earthly Father, and puffed up
with a vain conceit, that they are descended of a more noble parentage then
indeed they are: as the ^latterers of Alexander would have him to think that
he was the Son of Jupiter, and not of Phillip, but being wounded in a
battle, he was taught by experience that he was the mortal Son of a
mortal Father, and therefore smyling upon his ^latterers he said unto them,
this blood seems to me not to be (...), but (...), that is, not like the
strong blood of GOD, but the blood of man. But as for the Children of God, they
can not be deceived of their generation they know that God is their Father, and
with greater homeliness and more freedom of spirit yea and surer knowledge
they call God their Father, then any son in the world is able to call on his
earthly Father.

Whereby we cry. The Apostle here does teach us that it No prayer to God
without the spirit of God.
is by the spirit of Adoption we pray unto God: without that Spirit men may
speak of God, but without him they cannot speak unto God: Prayer is a proper
action of the sons of God. The Apostle describing them who are Saints by
calling, says, they are sanctified by Christ; and call upon the name of the
Lord Jesus: he ioynes these two together, to tell us that they who are not
called by God, and sanctified in Christ, cannot call upon him; as for profane
men it is certain they cannot pray: though they repeat that prayer: Our father
which art in heaven, what else do they but multiply lies as they multiply
words?

Only the spirit of Adoption teaches the Children of How the godly sometime
are transported in Prayer. 2 King. 2.
God to pray: Prayer is unto them like that fiery Chariot in the which Eliah
was carried from earth to heaven; by it they are transported to have their
conversation with God, and speak to him in so familiar a manner, that they
know not those things which are beside them, neither see they those things
which are before them; being in the body, they are carried out of the body, they
present to the Lord sighs which cannot be expressed, and vtters to the Lord
such words as they themselves are not able to repeat again: and that all this
proceeds from the operation of the Spirit who bends up their affections and
teaches them to pray, is evident by this, that when this holy Spirit intermits
or relents his working in them, they become senseless and heavy hearted, more
ready to sleep with Peter, James, and John, than to watch Mat. 26. 38.
and pray with Jesus; yea suppose it were in the very hour of tentation.

We cry, etc. The Apostle you see reckons himself among The godly should cry
together, not one against an other.
others who cries by this Spirit of Adoption; though the children of God be
many, yet seeing they all are led by one spirit, they should all cry for one
thing unto God: the assemblies of the Church militant on earth should resemble
as near as they can, the glorious assemblies of the Church triumphant in
heaven: many are they who follows the Lamb, their voice is like unto the
voice of many waters, yet they all sing but one song; so should there be among
us that are Christians, but one voice, specially when we meet in the public
assemblies of the Church, though we were Union of desires in prayer commended.
never so many yet our affections and desires should concur in one, and all of
us send up one voice to the Lord. We see that in nature conjunction of things
which are of one kind, makes them much stronger; many flames of fire united in
one, are not easily quenched; many springs of water if they meet together in
one, make the stronger river, but being divided are the more easily overcome.
Saint James James 5. 16.
says, the prayer of one righteous man auailes much, if it be powered out in
faith, what then shall we think of the prayers of many? Oh what a blessing
might we look for, if we could join in one to call upon God? but now alas,
where one with a contrite heart cries to God for mercy, how many by continuance
in sin cries to him for judgment? what marvel then the arm of the Lord be
shortened toward us, and he do not help us?

As they who resolve to lift any heavy burden join As many hands lift a
burden importable to one, so
their hands together under it, and so by mutual strength makes that easy to
many, which were impossible to one: so when we are assembled together to lift
from off our heads, by unfeigned repentance, that burden of the wrath of God,
which our sins has brought upon us, if there be among us no deceivers, but
that every man in the sincerity of his heart, join his earnest supplication
with the prayers of his brethren, what a blessing may we look for? Take heed
therefore how you behave your selves in the holy assemblies of the arms of God,
how you cry with your brethren; if ye be deceivers ye shall not be partakers
of that blessing which shall come upon them who worship him in spirit and
truth; where they shall go home to their houses justified, and rejoicing,
through the testimony of the spirit, that their sins are forgiven them* ye
shall go out as Cham went out of the Arc, more profane than ye came in, with
the curse of God upon you, because ye set not your hearts to seek his
blessing.

Neither is this union of our desires only to be observed Not in public
prayers only but in private also is union in Prayer commended.
in our public prayers, but in our private also: so our Savior taught us to
pray, as remembering others with our selves, Ou^ Father, and not my father
only; to tell us that in the arms of our affections we should present our
brethren to God with our selves. We greatly offend the Lord when we have
finished our prayers so soon as we have powered out some few petitions for our
selves, as if Gods glory were to be advanced in no other but in us alonely.
If Abraham prayed for Sodom, because he knew that Lot was in it, shall we not
pray for Jerusalem, wherein are so many of his sons and daughters, his Lots
indeed and chosen inheritance? We are now all in Christ made Priests to our
God, and Reu. 5. 2. 6.
therefore as Aaron when he went in before the Lord carried with him on his
breast in twelve precious stones, the names of the twelve tribes of Israel, so
are we in our prayers to God to present in our hearts with our selves, the
rest of our brethren.

This is for them who forgets the fellowship whereunto They are bastard
children who pray for themselves and not for Ierusalems peace.
they are called, while they profess themselves to be the daughters of
Jerusalem, and yet neglect to pray for her peace, they declare themselves to be
but bastard children. Yet their negligence is tolerable in regard of the malice
of others, who make a jest with their mouths at the divisions of Reuben; and
with the profane Edomite, reioyces at the desolation of Israel: they increase
with their speech the disease of the paralitique body of this Church, but
labors not to bind it up by their prayers; with cursed Cham they make a sport
of the nakedness of their father, if they can see it, but couers it not with
blessed Sem, therefore shall his blessing be far from them.

We cry. Prayer is called a crying, not in regard of the Prayer why it is
called a crying.
loudness of the outward voice, but earnestness of the inward affection. It
is true that in public prayers, he who is the mouth of the rest, should
speak so that others may follow him, and know wherein they should say, Amen:
neither is it unlawful in private Prayer circumstances of time and place
permitting it; yea rather the voice rightly and sincerely used, is profitable
to waken the affections, to hold up thy hands with Moses, to lift up thine
eyes toward Exodus 17. Acts 7. Psalm. 108. Judge. 5.
God with Stephen, to advance thy voice with David, if with these also thou
join thine heart, as did Deborah, this is to make a sweet and pleasant
harmony unto the Lord.

Yet none of these, the last accepted, is absolutely necessary Use of the
tongue not absolutely necessary in prayer. Exodus 14. 15. 1 Samuel 1. 12. 13.
in Prayer. Moses his tongue was silent at the red Sea, (for any thing we read)
yet his affection and desire was a loud crying voice unto God: Anna in the
Temple powered out her heart unto God, suppose Eli heard not her voice. The Lord
needs not the tongue to be an interpreter between him and the hearts of his
Children, he that hears without ears, can interpret the prayers of his own
children without their tongue.

Some prays with their lips only, these are accursed deceivers, For the Lord
knows the first conception of prayer in the heart. Luke 1.
let us leave that to hipocrites; some prays both with heart and mouth, and
these do well to glorify God with both, because he has redeemed them
both: others have their tongues silenced, and can speak no more then Zachary,
when he was stricken with dumbness, yet are the desires of their hearts
strong cries in the ears of the Lord of hoasts: he that knew Jeremy and John
the Baptist in the womb, and saw Nathaniel under the fig tree, does also
know the prayers of his children conceived in their hearts, though they should
never be brought forth by speech of the mouth, and this for their comfort, who
through extremity of sickness, or otherwise are not able to use their tongues
in prayer to God.

Farther we learn here, that the Parent which begets The Parents of Prayer.
Prayer, is the Spirit of Adoption, the mother that conceiues it, is the humble
and contrite heart, for no proud, unclean and hard heart can pray unto God;
the wings whereby it The wings whereby prayer ascends.
ascends, are feruencie and an heavenly disposition; feruency is noted in the
word of Crying, for as in crying there is an earnestnes of the powers of the
body to send out the voice, so in prayer should there be an earnestness of the
powers of our soul to send up our desires. As incense without fire makes no
smell, and therefore the Lord commanded it to be sacrificed with fire in the
Law: so prayer without feruency sends up no sweet smell unto the Lord. Our
heavenly disposition required in prayer is collected out of this that he to
whom we speak is our Father in Heaven, if our minds be earthly, we can have
no communing with him that is in heaven; we must therefore ascend in our
affection, enter within the veil, if we would speak familiarly with our
Father: Prayer this manner of way sent up, and presented to our advocate and
intercessor the Lord Jesus, out of the hand of Faith, cannot but return a
favorable answer, if not at the first, as in the very time of Prayer, Daniel
received his answer, yea at the beginning of his supplication, Dau. 9. 22. 23.
as the Angel Gabriel informed him, the commandment came forth to answer
him, yet shall not the Lord fail in his own good time to fulfill the desires
of them who fear him.

Manifold examples of holy Scripture lets us see that Efficacy of Prayer,
every petition returns with profit. Genesis 18.
Prayer this way powered out unto God is most effectual. At five sundry
petitions did not Abraham bring the Lord from fifty to ten? every petition
returns to Abraham some vantage, feign would Abraham had Sodom preserved for
Lots cause: at his first request he got this answer, that the Lord would
spare it for fifty righteous men's sake, if they might be found in it, but at
the last from fifty he brings him to ten; as long as Abraham prayed the Lord
answered, and for every petition he yielded something to Abraham: and most
comfortable it is that the Lord ceases not from answering, till Abraham ceased
from asking any more. Acts 10.
When Peter prayed upon the house top he fell into a trance, and saw a heavenly
vision; when Jesus prayed upon Mount Mat. 17.
Tabor he was transfigured; and if at any time the children of GOD be
transformed from an earthly disposition to a heavenly, they find in their own
experience that it is in the time of prayer.

Satan for this cause is a most troublesome enemy to the Satan an enemy to
the Word and Prayer.
exercises of the word, and of prayer: because the one is the mother, the other
is the nurse of all the graces of God in us: either he makes them lightly to
esteem the exercise of prayer, or then does what he can to interrupt them in
it: as that Pithonisse interrupted Paul while he was going to Acts 16. 16.
pray, so has that adversary a thousand wiles, whereby either before prayer,
he seeks to divert them to some other business, or in the action to trouble
them and divide the powers of the soul by uncomely and profane motions: If
Iehoshua stand before the Lord, Satan shall stand at his Zach. 3. 1. Genesis 15.
right hand to resist him. Unless therefore with Abraham we drive away the
ravening birds from our sacrifice, unless with the Israelites we stand on
Ierusalems wall, with a weapon ready in our hand to repel the adversary as
often as he comes to stay the work of God, it is impossible that our hearts can
continue in fervent prayer to God.

Yet the restless opposition of the adversary should not make us to break
off this exercise of prayer, but the more we find Satan angry at our prayers,
the more should we be provoked to pray; if he felt not himself hurt, and his
kingdom weakened by our prayers, he would not so busily trouble us in prayer:
ye see he troubles us not in such exercises as troubles not him; speak as
long as you will of vvorldly affairs, refresh the body with eating and
drinking, exercise the body in playing, in these and such like he interrupts
us not, because they offend him not, but if we go by prayer to vvound the
head of the serpent, then will he do what he can to sting us.

And herewithall let us remember that any other practice Other exercises of
religion may at a time be omitted with an excuse, but the neglect of Prayer is
inexcusable.
of religion men may omit it and be excusable, but the neglect of prayer cannot
be excused. It may be at a time thou have not given alms to the needy, because
thou had it not, it may be thou have not come to hear the word, because
thou have been diseased, but as for the neglect of prayer, wherewith will thou
excuse it? laboring with thy hands in thy vocation, needs not to hinder the
lifting up of thy heart unto God, if thine heart be good, every time and every
place is convenient for prayer; with Jeremy thou may pray in the Ieremi^ 36.
Daniel 6. Genesis 24. Luke 6. 14.
prison, with Daniel in the den, with Jonas in the Whales belly, with David
in the bed, with Isaac in the fields, with Jesus on the mountain; for thou
thy self art the temple of the living God, the sanctuary wherein he will be
worshipped, and should always carry about with thee, and within thee, that
golden Alter whereupon incense should be every morning and evening sacrificed
unto the Lord thy God, so that if thou do not pray it is because thou vvilt
not.

Abba Father, etc. But what is this that the spirit teaches It is a strong
Prayer if by the Spirit thou can call God thy father.
us to cry? the Apostle says that he teaches us to cry upon God, as upon our
Father. Is this enough in prayer to call upon GOD thy Father? yea if thou can
so call him from this spirit of Adoption (for all Gods children are not endued
with a like grace of prayer) it is effectual enough to draw down upon thee
all those blessings which the Lord communicates to his sons, his name shall
be sanctified in thee, his kingdom shall be advanced in thee, he shall teach
thee to do his will thou shall not want thy daily bread, he shall forgive
thee thy sins, and preserve thee that thou fall not into tentations; all
comfort rests under this name of a father, if thou can so call him in says,
the riches of his mercies are thine.

As the heavens are above the earth, so are his thoughts What comfort we have
in this, that we may call God our father.
above ours: if then earthly fathers carry so kindly an affection toward
their children, what loving affection may we think is there in our heavenly
Father toward us? Shall I cause others to bear (says the Lord,) and remain
barren my self? shall the Lord communicate to men the name and heart of a
Father and fill them with compassion toward their children, and shall he
himself to whom the name of a Father most properly belongs, want the heart
and compassion of a Father toward his children? let it be far from us so to
think. Seeing the Lord will have such tender mercy in us that are mortal
creatures, that not only seven times, but seauentie times seven times we
forgive our brother in the day, what readiness to forgive the sins of his
children must there be in himself? and seeing our Savior in the Gospel
points out so great a commiseration Luke 15.
in that earthly Father toward his prodigal Son, that when he saw him a
far off coming homeward, he ran and met him, and sell upon his face and
kissed him, what loving kindness may we look for at the hands of our heavenly
father, if we do repent of our wanderings, and resolve with our selves to
return unto him?

Again, we see here that the holy Spirit teaches us to Prayer to creatures
improued
pray to none but to our Father: whom shall we follow as Schoole-maisters in
prayer? If we will be instructed of Psalm. 50. 15.
the Lord. Call upon ^ee in the day of thy trouble, and I shall deliver thee,
and thou shall glorify me: If we will be taught by Jesus Christ, after this
manner (says he) shall ye pray: Mat. 6. 9.
Our Father which art in Heaven: If ye would know how the Spirit teaches us
to pray, the Apostle here tells you* he teaches us to cry Abba Father:
these three are one, and delivers unto us one truth: what better
Schoole-maisters to teach us a true form of acceptable Prayer unto God can we
have then these? and therefore that doctrine which teaches to pray to Angels
or Saints departed, must proceed from the spirit of error, for we are here
otherwise taught of God: we cannot says the Apostle call upon him in whom we
believe not. As for the Angels we believe that they are, which the Saduces did
not, but we believe not in them, and therefore will not pray unto them. In all
the old testament we read no prayer made to Abraham, albeit In all the
scripture no prayer to Abraham, Moses, etc. nor to Cherubin, nor Seraphin.
he was the father of the saithfull, none to Isaac, or Jacob, or Moses, or any
other of the Fathers departed. In a hundredth and fifty Psalms, no prayer is
made to Cherube or Seraphin, though they in their Psalter of the Virgin, have
turned over all the praises and petitions made to the Lord into petitions to
our Lady, as if where David says O Lord Psalm. 6. 1.
rebuke me not in thine anger, we were all to say, O Lady rebuke me not in
thine anger, and O Lord thou art my righteousness, Psalm. 4. 1.
O Lady thou art my righteousness, and so forth in the rest: but we may
boldly say with Bernard, libenter Bernard.
certe gloriosa virgo tali honor carebit, the glorious Virgin is willingly
content to want such honor. The Angel would not suffer John to prostrate
before him, do it not (says he) I am but thy fellow servant: this one of
those blessed spirits Reu. 19. 10.
witnesses to us in the name of all the rest, that it is the will of the Saints
of God in heaven, that we who are upon earth should reserve to the Lord his
own worship, and give no part thereof to creatures, yea they are offended when
that honor is offered to them which is due to the Lord.

Where if that common objection be brought which Ambrose It is not in the court
of heaven as in the courts of earthly kings. Ambros. in epist. ad Romans
did obuiate in his time, posse nos per istos ire ad Deum, sicut comites
peruenitur ad regem, that men by such mediators may go to God, as they go to
Kings by those who are honorable in their courts; to them we answer with him,
hoc est misera v^i excusatione, this is to pretend a miserable excuse: for men
go to kings by courtiers, because the king is but a man, and ad Deum autem
quem nihil latet promirendum, suffragatore non opus est sed mente deuota, but
as for the Lord from whom nothing is hid, there needs no such procutor to make
him favorable unto us, only there is required a devout mind, for in
whatsoever place he who is truly godly speaks unto God, the Lord shall
answer him

And lastly, that the Apostle here joins two words of Every tongue and
language is sanctified for prayer if we understand it.
sundry languages, Abba Father, it is to teach us that every tongue is
sanctified to the use of Gods children, and that it is lawful for us to pray
in any language, if so be we understand it; but to bind people to pray in a
language, they understand not, or for him that should be the mouth of God, in
the exercise of divine worship, to speak to the people in a strange language
which they understand not, is a sacrilegious tyran^ie. That which God powered
out as a curse on They are builders of Babell who speak to the people in a
language they understand not.
the first Babell, that one of them understood not what another said, and the
people knew not what the builder^ ^raued, in the second Babel is received as a
blessing. The Caldeans a fierce and cruel nation were sent against the Jews,
speaking to them in a language which they understood not, to punish in them the
contempt of the voice of God, which they would not learn nor understand: and
now the messengers of Antichrist, a cruel and merciless people, are come out
speaking to the world in an uncouth language, for punishment of them that
received not the love of the truth. A faithful servant of the Lord had he
never so many languages, had rather speak in the Church five words with
understanding, that others might be instructed, than ten thousand otherways:
he is but an hireling and a false Apostle, that purposely speaks to a people
in a language they understand not. We give thanks to God, who has delivered
us from this most fearful captivity and confusion of Babell.

Verse 16. The same spirit bears witness with our spirits, that we are the
children of God.
ALbeit this operation of the Spirit, whereby he witnesses unto us that we are
the Children of God be set down in the last place, yet in order of working it
goes before the other: for certainly unless his holy spirit testify unto us,
that God is become our father, and has made us his children, we dare not go
near him to crave good things from him. The beginning of our acquaintance with
GOD flows from him, herein is love, not that we loved him first, but that be
loved 1 Ioh. 4. 10. Romans 11. 35.
v^. Who has first given unto him, and he shall be recompensed?

We must first receive from God some secret information of his love and
fatherly affection, or ever we be able to return unto him the desires, the
words, and the deeds of his loving children.

Here first appears the fatherly indulgence of the Lord The great love of our
father, which he has showed by sending his spirit into our hearts.
our God toward us: we are here in a valley of death, in heaviness through
continual afflictions, the time is not yet come wherein the Lord will
communicate to us his glorious presence; to fill us with that fullness of joy
which is in his face; the time is not yet come wherein we must ascend to our
Father, yet to keep us in the mean time that we faint not, the Lord has
sent down his holy Spirit into our hearts to comfort us. O fatherly care! O
wonderful love! when Israel was yet in the wilderness, the Lord sent them
some of the fruits of Canaan to comfort them, by the hand of Joshua and Caleb:
but what was that if it be compared with the first fruits of heavenly Canaan,
which the Lord sends to us by the conduit of his holy Spirit, he has not
only promised to us by word that he will possess us in our heavenly
inheritance, but as if that were too little for us, he sends his Spirit with the
fruit of that land unto us, Righteousness, Peace, and Joy, for our further
confirmation: that Spirit the Comforter, descended once according to Christ's
promise upon the Apostles in a visible manner, and does daily also descend in a
secret and invisible manner into the hearts of the godly, least the Children of
the marriage Chamber should be swallowed up with heaviness, through the want
of their Bridegroom. Albeit the Lord send not to you who Dan. 9. 23.
are men, as he did to Daniel, an Angel to show him that he was greatly
beloved of the Lord, nor to you who are Christian Luke 1. 28.
women, as he did to Mary, to declare to you that ye are freely beloved of the
Lord, yet has he sent down unto us a more glorious ambassador, not only to
speak unto our ears, but much more to witness unto our hearts that we are the
sons of God.

Now as for this testimony of the Spirit, it is the secret The testimony of
the Spirit is known of none but those who have it. Reu. 2. 17.
voice of God whereby he speaks from heaven unto thine heart, assuring thee
that he is thine, and thou art his: no man can conceive what it is, unless
he have received it, for it gives that new name, which none can know but they
who have it; and that hid Manna, which none do understand but they who taste of
it: it is not gotten but after long and unfeigned humiliation, and is not kept
without sanctification, for every sin which the godly commit diminishes in
them this testimony of the spirit.

And this I would have to be considered for two sorts of men: first, for
carnal professors, who take their own A warning for carnal professors, who
take their presumption for this testimony.
presumption for this testimony of the Spirit, in their conceit they put it
out of all doubt that they have received the Spirit of Adoption, but their
works were testimony against their words: for the Spirit of Adoption is also
the Spirit of sanctification; he first makes men the new workmanship of God
created in Jesus Christ to good works, and then witnesses to them that they
are the sons of GOD: will thou make this holy spirit the witness of an
untruth? will he call thee the Son of God whom he never sanctified? Be not
deceived, so long as thy life is profane, boast what thou will of this inward
testimony of the Spirit, thou art but a liar against the holy Ghost, and a
wilful murderer of thine own soul, by faithless presumption.

The other sort of men are the Children of God, who A comfort for weak
Christians who are moved by their wants to doubt of this testimony.
because they find not always within themselves this testimony of the Spirit
in a like measure, are therefore cast down and made oftentimes to think they
never had it: for as none are more ready to boast of the spirit then they who
have him not; so none complains more that they want him, then they who
possess him. The children of God in this being like unto rich worldlings, who,
suppose they be possessours of much, yet the great desire of more which is in
them, causes them to esteem that which they have as nothing and therefore
comfor^s not themselves with the lawful use of that which they have, but vexes
their spirits with restless thoughts for that which they want: even so it is
customable with the Children of God, albeit they have attained to a good
measure of says and love of God, and are even become rich in the grace of the
Lord Jesus, yet are they so desirous of more, that many a time they esteem
nothing of that which they have, but go about mourning and complaining that
they have no faith, no love, no grace, no life; in which extremity we see that
many in their weakness offend the Lord their God. Herein therefore is the A
necessary admonition so to mourn for that which we want that we give thanks
for that measure of grace which we have.
Christian to be admonished that he keep mediocritie; to lament thy wants and
to thirst for more grace, is a sure token of a spiritual life, but let us so
complain for that which we want* that we be comforted in GOD for that
beginning and little measure of grace which we have; remember that the same
mouth of GOD which commands thee to mourn, commands thee also to rejoice, we
want not matter of both; matter we have of mourning for which (...)e may lament
with the Apostle, O wret^hed man that I Romans 7. 24.
am, who shall deliver ^e from the body of this death? matter of joy we have
also in our GOD, for which we may rejoice with him and say, I thank God
through Jesus Christ: Ibid. ver. 25.
surely it cannot be without unthankfulness unto GOD so to mourn for our
wants, that we give not praise to God for the beginnings of grace we have.

And for this same effect, let us yet further consider that This testimony of
the spirit is not always perceived in a like measure of them who have it.
this testimony of the Spirit is not at all times enjoyed in a like measure,
for that were to enjoy heaven upon earth. The Lord therefore does in such sort
dispense it, that sometimes he lets his children feel it for their
consolation, and again with-drawes it from them for their humiliation: when
they feel it they so abound in joy that all the terrors and threatenings of
Satan, all his promises and allurements are despised of them, and trodden
under their feet; they sing within themselves that glorious triumph of the
Apostle, wh^ shall Romans 8. 35.
separate us from the love of God? but this joy proceeding from the fullness of
faith, continues not, the voice of the Spirit of adoption waxing somewhat more
silent, fears and doubts succeedes in that same heart which before abounded
with joy: and this for our humiliation.

But now in this estate least the Children of God be discouraged Comfort
against spiritual desertions.
couraged by the silence of the testimony, let them first of all have recourse
to the fore-past working of God in them, let them call to mind with David the
days of old remember their joyful songs by which they have praised GOD, their
humble prayers by which many a time they have gotten access to the throne of
grace, and these heavenly motions which have replenished their souls with joy,
and so of the former footesteps of his grace, let them discern his presence
even then when they cannot perceive them. And next let them consider that the
godly in the time of their desertion, which is their spiritual disease, are
evil Judges of themselves, for they perceive not that which they possess:
there may be an muincible hope of mercy in that soul wherein for the present
there is no sense of mercy; and this all the Children of God may mark in their
own experience; for whereof I pray thee has it come, that thou a weak man
have foughten so long against principalities and powers? have endured so many
years the fearful assaults of Satan; thou have been troubled with
doubting, but have not dispaired; thou have been cast down, and have not
perished; thou have fallen, and yet risen again; thy enemy has thrust sore
at thee, yet has he not prevailed against thee. No power, no policy of
Satan has ever been able to quench in thee that spark of life which the Lord
has breathed into thee. Out of all doubt thy standing has been from this
spirit of Adoption, who has wrought in thine heart a deeper sense of mercy,
then that any contrary power is able to root out, yea or thou thy self art
able to perceive: hereof has come thy standing both in tentations which are
from thine adversaries, and in these desertions, whereby the Lord has
exercised thee. Thus have we comfort not only in the The standing of a
Christian in his apparent desertions, proves that he was not deserted indeed.
glorious effects of Gods mercy wrought in us, when we feel his presence,
but also by our standing and perseverance in desertions, wherein it seems to
us that the Lord has absented himself from us: two excellent comforts for the
Christian; for thy standing in desertions proves that thou were not deserted;
apparent desertions are not desertions indeed: surely the Lord will not fail
his people, nor forsake Psalm. 94. 14*
his inheritance. Again, thy standing against so many assaults of the Devil,
proves that the least spark of Christ's lively grace in a Christian, is
stronger than that the gates of hell are able to prevail against it* Be
therefore comforted O thou man of God, for if it had been in Satan's power to
have quenched thy life* he would have put it out long or now: be assured thou
shall prevail and obtain the victory, in the strength and might of that
mighty Lord, the Lord Jesus Christ*

Verse 17. If we be Children, we are also Heirs, even the Heirs of God, and
Heirs annexed with Christ.
THe privileges of a Christian, albeit they be commonly spoken of, yet because
they are not considered, are commonly contemned: men not deeply pondering with
themselves, what a high preferment this is, that a vessel of clay should be
made the Temple of the living God, and the Heir of wrath should become the
Heir of grace and glory: therefore the Apostle in this Chapter describing the
excellent state How glorious the privileges of a Christian are.
of a man justified by faith in Christ Jesus, from the time that once he began
to make mention of the benefits he has by Christ, can hardly make an end, but
from one proceeding to another, he ascends by a continual gradation, till at
length he come to such an height, that he is compelled to break off the
course of his speech, and to conclude with an examination, what shall we then
say to those things? Hitherto he has letten us see, how by Christ we are
delivered from condemnation; how we are made the freemen of God, freed from
sin, and death; how we are also made the Temples of God, wherein he
dwells by his Spirit, and that yet more also, we are made the Sons of GOD.
And now he goes up a degree further, to tell us that we are the Heirs of
God, and Heirs annexed with Christ Jesus. What shall we then say, but as the
Psalmist says of the City of God? Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou
City Psalm. 87. 3.
of God, so will we speak of every Citizen thereof, Glorious Psalm. 144. 15.
things are spoken of thee, O thou man of God. Blessed are those people whose
God is the Lord, and are called to this happy fellowship, wherein they are
made subject unto him who is King of Saints. Let us be glad and rejoice in the
Lord, let our hearts and our mouths be filled with his praise: except the Lord
had reserved mercy for us, we should be made like unto Sodom o^ Gomorrha, but
now the lots are fallen to Isai. 1. 9.
us in pleasant places, and we have a fair heritage. Blessed be the GOD of
our salvation from henceforth and for ever.

If we be Children. As for the Apostles order in these The Sons of God
cannot but l^ue because they are the heirs of God.
words, we are to remember that the Apostle here insists in the confirmation
of that part of his reason, that they who are the Sons of God shall live. Now
he lets us see the necessity thereof, the S(...)s of God are the Heirs of God,
and the heritage whereunto they are borne is eternal life, therefore of
necessity they must live.

We have here first to consider that high preserment Gods goodness is showed to
all his creatures, ^ut his inheritance is reserved to his Sons. Genesis 25.
whereunto we are called in Christ, not only to be the Sons of God, but
declared also to be the Heirs of God. The heir in a family has this
prerogative, that albeit the hand of his Father be not closed from giving good
things unto others, yet the inheritance is reserved for him. As Abraham gave
gifts to the Sons of K^turah, but kept his best things for Isaac, so the Lord
our God shows his great bountifulness, in that he makes his Sun to shine,
and Math. 5. 45.
his rain to fall down upon the unjust, no less than the just, yet herein
stands the comfort of his children, that he reserues his best and most
excellent things for them. Neither is it his creatures that he gives to them,
but he gives himself unto them in a portion as he promised to Abraham, so he
performs it to all the seed of Abraham; I am thy exceeding great reward: and
therefore do the godly so crave him, that without him nothing can content
them: O Lord thou art my portion (said David.) My Soul says to Psalm. 119. 57.
Lam. 3. 24.
the Lord, thou art my portion (said Jeremy) But as for them, who can content
themselves with the gifts of God, suppose they never enjoy himself, they
declare they are but Servants, who are not to bide in the house for ever, and
not the Sons of God.

Again, we have to mark here, that albeit the Lord All the Sons of God are
his heirs, and yet the inheritance is not diminished.
have innumerable sons, yet are they all his Heirs. No Monarch in the world
can beautify his children with this privilege, as to make them all his
heirs, and not diminish his Empire; but the Lord herein declares the riches of
hi^ glorious inheritance, that all his sons are his Heirs, and yet the
inheritance enjoyed of many is not the less. Neither are we to think this
impossible, for seeing the Lord has endued the Sun in the firmament with
this property, that albeit the light thereof be communicated unto many, yet is
it not the less in it self: plurium oculos pascit, and Aug. de verb. dom. in
Euan. Joan. ser. 64.
tamen tanta est, quanta erat and illi pascuntur, and illa non minuitur: it
feeds the eyes of many, they are nourished, and it is not diminished: may we
not much more think that the heavenly light communicated to many, shall for
all that not be impared? In earthly inheritances it is so the more be partakers
of them, the less they are, but it is not so in the heavenly, there needs no
strife among the brethren for division of the inheritance, for the rich portion
of one shall be no prejudice to another.

Neither shall we that are called to be the sons of They who were borne in
the first age of the world, shall not be perfected without us. Heb. 11. 40.
God in this last age of the world, suffer any prejudice that many hundred
years before us, some have bin entered heirs of that kingdom, God providing a
better thing for us, that they without us should not be perfected. Adam the
first that ever was made the son of God by creation, and afterward the first
son of God also by regeneration, together with the rest of those faithful
Patriarchs that followed him, has in regard of years long before us
inherited the promises, yet shall it not preiudge them who in the last age of
the world are called to the fellowship of the faith of Christ; yea, he that
shall be the last borne son of GOD in the earth by regeneration, shall also
be partaker of this privilege of the inheritance. And this should greatly
encourage us to serve our God, considering that how ever many of our brethren
be entered before us, whose example should confirm us, yet the portion prepared
for us, shall not be the lesser.

There is also another difference: for in the earthly inheritances In earthly
inheritances the Father dies or the son inherit, but here the son must dye,
or else he cannot inherit. Psalm. 102. 26.
the Father must first die, before the son come to the full possession
thereof; but in the heavenly we our selves must die, that we may possess the
inheritance. For our Father is the ancient of days: the heavens are the works
of his hands, they shall perish, but he does remain: they shall wax old as
does a garment, but he is the same, and his years shall not fail. He is the
Father of eternity in whom there cannot fall so much as a shadow of change,
far less is he subject to death: but as for us* by suffering death we must
enter into our kingdom; we cannot see him so long as we live, nor be satisfied
with his image* till we awake: therefore should the day of death be a joyful
day unto us, because it is the Psalm. 17. 15.
day of our entrance to our inheritance. Unnatural worldlings rejoice at the
death of their Parents, because by it they come to the heritage: they carry
merriest hearts within them, when they put on their blackest garments; but as
for us, we should rejoice at the day of our own death, it is not the day of
our sorrow as natural men accounts it, but the day of our delight, in the
which we enter into the fruition of our heavenly inheritance.

He calls us not only the heirs of God, but annexed heirs Theophilact.
with Jesus Christ, that so he may show, Nos grandes futuros haeredes, that we
are to be great heirs. The Lord Jesus has Christ's twofold right to the
inheritance and how in the second only we are annexed with him.
a twofold right to his Fathers inheritance: one by his eternal generation,
and so he is the heir of God, in a manner proper and peculiar to himself
only: the other he has by conquest, for by the merit of his death he has
conquered eternal life for all his brethren: and this right he communicates
unto us, whereby we also become heirs, annexed with him: in the first he
admits no companion, in the second, he calls us to be partakers with him.

And this serves unto us, not only for a special comfort How all these great
mercies should provoke us to walk worthy of our heavenly vocation.
in the hour of tentation, and day of death, as we marked before, but should
also provoke us to answer the heavenly vocation by a holy disposition: seeing
we are the sons of God, shall we not resemble his image? seeing we are
called to be heirs of an heavenly inheritance, shall we any more mind earthly
things? Far be it from us, that we should be profane like Esau, who sold
his birthright Genesis 25. 2 Timothy 4. Phil. 3. 8. 9.
for a mease of pottage; or like Demas we should forsake the fellowship of our
brethren, and embrace this present world: but let us rather with the holy
Apostle, account all things to be but dung in respect of the excellent
knowledge and fellowship of our Lord Jesus. Seeing Christ must be our comfort
in death, when all other comforts will forsake us, let us make him our joy and
pleasure in life, that so both in life and death he may bean advantage unto us:
for these things, for which miserable worldlings forsake their God, shall in
the end forsake them. Let a covetous man see in the hour of his death, those
treasures of gold and silver which he sought in his life more than God, and
they shall be no more pleasure to him, than was those thirty pieces of silver
to Iuda^, which he took in exchange of Jesus Christ. Present a spoonefull of
Wine to the drunkard, whose belly was his God in his life time* and he shall
not be able to receive it. Let the harlot stand at that time in the sight of
the whoremonger, she may increase his sorrow, and terrify his conscience, but
shall not render him comfort. Yet these are the strange Gods after which most
part of the world goes a whooring: but let us not cast in our portion among
them; we are partakers of the heavenly vocation, called to be the sons and
daughters of the living God; blessed shall we be if we walk worthy of our
calling. For Satan's silly offers are not to be compared to these high mercies
whereunto God has called us in Christ. Ioh. 14. 15. Heb. 2. 11. Math. 17. 5.


For we see here whereunto we are called, by adoption we are made the sons of
God, and brethren of Christ: of rebels, we are made the servants of God, yea
more than that, the friends of God, hence forth call I not you servants but
friends, yea more than friends, he has made us brethren, he that sanctifies,
and they who are sanctified are all one, wherefore he is not ashamed to call
them brethren: O wonderful comfort! the Father cries from heaven, this is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him: the Son again speaking
to us on earth says, I go up to your Father, and my Father, Job. 20. 17.
he that is my Father is also your Father, therefore go ye unto him, and
call upon him as your Father. O qualis ille dominus, qui omnes s^ruos suos
facit amicos suos, and quod multo maius est fratres suos: O what a sweet Lord
is he who makes all his servants his friends, and which is much more his
brethren. Surely the yoke of Christ is easy, and Math. 11. 30.
his burden is light, we are called to be annexed partakers with him of all
the good that is in him. The Lord therefore more and more confirm us, that
despising all the subtle offers of Satan, whereby he would steal us away
from the love of Christ, and delighting in that high dignity, whereunto we are
called, our hearts may cleave to the Lord for ever, without separation.

HEAVEN OPENED.

WHEREIN THE COVNSAILE OF GOD CONCERNING MAN'S SALVATION IS FVRTHER MANIfested,
so that the Christian effectually called may hear himself after the Cross
ordained to the Crown, and read his own Name written in the book of Life.

Being the second benefit we have by our Lord Jesus Christ.

Come and see.

Written by Mr. William Cowper, Minister of Gods word at Perth.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham for John Budge, and are to be sold at the
great South door of Paul's.

1611.

TO THE MOST Gracious, Excellent, and mighty Princess Anne, Queen of great
Britain, France, and Ireland, etc.
MADAME, As God in the first creation of one made two, so in the first
institution of marriage did he again unite those same two into one, that the
woman joined in marriage with her husband, might not only reverence him, as
the rock from whence she was taken, but much more love and honor him as her
head, under whom she lives. If they had not agreed in one, to divide themselves
from God, no division had ever fallen out among themselves. But that which God
made very good, Satan working upon the mutability of their will turned into
evil; so that the woman in stead of an helper, became a tempter of the man to
sin, and the man in stead of a defender, became a dilater of the woman to God
for sin. But the Lord Jesus, who came into the world, to destroy the works
of the Devil, as he has reconciled man and woman with God, so has he
reunited them among themselves, adding this to all the former bands of their
union, that now they should live together as heirs of the grace of life. In
this most happy union of both your Majesty's with God and among your selves,
consists your mutual strength and comfort, the welfare of your Highness
royal children, the terror of your enemies, and common benefit of all your
Majesty's well affected subjects. A good so much the more carefully to be kept,
because Satan out of all doubt spitefully does envy it, as being the very
fountain, out of which does flow that great and common good, both of your
royal posterity, and loyal people, the aspect of your Highness favorable
countenances looking in love one of you to another, and both of your majesty's
in coniunct compassion to your people, sweeter than the influence of the
undivided Pleiades, bringing to Church and commonwealth, under your happy
reign a flourishing spring of innumerable blessings. We do therefore bless
the Lord who has confirmed your royal hearts, and set it in the for most of
your godly cares, how to keep and increase this holy and happy band of love
which keeps you both. For the continuance whereof, as after my weak measure,
I stand up a daily supplicant unto the Lord, among others your Highness loyal
subjects, so do I humbly crave that your Highness impute it not to me for
presumption, that I have conjoined your majesty's in the participation of this
small propine of the first fruits of my labors, whom I do wish for ever to be
conjoined in the communion of all good present, and to come: but that rather
according to your Highness wonted favor and clemency toward me, your
majesty would graciously accept it, as a testimony of my earnest and unsained
affection toward your Highness name and honor in this life, and everlasting
welfare in the life to come.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject, and daily Orator WILLIAM COVVPER,
Minister at Perth.

HEAVEN OPENED.
THE SECOND PART OF THE CHAPTER; CONTAINING Comforts against the CROSS.
Verse 17. If so be we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with
him.
THE mortification of a Christian, The mortification of a Christian consists in
two things.
whereunto the spirit of GOD so frequently exhorts us, consists in these two,
first in a subduing by a holy Discipline our inordinate lusts, which
naturally rebel against the law of God: secondly, in a patient bearing of the
Cross of Jesus. In the first part of the Chapter, the Apostle has exhorted us
unto the one, and now in the second, by many arguments he strengthens us
against the other: unless we make some profit in the first point of
mortification, it is certain we shall never proceed to the second. For the
life of one affection is far less than the life of the whole man, if for
Christ's sake we will not He will not quit his life that will not quit his
affection for Jesus Christ. Ezech. 22. 14.
put out the life of one sinful affection, what hope is there, that for his
sake we will lay down our own life? beside that, a dissolute life weakneth
the strength of the soul, and makes it ^eeble in the day of affliction, so
that the heart cannot endure, nor the hands be strong in that day wherein the
Lord shall have to do with thee. It is a customable policy of Satan* first
to corrupt men, and make them dissolute in prosperity, that afterward he may
the more easily break them by adversity. When Justin Martyr beh^ld the patient
suffering of the Christians, notwithstanding that he was not as yet converted
himself, he gathered thereof, that they could not be men given to pleasures,
for it is most certain that men ouer-ruled by their affections, are either in
trouble feeble, and effeminate, or wickedly delperate, having in them no
spiritual strength to sustain it.

And for the connection of these words with the former, The connection of these
words with the former.
the Apostle slides in here cunningly from the first part of his Treatise into
the second, and that by way of answering an objection: for it might have been
said unto him, ye have called us the Sons of God, and the heirs of God, but
how can that be, our present estate and condition being so hard, and our life
so full of troubles? To this he answers, it is very true that I have said ye
are not only the Sons of God, but the Heirs of God, but conditionally, that
first ye suffer with Christ, before ye can come to the fruition of the
inheritance with him; so that the same argument taken from our afflictions,
which nature uses to impugn our adoption, the Apostle uses it to confirm us
so much the more in the certainty thereof. The words are to be read not
caus^liter, but conditionaliter, by way of annexed condition, not as if our
present sufferings were meriting causes of our glorification, but as conditions
which the members of Christ must accept, which are to be glorified with him,
for we go by tribulations as by a strait and narrow way, unto the top of the
mountain of God, wherein that treasure of eternal life, which is the lawful
conquest of Jesus Christ, but in regard of us is the free gift of God, shall be
communicated unto us.

In this treatise of comfort against the Cross, the Apostle Three principal
arguments against the Cross contained in this Treatise.
delivers unto us many arguments of Consolation, which we may reduce to these
three. The first is taken from the end of our afflictions; if we suffer with
him we shall also be glorified with him: and this he continues and amplifies to
the 26. verse. The second argument is taken from that present help which the
spirit ministers unto us in all our afflictions; likewise the spirit also helps
our infirmities, etc. verse 26. The third is, that our afflictions are means
by which we are brought to a conformity with Christ, whereunto GOD in his
eternal counsel has predestined us, and so are not able to preiudge our
salvation, but by the contrary must of necessity work for the furtherance,
and advancement thereof unto us; and this is set down verse 28 Also we know
that all things, etc. and confirmed to the 31. verse.

It is not without cause that the Apostle takes so great Our nature abhorres
affliction.
pains to confirm us against affliction, because our nature abhorres nothing
more then it. When Jesus went up to the mountain to preach, all his Disciple,
went with him, but when he went to mount Caluarie to suffer they all fled from
him; he has many Disciples to follow him by profession, but few to follow him
by patient suffering. It was Satan's voice in Peter to our blessed Savior,
when he made mention of his ^uffering, Master pity thy self; and it is his
daily voice in our corrupt nature, so often as we are called to suffering, O man
pity thy self; but the answer given by the head, were also good to be given
by the members, go b^ hi^^^ me Satan: he knows very well, partly by the
quickness of his natural wit, and partly by long experience, being now very
near six thousand years old, that man likes nothing worse then the Cross.
Skin for skin, and all that a man has Job. 2. 4.
(says he) will he give for his life, etc. He has told us himself wherein
his strength lies, to wit, that by trouble he preuailes most to make man
impatient, and so drive him to blaspheme God. And therefore most of all we are
to confirm our weakness against the Cross, since in it the enemy of our
salvation places his principal strength. Let us hearken to the Apostle, who
as a minister of Jesus indeed, and a heavenly Physician, sent to us from the
Lord our God, does here temper the b^tter waters of Marah, and make them sweet
unto all the Israel of God.

The first argument of comfort is set down in this latter The first principal
argument against the Cross^ is from the end of our afflictions.
end of the 17. Verse, and it is taken partly from the nature of our
sufferings, they are sufferings with Christ, and partly from the end thereof,
which is to reign with Christ in glory. Here first we learn that suffering
must go before glory: the husbandman must labor before he receive the
fruits, neither is he that strives for a maisterie crowned, except 2 Timothy ^ 8.
he strive as he ought. The Prince of salvation was consecrated by
affliction, it behooved him first to suffer and then to enter into his kingdom.
All that profess him are desirous with the sons of Zebedeus, to sit some at
his right hand, and some at his left, but are not so content to drink of his
cup, and be baptized with his baptism. Volunt omnes Bernard.
t^ frui, at non ita and imitari, conregnare cupiunt, sed non compati: they
would all enjoy thee, knowing that pleasures for evermore are at thy right
hand, but are not content to follow thee, they all desire to reign with thee,
but not so to suffer with thee: but this is a preposterous way, it is to divide
those things which the Lord here has joined together, except first we suffer
with him, we shall not hereafter reign with him.

Secondly, let us mark here the different courses of the Different courses of
the Christian and worldling.
Christian and worldling, the Christian by temporal trouble goes on to
eternal glory, the worldling by temporal glory goes on to eternal shame. If
ye go to the School of Jesus, the first A B C of religion taught you there,
will be this, If any man will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, Mat. 10.
38.
take up his Cross and follow me: if ye go to the School of Satan, the
first A B C of Atheism taught there is this, All the kingdoms of the world
will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. The Lord Jesus
through light and momentanie afflictions, leads his children to an infinite
weight of glory; but Satan through the present perishing pleasure of sin,
leads his miserable captives to everlasting pain: therefore it is said by our
Savior of the one, blessed Math. 5.
are ye that mourn, for ye shall be comforted: and of the other, woe be to
you that laugh now, for ye shall wail and Luke. 6. 25.
weep.

As there is no comparison between these two, so blessed The end of the
Christian is better than his beginning, not so with the worldling. Psalm.
shall we be if we make choice of the best. Moses esteemed the rebuke of
Christ, greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; because he had respect to
the recompense of reward: and shall not we rejoice in our present afflictions,
considering they are the way unto our glory? if we sow in tears, we shall
reap in joy. The end of the godly is better than their beginning, for the
light of the righteous increases Pro.
more and more, like the Sun unto the noone day, they begin with tears, and
they end with joy: but the light of the wicked is like unto the light of a
candle, it shines for a while and incontinent ends in stinking smoke: as
Beltasars Dan.
banquet was concluded with a cup of wrath, so all the pleasures of the wicked
ends in pain. At that banquet in Cana, the Lord Jesus brought in the finest
wine hindmost, John.
but Satan does with his miserable banquetters, as the gouerners of that feast
speaks, he presents his best first, and after when they have well drunken,
brings in that which is worse; in the entry he presents the deceitful
pleasures of sin, but doleful and lamentable is their end: for what better
portion can he give unto them, than is prepared for himself? he is reserved to
blackness of darkness, tribulation, and anguish of Spirit, terror and
horrible wrath, shame and endless confusion is prepared for him, and all those
who are portioners with him.

Thirdly, we mark here Gods wonderful dispensation That Gods dearest
servants have bin hardly entreat^d^n this life ye may see in the Patriarcks,
in his working, in that he entreates those men most hardly in this life, who
are most dearly beloved of him, even his sons, and his excellentones. If ye
go up to Abel, ye shall se^ the first sincere worshipper of God mercilesly
murdered by his brother Cain: come down to Abraham, named by the Apostle, the
Father of the Faithful, and ye shall see, albeit the Lord blessed him, yet he
wanted not some to curse him: Moses albeit he was faithful in all the house of
God, and received this praise, that such a Prophet rose not before him, yet how
often was his soul vexed with the unjust murmurings of his people against him?
If ye look to the Prophets, our Savior sets down a compendious description
Prophets,
of their sufferings, in that rebuke of the Jews, whom of the Prophets have
not your fathers killed? and again, when he calls Jerusalem a City which
kills the Prophets, and stoneth them who are sent unto her.

And as for the Apostles, like as they were the witnesses And in the martyrdom
of the Apostles.
of Christ by preaching, so also by suffering. It is recorded by many, that
Peter was beheaded by Nero at Rome, and that his brother Andrew was crucified
with his head downward, by A^geas in Patris, where he hung for the space of
three days, converting many to the faith of Jesus. Saint Luke testifies that
James was beheaded by Herod, and John was banished by Domitian, into the I Will
Pathmos. Phillip borne in Bethsaida, is bound to the Cross, and stoned to
death in Hierapolis. Bartholomew among the Indians, has his skin pulled off,
and so martired by Astiages. Thomas after long preaching to the Medes,
Persians, and Bactrians, is at length thrust through with a spear, because he
refused to worship the Sun, and so strengthened in the faith, dyed for the
Lord Jesus, whose resurrection he could not believe till he put his fingers
into the holes of his side, which was pierced with the spear for him. Simon
the Cananite was slain under Traian, both because he was a Preacher of Jesus
Christ, and accused to be one of the lineage of David. Matthias that was chosen
by lot in the room of Judas, is stoned to death by the Jews. Matthew the
Evangelist beheaded in Egypt and Mark drawn through the streets of
Alexandria, til he dyed. Luke was hanged on the branch of an Olive tree, and
Paul beheaded by Nero.

Of all these first we learn; that we are not to take afflictions Sufferings
are no testimonies of Gods anger.
as testimonies of Gods anger against us, seeing we see that by them, the Lord
has exercised his best beloved servants ever from the beginning: wherefore
shall we think strange concerning the fiery trial, if the Lord should send 1
Pet. 4. 12.
it among us to prove us, as if some strange thing were come unto us, seeing
affliction now is vita trita, a trodden path by all the godly that have gone
before us, and therefore let us not refuse the chastising of the Almighty.

Secondly, let us not fear least by affliction the light of Other Kingdoms
are weakened with trouble, but the kingdom of Christ increases by it.
the Gospel should be extinguished. It is not with the kingdom of Christ, as
with other kingdoms, they are weakened and worn at the length by trouble, but
it increases and flourishes by it. Where other trees wither in Winter, the
Palm continues green; other bushes are burnt with fire, but the bush wherein
Jehovah appears is not consumed thereby; other barks are ouerturned by the
vehement inundation of waters, but the Ark of the Lord thereby is exalted.
Neither is the Lord a prodigal vvaster of the lives of his Children, but a
wise and provident bestower of them, then only when he sees that their death
may be more profitable to his glory, their comfort, and edification of his
Church, then their life can be. Therefore said Tertullian that the blood of the
Martyrs was the seed of the Church, and after him Cyprian marked it, quo plus
sanguinis effusum Cip. de dupli. martyr.
est, eo magis fidelium effloruit multitudo, that the more Christian blood was
shed, the more the multitude of believers flourished: so that the Roman Empire
was not so much enlarged in the space of two hundred and forty years, by the
violent shedding of the blood of others, as was the Church of Christ by
patient suffering the shedding of her own blood, that fruitful Vine which
has sprung out from that blessed stock Jesus Christ, the more it was cut by
the bloody knife of cruel persecuters, the more has it flourished.

Again, we have here this comfort, that the sufferings The wicked have
crosses, but not Christ's Cross.
of the godly are sufferings with Christ. There is no man in the world, who
wants his own cross; even they who have their fattest portions in earth, have
it not without many sorrows, by virtue of that curse, in the sweat of thy brow
G^n. 3. 19. Barn. apol. ad Abbat. G^un
^halt thou eat bread, till thou return to the earth: and herein they are but
miserable, vae portantibus Crucem and non sequentibus Christum, woe is unto
them, who bear the cross and follow not Christ; comfortless, fruitless and
endless will their sufferings be. But as for the Godly, they are sufferers
with Christ, they suffer not alone; if Joseph go to the prison, the Lord shall
go with him; if the three Children go to the fire, the fourth like the son
of God shall go with them. God the Father protests that in all the troubles of
The three persons of the Trinity are said to suffer with the Godly.
his Children he was troubled, and that he has such a tender feeling of their
afflictions, that he who touches them, touches the apple of his eye: and the
Lord Jesus the son of God, when his Saints at Damascus were persecuted, cried
from heaven to the persecuter, Saul, Saul, why persecutest Acts 9. 4.
thou me. And as concerning the holy Ghost, the Apostle testifies. Blessed are
ye if ye be ratled upon for the name of 1 Pet. 4. 14.
Jesus, for the Spirit of God and of glory rests on you: which on their part is
evil spoken of, but on your part is glorified. Thus we see, quam magnos
habeamus commilitones, how great and Cir. catec. 16
strong fellow-warriours we have to assist; the Lord being so present with us,
non vt seruos suos spectet tantum, sed vt Cip. lib. 2. Epist. 6.
ipse luctetur in nobis, that he does not only behold his servants in their
conflicts, but he himself also does wrestle in them.

Wherefor our further comfort, if any man be desirous to Three things required
to make our sufferings sufferings with Christ.
know, whether if his sufferings be sufferings with Christ or not, let him
consider these three things: first, how Jesus received the Cross as a cup
given to him out of his Fathers hand, neither looking to Judas that betrayed
him, nor to the Jews that pursued him. Secondly, he received it not
grudgingly nor impatiently, but with an humble submission of his will, to the
will of his Father. Thirdly, he suffered for this end, that he might abolish
sin, and destroy him who had the power of death. If these three concur in thy
sufferings, thou may be sure they are sufferings with Christ: first, if
passing by the instrument of thy trouble, thou look to the hand of God,
tempering and giving it unto thee: secondly, if thou receive it with a humble
submission of thy spirit to him who is the Father of Spirits: and thirdly, if
it work in thee a mortification of thy sinful lusts and affections.

And of this we have to make our use in all our afflictions Comfort against
inward Afflictions.
inward, or outward: and first concerning inward afflictions, if at any time it
please the Lord to exercise us with fearful agonies of Conscience, let us
look unto GOD, who kills and makes alive, who casts down and raises up; let us
for a while bear his indignation, he abides but a moment in his anger: if we
find that by them we are more humbled, wakened out of security, and stirred
up more fervently to pray, and that the life of sin is weakened in us, let us
be out of all doubt, that these inward troubles are sufferings with Christ;
whose soul for our sins was heavy unto the death, and his body did sweat
blood, through the vehement anguish of his spirit. And as for outward
sufferings, Comfort against outward Afflictions which we suffer either in
name, Ambrose.
they are either such as concerns our Name, our goods, or our persons. As for
those which concern our name: it is a singular policy of Satan, to bear
down the children of God, in the estimation of others, vt qui conscientiae
suae luce clarescunt, alienis rumoribus sordidentur, that they who are glorious
in the light of their own conscience, may be made filthy by the false reports
of others, and so made unprofitable to do others the good that they would: but
let us in such tentations learn from David, to look unto God, and not to
Shimei, using the undeserved contumelies of men, as profitable means to work
in us that inward humiliation, which our manifold sins, though not against
man, yet against God requires of us: so shall we suffer with him, who being
the innocent Lamb of God, sustained nevertheless great contradiction of
sinners, reproched to be one possessed with a D^^ell, notwithstanding that h^e
was the very son of God, filled in his manhood with the holy Ghost.

And as concerning the loss of worldly goods, who ever Or in our goods.
be the instrument, learn thou to take it as a cup out of the hand of thy
heavenly Father, after the example of I^b, who passing by the Sabeans and the
Caldeans, looked to the hand ^^ God, the Lord has given, and the Lord has
taken, (says Job. 1. 21.
he) blessed be the name of the Lord. It is not for lack of love that the
mother withdrawes from the Child the use of the pap but that she may acquaint
him with stronger meat: and if the Lord take from us these transitory things,
it is not because we are not beloved of him, but that we may set our hearts
upon those things which are more weighty and permanent; which if we do then
are our sufferings, sufferings with him, who being rich became poor, that in
all things we might be made rich in him.

And the same are we to do in those troubles which we Or in our persons. Heb.
12. 9.
sustain in our bodies: for if (as the Apostle says) we have had Fathers of
our bodies who have corrected us, and we have given them reverence, should we
not much rather be in subjection to the father of Spirits that we might live?
and if we can yield our bodies to Physicians to be cut or burnt at their
pleasure, how much more should we submit them to the Lord in all humble
contentment to be chastised, as he will? seeing he protests himself he does
it not, but for our singular profit, that we might be partakers of his
holiness.

We shall reign with Christ.] Worldlings wrestles for their In trouble it is
expedient to look unto the end thereof.
corruptible crown, as uncertain whether they shall obtain it or no, but it
is not so with the Christian, we run not as uncertain, we are sure that if
we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with him: though for the present no
trouble be sweet yet is the end thereof most comfortable; and we are by the
eyes of faith to look unto it, least our present manifold tentations drive us
unto impatience, for as he that going through a strong running river is in
danger to fall and drown by reason of the dissinesse of his brain, unless
he six his eyes upon the bancke; so shall we be ready to saint in affliction,
unless we look to the comfortable end thereof. If we shall look to Lazarus
upon the dunghill, and Joseph in the prison, what can we judge them to be but
miserable men? but if we consider their end, we shall see the one in Abraham's
bosom, and the other reigning in great glory under Pharaoh in Egypt; then
shall we say, verily there is fruit for the righteous, and we shall find it
true, which here the Apostle says, that if we suffer with Christ, we shall
also reign with him.

Verse 18. For I count that the afflictions of this present time are not
worthy of the glory to be revealed.
THe Apostle here subioynes an amplification of Amplification of the first
principal argument.
his first argument: we shall not only (says he) reign with Christ, but
reign in such a glory, as does so far surmount all our present sufferings,
that if they be weighed together in a balance, the one shall be found but light
in regard of the other.

For I count.] The word the Apostle uses here, imports He that tasted both of
present sufferings and of glory to come, gives his judgment here of both.
thus much, after reasoning I conclude, or, after just reckoning this is the
sum which I collect and gather: here then are two circumstances which greatly
amplifies his purpose, one that he sets not down this as an uncertain
opinion, but as a most sure conclusion gathered out of good reason. And again,
that it is the conclusion of such a one, as by experience knew both: what
experience the Apostle had of our present suffering, he tells us, 2 Cor. 11.
what experience he had of the glory to be revealed, he tells us, 2 Cor. 12. so
that his words we are to consider this way, let other men count and reckon as
they will, this is my reckoning, who have proved them both, there is no
comparison between them. What knowledge he had of the weight of our present
sufferings, he tells you by a threefold universality: first* that he had
suffered all kind of crosses, hunger, thirst, cold, nakedness, rods,
stonings, imprisonings: secondly, that he suffered in all places, in the sea,
in the land, in the City, in the wilderness, where ever he came to preach the
Gospel, there was he persecuted by some one sort of trouble or other: thirdly,
that he suffered of all sorts of persons, both of the Gentiles, and of his
own nation, both of open enemies, and of false brethren. Again, as for his
experience of the glory to be revealed, he tells you how he was taken up into
Paradise, and there heard such words as cannot be revealed. This conclusion
therefore is the more The one he tasted in his journey from Jerusalem to
Illiricum, the other in his journey from earth to heaven.
to be esteemed of us, because he who gives out this judgment of the
excellency of the one above the other, is such a one, as had experience of
them both, he made a journey on earth from Jerusalem to Illiricum, all which
way preaching the Gospel, he suffered many afflictions; he made another
journey from earth to heaven whether in the body or out of the body he could
not t^ll, and there he saw that inutterable glory: and comparing with himself
these two together, he gives out this for a final sentence, that all our
present afflictions are but light, in respect of that infinite weight of glory
to be revealed. As for worldlings we are not to stand upon their testimony,
for as he cannot give out right sentence between two parties that hears not
both their causes, so cannot the worldling who knows something both of the
pleasures and sorrows of this life, but nothing of the joys which are to
come, consider how far the life to come is to be preferred before this: and
therefore albeit in the conclusions of his heart he give out sentence in favor
of the life present, we are not to regard it, because he has not heard nor
considered, that which tends to the commendation of the other.

We see then here, how that our strength in trouble is How the certainty of
the glory to come mittigates our present trouble.
greatly increased by the sight, at least by the certainty of that glory which
will be the end of our trouble: this sight made the Apostle count light of his
present sufferings: let Stephen have his eyes in prayer to see the Heavens
opened, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, and he shall not be moved
with the stones which the Jews violently throw at him: let Moses see him who
is invisible, and he shall not fear Pharaoh; let him see that recompense of
reward, and he shall be better contented to suffer rebuke with the people of
God, than to enjoy the treasures of Egypt: this is that which made the Martyrs
stand exulting and rejoicing, even then when Infidels tormented their bodies.
If they had been in the body, they had felt the pain, and it had disquieted
them, nunc vero non mirum si exules a corpore, dolores non sentiant Ber. in
Cant. ser. 61.
corporis, but now no marvel that being out of the body, they felt not the
dolors of the body: and where think ye was then the soul of the Martyr?
certainly in a sure place, even in Petra, in the rock invincible, in the
bowels of Christ, non sua sentit, dum Christi vulner a intuetur, he feels not
his own wounds, while as steadfastly he sixeth his eyes upon the wounds of
Christ, neither will he be afraid for the loss of this life, who has laid
hold upon eternal life, and is made sure of a better.

Let us therefore pray unto God diligently, that our eyes It should make us
despise both the threatenings and allurements of men.
may be opened, to see the riches of that glorious inheritance, that as we
speak and hear of it, so in like manner we may see and feel it, for the
sight thereof makes all trouble easy, yea causes the bitterness of death to
pass away: if the world threaten us with her terrors, let us remember they
are not comparable to Gods terrors; let us Mat. 10. ^8.
not fear them who kills the body, and are able to do no more, but let us
fear him, who is able to cast both soul and body into hell fire. M^na^ur homo
carcerem, and D^us gehennam? for what comparison is here when a man threatens
thee with prison, and God threatens thee with hell? And if again the world
promise reward, and allure us with her pleasures, let us remember they are not
comparable to Gods pleasures. In all such tentations wherein we shall be
solicited to loose a good conscience, for the gain or glory of the world, let
us answer our tempters, as those forty Martyrs answered the Emperors
deputy, who by promising many rewards would have entised them to make
Apostasy from Jesus Christ, putas ne te tantum posse d^re, quantum cripere
contendis? think ye (said they) that ye are able to give us Men cannot give
us so much as they would take from us.
so much, as ye would take from us? non ^ccipimus honorem vnde nobis nascetur
ignominia, we will none of that honor out of which ignomie and shame shall
arise unto us: a worthy answer indeed; for though we should gain the whole
world, and loose our own soul, what recompense can that be unto us?

Afflictions.] The Apostle commonly by two names expresses How afflictions are
Gods wine press to the godly, to press out and make manifest his grace in
them.
our troubles: sometime he calls them (...), and sometime (...), the first name
they receive, in regard of the malice of our persecuters who press us, and are
unto the Godly the wine press of God, to press out that sap and juice of
grace which is in them, which how ever they do for the worst, the Lord turns
it unto the best, making thereby, that grace which lurked in them before,
manifest unto others, like unto the good wine berryes of God, the more they
are pressed, the more the liquor of grace distilleth from them* and the sweeter
fragrant savor of life, to the edification and strengthening of all their
brethren. But let their persecuters know, that how ever this trial But woe to
the instruments of their troubl^s.
of the faith of the godly, shall be found unto their honor and praise, at the
appearing of the Lord Jesus, the fruit which they shall reap of their labor,
is told them by the Apostle, it is a righteous thing with God to render
vengeance to them who troubles you, for every cup of trouble which the wicked
fill unto us, they fill with their own hands another cup of wrath unto
themselves, which how ever for a while they set by them, yet as the Lord lives
they shall be compelled in the end to drink them out: thus we see why our
troubles commonly are called pressings. The other name is sufferings, and so
they are called in respect of the Godly, who bear them like the Lambs of
Jesus, patiently, and meekely, without grudging, or murmuring.

Where we are still to be admonished that the sufferings Every suffering
renders not glory.
which end in glory, are those that are sufferings with Christ, many are
ambitious of suffering, and takes up the cross before they be called unto it,
like those Circumcelliones in the days of Cyprian, but certainly glory grows
not out of every suffering, we must not suffer as contentious men, or vain
glorious: that God will bless an humble flying in trouble, rather than a
presumptuous standing, we may see in Peter if we compare him with the rest of
the Disciples; for he fell more fearfully than the other. It is neither for us
to decline the Cross of our Master, for so we shall be found not to be his
Disciples; neither yet in the heat and pride of flesh undertake to bear it,
least we be found presumptuous, and God punish us. It is properly marked by
Cyprian, that the first Martyrs slain for Christ were Infants, teaching all
that are to come after, what manner of men the Martyrs of Jesus should be,
namely, such as in regard of the cause for which they suffer are innocents, and
in regard of their affection, are meek and simple.

Of this present time.] In the original it is, of the time The time of our
trouble short called an hour or a day. Psalm. 125.
which is now. Hereby the Apostle will teach us that our afflictions are but
short and endures but a while, the rod of the wicked shall not lie for ever
upon the back of the righteous: the time of our trouble in holy Scripture is
called sometime a day of trial, and sometimes an hour of tentation. As our
Savior said to the three Disciples, Can ye not Math. 26. 40.
watch with me one hour? so may he say to us all, as often as we faint under
trouble, Can ye not suffer with me one hour? It was the comfort that
Athanasius gave to the Church in his time, that Julian should be but Nubeculo
cito transitura, a stormy little cloud, that would quickly pass by; and it is
certainly true both of our troubles, and of all the instruments thereof, let us
wait a while on our God with patience, and we shall see them no more.

This shortness of our afflictions depends upon the brevity How our life is
but the life of a moment.
and vanity of our life, which in the estimation of Gods spirit is so short
and vain a thing, that he vouchsafes not the name of life upon it, without
some restriction. Indeed it bewitcheth us so, that in our false imagination we
conceit there is more soliditie and continuance in one year that is before us,
then in ten that are past by us; the time which is past is gone away like a
thought, and that which is to come we think it longer, then indeed by
experience we shall find it. But the spirit of God, who best knows it, gives
unto it the name of life, as I said, with a restriction, he calls it a
momentanie life, it is but a moment wherein we live, if we judge aright we have
no more: for as for the moments which are past, they are dead to thee, and thou
to them, and as for the moments which are to come, they are uncertain, and
thou can not be said to live in them; so that no more is left to thee wherein
thou can truly say I live, but a moment, and this also must shortly go away
and give place to another, that so by succession of moments one unto another,
thy silly life may be prorogued for a while.

But this shall yet better appear, if we consider those similitudes Sacred
similitudes, by which the holy Ghost shadows the vanity of our present life.
Job. 7. 6. Job. 9.
by which the spirit of God describes the vanity of this our mortal life.
Patient Job compares the life of man unto the Weauers shuttle, which scarce is
in at the one end of the web, when it is out at the other, and he that looks
unto it, can hardly perceive it. He compares it also to the wind, that
quickly flies by us; and to the cloud, which speedily vanishes; to a Post that
runs diligently and rests not till he come to his end; to an hungry Eagle in
the air, who seeing her pray a far off flies speedily upon it; to a flower
that flourishes at once, but withers in continent; and Job. 14.
last of all to a ship sailing in the sea before the wind, which for the
present is seen, but within short space appears no more, yea does not leave
behind her any footstep or token that any such thing was there; and as it is
with them who sail in her, that how ever they change their action, yet go
they on in their course toward their wished Haven: so is it with us, do what
we will, whether we eat, or we sleep, we are hasting always toward our ends.
The Psalmist again compares our life to a spanne or hand breadth: to the
grass Psalm. 90.
which grows up in the morning, and is cut down in the evening: to a sleep
which slips away before we can know what we were doing in it: to a dream,
which of all things is most sickle and vain: to a thought, which is not well
begun, when it is ended: and last of all to a declyning shadow, as is the
shadow of the Sun in the setting, which a man shall see on the top of a
mountain less and less, vanishing till it be no more. The Apostle S. Paul
compares our life to a race, and S. James compares it to a smoke or vapor.

Thus we see how little the spirit of God esteems of that, The pleasures of
this life are worme-eaten.
whereof all the sons of Adam accounts so much. Our sin has shortened our
days, and made them miserable; the pleasures of this life are worme-eaten, and
the glory of flesh is but like the gourd of Jonas, which the one day grows
up, and the next day is consumed by the worms. If Solomon who proved all the
pleasures this life could yield, after trial of them, cried out all is
vanity; if Job when his wealth had worn from him, looking to his fore-passed
days was compelled to conclude, I have had for inheritance Job. 14. 5.
the mouth^ of vanity: what, shall we look to find more comfort in this
wretched life, than those men of God before us have found? let us not think
it, if we seek our comfort in her perishing gain or glory, we shall lament
at the last; we have fished all night, and have taken nothing; we have wearied
our selves, and it does not profit us.

O what a silly life is this* quae viuendo decresit, which in living wears
away, and that which is worse, not only suddenly goes away, but also
transeundo nos terit, wearies us in He has fewest years who has lived most
years.
the going by, and makes us ever the longer the less: the more of her days
this miserable life has lent thee, the fewer thou have. Worldlings accounts
them who are aged men of most years, but that they count wrong shall be made
clear by this similitude: I admit, that one who had in his purse ten thousand
pounds, has wasted all to one, will any man speaking of him, call him for that
a man of great riches? the most they can say, if they speak in truth, is that
once he was wealthy, but now is become poor. It might have been said of him
who now is aged, when he came first into the world, that he was a man of many
years, for then he had fifty, sixty or seauenty years, as it pleased God to
number them to thee, before to be spent, but now the more of these years thou
have received, the fewer thou have remaining unto thee, so deceivable a thing
is this life, that when she gives us most, she leaves us least, Non enim
accedunt nobis anni, sed discedunt, for years do not so come to us that they
bide with us, but that they go from us.

Are not worthy.] The word is used to express things The word exponed.
which being waighed in a balance are found equal, and so his meaning is,
that our present sufferings are not of equal weight with that glory. We will
not here stand out of this place to dispute against the doctrine of merits,
which might be destroyed by an argument a consequenti, only we will answer
that sophistical reason, which the Jesuits in their marginall notes on this
place use to stablish it: the works of Christ cannot be denied to be
meritorious, for the works of men are the works of Christ, being done in them
by the spirit of Christ, therefore are they meritorious. That the works of
Christ are meritorious we deny not, understanding Only the personal works
of Christ are meritorious.
thereby his personal works, that is, those which as Mediator he did in his
own person, in his own blessed body, while he was upon earth: he bare the
punishment of our sins, by the once offering up of his blessed body upon the
Cross, he made an atonement for us, and satisfied his Fathers justice, by
himself he has made the purgation of our sins, and so in his own body has
finished and perfected that action of meriting; there needs no more to be
done, neither by himself in his own body, nor by himself in the bodies of
his children, for meriting grace and life to them who are his, then that which
he has done already in his own blessed body.

As for the works therefore which by his holy spirit he Works of grace in
regenerate men are not suppleme^ts of Christ's personal merit.
works in good men, he does them not as supplements to his most perfect
personal merits* for so his personal merits should be found insufficient,
which were blasphemy to think: but he works them in the godly as effects of
his virtue, whereby he communicates to them those benefits, which once in his
own person he has perfectly merited, to wit, righteousness, and life, and
that for the beginning and finishing of their conformity with him.

Secondly, those works which Christ by his Spirit works They are not pure and
perfect.
in us, are in such sort wrought by him, that they are not wrought without us,
and therefore cannot be perfectly holy, and consequently meritorious. As the
fountain is so must the water of the spring be; as we our selves are so must
our works be: we our selves in a great part are unclean, and unregenerate,
what work then perfectly clean and holy can be done by us?

But leaving them and their error, let us mark here Our present vain and
sinful pleasures requited with an infinite weight of wrath.
for our instruction, that the inequality between our present sufferings and
that glory, consists in these two, the one are light and momentane, the other
of an infinite weight, and eternal: and as our sufferings for these respects
are not worthy of the glory to be revealed, so are not the present perishing
pleasures of sin, of any worth to be compared with that infinite weight of
eternal wrath which is due to them. As the seven years of Famine in Aegipt
did eat up the former seven years of plenty, so shall the endless sorrows
of the wicked, make all their former pleasures to be forgotten: the days shall
come upon them, in the which they shall say, I have no pleasure in them. Oh that
men could consider this double loss they incur by continuing in their
sins; Esau sold his birthright for a mease of pottage; and Adam lost*
Paradise for an apple; and thou more to be lamented, that becomes not wise by
their example, looses like a fool that glory to be revealed, for a flower: for
what better are the best things of the world, than the flower of the Rose,
which wants not the own thorns, and vermin; being plucked in the garden it
withers in thy hand before thou can bring it home to thy house; and yet for
the like of these thou do forgo those things which are above, and more then
that redeemes those shadows, by bringing upon thy self that infinite weight
of wrath, which is to be upon all the children of disobedience.

Of the glory.] The end of our present sufferings here we see it is glory. Ye
shall weep and lament (says our Savior) and the world shall rejoice, ye
shall sorr^w, but your sorrow John. 16. 20.
shall be turned into joy. Sometime God gives his children notable comfort
before trouble, as Elias received a double Comfort comes sometime before
trouble, sometime in trouble, but always after trouble, to the godly.
portion before his forty days fasting; Peter, James and John saw the glory of
Christ transfigured on Mount Tabor, before they saw his fearful and bloody
sweat in the garden; it pleased the Lord by the sight of the one to confirm
them, that the sight of the other should not confound them. Sometime again the
Lord in the midst of trouble gives his children such comfort, as deuoures all
their present sorrows; to Peter in the prison there appeared an Angel, and a
light shining round about him; and Jacob banished from his Fathers house, sees
a more comfortable vision at Bethel, than any that ever he had seen at home:
but albeit the Lord deals not always with all his children, as he did with
these, yet are they all sure of this comfort, glory shall be the end of their
sufferings.

To be revealed. The Apostle calls it a glory to be revealed, Our glory is
prepared but not revealed.
he tells us in another place, that it is prepared already, yea, it was
prepared before the foundation of the world, but it is not yet revealed:
beatitudo illa comparari hic Aug. de Sanct^s. ser. 46.
potest, possideri non potest, that felicity may be obtained here, but cannot
be possessed here. Ne itaque quaeras in via, quod tibi seruator in patria,
seek not therefore that in the way, which is kept for thee, till thou come to
thy country: let us possess our Souls in patience, waiting for that, which
in this life is neither revealed, nor can be possessed. Moses besought the Lord
to show him his glory, and he received Exodus 33. 18.
this answer, No man can see it and live: and when that glory filled the
Tabernacle, it is said, that Moses could Exodus 40. 38. Moriamur vt viuamus.
not enter into it. Seeing it is so that our wretched nature can not abide that
glory, and we cannot live and see the Lord; let us prepare our selves with joy
and contentment to dye, that we may see him.

And in the mean time, by that glory which God has Yet by the glory revealed
we may judge of that glory which is not revealed. Aug. de temp. ser. 9. 9.
revealed in his works, let us judge of that which is not revealed; if these
works of God which we see, be so beautiful* what shall we think of those
we see not? out of all doubt, among all the works of God, those which are
invisible, are most excellent, as the body of man is a beautiful work
manship, but not comparable to the soul. This glory I count it the highest
degree of eternal life: the first is, Righteousness; the second, Peace; the
third, Joy; the fourth is Glory: Righteousness breeds Peace, and Peace breeds
Joy, and our Joy shall be crowned with glory: if the doing of the works of
righteousness bring such comfort to the mind, as the godly find in
experience, how shall our comfort abound when we receive the reward of
righteousness, Ber. in Cant. Ser. 47. God is good to them who seek him, much
more unto the^ who find him.
which is Glory? Si sic bonus es quaerentibus te, qualis es assequentibus? if
thou Lord be so good to them who seek thee, what shall thou be to them who
find thee? we may be assured that these first fruits of the Spirit, and the
earnest of our heavenly inheritance, wherein now stands our greatest comfort,
shall appear as nothing, when that mass of glory shall be taken up, and
communicated unto us. As the light of the Sun, when it arises obscures the
light of the Moon and Stars: so that glory when it shall be revealed, shall
obscure those our joys, which now we esteem to be greatest: Adeo enim pulchra
est facies illa, vt illa visa Aug. de temp ser. 49.
nihil aliud possit delectare, for so pleasant is that face of God, that they
who once see it, can be delighted with no other thing. The Queen of the
South heard very much of Salom^ns wisdom and of the glory of his Kingdom,
but as she confesses herself, the half of his glory was not told We shall
see much more in heaven, than we can hear of it.
her; and so shall we one day not only say with the Psalmist, As we have heard,
so have we seen in the City of our God, but shall be compelled to
acknowledge that the glory prepared for us, by innumerable degrees excels all
that ever we heard of it, Semper enim maiora tribuit Deus, quam promittit,
Basil. hexam.
for the Lord our God gives always greater things than he promises.

And yet albeit we cannot speak of it as we should, let Meditation of the
Glory to come recommended to us.
us meditate upon it as we may, where the Apostle is silent, who can speak?
when he was ravished to the third heavens, he heard such words as he could
not utter: and again, the eye never saw, the ear never heard those things
which God has prepared for them who love him: facil^^s inuenimus quid ibi non
sit, quam quid sit, it is more easy to Aug. de verb. dom. ser. 64.
tell what that life is not, than to tell what it is: yet certainly the Lord
would never use it as an argument to comfort us in trouble, were it not that it
is his will that we exercise our minds in the consideration thereof. When the
Lord first promised to give Abraham the land of Canaan for inheritance, he
commanded him to rise, and walk through the land to view the length and the
breadth thereof, albeit he was not to put him in a present possession thereof,
yet the Lord will have him to view it, that the sight of that which GOD had
promised, might sustain and comfort him, till the day of possession came: so
we, though we be not presently to be entered into possession of our
heavenly* Canaan, yet seeing the Lord has so commanded us, let us now and then
go with Moses to the top of Pisgah, and view it; that is, let us separate
our souls from the earth, and ascend by prayer and spiritual meditation, and
delight our selves with some sight of that land, as it shall please the Lord to
give it unto us.

There are four principal names by which the holy Our estate in heaven
expressed under four most comfortable names.
Spirit in Scripture expresses that felicity of the Saints of God in heaven:
first, it is called a life, and such a life, as is eternal: secondly, it is
called a glory, and such a glory as is a crown of glory, and that of infinite
weight: thirdly, it is called a kingdom, and such a kingdom as cannot be
shaken: Heb. 12. 28.
fourthly, it is called an inheritance, and such an inheritance, as is
immortal, undefiled, and that fades not away. Tell O man what is it thine
heart would have? Is there any thing thou love better than life? is there
any better life, then a life of glory? is there any greater glory, than a
kingdom of glory? is there any surer kingdom than that which is thine by the
right of an immortal and permanent inheritance? and yet these are the
excellent things provided and reserved for them who patiently suffer with the
Lord Jesus Christ.

But to insist in the words here used by the Apostle* let Four things marked
here concerning the life to come.
us consider in them these four things. First, the excellency of it in the
word, glory. Secondly, the eternity of it, which is to be collected of the
secret opposition made between it and our present sufferings which are now.
Thirdly, the manifestation of it, in this that he says, it is yet to be
revealed. Fourthly, the verity and soliditie of it, in that he says, it is to
be revealed in us.

First then the excellency of that life is to be considered, 1 The excellency
of it.
in the word glory. There shall be there no base nor contemptible thing, all
shall be glorious that is there, and our estate then shall be an estate of
glory. Now we see the Lord but through a veil and in a mirror, but then we
shall see the Lord face to face, and shall in such sort behold his glory, that
we shall be transformed into it. This change as witnesses the Apostle, is
begun by the sight of God which we have in the Gospel, for even now we
behold as in a mirror the glory of the Lord with open face, and are changed
from glory to glory by the same image, by the spirit of the Lord, but in heaven
this change shall be perfected, and we shall be fully transformed into his holy
similitude, so that nothing shall be left in us, but that which is his own
workmanship. O how has the Lord magnified his mercy toward us! he has raised
our honor from the dust, and delivered our souls for the lower hell, and has
made us to sit with himself in the highest places, where we shall be filled
with the joys which are at his right hand; we shall drink of the rivers of
his pleasures; in his light we shall see light, and be transchanged by the
light of his countenance.

Moses was forty days with GOD upon Mount Sinai, Forty days company with
God changed the face of Moses, how much more? etc
and his face shined so brightly, that when he came down the people of Israel
might not behold him; if forty days remaining with God did so transchange
him, how shall we be changed, who shall for ever abide with him, and never any
more come down from him? Our Savior Christ says, that the face of the just
shall shine in that day, like the Sun in the firmament. O what glory shall be
among them all, when the glory of one shall be like the brightness of the
Sun? et qualis tunc erit splendour animarum, quando solis habebit claritatem
Aug. ad frat. in Erem.
lux corporum? and when the light of that body shall be like unto the light of
the Sun, how great think ye shall be the shining light of the soul? Those
three disciples If our bodies shall shine as the Sun, what shall our souls
be?
that were with our Lord upon Mount Tabor, were so filled with joy, at the
glance of his glory which they saw, that they wished they might bide there
for ever; how then shall we be ravished, when we shall see that full
manifestation of his glory? we shall never desire to remove out of that
mountain of God: another heart shall be given us, and we shall become other
men then we are: so that as a little drop of water powered into a great vessel
full of wine, loses both the taste and color of water, and becomes wine, or
as iron put into the fire takes on after a sort, the nature of fire, and as the
air illuminated with the bright shining Sun, seems not so much to be
illuminated, as to be light it self: so our souls and bodies, when the glory
of God shall shine upon them, shall be so wonderfully transchanged, that after
a sort, we shall become partakers of the divine nature.

Beside this the excellency of that glory shall yet better appear, All the
companions in that glory, are first borne, all noble me^, of strength and
dignity.
if we consider the companions with whom we shall be glorified: there is the
congregation of the first borne, al of them are men of excellent strength, and
dignity, not of base lineage, but noble indeed; for by their second birth they
are the Sons of God, and brethren of the Lord Jesus. The Citizens of Tyrus
are described by Esaias to have been companions to Princes; but in that heavenly
Jerusalem, every Citizen is a crowned King, and none but Kings, are freemen of
that city, knit among themselves by the band of one Spirit, into so holy a
communion, that every one of them accounts the joy, and glory of his brethren,
an increase of his own joy. It is not there as here upon earth, where the The
glory of one of them augments the glory of another.
joy of one is the cause of sorrow to another: the light of the Sun darkneth
the Moon, and the light of the Moon obscureth the light of the Stars; if the
one half of the earth be illuminated, the other is left in darkness: but
there the light of one augments the light of another, the glory of one shall be
the glory of all, every one of them rejoicing, not only because the lightsome
countenance of God shines upon themselves, but also because they see their
brethren admitted to the fruition of the same glory.

But among all those, with whom we shall be glorified, Specially the sight of
Jesus, Lord of that family, shall increase our joy.
there is one companion of our glory, who above all the rest shall breed us
exceeding delectation, Jesus Christ the man: O with what boldness and
spiritual rejoicing, shall we stand in among the holy Angels, when we
shall see the Lord of the house, the Prince of glory, clothed with our nature?
Now we are sure that our Redeemer lives, and we shall at the last day see him
in our flesh, we our selves shall see him, our eyes shall behold him, and none
other for us; and herein is our comfort, that albeit as yet we have not seen
him, we love him, and rejoice in him with joy unspeakable, and glorious.

And of this arises unto us some resolution of that doubt Whether we shall
know one another in heaven or not.
which commonly is moved, whether one of us shall know another in heaven or no?
shall we know the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Apostles? it is true that
these natural delights which now we have one of us in another shall vanish:
(yet as I have said) the joy that shall arise unto us of the glorification of
others, leads us to think that we shall know them. Peter, James, and John,
did they not know Moses and Elias talking with the Lord Jesus, albeit they had
never seen them before? and did not Adam so soon as he wakened out of his
sleep, know Euah that she was bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh,
albeit he had never seen her before? and shall we think that the second Adam
restores less knowledge to his redeemed, than they lost in the first Adam?
The consideration of the place shows the greatness of that glory.


Last of all, the consideration of the place wherein we shall be glorified,
will lead us to consider the excellency of that glory. As for the place, our
Savior sometime calls it Paradise, there being no meeter place in the earth
to shadow it, then was that Garden of Eden, the habitation of man in the state
of innocence: sometime he calls it his fathers house, wherein are many
mansions: sometime the everlasting habitations. The Apostle calls it the
third heavens; a house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. We
see in this composition of the world, that finest things are situate in highest
places; the earth as grosest is put in the lowest room, the water above the
earth, the air above the water, the fire above the air, the spheres of
heaven, purer then any of them, above the rest; but the place of our glory is
above them all, in the heaven of heavens, which does not only note the
excellent purity thereof, but shows also what excellent purity is required in
all them who are to inhabit it.

There are three places (says one) wherein the sons Three places of our
residence: the first is our mothers womb, the second is the earth, the third
is the heavens.
of God at three sundry times makes residence, according to Gods good pleasure.
The first is in our mothers womb: the second is this Earth: the third is that
palace of glory which is above: from the first the Lord has brought us to
the second, and from the second we rest in hope that the Lord ^n his own good
time will bring us to the third. If we compare these three together in time,
in bounds, and in beauty, we shall find the second does not so far excel
the first, as the third excels the second. The ordinary time of our remaining
in our mothers womb is nine Compared together in time.
months, the time of our soiourning in our second house is far longer,
threescore and ten times twelve months, but in our third house neither days,
months, nor years, shall be reckoned unto us, for it is the place of our
everlasting habitation.

If again we compare them in bounds and largeness of Compared in bounds.
place, we shall find, that as the belly of a woman is but of narrow
bounds, in regard of this ample universe, so this is nothing in comparison of
that high palace, wherein are innumerable mansions, prepared for many
thousands of elect men and Angels. For if one star be more than the whole
earth, what is the firmament which contains so many stars? and if the
firmament be so large, what shall we think of the heaven of heavens, which
has no limits, within which it is bounded?

And last, if we compare them in beauty and pleasure, Compared in beauty and
pleasure.
O then what a difference shall arise! when thou wast in thy mothers belly,
though thy body was endued with those same organes of senses, yet what saw
thou, or heardest thou there? every sense wanting the own natural object
could breed thee no delight: but this thy second house, thou see it
replenished with variety of all necessary and pleasant things, no sense
wanting innumerable objects, that may delight thee; and yet all the beauty and
pleasure of this earth is as far inferior to that which is above, as it is
superior to that which the infant had in the mothers belly. The firmament
which is the seeling of our second house, The seeling of our second house is
but the pauement of our third house
beautified with the Sun, Moon, and Stars set in it by the hand of God,
and shining more gloriously, than all the precious stones in the world, shall be
no other thing, but the nether side of the pauement of our Palace. John the
Baptist sprung for joy in the belly of his mother Elizabeth, when Luke 1. 14.
the Lord Jesus came into the house, in the womb of his mother Mary, but
afterward when he saw the Lord Jesus more clearly face to face, and pointed
him out with the finger, behold the Lamb of God; when he stood by him, as
John 1. 36.
a friend, and heard the voice of the Bridegroom he rejoiced in another
manner: so in very truth all the rejoicing that we have in the house of our
pilgrimage, is but like the springing of John Baptist in the mothers womb, in
comparison of those infinite joys wherewith we shall be replenished, when we
shall meet with our bridegroom in our Fathers house, wherein we shall see
him face to face and abide with him for ever.

It is written of Ahashuerus that he made a great banquet Ahashuerus banquet
not comparable to our marriage banquet.
to his Princes and Nobles, which lasted for the space of an hundred and
fourscore days, and when he had done with that, he made another banquet to
his Commons, for the space of seven days; the place was the outmost court of
the Kings Palace; the Tapestry was of all sorts of colors, Esth. 1.
white, green, and blew, fastened with cords of fine linen and purple, through
rings and pillars of silver, and marble; the beds were of gold and silver; the
pauement of porphire, marble, alablaster, and blew color, the vessels wherein
they drank were all of Gold* all this he did, that he might show the glory
of his kingdom, and the honor of his majesty. If a worm of the earth has
done so much for declaring his begged glory, as ravished men into admiration
thereof, how I pray you shall the Lord our God the great King, declare his
glory? when he shall make his banquet, cover his Table, and gather his
Princes, that is, his Sons, thereunto, not for a few days but for ever; not
in the outmost Court, but in the inner Court of his Palace? Surely no tongue
can express it: for seeing he has decked this If the outward court of Gods
palace be so furnished as we see, what is the inner?
world wherein we soiourne, and which I have called the outmost Court of
this Palace, in so rich and glorious manner, that he has ordained lights both
by day and night to shine in it, and has prepared a storehouse of Fowls in
the air, another of Beasts in the earth, and the third of Fishes in the Sea,
for our necessity; beside innumerable pleasures for delectation; what glory,
and variety of pleasures may we look for, when he shall separate us fully
from the children of wrath, and assemble us all into the inner Court of his
own Palace, into the chamber of his presence? we may well think with the
Apostle, that the heart of man is not able to understand those things, which
God has prepared for us; and therefore will rest with David, Psalm. 65.
Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to come unto thee, he shall
dwell in thy Courts, and be satisfied with the pleasures of thine house.

This being spoken as concerning the excellency of that 2 The eternity of it.
life, in that it is called a life of glory: the next thing to be considered
here, is the eternity thereof: for there is here a secret opposition between
our present sufferings, of which the Apostle here says, they are but for now,
and between that Glory which 2 Cor. 4 he calls eternal, but herein we insist
not, having spoken of it before.

The third thing concerning this Glory here touched, 3 The claritie and
perspicuitie of it. Col. 3. 3. 1 John 3.
is the claritie and perspicuitie thereof, ^t shall b^ revealed, and not
obscured any more, as now it is. Now our life is hid with Christ in God. Now
are we the sons of God, but it appears not what we shall be. As our head
being the God of glory, came into the world in the shape of a servant, so his
members live here in earth in a contemptible estate, far inferior to their
glory: therefore Gregory Nazianzen compares the Man's life on earth a stage play
wherein men are disguised, seeming to be that which they are not.
life of man upon earth, to a stage play, wherein oftentimes the gentleman
appears in a beggars weed, and the beggar comes in with the royal robe and
scepter of a King; in the time of action they cannot be discerned, the
honorable person being disguised is evil entreated, as if no honor were due
unto him, and he is placed in the seat of honor, who is not a man of honor:
but when the play is done, and the disguising garments laid away, then every
man is known to be such as indeed he is, and returns to his own place: it is
even so in this present world, the sons of GOD appear in most contemptible
shapes, and on the other part none more honorable than those of whom we may
say Psalm.
with the Psalmist, when they are exalted it is a shame for the sons of men
But when the play shall be ended, the maskes and vailes shall be taken from the
faces of men, and every one shall appear that which he is: the beggarly
garment of Lazarus shall be taken from him, he shall be declared to be the
son of God, and gathered unto Abraham's bosom; the purple garment of the rich
glutton, shall in like manner be laid aside, and then he who seemed honorable
in the world, shall be sent unto hell, and covered with shame and confusion.

The last thing to be considered here, concerning this 4 The verity and
soliditie of it, it is within us.
glory, is the verity and soliditie thereof: it shall not only be revealed
unto us, but says the Apostle it shall be revealed in us. (...). Where we have
to put a difference between the glory of a Christian, and the vain glory of
the worldling, Psalm.
the glory of Jerusalem is within; the Kings daughter is all glorio^s within,
but the glory of worldlings is without them, for they either place their glory
in the multitude of their attendants, the glory of a King, consists in the
multitude of Pro. 13.
his subjects, if they have no people to honor and obey them, their glory goes
to the ground; or in the testimony and commendation of men, counting it their
glory to be praised of men. As the Camelion lives on the air, so live they on
Silly glory of worldlings is without them, either in their followers,
the breath of other men's mouths; if men commend them, they are puffed up, if
men speak evil of them, they are cast down. O silly glory that is made up
and down by the breath of another man's mouth, surely it can neither be
steadfast nor stable. For as the Moon stands never in one state, but changes
continually, because it has no light of the own, but borrowes it from the
Sun, and therefore shines more or less, as it is in aspect with the Sun,
so is it with them whose glory depends upon the testimony of others, their
greatness is made up or down, according to the praise or dispraise of men,
but he who with Job knows that his witness is in heaven, will place all his
rejoicing in the testimony of a good Conscience, for that which at length will
be our glory, must be revealed unto us.

Others again are so foolishly vaine*glorious, that they Or in their gorgeous
garments.
place their glory in their garments. This is a begd and vanishing glory; from
the Worms man borrowes silks, to decore him; from the shel-fish Pearls; from
the earth silver and gold; from the Sheep, wool to be his garment; from the
Oxen their skin, to be his shoes; from the Fowls feathers, to dress him
like a fool: Thus being clad like Herod on his birthday, he would seem to
be an honorable man, foolishly rejoicing in that which is the witness of his
shame, and should be the matter of his humiliation: thus men having lost that
glory which GOD gave them in the beginning, solicit huc and illuc circumeunt
aliunde sibi Chri. in Mat. hom. 4.
gloriam colligentes omni irrisione dign^ssimam, runs up and down with great
care gathering from other things a glory to themselves, most worthy to be
scorned.

Now to conclude, as we have some way seen the greatness Use of this
doctrine is to move us to exchange things present with things to come.
of this glory prepared for us, so are we to labor to have our hearts inflamed
with such a love and desire thereof that we may despise the best things of this
earth as doung, and account the greatest glory of flesh, to be as withering
grass in comparison of it, and may resolve patiently to bear, yea, and to
rejoice in our present afflictions, under hope of that glory to be revealed in
us. There is no man we see that will refuse to change for the better, he
exchanges silver for gold, and gives lead for precious stones, though the
better he gets be but in opinion: and shall not we be content like the wise
men of God* to forgo the earth, and the pleasures thereof, that we may enjoy
heaven. As for worldlings, What taste worldlings have of the joys to come.
it is no marvel to see them take a dunghill of earth in their arms, and say
unto it, thou art my joy and my portion, for they not being illuminated with
the light of the living, make choice of that which according to their light
they esteem to be best; or if at any time they have tasted of the powers of
the life to come, yet are they like those Merchants, who having tasted wines
which pleased them well, refuse to buy them, being scared with the greatness
of the price which must be given for them: even so have they their own joy at
the hearing of the word, and has also their own desires, to be glorified
with Christ; but when they hear that before they enjoy that glory, they must
suffer with Christ, deny themselves, forsake their sinful pleasures, and cease
from their gainefull trade of wickedness, they give over the bargain, they
stumble and fall back to the former course of their ungodly life.

But assuredly if we all knew those things which belong The only cause why
we walk flowly toward that glory is because we know it not.
to our peace, but now are hid from our eyes, ten thousand worlds could not
keep us back from them; and therefore seeing all the cause of our slow running
toward that price of our heavenly calling is in the darkness of our minds, let
us pray continually that the Lord would lighten the eyes of our understanding,
that we may know the riches of his glorious inheritance prepared for the
Saints: and again, Lord Ephesians.
remember us with the favor of thy people, and visit us with thy salvation,
that we may see the felicity of thy chosen, Psalm.
and rejoice with the joy of thy people, and glory with thine inheritance:
which the Lord grant unto us for Jesus Christ's sake.

Verse 19 For the fervent desire of the creature wayteth when the sons of God
shall be revealed.
WE have heard hitherto the Apostles first principal The Apostle insists in
the amplification of this glory.
argument of comfort against the Cross, taken from the end of our afflictions,
set down in the end of the 17. verse. If we suffer with Christ, we shall
reign with Christ. This argument he has He proves the greatness and
certainty of that glory, by two arguments
amplified in the 18. verse. We shall be glorified with such a glory as for
weight and eternity shall far exceed our present sufferings. Now he insists
still in the same amplification, and he proves that glory must be both a great
and a certain From the fervent desire which the creature has to it by the
instinct of Nature.
which God has put into it, waits for the revelation of that glory. Secondly,
because the sons of God who have received the first fruits of the spirit, by
instinct of grace, wait also for it. Now it can neither be a small thing nor
yet uncertain, which God has taught his creatures both by instinct From the
fervent desire which the godly have to it by the instinct of Grace.
some excellent and most certain good, whereupon God has set the instinct and
desire of his creature.

This being the Apostles purpose, the order of his proceeding is shortly this,
verse 19. he sets down a proposition of the creatures fervent desire, to see
that glory revealed: The order of his proceeding in the first argument.
thereafter he assigns two reasons why they are so desirous of it. The first
is verse 20. taken from the present hard estate of the creature. The next is
verse 21. taken from their future better estate, unto the which they shall be
restored, when the sons of God shall be revealed: and then he concludes this
argument verse 22. And this purpose he handle^ at the greater length, because
in all the book of God this subject is not handled save in this place only. A
proposition of the fervent desire of the creature expressed by four phrases.


For the fervent. Here as I have said, he sets down a proposition of that
fervent desire, whereby the creature waits for the revelation of the sons of
God: and his earnest expectation of the creature he expresses by four very
significant phrases: the first word signifies such an earnest desire, as we
use to testify by the lifting up of our head, and attentive looking for the
coming of one, whom we would feign have; with this he ascribes to the
creature a hoping, and thirdly, a sighing and groaning, such as is used of them,
who lie under a heavy burden, whereof they would feign be eased, and last, he
says, they travail in pain with us: thereby declaring the vehemency of
their desire, that it is like the earnest desire of a woman travailing with
Child, who most earnestly wishes to be delivered.

All these by a figure and improperly ascribed to the Waiting, hoping, sighing,
groaning, ascribed to the creature, to signify their natural inclination and
instinct.
creature* signify unto us, that forcible inclination and instinct of nature,
whereby the creature bends it self to practice that good in the highest
degree, for which it was made, to the glory of God and good of man; which
because it is not permitted to do, being restrained by a superior power for
the sin of man, therefore it is described unto us sighing and groaning, weary
of the present estate, and waiting for a better. As we see that the needle of
the Mariners compass, touched with the Adamant* has in it this natural
inclination that it seeks continually toward the North, from which if it be
restrained by any violent motion, it shakes and trembles continually, as a
malecontent, but if it obtain the own end, and be once directly set toward
the North, then does it rest: it is even so with the creature, the heavens and
the earth being subdued under the bondage of vanity, and their natural
inclination to good restrained* for our sins cannot rest, but in their own
kind sigh and groan, waiting for the day of their deliverance, and this
instinct of nature in the creature, is unto the Lord as a certain voice or
desire, which he understands no less, than he does the voice of the mouth,
or desire of the heart in those creatures, whom he has endued with reason and
sense. This being spoken for the exposition of the words, we come to the
doctrine.

We find in the holy Scriptures a threefold use of Gods A threefold use of
the creature toward man.
creatures toward us: their first use is to serve us, if we will serve the
Lord; yea, upon this condition, the Angels are not ashamed to be called our
ministers and servants. Their second use is to cross us when we offend God,
then they serve either to punish us in our persons, or to hurt us in our goods;
for when we will not willingly honor God with the first fruits of our
riches, but abuse them to the fulfilling of our own lusts, it is a righteous
thing with God to tax us against our will, by sending forth his officers and
exacters, such as the Caterpiller, and the Palmer-worme, to eat up that
tribute which we owe unto God, but have refused to pay him. And thirdly, they
serve to teach us; for there is no creature in heaven or earth which does not
teach us some lesson: the Emmet learnes us providence, the Fowls of the air,
and Lillies of the field, teach us to cast our confidence on GOD: and here the
creature is brought in teaching us to become weary of our present servitude of
sin, and to long for our promised deliverance.

This is that miserable estate whereunto man is brought How far man by
apostacy has degenerated from his original glory
by his apostacy from God. In the beginning man was made Lord and governor of
all the creatures; in one day he called them all before him, and gave them
names according to their kinds as one who knew them better in their nature and
virtue, then they did themselves, and they all by coming at his call to his
Court, acknowledged him under God their superior and Lord: this was a part of
man's glory in the beginning, but now falling away from God* he has also so
far degenerated from his own kind, that he is become inferior to the
beasts, as Balaam* Ass was wiser then his master; so the creatures in their
kind reprove the foolishnes of man, who was their Lord.

Waits. The word import a continual act of expectation* The waiting of the
creature may make man ashamed, that waits not for that glory.
their expectation expects: this earnest waiting of the creature may make us
ashamed of our blockish dulnes, that have not our minds and hearts set
continually upon that day of our redemption, notwithstanding that exhortation
belongs unto us, that we should look for that day and have unto it. As the
creatures were not made for themselves 1 Pet. 3.
but for us, so they shall not be restored for themselves but for us, for the
greater augmentation of our Glory, and if they who shall have but the second
room, long for that day, how should we long for it, for whom that glory
chiefly is prepared?

When the sons of God shall be revealed. The sons of The sons of God now
are not revealed.
God are now said, not to be revealed in two respects: first, because their
persons are not revealed* secondly, because In regard of their persons, which
now are not known.
of elect men, it is true the Lord knows who are his, and makes themselves
also after their effectual calling, to know that they are his, his Spirit
bearing testimony unto their spirits, that they are the sons of God, he
gives unto them that new Name, which none knows, but they who have it; but
now they are not so revealed, that they are known of the world: For this cause
the world knows you not, because Ioh. 15. 20. 22.
it knows not him. The good wheat of the Lord is now so covered with chafe,
and his excellent pearls are locked up in earthen vessels, the vessel is seen
and contemned for the baseness thereof, the pearl is not seen, and therefore
not esteemed according to the excellency thereof: beside this, there are many
of the sons of God not yet come into the world, and many already gone out of
it, whom we know not, but in that general assembly all the Saints of GOD
shall be gathered together into one, at the right hand of the Lord Jesus, and
shall be clearly manifested, that the wicked their enemies shall know them,
and be confounded to behold them.

And of this arises a warning to us all, that none of us This learnes us not
to despise other men, because we know not what they are in Gods election.
despise another, but that even those who for the present are evil, and
contrary minded, we wait upon them patiently, proouing, if at any time God
will give them repentance, that they may come out of the snare of the Devil.
The sons of God are not yet revealed, he that presently is an enemy in regard
of his rebellious conversation, what know thou whether in the counsel of
GOD he be one of Gods chosen children or not? and if he be so, thou may be
sure, that ere he dye, the Lord shall convert him, if not of a persecuter to
make him a Preacher, as he did Paul, yet at least a Professor of that same
truth which thou have embraced.

Secondly, not only are the persons of Gods sons unknown, their life In
regard of their glory which now is obscured. Col 3. 3.
is hid with Christ, they are accounted the off-scowrings of the earth, and
entreated in the world, as if they were the only men to whom shame and
ignominy did appertain: yea, their glory is not known unto themselves, even
those who have received the new Name, and the testimony of the Spirit
recording to them that they are the Sons of God; when they look to their
contemptible bodies, and abundant corruption in their souls, they seem unto
themselves to be nothing less than the sons of God. I mark it, that we The
sons of God should not judge of themselves by their present state.
may learn to beware of Satan's policy, whereby he carries us to judge of
our selves by our present estate, which cannot but breed in us horrible fear
and doubtings. To this craft let us oppone that comfort of the Apostle, dearly
beloved, 1 John. 3.
now are we the Sons of God, yet does it not appear what we shall be, it is
but the beginnings, and not the perfection of grace and glory which we have in
this life: by the beginnings let us know that we are the sons of God, and
where we find no perfection* let us not be discouraged, remembering this is the
time wherein the glory of the sons of God is not yet revealed.

We are here again further to consider, that where the Comfortable, that
where the Lord calls the rest of his works his creatures, he calls us his
sons.
Lord gives unto the rest of his works, the name of a creature, he vouchsafes
upon us the names of sons, showing us, that albeit in regard of creation we
are his creatures, and come under that same name with the rest of his works,
yet now in regard of his grace communicated unto us, we are much more than
that which we were by creation, and in that respect more esteemed of by him,
then all the rest of his works beside. As a Father counts much more of his
son, whom he has begotten, than he does of all other things he has
whatsoever: so the Lord our God esteems more precious unto him, one of these
his excellent ones, whom he has begotten in his beloved Son the Lord Jesus,
than he does of all others besides. For their sakes he reprooues Kings, he
alters the course of nature, and turns vp-side down the state of things in
the world, yea, he shall declare at length that they are his only treasure:
from the time that once he gets them all gathered unto him, the administration
of this world, as now it is, shall cease and take an end.

Oh that we could stir up our hearts to a thankfulness Our duty again
craves that in our heart we should prefer the Lord above all his creatures.
toward our God: shall we not honor him as our Father, who has called us his
Sons? shall we any more set any of his creatures in our affection before
him, who has set us in his heart above all his creatures? Alas, how pitiful
is the folly of man, who being ignorant of God, goes doting after the
creature, as though the works of his hands were more to be loved than
himself? or as if there were more beauty or virtue in the creature than in
him who made it? true indeed, they have their own beauty, Pulchrum coelum,
pulchra terra, sed pulchrior quifecit illa, the heaven is beautiful, the earth
is beautiful, but more beautiful is he that made them: the greatest goodness
of the creature is but the smallest spark of that goodness which is in the
Creator.

Verse 20. Because the Creature is subject unto vanity, not of it own will*
but by reason of him who has subdued it under hope.
THe Apostle having set down in the former The first reason of the fervent
desire of the creature is taken from their present hard and evil estate.
Verse a proposition of that fervent desire, whereby the creature waits for
revelation of the sons of God, assigns now two reasons of their desire: the
first contained in this verse, is taken from the present evil estate of the
creature which now is subject to vanity. This vanity as we take it, is
opponed to that original integrity, wherewith the creature was endued in the
beginning, and it consists in these two: first* that the curse of God is laid
on the creature for the sin of man: secondly, that the creature is abused
contrary to the own will, which is also a consequent of the curse.

As for the first, the curse of God inflicted upon the creature The creature is
subject to a twofold vanity.
for a punishment of man, has spoiled the creature of original beauty and
original virtue: the heavens now are beautiful, but nothing so beautiful as
they were by the first creation: By the curse they are spoiled of original
beauty and virtue.
beautiful, but now deformed with scabs of leprosy,) with thistles, thorns,
and much barren wilderness, which are the sensible effects of Gods curse upon
it. They have in like manner lost much of their original virtue, though the
creature in the own kind intend it self to produce those effects which it
might have done by the first creation, yet it is restrained and subdued by a
superior power. The nearer the Sun draws to the end of his daily course, the
less is his strength, for we see the Sun in the evening decays in heat so it
is, the longer by revolution he turns about in his spheere, he waxes always the
weaker: and to use the similitude of the holy Spirit; as a garment the older it
grows, becomes the less beautiful, and the less able to warm him who
wears it; so the creatures by continuance of years, decreaseth in beauty and
virtue.

The sin of man has brought this curse upon the And as sin increases, so the
curse increases.
creature, and the daily increase of man's sin, makes a daily increase of the
curse. The first man that sinned was Adam, and for his sake God cursed the
earth: the second notorious sinner we read of was Cain, and for his sake God
cursed the earth the second time: and albeit the Lord does not always tell in
express words, how every abominable sinner that has succeeded Cain, has in
like manner drawn on a new curse upon the creature, yet that one serves for
all, to teach us, that as sin grows so grows the curse, and the
multiplication of the curse, brings with it a daily diminution of that
original virtue and beauty, which the creature had in the beginning.

The other part of this vanity is the abuse of the creature, The other part of
the vanity is a threefold abuse of the creature.
the godly: and thirdly, concerning the wicked. Concerning God, this is a
fearful abuse, that the creature which God made for his glory, is abused to
his dishonor; as when the Jews took the gold and silver which God gave them,
Baal to themselves; or when the Persians Concerning God.
worshipped the Sun; and the Egiptians beasts insteade of God: for this
vanity and bondage, the creatures in their own kind, they sigh and groan,
complaining they should be abused to another end then that whereunto the Lord
did make them, and whereat by their natural inclination they would be also
themselves.

Secondly, the creature is abused as concerning the godly, Concerning the godly.
they would do good: for every creature in the own kind, is naturally bent
to be a comfortable instrument and a servant to the servant of GOD; but
otherwise, where the fire is forced to burn them, or the water to choke
them, or that they are in any such sort abused by the wicked to trouble the
servants of GOD, it is against their will, a vanity and servitude, whereof
they feign would be delivered.

And thirdly, the creatures are abused when they are compelled Concerning the
wicked whom against their will they serve.
against their will. The Sun is weary of shining to the wicked, who having
their eyes open to see the works of God, had never their hearts nor mouths
open to glorify him; the Earth in like manner is wearied with the heavy
burden of sin, which daily increases upon her; she cries unto God, and
desires to be relieved of this bondage, yea, if the Lord did not restrain her,
she would open her mouth and swallow the wicked, as she did Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram: and in very deed when once the creature shall be set at liberty, and
no superior power shall hold them under this servitude, then shall the
creatures declare that they served the wicked sore against their will, for no
creature shall render any more service unto them; the Sun shall shine no more
upon them, the Earth shall bear them no longer, and the water shall not give
so much as one drop out of her treasures to refresh them.

To clear this, out of that one temporal judgment inflicted The creatures
being restored to the liberty shall all concur to plague the wicked.
upon the stiff-necked Egiptians, we may take some notice how fearful that
last and universal wrath shall be, that shall be powered out upon all the
wicked, being assembled into one. Out of the third heaven came his Angel to
fight against them, and slew their first borne. In the second heaven the Sun
withdrew his countenance from them, as from a people of darkness, not worthy
of his light. In the third heaven the elements by course fought against them,
the Fire flashed out terrible flames into their faces; the soft Water gushed
out of the bowels of the clouds, and was turned into hard stones, to strike
them, who in the hardness of their hearts rebelled against God: the Air
became pestilentious to them and corrupted their bodies with Biles and Botches:
the waters beneath were turned into blood; the earth was poisoned with
venomous flies which made it rot, abominable Frogs made their land stinck, for
the lothsomnesse of their sins: their sensitive creatures which served them
were horribly plagued: their Flocks by land consumed with murraine: their Fish
in the Sea rots and dies: their vigetatiue creatures are also destroyed: their
Vines and Fig Trees are blasted: the flax that should have clothed them; the
Barley that should have fed them are smitten, and there is nothing belonging to
them, were it never so small, but the wrath of God seized upon it. This was but
a temporal and particular judgment, yet does it make unto us some
representation of that universal judgment, wherein all the creatures of God
shall concur and lend their helps to torment the wicked, when the full cup of
Gods wrath shall be powered out upon them.

Not of the own will.] This is (as we said before) figuratively How a will is
ascribed to the creature.
spoken of the creature, that it is said to have a will. For the will of the
creature is no other thing, but the natural inclination of the creature; and
the meaning is, that the creature of the own nature is not subject to this
vanity, but that it is subdued under it, by the superior power of God, for
the sin of man. Where if it be asked how stands this How stands it with
justice that the creature is punished for man's sin?
with justice, that the creature which sinned not, should be subjected to
vanity for the sin of man? The question is easily answered, if we consider
that the creatures were not made for themselves, but for the use and service of
man, and that whatsoever change to the worse is come upon them, is not their
punishment, but a part of ours. If earthly Kings without violation of justice
may punish their rebels, not only in their persons, but by demolition of their
houses, or otherwise in their goods and substance, how shall we be bold to
reprove the Lords doing, who having convinced man of a notorious treason, has
not only punished himself, but defaced the house wherein he set him to dwell?
seeing he has violated the band of his service unto God, what reason is it
that Gods creatures should continue in the first course of their service to
him? surely it stands with the righteous judgment of God, that his creatures
should become comfortless servants to man, seeing man of his own free will is
become an unprofitable servant to his God, yea a wicked rebel against him.

And again, that the Apostle says the change which is The fall of Angels, of
man, and of the creature compared.
made in the creature, is against the will of the creature, it serves greatly
for our humiliation. The fall of Apostate Angels was a fall by sin, but with
their will, and without a Tempter to allure them, and now is without any hope
that ever they shall be restored. The fall of man was also a fall by sin of
his own free will, but not without the Tempt^r, and now not without hope of
recovery and restitution. But the fall of the creature, was neither a fall of
sin, nor of their own will, but a casting of them down against their will
from their original state, yet not without hope to be delivered. Miserable in
the highest degree are Apostate Angels, who of their own free will without an
exterior Tempter, have deserted their first habitation, and cast themselves
into remediless condemnation. Miserable in the second degree are reprobate
men, who have fallen of their own free will, suppose provoked by an exterior
Tempter, and shall never be partaker of the restitution of the sons of God.
But herein has the Lord magnified his mercy toward us, that where we fell
with Angels, and reprobate men, yet we are restored without them. The
consideration of our fall should humble us, for in it we are worse than the
creatures; they have fallen from their glory, but not with their own will; we
are fallen from ours, and we cannot excuse our selves, but it was with our
will: Again, the hope of our restitution should greatly comfort us,
considering that the Lord has vouchsafed that mercy unto us, which he has
denied unto others.

Further we are taught here, so often as we are crossed by We should blame our
selves when we are crossed by the creature.
the creature not to murmr against God, nor to blame the creature, but to
complain upon our selves. If the heavens above be as brass, and the earth as
iron, if the sea rage, and the air wax turbulent, if the stones of the field
be offenses whereat we stumble and fall, if the beasts we have bought or
hired for our use, serve us not at our pleasure, let us not foolishly murmr
against them, as Balaam did upon his Ass; what marvel they keep no covenant
with us, seeing we have not kept covenant with our God?

Under hope.] Herein has the Lord wonderfully magnified Man and the creature
for man's sake are restored to hope, which neither Apostate Angels, nor
reprobate men have.
his mercy toward us, that he has not only given to our selves a lively hope
of full deliverance, but also for our greater comfort has extended the same
toward the creature for our cause. The Apostate Angels are not partakers of
this hope, as we said before, that restitution promised in the Gospel, was
never preached unto them: we read that sometime they have given this
confession, that Jesus is the son of God, but they never sent out a petition
to him for mercy; for they have received within themselves an irreuocable
sentence of condemnation, and they know certainly that merciless judgment
abides their wilful and malicious Apostasy; and reprobate men in like manner,
have no hope of any good thing abiding them after this life: and therefore we
are so much the more to magnify Gods mercy toward us, who by Grace has put a
difference between us and them, where there was none by Nature, and has not
only given to us our selves a lively hope of restitution, but also for our
sakes has made the creatures that were cursed for our sin, partakers of the
same deliverance with us.

Verse 21. Because the creature also shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.
HEre follows the second reason, wherefore the The second reason of the
fervent desire of the creature taken from their better estate which is to come.
creature fervently desires the day of the revelation of the sons of God, and
it is taken from that glorious estate, into the which the creature shall be
translated in that day. Where first we have to see what creature this is which
shall be delivered: and secondly, what the deliverance is. The word creature,
is a general name of all the works of God, but here it is put for those
creatures which being made by God for man, were hurt by the fall of man, and
shall be restored with him. And so What creatures shall be restored.
under this name we comprise not reprobate Angels and men, neither those
excrements of Nature, which are bred of doung and corruption, neither thorns,
thistles, or such like, which are the fruits of Gods curse upon the creature
for our sin, and are in that day to be destroyed, not restored: but by the
creature we understand the heavens and earth, with the rest of the elements
and works of God, therein contained, made for the glory of God, and the use
of man.

And this is to declare that excellent deliverance we Jesus the restorer
heales every wound that Satan has inflicted upon man.
have by Jesus Christ, there is no wound which Satan has given man by sin,
but the Lord Jesus by his grace shall cure it: he shall not only purge our
souls from all sin, and deliver our bodies from the power of the grave and
corruption, but shall deliver the creatures our servants from that curse, which
our sins brought upon them. To make this yet more clear, we are to know
that there are three objects of Satan's malice. The first is God and his glory:
the second is man and his salvation: the third is the creature, made for Gods
glory and man's good. The principal object of Satan's malice is God and his
glory, he hates the Three objects of Satan's malice: first God: secondly man:
thirdly the creature.
Lord with a deadly and irreconcilable hatred, so that if it lay in his power
he would undo that most high and holy Majesty: but because rage as he will,
he cannot impair his sacred Majesty, he turns him to the secondarie object,
which is man, and troubles him by all means, not so much for man's own cause,
as for the Lords whose glory he seeks to deface that shines in man. And if
here also he cannot prevail, by reason that the Lord has made a hedge round
about man, he turns him to the third object of his malice, which is the
creature; against which he is so insatiable, that if he can be licensed to do
no more, yet does he esteem it some pleasure to him, to get leave to enter
into Swine, that he may destroy them: and this he does, not that he accounts a
beast his pray, for all the beasts of the earth cannot satisfy this roaring
Lion, but that destroying the creature, he may drive man to impatience, and
provoke him to blaspheme the Lord as by these same means he made the Gadarens
murmr against Jesus Christ, and put him out of their land; and this has
been the course of Satan ever since the beginning.

But blessed be the Lord our God who ouer-shootes Satan God ouershooteth
Satan in all his machinations.
and all his intentions, that same man whom Satan wounded has the Lord
restored, and shall set his image more glorious in him than it was before: and
those creatures which Satan defaced, for the hatred he carries to Gods glory
and man's good, the Lord shall restore again: the glory of God increases as it
is impugned, every new declaration of Satan's malice shall end in a new
declaration of Gods glory: neither is that enemy able to give a wound to any
of Gods children, but the Lord shall make it whole, and shall at the length
confound Satan by his own means.

And here because it is commonly demanded, unto what To what use the creatures
will serve in the day of restitution we shall know best when we see it.
use can these creatures serve in that day, seeing we shall have no need of
the Sun, nor of other natural means whereby now our life is preserved? To
this I answer, that if the Lord will have these works of his hands to
continue and stand as everlasting monuments of his goodness and witnesses in
their kind of his glory; who is it that can contradict it? It is enough for us
that we know they shall be delivered and transchanged into a more glorious
estate, but for what ^se, we shall best know in that day, when we shall see it:
in the mean time reuerencing the Lords dispensation, let us rather endeavor
to be partakers of that glory, than curiously to move thorny, and unprofitable
questions concerning it.

Now as for the manner of their deliverance. Seeing the Apostle says that the
heavens shall pass away with a noise, How the Apostle says, the creatures
shall be delivered, seeing the Psalmist says they shall perish.
and the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works therein
shall be burnt up with fire; and seeing the Psalmist says, they shall be
delivered? This doubt shall easily be loosed if Scripture be made interpreter
of Scripture. The Psalmist in that same place expones the word of perishing, by
the word of changing, what this changing shall be, the Apostle here makes it
manifest, while he calls it the delivering of them from one estate into
another: so that we are not to think that they shall perish as concerning
their substance, but as concerning those qualities of vanity, servitude, and
impotencie, whereunto they have been subjected by the fall of man. As silver
and gold is changed by the fire, the dross perishes, but the substance
remains; so shall these creatures be changed in that day, for which cause
also they are called, new heavens and new earth. Reu. 21.


And out of this we may perceive the necessity of that exhortation Seeing the
glory of that kingdom requires that the creature be changed, how much more
should we be changed?
given unto us by the holy Apostle, Seeing therefore that all these things must
be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be in holy conversation and
godliness? seeing the simplest servant who shall have any place in that
kingdom must be changed, and receive a new liuerie, how much more ought we our
selves to be changed, who are the sons and heirs of that kingdom? let us
not deceive our selves, no unclean thing can enter into that heavenly
Jerusalem, without sanctification we cannot see the Lord, unless we be 2 Pet.
3. 11.
purged from our dross and purified and fined, by the spirit of the Lord, we
shall not dwell in those new heavens wherein dwells righteousness.

Verse 22. For we know that every creature groneth with us also, and
trauaileth in pain together unto this present.
THe Apostle in this Verse concludes this purpose The same purpose further
amplified by g^oning and sighing of the creature.
with some amplification thereof, for he ascribes to the creature a groaning
with us, and a travailing together in pain, whereby he does yet more
express the vehemency of their desire: for as he that goes under an heavy
burden groans, and longs to be eased thereof, or as the woman which
travails with child, has a most earnest desire to be delivered thereof, so
the creature weary of this servitude longs to be eased.

This groaning of the creature is not to be neglected, seeing Sometime God
complains to the creature, sometime the creature complains to God upon man:
miserable is man if he complain not on himself. Esaias. 1.
in holy Scripture we find, that sometime God complains to his creatures
upon the sin of man, and sometime the creatures complains to God; miserable
is man if he do not complain upon himself. In the first of Esaias, there the
Lord complains to his creatures upon man, Hear O Heavens, heark^n O Earth, I
have nourished and brought up Children, but they have rebelled against me, etc.
and here again the creature is brought in, groaning, and complaining to God
upon man. The first blood that ever the earth received into her bosom, sent up
unto God a crying voice for vengeance, and the Lord heard it, and now the earth
meruailes in her kind that having received so much blood of the Saints of God
into her bosom, the Lord should delay to require it: she wonders again that
the hand of the Lord stablisheth her, and makes her bear up such a number of
wicked men, as are a burden to her, considering that once he caused her to
open and swallow up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram: and has many a time since
shaken her foundations, and destroyed by earthquake notable Cities, making the
houses of the inhabitants thereof, their burial place, the burden of sin
being now wonderfully increased, she meruailes that the Lord causes her to
bear it; and for this cause she cries and groans unto the Lord: and this
complaining of the creature, we are not to neglect it, (as I said) for seeing
they sigh and groan for the vanity under which our sins has subdued them,
should not we much more sigh and groan for our own sins? assuredly, if we
do not, we are convinced to be more senseless, then the senseless creatures
themselves.

Concerning this metaphor of travailing, it is two manner Travailing two manner
of ways ascribed to the wicked in the Scripture.
of ways ascribed to the wicked in holy Scripture, and one manner of way to
the godly. For first their concupiscence is compared to a mother that conceiues
and travails continually without rest, till it bring out sin, and sin
being finished, is compared in like manner to a mother that brings out death.
And secondly, the imagination of their heart is compared to a mother, which
conceiues cruel counsels and mischievous devices against the godly, all their
days they travail with this birth, and would feign have it brought out to
perfection, but at length they bring forth a lie: for the malice of the wicked
shall slay himself, his mischief shall Psalm. 7.
turn upon his own head, and his cruelty shall fall upon his own pate. But
as for the children of God, they travail One manner of way ascribed to the
Godly.
in pain of the monstrous birth of sin that is within them; not that they are
desirous to perfect and finish it, but to destroy and abolish it, as being a
monster within them which they abhor, an adulterous birth, begotten by a most
unlawful copulation between Satan and their corrupted will; the father that
begot this monster being Satan, and the mother that conceived it, their
corrupt Nature: for this they sigh, and cry unto God with the Apostle, O
miserable man, Romans 7. 24.
who shall deliver me from this body of death? This was his voice unto God, and
should much more be our continual lamentation, seeing in sins we are more
abundant, and in grace far inferior to that holy Apostle. The Lord therefore
work it in us for his Son Christ's sake.

Verse 23. And not only the creature, but we also who have received the first
fruits of the Spirit, even we do sigh in our selves, waiting for the
adoption, even the redemption of our bodies.
NOw follows the Apostles other argument, The second argument proving the
greatness and certainty of that glory, is the fervent desire the godly have
to it by instinct of Grace.
whereby he proves the greatness and certainty of that glory to be revealed,
and it is taken from that fervent expectation which the sons of God have of
it. It can neither be a vain nor a small thing, but by the contrary both great
and certain, whereupon God has set the desire of his best creatures, by
instinct of the Spirit of Grace. So that we have here first a description of
Gods children; they are such as have received the first fruits of the spirit:
secondly, a twofold effect which this holy Spirit works in Gods children;
first a weariness of their present bondage, and servitude of sin: secondly,
a waiting by a constant expectation for a better. And this does very much
confirm the Apostles purpose, there being none on earth who can better judge
the excellency of that glory to come, than they who have received the first
fruits thereof. Out of all doubt the testimony of any one, who has tasted of
that joy to come, is more worth to commend it, than is the contrary judgment
of a thousand others to disprove it.

And not only the creature.] The Apostle proceeds from The sons of God and
the creature groan together, and shall be restored together.
the testimony of the creature, to the testimony of the sons of God; when
he spoke of the creature he said, they sigh and groan with us, they travail
together in pain with us, and when he speaks of the godly, he says, we
sigh in our selves, As man was not made for himself but for the Lord, and
therefore should wait upon him, so the creatures were not made for themselves
but for us: and therefore where they are at covenant with us, they in their
kind wait upon us, they go with us, they groan with us, are grieved with us,
and shall never rest till we be delivered; let licentious men living in their
sins mark this: they sigh not in themselves with the godly, yea they scorn
their sighings, and therefore shall not be restored with the godly, they groan
not with the creature, and shall not be delivered with the creature. O
miserable man, how unhappy is that end, The wicked mourn not with them and
shall not be partakers so much as of the delivery of the creature.
whereunto thy vvanton and hard heart which cannot repent does lead thee? thou
shall not stand in judgment with the godly, where they go there shall not
thou go, thou did not mourn with the children of the marriage chamber, and
therefore shall not enter with them into it to be comforted; thou shall go to
another place, and mourn without them: the burden of thy sins which now
thou feel not, shall press thee down to hell, and confound thee for ever:
the creature that groned with the godly shall be restored with them, and thou
shall not be restored. O how shall thou be cast down, when the earth whereupon
thou treadest shall be delivered into the glorious liberty of the sons of
God, and shall as a servant stand in the day of restitution, but thou as a
rebel shall be cast into utter darkness, and shall not be so much as partaker
of the deliverance of the creature.

But we also who have received the first fruits of the Spirit.] A description
of the godly.
In this description of the godly, let us consider these three things. First,
that whatsoever grace we have we received it. Secondly, that grace we have
received is not full* but in part; for we have only received the first fruits
of the Spirit. And thirdly, that the first fruits which we have are sufficient
pledges to us of the plenitude and fullness, which afterward we shall receive.

The first of these learnes us humility: what have thou O Learning us
humility, thankfulness, and diligence in Prayer.
man which thou have not received? The Lord dispenses grace to every one
according to his pleasure, and we are but vessels filled and emptied as he
will. Secondly, it learnes us thankfulness: whatsoever Grace we have
received we should return both the praise and the use of it to him who gave
it; as the waters by secret conduits come from the Sea, return again openly
into it, through the troughes, so that all men may see the returning, albeit
they saw not the coming: so that Grace which the Lord by his Spirit secretly
conuayes to the godly, does again publicly return unto him by praise and
well doing. And thirdly, it does teach us diligence in prayer; if we desire
increase of Grace, we should seek it from him of whom we have the beginning,
and use all the means, such as hearing, reading, praying, keeping of a good
conscience, by which Grace may grow, and be entertained in us.

The next thing we observe is, that in this life we receive No plenitude but
first fruits of the Spirit have we now.
not the plenitude and fullness of Grace, but only the first fruits thereof.
The use of this is, first to comfort the children of God, who are oftentimes
discouraged with the sense and feeling of their own wants. It is one of
Satan's stratagems to try those by the rule of perfection, who are yet but in
the state of proficients, and we had need to beware of it. Shall I Therefore
are we not to think that we have no grace, because we have but beginnings.
give that vantage to the adversary, as to think I have no faith, because it
is weak? or I have no love, because it is little: or no satisfaction, because
it is but in a beginning? No, but I will so hunger and thirst for more grace,
that I will still give thanks for the grace I have received; for here we have
no fullness, our greatest measure is as the first fruits, in respect of that
which is to come.

On the other side, because every comfort which is given This comfort vainly
abused by profane men.
to the godly, is turned by profane contemners and mockers, into an occasion
and nourishment of sin: they are to know this comfort belongs not unto them:
It is a common thing to them to excuse the want of all Grace. O it is but a
small grace which in this life is communicated to the best, and they think
their sins are well enough covered, by this that all men are sinners, as if
there were no difference between sin tyrannizing in the wicked, and
captiued in the godly, or as if beginnings of Grace in the regenerate did not
separate them in regard of conversation from the unregenerate who are void of
all Grace. Let them therefore know that the Spirit of God whom the godly
receive, is not only called the first fruits, the earnest, and the witness of
God, but also the seal and signet of the living God. As a seal leaves in the
wax that similitude and impression of the form which is in it self; so the
Spirit of God communicates his own image to all those whom he seals against
the day of redemption, he makes them new and holy creatures. And this
conuinces carnal professors of a lie, who say they have received the first
fruits of the Spirit, notwithstanding that their works be wicked and unclean:
they may rather, if they would tell the truth, say as those who being
demanded whether they had received the holy Ghost or no, answered we know not
whether there be an holy Ghost or no: so may they instead of bragging of the
first fruits of the Spirit, say in truth we know not what ye call the first
fruits of the Spirit.

And thirdly, out of this description we may gather, that Why the Lord gives us
not in this life the principal, as well as the earnest.
albeit we have no more but the first fruits of the Spirit, yet are they
sufficient to assure us, that hereafter we shall enjoy the whole Mass. In two
respects it is customable to men to give an earnest penny in buying and
selling, either when the sum is greater then they are able to pay for the
present, or when the thing bought is of that nature, that it cannot presently
be delivered: but between the Lord and us there is no buying nor selling, he
gives freely unto us* both the earnest and the principal, but first the one,
and then the other; not that the Lord is unable to pay presently all that he
has promised, but because the principal is of that nature, that it cannot be
received, till we be prepared for it. As the husbandman must sow and tarry
with patience till the harvest come, wherein he may sheare: as the warrior
must fight before he obtain the victory; and the wrestler receives not his
crown till he have overcome, neither does he that runs in a race obtain
the prise, till he have finished it: so must the Christian, in all these be
exercised, before that the Lord possess him in the promised kingdom of his
Son Christ Jesus.

And though payment of the principal for a time be What comfort we have now
in the earnest and first fruits of the Spirit.
delayed, yet for our comfort, the earnest and first fruits are presently
delivered unto us, the Lord so dealing with us as he dealt with Israel in the
Wilderness, when he caused the twelve spies to bring with them from the river
of Eschol, a branch of the Vine tree, so full of the clusters of grapes, that
it was borne between two upon a tree, together with the figs, and
pomegranats, and other fruits of that land: for no other end, but that Israel
tasting of the first fruits of Canaan might be provoked to a more earnest
desire thereof, as also to assure them that the Lord who had given them the
beginnings, would also put them in possession of the whole, accord^ing to his
promise: even so the Lord Jesus who has gone before us to our heavenly Canaan,
not to view it only, but to take possession thereof in our name, has sent
down unto us some of the first fruits thereof, that we may taste them, such
as peace of Conscience, and joy of the Spirit, that by proof of the small
beginnings, we may know what excellent comfort is laid up in store for us.

We sigh in our selves. Here follows now the two effects Two effects which
the Spirit works in the godly, first a sense of their misery for which they
sigh.
of the Spirit, which he works in them who have received it. The first, is a
sense of their present misery, which causes them to sigh unto God for
deliverance, and he says, they sigh within themselves, to teach us that it is
not an hipocriticall and counterfeit, but an inward and godly sorrow, which the
Spirit works in the children of God. Which I do not so speak as if I did
condemn those sighs which break forth without; for sometime the grie^e of
heart is so abundant in the godly, that not only it breaks out in sighing
and mourning, but in strong crying to GOD also, but to restrain the hypocrisy
of others, who make a fair show of that in the flesh, which is not in the
Spirit. True religion strives rather to be approved of God, than seen of men:
one sigh proceeding from the heart, is a louder crying in the ears of the Lord
of hosts, and more forcible to move him* than the noise of all the shooting
Priests of Baal, when they are gathered together into one.

We are therefore more deeply to consider this, that the Sighing and mourning
go before comfort
Spirit of God first teaches us to sigh and mourn for our present misery,
before he comfort us with a constant hope of deliverance. If now we mourn not,
we shall not rejoice hereafter: it is only mourners whom God has marked in
the forehead* to save from the wrath to come: such a continual Psalm. 6. 6.
mourner was David, who protests that in the night he watered his couch with
tears, and in the day mingled his cup therewith: and Job in like manner, my
sighing (said he) Job. 3. 24.
comes before my eating. The Saints of God are not ashamed to profess that of
themselves, which the mockers of this age esteem a womanly affection; there
is nothing to be found among them, but eating, drinking, singing, and a
contracting of one sin after another, with carnal rejoicing; but woe be unto
them that now laugh, for assuredly they Luke 6. 25. Mat. 5. 4. Genesis 27. 38.
shall weep, the end of their joy shall be endless mourning and gnashing of
teeth, they shall shed tears abundantly with Esau, but shall find no place
for mercy.

Let us therefore go to the house of mourning with the Mary's tears pleased
Christ better than the Pharisees delicates. Luke 7. 38. verse 44.
godly, rather than to the banqueting houses of the wicked, rejoicing in their
sinful pleasures. At one time Simon the Pharisee gave our Savior a dinner,
and Mary who had been a sinner, brought him the sacrifice of a contrite heart,
and the Lord esteemed more of her tears, than of the Pharisees delicates. No
banquet pleases the Lord Jesus so well as a banquet of tears, poured from a
truly penitent heart. Psalm.
The Lord is said to gather the tears of his children, and keep them in a
bottle, thereby to tell us that they are precious in his sight: for he is not
like fools who gather into their treasures, things which are vain and
needelesse. But alas, how shall he gather that which we have not scattered?
where are our tears, the vvitnesses of our unfeigned humiliation before God.
The hardness of heart has ouergrowne The deplorable hardness of h^rt in this
age, that cannot mourn Genesis 4. 22.
this age, that albeit there be more then cause, yet there is no mourning. The
sons of Cain learned without a teacher to work in brass, and iron, and the
wit of man can make the hardest metal soft, to receive an impression, but
cannot get their own stony heart made soft; yea, the children of God find in
experience how hard a thing it is Numb. 20. 11.
to get a melting heart. The rock rendered water to Moses at the third stroke,
but alas, many strokes will our hearts take, before they send out the sweet
tears of repentance: this I mark that knowing our natural hardness, we may
learn without intermission to fight against it.

For herein is our case so much the more pitiful, that having Seeing we have
so many causes of mourning without us, the troublesome estate of Gods Church.
Nehe. 1. 4.
more than matter enough of mourning, yet we do not mourn: without us,
should not the troublesome estate of the Church of God, be a matter of our
grief, though our private estate were never so peac^able? Godly Nehemiah being
placed in the honorable service of King Artashashte the Monarch of the world,
was not so much comforted with his own good estate, as grieved at the
desolation of Jerusalem. Decay of Religion, and increase of Idolatry, 1 King.
29. 4.
made Eliah weary of his life: the Ark of God captiued, and the glory departed
from Israel, drove all comfort 1 Samuel 4. 19. A^^ 6. 6.
out of the heart of the wife of Phinces: these and many more may ^each us, that
the affliction of Joseph should be matter of our sorrow.

The causes of mourning within us, are partly our sins, Causes of mourning
within us, our manifold sins.
partly, our manifold tentations. As our sins are contracted with pleasure,
so are they dissolved with godly sorrow. It is the best medicine, which is most
contrary to the nature of the disease: our sin is a sickness, wherein there
is a carnal delight to do that which is forbidden, and it is best cured by
repentance, wherein there is a spiritual displeasure and sorrowing for the
evil which we have done: this mourning for sin lasts in the godly so long as
they live in the body, Rom 7. 24.
yea, those same sins which God has forgiven, and put out of their
affection, are still in their remembrance for their humiliation, so that with
godly Ezechia they recount all 2 King 20. 23.
their days and their former sins in the bitterness of their heart: so long
as sin remained in their affection, it was the matter of their joy, but now
being by grace removed out of the affection, it becomes the matter of their
sorrow. And our manifold tentations.


The other cause of our mourning, is our manifold tentations: for this world
is no other thing but a stormy Sea, wherein so many contrary winds of
tribulation blows upon us, that we can hardly tell which of them we have most
cause to fear. On every side Satan beset^ us with tentations, on the right
hand and on the left, vt quatuor angulis Gregor. Moral.
pulsata domus, aliqua ex part ruinam saciat, that the house being shaken at
all the sour corners, may fall down in one part or other; no rest nor
quietness for us in this habitation, terrors within, fightings without. Propter
quod vno con^ilio Act. 20. 19.
migrandum est Christianis, for the which, it is best for us with one advice
to conclude, that we will remove; and in the mean time send up our complaint
to our Father in heaven, as the Gibionites did to Joshua, showing him how we
Joshua 10. 6.
are besieged and environed for his sake, and praying him to come with have and
help us.

Waiting for the Adoption. Now follows the other effect The other effect the
spirit works in us, i^ a waiting for deliverance.
of the Spirit, for he not only causes us (as we have heard) to sigh and
mourn for our present miseries, but also comforts us with the hope and
expectation of deliverance, though in this life we have trouble, yet have we
no trouble without comfort. Blessed be God who comforts us in all our 2 Cor.
1. 3. 4.
tribulations, and beside that which we presently have, it is yet much more
which we look for. The men of this world have no joy without sorrow, even
in laughter their Pro^. 24. 13.
heart is sorrowful, pretend what they will in their countenance, there is a
heaviness in their conscience, arising of the weight of sin, but it is far
otherwise with the godly, for even in mourning they do rejoice, and under
greatest heaviness they carry a lively hope of joyful deliverance.

Again, we are to mark that the godly are described The day of death and day
of resurrection earnestly waited for by the godly.
in holy Scripture, to be such as do not live content with their present
estate, but waits and longs for a better: and specially there are two days,
for which the Children of GOD are said to wait; the first, the day of death,
wherein they go to the Lord: the second, the day of appearing, wherein the
Lord shall come unto them: they soiourne in the body, more weary of it, then
David was of his dwelling in the tents of Kedar: they wait with patient Job,
till the day of their change come, and do desire with the Apostle to be Job.
14. 14.
dissolved, that they may be with Christ: they pray for it so often, as they use
that petition, Let thy kingdom come, seeking Mat. 6. 10. Luke 11. 3.
death so far as it is a means to abolish sin utterly, that Christ their
King may alone reign in them: but as for the wicked, the remembrance of death
is terrible unto them, and in their thought they put it far from them, and when
it comes, it comes upon them unlooked for. As Iehu furiously Death comes on the
wicked as Iehu came on Iehoram.
came upon Iehoram, and he made with all his speed to his chariot, thinking
to fly away, but in vain for the arrow of Iehu ouertooke him; so death comes
upon the wicked 2 King. 9. 23. 24
in a day, and place wherein they looked not for it, and they being terrified
with it, runs with all the speed they can to their chariots, that is, to
their refuges of vanity, but the dart of death surely ouer-takes them.
Miserable are they whose comfort stands rather in an uncertain delay of
death, than in any certainty which they have of eternal life.

But let us be prepared for it, as the good Israelites of We should not
soiourne in the body like Jonas in the sides of the s^^p, but like Abraham in
the door of the tabernacle. Exodus 12. 11. Genesis 18. 1. 1 King. 19. 9.
God, with our loins girded up, and our staves in our hands, ready to take our
journey from Egypt to Canaan, whensoever the Lord our God shall command us. As
fowls desirous to fly, stretch ou^ their vvings, so should man desirous to be
with the Lord, stretch out his affections toward the heavens. Abraham sat in
the door of his Tabernacle when the Angel appeared unto him, Elias came out
to the mouth of his Cave, when the Lord appeared to him, and we must also
rejoice to come out of the cave and tabernacle of this vvretched body, if we
would meet with the Lord, yea, even while as we dwell in the body, if in our
affection we come not out, and stand as it were in the door of our
tabernacle, but like Jonas sleeping in the sides of the ship, Jonas 1. 5.
we lie down in the hollow of our heart, sleeping in careless security, it
is not possible that the Lord can be familiar with us.

The other day for which the godly are said to wait, is the The day of Christ's
second coming longed for. 1 Cor. 1. 7. Phil. 3.
day of Christ's second coming. The Apostle gives this as a token of the rich
grace of God bestowed on the Corinthians, that they waited for the appearance
of Christ, and to the Philippians he says, our conversation is in heaven, from
whence we look for our Savior the Lord Jesus, yea he gives it out as a mark
of all those who are to be glorified, when he says, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, and not for me only but
for all them who love Christ's second appearing: And Heb. 9. 28.
again, Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many, and unto them
that look for him, shall he appear the second time, without sin unto
salvation.

These and many more places proves that there is great As the Jews waited for
the year of Jubilee so should we for the day of Christ, but alas few do so.
Reu. 22. 20.
scarcity of Faith and spiritual grace in this generation, there being so few
that unfeignedly longs for the day of his appearance: suppose every man in word
mumble up that petition, let thy kingdom come, yet are they few who when Jesus
testifies surely I come quickly, can in truth answer with the godly, Amen,
even so come Lord Jesus: and all because we are neithe wearier of our present
misery, nor certain of that glorious deliverance to come, otherwise we would
long for it, and rejoice at the smallest appearance thereof. The woman with
child reckons her time as near as she can, and albeit others have no mind of
it, yet is it always in her remembrance, because that then she hopes for
deliverance. Among the Jews as the day of their Jubilee draws near, Leuit.
25. 10.
so the joy of them that were in prison increased, being assured that then they
were to be relieved; and should not we much more rejoice, the nearer that the
day of our eternal Jubilee draws unto us, wherein all tears shall be wiped
away from our eyes, and sorrow and mourning shall fly away for ever.

Where, for the comfort of the weak Christian, we are The wounded conscience
even of the godly desires not death.
to consider, whether the godly be always in this estate, that they dare lift up
their heads with joy, and pray for Christ's second appearance or not? To this I
answer, that their disposition herein is according to the estate of their
conscience: as the eye being hurt is content to be covered with a veil, and
desires not to behold the light, wherein otherwise it rejoices; so the
conscience of the godly being any way wounded, is afraid to stand before the
light of the countenance of God, till the time that it be cured again. And
this made David to crave, that the Lord would spare him a Psalm. 51. 9. Psalm.
86. 3.
little, and give him space to recover his strength; but after mourning and
earnest calling for mercy, the conscience being pacified, then do the godly
say with Simeon. Now Lord let thy Servant depart, for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation. Luke 2. 29.


For the Adoption. He said before, that we have received Adoption is either
begun as now: or accomplished as we look for it.
the spirit of Adoption, and now he says that we wait for Adoption: but we
must understand that there is a begun Adoption, whereby we are made the
sons of God, and that we have received already: there is in like manner a
consummate Adoption, whereby we are manifested to be the sons of God, and
entered into the full possession of our fathers inheritance, and that we wait
for.

The redemption of our bodies. As there is a twofold adoption, There is also a
twofold redemption: first, of the soul from sin: secondly, of the body from
death. Ephesians. 1.
so also a twofold redemption: the first is defined by the Apostle to be the
remission of our sins, and that we have received already: the second is
called in that same Chapter, the redemption of the possession, and here the
redemption of our bodies, and this we look for to come. As the soul was
first wounded by sin, and then the body with mortality and corruption: so
the Lord Jesus the restorer, who came to repair the wound which Satan
inflicted on man, does first of all restore life to the soul by the remission
of sins, which he has obtained by his suffering in the flesh: and therefore
the Herald of his first coming Ioh. 1. 29. Reu. 20. 5. 6.
cried before him, behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world: This is the first Resurrection, blessed are they who are partakers of
it, for upon such the second death shall have no power: but in his second
coming we shall also be partakers of the second redemption, he shall redeem
our bodies from the power of the grave, wherein now they lie captiued, and
deliver them from the shame of mortality and corruption.

Let this comfort us against the present base and contemptible Comfort against
the present base estate of our bodies.
state of our bodies, now they are but filthy sinckes of corruption, and
vessels so full of uncleanness, that the Lord has appointed in the body five
conduits to purge the natural filth thereof, and after this they are to be
laid down in the bed of corruption, the worms spread under them and above
them (as it is said of the King of Ashur) shall devour 2 King. 19.
and consume their flesh, the earth shall eat up their bones, and turn them
into dust; the brain which was the seat of many proud and vain imaginations,
becomes after death oftentimes the seat of the ugly toad; the reins that were
the seat of concupiscence, engenders serpents; and the bowels which could
never be gotten satisfied with meat and drink, shall be replenished with
armies of crawling worms: but against all these we have this comfort* that as
presently we have obtained remission of our sins, so are we assured of a
glorious redemption of our bodies, qui enim Bernard.
resurgit in anima, resurget in corpore ad vitam, for he that rises now in his
soul, shall hereafter rise in his body to eternal life.

And of this every man is admonished, that if he love his He who has the first
redemption shall be sure of the second.
body, he should in time take heed to the estate of his soul, see that it be
partaker of the first redemption, which is the remission of sins, and be sure
thy body shall be partaker of the second redemption. It is a pitiful thing to
see what preposterous care is taken by men for conservation of their bodily
life; there is nothing they leave undone, vt differant mortem quam auferre
non-possunt that they may at the least Bernard.
prolong and delay death, which they cannot cut away: but if men take so much
pains, and suffer so strait a diet of body, and bestow so great expenses that
they may live a short while longer upon earth, what should men do that they
may live for ever in heaven?

Verse 24. For we are saved by hope, but hope that is seen is not hope: for
how can a man hope for that which he sees?
IN this verse and the subsequent, the Apostle An objection answered.
answers an objection: seeing he said before that we have received the
Spirit of adoption, how has he said now that we are still waiting for
adoption? He does therefore teach us, that both these are true, we are saved
now, and we look for a more full salvation hereafter; we are adopted now, and
we look for the perfection of our adoption hereafter: and that it is so he
proves here by this reason; the salvation that now we have is by hope,
therefore it is not yet come, nor perfected. The necessity of this consequence
depends upon the nature of hope, which is of things that are not seen, nor as
yet come to pass.

This place is abused by the adversaries, to impugn the This verse abused to
impugn Justification by Faith.
doctrine of justification by Faith: we are saved say they by hope, and
therefore not by Faith only. That we may see the weakness of their reason,
we will first compare Faith and Hope, in that relation which they have to
Christ: secondly, in that relation which they have mutually among themselves.
For we deny not, that Faith, Hope, and Love, each one of them have a place in
the work of our salvation, but the question between us and them is,
concerning the right placing of them. First, then it is certain, that both
Faith and Hope compared in their relation to Christ.
Faith and Hope look unto Christ; Jesus Christ and that which he has
conquered unto us, is the object of them both, but diversely: for faith enters
us into a present possession of Christ and his benefits, he that believes in
me (says Ioh. 3. 36.
our Savior) has eternal life, he says not only he shall have it, but
also that presently he has it. Hope again looks for a future possession of
Christ, which shall be much more excellent, than that which presently we enjoy;
for the possession of Christ which now I have by Faith is 1 Cor. 13. 9. 10.
imperfect and mediate; by Faith I know Christ but in part, by Faith I
apprehend him but in part also: and this possession I have it mediately, to
wit, by the means of the Word and Sacraments; but my hope directs me to look
for a more excellent possession of Christ, within a short while, in whom I
shall enjoy much more than now by the knowledge of my Faith I can see in him,
or yet by apprehension of my Faith I can comprehend of him. And this is that
perfect and immediate possession of Christ which by Hope we look for.

Now as for their mutual relation among themselves, Faith and hope compared in
their mutual relation between themselves.
Faith is of things past, present, and to come; Hope is only of things to
come: Faith is more largely extended than Hope: we hope for nothing which we
believe not, but something we believe for which we hope not: we believe
that the pains of hell abide the wicked, but we hope them not; for hope is an
expectation of good to come, they may fall under fear, but come not under
hope. Again, Faith is the mother of Hope; for of that imperfect knowledge, and
apprehension of Christ which I have by Faith, there arises in me an hope and
expectation of a better: Hope again, is not only the daughter of Faith, but
the conseruer and nourisher of Faith, the pillar that underprops it, when it
faints; for in this life we are beset with so manifold tentations, the work
of God seeming oftentimes contrary to his word, and things appearing to fall
out otherwise than the Lord has promised, that our Faith thereby is
wonderfully daunted, and therefore has need to be supported by Hope, which
teaches always with patience to depend upon Gods truth, and to look for a
better. As for example, the Lord says, Call upon me in the day of thy trouble,
Psalm. 50. 15.
I will hear thee, and deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, according to
this promise the Christian calling upon God and yet not finding deliverance,
his Faith begins to faint, but then Hope comes in, and succoureth Faith, and
her counsel is, the vision is for an appointed time, at last it shall Habak.
2. 3.
speak and not lie: though it tarry, wait, for it shall surely come and not
stay: and this Faith being strengthened by Hope, continues her prayers to God,
until she obtain her promised and desired deliverance.

And of this it is evident, in what sense it is that the Apostle The right
place assigned to every one of these three, Faith, Hope, and Love, in the work
of salvation.
says, we are saved by Hope, to wit, because by it we are vpholden in
trouble: for he is not here disputing of the manner of our Justification (which
he has done before) but discoursing of those comforts which we have to
sustain us in affliction. If ye ask by which of these three, Faith, Hope, and
Love, we are justified, that is, by which of them we apprehend Christ's
righteousness offered to us in the Gospel, the Apostle has answered already,
we are justified by Faith. If ye demand which of these three chiefly
sustaines us in affliction: the Apostle here tells you, that when Faith is
weak, Hope saues us that we despair not: and if ye demand which of these
three declares us to be men justified by Faith in Christ, the Apostle tells
you, we must declare our Faith by good works; for Faith works by Love:
these are the right places, which these three excellent graces of the Spirit
has in the work of our salvation, and they go so jointly together, that they
cannot be sundred:

When we say that a man is justified by Faith only, we do not therefore make
the justified man to be without Hope and Love. For albeit in the action of the
apprehending The doctrine of Justification by faith only, takes not away Hope
and Love.
and applying of Christ's righteousness. Faith only works, for which we say
truly we are justified by Faith only, yet Hope and Love have other actions
pertaining to salvation, necessarily requisite in the justified man. And this
does clear us of that false calumny wherewith the adversaries do charge us,
as if we did teach, that Faith might Calumny of the adversary concerning this
confuted.
be without Hope or Love. because we affirm that we are justified by Faith
only. I say most truly, when I say that among all the members of the body,
the eye only sees, but if any man collect of my speech, that the eye is only
in the body, without ear or hand, he concludes wrong. For albeit in the
faculty of seeing I say the eye only sees, yet do I not for that separate it
from the communion of the rest of the members of the body. In the Sun heat
and light go inseparably together; of these two it is the heat only that
warmes us, do I therefore say that the heat is without the light? Among all
the graces of the Spirit, when I say that Faith only iustifies, I do but
point out the proper action of Faith, but do not therefore separate it from
Hope and Love. So far injurious are the adversaries of the truth unto us,
when they accuse us for maintaining a Faith which is without Hope, and does not
work by Love, which we never affirmed.

Of this now it is evident, that the Hope of a Christian Hope of a Christian is
a strong thing, depending on sure warrants.
must be very strong, seeing it sustaines him in trouble; it is a pillar that
sustaines the whole building, and a most sure anchor, which being fastened upon
the rock Christ Jesus, holds us so fast, that we who are weak vessels, tossed
too and fro with restles tribulations, cannot be overcome; it leanes upon most
certain warrants, whereof now we will only consider a few.

The first vvarrant of our hope is the word of GOD: The first warrant of our
Hope is the word of God. 1 Pet 7. 4.
whereof now only we will touch these two comfortable places. The Apostle
says, there is reserved for us in heaven an immortal inheritance, unto the
which we also are kept by the power of God through faith. A word certainly
full of all comfort; that inheritance which the Lord keeps for me in heaven,
who can disappoint me of it? and seeing I am kept by his power on earth for
that same inheritance, who can take me out of his hand? he reserues my portion
in heaven for me, he keeps me on earth for it, what then is there that is able
to disappoint me of this hope? Again, compare me these two together, that the
Father speaking from heaven, says of Christ, this is my beloved Son in whom
I am well Mark, 9. 7.
please^, hear him: the Son again, to whom the Father has sent you, he
says, fear not little flock, it is my Fathers Luke 12. 32.
will to give you a kingdom: not for your worthiness, but for the good
pleasure of his own will. O what a strong consolation and fortress of our
Hope have we here? the Father commands us to hear his Son, the son
assures us that it is his Fathers will to give us a kingdom: therefore will
we casting away faithless fear, possess our souls in patience, looking by
a constant hope for performance of that kingdom, which he has promised us.

The second warrant of our hope, is the Oath of God: The second warrant of our
hope is the oath of God.
surely the word of GOD in it self is as true when it is spoken as when it is
sworn; but for the strengthening of our vveake faith it has pleased the Lord
to join his oath with his word, being willing to show unto the heirs of
promise Heb. 6. 18.
more abundantly the stabilitie of his counsel, has bound himself by an
oath, that by two immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should
lie, we might have strong consolation, who have our refuge to hold fast the
hope which is set before us.

The third vvarrant of our hope is, the legac^e and testament The third warrant
of our hope is the legacy of Christ.
of Christ, in the which he does not only by prayer recommend us to Gods
eternal mercy, but more particularly he assures us that he is gone to prepare a
place for us, and that he will come again to receive us unto himself, that
where he is, there also we may be. And further speaking unto his Father, he
says, Father I will that those whom thou have given me, be with me where I
am, that they may behold my glory, which thou have given me. Shall we think
that the Father will disannul the testament of his Son? O how comfortable is
it to compare these two? the Father says unto the Son, Ask of me what thou will, and I will give it thee: the Son again asks of the Father, that they
who are his may be where he is, shall we not then rest in hope, assured to be
glorified with him?

The fourth pillar of our hope, is the blood of Jesus The fourth is the blood
of the Lord Jesus.
Christ, shed for us, by which he has subscribed and sealed all the promises
of GOD to be yea and Amen. A testament says the Apostle, is ratified by the
death of a testator, and the Lord Jesus by his death has confirmed the
testament, that blood which he has poured out as the price of our
redemption, cries continually unto God for us, until the redemption of our
souls and bodies be perfected.

The fifth warrant of our hope is the pledge of the Spirit, The fifth is the
pledge of the Spirit given us on earth.
which the Lord Jesus according to his promise has sent down into our
hearts. By him (says the Apostle) we are sealed against the day of
redemption, he is an earnest given us from him who is faithful and true, and
therefore may we assuredly look to receive the principal sum. Praesentia
gratiae attestatur foelicitatem promissae gloriae sine dubio sequuturam: the
presence of grace now testifyeth unto us, that the felicity of the promised
Glory shall certainly follow.

And the last warrant is the pledge of our nature, which The sixth is the pledge
of our nature taken up into heaven.
the Lord Jesus has carried from earth unto heaven, and has placed at the
right hand of his Father, and therein has taken possession for us, and in our
name: therefore the Apostle says, that he has entered into heaven as our
forerunner, calling him so in regard of us, who through him are also to enter
in after him: these are the six pillars and strong confirmations of our hope,
which in all troubles sustain it under a certain expectation of that
redemption of the possession which is to come.

But hope that is seen is not hope. The Apostle to confirm A short
description of the Nature of Hope.
his reason subioynes a short description of the nature of hope, that it is of
things which are to come, and not yet seen, for that which is present, and a
man sees, he cannot be said to hope for it: yea, then shall hope cease, when
we shall enjoy that which we hope for. Spes tunc non erit quando August.
erit res. In the first of these words Hope is put for the thing Hoped: in the
second, for the virtue of Hope it self; and thus much of Hope.

Verse 25. But if we hope for that which we see not, we do with patience
abide for it.
THe Apostle here concludes not only this his The conclusion of his first
principal argument of comfort against the cross.
last purpose, wherein he has taught us, that the very nature of hope leads
us to look for some better thing which is to come, but also he concludes his
first principal argument of comfort; making this to be the end of all, that it
becomes us with patience to abide our promised deliverance. And albeit for
memories sake we have reduced all that he has spoken, into one principal
argument, yet may we see how under this one, many particular reasons are
heaped up together, tending all to this one conclusion; that we should abide it
with patience. First, we have heard that the nature of Six several reasons
of comfort, lurking under this one.
our sufferings are so changed, that they are now made sufferings with Christ.
Secondly, that the end of them is to be glorified with Christ. Thirdly, that
the glory to come does far exceed in weight and eternity our present
sufferings. Fourthly, that the creatures have a fervent desire of the
revelation of that glory. Fifthly, that they also who have received the first
fruits of the Spirit, are weary of their present misery, and wait for the
redemption to come. And last, that in all our troubles we are saved, and
sustained with the hope of that which is to come, and not with a present
possession of that which we would have. In all these respects, it becomes us
not only to be of good comfort for the present, but also patiently to look
for a better. The Apostle brings in his conclusion upon his last argument, but
we are to consider that it has an eye unto all that goes before, and that
every one of those reasons aforesaid, serves to strengthen this conclusion,
that if we hope for that which is to come, then will we with patience abide
for it.

We have first to mark a difference between the Christian The worldlings
comfort is in things that are seen, the Christians not so.
and the Worldling: the Worldling has his affection on things which are seen,
he cannot mount above them; he has received his consolation on earth; his
portion is here, and he possesses his best things in this present life. It is
far otherwise with the Christian, for in his affection he transcends every
thing which is subject to sense, he is not now a possessor, but an expectant
by hope of his best things, he has them not in re, but in spe: therefore may
he say to the Worldling, as our Savior said to his Kinsmen, your time is
always, but my time is not yet come. The Christian is that good husbandman, who
has more comfort in that seed, which he has sown, and covered with earth
that he sees it not, than he has in that, which he sees lying before his
eyes in the barn, for he knows that the one, at the last, shall render him
manifold greater increase, than the other.

It is not an unpleasant Allegory which Augustine makes Augustines Allegory
on the words of Christ. Luke. 11. 11.
upon these words of our blessed Savior. If a Son ask bread of any of you
that is a Father, will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he give
him a Serpent? or if he ask an egg, will he give him a Scorpion. The Lord
Jesus being the highest Doctor that ever taught, does teach in the lowest
manner, applying himself to our capacity; by homely similitudes of earthly
things, he labors to bring us in all his doctrine to the knowledge of things
heavenly: I know that the end of these parables is to confirm us in this
assurance, that if we seek good things from the Lord, we shall obtain them,
specially says that Ancient, if we seek Faith, Love, Wherein he compares
Love to Bread that nourishes.
and Hope; three principal graces which we ought to crave from our heavenly
Father, not improperly represented by the Bread, the ^ish, and the Egg. For as
Bread nourishes the hungry, and serves principally to preserve the life of man:
so love is of that nature that it delights to nourish the needy, and to do
good unto others, for love is bountiful: the contrary 1 Cor. 13. 4.
hereof is the stone, which helps not the life of man in his necessity,
figuring the stony hearts of those who being void of Charity are unprofitable
to others.

The Fish again not improperly represents Faith: for it Faith to the Fish that
swims above.
swimmes not only in the calm but also in the storm, in the midst of most
turbulent waves it abides whole and cannot be overcome: the enemy hereof is
that old Serpent, who seeks by all means to quench our Faith, that being
borne down by the waves of stormy tentations, we might perish in insidelitie.

And Hope may very well be compared to the Egg, And Hope to the Egg, wherein
there is more good than appears.
wherein there appears nothing to look to but a dry and barraine shell,
unprofitable for nourishment, yet is there in it not only meet nourishment,
but also the greatest fowls which God has made for the pleasure and profit of
man, are procreated of it. The contrary hereof is the Scorpion, which has his
sting in his tail: if we keep us before it, the sting thereof shall not reach
to the breaking of our hope, then only is our hope wounded when we go back,
looking with the Wife of Lot unto Sodom, or with the carnal Israelites, to
the fleshpots of Egypt. Let us therefore with the holy Apostle forgetting that
which is behind, endeavor our selves to that which is before, following hard
toward the mark for the prise of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, with
constant hope and patience abiding those things which yet we have not seen.

And here if the lovers of this life and pleasures thereof, The fectlesse
objection of worldlings to Christians.
object unto us and say, what folly is this in you, that forgoing pleasures
which are seen, ye wait upon those which are not seen? were it not better
for you to enjoy with us, these present things which are certain, than to
defer your joy for things to come, which are uncertain, for who ever came
again from the dead, to tell you that there is such a joy abiding you, as ye
look for? To these Atheists we answer, that it is no vain nor uncertain
thing for which we wait: he that raised Lazarus from death the fourth day, and
rose also himself from the dead the third day, being not to dye any more, has
come from them with a testimony which we know is true: for he is that
faithful and true witness; thou that beleeuest not have the wrath of God
abiding upon thee, but he that believes has everlasting life: he has
forewarned us of the endless misery of the one, in the person of that rich
glutton, and of the endless joy of the other, in the person of poor Lazarus:
he told us even after his resurrection from the dead, that he was to ascend
unto his Father, as he has done, and that he will come again, that where he
is there also we may be, and this we rest assured that he will do.

But as for you who are faithless men, and by your scornful The foolishnes of
worldlings rebuked by Christians.
speeches would extenuate the hope of the children of God, you neither have
certain pleasures present, nor yet to come; you count us foolish, because we
wait on pleasures which are to come, but what are ye, who rest presently in
that which indeed is not? speak in truth and tell us, where are your
pleasures wherein you delight? what enjoy you this day of these carnal
pleasures, for which you have offended your God? in the moment wherein you had
them, what were they? tell if you can; and now if you g^e to seek them, where
are they? are they not gone from you, and so gone from you, that they have left
behind them a sting of guilty Conscience to torment you? does not the
pleasures of one day devour and swallow up the pleasures of another? those
days of thy life which were intended to thee before hand for days of pleasure
and triumph, are they not now vanished? and is there not coming upon thee a
day of death, which will be to thee a day of darkness, and doleful
displeasure, which shall swallow up with one gape, not only the sense, but
also the remembrance of all thy former delights?

Where then are your pleasures O worldlings, wherein Worldlings have no present
pleasures: such as are gone are lost, such as are to come are uncertain.
ye rejoice? present pleasures ye have not, those which are past are vain
and comfort you not, and those which are to come are uncertain: in the
smallest things how often are ye deceived? ye look for a fair day and a foul
comes upon you: ye look for continuance of health, and sickness unawares
seals upon you: ye comfort your selves with the hope of a good success of
your affairs, and an evil success ouerturnes incontinent all the counsels of
your heart: thus the good for which ye look to come, in your own experience
you find it deceiues you. Call not therefore any more upon us to follow you
and to drink with you of your perishing pleasures, we have had a proof of
yours, and found them to be vanity; but if ye will, come and take a proof of
ours, will you taste of those delicates whereunto GOD has called us? will you
eat of the fruit that grows upon the tree of life, discovered by the Gospel,
under the shadow whereof we delight to sit? righteousness shall breed you
peace, and peace shall breed you joy in the holy Ghost, and these shall in such
sort delight you, that in regard of them, your soul shall loath all your
former vain pleasures wherein you delighted before.

Of this we may see further, that as Faith procreates hope, Impatience in
trouble proceeds from the want of Hope.
so hope procreates Patience: so that the want of Patience in trouble bewrayes
the want of Hope. What made Saul who in his first beginning drove Witches out
of the land, in his latter end to make his refuge to them? surely because all
hope had failed him that the Lord would answer him any more. When Samaria was
besieged and straited with Famine, as long as Iehoram had any hope he waited
with patience upon the word of Elisha, that there should be great plenty
shortly in Samaria, but when by the woman's complaint he understood that the
Famine was encreast to that height, that his subjects were forced to eat their
children, his hope failed him, and he concludes to attend no longer upon the
Lord, but vows in his impatience to cut off the head of Elisha. Thus the cause
of all impatience in trouble, that drives men to seek deliverance by wicked
and unlawful means, is only the want of hope.

Again, if ye look to those who in prosperity lays Licentiousnes in
prosperity proceeds from the want of hope.
down the raynes of their affections with all licentiousness to go after
their desired pleasures, ye shall find the only cause thereof is the want of
hope, he that has (says Saint John) this hope in himself that he shall see
God, purges himself, even as God is pure. And this our Savior teaches us
more clearly, in the Parable of that servant who because he thought within
himself that his Master would not come, began to beat his fellows instead of
feeding them. So that the ground of all the Atheism of our time, is pointed
out to be the want of hope: there is no sin committed but through
impatience, all proceeds of this, that man's unregenerate and proud nature
cannot contain the self within the limits prescribed unto it by the Lord: he
that is governed with patience is easily kept both in peace and war from
etremitie of affection. If any man profane like Esau sell his birthright for
a mess of pottage, that is, forgo eternal life for the perishing pleasures
of this life, it is because he has no hope; and therefore no marvel if with
patience he abide not for a better, but rather in impatience break after his
affections, to embrace those things which are present.

Among all the graces of the Spirit, this praise may be Without patience no
grace can be preserved.
given to Patience, that it is the keeper of the rest: if our patience be not
first broken, we cannot be induced to the committing of any sin. Sinful
concupiscence proceeds from the impatience of continency; covetousness from
this that we are impatient of our sober estate. Therefore did Tertullian call
Patience such a governor of the affairs that concern God, vt nullum oput Deo
complacitum perpetrare extraneus a Patientia possit, that it is not possible
for him, who is a stranger from patience, to do any work acceptable unto God,
for impatience is so great an evil that by it, optima quaeque suff^cantur, the
best things which are in man are choked; where impatience has place, the grace
of Prayer is silent. A man in the perturbation of his affect^on can neither
hear any wholesome admonit on, nor do any duty of love to them unto whom he
owes it, therefore says the Apostle, ye have need of Patience, that after
ye have done the good will of God, ye may receive the promise.

The patience of a Christian consists either in a suff^ring Best medicine of
our present evils is patience
of our present evils, or in a patient expecting of our good that is to come.
Our present evils are crosses and afflictions, evils of their own nature,
being fruits of sin, yet changed unto us by the suffering of Christ. These
crosses are either such as come immediately from God, or mediately from men;
when they come immediately from God, we should receive them with thanksgiving,
as a cup, suppose bitter, yet wholesome, given unto us out of the hand of our
heavenly Physician: where otherwise they are sent unto us by the hand of men,
we are there also not to suffer our affections to be disquieted, by
consideration of him who brings it, but glorifying God who sent it to receive
it with patience, so David not looking unto Shimei the bringer, received the
cup of his curses as sent from God.

As the Israelites wanted not Cananites to be pricks and The Christian be where
he will* shall not want cursed Cananites to cross him.
thorns in their sides; so the godly in this life, live where they will, shall
not want wicked men to cross them, which are unto them as thorns in their
sides to stabbe them, and waken them to call upon God. The Popple grows in the
field of God with the good wheat, neither is any man able in this life to
sunder the one from the other, it being the Lords dispensation, that both
should grow till the day of harvest, and then the good wheat shall be gathered
into the barn, but the Tares shall be bound in sheaues and cast into the fire.
In the mean time, let the Godly remember that every wicked man among whom we
live, is a trial of our patience. As a skillful Artificer uses Lead to melt
Gold, so the Lord uses the dross of the earth, which are the wicked, as
means to purify and perfect his own children.

They are rods whereby he corrects us, they are thorns They are left for our
trial and our Savior by his example teaches us how to suffer them.
whereby he wakeneth us, therefore have we need to be armed with patience, and
to walk circumspectly: the Lord will not have them now to be weeded out of his
field, he will have them to remain in the face of his visible Church to the
end of the world. Patienter itaque ferendum, quod non est festmantur
^uferendum, we must therefore bear that patiently which we may not suddenly
take away. And of this patient suffering our Savior has given us a notable
example; he knew that Judas was a thief and a traitor, yet he offered unto him
his blessed mouth, even then when he came to betray him; he knew that a
fearful woe did abide him, yet did he bear with him patiently, till his time
came, for every wicked man has a particular day of judgment assigned unto
him, wherein he shall be rooted out, as a noisome weed, by the hand of God,
beside that general destruction which abides them all.

But here, least under pretense of that which I have said, What Christian
Patience is.
men foster that Patience which is meeter to be destroyed, let us consider what
this true Patience is, which here is recommended: we may this manner of way
define it out of Augustine, Patience is a grace of the Spirit flowing from
Grace and Hope, qua aequo animo mala toleramus, ne ^niquo bona illa deseramus,
per quae ad meliora peruentamus, whereby we so suffer things that are evil,
that we forsake not those things which are good, by which we may attain unto
those that are better: this excludes four sorts of men from the praise of
Christian Patience.

First, it excludes Ethnicks: even those chief Philosophers renowned for
Patience; it is true their ordinate behavior may convince the unbridled
affections of many Ethnicke Philosophers excluded from the praise of true
Patience.
professed Christians. In which sense Basile commended Socrates: yet cannot
their patience deserve the praise of true virtue; for neither did their
suffering proceed from the Spirit sanctifying their hearts by Faith, without
which it is impossible to please God, nor was the end thereof directed to his
glory; albeit as says the Apostle, after a sort they knew him, yet did they
not glorify him, and though they seemed omni virtutum genere praeclari, to
excel in every kind of virtue, yet herein are they convinced to be unjust,
quod dona Dei non retulerunt ad suum authorem, that they returned not the gifts
of GOD to the Author thereof, but rather abused them to their own vainglory;
and so failing both in the beginning, as also in that end whereunto they should
have been directed, they cannot have the praise of acceptable virtues to GOD,
but are rather to be accounted shadows of virtues, than virtue indeed. Quid
enim illis cum virtutibus, qui Dei virtutem Christum ignorant? what have they
to do with virtue, who are ignorant of Christ the true virtue of God? Certe
verus Philosophus est amator Dei: but the most excellent thing that ever they
did, flowed rather from a love of themselves, and their own glory, than from
any love of God.

The second sort of persons excluded from the praise of Worldlings sustayning
great distress for gain, are also excluded from the praise of true Patience.
true patience, are worldlings: who howsoever they endure very much, and
sustain great distress in their bodies, and restless cares in their minds,
yet have not this end proposed to them, that by the good which presently they
seek they may attain unto better. Our Savior has recommended to us that
patience whereby we possess our souls; he counts not of those sufferings,
which men endure that they may possess things which are without them: for what
is that possession worth whereby men possess those things which are without
them, they themselves being possessed within of worse than themselves? They are
called Lords, and are the servants of servants; have Villages, Cities and
multitudes of men under their commandment, and they themselves are captiued
slaves under the servitude of Satan: but that Patience is praise worthy,
whereby we possess our souls in patience, even then when we sustain greatest
loss of things that are without us: yet certainly all those cares of
worldlings, which causes them to endure the necessities of hunger and thirst,
the heat of the day, and cold of the night, seems to be but licitae quodammodo
insaniae, that is, lawful and tolerable suries, if they be compared with
others.

This definition does also exclude from the praise of this Atheists who pine
themselves to commit evil, excluded from the praise of true Patience.
excellent virtue those miserable Atheists who sustain great stre^^e and
painful labors, that they may commit evil. These are they of whom Solomon
says, they cannot rest unless they have done wickedly. And of this sort were
those Jews who vowed they would neither eat nor drink, till they had the
Apostles life; and those pharasaicall spirits, of whom our Savior says, they
compass both sea and land to make one of their own religion, and when they
have done, makes him ten times more than himself the child of Satan; this is
wicked Patience. Vera enim patientia est amica bon^ conscientiae, non inimica
innocentiae: as in like manner, that loss of goods, want of rest, and
enduring of shame, which men suffer to obtain the sinful pleasure of their
lusts. For Patience is not famula concupiscentiae, the handmaid of inordinate
concupiscence, but comes sapientiae, the companion of godly wisdom. And last
of all here is secluded that Patience, by which men in the hardness of heart,
endure most stubbornly the punishment inflicted upon them for their sins,
which is miseranda potius durities, quam miranda aut laudanda patientiae,
rather miserable hardness to be pitied, than patience worthy to be praised:
for then is patience good when the cause for which we suffer is good* It is not
poena sed causa quae facit Martyrem, every strong suffering of torment makes
not a man a Martyr, but the good cause for which he suffers: therefore are we
commanded not to suffer as murderers, thieves, or evil doers but as
Christians.

And last of all are excluded from this praise of Patience, Carnal professors
patient when God is dishonored, excluded from the praise of true Patience.
those professors, who being neither hot nor cold, can suffer with patience to
see the Lord dishonored, and not be grieved thereat, fiery in their own
particulars, when they are crossed; but more than cold and remiss in the
cause of God: this is not Patience but effeminate feebleness. It is the praise
of the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, that he could not suffer nor forbear
them that are evil, and it is the dispraise of Eli that when he knew his
sons did wickedly he stayed them not. The Lord Jesus the most rare example of
patience that ever lived in the world, was greatly commoued when he saw the
house of God profaned with merchandise: though we be but private men* yet the
rebukes of those who rebuke the Lord should fall upon us: if we love the Lord,
we cannot but be commoued when we see him offended; for no man can suffer that
to be contemned which he loves dearly: if we can do no more, at least our
eyes should gush out rivers of water when we see how the wicked will not keep
his Law.

But as for those whom God has placed in public authority, The holy spirit
has appeared sometime in the similitude of a Dove, sometime in the similitude of
fire, teaching us, etc.
there is more required of them, because more is given them, they ought to
plead with an holy anger the cause of Gods glory, following the good example of
Moses, who had this praise, that he was the most meek man upon earth; yet when
the Lord was dishonored by idolatry, his anger so increased, that he brake the
Tables, thereby declaring the people to be most unworthy, with whom the Lord
should keep any covenant, he stamped their Calfe to powder, and executed the
idolaters unto death. That same holy Spirit, who once descended in the
similitude of a Dove, did afterward descend in the similitude of fire, to teach
us his two-sold operation: in some cases he makes those upon whom he descends
like unto the Dove, simple, meek, patient, without any gall or bitterness,
and that is in offenses done against our selves; otherwise in offenses done
against our God he makes us hot and fervent. Thus far have we spoken of
Patience, which seeing it is so necessary a grace of the Spirit, we are to
seek it from the Father of light, from whom every manner of good gift does
descend unto us.

Verse 26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not
what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes request for us,
with sighs which cannot be expressed.
NOw follows the second principal argument The second principal argument of
comfort, is from that help which presently we have in our trouble.
of comfort against the cross: the first was taken from the comfort which is
to come, this is taken from that present comfort and help which we have even
now: albeit affliction be a burden heavier than we of our selves are able to
bear it, yet the spirit of Christ is present with us, not as a spectator only
of our sufferings, but as a party helper of us in all our afflictions. This
Spirit is that comforter whom the Lord Jesus promised to send; he once
descended upon the Apostles in a visible manner, in the similitude of cloven
tongues of fire, and made every one of them to speak with new languages, and
does still daily descend in an invisible manner upon the children of God,
working in them heavenly motions and spiritual strength, whereby they stand in
tentations: this is the sum of the argument

Where first we have to mark, that the Apostle ascribes We are full of
infirmities, but our help is from the Lord, who is present with us not as a
spectator only, but as an helper.
unto us of our own nothing but infirmities, the help whereby we stand he
ascribes it unto the Lord: and it is to be marked, that when the Apostle
ascribes unto us infirmities, he will thereby point out unto us, that
remanent weakness and debility to do any thing that is good; our best actions
are rather a preasing to do good, than a perfecting of it. In a Godly man his
desires are better than his deeds, he cannot do the good that he desires, as
the Apostle plainly confesses of himself: but the wicked have their desires
worse than their deeds; for when they have done most wickedly, yet have they
still a desire to do more, till their tormenting conscience vvaken them: and
so whereas the one sins of weakness, the other sins of wickedness.
The Christian is freed from wickedness not from weakness.
Certainly they who are truly Godly are so far from wickedness, that if
they were such men as they desire to be, and could possibly perform that good
which they prease to do, there would not be such a thing as a spark of the
life of sin left remaining in them. Always we live under this hope, that the
Lord who has already by his grace delivered us from wickedness, will also in
his own good time deliver us from our weakness: he shall make our deeds
answerable to our desires, and we shall become such as may say, Now thanks be
to God, for I do the good which I would.

These infirmities after our regeneration are left in us, Why infirmities are
left in us after our regeneration.
partly as Antidotes against our natural presumption, as we may see in the
holy Apostle, who least he should have been exalted out of measure, was
buffeted with the Angel of Satan: and partly for our provocation to prayer,
that having experience of our own weakness, we might run to the Lord who
is the strength of our soul, and seek his help by prayer, whereunto
otherwise we are very slow by nature, notwithstanding it be the best and most
acceptable service that we can give unto God upon earth. We have marked this
in experience, that as they who find not themselves bodily diseased seek not
the Physician, so he that feels not the spiritual infirmities of his soul,
cannot pray unto God to remedy them: the Lord has used the infirmities of
many as holy means to make them truly religious, who were profane before,
and for these causes are infirmities left in us.

Infirmities.] So the Apostle speaks in the plural number, Our infirmities
are manifold.
because not one but manifold are the infirmities whereunto we are subject:
whereof there arises to us a twofold warning. First, that we take heed unto
our selves, and see where we are weakest, to the end that there we may
strengthen our selves. The Philistims were very careful to know wherein
S^mpsons strength lay, to the end that spoiling him of his strength they might
spoil him of his life: but Satan by long experience knows our infirmities,
and sets upon us there where he knows that we are weakest. As therefore
the^ who are besieged look not so much unto the stronger part of the wall, as
unto the weaker, that they We should strengthen our selves most where we are
weakest.
may strengthen it: so wisdom craves that we should look most narrowly to
our greatest infirmities. He that has children albeit he love them all* yet
has he most respect to the most infirm among them; and he that has many
tenements of land* hastes soonest to repair that which is most ruinous; and
among all the members of the body, we care most for those that are weak or
vvounded. Seeing Nature has taught us to take heed to those things which are
ours, shall we not much more take heed unto our selves? It is even a point of
holy wisdom to consider where we are weakest, and what those sins are
unto which we are most subject, and by which Satan has gotten greatest
vantage against us, that so we may take the more pains to make our selves
strong against it.

And after that by prayer and spiritual exercises, thou Yet so that we
remember that the enemy repulsed at one place will assault another.
have made thy self strong there where thou vvast wont to be vveake, yet take
heed unto thy self, it is not one but many infirmities whereunto we are
subject, and the crafty enemy can very well change his tentations upon thee,
if he be repulsed at any one part, whereat he was wont to enter, he will go
about and seek vantage at another: and therefore seeing our enemy is
restless, and the matter he works upon is our manifold infirmities, let us
walk circumspectly, and pray continually, standing with the whole complete
armor of God upon us, that we may resist him.

Where for our encouragement let us mark, that albeit Comfort, our standing in
tentations past, proves we have been supported by a stronger than he is that
impugnes us.
our infirmities be many, and our enemy strong, yet in all our conflicts we
are not alone, but have an helper who sustaynes us. And this thou may find
in thine own experience, if thou will consider with me, whereof comes this
that so many years thou have endured the battle against principalities and
powers? Is it not of the Lord, whose secret help has sustained thee? how often
have thou been compassed with fearful tentations, standing like Israel in
the red sea, with mountains of waters about thee, threatening to ouerwhelme
thee? how many times have thou received within thy self the sentence of death,
and been so far cast down, that thou have thought with David, there has
been nothing for thee but death, and reiection from the favor of God? how often
have thou looked to be swallowed up of thy enemy, and given unto him as a
pray? and yet has the Lord beyond thy expectation delivered thee from so
manifold deaths: May thou not feel that the powers of hell are not able to
quench that spark of light and life, which God has created in thee? No, no,
assuredly if it had been in the power of Satan to have put it out, it should
have been done long or now: but blessed be the Lord, it is he who keeps our
souls in life, and whose secret grace continually sustaines us.

The greatness of this comfort shall yet appear the better, How the holy
Spirit bears with us and ouer-against us every burden laid upon us.
if we consider the word here used by the Apostle, which signifies that he
lifts with us, and before us in the burden. We see by daily custom that the
burden which is too heavy for one, is made easy by the help of an other; two
joining hand in hand lift up that which one is not able to do: and the burden
of Affliction, which to our Nature is intolerable, by the help of the Spirit
becomes portable and easy: for he lifts not only ouer-against us, but least
our part of the burden should ouer-match us, he lifts also with us, which the
double composition of the word imports: herein then is our comfort, that the
Lord our God is not like unto other Lords and Masters of the world, if he send
us forth to do any work in his name, he goes with us himself to assist us,
what good he commands us to do, he helps us to do it, and whatsoever cross
he lays upon us he strengthens us to bear it, being as I said ever present
with us, not as a spectator only, but as an actor.

For we know not.] The Apostle this way having generally Our infirmities
proceed from the want of Prayer.
set down his second principal argument of comfort, proceeds to a particular
explication thereof, wherein first he lets us see that our infirmities proceed
of the want of a spiritual disposition to prayer: and secondly, that the way
by which the Spirit helps our infirmities, is by the grace of prayer. Prayer
then is here recommended unto us as a sovereign remedy against all our
infirmities. In our heauiest tentations we get comfort as soon as we get
grace to pray, Ascendit precatio, and discendit Dei miseratio, when Augustine.
Prayer goes up, the mercy of God comes down: deijcitur Ambrose de fuga
saeculi. cap. 7. We recover our strength by Prayer.
Satan cum tu ascenderis, Satan is cast down when thou do ascend by Prayer*
At the Lords Command the blind sees; the paralitique walks, the dumb
speaks, the deaf hears, she that was sick of the Fever rises and
ministers; then comes these commandments out, when thy Prayer preuailes with
the Lord, light comes to resolve our doubts, comfort to mitigate our trouble,
strength to sustain our weakness: blessed is the man to whom the Lord keeps
open this door of refuge, that he may say in his greatest distress with
Iehoshaphat, O Lord we know not what to do, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12.
neither is there strength in us against this people, but our eyes are toward
thee: for he may be sure of comfort in time of need.

Again, we learn here that it is not so easy a thing to It is not an ^asie
thing to pray.
pray as commonly men profess, it is thought of many that it is an easy thing
to pray, therefore they begin it, and go through it, as if it were a work of
no difficulty: but alas, if we knew our own natural inabilitie, and how
rare a grace, the grace of Prayer is, we should not so vainly profess in our
words, that we can pray, as earnestly beseech him with the Disciples that he
would teach us to pray. As that Eunuch professed that he could not understand
without Acts. 8. 31.
a guide, so may we that we cannot pray without a guide, it is easy to speak
of God, but not so easy to speak unto God; he that will speak to God (says
Ambrose) must speak to him in his own language, that is, in the language of
his Spirit.

Prayer is not a communing of the tongue with God, but Prayer is a communing of
the soul with God.
of the soul with God, and of such a soul only as is taught by the holy
Spirit how to pray: it is true the Lord understands the thoughts of every man's
heart, but the language acceptable to God, are those motions of the heart which
are raised by his own Spirit, and he that wants this Spirit, can not speak
unto God in Gods language. Let this serve to reform the corrupt judgment of
many, who thinking themselves able enough to pray, pass over their days
without the grace of Prayer, a fearful punishment of carnal presumption.

This natural inabilitie to pray consists in these: sometime Our natural
inabilitie to pray is, either in our corrupt understanding, by which we seek
things unlawful,
the fault is in our understanding, fallimur putantes prodesse quae poscimus,
cum non prosint, we are deceived, thinking those things to be profitable for
us which are not: so the Jews not content to be fed with Manna according to
the Lords dispensation, will have flesh, which the Lord gives them, but in his
anger: and their posterity not content with the Lords government, will have a
King like other nations, which the Lord gave them, but in his wrath. Of this
sort are they, who send out in stead of lawful prayers* unlawful imprecations
against their brethren, crying for the plagues of God upon their neighbors,
for every small offense, in stead of the blessings of God: these are like the
Disciples that prayed for fire from heaven to burn up Samaria, not being led
by a right spirit; or rather like unto Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, who sent up
to the Lord Numb. 16.
strange fire, which at length brought down a strange judgment upon
themselves.

Sometime again we seek that which lawfully may Or in our corrupt affection,
by which we seek things lawful for the wrong end. James 4. 3. Mat. 6. 33.
be sought: the fault is not in the understanding, but in the affection? as
when men seek lawful things for the wrong end, or in the wrong place. Of the
first (says Saint James) ye seek and receive not, because ye ask amiss,
that ye may consume it upon your lusts. Of the second (says our Savior) seek
first the kingdom of God and other things shall be cast unto you: the Lord is
greatly dishonored when we seek any thing before himself: for remedy let
us remember these rules. First, that the thing we seek be good. Secondly, that
we seek the greatest good in the first room. And thirdly, that the secondary
gifts we seek them to the right end, namely, that they may be servants to us
in our serving of God only, and that we abuse them not as occasions of
sinning against our God.

And further we may learn here how little cause either What good can we do by
Nature, seeing we cannot do so much as pray for our selves.
the Pelagian had of old, or the semipelagian Papists have now, to magnify so
far the arm of flesh, as to affirm that man unregenerate has power of his
own free will, to make choice in things spiritual, of that which is good: for
seeing we cannot know what is good for us, till the Spirit teach us, what
power have we of our selves to make choice of it? It is true that men by the
quickness of their natural wit, have found out many arts and trades,
profitable for this natural life; so Iubal was the first Father of them who
play on Harpes and Organes, and Tubal-Cain the first inuenter Genesis 4. 22.
of cunning working in brass and iron: but as for spiritual things which
concern the life to come man is not able by any power of Nature to help
himself therein: for what can he do, seeing he does not understand those
things that are of God?

But the spirit it self makes request.] The Apostle to the How the Spirit
requests for us.
Galathians has a commentary for these words, when he says that God has
sent down his Spirit into our hearts, by which we cry Abba father: the
requesting then of the Spirit is no other thing, but his framing of such
desires in us by which we request God. And hereupon depends the efficacy of
the prayers of Gods children: no marvel they be effectual to move the Lord,
seeing they are the birth of his own Spirit, the effect of his own operation;
they come from him, and it is not possible that he can mislike them when they
return unto him. If we shall take a view of example of holy Scripture, and
Ecclesiastique story, we shall find that the prayer of the godly has done
many vvonderfull things, yea, what is it that fervent prayer has not done?

Abraham's prayer opened the barraine vvombes of Examples in holy scripture
proving the efficacy of Prayer.
Abimilechs household, and closed up the hands of the Angels who went to
destroy Sodom, they could bring down no fire upon it, till Lot was removed
out of it. The prayer of Moses parted the red sea, and was more forcible to
overthrow the army of Amalecke, than all the weapons of Israel. The prayer of
Joshua made the Sun stand still in the firmament; and Samuels prayer brought
loud thunder, flashing fire, and heavy haile-stones upon the Philistims. Eliah
by prayer closed the heavens for the space of three years and six months, and
opened them again. And this example Saint James applies to every godly man,
that we should not think they did these things by the privilege of their
persons, rather then the efficacy of their prayer, he shows that Eliah was a
man subject to the same infirmities whereunto we are subject, and that the
prayer of any righteous man auailes much, if it be fervent, no less than his*
though we work not by prayer such external miracles as he did, yet do we
by it draw down inward grace, bringing light to the blind, life to the dead,
and makes a vvonder^ull change by repentance, a work full of miracles indeed
in them who obtain it.

In like manner it is written that Aurelius Antonius in Examples in
Ecclesiastique history.
his expedition against the Germans, had in his army a legion of Christians,
who by their earnest prayer unto God, obtained rain for refreshment of his
army, when it was like to perish with thirst; as likewise fearful
thundrings against their enemies: for which he then called that legion (...),
fulminatrix, the thundering band. Thus in all ages has prayer been so
forcible, that it has sometimes altered the very course of Nature without, and
at all times has changed the course of corrupt nature within, in such as had
it.

Where if the children of God, who are of tender conscience, Comfort for the
godly when they pray and are not instantly answered.
object unto me that the more I speak of the efficacy of prayer, the less is
their comfort, considering that of a long time they have called upon the Lord*
and can find no relief of their trouble: let them remember that in this
tentation they are not without companions godly men have been exercised with
the like before them. David a man after Gods own heart, complains ofttimes to
the Lord that he was hoarse with crying; and that albeit he continued his
prayer day and night, yet the Lord was to him as one that is deaf, and would
no more be merciful unto him, but at length he is always compelled to burst out
into glorious thanksgiving, praising the Lord that has heard his voice: and
not only so, but he has left this which he found in his experience to be
true, as a bulwark of our faith unto all posterity. Surely the Lord will not
fail his people, 1 Samuel 12. 20. 21.
nor forsake his inheritance. He endures but a while in his anger, but in his
favor is life. He is the most high God that performs his promises toward me.
Howsoever in our trouble we think many times that he has forsaken us, yet
vvil he return and revive his work in us, and not fail to fulfill the
desires of them who fear him. Thus looking unto David let them not think evil
to be tried with the same tentation, by which David a man beloved of God was
tried before them, and consider that there is a difference between delaying
and denying: the Lord for a time delays that which he will not deny, non vt
neget, sed vt commendet sua dona. Augustine.
and again, tardius dando quod petimus, ^^stantiam nobis orationis Chris. in
Mat. hom. 10.
indicit, the Lord when he is slow to give that which we ask, does it only
that he may commend his gifts unto us, and make us more instant and earnest in
prayer.

For the better understanding of this, let us distinguish If the Lord refuse
that which we will, it is because it is not for our weal.
our petitions: sometime we seek those things which are not so expedient for
our selves to be granted as refused unto us; and in these non audit nos ad
voluntatem, vt exaudiat ad salutem, the Lord regards not thy will, but thy
weal. The Apostle buffeted by an Angel of Satan, besought the Lord to remove
that tentation from him, but obtained not his will, the Lord saw it was not for
his weal: and not only do we read that men beloved of God have been refused
in mercy, but others have had their petitions granted in anger: which we may
see not only in the Israelites, who obtained flesh when they sought, but in
his anger; but also in those damned Spirits, who sought license of the Lord
Jesus to enter into Swine, and obtained it, but to the greater augmentation of
their wrath.

If therefore thy petition unto GOD be for a thing absolutely And the refusal
of any thing to his own, is not without the grant of a better.
necessary to thy salvation, be assured that howeuer the Lord delay it, he
shall not simply refuse it: and if otherwise thou crave a thing not absolutely
necessary for thee, if the Lord refuse to satisfy thy will therein, it is that
he may do according to thy weal. When the Disciple asked Jesus of the
resurrection, Lord will thou at this time restore the Acts 1. 6.
kingdom of Israel? he satisfied them not in that which they craved; It is not
for you (says he, to know the times or seasons which the Father has put into
his own hand: but another thing meeter for them, and less craved of them, he
promised But ye shall receive power of the holy Ghost, when he shall come upon
you, and ye shall be witnesses unto me. A comfortable answer indeed, an
exchange most profitable for us, and we rest content with it, So be it, even
so be it, O Lord, give us thine holy Spirit, and deny us any other thing thou will.

And of this again we learn, that we live only by mercy, Prayer which
obtaines all other gifts is also a gift of God, therefore the praise of all is
due to the Lord 1 Cor. 4. 7.
for not only those things which we obtain by prayer, are begged by us, and
given by God, For what have thou O man that thou have not received? but we see
here that prayer it self, whereby we get all things, is also a gift of God: if
we wanted not of our own, we would not seek of another by prayer, and if we
could also pray of our selves, we needed not another to teach us. Etiam ipsa
Oration inter gratiae munera reperitur, it is the Lord who commands and
works in us both the will and the deed: unto him therefore belongs the
praise of all.

We have here also to consider a great comfort for the Comfort for the godly,
when no man will speak for them they want not Intercessours.
godly, who are ofttimes redacted to that estate, that there is none among men
to speak for them: Jeremy cannot find out Ebed-melech, neither have the
Prophets of the Lord one Obadiah to hide them: Daniel had none to speak for
him, al stands up that had credit, to procure that he may be cast into the
den: those that should be friends, oftentimes become foes to the servants of
God, but even at this time their comfort is, that not only they have Jesus the
Just an Advocate for them at the right hand of his Father, but have also the
Spirit the Comforter within them, an Intercessor for them.

Miserable therefore must they be who bend their tongues Miserable are those who
bend their tongues against them, for whom the holy Spirit makes request. 2 Chronicles. 18.
to speak against those, for whom the holy Ghost makes request unto God: that
rebuke which the Prophet gave to Iehosaphat, when he went out to help wicked
king Achab, will thou help them that hate the Lord? we may turn to those in
our time, that are enemies to the Children of God. Will ye hurt them, whom the
Lord helps? The children of God in all their infirmities have the holy Spirit
for their helper, what ever man speaks against them, he makes request unto
GOD for them. It cannot then otherwise be, but in the end comfort must be to
them, and confusion unto their enemies. That oracle which Zeresh gave to Hamans
Esth.
husband, shall assuredly prove true upon all the enemies of God in word or
deed. If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews thou shall not fail to fall
before him: If Eliah be the man of God though not a fire from heaven, yet
doubtless a wrath from heaven shall overtake his enemies. Only let those who are
troubled by the malice of wicked men, make sure unto themselves that they have
the Spirit of grace, and of glory resting in them, partaker with them of their
afflictions, Pet.
and then let them be assured that either their enemies shall become their
friends, or then the righteous Lord shall render vengeance unto those that
trouble them.

With sighs.] Last of all we learn here that the godly No malice of men can
cut off the intelligence of a Christian with the Lord.
have an intelligence with the Lord their God, which no power of man is able to
cut away. For howeuer they may be separated from the company of men, and locked
up in inaccessible places, yet can no man hinder their access unto God, and
speaking with him: yea suppose they should cut their tongues out of their
heads; for it is not by words, but by sighs they make request unto God, and
their sighs may well be increased by trouble, but cannot be destroyed. And
herewith also let the children of GOD comfort themselves, when they are brought
unto that extremity, that neither eye, hand, nor tongue can serve them in
prayer; let them look unto good king Ezekiah, who being so weakened with
bodily diseases, that he could not speak distinctly unto God, yet his
mourning like a Dove, and chattering like a swallow, entered into the Lords
ear, and brought back a comfortable answer to him.

Verse 27. But he that searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning of the
Spirit, for he makes request for the Saints, according to the will of God.
LEast any man should think the sighs of the It is a style only competent to
God, that he is the searcher of hearts.
godly of little avail, because the Apostle has said they cannot be expressed,
the Apostle here obuiats the doubt, showing that albeit we cannot express
them, yet the Lord to whom they are made he understands them: for he knows the
meaning of the Spirit. Wherein first occurs to be marked this description of
God: he is called the searcher of hearts. Many glorious styles are given to the
Lord in holy Scripture, and among the rest this one, importing his great
sovereignty over all his creatures: many of his properties after a sort are
communicable to the creature; but this is no way communicable: none but the
Lord tries the raynes and searches the heart. And in this the Lord is brought
in rejoicing. Am I a God near hand, and not a God far off? Can any hide
himself Ier. 23. 23.
in secret places that I shall not see him? do not I fill heanen and earth? As
for man he is oftentimes so blind that he sees not those things which are
near him, no more then Hagar did the Well that was before her, and how then
shall he see things which are far from him? he sees not things which are
plain and reueiled, far less can he understand those that are covered. Old
Isaac when his eyes waxed dim was so deceived that he took Jacob for Esau, but
the ancient of days, who hears without ears, and sees without eyes cannot be
so deceived. Samuel may look upon Eliah, and think he should be King,
because of his likely personage, but the Lord can tell him this is not the man:
for man beholds the countenance, but the Lord regards the heart.

Of this we have first to learn a lesson of true godliness, that seeing the
Lord searches the heart, it becomes us in all our ways principally to look
unto it. It is in the most part of men an argument of their Atheism, that they
look curiously to the decking of the body, which falls under the eye of man,
but regard not the hid man of the heart, Let not man therefore sin under hope
of secrecy.
which falls under the eye of God. And again, we learn here, that it cannot
be without great contempt to God, to sin against him under the hope of
secrecy; it is with thy sin, to join a mocking of God: for in effect thou
say with the Atheist, The Lord sees not. A most high sin against his
Majesty, whereby thou do all thou can to pull out the eyes of the Lord,
that he should not see, or at least thinks so of him in the false conclusion
of thy darkened mind. No marvel therefore, that against such as thou art, the
Prophet threaten that fearful curse: Woe be to them that Esaias 29. 15.
seek in deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, their works are in
darkness, and they say, who sees us? or who knows us? your turning of
devices shall it not be esteemed as the potters clay? for shall the work say
to him that made it, he made me not? or the thing formed, say of him that
fashioned it, he had none understanding? Understand ye unwise among the
people, and ye fools when will ye be wise? He that planted Psalm. 94. 8. 9.
10. 11.
the ear, shall be not hear? or he that formed the eye, shall he not see?
he that teaches man knowledge, shall he not know? Certainly, the Lord
knows the thoughts of the heart of man, that they be but vanity.

Let us therefore sanctify the Lord God of hosts in our But let the eye of
the Lord be an awband, even in secret to keep us from sin.
heart, let us never seek to hide our ways from him, for that it is
impossible: let us learn of Henoch to make our lives a walking with God; and
with David, let us always set the Lord before our eyes: so in the midst of
our own house we shall walk in the innocence of our heart: where there is no
eye of man to make us ashamed, the reverence of God shall keep us from sin.
The fear of carnal men, is the countenance of men: what restrained Abner, and
made him unwilling to slay Asahel? If I do it (said he) how shall I hold up my
face to thy brother Ioab: but the awe of spiritual 2 Samuel 2. 22.
men is the countenance of GOD: this restrained Joseph Genesis 44. 18.
that in secret he durst not commit adultery, and it was his reason to
persuade his brethren, I fear God, and therefore dare do you no evil.
Certainly this is only true godliness, when we live so as under the eye of
GOD, and the reverence of his invisible majesty, restraines us from doing
those sins, which otherwise we might do unknown, or at least uncontrolled
of men.

And so much the more let us endeavor to attain to this The sons of Adam
seek to hide themselves from the Lord.
holy disposition, because howsoever our corrupt Nature cannot hide her crooked
ways from the Lord, yet she desires and preases to do it, and if her deeds
and thoughts be brought unto the light, it is sore against her will: but the
children of God renewed by grace, willingly presents their hearts to God, that
he should look upon them. And this the Apostle points out here, when he
says, that not only God knows the heart, but that he searches the heart.
Searching is the inquisition of a thing which is hid and covered, and imports
the contrary corruption of our Nature, which seeks to hide and obscure it
self from the Lord. As Adam presently after his fall sought to cover his
nakedness with fig tree leaves, so has he transmitted this heritable evil
to all his posterity, that when they have done wickedly, they do what they
can to cover it: but in vain, But in vain.
for the Lord is such a searcher, from whose eyes no man can hide that for
which he makes inquisition. Laban searched the Tent of Jacob for his Idols,
and could not find them though they were there: but what the Lord searches
he shall find out. If Saul hide himself the Lord can tell the people that
he lurkes among the stuff. As a light where it comes makes things to be
seen which were hid in darkness, so the Lord when he searches, says he will
search with lights; to tell thee that were thy deeds never so secret, he will
make them manifest. Let us not therefore like the profane Atheists seek to
hide our secrets from the searcher, but let us live as in the sight of God.

Neither is it without great cause that the Lord passing The heart only makes
the difference between the true Christian and counterfaite.
by other things, looks only to the heart, the heart being the essential
difference that distinguishes a true Christian from a counterfaite: for
outward exercises of godliness the hypocrite in appearance may match the holy
one. Ye shall see Cain sacrificing no less then Abel: ye shall see Esau
seeking the blessing with greater crying, and more tears, than Jacob: and Saul
shall confess his sin no less than David: and Ahab shall humble himself in
dust and ashes, more penitent like than Ezechiah: the Pharisee shall be more
abundant in fasting and giving of alms, than the Publican. As he that does
paint a fair fire, may paint the color and the form of the bowing flame
thereof, but can no way paint the heat thereof: so an Hypocrite can look like
a Christian, speak like a Christian, and in outward actions counterfeit the
Christian, but can never attain to the Christians heart: therefore is it that
the Lord most of all delights in the heart, and we also most of all should
take heed unto it, to keep it holy.

Beside this, that the Lord has locked up the heart of It is in great wisdom
that God has locked up the heart of one man from another.
one man from another, and has reserved the knowledge of the heart to himself
only, the Lord has done it in great wisdom: for seeing that man divided
himself by sin from God, their hearts by nature are so discordant among
themselves, that if their hearts were as manifest to others, as their faces,
there could not be a fellowship nor society entertained among men. Look how
many men are in the world, there are as many sundry judgments and wills, every
man having a kingdom in his breast, and so carried away with a desire of his
own super-excellencie, that he seeks the advancement of his own will with
the overthrow of all others, whose will is not agreeable to his, if he might
attain unto it. Again, the heart of man is such a bottomless fountain of
wickedness, that if it were manifested, the world should be infected with
viler abominations, than any that yet are known in it: for if the tongue
which is but a little member of the body, when it somes out but a small part of
that filth which abounds in the heart, be so forcible as to corrupt the honest
minds and manners of the hearers, what should be done if the heart it self
were laid open, which is by nature but a stinking puddle, and filthy
storehouse of all iniquity?

And further for the comfort of the whole Church of God, The sovereignty of God
over man appears in this, that he is upon the secrets of their hearts.
and every member thereof, let us mark the sovereignty of our God over all
his creatures in these two, that not only he is upon their secrets whether
they will or not, for he sits in their hearts, but also has soueraign
commandment over them, so that he can when he will, and will when his glory
requires, either take their hearts utterly from them, or turn their own hearts
against themselves, as domestic enemies to torment them. And as for the first,
it is manifest out of this place, that the Lord sits upon the secret
counsel of the wicked; for he searches the heart. It was a great
discouragement to Benhadad King of Aram, that the secret conclusion, which he
laid with his captains in his cabinet counsel, concerning the ordering of his
battles against Israel were discovered as they were concluded, by Elisha the
Prophet, unto the King of Israel, and who reueiled them to Elisha, but the
Lord our God? who sits as moderator in the counsel of the wicked, whether they
will or not to ouerrule their determinations, and direct them to their own end,
which is the glory, and good of his church. Let our enemies then take counsel
and conspire together as they will, he that does sit in the heavens shall have
them in derision. The counsel of the Lord shall stand, and what he has
decreed shall only come to pass: let us therefore rest in him.

It were good for men to consider this, that albeit man Man has but his heart
to hold him up, and God can take it from him, when he will.
be sustained and vpholden by his own heart, so that no other thing can help
him if it fail him, yet it is in the Lords power to do with it what he
will: how often have we seen that the Lord being angry at man, passing by all
the members of his body, and leaving them whole and sound, has stricken the
heart with such terrors, that most valiant men having eyes could not see,
having a tongue could not speak, having hands could not strike to defend
themselves, and having feet could not do so much as run away, their heart
being taken from them by God, they are left in a strait and comfortless
estate. But far more miserable are they, when the Lord turns their own
hearts against themselves, and makes them a terror to themselves. A fearful
example whereof we have in Belshazzar, who seeing nothing Dan. 4. 6.
without him, but the figure of a hand which stirred him not, was so stricken
and pursued with his own heart within him, that his flesh trembled, his
countenance waxed pale, his knees smote one against another. If man considered
this, he would be loath to provoke the Lord unto anger, seeing he can neither
sustain the wrath of God nor eschew it.

Moreover we are taught here, seeing our Prayer is a We have need of great
reverence in prayer, seeing we speak to him who searches the heart.
conference with him who searches the heart, that we should always pray with our
heart, for otherwise if we draw near him with our lips our heart being far
from him, he will curse us as deceivers, that having a male in our flock, do
sacrifice a lame thing unto the Lord: that is, in stead of the service of our
hearts, do offer unto him the service of our lips. The Lord has no delight in
the sacrifice of fools, who are rash with their mouth to utter a thing before
him, not considering that he is in heaven, and they are upon earth, the mouth
may reach to men who are beside us* the heart only may reach to God who is
above. It was a very godly Psalm. 139. 23.
protestation that David made, Try me O Lord, and prove my thoughts in the
night, and see if at any time I have spoken that to thee with my mouth, which I
have not thought with my heart: and albeit we have not as yet attained unto
it, yet it is that holy sincerity vvhereat we should aim in all our Prayers,
so to speak unto GOD, that our conscience may bear us record that we lie
not, and that we have spoken nothing with our mouth, which we have not
thought with our heart.

We are therefore for the right ordering of our prayers, Three things to be
observed in Prayer.
to take heed to these three things. First, preparation before prayer.
Secondly, attention in prayer. Thirdly, reverent 1 That preparation go before
it.
thanksgiving after prayer. As for the first, as Moses and Joshua put off their
shoes before they came near the Lord, so are we to remove out of our hearts
unclean cogitations, and affections, whereby we have trod in the filth of
sin, before we pray; for those are never lawful, but most unlawful in the
time of prayer. As for worldly cogitations they are sometimes lawful, but
never in the time of prayer. As Abraham used his Asses to serve him for his
journey, but when he came to Mount Moriah, the place of the worship, he left
them at the foot of the hill: so the thoughts of the world are sometime
tolerable, if we use them as servants, to carry us through in our journey,
from the earth to heaven, but we must not take them with us into the holy place
wherein the Lord is to be worshipped.

To help us to the preparation before prayer, let us consider; Motives to
preparation.
first, that he to whom we speak is the Father of light, and we are by nature
but the children of darkness: call therefore upon him in the sincerity and
uprightness of thine heart; for he loves truth in the inward affections
Secondly, he is the Father of glory, come therefore before him with fear and
reverence, for thou art but dust and ashes. Thirdly, he is the Father of
mercy, repent thee therefore of thy sins, and then draw near with a true
heart, in assurance of Faith.

The second thing requisite, is attention in Prayer: the Lord 2 That there be
attention in Prayer.
to whom we speak is the searcher of the heart, and therefore we should beware
that we speak nothing to him with our mouth, which our heart has not
conceived. For it is a great mockery to the Lord to desire him to consider
those petitions which we have not considered our selves; we scarcely hear
what we say our selves and how then shall we crave the Lord may hear us? We
find by experience that it is not an easy thing to gather together in one,
and keep united the powers of our soul in prayer unto God, Satan knows that
the gathering of our forces is the weakening of his kingdom, and that then we
are strongest, when we are most fervent in prayer, and therefore does he
labor all that he can to slack the earnestness of our affection, and so to
make us more remiss in prayer, by stealing into our hearts if not a profane,
at least an impertinent cogitation: so that unless we fight without ceasing
against the incursion of our enemy, like Abraham driving away the ravening
birds from his sacrifice; unless we expel them speedily, as often as they come
upon us, it is not possible that we can entertain conference with God by
prayer.

And thirdly, after thy prayer thou should come away with reverent
thanksgiving. It is the fault of many careless 3 That after prayer there be
thanksgiving to God.
worshippers, they go unto God as men go to a Well to refresh them when they
are thirsty; they go to it, and their face toward it, but being refreshed they
return with their back upon it: even so do they sit down to their prayers
without preparation, power them out without attention and devotion, and when
they have done, goes away without reverent thanksgiving: whereas indeed every
access to God by prayer, should kindle in our hearts a new affection toward
him, if we consider that when we pray, and gets any access, so often are we
confirmed in this, that he who has the keys of the house of David, and opens
and no man shuts, has opened to us an entrance to the throne of grace, which
shall never be closed again upon us: whereof there should arise in our hearts
a daily increase of joy, which should make us to abound in thanksgiving.

Makes request for the Saints.] We have further to learn The curse of Moab is
upon profane men they pray and preuailes not.
that none are partakers of the grace of Prayer, but men sanctified in Christ
Jesus: the Spirit requests for Saints, not for profane and impenitent men,
howsoever sometime they babble for themselves, yet are their prayers turned
into sin. The curse of Moab is upon them, they pray and preuailes not. As
without sanctification we cannot see God, so without sanctification we cannot
pray to God: every one that calls on the name of the Lord, should depart from
iniquity. Do we not feel it by experience, that the further we go from our
sins, the nearer access we get unto the Lord: and on the contrary, does not
the Lord protest against his people the Jews? albeit ye make many prayers yet
Esaias 1. 15. Ierem. 7. 9.
I will not hear you, for your hands are full of blood. Will you steal,
murder, and commit adultery, and come and stand before me in this house,
where my name is called upon, before your eyes? behold even I see it, and will
for this cause cast you out of my sight.

But here seeing it is for Saints only that the Spirit requests, Seeing the
spirit requests for Saints only, how shall we know that he requests for us who
are sinners? 1 Ioh. 1. 8.
what shall then become of me may the vveake Christian say, who am the chief
of all sinners? To this I answer, that in us who are militant here upon earth
both of these are true; we are sinners, and we are Saints, but in sundry
respects. If we say we have no sin we lie, and the truth of God is not in
us. And if our adversary say that there is nothing in us but sin, he is
also a liar. That therefore we may know how these are to be reconciled, let us
consider that the Evangelist Saint John says, he that is borne of 1 Ioh. 5.
18.
God sins not: and in the same Epistle speaking also of men that are
regenerate and borne of God, he says, if we say we have no sin we deceive
our selves. The Apostle Saint Paul speaking of himself in one and the self
same place, affirms that he did the evil which he would not, and yet
incontinent Romans 7. 15. 17.
he protests that it was not he but sin dwelling in him.

The resolution of this doubt will arise by considering In the christian man
are two men, the new and the old.
that in the Christian man are two men, the new man, and the old; the one the
workmanship of God, the other the workmanship of Satan; the one but young,
little and weak in respect of the other, like little David compared to the
Giant Goliath. Yet the new man who is weakest has this vantage, that he is
daily growing, whereas the other is daily decaying; the life of the new man
waxes stronger and stronger, the life of the old man weaker and weaker, the
one tending to perfection, the other vvearing to a final destruction.

Now the Lord in judging of the Christian looks not God judges of the
Christian by the new man, and not by the old.
to the remanents of sin in him, which are daily decaying, but to the new
workmanship of his own grace in him, which is daily growing, according to it
he esteems, judges, and speaks of the Christian: from it he gives us these
names, as to call us Saints, righteous, etc. not counting with us what have
we been, neither yet weighing us by the corruption of sinful nature which
remains in us, but according to the new grace which in our regeneration he
has created in us, He sees no iniquity in Israel, and it is his Numb. 23. 21.
praise to pass by the transgressions of his heritage. But the Christian by
the contrary in judging of himself, he looks most commonly ^o that
whereunto the Lord looks least, his sins are ever before him, the old man
is continually in his sight as a strong, and mighty Giant, whose force he
fears, whose tyranny makes him to tremble, and by whom he finds himself
detayned under miserable thraldom far against his will, and therefore all
his care is how to subdue his tyranny, how to quench his life, and shake off
his dominion in this warfare: he sighs, complains, and cries unto GOD with
the holy Apostle, O miserable Romans 7. 24.
man, who shall deliver me from this body of sin? But because so long as this
old man has a life, he never rests to send out sinful motions and actions,
which do greatly grieve the child of God, therefore is it that he esteems
himself a miserable creature, yea, and the chief of all sinners. Thus ye see
how it is, that God accounts his children, Saints, and they account themselves
Sinners.

Where again Saint John says, that he who is borne of God How it is to be
understood that he who is borne of God sins not.
sins not, and yet that he who says he has no sin is a liar, both of
these is true. He that is borne of God that is, the new man, sins not: for
sure it is that all the sins which are committed by man, are either done
without the knowledge of the new man, his understanding being as yet so vveake
that he does not know every sin to be sin, or then if he knows them to be
sins, they are done without his consent or approbation, yea they are done
sore against his will, so that the new man in the sins which are done in the
body is a patient not an agent.

So that as an honest man captiued by violence, and against The new man lives
in the body like Lot in Sodom:
his will compelled to behold wicked and abhomi^able deeds, which he would not
so much as look to if he were free: so is the new man detayned in the body as
a captive, and compelled to look unto that which he loves not* that is, to the
sinful motions, unruly lusts and affections of his corrupt nature, whereunto
he consents not, but protests against them, and for their sake becomes weary
of soiourning in the body, so that Joseph was not more weary of his prison,
nor Jeremy of his dungeon, nor Daniel of the company of Lions, nor David more
weary of his dwelling in Psalm. 120. 5.
the tents of Kedar, than is the new man weary of his abiding in the body. He
is like Lot in Sodom, whose righteous soul was vexed day by day, by hearing
and seeing the unclean conversation of the Sodomites: he is like Israel in
Aegipt, kept in most vile slavery by the tyranny of Pharaoh, sighing and
crying: he is like the godly Jews holden in captivity in Babell, many things
they saw there done to the dishonor of God, which they no way approved, and
many things they would have done that they had no liberty to do. So this new
man perceiues many sinful motions and actions brought in upon him by a
superior power, which are a grief unto him, and vexation of his spirit.

And this is the greatest comfort of the new man, that Rejoicing when ^e does
good, grieved when he does evil. Romans 7. 15.
whatsoever good he does, he does it with joy: and on the contrary, evil that
is done in the body it is a grief to him to see it, yea he protests against
it, O Lord this is not I, but sin that dwells in me, thou know I like it not,
I allow it not, I wish from my heart there were not done in me any thing that
might offend thee. Only happy, and thrice happy is the man, who with the holy
Apostle is able to say so. Thus ye see in what sense the Godly are said by the
Evangelist in one place not to sin, and in another not to be without sin. The
Lord work this holy disposition in us, that the life of sin may daily be
weakened in us.

According to God.] We have last of all to mark here, We should not present
petitions to God, which are not according to his will.
that those petitions which flow from the Spirit, are according to Gods will,
and therefore as concerning temporal things, because we know not absolutely
what is the will of God, whether health, or sickness, riches, or poverty be
most expedient for us, we are to pray with a condition, if it be his will: but
as for those things which are directly against his will, it is a great mockery,
if it be done with knowledge, or otherwise a gross impiety to seek them from
him. It is written of Vitellius that one of his friends asking from him a
certain thing which he refused, and being impatient of the refusal, did say
to him, What avails thy friendship to me, if I cannot obtain that which I
crave? returned back to his friend this answer, And what avails to me thy
friendship, if for thy sake I must do that which becomes me not? If such
equity be in a mortal man that he will not grant an unlawful thing, even to
his tender friend, how much more are we to think that it is in the Lord our
God: Away therefore with these cursed and abominable sacrifices, as to present
unto the Lord petitions which are not agreeable unto his holy will.

And last to conclude this, that we may be encouraged A Christian has access
to the privy chamber of the great king ever when he pleases.
to prayer, let us consider what excellent privilege this is, that the
Christian as often as he pleases, has liberty to speak unto the Lord his
God. The Persians thought it a piece of their silly glory not to grant access
easily unto their subjects, yea, not to those of most noble rank; therefore
ye see how afraid Hester the Queen was to go in unto the King unsent for.
But the Lord our God King of Kings, proclaims unto us free access, as often as
we are disposed to call upon him, ready at all times to extend the Scepter of
his peace toward those who seek him in spirit and truth. Yea, though with
David thou prevent the morning, and rise at midnight to call upon him, thou
shall find him, even then waiting upon thee, Inuenire potes, praeuenire non
potes, come when thou will thou may find him, but can not prevent him. Let
us therefore use our liberty well, and see we neglect not to begin in time
our acquaintance with the Lord, by frequent speaking unto him, if so be we
look hereafter for ever to remain with him.

Verse 28. Also we know that all things work together for the best to them who
love God, even to them who are called according to his purpose.
NOw follows the Apostles third and last principal The third principal
argument of comfort, is from the providence of God, working all things to the
good of his own.
argument of comfort, taken from the providence of God, which so ouer-ruleth
all things that fall out in the world, that he causes them to work together,
and that for the best unto* those who love him: and among the rest our
afflictions are so far from being prejudicial to our salvation, that by the
providence of God, which is the daily executer of his purpose, working all
things according to the counsel of his will, they become means helping us
forward to that end, namely, conformity with Christ, whereunto God has
appointed us. The comfort is summarily set down in these words, All things
work together for the best to them who love God: the confirmation thereof is
broken up in these words, even to them who are called according to his purpose;
and the explication is subioyned in the two subsequent Verses.

Also.] That is, beside all the comfort which I have given Manifold blessings
of God are upon the Godly. Psalm. 34. 19.
you before, I give you yet this further: not one but manifold are the comforts
which the Lord has discovered for his children in holy Scriptures. Many are
the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all: that
is, for every trouble the Lord has a several deliverance. Every 1 Cor. 10. 13.
tentation (says the Apostle) has the own issue: every horn that rises
against us to push us, has an hammer attending Zach. 1. 21.
upon it to repress it (says the Prophet.) Esau mourned on Isaac, albeit he
was profane, yet he cried pitifully, Have thou but one blessing me Father?
but we, with the holy Apostle may bless our heavenly Father, who does so
comfort us in all our tribulations, that as the sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so our consolations abound through Christ. The storehouse of his
consolations can never be emptied.

The Lord our God has not dealt niggardly nor sparingly If the first fruits of
our comfort be so sweet, what shall the full mass be?
with us, but a good measure of consolation, pressed down and running over,
has he given us in our bosom, his holy name be praised therefore. And yet how
little is all this, which now we receive, in comparison of those inestimable
joys prepared for us, the like whereof the eye never saw, the ear never
heard, the heart did never understand? Surely the greatest measure of comfort
we have in this life, is but the earnest penny of that principal, which shall
be given us hereafter: if the first fruits of heavenly Canaan be so delectable,
how shall the full mass thereof abundantly content us, when we shall behold
the face of our God in righteousness, and shall be filled with his image, and
with that fullness of joy which is in his presence, and those pleasures which
are at his right hand for evermore?

We know.] If ye ponder the Apostles words, ye shall None but a Christian can
know the mysteries of the Gospel. 1 Cor 9. 11. 1 Cor. 2. 14. 1 Cor. 2. 5. 6.
find that by an Emphasis be restraines this knowledge to the Children of
God, excluding worldlings and naturalists from it: The spiritual man
discerns all things, but he himself is judged of no man. A natural man
cannot understand the things that are of God. The Gospel is wisdom indeed,
but wisdom in a mist^rie, and wisdom among them that are perfect. Every
article of our Faith and point of Christian doctrine, every privilege of a
Christian is a mystery: no marvel therefore that the Gospel be foolishnes to
the natural man who perishes; the excellent things of Christianity can be
known of none, but those who possess them: the Pearls which none know but
they who have them.
value, or rather vanity of earthly Jewels has been better known of some
who never had them, than of others who have enjoyed them: but the Jewels of
Gods Children such as Peace, Righteousness, and joy in the holy Ghost, can be
known of none, but of him who does possess them the new Name none can know
but he who has it, neither can any man know the sweetness of hid Manna
unless he taste it.

If you go, and speak to a Worldling of inward peace, Worldlings speak of
them like birds counterfaiting the voice of man.
and spiritual joy, or of the privileges of a Christian, ye shall seem to
him a Barbarian, or one that speaks a strange language, which he does not
understand: or if he himself speak of them, as he has learned by hearing,
or reading, yet shall he speak like a Bird, uttering voices, which he
understands not. As the brute beast knows not the excellency of man's life,
and therefore does delight it self with Hay and Prouender, seeking no better,
because it knows no better: so the natural man knows not the excellency
of a Christian, and therefore does disdain him, and esteem him a fool, a mad
man, and the off-scowring of the world; he takes the doung of the earth in his
arms for his inheritance: if he can obtain the portion of Esau, that the
fatness of the earth may be his dwelling place; if his wheat, and his oil
abound to him, he cares for no more; he knows not what it is to have his
soul made glad with the light of the countenance of God. This is your
miserable condition, O ye wretched Worldlings, ye are cursed with Worldlings
cursed with the curse of the Serpent.
the curse of the Serpent, ye creep as it were, upon your bellies, and ye
lick the dust of the earth all the days of your life, ye have not an eye to
look up unto heaven, nor an heart to seek those things which are above. Most
fearful is your estate, we warn you of it, but it is the Lord who must
deliver you from it.

This resolute knowledge is the mother of spiritual courage, constancy, and
patience: for why shall he fear in the evil day, yea, though the earth should
be removed, and the Sure knowledge of Christian comfort is the mother of
patience. Revel. 4.
mountains fall into the midst of the sea, who sees the Lord sitting on his
throne, and the glassie sea of the world before him, governing all the
waltrings, changes, and events of things therein, to the good of them who love
him? Oh that we had profited so much in the school of Christ all our days,
that without doubting or making any exception, we could believe this which here
the Apostle lays for a most sure ground of comfort, that so we might change
all our thoughts and cares into one, namely, how to grow in the love of God:
that in a good conscience we might say to the Lord with Peter, Lord thou
know I love thee: casting the Ioh. 21. 15.
burden of all the rest of our fears, grieses, and tentations upon the Lord
who cares for us, and has given us this promise for a praemunire, all c^mes
for the best.

The Soldier with courage enters into the battle under Other men hazards
under hope, but the Christian runs as sure to obtain.
hope to obtain the victory; the Ma^^ner with boldness commits himself to
the stormy seas under hope of vantage, and every man hazards in his calling,
yet are they uncertain venturers, and knows not the end: but the Christian
runs not as uncertain, but as one sure to obtain the Crown; for he knows
that the God of peace shall shortly tread Romans 16. 20.
Satan under his feet. What then? shall not he with courage enter into the
battle, wherein he is made sure of the victory before he sight, knowing that
all the warriors of Christ shall be more than conquerours through him? if we
will only 2 Chronicles. 20. 17.
stand still we shall see the salvation of the Lord. Gideon with his three
hundred fought against the great host of Midian without fear, because he was
sure of victory. David made have and ran to encounter with Goliath, because he
was persuaded that God would deliver him into his hands. The Israelites were
not afraid to enter into the River of Iordane, because they saw the Ark of God
before them dividing the waters. And shall only the Christian stand astonished
in his tentations, notwithstanding that the word of God goes before him to
resolve him that whatsoever falls out, shall come for the best to him? The Lord
increase us and make us to abound more and more in the love of our God; for
perfect love casts out fear: the Lord strengthen our faith, that through these
mistie clouds of affliction which now compass us, we may see that comfortable
end which God in his word has discovered unto us.

And to this effect we must beware of the subtle slights One of Satan's
slights is to cause us to judge of the works of God by their beginnings.
of Satan, who to the end that he may spoil us of this comfort in trouble,
endeauours by all means either to quench the light of God utterly in our
minds, or at least to darken and obscure it by precipitation of our
unbelieving hearts: carrying us headlong to judge of the works of God by their
beginnings, and to measure our selves in trouble by our present estate and
condition, not suffering us to tarry while we see the end: whereof it comes to
pass that our hearts being What inconveniences arise from this precipitation.
tossed too and fro with restless perturbations, like trees of the forest
shaken with the wind, we hasten in our necessities to be our prouisors, in our
dangers we will be our own deliuerers, and every way we become the caruers of
our own condition. We have so much the more need to beware of this
precipitation, because the dearest servants of God have fallen through it into
fearful sins against the Lord: As we may see in David, who being in
extreme danger in the Wilderness of Maon, said in his fear that all men were
liars. Is not this a great blasphemy, to say that the promises which the Lord
made to him by Samuel were but lies? and in his other extremities he is not
ashamed to confess that he thought that God had forgot to be merciful, and
had shut up Psalm. 39. 9.
his tender mercy in displeasure: but when he saw the end, then he was
compelled to accuse himself, and give glory unto God. I should have been
dumb, and not opened my mouth, Psalm. 116. 10.
because thou did it: and again, I said in my fear all men are liars, for
notwithstanding all Samuels promises, I looked for nothing but death, but now
considering the deliverance, I must say precious in the sight of the Lord is
the death of all his Psalm. 116. 13.
Saints.

Seeing this precipitation made David to stumble and He that will judge of
Lazarus on the dunghill, shall think him more miserable than the rich Glutton.
fall, may we not fear least it carry us to the like inconvenience unless we
learn to beware of it in time? let us not therefore judge of the works of God
before they be ended. If we should look to Lazarus on the doung-hill, full of
byles and sores, having no comfort but from the dogs, and compare him with the
rich Glutton clothed in purple, and fairing daintily every day, what can we
judge but that Lazarus is the most miserable of the two? yet if we ^arrie till
the Lord have ended his work, and Lazarus be conuayed to Abraham's bosom, and
the rich Glutton be gone to his place, then shall the truth appear manifestly,
All things work together for the best to them that love God. Let us therefore
learn to measure the event of things, not by their present condition, but by
the prediction of Gods word; let us cleave But we shall best judge of the
works of God, if we ^arrie till they be ended.
to his promise, and wait on the vision, which has his own time appoin^ed,
it shall speak at the last and shall not lie, though it tarry, let us wait for
it, it shall surely come and not stay: let us go into the Sanctuary of God and
consider the end, there shall we learn that, there is no peace to the wicked,
Esaias 48. 22.
howsoever they flourish for a time: and that it cannot be but well with them
who love the Lord: Mark the upright man, Psalm. 37. 37.
and behold the just, the end of that man is peace, but the transgressors
shall be destroyed together, and the end of the wicked shall be cut off. Thus
both in the troubles of the Godly, and prosperity of the wicked, we should
suspend our judgment, till we see the end.

All things work together.] Mark the singular privilege Gods wonderful
wisdom in causing things of so contrary qualities to agree to do one work.
of the Christian, no^ only afflictions, but all other things whatsoever
work for the best unto him, and not only so, but they work together. Many
working instruments are there in the world, whose course is not one, they
communicate not counsels; yea, their intentions oftentimes are contrary, yet
the Lord brings all their works unto this one end, the good of those who
love him: where ever they be in regard of place; what ever in regard of
persons; yea, howsoever disagreeing among themselves, yet are they so ruled by
the provident power of the supreme governor, our heavenly Father, that all of
them works together unto the good of them that love him. For albeit the Lord
rested God has rested from the work of creation, not of gubernation. Ioh. 5.
17.
the seventh day from the works of creation, so that he made no new kind of
creature after that day, yet did he not rest from the works of providence or
gubernation: whereof our Savior says, my Father works hitherto and I work.
When man has finished a work he resignes it to another to be governed: as
the Wright when he has builded a ship gives it over to the Mariner to rule
it; neither is man able to preserve the work of his hands, neither yet knows
he what shall be the end thereof: It is not so with the Lord: as by the
work of creation he brought them out, so by his provident administration he
preserues them, and rules even the smallest creatures, directing them unto such
ends as he has ordained them for in the counsel of his will.

How ever some Ethnicks have been so blind, as to His providence extends to
the smallest things.
think that God did neglect the smaller things upon earth, scilicet is superis
labor est: and Epicures also whose false conceptions of the divine providence
are rehearsed by E^iphaz. How should God know? how should he iu^ge through
Job. 22. 13. 14.
the dark cl^ude? the clouds hide him that he cannot see, and he walks in
the circle of heaven: yet it is certain he rules Psalm. 113.
not a part only but all; he is not as they thought of him a God only above
the M^one: No, though he dwell on high yet he abases himself to behold the
things that are on earth; he is not only a God in the mountains, as the
Syrians deemed, 1 King 20.
but a God in the valleys also There is nothing so great nothing so small but
it falls under his providence, yea he numbers our hayres, and keeps them,
not one of them can fall to the ground without his providence. Si sic
custodumtur Augustine.
super fl^a tua, in quanta securitate est anima tua? if he so keep thy
superfluities, how much more will he keep thy soul?

Let it therefore content us in the most confused estate In greatest confusion
of things, let us keep our comfort, the end of them shall be our good.
of things we can see fall out in the world* that the Lord has said, All
things shall work for the best unto us. Let us not question with Marie, how
can this be? nor doubt with Sarah, how can I conceive? nor with Moses, where
shall flesh be gotten for all this multitude? but let us says Augustine
consider the Author, and such doubts shall cease. As he has manifested his
power and wisdom in the tempering of this world, making Elements of so
contrary qualities agree together in one most pleasant harmony, so does it
appear much more in governing all the contrary courses of men to the good of
his own children. One notable example whereof we will set down for all. Jacob
sends Joseph to Dothan Genesis 37. etc.
to visit his brethren, his brethren casts him into the pit, Reuben releeues
him, the Midianites buys him, and sels him to Potiphar, his Mistress accuses
him, his Master condemns him, the Butler after long forgetfulness recommends
him, Pharaoh exalts him. O what instruments are here, and how many hands about
this one pooreman of God? never a one of them looking to that end which God had
proposed unto him; yet the Lord contrary to their intention makes them all
work together for Joseph's advancement in Aegipt.

But now to the particulars. There is nothing in the world The end of all the
ways of God, is our good.
which works not for our weal: all the works of God, all the stratagems of
Satan, all the imaginations of men, are for the good of Gods children; yea,
out of the most poysonable things, such as sin and death, does the Lord draw
wholesome and medicinable preservatives unto them who love him. All the ways
of the Lord (says David) are mercy Psalm. 25. 10.
and truth: mark what he says, and make not thou an exception where God has
made none, All, none excepted: therefore be thou strengthened in the Faith, and
give glory unto God, resolving with patient Job, albeit the Lord would Job. 13.
15.
slay me, yet will I trust in him.

Sometime the Lord seems to walk in the way of anger against his children,
which has moved many of them to Yea even when he seems to be most angry with
his children, he is working their good. Job. 6. 4.
pour out the like of these pitiful complaints, the arrows of the almighty
are upon me, (said Job) the venom whereof does drink up my spirit, and the
terrors of God fight against me, thou set me up as a mark against thee,
and makes me a burden to my self. Thy indignation lies upon me (said David)
yea from my youth I have suffered thy terrors, doubting of my life. For
felicity I have had bitter grief (said Ezekiah) for Isa. 38. 17. 13. 14.
the Lord like a Lion brake all my bones, so that I did chatter like a Swallow,
and mourn like a Dove. I am troubled on every side (said the Apostle) having
sightings without and terrors 2 Cor. 7. 5.
within. Yet in all this dealing the Lord has a secret way of mercy, in the
which he walks for the comfort of his children: it is but to draw us unto him,
that he shows himself to be angry with us, aduersatur tibi Deus ad tempus, vt
te secum Chrisost. in Mat. hom. 14
habeat in perpetuum, the Lord is an adversary to thee for a while, that he
may for ever reconcile thee to himself. And this albeit for the present we
cannot perceive, and can see no other but that the Lord has taken us for his
enemies, yet in the end we shall be compelled to acknowledge and confess with
David, it was good for me O Lord that ever thou Romans 11. 13.
correctedst me, for the Lord is marvelous in his Saints: O the deepenesse of
the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his
judgments and his ways past finding out? His glory is great when he works by
means, his glory appears greater when he works without means, but then his
glory shines most brightly when he works by contraries.

It was a great work that he opened the eyes of the For the working of God
with his children is by contraries.
blind man, but greater that he did it by application of spettle and clay,
means meeter to put out the eyes of a seeing man than to restore sight to a
blind man. So he wrought in the first creation, causing light to shine out of
darkness; so also in the work of redemption, for by cursed death he brought
happy life, by the cross he conquered the crown, and through shame he went to
glory. And this same order the Lord still keeps in the work of our second
creation, which is our regeneration, he casts down, that he may raise up;
he kills and he makes alive, he accuses his children for sin, that so he
may chase them to seek remission of sins; he troubles their consciences
that so he may pacify them. And in a word, the means which he uses, are
contrary to the work it self, which he intends to perform in his Children.
He sent a fearful darkness on Abraham even then when he was to
communicate unto him most joyful light; he vvrestled with Jacob and shook
him too and fro, even then when he came to bless him; he struck the Apostle
Paul with blindness at that same time, when he came to open his eyes; he
frowns for a while upon his beloved, as Joseph did upon his brethren, but in
the end with loving affection shall he embrace them; he may seem angry at thy
prayers, as he put back the petitions of that woman of Canaan, but at length
he will grant a favorable answer unto them. Let us not therefore murmr
against the Lord, by whatsoever means it please him to work: It is enough we
know that all the ways of God, even when he deals most hardly with his
children, are mercy, and tends to the good of those who love him.

And as for Satan's stratagems, it is also out of doubt, that Satan's
stratagems are directed to the good of the godly.
they work for the best to them who love the Lord, not according to his
purpose indeed, but by the Lords operation, who directs all Satan's assaults
to another end then he intended, and trappeth him continually in his own
snare. If under the Serpents shape he deceived Adam, under the Serpents name
shall the Lord curse him, and all those weapons whereby he seeks to destroy
the work of Gods grace in us, does the Lord turn to destroy the workmanship
of Satan in us: I mean that whole bastard generation of perverse affections,
what Satan has begotten upon our mutable nature, by a most unhappy and Ambr.
lib. 1. de poeni. ca. 13
unlawful copulation. De veneno eius fit spirituale antidotum: of this poison
the Lord makes a spiritual preservative. Satan's accusations for sins past
are unto the godly pres^ruatiues against sin to come.


The experience of all the Saints of God proves this, that Satan by his
restless tentations does destroy himself: which is most evident both in his
tentations for sin committed, tending to desperation, as also in his
tentations unto sin, tending to presumption. Every accusation of the
conscience for sin past is unto the Godly man a preservative to keep him
from sin in time to come, he reasoning with himself after this manner: If
mine enemy do so disquiet my mind with inward terror, for those sins
which foolishly I did by his entisement, why shall I hearken to him any more,
and so increase the matter of my trouble: for what fruit have I of all those
sins which I did by his instigation, but terror and shame? and shall I look
that this forbidden tree can render unto me any better fruit hereafter? O what
a faithless traitor is Satan, he entiseth man unto sin, and when he has
done it, he is the first accuser and troubler of man for sin. When he comes
first unto us he is a tempter; when we have finished his work (which is sin)
he is an accuser of us unto the Judge; and when he returns, he returns a
troubler and tormenter of us for those same sins which he counseled us to
do. Stop thine care therefore O my soul, from the voice of this deceitful
enchanter.

His tentations again unto sin, are unto the Godly And his tentations to
sin chases them to the throne of grace.
man prouocations that spur him forward unto the throne of grace: for while
as we find his restless malice pursuing in us that little spark of
spiritual life, whereby the Lord has quickened us, and our own weakness
and i^ ability to resist him then are we forced with Israel in Egypt, to sigh
for the thraldom, and to cry with Ie^oshapl^^, O Chron. 20. 13.
Lord our God, we know not what to do but our ^^es are toward thee And who
feels not this, that the grace of fervent prayer, wherein otherwise we
saint, our heart being more ready to fall down than the hands of M^ses,
unless they be supported, is grea^ly intended in the Children of God by the
buffets of Satan as is manifest in the holy Apostle. Magna certe potestas,
quae imperat Diabolo, vt se ipse destruat, Ambr. ibid.
a great power of God this is certainly, which commands Satan to destroy
himself; Se enim destruit, cum hominem quem tentando supplantare studet, ex
infirmo fortiorem efficit, for then does he destroy himself, when the man
whom he seeks to overthrow by his tentation, of a weak man is made
stronger, by those same m^^nes. Thus the Lord our God ouershootes Satan in his
own bow, and cuts off the head of Goliath with his own sword: his holy name be
praised therefore.

Now as concerning outward afflictions, it is true, that as As the Philistims
understood not Sampsons riddle, how sweet came out of the sour, so cannot
worldlings that comfort is in the cross. Judge. 14. 14. Romans 5. 3. 2 Cor. 4.
13. Heb. 12. 11.
the Philistims could not understand Sampsons riddle, how sweet came out of the
sour, and meat out of the eater, so cannot Worldlings understand, that
tribulation brings out patience, and that our light and momentanie
afflictions cause unto us a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory:
but the Children of God have learned by experience, that albeit no visitation
be sweet for the present, yet afterward it brings the quiet fruit of
righteousness unto them who are thereby exercised, and that there is more
solid joy in suffering rebuke with Christ, than in all the pleasures of sin,
which endure but a season. As Moses the typycall Mediator of the old Testament
made by his prayer the bitter waters of Marah become sweet, so Jesus the true
Mediator by his passion, has mittigated to his children the bitterness of the
cross, yea, has made it profitable unto them.

The prodigal son concluded not to return home to Afflictions profitable to
the children of God.
his Father till he was brought low by affliction. Hagar was proud in the house
of Abraham, but humble in the wilderness: Jonas sleeps in the ship, but
watches and prays in the Whales belly: Manasses lived in Jerusalem as a
Libertine, but bound in chains in Babell he turns his heart unto the Lord
his God. Corporal diseases forced many in the Gospel to come to Christ,
where others enjoying bodily health would not acknowledge him. The earth which
is not tilled and broken up, bears nothing but thorns and briars; the Vines
wax wild in time, unless they be pruned and cut: so would our wild hearts
ouergrow with the noisome weeds of unruly affections, if the Lord by
sanctified trouble did not continually manure them. It is good therefore (said
Jeremy) for a man to bear the Lam. 3. 27. Psalm. 119. 71. Ioh. 15. 2.
yoke in his youth: and David confesses, it was good for him that he was
afflicted: yea our Savior says, every branch that bears fruit, my heavenly
Father purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit.

No work can be made of gold and silver without fire, The wicked putrify and
rots in their prosperity.
stones are not meet for palace work unless they be pollished and squared by
hammering, no more is it possible that we can be vessels of honor in the house
of our God, except first we be fined and melted in the fire of affliction:
neither can we be as living stones to be placed in the wall of heavenly
Jerusalem, except the hand of God first beat from us our proud lumps, by the
hammer of affliction. As standing waters putrify and rot, so the wicked fears
not God because Psalm. 55. Iere. 48. 11.
they have no changes: and Moab keeps his sent, because he was not powered
from vessel to vessel, but has been at rest ever since his youth. And
therefore, O Lord, rather than that we should keep the sent of our old
natural corruption, and live in a careless security without the fear of
thine holy name, and so become sit-fasts in our sins, no, rather O Lord
change thou us from estate to estate, waken us with the touch of thine hand,
purge us with thy fire, and chastise us with thy rods, always Lord with this
protestation that thou keep toward us that promise made to the sons of
David, I will visit them with my rods if they sin against me, 2 Samuel 7. 14.
15.
but my mercy will I never take from them: So be it, O Lord, even So be it.

The same comfort have we also against death, that now Death works also the
good of Gods children.
in Jesus Christ it is not a punishment of our sins, but a full
accomplishment of the mortification of our sin, both in soul and body: for
by it both the fountain and the flux of sin are dried up, all the conduits
of sin are stopped, and the weapons of unrighteousness broken. And though
our bodies seem to be consumed and turned into nothing, yet are they but sown
like graynes of Wheat in the field and husbandry of the Lord, which must dye
before they be quickened, but in the day of Christ shall spring up again most
glorious. And as for our souls, they are by death relieved out of this house
of servitude, that they may return unto him who gave them: therefore have I
compared death to the red sea, wherein Pharaoh and his Aegiptians were drowned,
Death compared to the red Sea: Egiptians drown in it.
and sancke like a stone to the bottom, but the Israelites of God went through
to their promised C^^^an: so shall death be unto you O miserable Infidels,
whose eyes the God of this world has blinded, that no more then blinded
Aegiptians can ye see the light of God shining in Goshen, which is his Church,
though ye be in it; to you I say your death shall be the very center of all
your miseries, a sea of the vengeance of GOD, wherein ye shall be drowned,
and shall sincke with your sins heavier than a mislone about the neck of your
souls to press you down to the lowest hell.

But as for you who are the Israelites of God, ye shall walk But the Israelites
of God shall go through it.
through the valley of death and not need to be afraid, because the Lord is
with you, his staff and his rod shall comfort you: albeit the guiltiness of
sore-passed sins, yet remaining in the memory, the terror of hell, and
horror of the grave stand up on every side like mountains threatening to
ouerwhelme you, yet shall ye go safely through to the land of your
inheritance, where with Moses and Miriam and all the children of God, even the
congregation of the first borne, ye shall sing praises joyfully to the God of
your How the enemies of Gods children against their will procures their good
Gen 50. 20.
salvation.

Now in the last room, concerning the imaginations of men against us, we
shall have cause to say of them in the end, as Joseph said to his brethren, ye
did it unto me for evil, but the Lord turned it to good. The whole history of
Gods book is a cloud of manifold witnesses concurring together to confirm his
truth, therefore among many we will be content with one. When David was going
forward in battle against Israel, with Acish King of Gath, under whom 1 Samuel:
29.
he soiourned a while in the time of his banishment, the remanent Princes of
the Philistims commanded him to go back, and this they did for the worst to
disgrace him, because they distrusted him, but the Lord turned it unto him for
the best: for if he had come forward he had been guilty of the blood of
Israel, specially of Saul the Lords anointed, who was slain in that battle:
from this the provident mercy of God does in such sort deliver him that no
offense is done by David to Saul, or his people, because David came not against
them, neither yet could the Philistims blame him, because he went back by their
own command. So a notable benefit David did receive by that same deed wherein
his enemies thought they had done him a notable shame.

And where otherwise it pleases the Lord to suffer wicked Death of the body to
a Christian is but as the renting of Joseph's garment from him.
men to lay hand on the bodies of his children, yet all they are able to do is
but like the renting of Joseph's garment from him. As he does sustain small
loss whose garment is cut if his body be preserved: so the Christian when his
body is wounded unto the death, yet has he lost nothing which he strives to
keep, for he knows it is but a corruptible garment, which would decay in
itself, albeit there were no man to rent it. Non sunt itaque timenda spiritui,
quae fiunt in Chrysostom.
carne, quae extra nos est quasi vestamentum: let not therefore our soul be
afraid for those things which are done to our bodies, for it is without us as a
garment that does but cover us. Thus have we seen how that there is nothing so
evil in it self, which by the provident working of God, is not turned to the
good of his children.

Whereof arises yet unto us this further comfort, that seeing it is the
privilege of every one who loves the Lord, it must much more be the privilege
of the whole Church, that promise made to the Father of the faithful, I will
bless Since to every Christian all things work for the best, much more are we
to think that this is the privilege of the whole Church. Genesis 12. 3.
them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, we may easily think
belongs also to all his seed, even to that congregation of the first borne. The
Lord will be a wall of fire round about Jerusalem, and the glory in the midst
of her, he will keep her as the apple of his eye, and make Jerusalem a cup
of poison to all her enemies, and a heavy stone, which whosoever strives to
lift shall be torn therewith, though all the people of the earth were gathered
together against it, the weapons made against her shall not prosper, and every
tongue that shall rise against her in judgment shall be condemned. This is the
heritage of the Lords servants and the portion of them that love him: for the
church is that Arc which mounts up higher, as the water increases, but cannot
be overwhelmed: the bush which may burn^, but cannot be consumed, the house
built on a rock, which may be beaten with vvinde and rain, but cannot be
overthrown.

The Lord who changes times and seasons, who takes A warning for Kings and
such as are in authority.
away Kings, and sets up Kings, has reproved Kings for his Churches sake, yea,
he gouernes all the kingdoms of the earth in such sort, that their fallings
and risings, their changes and mutations are all directed to the good of his
Church. In one of these two sentences all the Judges of the world may see
themselves, and foresee their end, for either that shall be fulfilled in them,
which Mordecay said to Este, who knows if for this thou art come to the
kingdom, that by thee deliverance may come to Gods people? or else that which
Moses H^ster. 4 14.
in Gods name said to Pharaoh, the oppressor of the Church in her
adolescencie, I have set thee up to declare my Exodus 7.
power, because thou exaltest thy self against my people.

May we not behold here how unsure their standing is, They who rise to
authority and not to the good of the Church shall assuredly fall.
and how certain their fall, who when they are highest, abuse their power
most, to hold the people of God lowest; what else are they but objects whom the
Lord has raised up to declare his power and justice upon them? If we shall
mark the course of the Lords proceeding, ever since the beginning of the
world, we shall find a blessing following them whom he has made instruments
of good unto his church, and that such again have not wanted their own
recompense of wrath, who have continued instruments of her trouble.

When the Lord concluded to bring his Church from Examples showing how God has
altered the state of worldly Empires for the good of his Church.
Canaan to soiourne in Egypt, he sent such a famine in Canaan as compelled them
to forsake it, but made plenty in Egypt by the hand of Joseph, whom the Lord
had sent before as a prouisor for his Church, and by whom Pharaoh was made
favorable to Jacob: but when the time came, that the Lord was to translate his
Church from Egypt to Canaan, when he altered Pharaohs countenance, and raised
up a new King who knew not Joseph, he turned the Egyptians hearts away from
Israel, so that they vexed Israel, and made them to serve by cruelty. Thus
when the Lord In Pharaoh king of Egypt.
will bring them to Egypt he makes Pharaoh favorable which also brings a
blessing upon Tharaoh, and his people; but when the Lord will make them to
go out of Egypt, he makes another Pharaoh an enemy unto them whereby both
they are made willing to forsake Egypt, and Pharaoh prepares the way for a
fearful judgment on himself and his people.

Again, when the sins of Israel came to that ripeness, In the Monarch of
Babell and Persia.
that their time was come, and their day drew near, the Lord stirred up the
King of Babell, as the rod of his wrath, and staff of his indignation: He
sent him to the dissembling Esaias.
nation, and gave him a charge against the people of his wrath, to take the
spoil and the pray, and to tread them under feet like mire in the streets,
and to this effect, that the Lord might be avenged of the sins of Israel, he
subdued all the kingdoms round about them under the King of Babell, that no
stop nor impediment should be in the way to hold back the rod of Ashur from
Israel. But yet again when the Lord had accomplished all his work upon
Israel, and the time of mercy was come, and the seauentie years of captivity
expired, then the Lord visited the proud heart of the King of Ashur, and for
his Churches sake he altered again the government of the whole earth,
translating the Empire to the Medes and Persians, that so Cyrus the Lords
anointed might perform to his people the promised deliverance.

All which should learn us in the greatest changes and Therefore in our
greatest mutations our heart should not be moved from confidence in God. Psalm.
alterations that fall out in the world, to rest assured that the Lord will
work for the good of his Church: though the earth should be moved and the
mountains fall into the midst of the Sea, yea, though the waters thereof
rage, and be troubled, yet there is a river, whose streams shall make glad the
City of our GOD in the midst of it; yea, if they who should be the
nourishing Fathers of the Church, forsake her, and become her enemies, they
shall assuredly perish, but comfort and deliverance shall Esth.
appear unto Gods people out of another place. The Lord for a while may put
the bridle of bondage in the Philistims hand, to humble Israel for their
sins, but it shall be taken from them, at length his Church shall with joy
draw water out of the Well of salvation, and praise the Lord, saying: though
thou were angry with me, thy wrath is turned away, and thou comfortest me,
yea Sion shall cry out, and shout for joy, for great is the holy One of Israel
in the middect of her. And therefore in our lowest humiliations let us answer
our enemies: Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, though I fall I shall
rise, when I shall sit in darkness, the Lord is a light unto me. I will bear
the wrath of the Lord because I have sinned against him, until he plead my
cause and execute judgment for me, he will bring me forth to the light, and I
shall see his righteousness: then he that is mine enemy shall look upon it,
and shame shall cover him who said to me, where is the Lord thy God? now shall
he be trodden under as the mire in the streets? yea, so let all thine enemies
perish, O Lord.

For the best.] This good or best, is no other thing, but What is a christians
best.
that precious salvation prepared to be showed in the last time, reserved in
the heavens for us, and whereunto we are reserved by the power of God through
Faith. Of this it is evident that our best is not yet wrought, it is only in
the vvorking, and therefore we are not to look for it in this life.

There is a great difference in this, between the godly A wicked man is at his
best when he is first borne, for the longer he lives the more sins he
multiplyes.
and the wicked: the one inioyes their best in this life, the other not so, but
looks for it. If it should be demanded when a wicked man is at his best. I
would answer his best is evil enough, but then is he at his best, when he
comes first into the world, for then his sins are fewest, his judgment
easiest: it had been good for him that the knees had not prevented him, but
that he had dyed in the birth. For as a river which is smallest at the
beginning, increases as it proceeds, by the accession of other waters unto it:
so the wicked the longer he lives, waxes worse and worse, deceiving Ierem. 9.
3.
and being deceived, proceeding from evil to worse, till at length he be
swallowed up in that lake that burns with fire and brimstone.

And this the Apostle expresses most significantly, when A man continuing in
sin compared to one gathering a treasure. Romans 2.
he compares the wicked man unto one gathering a treasure, wherein he
heapeth up wrath unto himself against the day of wrath: for even as the
worldling, who every day casts a piece of money into his treasure, in few
years multiplyes such a sum, that he himself is not able to keep in mind
the particulars thereof; but when he breaks up his box, he finds in it
sundry sorts of coin, which were quite out of his remembrance: even so it is,
and worse with thee, O impenitent man, who not only every day, but every
hour and moment of the day do multiply thy transgressions, and defile thy
conscience, by hoording up into it some dead work or other, to what a
reckoning think thou, shall thy sins amount in the end? though thou do
forget them, as thou committest them, yet the Apostle tells thee that thou have
laid them up in a treasury.

Yea not only have thou laid up in store thy sins, but With every new sin
he gathers a new portion of wrath.
with every sin have gathered a portion of wrath proportionable to thy
sin, which thou shall know in that day wherein the Lord shall break up thy
treasure, and open the book of thy conscience, and set thy sins in order
before thee, then shall thine own wickedness correct Ierem. 2.
thee, and thy turning back shall reprove thee, then shall thou know and
behold that it is an evil thing and a bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord
thy God. Thou shall be astonished to see such a multitude of vvitnesses
standing up against thee, those sins which thou have cast behind thy back,
thou shall see them set in the light of the countenance of God: woe then shall
be unto thee, for the Lord then shall turn thine own ways upon thine head,
the Lord shall give thee to drink of that cup which thou have filled with
thine own hand, when thou shall have accomplished the measure of thine
iniquity, and he shall double his stripes upon thee according to the number of
thy transgressions.

But as for the children of God if ye do ask, when A Christians best begins
in the day of his conversion.
they are at the best: I answer, praised be God, our vvorst is gone, our good
is begun, our best is at hand. As our Savior said to his kinsmen, so may we
say to the worldlings, your time is always, but my time is not yet come. We
were Ioh. 6. 3.
at the vvorst immediately before our conversion, for our whole life till then
was a walking with the children of disobedience in the broad way that leads to
perdition, then we were at the worst, when we had proceeded furthest in the way
of unrighteousness, for then we were furthest from God. Our best began in the
day of our recalling, wherein the Lord by his word and holy Spirit called upon
us, and made us change our course, turning our backs upon Satan, and our
faces toward the Lord, and so caused us to part company with the children of
disobedience, that where they ^ent on in their sins to judgment, we came
home with the penitent forlorn, unto our Fathers family. That was a happy day
of division between us and our sins; in that The day of our conversion was a
day of division between us and our old sins which we should not forget.
day with Israel we entered into the borders of Canaan to Gilgall; there were
we circumcised, and the shame of Egypt taken from us, even our sin, which is
our shame indeed, and which we brought with us even from our mothers womb.
The Lord grant that we may keep it in thankful remembrance, and that we may
count it a double shame to return again to the bondage of Egypt, to serve any
more that Prince of darkness in brick and clay, that is, to have fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but that like the redeemed of the
Lord we may walk from strength to strength, till we appear before the face
of our God in Sion.

Always this difference of estates between the godly and Seeing our best is not
in this life, let us possess our souls in patience.
wicked, should learn us patience, let us not seek that in the earth, which
our gracious Father in his most wise dispensation has reserved for us in
heaven. Let us not be like the foolish Jews who loved the place of their
banishment in Babell, better than their home. Now our life is hid with God in
Christ, and we know not yet what we shall be, but we know when he shall
appear we shall be like him, the Lord shall carry us by his mercy, and bring
us by his strength into the holy habitation; he shall plant us in the mountain
of his inheritance, even the place which he has prepared, and sanctuary which
he has established, then everlasting joy shall be upon our head, and sorrow
and mourning shall fly from us for ever. And now till the Lord have
accomplished his work in us, let us not faint because the wicked floruish: how
ever they prosper they are to be pitied more than envied; let them eat, and
drink, and be merry, sure it is they will never see a better life, then that
which presently they enjoy, they have received their consolation in this life,
and have gotten their portion in this present world.

Surely; no tongue can express their misery: and yet ^s How they are to be
pitied who rejoice in things present, as in their best things.
Samuel mourned for Saul when God rejected him, and Jeremy wept in secret for
the pride of his people, that would not repent of their sins: how can we but
take up a bitter lamentation for many of you, whom in this time of grace we
see to be strangers from grace? we wish from our hearts ye were not like the
kinsmen of Lot, they thought he had but mocked, when he told them of an
iminent judgment, and therefore for no request would go out of Sodom, but
tarryed till the fire of the Lords indignation did consume them: but that
rather as Sarah followed Abraham from Caldee to Canaan, so ye would take us
by the hand, and go with us from hell to heaven: but alas, the lusts of the
flesh hold you captive, or then the love of the world does bewitch you; but all
of them in the end shall deceive you: for all the labor under the Sun is but
vanity and vexation of the Spirit, when you have finished your task, you
shall be less content than you were at the beginning; you shall be as one
vvakened out of a dream, who in his sleep thought he was a possessor of
great riches, but when he awaketh behold he has nothing: or not unlike that
rich man who said in his security, Now my Soul thou Luke 12. 19.
have much good for many years, and even upon the next day redacted to such
extreme necessity with that other who despised Lazarus, that he had not so
much as a drop of cold water to cool his tongue vvithall: then shall you
lament Wisd. 5. 7.
and say, We have wearied our selves in the way of iniquity, and it did not
profit us. Miserable worldlings who take more pains to get and keep any thing
than Jesus Christ.


Alas, how shall I learn you to be wise? Is not this a pitiful blindness?
the Lord when he created man, made him Lord above all his creatures, and now
unthankful man sets every creature in his heart above the Lord. O fearful
ingratitude, Do you so reward the Lord, O ye foolish people and unwise? There
is nothing which ye conceit to be good, but when ye want it, you are careful
to seek it, when you have it, you are careful to keep it; only you are
careless of the Lord Jesus, though he be that incomparable jewel, which
brings light in darkness, life in death, comfort in trouble, and mercy
against all judgment: ye should set him as a signet on your heart, as an
ornament on your head, and put him on as that glorious attire which gets you
place to stand before God. But what pains do ye take to seek him? what
assurance have ye that ye are in him? or what mourning do ye make, for that
ye do not possess him? can you say in truth, that the tenth part of your
thoughts or words have been bestowed upon him? No, no, it is the shame of many
that they have taken more pains to keep a signet on their hand, than ever
they did to keep Jesus in their heart; they wander after vanity and follow
lies, they forsake the fountain of living waters. Oh Psalm. 50. 22.
consider this ye that forget God, least he tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver you.

The last lesson we observe in this part of the Verse is How all things work
for the worst to the wicked.
this: as all things works for the best to them who love the Lord, so all
things works for the worst unto the wicked; there is nothing so clean which
they defile not, nothing so excellent which they abuse not. Make Saul a King,
and Balaam a Prophet, and Judas an Apostle, their preferment shall be their
destruction: if they be in prosperity they contemn God, and their prosperity
becomes their ruin: if they be in adversity they blaspheme him, and like
raging waves of the sea cast out their own dirt to their shame; yea what
speak I of these things? even their table shall be a snare unto them, Jesus
Christ is a rock of offense unto them, the Gospel the savor of death unto
them, and their prayer is turned into sin; and what more excellent things
then these? As a foul stomach turns most healthful food into corruption: so
their polluted conscience turns judgment into gall, and the fruit of
righteousness into wormwood. And all this should provoke us to an holy care
to become good our selves, or else there is nothing were it never so good can
be profitable to us.

To them that love God.] We have heard the Apostles last The persons to whom
the former comfort belongs are described to be such as love God, and are called
by him.
argument of comfort, which is that the Lord so rules all things by his
providence, that those things which seems to be against his children, are made
to work together for the advancement of their good. Deus enim adeo bonus est
vt nihil mali esse sineret, nisi e^^am adeo esset potens, vt ex quolibet malo
possit elicere bonum, for God is so good that he would suffer no evil to be,
were it not he is also so powerful that of every evil, he is able to draw
out good. Now we proceed to the persons to whom this comfort belongs: who
are first described to be such as love God: secondly, as are Three things
inseperably knit, 1. Gods purpose concerning us, 2. his calling to us, 3. our
love toward him.
called according to his purpose. Here are three things conjoined together,
every one depending on another. First, the purpose of God, which is no other
thing but his eternal and immutable decree concerning our salvation. Secondly,
our calling, flowing from this purpose. Thirdly, a love of God, wrought in our
hearts by this effectual calling. These three are so inseperably conjoined
together that from the lowest of these we may go up to the highest: of that
unfeigned love of God which is in thee* thou may know that he loved thee and
in his unchangeable purpose has ordained thee to life. This is the greatest
comfort that can be given to men upon earth, to let them see that or ever the
Lord laid the foundations of the earth, he first laid the foundation of thy
salvation in his own immutable purpose, which being secret in it self and
obscured from us, is most manifested unto us by our effectual calling. But of
this we will speak more God willing hereafter.

The love of God then is set down here as a principal None can love God but
such as he has chosen and called.
effect and token of our calling: As the Lord calls none effectually but those
whom he has elected: so none can love him but those who are effectually
called by him; yea thou thy self who now loves the Lord, before thy calling
louedst him not, thy heart went a whooring from God, and thou preferedst every
creature before him, and for the small^st pleasure of sin thou caredst not to
offend him. It is thought among the multitude a common thing, and an It is
thought a common thing to love God, but no^e can love him who are not beloved
of him. 1 Ioh. 4. 10.
easy to love the Lord, and every man abhorres in word to be counted such a
monster as has not the love of God, but they are far deceived; for man till
he be called by grace cannot love the Lord, herein is love, not that we loved
God, but that he loved us. If now we do know him and know him so that we
love him, it is because we were first known of him, and so known that we
were beloved of him: not that there is any equality between these loves, or
that we are able to match the Lord in affection; non enim pari vbert^te sluunt
hi duo am^res, for these two loves flows not in a like plenty: as the running
of a little strand is nothing in comparison of the great Ocean, so is our love
to God as nothing, if it be compared with his incomprehensible love toward us,
yet it is most certain, amor Dei amor^m animae parit, it is Gods love to us
which begets in the soul a love to God: Nemo itaque se amari dissidat, qui
iam amat, let no man therefore who loves God distrust that he is beloved. It
is very comfortable, that among all the penmen of the holy Ghost none do
speak more of love than John, even he who was Christ's beloved Disciple.
whom he loved above the rest: for it does teach us that whosoever is greatly
beloved of God, shall also become a careful practiser of love toward others.

That therefore we may know the heart of God toward He that would know Gods
purpose toward him, let him go down to his own heart, and not up to Gods
counsel.
us, it shall not be needful that we enter into secret counsel, but let us
go and enter into our own hearts, and there we shall find resolution,
albeit the Lord send not now to you that are men, an Angel to witness, as
he did to Daniel, that he was a man greatly beloved of God, or to testfie to
you that are women, that which he did to Mary, that she was freely beloved
of the Lord, yet so many of you as upon knowledge in sincerity can say with
Peter, Lord Ioh. 21. 15.
thou know that I love thee, have here a testimony no less certain, to
wit, his own Oracle in his word, to make you sure that ye are beloved of him.

And that the comfort may be the more sure unto us, Love the first affection
that Satan perverted.
seeing love is the principal token of our calling, we will speak a little
of Love, that so we may know whether we be endued with this most excellent
grace of the spirit or no. Naturally the affection of Love in man is so
inordinate, that not improperly Nazianzen called it dulcem tyrannum, a sweet
tyranny, that by deceitful allurements compels the whole man to follow it:
and it is not only in it self distemperated, but altogether set upon wrong
objects, our love being so set upon the creature that we neglect the Creator: a
fearful ingratitude, that where in the beginning the Lord set up man as Prince
and ruler over all his creatures, putting all the works of his hands in
subjection under him, that man should meet the Lord with such unthankfulness
as to set in his affection, every creature before the Lord, Do ye Deuteronomy.
so requite the Lord O ye foolish people and unwise?

But as this was the first affection which Satan through And the first which
in our regeneration is rectified by the spirit of grace.
infidelity perverted, turning it from the Lord and setting it upon the
forbidden tree: so it is the first affection which in the regeneration is
rectified by Faith, and by which faith works in the sanctification of the
rest* turning it from the creature and setting it upon God. Where we are to
consider of the lawful objects of our love, and of the due measure of love we
owe unto every one of them. The objects of our love are three: the first is
God: the second is our self: the third is our neighbor.

The first and principal object of our love is the Lord The first object of
reformed love is God.
our God, whom we ought so to love that we love him above all things, and
that for no other thing more than for himself: in love the Lord will not
suffer a companion, neither Father, nor Mother, Wife nor Children, nay not thy
own life should be so dear to thee, as that for any of these thou should
offend thy God* otherwise he tells thee himself that thou art not worthy of
him, and he will not reckon thee among those that love him: Non amat Christum
qui August. de temp. ser. 223
aliquid plus quam Christum amat, he loves not Christ who loves any thing more
than Christ, and then do we love something more than him, if from him we
seek any thing more than himself. This is a mercinarie love, when man loves
God for his gifts. It was objected by Satan unto Job, but falsely; for even
then when he was spoiled of all the earthly comforts which God had given him,
yet the love of God continued in him, from which he blessed the Lord. As the
woman which loves her husband because he is rich, is rather to be called a
lover of his riches, than of himself: so the Worldling, who with the carnal
Israelite, does worship GOD for his wine, and his oil, and the rest of those
good things which God gives men, is but an hyreling, and not a sincere
worshipper, nor a chaste lover of the Lord his God.

The second object of our love is our selves: for in that The second object of
reformed love in our selves. He cannot love his brother who loves not himself.
the Lord requires that I love my neighbor as my self, it is manifest, that
first of all I ought to love my self. He that loves not God cannot love
himself; and he who loves not himself, cannot rightly love his neighbor:
without the love of God, all the self-love which is in man is but
selfe-hatred. As the frantic man who in his fury vvounds his own body is
pitied of all men, as one that has no pity of himself: so the profane
man, who by multiplying transgressions slays his own soul, is more justly
to be accounted an hater of himself: it is the holy love of God that first
teaches thee to take heed unto thy self, to preserve both soul and body from
the wrath to come, and that works in thee an holy care to conform thy self
to the Lord whom thou love, and with whom thou desire to remain for
ever. Thus being taught to love our selves, we shall also learn to love our
neighbor; the ordered love of our selves being (as I said) that pattern,
according to which we should love our neighbor. Prius itaque vide si nosti
diligere Augustine.
teipsum, and tunc committam tibi proximum, quem diligas sicut teipsum. Learn
therefore first of all to love thy self, and then will I commit thy neighbor
to thee that thou may love him as thy self. Si autem nondum nosti diligere
te, t^meo ne decipias proximum sicut te, but if otherwise thou have not learned
to love thy self, I fear that as thou deceiuest thy self, thou vvilt also
deceive thy neighbor, loving him so that thou draw him into the snare of sin
with thy self, to both your destructions: this is not love but hatred; for he
who loves any thing truly, hates every thing that would destroy it; as he
that loves a garment, hates the moth that consumes it; and he that loves a
tree, hates the worm that eats it up: so he that loves a man will also
hate the sin that slayes the man: otherwise if thou cherish that which
destroys him, thou hate him indeed, and love him not.

It is commonly thought a needles lesson to teach a man Man has need to learn
how to love himself rightly. Aug. ad frat. in Eremo. ser. 30. Aug. lib. 2.
offi. cap. 12.
how to love himself, but in very deed it is most needful, it being a common
discase among men, amare res suas magis quam seipsos, to love any thing which
is theirs better than themselves, and quis vtilem indicet vitaealienae, quem
videt mutilem vitae suae? and who can judge that he can be profitable unto
other men, whom he sees unprofitable, yea, hurtful unto himself? Though it
be principally said to Preachers, ye are the light of the world, and salt of
the earth, yet does it also (says Chrysostom) appertain to every Christian:
but he that has not so much light as to shine to himself, how shall he shine
unto others? how shall he guide them, except it be as the blind leads the
blind, and both of them at length falls into the ditch? and he that has no
salt to powder his own speeches, nor to eat up the corruption of his own
heart, how can he effect the reformation of others? Thus you see how the spirit
of grace reforming Love to our selves and our neighbor should be measured, but
our love to God should be without measure.
our affection of love, sets it upon God, our selves, and our neighbor.

Now as for the measure of our love toward these, we are to know that the
love of our selves and our neighbor is bounded and limited, but the due
measure of the love of God is to love him without measure. Three conditions are
required in our love to God: to wit, that we love him with all our heart,
with all our mind, and with all our strength: we must love him earnestly,
that other love draw us not from him, but his love may be strong in our heart,
as to banish out of it all other unlawful love, and vincat dulcedo Bern. in
Cant. ser. 20.
dulcedinem, quomadmodum clauus clauum, that so the sweetness of Christ may
overcome in us all sweetness of the creature, as one nail drives out another.

The Apostles loved Jesus with an hearty affection, we Three conditions
requisite in the love of God. Mat. 19. 27.
have (said they) forsaken all things to follow thee: yet had they not learned
to love him with all their mind, that is, wisely, with knowledge and
understanding; for they loved him so that they liked not his sufferings, and
had no will that he should dye; the speeches given out before hand by our
Savior of his death, they could neither conceive them nor approve them:
therefore did our Savior rebuke them, If John 14. 21.
ye loved more, ye would certainly rejoice that I go up to my Father: out of
doubt their affection was toward him, but they did not yet understand how good
it was for the glory of God and man's salvation, that Jesus should dye, and
therefore could not rejoice in it. And the Apostle Peter when he heard that
Jesus behooved to suffer, because he loved Mat. 16. 22. 23.
him said to him, Master pity thy self, but received this answer, Go
behind me Satan, for thou understand not the things that are of God.
Culpans in vtroque non affectum se^ consilium, blaming in them both, not their
affection, but their understanding: yet afterward when Peter was better
informed, that Jesus behooved to dye, and rise the third day, he dissuaded him
no more, but rather promised that he would dye with him; he had now learned to
love Jesus not only with his heart, but also with his mind; not earnestly
only, but also wisely; yet when it came to the point, he denied his Master
at the voice of a Dainsell, because he had not learned to love him with
strength, as he did afterward: when he had received the holy Spirit in greater
measure, he loved Jesus even to the very death, with so strong an affection,
that before the Counsel, he choosed rather to dye for Christ, than to deny
him, Licet vitam tunc minime posuit, deposuit tamen, in so much that albeit he
lost not his life, yet he freely laid it down for Jesus.

These are the three, whereunto we are to aspyre in all In this life we are
far from that measure of the love of God which should be in us.
our life, to love the Lord heartily; to love him wisely; (for inconsiderate
zeal, and temerarious precipitation does not please him) and to love him with
so strong an affection, that we chose rather to suffer death than to forsake
him. But alas, how far are we from this holy disposition? who can say he
has attained to that measure of holy Love which the law of God requires in
him? and therefore should we endeavor to grow daily in love, earnestly praying
the Lord, that he would breath by his Spirit upon that little spark of
heavenly life which he has created in our hearts, that it be not extinguished
with the ashes of our corruption, but may increase, and become a great flame to
burn up our affections with such a love of God, as may carry up all the powers
of our soul toward him.

To this effect let us meditate frequently upon these four Four meditations
helpful to increase in us the love of God.
causes for which we should love the Lord: first, for that which he is in
himself, to wit, the fountain of all goodness, the greatest and supreme
good; if it be good that man would have, let him love the Lord to whom there
is 1 We should love him because he himself is the supreme good.
none like in goodness, inuenito si potes aliquid pretiosius Deo, and dabitur
tibi, find out if thou can any thing more precious than God, and it shall be
given thee. The Platonists by the light of nature saw that all the pulchritude
and beauty which shines in the creature was but splendour quidam summi illius
boni, which should transport us in our affection toward him from whom it came,
Pulchrum coelum, pulchra terra, sed pulchrior, qui fecit illa, the heaven and
earth are beautiful, but more beautiful is he who made them: and therefore as
often as any good in the creature begins to steal our heart after it, let us
in our affection go up to the Creator, considering that the Lord has not made
these beautiful or profitable creatures that we should go a whooring after
them, but that by them as steps we should climb up to him that made them, and
rest in him.

The second cause that may breed the love of God in us, if 2 Because he has
first loved us.
we meditate upon it is, that the Lord has first loved us: In(...) e^m s^d non
praeuentmus, we have found him, but we did not prevent him; we know him now,
but were first known of him, he sound us first, and that even when we were
enemies unto him: dilexit non existentes, into resistentes, he loved Bernard.
us when we were not, yea when we were rebels against him, and shall we not
now being reconciled by the death of his son endeavor to love him again.

Thirdly, the Lord by his continual gifts has testified his 3 He has
declared his love by innumerable gifts already given us.
love to us, he has not been unto us as a wilderness, or as a land of
darkness: if we will remember and tell what the Lord has done to our soul,
we shall find we are overcome with the multitude of his mercies, and there is
none that has deserved the love of our hearts comparable to the Lord. If our
love be free, let us set it upon him who is most worthy to be loved, and if it
be venial, let us also give it unto him who has given us most for it.

And fourthly, it shall waken in us the love of God, if we 4 He has yet
greater things which he has prepared for us to give us.
consider in our hearts what great things the Lord has promised to give unto
us even such as the eye has not seen; and the ear has never heard; life
without death; youth without age; light without darkness; joy without
sadness; a kingdom without a change, and in a word, he shall then Aug. de
ciuit. dei. l. 10. c. 18 Our love to God must be tried by the effects thereof.
give us a blessed life, non de his quae condidit, sed de seipso, not of those
things which he has made but of himself.

But to return to our former purpose, that we may know whether this holy love
be created in our hearts by the spirit of grace or no, we must try it by the
fruits and effects of love, whereof now it shall content us to touch a few.
First, 1 Property of Love, it longs to obtain that which is beloved.
it is the nature of Love, that it earnestly desires and seeks to obtain that
which is beloved. Hereby shall thou know whether thy affection of love be
ordered by Christ, or remain as yet disordered by Satan. The affection which
Christ has sanctified will follow upward, seeking to be there where he is.
Every thing naturally returns to the own original; as the waters go down to
the deep, from whence they came: so carnal love powered out like water,
returns to Satan who begat it, and carries miserable man captiued with it
downward to the bottomless pit: but holy love being as a spark of heavenly
fire kindled in our hearts by the holy Ghost, ascends continually and rauishes
us upward toward the Lord, from whom it came, not suffering us to rest till we
enjoy him.

Let this then be the first trial of our love, if we use carefully We love
not God if we use not the exercises of the word and prayer, seeing by them
only we have familiarity with God upon earth. Psalm. 110. 97. Psalm. 26. 8.
Psalm. 27. 2.
those holy means by which we keep and entertain familiarity with our God,
it is an argument that we love him: and what other means is there by which
man upon earth is familiar with God, but the exercises of the word and prayer?
Godly David who protests in some places that he loved the Lord, proves it in
other by the like of these reasons, O how love I thy law? it is my meditation
continually: and again, I have loved the habitation of thine house, and the
place where thine honor d^^els. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I
may dwell in the house of my God all the days of my life, to behold the beauty
of the Lord, and to visit his holy temple. As this does serve for the comfort
of those who delight in the exercise of the word and prayer, so does it serve
for the conviction of those, to whom any other place is more amiable than the
tabernacles of God: an evident proof they have not the love of God, because
they neglect the means even when they are offered, by which familiar access
is gotten unto the Lord.

And again, because the sight we have of God in this life, We love not God if
we long not to be with him in heaven, where he shows his most familiar presence.
is but through a veil, and the taste we get of his goodness is but in part,
and that in the life to come the Lord will fully embrace us in the arms of his
mercy, and kiss us for ever with the kisses of his mouth: therefore is it that
the soul which unfeignedly loves the Lord, cannot rest content with that
familiarity which by the Word and Prayer it has with GOD in this life, but
does long most earnestly to be with the Lord, where she knows that in a
more excellent manner she shall embrace him: whereof proceeds these and such
like complaints. As the Heart brayeth for the Psalm. 42. 1.
rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee O God, O when shall I come and
appear before the presence of my God? My Psalm. 143. Phillip. 1.
Soul desires after thee as the thirsty land, For I would be dissolved and
be with the Lord, Therefore come, even so, come Revel. 22.
Lord Jesus.

But alas, here are we taken in our sins, thou say How by this trial it
is found that many are void of the love of God.
thou love the Lord, but how is it then that thou longest not to see him,
neither desire thou to be with him? yea, a small appearance of the day of
death, or mention of the day of judgment does terrify and afray thee: where
as otherwise if thou did love him, they would be joyful days unto thee:
seeing in the one we go to him, and in the other he comes to us to gather
us, and take us thither where he is. Surely, those men who contenting
themselves with the gifts of God in this life, think not long to enjoy
himself, are but like an adulterous woman, who if so be she possess the goods
of her husband, regards not albeit she never see himself. I confess indeed,
we may rejoice in all the gifts which God has given us, as in the tokens and
testimonies of his love, but we are always to use them with this
protestation, that nothing given us in this life be allowed unto us for our
portion and inheritance, and that no contentment ever come unto our hearts till
we get himself who gave them. If the love of the Corinthians made the
Apostle^^ say, I seek not yours but you, how much more should the love of God
compel us to say unto him. It is not thy gifts O Lord, but thy self I long
for, thou art the portion of my soul? if thou would give me all the works
of thine hands, yet shall I never have comfort nor contentment, except thou
do give me thy self, Therefore O thou whom my Cant. 1. 6.
Soul loves, show me where thou feedest, where thou lie at noone, and do
rest, for why should I be as she that turns aside to the flocks of thy
companions? Blessed is he that hungers and thirsts for thy righteousness, for
he shall behold thy face, and be filled with thine image, for in thy presence
is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.

The second trial of our love is Obedience, and an holy 2 The effect of true
love is obedience, and a care to please the Lord. John 21. 15.
care in all our callings to serve and honor the Lord. Preachers must be tried
by this rule, Peter, love thou m^? seed my flock. Governors and
Counselors must be tried by this, Can ye say in truth with the Godly
Governor David, I love the Lord? then will ye also say with him, what shall I
render to the Lord for all his benefits? how shall I show my love toward him?
and what shall I do in my time for advancement of his glory? If thou do
love the Lord, then will thou be a nourishing Father to his Church, a careful
aduancer of his kingdom, a wise prouisor to remove those stumbling blocks
which hinder the course of the Gospel: If ye love the Lord, then will ye
stand up with David, and say, Do^ not I hate them O Lord that hate thee? do
not Psalm. 139. 21.
I earnestly contend with them that rise up against thee? surely I hate them
with unfeigned hatred, a^ if they were mine utter enemies.

If ye honor the Lord as David did, the Lord shall bless What great blessing
belongs to them, who in their calling seek to honor God.
you as he blessed David. David swear unto the Lord, that he would not rest,
till he found out a place for the Lord, even an habitation for the mighty God
of Jacob. And the Lord swears again unto David, that of the fruit of his
body, he would set up one to reign after him. But if otherwise there be
nothing in you but a care to stablish your selves and your houses, with the
neglect of the glory of God, then remember that the curse of Shebna, and not
the blessing of Eliakim shall be upon you, Ye shall not be fastened Esaias 22. 23.
as a nail in sure place, but shall be rolled and turned away like a ball: the
Lord shall drive thee from thy station, and out of thy dwelling place shall he
destroy thee: For the wicked shall not have his desire, his thoughts shall not
be performed, neither Psa. 140. 11. Psalm. 52. 5.
shall he be established on the earth, but evil shall hunt him to
destruction, The Lord shall take thee and pluck thee out of thy Tabernacle,
and root thee out of the Land of the living.

And generally all of you in your callings remember that But this age in word
calls Christ their King, but casts off his yoke. John 15. 10.
the value of your Christian love must be tried by the same touchstone, not by
your words, but by your works. If any love me (says Jesus) let him keep my
commandments, but here also the hypocrisy of this age is discovered: as the
Jews called Jesus their King, and bowed their knees before him, but spat in
his face and buffetted him: so the bastard Christians of this age call Christ
their Lord, and bow their knees before him, yet by their sinful life they
crucify him, and tread his blood of the covenant under their feet: they kiss
and betray him with Judas, it is but a Scepter of reed they allow him, for
they give him no commandment over their affections, wherefore great is the
controversy which the Lord has this day with the men of this generation.

The third trial of love is Bountifulness, the Apostle 3 The property of
love is bountifulness. 1 Cor. 13. 4.
says Love is bountiful: experience proves that every lover bestows
bountifully on that which he loves: ye love your bodies, and therefore
largely bestow upon them to feed them, and cloth them, yea, with excessive
apparel; ye love your Children, and lets them want no needful thing for
them; yea, ye love your beasts, and spares not to bestow largely upon them:
only you say you love the Lord, but wherein are ye bountiful toward him? It
is true that in nothing can a man be profitable to the Almighty, but are there
not works commanded us* which should so shine before men, that by them our
heavenly Father may be glorified? though works can be no merits* yet are they
your witnesses, and what have ye done to remain when ye are dead as
vvitnesses of your love toward the Lord? Though your goodness extend not to
the Lord, yet where is your delight that should be on his Saints and excellent
ones upon earth? where is your compassion and love toward the brethren? are not
the men of this age like unto that fig tree which had fair leaves, but not so
much as one fig to give unto Jesus in his hunger, having the show of
godliness, but have denied the power thereof, yielding words enough but no
fruits to adorn the glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus. Of these and many more
if we might insist in them, it is manifest that all have not the love of God
in their hearts, who this day pretend it.

The last trial of Love which now we bring, is readiness 4 The last is
readiness to suffer for his cause.
to suffer affliction for the cause of God. The Apostles being beaten for
preaching in the name of Jesus, instead of mourning, departed reioyeing that
they were counted worthy to suffer for Christ's sake, and all because they loved
him. For the love of Rahel seven years of hard servitude seemed unto Jacob
but a short space. For the love of Dinah Sichem willingly sustained the
circumcision and cutting of his flesh: much more to him in whose heart abounds
the love of the Lord, will bitter things become sweet, and hard things easy.
This Love has made the holy Martyrs step out of their own element into the
fire, with greater joy and willingness, then worldlings have when they sit
down to their banqueting tables to refresh them, or lies down in their beds
to rest them. The Apostle who suffered all sorts of affliction for the Gospel,
gives this for a reason, that the love of Jesus constrained him. Thus much
concerning the effects of holy love, by which we are to make sure our calling,
and consequently our election, for our everlasting comfort.

Even to them that are called according to his purpose.] Hitherto the Apostle
has summarily set down his third principal A confirmation of his third and
last argument of comfort.
argument of comfort: and now in the end of this verse he shortly breaks up
the confirmation thereof, which is this: they who love God are called according
to his purpose, therefore all things must work for the best unto them. The
necessity of this reason shall appear if we consider that the Lord cannot be
frustrated of his end. Those whom the Lord in his immutable purpose has
ordained to glory, and whom according to that purpose he has called in time,
how can it be but all things must work unto their good? for the vvorking
providence of God which is the executer of his purpose, does so overrule all
incidents which fall out in the world, and does so govern all secondary and
inferior causes, that of necessity they are directed to that end, whereunto
the supreme cause of all, to wit, the purpose and will of God has ordained
them. This is shortly set down in these words, and more largely explaned in
the two verses following. It is the last reason of comfort, and the highest:
for now the Apostle leads us out of our selves, and sets us upon that rock
which is higher than we, he carries us by the hand as it were out of the
earth up into heaven, and lets us see how our salvation is so grounded in Gods
eternal purpose, that no accident in the world can change it.

We have here then three things, every one of them depending Comfort, that the
ground of our salvation is in God, the tokens thereof in our selves.
upon another: the love of God, flowing from the calling of God, and the
calling of God, coming from the purpose of God: unto which the Apostle here
draws us, that we casting our anchor with the veil, and resting in the Lords
immutable purpose, may have comfort in all our present tentations. It is most
expedient for the godly to mark this, that our manifold changes do not
interrupt our peace: let us consider that the Lord has in such sort dispensed
our salvation, that the ground thereof is laid in his own immutable purpose,
but the marks and tokens thereof are placed in us after our calling: the
marks and tokens are changeable, like as we our selves in whom they are, are
changeable; but the ground holds fast, being laid in that unchangeable God in
whom falls no shadow of alteration, Esaias. 46. Ioh. 10. 2 Timothy 2.
I am God and am not changed: My sheep none can take out of my hand: The
counsel of the Lord shall stand, and his foundation remains sure. It is true
that the tokens of election cannot be sully taken away from any that is
effectually called; nay, not in the greatest desertion, yet have they in us
their own intention and remission. And this should comfort us against our
daily vicissitudes and changes, when we feel that our Faith does saint, our
life languishes, our hope houers, and we are like to sincke in the tentation
with Peter, and our feeble hands fall down with Moses, yet let us not
despair; no change in us can alter Gods unchangeable purpose, he who has
begun the work in us will also perfect it. Because I am not changed (says
Mal. 3. 6.
the Lord) therefore is it that ye O sons of Jacob are not consumed.

This purpose of God is called otherwise the will of God, Our calling and
conversion flows from Gods purpose, and therefore all the praise of it belongs
to the Lord.
and the good pleasure of his Will. In that the Apostle says our calling is
according to his purpose, it teaches us to ascribe the whole praise of our
salvation to the good pleasure of his will, and not to our own foreseen
merits. That poison of pride which Satan poured into our first Parents, and
by which they aspyred to be equal with God, does yet break forth in their
posterity, the corrupt heart of man ever aiming at this, to seek unto himself
either in part or in whole, the power and praise of his own salvation. This is
to start up into the room of God, and to usurp that glory which belongs to
the Lord, and he will not give to any other: than the which no greater
sacrilege can be committed against the Lord. O man content thee with that
which the Lord offers thee, and let that alone which he reserues unto
himself: My peace (says the Lord) I give to you, my glory I will not give to
any other. The first Preachers of the Gospel were Angels, they proclaimed
glory and peace, but glory they gave to God which is on high, and peace they
cried to the children of his good will which are upon earth. It is enough that
peace and salvation is given to be thine, but as for the glory of salvation let
it remain to the Lord.

He is for this called the Father of mercy, because mercy For this cause he
is called the Father of Mercy and not of Judgment. 2 Timothy 1. 9.
bred in his own bosom. He has found many causes without himself moving
him to execute justice, but a cause moving him to show mercy he never found,
but the good pleasure of his will: therefore the Apostle says, the Lord has
called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to
his purpose and grace. Surely except the Lord had reserved mercy for us, we
had been like to Sodom and Gomorrha: but it pleased him of his own good will
of the same lump of clay to make us vessels of honor, whereof he made
others vessels of dishonor. And who is able sufficiently to ponder so great a
benefit? and therefore howsoever the blinded Pharisee sacrifice to his own
net, and make his mouth to kiss his hand, as if his own hand had done it, yet
let the redeemed of the Lord praise the Lord; let them cry out with a louder
voice than David did, O Lord what are we that thou art so mindful of us? Not
unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name give the glory, for thy loving
kindness and thy truth: for our salvation comes from God that sits upon the
throne, and from the Lamb. To thee O Lord be praise, and honor, and glory
for ever.

Now as for the calling; we are to know that the calling Our calling is
twofold, and the inward calling is a declaration of our election.
of God is twofold, outward and inward He speaks not here of the outward
calling, of which our Savior says, many are called and few are chosen, but he
speaks of the inward calling, which is the first intimation and declaration of
our election. For the decree of our election is always hid and secret unto us,
till the Lord by calling reveal it, and make it known unto us that we are of
the number of those whom he has appointed to life. As in his secret counsel
he made a distinction of the elect and reprobate: so by his calling he
begins the execution of this decree, seperating the one from the other in
this life in manners and conditions, who are to be separated in the life to
come for ever in estate and place.

He that will take a right view of all mankind, shall find All mankind are
considered standing in three circles, and they only are blessed who are within
the third.
them standing as it were in three circles, they only being happy, who are
within the third. In the outmost circle are all those on whom the Lord has not
vouchsafed so much as an outward calling by his Gospel; and here stands the
greatest part of the world. In the middle circle, which is much narrower,
stand they who are partakers of an outward calling by the Word and Sacraments.
In the third circle, which yet is of smaller compass than the other two, stand
they who are inwardly and effectually called; these are Christ's little flock;
the communion of Saints; the few chosen; the Lords third part, so to speak
with Zachary: Zach. 13. 9.
the other two parts shall be cut off and dye, but the third will the Lord fine
as silver and gold: the Lord will say of them, this is my people, and they
shall say the Lord is our God. It is a great step indeed that we are brought
from the first circle into the second, but it is not sufficient to salvation,
yea, rather they who stand in the second circle, hearing the voice of God
calling them to repentance, and yet harden their hearts and will not follow
him, may look for a more fearful condemnation then they who are in the
outmost rank of all. Double stripes are for him who knows his Masters
will, and does it not. Sodom and Gomorrha shall be in an easier estate than
they. Content not therefore your selves, that ye are brought within the
compass of the visible Church, that ye have been baptized in the name of
Jesus, and have communicated at his holy Table, Not every one that says, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into Math. 7. 21.
his kingdom: except ye find also his inward and effectual calling that the
arm of his grace has drawn you within the compass of the third circle, and
has set you down among those whom he has chosen to be his own peculiar
people.

And again, that the calling of God is according to his purpose yields unto us
this comfort, that seeing his calling is extended toward us, we may be sure
that from everlasting he has had toward us a purpose of love. Certainly
Where ever the Gospel is preached to call men, there God has toward some a
purpose of love.
he had not sent his Gospel among us, were it not that he has here a number
belonging to the election of his grace; he has lighted a candle among us, and
set it in an eminent candlestick, to assure us that he is seeking here some
pieces of money which were lost, and he will not rest till he find them.
When the Apostle Paul should have gone by Bythinia, the Lord commanded him to
go to Macedonia, what the purpose of God was, the event declared, namely, that
it was to convert Lidia and the Iaylour. Who Acts 16.
may not see here Gods marvelous mercy toward his own, that for the
conversion of a few, will have his Gospel to be preached to a whole kingdom?
which does yet more clearly appear, in that when he commanded his Apostle
Paul to tarry at Corinthus, he gave this reason, because (says he) I have
much people here: showing unto Acts 18. 10.
us, that the greater harvest he has, the longer does he continue his
Laborers among a people. This is the very work of God which he is working in
the midst of you, and for which he continues among you the preaching of his
glorious Gospel, it is because toward many of you, he has a purpose of love:
some has he called already, whom he will have confirmed; others yet inwardly
called, he will convert by the Gospel, before he remove it. Let every man
look to himself, whether he have part in that grace which comes by the
Gospel, or no; for woe will be to him that shall be found in darkness, after
that the light has shined unto him.

Good were it yet for us all, if we could more deeply If this were
considered, it would work a greater ^^uerence of the Gospel.
consider this, that the Gospel of the Lord Jesus is come among us, not by
accident, nor by the means of men, but by the purpose of God: that in these
days we hear that voice, which many of our Fathers heard not, that in some
places of the world this Gospel is preached, and not in others, that it is
continued with us, notwithstanding the manifold machinations of the Children
of darkness to subvert it, yea, that by such and such persons the Gospel has
been preached unto us, if we did consider that all these fall out according to
Gods determinate purpose, it would waken in us a more reverent hearing of the
word of Grace, and a greater care to take heed to the smallest occasion of
grace when it is offered: but all the contempt thereof which now is among men
flows from this, that they do not look unto the hand of God sending out
such a message to them, by such persons, at such a time, in such a place, as
he in his eternal purpose has concluded with himself. But as Samuel before
he knew the Lord, thought the voice of God to be but the voice of El^, and
therefore went again to his rest: so the great multitude of them who hear it,
not as the word of God, but as the word of men, esteeming that it comes by
the means of men, and not according to the determinate purpose of God, it is
no marvel if still they return to their old sins, and remain disobedient
to the heavenly vocation.

And further out of the ground laid already, that the calling A fearful token
of Gods departure, when he cease to call a people any more.
of God is according to his purpose, we are taught, that the least intermission
of Gods calling should be unto us a great matter of humiliation; seeing the
Lord calls men to be Preachers, and has them in his hand as stars, holding
them out sometime to one part of the world, and sometime to another, that he
may communicate light to them who are sitting in darkness; the removing of
them from a people, is a feare^ull token of the Lords departure, and
translating of his kingdom. The Husbandman calls not his Laborers For no
Husbandman will want laborers in his field, as long as the harvest is not
ended.
out of the field in the midst of the day, unless the harvest be done: and
if the Lord remove his Servants from a people, it is because his purpose is
finished; for the ground is sure, that his calling is according to his purpose:
but the Lord forbid that the term of the ending of this calling should ever
come in our days.

And to the end that we haste it not upon our selves, we are to know that as
the Gospel comes not to a Land by man's procurement, so no power of man is able
to remove As the Gospel comes not by man's procurement, so no power of man can
remove it.
it. The Lord who set the Sun in the Firmament, and gouernes it in such sort,
that it gives light to one part of the world when another is in darkness, and
no malice of the evil doer is able to obscure it, howeuer he hates it, has
also set his Gospel in the firmament of his Church, to give light to Goshen,
while as Egypt is in darkness; and all the courses of politikes, though they
were filled with Achitoph^ls wisdom, are not able to stay it: only our own
unthankfulness, and abuse of the time of Grace is to be feared; if therefore
we love the light, let us cast away the works of darkness, and walk in the
light while as yet we have it: let us vvelcome those messengers of peace, that
come to us in the name of the Lord, endeavoring by all holy means to
transfer this Kingdom of God to our Children after us, that they also may
see the beauty of the Lord, (which we have seen) to their everlasting
salvation.

Verse 29. For those whom he know before, he also predestined, to be made
like unto the image of his S^nn^, that he might be the first borne among many
brethren,
THe whole Book of God is full of heavenly What a treasure of comfort is to
be dug out of this Verse.
consolation, every parcel thereof has in it the words of eternal life; but
this place of Scripture wherein now we are travailing, may be called above
the rest a treasure of comfort, for here the Apostle leads up the Christian
to the register of God, and lets him see his own name written in the book of
life, his salvation established in Gods immutable decree, exhibited now by Gods
effectual calling, to be performed and perfected to him by his endless
glorification. So that in all the book of God, there is not so clear and
certain a sight of salvation given to the Christian as in this place. It Not
so clear a sight of salvation in all the book of God.
comforted Stephen when he was in the valley of death, that he saw the heavens
opened, and the Lord Jesus standing at the right hand of his Father: and it
should no less comfort us in all our tribulations that the Apostle here lets
us see the third heavens opened unto us, to make known unto us the will of God
concerning our salvation.

This comfort the Apostle brake up shortly as we heard The linckes of the
Chain of salvation: Election: Calling: Justification: Glorification, are knit
inseperably.
in the end of the last verse, and now more largely explanes it in these two
verses: in the which he sets down in order the causes of our salvation and
lets us see how our present effectual calling is so inseperably knit with our
election and glorification by the hand of God, that no power in earth nor in
hell is able to sunder them: whereof the certainty of his former comfort
appears clearly, that of necessity all things must work together for the
best unto them that love God, even to them that are called according to his
purpose. Which shall yet be more manifested if we consider how that this
golden Chain of our salvation reaches (so to speak it) from eternity to
eternity; the beginning of it, albeit without beginning, is our Election; the
end of it, albeit without end, is our Glorification. And these two ends of the
chain the Lord keeps them sure and secret in his own hand, but the two
middle linkes thereof, to wit, our Calling and Justification, the Lord lets
them down from heaven to the earth, that we for our comfort might gripe and
apprehend them, and being sure of the two middle linckes, we might also be
sure of the two ends, because the Lord has knit them inseperably together.

Thou then who would be comforted with the assurance He that has a sure
hold of the middle linckes, Calling and Justification, is sure of the other
two, Election and Glorification.
of thy salvation, make it first known to thy own conscience, by breaking off
the former course of thy sins, and by well doing for the time to come, that
God has called thee and justified thee. Gripe sure as it were with the one
hand the lincke of Calling, and with the other the linck of Justification:
fasten both thy hands upon the middle linckes of this Chain, that by them thou
may be pulled out of this dungeon, and raised up to heaven to see that thou
art one of them who was elected before time, and after time shall be glorified.
To make this yet more plain, we are Our present life is a point of time
between two eternities.
to know that this mortal life of ours is a short interiected point of time,
between two eternities (so to call it,) in the which some in fear and
trembling working out their salvation, passes from Gods eternal election to
endless glorification: others again in wantonness and careless security,
drink in iniquity with greediness, and so steps from the decree of
reprobation, that most justly they procure their own condemnation: So that
every man has to consider of his everlasting weal or woe by his present
disposition in this life.

Oh that we had sanctified memories, always to remember If in this life we
fall we may rise again, but if in death we step downward we shall never mend
it. Eccles. 11. 3.
this: so long as we are here, if of weakness we fall we may rise again,
and if in one day we have not learned well to repent, we have leave of the
Lords patience, to learn it better another day: but he who in the day of his
transmigration steps the wrong step, will never get leave to amend it: where
the tree falls it shall lie there: the wicked who dye in their sins, step
downward to the deep pit and gulf, out of the which there is no redemption.
Let us therefore be well advised before we leap; let us fasten the one foot
upon the border of that Canaan, before we go out of the body; let us make sure
that we shall be received into those everlasting habitations. This shall be
done if we make our whole life a proceeding from election to glorification,
and that through calling and justification, which two have inseperably
following them the sanctification and renouation of the whole man. The Lord
make us wise in time that we may consider the course of our life, and think
of the end whereunto it leads us: for as Moses protested to Israel, so do I
unto you, I have laid this Deuteronomy. 30. 15.
day life and death before you: the Lord give you grace to make choice of the
best.

In these causes of our salvation linked together in this Prescience and
Predestination how they are here distinguished.
Chain, we have first to look unto Gods decree, consisting in his
foreknowledge and predestination: secondly, to the execution thereof, which is
made by his Calling, Justification, and Glorification. The decree has in it
these two acts or preordinances (so to call them) Prescience and
Predestination, which this manner of way are to be distinguished: by
foreknowledge the Lord sets before him the whole number of mankind, whom of
the good pleasure of his own will he purposed to save: so that the first
preordinance is this, these are they whom I will save: by predestination
again he concluded to save them by such and such means; so that the second
preordinance of the decree is this; those whom I have decreed to save I will
save this manner of way; so that prescience looks to the person to be saved,
predestination to the means whereby they are to be saved. Where we must
consider that this decree of God is thus distinguished by the Apostle in these
two words for our capacity, who being but mortal creatures endued with
reason, conceiues, understands, and discernes one thing after another, and
cannot do otherwise: but it is not so with the Lord our God, who being
himself a most perfect understanding, by one act without priority or
posteriority, knows, conceiues, and discernes all things.

We come first now to speak of Gods foreknowledge: Prescience improperly
ascribed unto God.
the properties of God are either absolute, as namely, that he is a Spirit,
simple, and infinite, or else such as have a relation to the creature. And of
this sort is foreknowledge, which improperly is ascribed unto God: for properly
there (...) ^ore nor after in God, nothing past, nothing to come: but
foreknowledge is ascribed to God in respect of the creature, because he knew
us before that we were. This foreknowledge Pr(...)nce two manner of ways
considered, generally, and specially.
is two ways considered: first, generally, as it is extended to all his
creatures, and so it is compared to a common book of register, wherein the
Lord has written all things which were afterward to be: and of this speaks
the Psalmist, My bones (says he) are not hid from thee, though Psalm 139. 15.
I was made in a secret place and fashioned beneath in the earth, thine eyes
did see me, when I was without form: for in thy book were all things
written, which in continuance of time were fashioned, though they were not
before. Of it also speaks the Apostle, All things are manifest in his sight
with whom we Heb. 4. 13.
have to do. This manner of way foreknowledge is Gods universal eye, by which
with one look he knows all his creatures within and without, their nature,
their shape, their actions, their beginnings, their ends, but foreknowledge
this manner of way considered, is not a lincke of this Chain, it being
certain that there is not one of these lincks more patent, nor largely
extended than another, as ye shall afterward hear.

Foreknowledge then in this Chain of Salvation, is specially In this Chain it
is specially considered as it looks to the Elect only. John 13. 18. Mat. 7.
23.
considered, as it is conjoined cum (...), with the love and liking of God, as
it is all one with Election, extended to none but unto the children of his good
will: this way it is affirmed of the godly, the Lord knows who are his, but
denied of the wicked, depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not,
that is, albeit I know your persons, yea, your most secret actions, yet your
selves I know not, so that I love you: and this way foreknowledge specially
considered, is called the book of life, wherein the Lord has written the
names of those whom he has ordained to life.

Predestination is also two manner of ways considered, Predestination is also
two ways considered.
first, as it is generally extended to all his creatures, for as he knew them
all before they were, so he appointed them by mids into their own end;
other artificers when they have made a work, know not what will be the end of
it; he that builds an house, knows not how long it will stand, whether fire
shall consume it, or the wind ouer-turne it, or the earthquake undermine it;
but the Lord as he has made his creatures, so has he appointed them to an
end, which he knows himself: but here Predestination is specially
considered, and is no larger than Election, respecting the Elect only, whom he
has ordained unto life by his own mids: for the word (...), here not only
signifies to ordain to an end, but also to appoint all the limits, borders,
and mids, within and by which thou art to come to that end.

Where, before we come to the doctrine of instruction, Foreseen me rits
falsely collected out of this place.
we will shortly encounter with our adversaries, who read these words in this
manner; that the Lord predestined those whom he fore-knew to be conformed to
the image of his Son, that so they may establish here out, their error of
foreseen merits. It were sufficient to bring against them the best learned of
their own side, some whereof read these words no otherwise then we do; as
the Jesuits of Rhemes: others plainly impugn that reading, and the error of
foreseen merits founded upon it, for so Caietane writes upon this place. Ad
confutandum dogma illorum, This error is improued by their own men, as
Caietane.
qui primum salutis nostrae locum, tribuunt diuinae praescientiae futurorum,
qui praescientiam meritorum ponunt rationem definitionis diuinae ad confutandum
inquit haec, primum nostrae salutis locum tribuit diuino proposito, dicendo ijs
qui secundum propositum vocati sunt. To confute (says he) the doctrine of
those, who give the first place of salvation to Gods foreknowledge of man's
merits, which he was to do, and so puts his prescience as a reason and cause
of his predestination; to confute these I say, he gives the first place of
salvation to the purpose of God, while he says, to them that and Aquinas.
are called according to his purpose. Aquinas in like manner writing upon this
same place, says: Ponere quod aliquod meritum ex part nostra praesupponatur,
cuius praescientia, sit ratio praedestinationis, nihil est aliud quam ponere
gratiam dari ex meritis nostris, and quod principium bonorum operum est ex
nobis, and consummatio ex Deo. To affirm that any merit upon our part must be
presupposed, the prescience whereof was the cause of predestination, is no
other thing but to affirm that grace were given of our merits, and that the
beginning of good works were of our selves, and the consummation thereof were
of God: therefore (says he) the words are to be read this way more
conveniently, whom he fore-knew them he also predestined to be made like unto
the image of his Son, vt ista conformitas non sit ratio praedestinationis sed
effectus, that so this conformity be not a cause of predestination but an
effect.

But beside these, this error is convinced by manifold Sanctification is an
effect of predestination and therefore not a cause of it. Ephesians. 1. 4.
proofs of holy Scripture: the Apostle says, he has chosen us in Christ,
therefore not in our selves: he says again, that we should be holy and
without blam; he says not, he chose us because he foresaw that we would be
holy; so he sets down sanctification as an effect of Predestination. Now it
is certain that one effect of Predestination may well be the cause of an other
posterior effect, as the preaching of the word is a cause of faith, and faith
is a certain cause of justification, but no effect of Predestination can be
cause of it. Again he says, The Lord has saved us, and called us with 2 Timothy
1. 9.
an holy calling, not according to our works, here ye see, that in our
calling our works and Gods purpose are manifestly opponed, so that the putting
of the one is the removing of the other: thus neither in our Election before
time, nor in our calling in time, has the Lord regarded our works, or
foreseen rectitude of our will, but the good pleasure of his own will.

And I pray you what other thing could the Lord foresee The calling of God
finds every man in an evil estate. Esaias 48. 8.
in us, than that which he foresaw in the Israelites? I knew that thou art
obstinate, and thy neck an iron sinew, and thy browe brass: I knew that thou
would grievously transgress, therefore I called thee a transgressor from
the womb, yet for my Names sake will I defer my wrath, and for my praise
will I refrain it from thee, that I cut thee not off: yea, in so many places
of holy Scripture does the Lord plead the cause of his own glory, that it
cannot be but a most fearful sacrilege against so clear a light for a man
either in part or in whole, to make his own merits a cause of salvation. When
the Lord called Abraham, he found him an Idolater: when he called Paul, he
found him a persecuter: when he called Matthew, he found him a Publican: when
he called Mary, he found her possessed with Devils; all that ever received
grace, stand up as so many witnesses of his glory. Not unto us O Lord, not unto
us; but to thy name be Psalm. 115. 1.
the praise.

And to these objections which the brain of man has Objections of men against
Gods predestination, answered.
brought out against this truth of God, to clear themselves and charge the
Lord with unrighteousness, they are all sufficiently answered by the Apostle,
that the Lord by reason of his absolute authority over all his creatures has
power of the same lump to make one vessel of honor, for to Romans 9. 10.
show the glory of his mercy, and an other vessel of dishonor, to show the
glory of his justice: seeing this power is not denied to the potter over his
clay, how dare man speak against it in the Lord over his creature? O man who
art thou that pleadect with God? Woe be to him that strives with his Maker. If
I dispute with thee O Lord, thou art righteous, how ever I judge of thy
counsel and of the manner of thy working, thou art asway righteous. Si non vis
errare, if thou Aug. in Joan. tract. 26.
wilt not err, says Augustine, judge not the Lord: why one is saved the
Apostle tells you, I have mercy on whom I will have mercy, Misericordia eius
misericordiae causa: why another Aug. Epist. 59. ad Paulin.
is rejected, Causa potest esse occulta, iniusta esse non potest, the cause may
be secret, but cannot be unjust: qui infactis Dei rationem non videt,
infirmitatem suam considerans, cur Gregor. in Job cap. 9.
non videt rationem videat, he that sees not a reason of the Lords doing, let
him look to his own infirmity, and he shall see a reason why he sees it
not. The Lord has hid even from most wicked men the purpose of their own
reprobation till it come to the execution, and then shall they receive an
answer from their own consciences, to stop their mouths, which now they will
not receive from man. Every one of the damned shall be compelled to
acknowledge, that the judgment executed upon them is righteous.

But now to return to the doctrine, we have first to observe Predestination
takes not away the second causes and means of salvation.
out of the signification of the word which I marked before, that the Lords
determinate counsel and predestination takes not away the nature, properties,
nor necessities of secondarie causes and means of salvation, but rather
establishes them: for those whom God has appointed to salvation, he has also
appointed to those means which may bring them unto it. It is therefore a
blasphemy which is frequent in the mouths of carnal professors, if I be
elected howsoever I live I shall be saved, and if otherwise I be a reprobate,
live as I will I cannot mend it: this is no other thing but Satan's divinity:
if thou be the Son of God Satan's divinity teaches Atheists to despise the
means of salvation.
cast thy self down from the Temple: thou shall not dash thy foot against a
stone: as if the sons of God were licensed to despise the second and
ordinary means, and not rather bound to use them: but in very deed as it is
against the nature of fire to be cold, so is it impossible that the elect man
effectually called can reason after this manner, yea the more he hears of
election, the more he endeauours to make it sure by well doing, knowing that
no man can attain to the end of our Faith, which is the salvation of our
soul, but by the lawful and ordinary means.

Both temporal and spiritual blessings the Lord will have God gives his
blessing by means, therefore they should not neglect the means who seek the
blessing. Hos. 2. 21.
us to seek them by the lawful and ordinary means: the Corns cannot serve
Israel except the earth bear them; the earth cannot bear them except the
heavens give rain; the heavens can give no rain except the Lord command them.
Therefore when the Lord promises a blessing, In that day (says the Lord) I
will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth, and the earth shall
hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Israel. And
that he keeps the same order in bestowing spiritual blessings we are taught by
the Apostle, when he says, that before we be saved we Romans 10. 13.
must call on the name of the Lord, before we call on his name we must
believe, before we believe we must hear, before we hear there must be
preaching: whereof it is evident that they who neglect and contemn the
ordinary means of salvation, do give out a very hard sentence against
themselves, which is* that if they so continue they do not appertain unto
election.

And again for our further comfort we have here to Comfort, our election
before time cannot be disanulled by any creature made in time.
mark the certainty and soliditie of our salvation: it is neither to day nor
yesterday that the Lord concluded to be merciful unto us; our election began
not with our selves: before the mountains were made, before the earth and the
world were formed, even from everlasting to everlasting the Lord is our God.
What creature then is able to disanull that which God has willed, before that
ever a creature was? only let us labor that as our election is sure in it
self, so we may make it sure in us, by walking in a good conscience before the
Lord; and then we shall not care what man or Angel say to the contrary
against it; they are but posterior creatures, and what intrest can they have to
gainesay that which GOD has done before that they were? Happy are they who
are rooted, grounded, and builded upon this rock; no stormy wave of the Sea
shall ouerturne them, no rage of tentation, nor power of the gates of hell
shall prevail against them.

Lastly, we are taught here by the holy Apostle that all Saving grace is
communicated to few, and therefore should be the more esteemed.
men are not foreknowne, all are not predestined to life, otherwise there
were not an election: there is only a certain and definit number which
belong to the election of Grace; a fullness both of Jews and Gentiles; a
number not known to us, but known to the Lord; not one more nor one less
shall be partakers of salvation. Many (says our Savior) shall come from the
East and from the West, and shall sit with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the
kingdom of Mat. 8. 11.
God: he says not all the children of the East shall come, but many shall
come. This should vvaken in us a holy care so long as the calling of God
continues among us, to take heed to our selves, striving to thrust in at the
door of the kingdom of heaven: for it suffers violence, and the violent take
it; the fewer there be to be received into the kingdom, the more we should
labor to be of that number. We see So it is in nature that rarest things are
most regarded.
that in nature, things that are common were they never so excellent, are not
esteemed: the Sun because common to all, is regarded of few, though it be a
very excellent and profitable creature; but parcels of the earth possessed by
men in property, are much more remembered and regarded by those to whom they
belong; riches and honor are in greater account among men because few attain
unto them: and if we were as wise in spiritual things, that grace of Christ
which brings salvation would be more precious and dear unto us* because it is
communicated to few. The Lord give us grace to consider rightly of it in time.

To be made like to the image of the Son. The Apostle Predestination is unto
glory by a conformity with Christ in our present life.
insists not in the rest of the linckes of the Chain; having touched them he
leaves them, only he insists in this lincke of Predestination: teaching us
that he uses not here the word of Predestination generally, but restraines
it to Predestination unto life; as also that we cannot step from election to
glory but by a conformity with Christ, which is most necessary for us to
mark: for albeit there be great comfort in the consideration of Gods immutable
purpose ordayning man to life, as also in the consideration of that glory
whereunto we are ordained, yet neither of them can comfort us unless we be
sure that our life is proceeding from election to glorification by the right
means.

The first and nearest end of election in regard of man, Ephesians. 1. 4. As Christ
is the life, so is he the way, neither can we come to life but by the way.
Ioh. 14. 6.
is his sanctification: for the Lord has chosen us that we should be holy:
the second and furthest end is man's glorification. The same Lord Jesus who said
I am the life, said in like manner I am the way and the verity: if thou
would be at life lie not still in thy sins, but rise and walk in the way,
and if thou know not the way, learn it from him who is verity. Let not
presumption which slayes the wicked overtake thee; they pass over the matter
of their salvation with a wanton word; their hearts are profane, yea they
boast with their tongues that they are sure to be saved; but this is a vain
rejoicing: for he that walks not in the way, how is it possible that he can
come to the end? assuredly he shall never come where Christ is to live with him,
that walks not after Christ in newness of life.

This conformity with the Lord Jesus whereunto we Conformity with Christ
wherein it stands.
are predestined, is partly in this life, partly in the life to come. Our
conformity in the life to come shall stand in living and reigning with
Christ, which is our glorification, whereof he speaks hereafter. Our
conformity in this life stands in living and suffering with Christ, and of
this he speaks here; to live godly after the rule of Christ, to suffer
patiently after the similitude of Christ, are the two parts of our present
conformity with him. The Lord Jesus is given us of the Father both to be a
Savior, and an example, unless we make him an example to follow him in our
doing and suffering, he shall not be unto us a Savior.

Here we are to mark that the works done by Christ in Works done by Christ
are threefold: 1. personal works of Redemption: 2. Miracles: 3. works of a
godly life.
our nature, are threefold: first, his personal works of Redemption; as that
he was borne of the Virgin; that he suffered the cursed death of the Cross,
for the exp^ation of our sins; that he rose the third day for our
justification; that he ascended triumphantly into heaven, leading captivity
captive. Secondly, his works of miracles; as that he fasted forty days; gave
sight to the blind; life to the dead, and such like. Thirdly, his works of
godliness and sanctification; as that he was subject to his parents; loving to
his brethren, painful in his calling; perseuering in prayer. To prease to
follow him in his personal works of Redemption is blasphemy, or in his
works of Miracles is imp^ssibilitie, but to follow him in the works of a
godly life, is true piety. In the first papists are blasphemous, that on
Good Friday makes a play to the people, by counterfaiting In the first and
second Papists are apish imitators.
the sufferings of Christ. In the second Papists are ridiculous, that practice
to counterfaite him in his forty days fasting, as if that might ordinarily be
done of men, which once Jesus did for a Miracle. In the third let all those
who are truly religious str^ue to follow him: as Children looking to their
copy learn to mend their letters; so let us by looking daily to our example,
learn to amend our lives.

Imitation in the first two Jesus did never require, only In the third only
should we follow the Lord Jesus. Ioh. 13. 12.
he craves that we should follow him in the third: there is his voice, Learn
of me that I am lo^ly and meeks, he did not bid thee (says Augustine) learn
at him how to make the world, or how to raise the dead, but how to be lowly and
meek, for this cause did our blessed Savior wash his Disciples feet, that he
might give us an example, how one of us should serve another, as I have loved
you (said Jesus) so love ye John 15. 12.
one another: yea, in that upon the Cross he prayed for his enemies, he has
also taught us how to practice that precept, Pray for them who persecute you.
In patience likewise he Mat. 5. 44.
is proposed unto us for an example, for so are we exhorted, Heb. 12. 2.
Let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus
the author and finisher of our Faith: these and such like are the works
wherein we are commanded to conform our selves unto him. We must also follow
the Lord Jesus in suffering.


The other point wherein stands our conformity with him, is in patient
suffering with him for righteousness, which we shall not be able to do, except
we live first after the similitude of his life: what like suffering to the
suffering of Christ, than the suffering of that reprobate the^fe, who dyed
with Jesus at the same time the same kind of death? yet because his life was
never like the life of Christ, his sufferings shall never be accounted the
sufferings of Christ. Similis in ^oena, dissimilis ^^causa. But as for the
other whom Augustine.
the Lord Jesus converted upon the Cross, to declare to all the world that
even in death, he retained the power of a Savior, able to give life to them
who are dead, he brought out in the last hour of his life, the first fruits of
amendment of life; he lived long a wicked malefactor, but a short while a
converted Christian; yet in that same space he abounded in the fruits of
Godliness, confessing his sins, giving glory to the justice of God, rebuking
the blasphemies of the other, and pleading the cause of his innocent Savior;
thus being turned from his sin, he began even on the Cross to live with
Jesus, and therefore heard that joyful sentence, This night thou shall be with
me in Paradise. Luke 23. 43. Reasons moving us to a conformity with Christ.


Now that we may be moved to embrace this conformity with Jesus, let us
remember that the image of God, by which we were created conform unto him, is
the most ancient glory to which we can make claim: and therefore 1 The Image
of God is our most ancient glory, stolen from us by Satan and which we should
seek to recover.
if there be in us any piece of manhood and spiritual wisdom, we ought to
endeavor to recover it, which our enemy craftily and maliciously has stolen
from us. O what a pity is it to see that man cannot do that in the matter of
salvation, which he can do in the smallest things pertaining to this life?
There is no man among us who knows that any tenement of land, or portion of
earth possessed now unjustly of another, did of old pertain to his Fathers,
but if he can, he will seek to recover it; seeking by justice to bring that
home to himself, which oppressors unjustly had taken from him. Is it not then
most lamentable, that where the Lord Jesus, the King of righteousness, and
Prince of peace, offers to restore us to our most ancient glory, which is his
own image, that we will not call the oppressors of our soul before him,
nor seek to be restored to that glory, which most deceitfully our adversary
has stolen from us? but this comes also upon man by the subtilty of Satan,
that having once spoiled us of the image of God, he does what he can so to
blind us, that we should never seek it again, nor do so much as receive it
when it is offered unto us.

Jacob complained of Laban that he had deceived him, Satan a double deceiuer.
and changed his wages ten times; and Esau complained of Iacoh, ^s of a
supplanter, who first had stolen from him his birthright, and then the
blessing also: but more cause have we to turn these complaints upon Satan,
who has not only stolen from us the Image of God, but daily steals away
the blessing, whereby it is restored unto us. Oh, that we had wise and
understanding hearts, that we might be stirred up to an holy anger against the
enemy of our salvation, seeking in despite of him to be restored to that
right, which by creation belonged to our forefathers. But alas, what a
beastly stupiditie is this, that man will not do so much for recovery and
maintenance of the image of God, as he will do for preservation of his own
portraiture drawn on a piece of timber? if any man pollute it, incontinent he
is offended, and stomachs at it, as an injury done to himself, but as for man
who is the image of God: he lies down like a beast, content that Satan should
tread upon him, pollute, and defile him with all kind of abomination, all
which proceeds from a pitiful ignorance of his own glory.

The second reason which should move us to conform 2 Jesus Christ has first
conformed himself unto us.
our selves to Jesus, is that he has first of all conformed himself unto us,
he was not ashamed to take upon him the shape of a servant, and to become man,
like unto us in all things, sin accepted; and shall we refuse to conform our
selves unto him? let it be far from us, but rather putting from us that
foolish emulation, by which we strive to conform our selves unto this
world, let us consider whereunto we are called, even to be partakers of the
divine nature, and may think it most greatest glory to be like unto our head
and husband the Lord Jesus.

Thirdly, necessity so craves, seeing we cannot be saved 3 We cannot be
saved except we be conformed to him.
without conformity with him. It is not Caesar's money which has not upon it
Caesar's image and superscription; he is not the Son of God who carries not
the image of his Father: for whom the Lord begets in the regeneration, he
communicates to them his own spirit, which transformes them into the
similitude of his own Image. No unclean thing shall enter into heavenly
Jerusalem, neither shall any man see him in his glory, who by grace is not made
like unto him.

That he may be the first borne among many brethren. The Apostle insists here
in the explication of his former purpose, adding that it is necessary we
should conform our selves unto him, for ratifying that superiority and
privilege of the first borne, which God the Father has established unto his
Son the Lord Jesus Christ* and he makes it very properly to serve his
purpose: for seeing it is so that Jesus our elder brother, and Prince of our
salvation, has been consecrated by affliction, and by suffering has entered
into his kingdom, shall we refuse to follow him in his tentations, if so be
we desire to sit with him in his glory?

The name of the first borne is ascribed unto Jesus Christ The name of the
first borne three ways ascribed to Christ: 1. as God: 2. as man: 3. as a
mediator Col. 1. 15.
three manner of ways: first, as he is God: secondly, as he is man: thirdly,
as he is both God and man, our mediator, and the head of his mystical body,
which is his Church. As he is God, he is called by the Apostle, Primogenitus
omnis creatur^, the first begotten of every creature; and that by such a
generation as none (says Esaias) are able to express. Now before the creature
was, what could there be? surely nothing but the Creator. Secondly, as he is
man S. Luke calls him the first borne that opened the womb Luke 2. 7.
of the Virgin. Thirdly, as Mediator and head of his mystical body, as Prince
of that kingdom which is the communion of Saints: he is here called the first
borne among many brethren, and in another place the first fruits of them who 1
Cor. 15. 20.
rise from the dead.

The privileges of the first borne were two: first, excellency Privileges of
the first borne are two: 1. excellency of strength: 2 excellency of dignity.
of strength, for he had a double portion: secondly, excellency of dignity,
for he was the Prince and priest of the rest of his brethren: now both these
most properly appertains to our eldest brother Christ Jesus. Excellency of
strength is his, he has received the double portion: for he received not the
Spirit in measure as we do, but the plenitude and fullness thereof was
communicated unto him, and the comfort thereof redounds unto us: for he
received it not for himself but for us, that of his fullness we might all
receive grace for grace. Excellency also of dignity is his; for beside that
glory which he had with his Father from the beginning, he is also as our head
crowned with glory Mat. 28. 18.
and dignity; all power in heaven and earth is given him, and he is set over
his brethren, as the only high Priest of the living God, who makes atonement
for the sins of his brethren; as the only Prophet and teacher of the whole
family of God, for so has the Father authorized him: This Mat. 3. 17.
is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him.

Let us therefore submit our selves unto him, seeing God Miserable are they in
this age who do not acknowledge Christ's prerogative.
the Father has set him over us, let us not be disobedient to that heavenly
proclamation ( hear him.) Woe be to them that subscribes not unto the
excellency of his dignity. But alas if the world proclaim such pleasures as
she has to give by any sport or play, or such profits as she can yield at her
fairest fayres and marke^s, O what a frequent concourse of people is made unto
her? but if the Priests of the Lord stand as they did of old in the west part
of Ierusalems temple, or in their several turrets, to blow their two silver
Trumpets, and warn the people to resort unto the house of the Lord, or if now
any other manner of way signification be made unto them to enter into the
courts of the Lord with praise, how few shall he find flocking into the house
of God in respect of them who abides without, and follows the world; and
which is yet more to be lamented, there are many of those who hear the word of
Christ, and yet does not change the manner of their conversation for any
commandment he can give them; speak what he will, they do what they like:
they come to the holy assemblies of his Saints, but are like those unclean
beasts which entered into the Arc of Noah, they came in unclean, and went out
unclean. Neither of these unless they amend, shall be pertakers of our
salvation which Jesus the first borne has purchased to the rest of his
brethren.

But to let them alone, and to return to the instruction of Gods children;
though apostate Israel fall from him as a Whatsoever excellency our elder
brother has it is for our benefit.
people that have no portion in Ishai, nor inheritance in the son of David,
yet let Judah cleave to their King; let us acknowledge his supereminent
excellency, and reverence him for our first borne and elder brother. Among
other brethren the more the elder has, the less remains to the younger;
whereof it falls out that many a time there is strife among them for division
of the inheritance: but here the more our elder brother has, the greater is
our good, seeing whatsoever he has received as mediator, he has received it
to be communicated unto us: he has received strength, not to subdue us, or
ouergoe us, but to protect us from our enemies, which he has also done; for he
has broken the gates of hell, and carried them away more triumphantly upon his
shoulders than Sampson did the gates of Azzah. We who are poor in our selves
are made rich in him: we who are weak are in him more than conquerours; and
therefore let us resolve for ever to abide in him.

Among many brethren.] This brotherhood of ours with Brethren in Christ are
many ways knit together.
Christ, consists not in the communion of the same flesh and blood, for so
every man were Christ's brother, but it stands in our spiritual union with him
by regeneration: those are the sons of God, and consequently the brethren of
Christ, who are borne not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor of the will
of man, but of God, by the operation of his spirit, and immortal Ioh. 1. 13.
seed of the word. In the carnal brotherhoode though the parents be one, yet
the inheritance is not one; though the seed of the flesh be one, yet the soul
that quickneth the body in both is not one: but in the spiritual brotherhood
the parents are one, the inheritance one, the seed whereof they are begotten
is one, and the spirit which quickens them all is one. It is not then
Baptism nor external profession which proves a man to be the kinsman and
brother of Christ; it is the spirit of Jesus, which whosoever has not, the
same is not his, and whosoever has him, it is certain they become new
creatures.

Great is that dignity certainly whereunto we are called; The greatness of
Christ's love toward us in making us his brethren.
and matchless is that love which the Lord Jesus has carried toward us; who
not content to make us his servants, has made us his brethren. If he had
showed us no more kindness then Abraham did Lot his kinsman, yet even for that
had he been worthy to be loved for ever: but behold what a greater love our
Lord has showed unto us, we forsook him more unkindly than Lot did Abraham,
yet did he still retain his kindly affection toward us, when we were carried
away captive by spiritual Chedarlaomer, he did not only hazard, but laid
down his life for our Redemption. Moses is greatly praised for that when he
was honorable in Egypt, he left the Court of Pharaoh to visit his brethren,
esteeming the rebuke of Christ in his people, greater riches than all the
treasures of Egypt: and Joseph is also commended, that being second person
under Pharaoh in the kingdom of Egypt, yet he was not ashamed of his Father
and brethren, albeit they for their trade being sheepekeepers, were
abomination to the Egyptians. But all these are not comparable to that love
which the Lord Jesus has borne toward us, in that notwithstanding our base
estate, he has not been ashamed to call us his brethren. The Lord make us
thankful, and shed abroad in our hearts the sense of that love which he
has borne toward us, that we never be ashamed of him for no Cross that for
his sake can be laid upon us.

Verse 30. Moreover, whom he predestined, them also he called, and whom he
called, them also he justified, and whom he justified, them also he glorified.
THere is no part of holy Scripture which is What a clear sight of salvation
is here discovered to the Christian.
not stored with the words of eternal life; but as that part of earth which is
rich of minerals of gold and silver, is more esteemed than other land, were it
never so fruitful; so ought this place of holy Scripture to be accounted of us
all, as containing in it a most rich mineral, not of gold, silver, or precious
stones, but of a more precious salvation, wherein the deeper thou art able to
dig, the stronger, clearer, and greater sight of salvation arises unto thee:
there is not in all the book of God a place of holy Scripture, which presents
to the child of God so clear and certain a sight of his election and
glorification, as this place does, wherein now we are travailing: for the holy
Apostle in this golden chain of Salvation does in such sort knit our
effectual Calling with our Election and Glorification, that the Christian upon
earth may evidently see what God in the heavens has decreed toward him: we
have spoken of the first two lincks of the Chain, Prescience and
Predestination: now we proceed to speak of the third, to wit, our Calling.

Where first of all for our greater comfort, let us stand The prerogatives of a
Christian are far more honorable than any that worldlings can claim.
and consider how great and glorious are the benefits which God has bestowed
on the Christian: before time the Lord has chosen him; after time the Lord
will glorify him; in time the Lord does can and justify him. Worldlings also
have their own prerogatives wherein they place their glory: those among them
that have most ample and ancient inheritances are counted most honorable: but
thou who art named a Christian, if thou be so indeed, look to thine own
privileges, and thou shall see that the glory of a Christian does far exceed
the glory of the most honorable Worldling: as the Psalmist spoke of Jerusalem,
so may we of the Christian, Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou man
Psalm. 87. 3.
of God.

Election is the first and most ancient charter of the The most sure and
ancient Charters of a Christian to his inheritance.
right of Gods Children, to their Fathers inheritance: Calling is the second,
by it we are known to be the Sons of God, and our Election secret in it
self, is manifested to us and others: Justification is the third, by it we
are infest in Jesus Christ, and made partakers of all that is his:
Glorification is the last, by it we are entered heirs to our Father, and fully
possessed in his inheritance. No King upon earth, can produce so ancient a
right to his Crown: though with the Egyptian thou should reckon thy
beginning so many years before the creation of the world, yet can thou not
match the Christian: he has the most ancient charter of the most ample
inheritance: neither can any man upon earth be known his Fathers heir upon
such sufficient warrant as the Christian; for in the regeneration, the Father
communicates to him his Image, his Nature, his Spirit, whereby he begins
from feeling to call God his Father, and in life and manners to resemble him.
No freeholder so surely infest in his lands, nor has received so many
confirmations thereupon, as the Christian justified, who upon his gift of
righteousness and life, has also received the earnest, the pledge, the scale,
and the witness of the great King. And last of all, the Christian shall be
entered to the full possession of his Fathers inheritance, with such joy and
triumph in the glorious assembly of the Saints, as the like was never seen in
the world, no not in Jerusalem, that day wherein Solomon entered heir to his
Father David, then the earth rang for joy, but nothing comparable to that joy,
wherewith the heavens shall ring, when all the Sons of God, shall be caught
from the earth into the air, to meet the Lord Jesus, and to be invested in the
Kingdom of their Father.

But now we are to speak of this Calling, wherein consists all our comfort:
for it is the middle lincke of this indivisible Calling is the first
manifestation of our Election, and forerunner of our Glorification.
Chain; he that has it is sure of both the ends. Our Calling is the first
manifestation of our secret Election, and it is a sure forerunner of our
Glorification, being in effect the voice of GOD, foretelling us that he will
glorify us. As the best way in a maine land to find the sea, is to walk by a
river which runs into it; so he that would proceed from Election to
Glorification, let him follow this Calling, which is (so to call it) a river
flowing out of the brazen mountains of Gods eternal Election, running
perpetually upward till it enter into the heaven of heavens, which do
altogether ouerflow with that great and unbounded Ocean of divine Glory: but
we are still to remember that we speak now of the inward Calling: for the
lincke^ of this Chain are so comely framed by that most skillful Artificer,
that they are all of a like compass, none of them larger nor narrower than
another: so that this Calling does extend to no more nor fewer, than those
whom God has chosen.

This inward calling is the donation of Faith, by the What the inward calling
is.
preaching of the Gospel, or communication of the saving grace of Jesus, by
which we are moved to answer the Lord, and follow the heavenly vocation:
for as the Lord by the preaching of the Gospel offers unto all, that are in
the Church visible, righteousness and life by Christ, if they will repent and
believe: (wherein consists the outward Calling) so by his holy Spirit, he
gives to his Elect children justifying Faith, by which he opens their
hearts as he did the heart of Lidia, to receive the grace offered by the
Gospel, and herein consists the inward Calling.

The word (...) whereby the Apostle expresses it, In this Calling there is a
taking of some, and leaving of others.
signifies to euocate and choose out some from among others: this shall make
the greatness of Gods mercy toward us appear the more clearly, if we do
consider that we and the reprobate were alike by nature, borne blinderebels,
and transgressors from the womb, and did walk on with them in the same
course of disobedience, which leads to damnation: but it pleased God to call
us out of their fellowship, and enter us in a better course that we might be
saved. A notable example whereof we have in the calling of Lot out of Sodom:
the Lord having concluded to consume Sodom with fire, for her abominable
filthiness, he first of all sent two Angels to call Lot out of it; but Lot not
knowing the danger, lingered and delayed to follow their calling, till at the
length they put hands unto him and forced him to go out; but when he was set
upon the mountain, and knew the fearful destruction of Sodom, then no doubt
he acknowledged the wonderful mercy which God had showed upon him: it is even
so with us, we are here soiourning in a Sodom God has taken us out from among
the children of wrath, as he took Lot out of Sodom
which God will destroy, and we have our conversation among those whose
portion shall be in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, from which
the Lord being purposed to save us, has sent his Angels to us, not two but
many Ministers of the Gospel of Grace, exhorting us to fly from the wrath
which is to come: but alas, because we know not the danger, we fly slowly, and
delay to follow the heavenly vocation, but in that day wherein we shall be set
upon the mountain of Gods salvation, and shall stand at the right hand of
Jesus, and hear that fearful condemnation of the wicked, Depart from me,
etc. when we shall see the earth open and swallow them, then shall we rejoice
and praise the mercy of our God: O happy time wherein the Lord sent his
messengers among us, to call us from the fellowship of the damned.

There is no difference by nature between the Elect and No difference by
nature between elect men and reprobate, till our calling make it.
reprobate, neither in inward nor outward disposition till God make it by
grace. Paul as bloody a persecuter as ever was Domitian or Julian. Zacheus as
unconscionable and covetous a Worldling, as was that rich Glutton damned to
hell. The elect and reprobate men, before Grace make a difference, are like two
men vvalking in one journey, with one mind and one heart, like Eliah and
Elisha, walking and talking together, when a chariot of fire did incontinent
separate them, and Eliah is taken up into heaven, Elisha left upon the earth:
not unlike is it when the unlooked for calling of God comes and seperateth
those two who before were walking together, yea, running in the same excess of
riot; the one changing the course of his life, returns back again to the
Lord, from whom he had fallen: whereas the other not touched with the same
Calling, meruailes that his former companion has forsaken him, and walks
still on stubbornly in the former course of his sins to his condemnation.
Apply this unto your selves, and see whether this effectual Calling has
separated you in your conversation from the wicked or not, an evident argument
that ye shall be separated from them in their condemnation: Blessed is he, that
Psalm. 1.
walks not in the counsel of the wicked, nor stands in the way of sinners,
nor sits in the seat of the scornful.

And if we find after trial that the Lord has called The time of our
calling is to us as the deliverance from Egypt, or the year of Iubily to
Israel.
us, then should we always show forth his praises, who has translated us
from darkness into his marvelous light. The Lord showed a great mercy to
Israel when he delivered them out of the house of bondage; he set the
remembrance of that benefit in the forefront of his law, as a bond ever
oblieging them unto thankfulness: but their bondage was not so horrible as
ours. Pharaoh oppressed their bodies and compelled them to work in brick and
clay, yet their spirits were free to sigh and cry to GOD for the bondage: but
here so long as we were the slaves of Satan, he compelled us to work the
abominable works of darkness and uncleanness, and therewithal did so
captive our spirits that we could not so much as cry and sigh unto God for the
bondage, and therefore our deliverance should never go out of our remembrance,
and our hearts and mouths should ever be filled with the praises of our
Redeemer, when we think of this year of Jubilee, wherein he has opened the
door of the prison, and set us at liberty as the freemen of God, who were the
captiued and bond-slaues of Satan.

The Author of this calling is the Lord, even he who Calling being a new
creation, is only wrought by God.
calls things which are not, and makes them to be. Calling is a new creation
and the first resurrection. The Lord that commanded light to shine out of
darkness, is he who has given to our minds the light of the knowledge of his
glory in the face of Jesus Christ. It is he who creates in us a new heart, and
puts in our bowels a new spirit, that we may walk in his statutes. As man when
he was not, could not help to create himself; and Lazarus when he was dead
helped not to raise himself: so a stranger from Grace helps not to call
himself to the fellowship of Grace: the Lord who makes the barraine womb a
mother of many children, makes also the barraine heart to be fruitful. The
praise of our calling belongs to the Lord only. Nemo dicat ideo me August. de
verb. Apost.
voca^it, quia colui Deum, quomodo coluisses, si vocatus non fuisses, let no
man say therefore has God called me because I worshipped him, for thou could
not have worshipped him unless he had called thee.

The calling of God finds every man either vainly or Man has not so much as
mind of it when it comes to him.
wickedly exercised. When God called Paul to be a Preacher, he found him a
persecuter: when he called Matthew he found him sitting at the receipt of
custom: when he called Peter and Andrew they were mending their nets, no such
mind had they as to be fishers of men. As Saul was seeking his Fathers Asses,
when Samuel came to call him to the kingdom: and as Rebecca had no errand to
the Well but to water her Fathers goods, when Eliezer came to seek her in
marriage unto Isaac: so if we do enquire at our own consciences how we were
exercised when God called us, we shall find our hearts were set upon the
trifling things of this world, and that we had no mind of his kingdom: let
the praise therefore of our calling be reserved to the Lord only.

As this work of calling is the Lords only, so he extends it to none but
unto those who are chosen: it makes a particular separation of a few from the
remanant, and does None are called by this calling but they who are elect.
so distinguish between man and man in all rancks and estates, that of two
brethren, as Jacob and Esau, of two Prophets, as Moses and Balaam, of two Kings
as David and Saul, of two Apostles, as Peter and Judas of two thieves, the one
is taken, the other is rejected. The first distinction between man and man was
in Gods eternal counsel and this is secret: the last distinction will be in
that last day wherein the one shall stand at the right hand of Jesus, the other
at the left and that shall be manifest: the middle distinction is presently
made by this calling of God; his Gospel is the arm of his Grace, being
extended sometime to one corner of the world, sometime to another, according to
his own dispensation, to sever out his own from among the remanent of the
world.

Whereof it comes to pass, that this saving grace of the What a wonderful
distinction this calling makes among men.
Gospel enters into a land, but not into every City; it enters into a City,
and not into every family; it enters into a family, but comes not on every
person of the family. Of Husband and Wife, of Masters and Servants, of Parents
and Children, of Brethren and Sisters, the one is taken, the other rejected. It
came to Jericho and chose out Zacheus: it came to Philippi and chose out Lydia
and the Iaylour: it Act. 16 14. Romans 16.
entered at Rome into the Court of Nero, but lighted not upon Nero: it entered
into the Family of Narcissus, but not into the heart of Narcissus. As the Lord
so gouernes the clouds that he makes them rain upon one City and not upon
another: so does he dispense the dew of his grace, that he makes it drop upon
one heart, and not upon another. The Gospel is preached to many, but the
blessing that comes by the Gospel, abides only upon the children of peace.
Let every one among you see to himself, this preaching of the Gospel among
you assures us that the Lord has a harvest here, that is, a number that
belongs to the election of Grace: but who they are that are his the Lord
knows, but as for us we may lament as Augustine did of the hearers of his
time, In ap^rto est vnde doleam, etc. the matter of our grief is manifest: for
we see many of you who hitherto have received the word of grace in vain: but
the matter of our comfort is not so apparent; yet do we not doubt but that
among this chafe the Lord has some good Wheat, whom he will perfect by our
Ministry, and gather into his garner, to his glory and our comfort, when we
shall see that fruit of our labor, which now we cannot see.

Always of this which we have spoken, we exhort you Miserable are they whom
this calling has not separated.
who as yet stands strangers from grace, to consider how miserable your estate
is. It should pierce thy very heart for grief, to consider that the grace of
God has converted so many in the City yea perhaps in the family wherein thou
dwell, and has not lighted upon thee, but left thee in thy old sins. If
the Lord should so do to you as he did to Israel in the days of Achab, cause
it to rain for three 1 King. 17.
years and a half upon all the land about you, and not upon your land, would
you not take it as a token of Gods anger against you? O hipocrite that can
discern the face of the sky, and can mark the tokens of his anger in the
creature, can thou not discern the state of thy own soul? nor consider this
sensible curse of God, that these thirty or forty years the showtes of his
saving grace has descended upon others round about thee, but never upon thy
self: thou possessest still a hard, a barraine, and fruitless heart. What
shall I say unto thee? to cut thee off from hope of mercy, and to send thee to
despair, I have not that in commission, there is ever some hope of a better as
long as God calls upon thee: but of this one thing I can certify thee, that
for the present thy estate is lamentable, and if this grace go by thee in time
to come, as it has done for the time forepassed, it had been better for thee
that thou had never been borne.

The time of our calling is but short and limited, let it not go by us without
grace, but let us strive to redeem it. It is called sometimes an acceptable
year, and sometimes The time of our calling is called a year, a day, to tell
us it is but short.
a day of salvation: some days are longer and some are shorter, but they have
all an end. The Jews had a fair long Summer day of Salvation, sixteen
hundred years did the Lord offer grace to the house of Sem: but now the bright
shining Sun of righteousness has gone down upon Amos 8. 9.
them, and darkness is unto them instead of divination; and other sixteen
hundred years has the Lord been offering grace to the house of Iapheth,
persuading them by the Gospel to come and dwell in the tents of Sem, and that
by their several families: he began at the Churches of the East; they had
their own day, although but a short Winters day compared with that of the
Jews. From them in the East the light is now come, praised be GOD, to us in
the West; now is our day, how long it is to continue with us who can tell?
While therefore the light is with you walk in the light, Ioh. 32. 35. Romans 13.
11.
least darkness come upon you. Let us consider the season, for if once the day
of grace go by us, we shall never find it again.

For suppose this day of salvation were to shine upon No Grace will be offered
to us after this life.
this land still on to the worlds end, yet what is it to thee, seeing the day
of grace ends to thee in the day of thy death? after that, the Lord shall
never any more offer mercy unto thee: in that the Apostle wills us to do good
while we have time, he tells us that after this there is no time; let us not
think quod apud inferos ad faciendos fideles atque liberandos, Aug. Euodio.
Epist. 99.
euangelium praedicatum sit, vel adhuc etiam praedicetur quasi and ibi sit
Ecclesia constituta, that the Gospel ever has been or yet is preached in
hell, to work Faith in men therefore their deliverance, as if there also were
a constitute Church in it. Here by preaching grace is offered to thee, that if
thou will believe thou may be saved; but if now thou despise it, there
remains nothing but a fearful looking for of judgment. And no less
deceitful is that opinion, that by suffering hereafter thou may redeem that
life which here thou have not obtained: Vita hic aut amittitur, aut tenetur,
cum istine excessum fuerit, nullus paenitentiae locus, nullus satisfactionis
Cyprian.
effectus, Now life is either kept or lost; for when we go out of the body
there is no place of repentance, no effect of satisfaction.

It is a principal policy of Satan to steal away from Satan's principal
policy is to steal away from men the time of grace.
man the time of Grace: he will not simply say to any man, ye need not to
repent at all; he knows the most profane man will abhor that, he seeks
only a delay; thou need not (says he) to repent as yet, and so steals
away one day after another, till the day of Grace be gone. When Pharaoh was
stricken with Frogs, and Moses offered to him, that when he would bid him,
he would pray to God that he might be delivered from them, it was but an
unwise answer he gave him, Pray for me to morrow, it had been better Exodus 8.
10.
for him to have said, Pray for me presently: but more miserably blinded are
they, to whom the Lord presently offers salvation, they delay not till
tomorrow only, but till the next year, yea, for many years; they are called
upon in their youth, but they refuse to repent till they be old, seeking first
leave to kiss their Father, that is, to follow their own pleasures, before
they will resolve to follow the Lord Jesus; and so lets their days one after
another be stolen away from them, till at length they be taken away in their
sins and the day of Grace be closed upon them.

And whom he Called, them also he Justified. Having Justification posterior
to Calling in order, not in time.
spoken of our Calling, we come now to speak of our Justification. This is a
new benefit different from the former benefit of our Calling, posterior to it
in order of working but not in time: for in the same moment wherein the Lord by
effectual Calling gives us faith to believe, he does also justify us.

That we may understand what a benefit this is, we are The word of Justifying
three ways taken.
to know that the word of Justifying has three principal significations.
First, to justify is all one with this, to sanctify, or to infuse by grace
new qualities into the soul of man, seu motus ad Iustitiam, as Dan. 12, They
who justify many, shall shine as Stars for ever; and in this sense the
Papists take it in this question, but wrongfully. Secondly, to justify, is to
acknowledge or declare one Luke 7. 29.
force we must expound it, they acknowledged or confessed him to be just: so S.
James says, that a man is justified by works, that is, declared to be just by
his works, or as S. James expounds it himself, his Justification is showed by
his works. Thirdly, the word to Justify, is a judicial term, and Solomon
uses it, He that iustifies the wicked, Pro.
and condemns the just, are both alike abomination to the Lord: and in this
sense the Apostle uses it here, for he oppones it to condemnation.

This right understanding of the word, will lead us to Justification is
opponed to condemnation.
know what the benefit of Justification is: for what ever condemnation be,
Justification must be the contrary: they are both judicial terms, used in
judgment holden on matters of life and death. Condemnation (no man will deny)
is the sentence of a righteous Judge, adiudging a malefactor to death for some
capital crime, whereof he is found guilty in judgment: Justification then is
the sentence of God, a righteous Judge, absoluing the man that is in Christ
from sin and death, and accepting him to life for the righteousness of
Christ, which is his.

So that it is evident, the state of the question in the controversy How the
state of the controversy of Justification stands between us and the Papists
of Justification will be this: how is a man justified before God? that is,
what is it that a man must bring before Gods tribunal, for the which he shall
be pronounced innocent, absolved from death, and adjudged to life? whether is
it ou^ works of sanctification inherent in us, or is it the righteousness of
Christ given unto us, and made ours? The question being this way taken up, shall
give great light to the c(...)ouersie that is between us and the falsely named
Catho(...) of our time: for we deny not that there is in Gods children an
inherent sanctification, and that they are changed from unrighteousness to
righteousness, but this inherent righteousness (say we) is not able to
purchase to us an absolu^torie sentence from death.

To make this yet more clear, let us know that the righteousness Four names
given to that righteousness, by which we are justified.
by which we are Justified, receives four names: first, it is called the
righteousness of Christ: secondly, the righteousness of God: thirdly, the
righteousness of Faith: fourthly, our righteousness. The righteousness of
Christ, because it is conquered by him, and inherent in him, as in the proper
subject: The righteousness of God, because he only in his marvelous wisdom
found it out: it is called the righteousness of Faith, because Faith is the
instrument by which we apprehend it: and it is called our righteousness,
because it is given unto us of God to be ours, by imputation on Gods part, by
acceptance of it by Faith upon our part, for these two ways that acquisite
righteousness of Christ is made ours.

This we have to mark for our comfort, against those The consideration that
Christ's righteousness is ours, stops the mouth of all that impugnes our Faith.
objections, which either inwardly by Satan, or outwardly by men of a contrary
opinion are objected unto us. If they to trouble our peace, and weaken our
Faith, ask, how can ye be justified by a righteousness which is not yours?
we answer, the righteousness of Christ is ours, and ours by as great a right
as any other thing that we possess is ours, to wit, by the free gift of God:
seeing it has pleased God to give us a ga^ment who were naked, and to give us,
who had none of our own, a righteousness answerable to his Justice, what
intrest can either man or Angel have to resist it?

The euasions and objections, whereby the adversary Works not of the
unregenerate only, but of the regenerate also excluded from the act of
Justification.
impugnes this doctrine, are chiefly these: First, the Apostle (say they)
excludes the works of nature, not the works of Grace; the works of a man
unregenerate they confess cannot justify him, but the works of a man
regenerate, say they, do justify him: but this is false, as is proved first
by examples: for Abraham whose example the Apostle brings in to confirm the
doctrine of Justification, was a regenerate man and effectually called; yet as
witnesses both Moses and S. Paul, his says was counted to him for
righteousness. Proved by examples.
David after he had been a regenerate man yet says, Lord enter not into
judgment with thy Servant, for in thy Psalm.
sight shall no flesh be justified. The Apostle Paul protests of himself, I
have in all good conscience served God unto this day; neither know I any thing
of my self, yet am I not thereby justified: he was more abundant in good
works than all the rest of the Apostles: he did also bear in his body the
marks of Jesus; and was renowned through his manifold sufferings: If ever any
regenerate man could have bin justified by his good works, it was this holy
Apostle, yet he tells you himself, for all that I have done, for all that I
have suffered, yet am I not thereby justified.

The same is proved by reason: that which by order of The same proved by reason.
nature follows our Justification before GOD, cannot be said to justify us in
the presence of God; but so it is, good works by order of nature, follows our
justification before GOD, Non praecedunt iustificandum sed sequuntur
iustificatum. Again, such works as are not Augustine.
perfectly agreeable to the rule of Legal justice cannot justify us, but
rather fall under that curse, Cursed is he who fulfilleth not every jot of the
Law: but so it is, that the works even of men regenerate, are not able to
answer the perfection of the Law. There is no man (says Solomon) just Eccles.
7. Job.
in the earth, that does good and sins not. If I would dispute with God, I
could not (says Job) make answer unto one of a thousand. All our
righteousness (says Jeremy) is but like a Ierem.
menstruous cloth, and our Savior has taught even regenerate men to pray
daily for the remission of their sins. Quid ergo de peccatis nostris fiet,
quando ne ipsa quidem pro se Bern. in fest. o(...)u^ sanct. sermon. ^.
respondere poterit iusti^^a nostra? what then shall become of our sins,
when our righteousness is not able to answer for it self? Vae hominum
iustitiae quantumuis laudabili, si remota misericordia Dei iudicetur: woe to
the righteousness of man were it never so lowable, if God setting aside mercy
enter to judge it.

But they insist, the works of regenerate men are the How it is that works
of men regenerate do not merit, seeing they are works done in us by the
spirit of Christ. Heb. 1. 3.
works of Christ, for it is he who by his spirit works them in them,
therefore they are meritorious and iustifies. I answer, the works of Christ
iustifies, it is true, if ye understand his personal works, done by himself
in his own person; as the Apostle teaches us, He has purged our sins by
himself. But as for those works which he works in us by his spirit of grace,
he works them not for our justification, that as I have said he has done
already by himself and in his own person, but for our sanctification*
Secondly, the good works of men regenerate are so wrought by Christ in us that
they are also wrought by us, and we have our working in them, and therefore by
reason of our imperfection cannot be perfect: for as the fountains of the
actions are, so must the actions be themselves, the fountains are mixed being
partly good* and partly evil: for our mind is not so illuminated that there
is no darkness in it; neither is our heart so sanctified that there is no
uncleanness in it, and therefore the actions flowing from thence cannot be
perfect works of light and sanctification.

They insist yet further, and objects, if the Apostle, say Faith and works are
not simply opponed to other, for they are inseparable, but opponed only in the
act of Justification
they, in his conclusion (we are justified by Faith without the works of the
Law) did understand the works of Grace, then it would follow that he oppones
things which are not to be opponed: for works and Grace, works and Faith,
works and Christ, are not opposite, but agrees very well together, as the cause
and effect as the tree and the branch. To this we answer, that Faith and
works agrees well together, but there is nothing in the world which agree
so well the one with the other but in some things they may be opponed: as for
example; the tree and the branch agrees very well together, but if the
question be moved whether the tree bears the branch or the branch the tree, in
this they are opponed; that which is affirmed of the one must be denied of the
other. Again, there is a very sweet harmony between a natural Father and the
son, the one of them cannot be without the other: for he is not a Father,
who never had a son; neither is he a son, who never had a Father: but if
this be the question which of them gave beginning to another, here we must
oppone them, affirming that of the one, which we deny of the other. In like
manner there is a very sweet harmony and agreement between Faith and good
works; but if this be the question, for which of them it is that God does
justify us, there we must oppone them, affirming with the Apostle that we are
justified by Faith, and not by works: always the opposition is not simple, but
(...).

Their second evasion is a distinction of the works of the Works not of the
Ceremonial Law only, but of the Moral also excluded from Justification.
Law, Moral and Ceremonial. It is true, say they, that the works of the law
ceremonial iustifies not, but the works of the Law Moral iustifies. But the
Apostle in his conclusion excludes from justification the works of the Law
Moral, for these reasons: he excludes those works of which he has proved
both Jews and Gentiles to be guilty, but so it is he has proved them to be
guilty of the transgression of the Law Moral, as is evident out of the sins
wherewith he charges them, therefore, etc. Secondly, he excludes from
justification the works of that Law, by which comes the knowledge of sin;
but so it is the knowledge of sin comes by the Law Moral, therefore, etc. I
had not known (says the Apostle) that concupiscence is a sin, except the
law had said thou shall not covet. Now it is evident that this is a precept of
the Law Moral.

Their third evasion is by a distinction of the first and The distinction of
the first and second Justification improued.
second justification, the first whereof say they is by Faith, but the second
is by works. But this twofold justification is also forged: for iustificatio
est actus indiuidius and simul totus, there is no first and last in the act of
justification: he that is once condemned iudicially stands so, and he that is
absolved stands so. Again, this distinction confounds two benefits,
Justification and Sanctification, which Justification and Sanctification
distinct benefits.
to them is the second Justification. That they are distinct benefits the
Apostle does teach us, Christ is made to us righteousness and sanctification;
but they inconsiderately confound them: for if these new qualities infused by
Grace into the soul of man, and good works flowing therefrom be the matter
they say of man's second Justification, then let them tell us what is the
matter of his Sanctification.

To conclude this, these are two inseparable benefits, to Justification and
Sanctification inseperably conjoined.
whomsoever the Lord imputes the righteousness of Christ, and gives them Faith
to accept it as their own, like as for it he absolues them from sin and
death, and adiudges them unto life, so also incontinent works he in them by his
holy spirit, an inherent righteousness, by which they become new creatures;
so that our Justification has inseperably annexed with it Sanctification. But
this Sanctification of ours is so imperfect, that howsoever it be accepted of
the Father for the righteousness of Christ, yet is it not so perfect nor
sufficient that for the merit thereof we dare seek to be absolved from our
sins, and received into favor.

Them be also glorified.] Glorification the last lincke of the Glorification
our last and highest estate, out of which we shall never be changed.
chain is the last and highest benefit that we have by Christ, by which both
our soul and body shall be restored to a greater glory and more happy, than
ever we enjoyed in Adam. He had his own most excellent privileges; he had
this inward glory, that he was created to the image of God, he had also for
outward glory a dominion and Lordship over all the creatures of God: the
heavens were made beautiful for his sake; the earth made fruitful; Paradise
assigned to him as a special garden of pleasure, and all the creatures
ordained to serve him: but by our second creation we are beautified with more
excellent privileges; that same image is restored to us; new heavens and new
earth created for our sake, and with all these we shall have the Crown of
perseverance, which Adam had not: for glorification is our last and highest
happy estate, out of which we shall never be transchanged, and therefore the
Apostle goes not beyond it.

And herein appears the Lords wonderful power and How the glorification of
our bodies shows Gods wonderful goodness and power.
goodness, who of the fall of man takes occasion to make man better than he
was before the fall. Our bodies shall not be raised like to Adams body, for
even in the state of innocence he was mortal; but they shall be raised up
like to the glorious body of Christ. Solomon built a Temple, the Chaldeans
destroyed it, and it was never again restored to the former glory, which moved
the ancient men to mourn, when they saw how the glory of the second Temple
was not like the glory of the first; but it shall be the great joy of our
ancient Father Adam, who saw the glory of the first creation, when he shall
see how far the glory of the second creation, shall exceed the glory of the
first.

Of this Glorification the Apostle speaks in the time Three degrees of
eternal life.
past, partly to declare the certainty thereof, and partly, because it is
already begun: for there are three degrees of that Glory. The first in this
life, and that is our sanctification, called by S. John, the first
resurrection, and by Saint Paul our transformation into the glorious image of
God. The second is in the hour of death, and that is a nearer union of our
souls with Jesus. The third will be in the last day, wherein both soul and
body shall be glorified; this is the highest step of Salomons throne, unto the
which we must ascend by the former degrees. As for the beginning The first
degree is in this life, and has in it these three: 1. Righteousness. 2.
Peace. 3. Joy.
of this glory, which now we have, it consists in these three; Righteousness,
Peace, and Joy: there is a joy which is no presumption, flowing from a peace
which is not security, bred of righteousness which is not hypocrisy: in
these three stands the beginning of eternal life here upon earth, and in the
perfection of them shall consist the perfection of eternal life afterward in
heaven: perseverance in righteousness, in peace, in joy, and glory being
adjoined unto them.

This joy which is the highest degree of eternal life, we A threefold joy we
have in this life.
can attain to here upon earth, has also these three degrees: first, there is
a Joy which arises of believing, we have not as yet seen the Lord Jesus, yet
d^e we believe in him, 1 Pet. 1.
and rejoice in him with Joy unspeakable and glorious. Secondly, there is a
Joy which arise^h of feeling and tasting, taste and consider how gracious the
Lord is, and this feeling is much more than believing. Thirdly, there is a joy
which arises of sight and of spiritual embracing; such was the joy of Simeon
when he saw that promised salvation, and embraced the Lord Jesus in h^s arms*

Hereof arises to us first a lesson of comfort: if the beginnings By the
joyful first fruits of eternal life, we may judge of the fullness thereof.
Bern. in cap. ieiun. Ser. 2.
of this glory be so great, that as S. Peter says; they bring us to joy
unspeakable and glorious, what shall the fullness thereof be? let this waken in
us a loathing of these vain perishing pleasures, and a longing for that better
and more enduring substance, Certe non sunt tibi nota futura gaud^^, si non
renuit cons^lari anima tua donec veniant, thou know not those joys which
are to come, if thy soul do not refuse all comfort till they come unto thee.
Certe si sempiterna Basil. ser. in Gord. Mart.
essent haec terrena, tamen prae coelestibus essent commntanda, Certainly
albeit these earthly things were eternal, yet were they to be exchanged with
those that are heavenly. And therefore let the little taste of that joy which
we have now, work in us a greater hunger and thirst after the fulness thereof.

And again we are here to be remembered, that as pearls This joy is not found
but in the depth of a contrite heart.
are found in the bottom of the water, and gold is not gotten in the
superfice, but bosom of the earth: so this joy is not to be found but in the
inward parts of a broken and contrite spirit: many speak of this joy who never
felt it, Righteousness is the mother of Peace, and Peace the mother of Joy:
they who have not learned to do well, and cannot mourn for the evil which
they have done, how shall they taste of the joys of God? we must pierce by the
hammer of contrition into the very inward of our hearts, or ever we can find
the refreshing springs of Gods sweet consolations arising unto us. It deceiues
many that they think eternal life is not begun but after death, but
assuredly except now thou get the beginnings, thou shall never hereafter
attain to the perfections thereof, and therefore look to it in time.

As for the second degree of this glory, which is a nearer Of the second and
third degree of eternal Life.
union of our souls with Jesus Christ after our dissolution by death, it is
not my purpose now to insist in it. As for the third degree which consists in
the glorification both of our souls and bodies, we have spoken of it before,
specially in the 18. verse. Now the Tabernacle of God is with men, but then
shall our security be without fear, and our glory consummated, when we shall
dwell in the Tabernacle of God: unto the which the Lord bring us all for Jesus
Christ's sake. Amen.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT, VIRTUOUS, AND GRACIOUS PRINCE, HENRY, by the Grace of
God, Prince of Wales, and Heir Apparent unto the most famous Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland: All happiness in this life, and
eternal Glory in the life to come.
THat which the Apostle has severally delivered in the two former Discourses,
dedicated to your most Royal Parents, he now in this last Treatise collects
and conioynes in one, which therefore of right can appertain to none more then
to you Sir, who being by them both the happy fruit of heavenly providence, and
dearest pledge of their mutual love and joy, may justly challenge interest in
the smallest good over which their names are named. Sir, here is the way to
that Crown of Triumph, which the more you know, the more (I hope) shall you
place your glory in it. Crowns of earthly Kingdoms are indeed the gifts of
God, but such as bring not so much Honor as they breed unquietness. O nobilem
magis quam foelicem pannum (said Antigonus.) If the cares which dwell in the
Diadem were known, no man would stoop to the ground to take it up (said
Seleucus.) And albeit, it be not given to all to know this in their entry to
Honor, yet are they all compelled to acknowledge it in the end. Seuerus,
Monarch of the world, found his Crowns but comfortless to him in death,
(...), I have (said he) been all things, and it profits me nothing. Not
only the tears of Xerxes, but the laments of Solomon may witness to all the
world, that the end of the worme-eaten pleasures of this life, is heavy
displeasure: yea, the golden head of Babell had at length worms spread over
him, and worms to cover him. Esa. 14. For all flesh is grass, and the glory
thereof as the flower of the field: Only, the word of the Lord endures for
ever. By which that same God who has called you to be an apparent Heir of the
most famous Kingdoms on earth, does also call your Grace to a more certain
inheritance of a better Kingdom in heaven, which cannot be shaken: whereby
above other Princes, and Rulers of the earth ye are blessed, if so be ye
answer your Calling, endeavoring to be no less than you are named, Principem
te agnosce ne seruias affectibus. It is unseemly in any, but most of all in a
Prince, to become a servant, either to the corrupt humors of men without him,
who creeping in into the Courts of Kings, like worms into the bosom of
excellent trees, do nothing but consume them: whom godly Constantine properly
called Tineas and Sorices palatij, subtle peruerters of the good inclination
of Princes in manners and Religion, where they can prevail: or yet to the
disordered affections of his own heart, which if they be not restrained do
quickly turn the glory of a man into shame. What did it profit Cham that he
was the Son of Noah, the Monarch of the world, and Patriarch of the Church in
his time; or that he was the Heir of the third part Chrysostom.
of the world? vitia siquidem voluntatis vicerunt priuilegia naturae, his own
vndantoned will bursting out in contempt of his Father, brought upon him that
curse, and shameful name, A servant of Servants, which was never taken from
him. Seeing God (as says the Apostle) is the glory of man, what honor can
make that man glorious, who carries not the image of God, consisting in
righteousness, and true holiness? but especially a King, whom the very
Ethnicks called, Animata Dei imago in terris, should carefully keep that Image
which keeps his glory. Naturally facilius alijs, quam nobis imperamus, but in
very deed he shall never be a skillful Ruler of others, who is not first
taught of God to rule himself, decet eum qui alijs praefectus est interiora
sua decenter Basil.
adornare.

The best remedy against both these evils, is to embrace that wholesome
counsel given by God to the Governors of his people, Let not the book of the
Law depart from thee, but meditate in it day and night, that thou may do
according to all that is written therein: turn not away from it to the right
hand nor to the left, so shall thou make thy way prosperous, and shall have
good success. Beware of those Lucifugae, haters of the light, because it
discouers the darkness of their errors, Qui cum a Scripturis redarguuntur, in
accusationem Tertull.
Scripturarum se conuertunt. As the wise men following the Star, were at
length led by it to Christ, so if according to Peter's counsel, ye take heed
to the light that shines in darkness, not only shall the day star arise in
your heart, but that clear shining Sun of Righteousness (so named by
Malachie) ever rising and never going down, shall illuminate you with his
brightness. And herewithal take to you the domestique example of your Royal
Father, who stands before you as a pattern of piety, viuum omnis virtutis
examplar: it shall be no small proof of your progress in virtue, and greatest
praise among your godly Subjects, that ye be a follower of him. And so praying
Almighty God that your happy deeds may exceed all that great hope which is
conceived of you, I humbly take my leave.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject and daily Orator William Cowper, Minister
at Perth.

HEAVEN OPENED.
HERE FOLLOWS BY WAY OF conclusion, the third part of the Chapter:
containing the Christians triumph against all sorts of enemies.
Verse 31. What shall we then say to these things? If God be on our side, who
can be against us?
NOw follows the conclusion The conclusion of the whole Chapter: consisting
first of a general, secondly of a particular triumph.
of the whole Chapter: wherein the Apostle breaking off the course of his
former speech, gathers up all that he has spoken into a short sum, he began
at the first and lowest benefit which GOD in Christ has bestowed upon us, to
wit, deliverance from condemnation: this is indeed the least of his mercies,
yet so great that if we had received no more, we are never able to yield unto
the Lord that praise which is due for it. Yet as I said it is but little in
respect of that which God has done unto us, and therefore the Apostle
beginning at it ascends continually till he comes to the last and highest,
which is our estate of glorification, and so having run so high in the
enumeration of gods mercies toward us that he can go no higher, he bursts out
into an exclamation, as if he did say, more cannot be spoken, further comfort
cannot be given, but content^ himself to make a brief recapitulation of all
that he had said; wherein first he triumphs generally, ver. 31. and 32.
thereafter particularly: and that first against sin, Who sh(...) accuse, who
shall condemn? verse 33. 34. Secondly, against affliction, who shall separate
us from the love of God? outward and visible enemies cannot do it, by no sort
of trouble verse 35. 36. 37. Inward and invisible enemies are not able to do
it, verse 38, 39. Thus like a valiant man stablished on Christ, in his own
name, and in the name of the rest of Gods children, he proclaims a defiance
to all his enemies visible and invisible whatsoever.

The general triumph contained in these two verses consists The first part of
his general triumph, nothing can be against the Christian to hurt him.
in these two. In the first he glories that nothing can be against the
Christian to hurt him, the reason is, because God is with him. In the second he
glories that the Christian can want nothing that is needful for him, the
reason is seeing the Lord has given unto us his own Son, which is the
greatest gift, that can be given, he will not let us want any of his inferior
gifts.

If God be on our side.] His meaning is if God be with us, Worldlings evil
judges of Gods presence who measure it by external prosperity:
electing, calling, and justifying us, that he may glorify us, as has been
said, then we may be sure that nothing can be against us. This I mark because
worldlings judge of Gods presence with men by the wrong rules, to wit, as
Abimilech and Phicol judged of Abraham, we see, say they, that God is with
thee, because thou prosperest in all that thou do. That Genesis 21. 22.
which they judged was true, for GOD was present with Abraham indeed, but the
rule by which they so judged was not sure: for if this rule were sure, how
often might the wicked be judged to be blessed? who prosper in all they put
their hand unto: the rich glutton might be thought more Not by inward Grace.
happy than poor Lazarus: but the presence whereof the Apostle speaks is to
be tried by grace, which grace flowing from the effectual calling, is a surer
argument to prove that God is with thee, then if he should give thee, as he did
Esau, the fatness of the earth for thy portion, and multiply upon thee in
never so great abundance the things of this world.

And that we should not be deceived to judge otherwise, The presence of God
exempts not his children from trouble both inward and outward.
our blessed Savior has forewarned us both by his word and example, how that
great troubles outward and inward are to follow them which follow him. In the
world (says he) ye shall have trouble, in me ye shall have peace. So soon
as our Savior was borne Herod raged against him, seeking his life; to warn us
says Chrysostom, that so soon as we are borne Christians we should look
for trouble: Jacob gat no sooner the blessing but incontinent Esau persecutes
him. Sosthenes before he was a Christian was a ruler of a Synagogue, but after
that he embraced the Faith of Christ, they deprived him of his office, and
scourged him. Paul a persecuter is in great worldly honor, commissioner of the
high Priest and Elders of Jerusalem; but when he becomes a Preacher, his former
friends becomes his enemies. The same is also true in inward tentations: when
our Savior began to discharge the public office of the Messiah, Satan began
to tempt him: of his two most excellent Apostles, the one was winnowed by
Satan, the other buffeted by the Angel of Satan: and all to tell us that
notwithstanding the Lord be present with us, yet we may be tempted as our
Savior was, winnowed as Peter was, buffeted as Paul was; and therefore let us
despise the judgment of worldlings, and lying conclusions of Satan, who
would make us to esteem our inward and outward tentations to be tokens and
arguments of Gods departure from us. The whole world consists of two contrary
factions.


Again, perceive here how in the world are two contrary factions, the one
always militant against the other. This inimitie was proclaimed by God in
Paradise, and has continued since, like as it shall for ever without
reconciliation; only let us take heed upon what side we stand; if we stand
upon that wherein God is Captain, and all the Saints of Christ are Soldiers,
we are happy, for here the victory is certain: otherwise they who are among
the children of disobedience, Miserable are they who are militant under the
Prince of darkness.
militant under the Prince of the air, are most miserable, their end is
darkness, shame and confusion. It is a comfortable Oration which Abaijah King
of Judah, having in his army four hundred thousand, made to Jeroboam King of
Israel, and his army of eight hundred thousand, 2 Chro. 13. 8.
with you (said ^e) is the multitude, but with them ye have the golden calves:
but with us God is a Captain, and his Priests, to sound with the trumpet an
Alarm against you: therefore O Israel fight not against the Lord God of your
fathers, for ye shall not prosper: but this comfort much more appertains to
the true Israel of God, howsoever there be many which are against us, the
golden calves are with the^, that is, strange gods, which shall be their
destruction. As Moses when he was to plead the cause of God, stood in the gate
of the Camp and cried, whosoever pertains to the Lord let him come to me, so
daily by the word of God do we exhort you which are on Gods side to gathe^ you
together into one, not that it is possible ye can be separate from them in this
life in regard of personal conversation for so says the Apostle, ye behooved
to go out of 1 Cor. 5. 10.
the world, but that by difference of your words and deeds from them ye
declare that ye are not of their communion.

They who are on the side of Jesus are known chiefly Why all the followers of
Christ are pursued of Satan with restless malice.
these two manner of ways: First, Satan fights against them: Secondly, they
are also warriors against him: the first without the second is nothing; for
man even as he is a natural man is an object of Satan's malice, but where the
grace of God has made the man a new creature, there Satan doubles his hatred;
for he enuies most the glory of Gods mercy, whereof he knows he shall never
be pertaker. As Nabuchadnezars countenance changed, and his rage increased when
the three Children refused in his face to worship his image, and thereupon
commanded to make his Oven seven times hotter than it was before: so is
Satan's malice most intended against those who plainly refuse to fall down and
worship him.

But that the godly be not discouraged with his malice, What comfort
christians have of this that they find Satan an enemy to them.
let us remember that first he was an enemy unto God, or ever he was an
enemy unto us, and that we have cause to rejoice in that we find that
Apostate spirit an enemy unto us, whom God from the beginning has proclaimed
to be an enemy unto himself. Secondly, we are to collect of his invasion and
our resistance, that there is in us some measure of the grace of Jesus Christ:
for against those does he multiply his malicious assaults, on whom he sees that
the Lord has multiplied his graces: like to a crafty Pirate, who passing by
the empty vessel, sets upon that which is loadned. Thirdly, how ever he being
compared with us has many vantages; as that he is more subtle in nature,
being of greater experience and more ancient, being now almost six thousand
years old: and has also vantage of place; for he is the Prince of the Air,
assisted with armies of spiritual wickedness, who for their number are
legions, for their strength principalities and powers, for their subtlety
serpents, for their fierceness dragons: yet stronger is he who is on our side,
than they who are against us; the serpents head is bruised, some life remains
in him, but he ha^h no power to inflict death on them which are in Christ. If
so be that they also live at inimitie with Satan. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.


But what ever inimitie Satan exercise against us, it is not sufficient to
comfort us, unless we also live as enemies unto him. It was a notable speech
of Azariah the Prophet to Asa, the Lord is with you, while ye be with him: if
thou stand with the complete armor of God, pleading the cause of God, fighting
against the enemy of God, than may thou say in a good conscience, God is with
thee, and thou art with him. But alas we see in this generation many wearing
Christ's liuerie, and bearing Satan's armor, professing friendship to Christ
yet fighting against him: these two factions are entered already into the
battle pelmell, so that in the smallest fellowships some ye shall find
advancing the kingdom of the one; though very few to fight for the glory of
the other. This comfort taken from carnal men, who profess friendship to
Christ, and are servants to satan.
What a shame is this for us, who say we are on the Lords side, that a wicked
man serving Satan shall in our audience open his mouth to blaspheme God, and
we will not open our mouths to rebuke him? we see carnal men so shameless
that they stand upon no circumstances to dishonor God, and we who profess we
love him, for fear we fail against courtesy, and I cannot tell what
circumstances, dare not open our mouths to praise him. Our coldness in this
point has need to be admonished, that we may be stirred up not by profession
only, but by conversation also, to make it known to the world, that we
belong wholly to the Lord Jesus.

Who can be against us? It may seem strange that the A Christian wants not
enemies.
Apostle should use any such interrogatorie: what Christian wants enemies
enough against him? yea, says not the Apostle of himself, that he had beasts
at Ephesus with whom 1 Cor. 15. 32.
he behooved to fight? was there not an Angel of Satan sent to buffet him? did
not Nero at length behead him? 2 Cor. 12. 7.
how is it then that he asks who can be against him? But we are to know
that the Apostles meaning is not that godly men have no enemies, but that no
enemy can take But none of them can take from us that for which we* strive.
from us that for which we strive: it is not for the maintenance of our bodily
life that we fight, when our enemies have taken that from us, they have done
no more than Potiphars wife did to Joseph, when she pulled the garment from
him. There are three notable things for which we strive, and which the world
is never able to take from us: the love of God which he has borne to us: the
grace of God which he has communicated to us in our calling: the glory of God
and eternal life, which hereafter does abide us: no power of man nor Angel is
able to deprive us of these things.

An example whereof we have in that notable warrior This is declared in the
example of Job.
of God, Patient Job, whom the Lord set up as an object of all Satan's buffets,
and against whom he was permitted to use all the stratagems of the spiritual
warfare that possibly he could: he crossed him not only in his goods, in his
children, and in his own body, but also in his mind; by his wife he tempted
him to blasphemy; by his friends to diffidence; yet by none of these could he
ouercom him: In his outward troubles his resolution was, the Lord has Job 1.
21.
given, the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord for ever: in his
inward terrors his resolution was, Albeit Ioh 13. 15.
the Lord would slay me, yet would I trust in him: so impossible it is for
Satan by any tentation whatsoever, to separate from the love of God, his
Children, chosen, called, and justified. The Lord is present with present with
his children to keep them, sometime from trouble, sometime introuble.


To clear this, let us yet know that God is many manner of ways present with
his children in trouble: first, he is with them by preventing the danger, so
that he will not suffer the intended evil of the enemy to come near them:
so he brought Senacherib to see Jerusalem without, but suffered him not to
shoot so much as a dart against it within. Sometime again the Lord enters his
children into the trouble, as Daniel into the Den, Joseph into the prison, the
three children into the fire; but delivers them in such sort that both his
glory, and their comfort is greater than if they had not been in trouble at
all: Sometime he suffers his children to end their mortal lives in trouble,
and yet is with them strengthening them by his glorious might to all patience
and long suffering, filling them with such a sense of his love, that in death
they rest under the assurance of life. This also is declared by example.


The practice of this see in the examples of Eliah and Paul: when Iezabel vowed
to have the life of Eliah, ye shall see that the Lord is with him, sometime to
hide him, that albeit Achab and Iezabel seek him they cannot find him:
sometime God lets Achabs captains see where he is, but consumes with fire
them that came proudly to take him: Sometime he presents him to Achab and
Iezabel, but bridleth the tyrants that they have no power to stir him. The
Apostle Paul in like manner being sent prisoner to Rome, the Lord assisted him
in such sort that he delivered 2 Tlm. 4. 17.
him out of the mouth of the Lion Vero; and yet the second time suffered him to
fall by the sword of the same tyrant: shall we think that the Lord was not
with the Apostle to assist him the second time as well as the first? let it be
far from us. The Lord was with him indeed to make his death a seal and
confirmation of that Gospel which he had preached in his life. The comfort then
remains, that howeuer GOD work with his children in trouble, no adversary is
able to take from us that for which we strive, to wit, grace, and glory, they
may be unto us as sharp rasers of God, to cut away our superfluities, but
shall never be able to bereave us of the end of our Faith, which is the
everlasting salvation of our souls.

Verse 32. Who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all unto death,
how shall he not with him give unto us all things also?
NOw follows the second part of the Apostles general triumph, wherein he
gloryeth The second part of his general triumph, the Christian can want
nothing that is needful for him.
that the Christian can want nothing needful for him; for seeing the Lord
has given unto him the greatest, and most excellent gift, to wit, his own
Son, is it possible that he will deny him any secondarie or inferior gifts
needful for him? Satan who is a liar from the beginning, accused the Lord of
two things: first, of an untruth: albeit the Lord has said it, yet ye shall
not dye: secondly, of Envy. In the first Satan is proved false and the Lord is
found true: for are they not dead to whom the Lord said, ye shall dye? In the
second Satan is found a calumniator: for what good tree will the Lord refuse
to his own, who has given unto them this excellent tree of life, which brings
with it unto them all things needful for them.

To amplify this great love of God, the Apostle says The great love which GOD
has showed in giving his Son for us.
not simply, that he gave his Son for us, but that he spared not to give
him. O vvonderfull love ^ the Natural and only Son of God is not spared,
that the adoptiue sons may be spared: for our sins being imputed to him by
the ordinance of God his Father, and voluntarily accepted by himself, so the
punishment of our sins and chastisement Esa 53. 5.
of our peace was laid upon him, that by his stripes we might be healed. The
bitter cup due to us was propined to him, for the which albeit he prayed to
his Father, that if it were his will, this cup might pass by him, yet the
Father Mat. 26. 39.
spared him not, but held it to his head, till he drank out the uttermost
dregs thereof. So strait is the Justice of God, that sin being imputed to
the Son of God, who had no sin of his own is pursued to the uttermost.
The greatest example of Justice that ever the Lord declared in the world, the
drowning of the original world, the burning of Sodom; the plaguing of Egypt;
were terrible proofs of the straitness of divine Justice, but nothing
comparable to this.

Which I mark partly for a comfort to the Godly, and Comfort for the Godly
that the justice of God shall not, ^ay, cannot strike upon them.
partly for a warning to the wicked: it is our great comfort, that the
salvation which Jesus has purchased unto us, he has obtained it with a full
satisfaction of his Fathers Justice, so that now we that are in him, are not
any more to fear it. The great Judge of all the world will not do
unrighteously, to require that again from us, which our Christ, whom he
himself has given unto us, has paid for us. Miserable are the wicked who in
their own persons bear the punishment of their sins.


And as for the wicked who are not in Christ, how miserable will their state
and condition be, for they must bear the punishment of their own sins in
their own persons? If the burden of that wrath due to our sins, caused
Jesus to sweat blood, and to say, that his soul was heavy unto Mat. 26. 38.
the very death. O how shall the burden of this wrath press down the wicked!
it is even a horror to think of it: their faces shall be confused without,
and spirits oppressed within, with tribulation and anguish; he that spared
not in his own Son sin imputed unto him, will he spare in thee sin
committed by thy self? no, no, when he begins to smite thee, he shall
never lift up his hand from thee, but double his stripes upon thee, and there
shall be no end of thy sorrow. As the joys prepared for the godly, so the
pains prepared for the wicked, are such as the eye never saw, the tongue
cannot utter, nor the heart conceive. That place of the damned is the great
deep, the Ocean of all the judgments of God, all his temporal plagues are
but like rivers and strands running into it.

If therefore the beauty of Sion does not allure us, let How both Sions beauty
and Sinaies ^error should move us ^o repent.
the terror of Sinai afray us. The Lord proclaimed his Law in a fearful
manner upon mount Sinai, but in a more terrible manner will he execute it: if
Moses who was so familiar with the Lord, trembled when he heard it proclaimed,
what horrible fear shall ouer-take the wicked when they shall see it executed
upon themselves? Let therefore the children of wisdom hearken in time to the
joyful tidings of peace which are daily proclaimed on mount Sion; let us
drink of the still and peaceable waters of Siloh, which flow from it; let us
embrace that mercy which Jesus by the merit of his death has conquered unto
us, that so we may be saved from the wrath which is to come.

His own Son.] Jesus Christ is called Gods own Son How Christ is Gods
own Son.
both in respect of his divine and humane natures: for as he is God, he was
begotten of the Father by so unspeakable a generation that as Esaias says, none
are able to declare it: Esaias 53. 8.
and as he is man, he is the Son of God, conceived by the holy Ghost, made
man indeed, but not after the manner of other men, but of this: see Verse 3.

But gave him for us all.] This is very often alleged in The price of our
redemption tells how much the Lord has esteemed of us. 1 Pet. 1. 18.
holy Scriptures, as an argument of the great love of God toward us, that he
gave his son to death for us: and so it is indeed, for it is not by any
corruptible thing, as Gold and silver that he has redeemed us, but by the
precious blood of his own Son, the Lamb undefiled, and without spot. There
is no man will give much for that whereof he esteems but little, we measure
the price of a thing according to the worth of it in our judgment: even so of
the greatness of that gift which our God has given for us, we may estimate
the greatness of his affection toward us. Precious indeed in the sight of the
Lord is the death of his Saints: who to redeem us from death spared not to
give his dearest son unto the death. It was the Lords reasoning to Abraham,
now I perceive thou Genesis 22. 12.
love me, because for my sake thou have not spared thine only son: and
have we not much more cause to turn over the same reasoning to the Lord; now
Lord we perceive thou love us, because for our sake thou have not spared
thine only one son. The Lord shed abroad in our hearts more abundantly the
sense of that inestimable love, that we may be careful to requite the
kindness of the Lord, putting his holy will before all things in our
affection, and endeavoring in holy love to serve him, who has saved us.

Shall he not with him give us all things also? We are to understand All things
belong to the godly in regard of right, albeit not in regard of possession.
all things that are needful for us: And here it is necessary that we put a
difference between our right and our possession. The children of God have the
right and property of all Gods good creatures, for Christ their Lord is the
heir of all, and has made them with himself fellow heirs: All things are
yours (says the Apostle) and ye are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3. 21.
and Christ is Gods. But as for the possession of them in this life, the Lord
gives it, or withholds it, according as he sees may be for the good of his
children. We know our father Abraham had the right of Canaan when he had not
the possession of it, and are not therefore to think it strange that the Lord
gives not always possession of that to his children whereof they have the
right. But as for the wicked they have possession without a right, and
therefore shall be punished as thieves and robbers, and violent usurpers of
Gods creatures, whereunto Jesus Christ who is the heir of all has never
given them a right.

Secondly, we mark here that the giving and dispensation Seeing all things are
given by God, let us moderate our care, and take nothing but out of his
fatherly hand.
of earthly things is from God; if we could remember this it would moderate our
care, and make us in our callings first to seek the Lords blessing, and loath
any manner of way to take the things of this world, unless we see they be given
us out of the hand of God. For we are to know that Satan who is a
counterfaiter of GOD, does also arrogate to himself, though falsely, to be the
giver of things: he that durst say to the son of God, all the kingdoms of
the earth are mine, Mat. 4. 9.
I will give them to thee, if thou will fall down and worship me: will he
stand in awe to speak it unto sinful man? No indeed, it is his daily
tentation, by which he circumuents many, intangling their hearts with the love
of vvorldly gain, that to obtain it they care not to lie, to steal, to
swear, to oppress, to deceive one another: which in effect is to fall down
before Satan and worship him.

Thus Satan rules in the kingdom of Babell, like a spiritual Satan another
Nabuchadnzer, and a Balak, offers also gifts to men.
Nabuchadnezar, presenting to his subjects his great image of gold, accompanied
with all sorts of musical instruments, that is, vvorldly pleasures, wealth,
and prosperity, which bewitch the simple and makes them fall down and
worship, yielding themselves servants to Mammon. But happy are those children
who refuse so to do, and can stand up with their father Abraham, lifting up his
hand to heaven and say, I will not have so much as the la^chet of a shoe from
Genesis 14. 22.
the king of Sodom: I will have nothing by any crooked or indirect means, out
of the hand of Satan or any of his instruments: the buds of Balak shall not
hire me to do evil, neither the wages of iniquity, nor the reward of Sodom
for doing good, shall ever cleave to my hands, I will look for my portion from
the Lord.

Again, seeing God is the giver of all things, let us learn Seeing God is
giver of all, let us stand content, and not murmr if others get a more
portion than we.
with the Apostle in whatsoever state we are to be content, remembering that
every man's portion of vvorldly things is measured unto him from the Lord. We
see that a steward in a family ministers not alike unto all that are in it, the
aged and the young, the servant and the Lord, receives not a like portion, yet
no man gainsayes it; and shall we not reverence the Lords dispensation, who is
the greatest steward of his family in heaven and earth, shall we murmr
against him if he give Benjamin a double portion, and bestow upon some of his
children these worldly things in greater abundance than he does upon others?
far be it from us: for he dispenses these perishing things in great wisdom
and love toward us, as he sees may be best for us. Certainly we ought so to
He has no cause to complain to who^ the father has given his Son for an
irreuocable gift.
rejoice in that great gift the Lord Jesus, whom the Father has given us, and
in whom he has blessed us with all spiritual blessings, that we take no
thought for any other thing whatsoever which he has thought expedient to hold
from us. Oh that we could give unto the Lord this glory, as to say without
grudging. O Lord Jesus I can want nothing, seeing I have thee to be my portion.

And further, seeing all these things are dispensed and Our care and labor is
but vain without his blessing.
given by GOD, let us (as I said) in our callings above all things seek his
blessing. Adam may make himself a garment, but it shall not cover his
nakedness: Jonas may build himself a booth, but it shall not defend him from
the heat of the Sun: Peter fished all night and he profited nothing till
Jesus spoke the word. Though we rise early and lie Psalm. 127. 2.
down late, and eat the bread of sorrow, yet shall we labor in vain
unless the Lord give the blessing. Let us therefore so use the means that
with them we join prayer, moderating our care let us commit the success to
the Lord. It is true that Religion allows not carelessness, yea by the
contrary it commands us to be careful for those whom God has committed unto
us: If any man care not for his household he is 1 Timothy 5. 8.
worse than an infidel. This is (...), a moderate foreseeing of things which
are needful: but there is an unlawful care Two sorts of cares.
the daughter of distrust, whereby men are carried either beyond lawful
means, or else if the means be lawful beyond the measure of a temperate
affection; as though a man had not a Father ^ heaven to care for him, or were
able to compass things by his own wit. This care is not unprofitable only,
but full of many perturbations, for which our Savior compares it to thorns,
which are most easily governed when they are most lightly touched, whereas he
who gripes them hardly inuolues them and makes them more perplex, and hurts
himself also. Our Savior correcting Martha for too much care of the vvorldly
part, Luke 10. 41.
ioynes these two, thou art careful about many things, and ar^ troubled:
telling us that which we find in experience, that many worldly cares breeds
many troubles. Let us walk therefore in the right way, using the means in
soberness let us cast our care on the Lord.

Last of all, it is to be marked here that the Apostle says, Christ is the
chief gift, all other gifts are but pendicles given with him.
that God with Christ gives all things unto us: so then Jesus Christ is the
maine and great gift, and all other things are but pendicles annexed unto it.
Other gifts without Christ have a show of comfort, but renders no solid
comfort in the end: they shall be deceived at length who glories in other
things, were they never so excellent, while as they are strangers from Christ.
When God said to Abraham, fear not I am thy buckler, and thy exceeding great
reward: not considering Ge^. 15. 1.
what the Lord offered to him, he answered in his weakness, O Lord what
can thou give me, seeing I go childlesse? Verse 2.
Even he who was the Father of the faithful could not conceive how great good
God promised to him, when he promised himself to be his reward. And therefore
let us suspecting our weakness that it carry us not into the like error,
watch over our own hearts, that they be not set upon Gods secondary gifts more
than upon himself. Albeit the Lord should give us pleasant Canaan for an
inheritance, and multiply our posterity as the stars of heaven, yet will we
say, O Lord all these shall not content us, unless thou do give us thy
self: It does more rejoice us, that thou have given us thy Son Jesus to be
our Savior, than that thou have subdued all the works of thine hands under us.

Verse 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God that
iustifies.
THe Apostle in his general triumph, contained The Apostles particular
triumph, first, against sin: secondly, against the cross.
in the last two Verses, having proclaimed a defiance to all the enemies of a
Christian, does now begin to challenge them particularly, triumphing first
against sin, Verse 33. 34. thereafter against all sort of afflictions that
come upon us, by whatsoever instruments visible or invisible. We ^egun first
at his triumph against sin, who (says he) shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods chosen? he excepts no person, neither is any either in heaven, in
earth, or in hell able to do it; he reserues no sort of sin, seek what
they will, there is nothing to be found in the Christian to accuse him and
condemn him, his interrogation is plain, his answer is suppressed, his reason
is subioyned, It is God that iustifies, where the supreme Judge absolues can
any inferior Judge whatsoever condemn?

Where first we have to consider, who is he that this A man relieved of the
burden of sin, is filled with joy. 1 Timothy 1. 15. 1 Cor. 15. 9.
manner of way triumphs? Is it not Paul, who before his conversion was a
persecuter, a blasphemer, and an oppresser, who confesses himself to be the
chief of all sinners, and the least of all Saints? yea, indeed the same is
he: but mark, such a one he was indeed, but has gotten mercy, and therefore
now like a man relieved of a heavy burden, which before oppressed him, he
reioyces and triumphs. Certainly no greater comfort can come to man, than to
feel his sins forgiven him, this only causes true rejoicing. See this in
David, as long as the burden of sin lay upon his conscience, it pressed out the
very natural moisture of his body; he had no rest night nor day, but from the
time that once Nathan proclaimed to him remission, and that in his own
conscience he felt his sin forgiven him, then he cried ^ut: O blessed is the
man whose wickedness is forgiven, Psalm. 32. 1.
whose sin is covered, and unto whom the Lord impu^es not his iniquity. As
he that lay sick six and thirty years of Luke 5. 25.
the palsy, arose with great joy when Jesus relieved him: and he that was a
creeple, when he found that his feet, which Acts 3. 8.
had failed him so long, did now serve him, leaped for joy, and followed the
Apostles into the Temple to praise God: so that soul which finds it self
freed from the guiltiness and servitude of sin, of all burdens that ever
lay upon man the heauiest to bear, will with much more abundant joy exult and
triumph in that mercy of God which has made it free.

Secondly, let the Apostle here stand unto us as an example Both by promises
and examples does the Lord confirm poor penitent sinners.
of the like mercy of God to be showed upon our selves, how great sinners
soever we have been, if we follow him in the like faith and repentance. The
Lord our God, is not content by his word to promise mercy unto penitent
sinners, but also confirms us by the examples of his manifold mercies showed
to others before us: when we look upon them, let our weakness be
strengthened; let us not think that the Lord will close that door of mercy
upon us, if we knock aright, which he has opened to so many before us; he
who has been found of them who sought him not, will he hide himself from
us, if forsaking our sins we seek him in spirit and truth? Let his mercies
showed to others be unto us as cords of Love to draw us among the rest, and
Hos. 11. 4.
like ointments powered out, the sweet smell whereof may delight us to run
after him: for that meekness which is in thee O Lord Jesus, we will follow
thee, we have heard that thou despisedst not the poor sinner; thou abhorredst
not the penitent thief; nor the sinful woman that powered out tears before
thee; nor the Cananitish woman, that made supplication to thee; nor the woman
deprehended in adultrie; nor him that sat at the receipt of custom; thou
abhorredst not the Disciple that denied thee; yea, the persecuter of thy
Disciples thou receiuedst to mercy, In odore horum Cant. 1. 3.
vnguentorum curremus post te, In the smell of these thy sweet ointments we
will run after thee O Lord.

But we are to mark that before the Apostle came to The Apostle fought long
before he came to triumph. 1 Cor. 2. 3.
this triumphing, he was long exercised with fighting; he confesses to the
Corinthians that his preaching was among them in great fear and trembling,
that in his personal conversation he was beaten and buffeted with an Angel of
Satan; that he had terrors within and fightings without: and what terrors
are we to think did trouble him? out of doubt the sight of his sins, the
greatness of the judgment to come did terrify him, whereof we are warned,
how we must fight before we triumph, and mourn How can they triumph that
have not fought nor resisted so much as to shedding of tears, far less to
the shedding of blood. 1 Samuel 30. 16.
before the Lord comfort us: if we cannot triumph with the Apostle, it is
because we have not foughten with the Apostle: for let be that we have not
yet resisted unto the blood, how many among us can say that they have resisted
unto the tears that is, who strives with God as Jacob did with prayers and
tears to obtain a blessing? Careless security has far ouer-gone us, and
we are become like those Amalekits, who returning from the spoil of Ziglag,
and supposing they were past all danger, cast their armor from them, and
spread themselves abroad in the fields to eat, and drink, and to sport
themselves, when in the mean time the devouring sword unlooked for came upon
them. It fares even so with the multitude of this generation, they are become
so careless in the spiritual warfare, that as if there were no more battles
to be ^oughten, they walk without the armor of God, and spread themselves
abroad in the fields of fleshly pleasures, and not so only makes themselves a
pray to their devouring enemy, but defrauds their souls of that inward joy
arising of spiritual victory, which they who continue in fighting finds at
the end of every battle.

Now to enter into the words. The Apostle conioynes The tongue of the wicked
is a furnace of fire wherein the godly are tried.
these two interrogations together very conveniently, Who will accuse? who will
condemn? because howeuer there be many forward enough to accuse us, there is
none who have power to condemn us. It is not the Apostles meaning that we
shall want accusations: for the world, Satan, and our own conscience shall
not cease to accuse us: Laban searched narrowly Jacobs stuff, to see if he
could get any thing wherewith For sometime they accuse them publicly and in
judgment.
to charge him, but more narrowly do worldlings search the words and deeds of
the Christian, seeking whereupon to accuse them, and where they can find none,
yet upon shadows of evil they are bold to publish false reports, or at least
by private surmisings seeks to disgrace them. Moses a man approved of God, yet
accused as an usurper: Jeremy the Prophet, albeit he so loved his Country
people, that in secret his soul mourned for their desolation yet did they
accuse him of treason, alleging that he had made defection to the King of
Babell: Daniel a man beloved of God, accused and condemned of Darius his
counselors, as a rebel to the King: the Israelites who returned from
captivity accused by Tobie and Sanballat of sedition: the Christians of the
primitive Church oppressed with horrible slanders. The first weapon wherewith
Satan fights against the Godly, is the tongues of the wicked: for he loses
their tongues to speak evil, before he loose their hands to do evil to
them: therefore said Augustine, Lingua impiorum Aug. confess. lib. 10.
est quotidiana fornax, the tongue of the wicked is a daily furnace, wherein
the Godly are tried: let no man think to serve God in a good conscience, but
he must be purged in this Oven, ye are not of the world (said our Savior)
therefore it is that the world does hate you, and speak evil of you. Ioh. 15.
19.


As for their private surmisings they are of two sorts: sometime they charge
Gods children with evil which they have done indeed, but whereof they have
repented them, and herein they are malicious, that the sins which God
Sometime they speak evil of them privately and that either maliciously
charging them with sins they have done, but have repented.
has forgiven, they will not forget: but this should not provoke us to
impatience, seeing they blame us for nothing for which we blame not our
selves, why shall we be commoued? let us not think shame to say with the
Apostle, it is true, I was such a one, but now I am received to mercy. I will
not so love my self that I will hate him who reproues me for that which I
have reproved in my self, of whatsoever mind he do it, sed quantum ille
accusat vitium meum, tantum Aug. cont. lit. Petili. lib. 3. cap. 10.
ego laudabo medicum meum* but look how far he accuses my fault, so far
will I praise my Physician who healed me.

Sometime again their surmisings are most false, they Or then falsely charging
them with sins which they never did.
charge us with things which we never did; but these backbitings should be
disdayned of us like the barking of beasts: he who knows with Job that his
witness is in heaven, and can say with the Apostle, that he has a good
conscience within him, what needs he to care for the judgment of men
without him? Notitia nostri certior intus est, the surest Aug. epist. 6. lial.
viduae. Amb. lib. 1. offic. cap. 6.
knowledge of our selves is within us. Neither are we to be so base minded as
to think that there is plus ponderis in alieno conuilio, quam in nostro
testimonio: that there is more weight in another man's calumny, than in the
testimony of our own conscience. Augustine being misreported of by Petilian
gave a notable answer, for my self, says he, I am not that which he has
called me, if ye think that he knows me better than I know my self, choose
you which of us you will believe.

Let not therefore the detracting speeches of men interrupt No speech of man
can make us any other thing then that which we are.
our peace, remembering their tongues can make us no other thing than we are: it
is not Ventilabrum areae dominicae, the fan of the floor of the Lord that
can separate the chafe from the Corn. Secondly, their evil speaking commends
us to GOD, blessed are ye when men revile you and Mat. 5. 11.
speak all manner evil of you for my sake, be glad and rejoice, for great is
your reward in heaven. Qui volens detrahit famae Augustine.
meae, nolens addit mercedi meae: he that with his will impaires my name,
against his will augments my reward. I have spoken the more of this purpose,
partly because it is a common craft of Satan, to oppress good men with
misreports, vt qui conscientiae suae luce clarescunt alienis r^moribus
sordidentur, Ambrose.
and partly because our weakness is easily overcome with this tentation.
Seeing the Lord will have us to sustain the strife of tongues, let us
strengthen our selves, let us so walk through good report that we be not
puffed up, and through evil report that we be not cast down, but that by
weapons of righteousness on the right hand and on the left we may overcome.

Now as for Satan he is styled the accuser of the Saints Satan ^tiled a
calumniator or accuser and why. Reave. 12. 10. He accuses God unto man.
of God night and day; and sometime he accuses God to man; sometime man to
God; and sometime man to himself. In Paradise he began and accused God,
charging him with envy; and in the same trade of lying does he still continue:
For sometime he lies against the justice of God, when he says to the
licentious liver, albeit ye sin ye shall not dye, that so he may puff him
up to presumption: sometime he lies against the mercy of God, as when he says
to the weak in faith, your sin is greater than that God can forgive it, that
so he may drive him to desperation: sometime he lies against Gods providence,
as when he says to them that are in necessity, the Lord has cast you off
and will no more provide for you, that so he may provoke them to put out their
hand to wickedness.

Secondly, he is a restless accuser of man unto God, as He accuses man unto
God
ye may see in the example of Job: he heard the Lord commending him, yet he
spared not to traduce him; when he could not gainsay his actions, he
gaine-said his intention and affection, he charged him to be a hireling and
not a son, a mercenarie worshipper, who served God for his gifts and not for
himself, albeit after trial he was found a liar. And herein we are to
consider how faithless a traitor Satan is, for those same sins which man
does by Satan's instigation, he is the first accuser of man for them unto God.
Oh that man could remember that Satan is A discovery of Satan's traiterous
dealing.
ever doing one of these three against him: first, he is a Tempter of man to
sin; secondly, when sin is committed he is an accuser of man unto GOD for
those same sins which he tempted him to do: and thirdly, he is a tormenter
of man for them, unless they be removed by repentance. But Jesus Christ our
Lord is of a plain contrary disposition: first he disswades us from sin,
warning us of the danger, and then if of weakness we sin, he offers
himself an advocate for us if we repent: These things my 1 Ioh. 2. 1.
babes I write to you that ye sin not, but if any man sin we have an
advocate with the Father, even Jesus the just. These two compared lets us see
what a great difference there is between them, that knowing the deceitful
malice of the devil, we may learn to abhor him; and the hearty unfeigned
affection of Jesus Christ toward us, we may love and follow him.

Thirdly, Satan accuses man unto himself: he deceiues He accuses man unto
himself.
the wicked and bears them in hand that they are the sons of God, and
labors to persuade the godly that they are reprobates, denying that they have
Faith or Repentance, or any spiritual grace. There is nothing so true but
Satan dare deny it: he that durst call it in doubt to Christ himself
whether he were the son of GOD or no, will that shameless liar spare to
do it unto others? But let us work out our salvation in fear and trembling,
and Philip. 2. 12.
make sure our calling by well doing, that we may have within us the
infallible tokens of our election, and as for the rest let us keep this
ground; seeing the work of our salvation is done by God, in despite of Satan;
Sathan^ testimony in it is not to be regarded, though he would call us as he
did Paul and Sylas the servants of the living of God, yet are we not the
better, neither the worse, albeit he pronounce us to be such as are abject and
cast away from the favor of God.

And last, the children of God are accused of their own Conscience accuses
either upon right or wrong information.
consciences: these are either such as proceed from sufficient light, or from
wrong information. If conscience accuse upon light which she has received
out of the word of God, her sentence is divine, and we are to regard it: if
otherwise she accuse upon vvrong information, it is the error of conscience,
and we are to remedy it by sending conscience to seek the warrant of her
sentence out of the word of God. It is very expedient that we put a
difference between Conscience, and error of conscience to be distinguished.
conscience and the error of conscience: where conscience discernes not
according to the Law of the supreme Judge it cannot but err, either in being
over large, and then she pronounces those things lawful which are
unlawful, or over strait, and so she declares those things unlawful which
are lawful: for if this be not observed, we shall be disquieted while we
hearken to the errors of conscience, as if they were the just and lawful
accusations of conscience.

Sometime again conscience presents to men sins which Why the Lord leaves
remembrance of a sin in the conscience after that it is pardoned.
they have done many years ago, and whereof they have repented: for we are
to know that albeit the Lord after repentance forgive the guiltiness of sin,
yet he will have the memory thereof to remain in that conseruing faculty of
conscience, called (...), that it may both serve to humble us for the evil we
have done, as also to preserve us from sin for the time to come. And sin
this manner of way retained in the memory, I compare it to thorns and briars,
which in the midst of a garden are hurtful, and hinder the growth of good
fruit, but being put in the hedge are profitable to preserve them: so sin as
long as it is in Sin evil in the affect on but good in the memory.
the affection is very pernicious; for then it chokes the seed of the word of
God in them, but being taken out of the affection and set in the memory, is as
a hedge to the soul, to preserve it from wild and raging beasts that would
come in and devour it: thus for our humiliation the Lord keeps in us a
remembrance even of those sins which he has pardoned, but so that with
the remembrance of the evil which we have done, our conscience does also
excuse and comfort us with the remembrance of our unfeigned repentance toward
God.

And if otherwise the conscience accuse us for those evil deeds which we have
done, and whereof we have not repented, it is of Gods great mercy toward us,
who by inward 1 Cor. 11. 31.
trouble wakens us to judge our selves now, that we should not be judged of
the Lord in the world to come.

As this is the comfort of Gods chosen, so does it point As no creature has
place to accuse the godly, so by the contrary all shall stand up and accuse the
wicked. Malach. 3. 5. Ioh. 5. 45. Luke 9. 5. Josh. 24. 27. Deuteronomy. 4. 26. Iam. 5.
3. Math. 23. 3.
unto us the contrary miserable estate of the reprobate, for there is nothing
in heaven and earth which shall not stand up against them to accuse them, the
Lord himself shall come near them as a swift witness against them. O
miserable are they to whom the Lord is a Party, a Judge, and a Witness: as
our Savior said to the Jews, Moses and all the servants of God shall be
witnesses against them; yea, the dust of the feet of those who brought the
glad tidings of peace, shall witness against them; the stones of the field
said Joshua; the heavens and earth said Moses; their motheaten garments said S.
James; yea they themselves said our Savior, shall witness against
themselves: vvoe be unto them, they must be presented to judgment, but shall
have none either in heaven or earth to speak for them, nothing without them,
nothing within them, which shall not be a witness against them: when they are
judged they shall be condemned, and their own conscience shall say, righteous
is the Lord and just are his judgments.

It is God that iustifies.] Of this ye may see clearly, that The arguments of
our comfort are not brought from our innocence but Gods mercy.
Justification as the Apostle uses it here, is a judicial term, for he
oppones it to accusation and condemnation: but leaving that because we marked
it before, in the point of Justification, we will add this more: that the
Apostle brings not the reason of his comfort from his own innocence, but from
Gods mercy; he says not, there is nothing in me worthy to be accused or to be
condemned, but his comfort is, that whateuer it be, God has pardoned it. This
is it that breeds unquietness and perturbation in many weak consciences,
they seek within themselves that which should commend them to God, as if they
could not be saved unless they were perfect; this comes of Satan's singular
subtlety, who labors to creep in between us and our warrant, as if our own
innocence were the warrant of our salvation, and not Gods mercy, nor Christ's
merit. It is true. It becomes us for our greater comfort to nourish within our
selves the tokens of Grace, but to conclude, that because they are weak,
therefore we cannot be saved, it is Satan's sophistry, with which we should
not suffer our souls to be abused.

Verse 34. Who shall condemn? it is Christ, which is dead, yea or rather,
which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request
also for us.
THe Apostle insists in his particular triumph The death, resurrection,
ascension, and glorification of Christ, assures us of immunity from
condemnation.
against sin, and he demands now who shall condemn? it may be as we heard
there be some bold to accuse; but is there any (says the Apostle) that has
power to condemn? none at all; and that he proves from the death,
resurrection, exaltation and intercession of Christ: for as all these were done
for us; so do every one of them render unto us the sweet fruit of consolation.
Of the comfort arising from Christ's death we have spoken before.

The next is his resurrection, we have comfort (says the The great comfort we
have of Christ's resurrection.
Apostle) in his death, but much more comfort in his resurrection: therefore
says the Apostle, It is Christ who is dead, or rather, who is risen again,
for if we look to Jesus dying, albeit in death he showed himself a
powerful Savior, yet in his death his glory was greatly obscured under the
covering of mortality, which again in his resurrection was more clearly
manifested: for he was declared mightily to be the Son of God by his
resurrection, and has made Romans 1. 4.
us sure of the remission of our sins: for he had not come out of the prison
of the grave, if he had not paid the uttermost 1 Cor. 15. 17.
farthing of our debt. If Christ (says the Apostle) be not yet risen, then are
we yet in our sins, thanks be to God, we may turn it to our comfort; Jesus
is already risen, therefore we are not in our sins.

As for his exaltation, the Apostle says, he sits at the Of Christ's
exaltation at the right hand of God.
right hand of God: to speak properly, the Lord who is a Spirit has neither
right hand nor left, but by these borrowed speeches the Lord who dwells in
light inaccessible, to whom we cannot ascend by our selves, that we should
know him, descends unto us, and speaks of his unspeakable Majesty unto us,
in such manner as we are best able to conceive it: so that when eyes, and
ears, and hands are ascribed to the Lord, we are to think these he has,
per Papists blasphemous who set out the majesty of God in the similitude of a
corruptible man. Deuteronomy. 4. 15.
effectum non per naturam. And this may rebuke that bold blasphemy of the
Papists, who presume to paint the incomprehensible Majesty of God, under the
similitude of an aged and worn creature, expressly contrary to Gods
commandment. In that day (says the Lord) that I spoke unto thee out of the
mountain, thou heardest a voice, but saw no Image, beware therefore thou make
none: and in many places is the same presumption condemned by the Prophets.

Where if they excuse themselves that they paint the Lord Their fact not
warranted by any appairtion of the divine majesty in the shape of man.
in such a similitude as he appeared unto Daniel, and no other-way. I answer,
first this is false, for sometime (which is horrible to speak) they paint him
in the shape of an humane body having three heads; but albeit it were true,
which they say, yet does it not excuse them: for the Lords extraordinary facts
are not to be used as warrants to break his ordinary and eternal
Commandments; neither does it any more excuse them, than that deed of the
Lord, whereby he caused the Israelites to take from the Egyptians their
silver, gold, and Jewels which they never rendered, can excuse them that do
borrow, steal, and rob from others but never restore.

But howeuer they excuse themselves, as long as the word They are convinced by
the Apostle of Idolatry. Heb. 1. 11.
of the Apostle stands true, they shall not rubb off them the blot of idolatry:
they turn the glory of the incorruptible God into the similitude of a
corruptible man. The Majesty of God is eternal the heavens wax old, but he
remains the same; why then do they paint him under the similitude of a worn
creature, weakened by the length of days? The Jesuits of Rhemes convinced of
darkness, are ashamed of the light that shines in this place of Scripture, and
pass by it without an answer, they excuse the making of the Image of Christ,
and of his Saints, but speak not one word to defend the gross Idolatry,
whereby they turn the glory of the invisible God into the image of a
corruptible man. It had been good for them they had been as dumb in the
defense of the rest of their abominations, as they are in this.

This speech therefore to sit at the right hand of God The sitting of Christ at
Gods right hand imports his high honor and dignity. 1 King. 2. 19.
is a borrowed speech, the Metaphor being taken from Kings, who use to set on
their right hand those whom they honor most, as Solomon did his mother
Bathsheba: and so the phrase will import that high honor and dignity,
whereunto Christ Jesus as man is exalted, being crowned with glory both above
Angels and man.

This right hand of God whereat Christ sits, is expounded Error of
Vbiquitaries improued.
by other places of Scripture, to be the high and heavenly places: which
serves to improve that paralogisme of the Vbiquitaries, who will have Christ's
natural body to be in every place, because the right hand of GOD is in every
place. It is true indeed. Christ sits at the right hand of Heb 1. 3. Ephesians. 1.
20.
God, but so that he sits in the high and heavenly places, The right hand of
GOD, that is, the power and glory of GOD stretches throughout the whole world,
but we are plainly taught that the place of the residence of Christ Jesus the
man, is in the heavenly places and not in earthly places* in the high places to
which he is ascended, and not in the low places in which we soiourne: for the
heavens most contain Acts 3. 21.
him, until the day of refreshment come.

And makes request also for us. Christ our Lord has entered Christ makes
request for us in heaven.
into heaven not to enjoy for himself a blessed life only, but to appear in
the presence of God for us. As the high Priest when he entered into the most
holy place, had graven in stones upon his breast the names of the twelve tribes
of Israel: so the Lord Jesus presents to his father the names of all his elect,
that by the merit of his death he may procure mercy unto them.

Here again we are taught that Jesus Christ is described No Mediator of
intercession but Jesus Christ.
to us in holy Scripture as our mediator of intercession, and that there is no
other beside him recommended unto us. In all the old testament no prayer is made
to Henoch, Moses, nor Eliah, who ended their days not after the common course
of men: no prayer to Abraham, albeit he was the Father of the faithful: yea
no prayer to Cherubin nor Seraphin; though now the Apostate Church of Rome have
made as many advocates for us in heaven, as there are Saints departed, and has
framed particular prayers unto them, and which is more ridiculous, has parted
among them the patrocinie of sundry sorts of sickness and diseases.

It is true indeed that the Saints which are departed have Saints departed have
their own desires which they crave to be fulfilled, but knows not our
necessities
not as yet all their desires fulfilled, and shall not be perfected without us:
wherefore also it is that they long for the full gathering together of the
Saints, and for the restitution of their bodies, and for the last day of
judgment: but that they know the particular troubles of Gods children, our
greatest troubles being inward tentations and wrestlings of conscience, neither
known to man nor Angel but only to God, who is the searcher of the heart: or
that we can in faith use them as mediators unto God for us, we justly deny it.
Where if they take them unto their common refuge, that there is but one mediator
of redemption, but many mediators of intercession: to this we answer that in
the same place wherein the Apostle says there is one mediator between God 1 Timothy 2. 5.
and man, the subject whereof he entreats is Prayer; so that even in prayer he
will have us to acknowledge no mediator of intercession but Jesus Christ.

And beside this, Augustine does so desine a mediator of A Mediator of
intercession as he is desined by Augustine is competent to none but Christ.
Aug. con. Epis. Par. l. 2. c. 8. Three manner of ways are things known 1. by
sense: 2. by report of creatures: 3. by revelation from God.
intercession, that it can be competent to none but to Jesus Christ. It is
commanded says he that every Christian pray to God for another: Pro quo autem
nullus interpellat, sed ipse pro omnibus, hic vnus v^rusque mediator est, but
he who requests for all, and for whom none requests is the only one true
Mediator.

And where again they allege that the Saints of God in heaven are not
ignorant of things done upon earth, we are to know that things are known three
manner of vvayes: first by hearing and seeing: Secondly, by reflex, as by
looking in a glass, those things are made known to us which are behind our
backs: and thirdly, by report. This second and third way say they, there is no
doubt but Saints that are in heaven know those things which are done upon
earth, but both of these are false, for if they say they know our estate by
report of Angels, or such as are departed this life, how can that be? seeing
we know that when Hanna prayed in the presence of Eli, yet he knew not her
trouble, yea those Moan of these ways do saints departed know our miseries.
who live in one family are not privy to the tentations of others, that which
they knew not in their life, how shall thou make them to know it when they are
dead?

If again they say that they have it by revelation from God, then I pray you
consider how the one error of Papistrie dashes against another, for sometime
in the same controversy they say, that as in earthly courts we must first
communicate our petitions to those who must be our mediators to the King: now
if it be so that they have no intelligence of our estate but such as they
receive from God* wherefore shall we pray to them to commend our cause unto God
who knows it better than they, and pitties it more than they: as Augustine
prettily observes out of that Parable proponed by our Savior, wherein he who
knocked at midnight to seek bread from his neighbor, found the whole family
a sleep, only the Master of the house answered, opened, and gave him that
which he craved. Nullus Aug. detemp. sermon.
de ian^tor^b ^s respondit, quia omnes tenuerat somnus, non Ang^li, non
Archangeli, non Pr^phet^, non Ministri. None of the Po^ters answered, because
they were all asleep, neither Angels, nor Archangels, nor Prophets, nor
Servants, made any answer: but O Lord albeit so it be, answer thou me, for at
thee I knock, thou art the door, licet puer(...) Psalm. 121.
dormi^nt, tu non dormis, qui custodis Israel, albeit thy children sleep, yet
thou that keeps Israel sleeps not.

But leaving them let us pray to the Lord in whom we ^n exhortation to
content us with Christ's medi^t^on. Io^. 2. 1. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Zach. 4. 10.
believe: let us use the mediation of Christ, whom S. John recommends to us an
advocate with the Father, whom S. Paul calls in this place our intercessor,
and in that to Timothy, our only one Mediator. For knowledge, his eyes are
like flaming fire, and his seven eyes go through the earth: for compassion
he came into the earth to seek us when we knew him not, and he gave his
life for us that we might live: he speaks perpetually to his Father for us by
the merit of his death, and cries to us by himself in his word. Mat. 11. 28.
Come to me all you that are weary and laden, and I will refresh you. Let the
Papist say what he will, to any other than Christ, or any other before Christ,
will I never go, so long as he cries, Come unto me.

Verse 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?
We have heard the Apostles particular triumph His particular triumph against
the cross: no cross can cut us often from the love of God.
against sin: now follows his particular triumph against the cross: he
glories not in this that Christians are without a Cross, yea rather he shows
it is the lot of Gods children to be exercised with all sorts of crosses; but
herein he reioyces that no cross can separate us from the love of God. In
this quarrel the Apostle prouokes all enemies whatsoever, corporal or
spiritual, present or to come, and against them all he takes up the triumph in
his own name, and in the name of all the children of God: Nevertheless in all
these things we are more Verse 37.
then conquerors through him that lou^^ us. Our love to God cannot fully nor
finally be put out by any trouble, nor yet the sense of his love to us.


By the love of Christ we are to understand here, that love wherewith God in
Christ has loved us, for so he expounds it himself, through him that loved
us. It is true also that the sense of our love to God once shed abroad in our
hearts by the holy ghost, can never fully nor finally be taken from us; I say
fully and finally because of those inward tentations wherewith Gods children
are so exercised, that the sense of that love in them is greatly diminished:
but in all those spiritual desertions and oppressions Faith ouercomes at
length, and ^ets us see the face of God our merciful Father shining 2 Cor. 4.
9.
toward us in Christ, we may be cast down but we cannot perish; if Peter be
ready to sincke, Jesus Christ shall succor But here the Apostle understands
the love of God to us which can never be altered.
him.

But as I said, by the Love of God I understand that love which he has borne
toward us: from this most constant love it comes to pass, that we vvhe are
weak and silly creatures cannot be overcome, notwithstanding the multitude of
mighty enemies that are against us. If our salvation were in our own custody,
and we stood by our own strength the smallest tentation would overcome us;
our feet are ready to slide, and then our feeble hands lets go that hold of
mercy which once we had gotten; but howsoever we loose our hold* the Lord holds
it fast for us: we may change, but he remains the same; because the Lord
has loved us, and whom he once loves, he loves to the end: John 13. 1.
therefore it is that it cannot be but well with us; he loved us before we
were, yea, before the world was made. If we search the beginning of Gods love
toward us, we may run up in our thought to the beginning of the world, but
Psalm. 90. 2.
cannot attain to the beginning of this Love* before the mountains were made,
and thou ha^st formed the world, even from everlasting to everlasting thou art
our God.

Likewise we are taught here that the end which Satan The end of all Satan's
tentations is to separate us from the love of God.
proposes to himself in all tentations, is to separate us from the love of
God, which notwithstanding he shall never effectuate. There is a covenant knit
up between God and man the band whereof is Jesus Christ, this Covenant Satan
does what he can to dissolve it, by alluring us to sin, and accusing us to
God: on Gods part he cannot prevail, on our part he assaults continually* but
in vain also, because the Lord who has made a covenant with us, keeps us also
with him* so that though we be tempted we cannot be overcome. This is
evident in Jobs tentations, it was neither the affliction of his body, the
loss of his children, nor goods, which Satan craved so much as to empty his
heart of the love of God, and make him to blaspheme.

If we remembered this it would make us endeavor to If we remembered this, it
would make us strong in all tentations.
possess our souls in patience in all our troubles, for so often as those
things which we love are separate from us, Satan's end is to separate us from
our God, whom we should love above al things. And in very deed this is a
proper mark of the children of God, that howeuer their outward estate change,
their heart is never changed from the love of God; they are godly in
prosperity, but more godly in adversity the more they are troubled the nearer
they draw unto the Lord: as fire is not quenched with wind but made greater, so
the love of God waxes stronger in the hearts of Gods children by tribulation;
whereas the wicked not rooted in Jesus Christ, are like unto chafe and the
dust of the earth, Psalm. 1. 4.
carried away with every wind; there is no pleasure so small, nor profit so
vain which they prefer not before God.

Now before the Apostle subioynes the answer, he makes Christians are
subject to many crosses.
an enumeration of some particular crosses, and demands if they will do it:
these crosses do either concern our bodies, our goods, our dwellings* or our
minds; for we are not to think here that the Apostle beats the air,
triumphing against such enemies as we have not. No, we have Our dwelling on
earth is not the place of our rest, as the Jews thought; far less the place
of our glory as Nabuchadnezar thought. Micah. 2. 10. 1 Cor. 7. 31. 2 Timothy 3. 4.
both crosses of body and of mind, which we must prepare our selves to
suffer; so using all the helps of this our mortal life, as being content for
the love of God to want them, for this is the trial of true religion, we must
not look to our houses, as Nabuchadnezzar did to his palace of Babel, as a
place of his glory, but remember that which Micah said to the Jews, This is
not the place of your rest: and whatsoever thing else we use for maintenance
of this mortal life, let us so use them, as if we used them not, that we be
not found when it comes to the trial lovers of them more then lovers of God.
Blessed is the man who loves nothing otherwise but in God, Nam solus is nihil
charum amittit, cui omnia chara sunt in eo qui non amittitur. Gods indulgence
toward us appears in that he has not laid on us the greatest crosses.


Again perceive here in this enumeration, a gradation of seven steps, by
which the Apostle ascends: It is a great thing to be in trouble, but to be
troubled, and in anguish also is yet greater, and for him that is in anguish to
be banished, in banishment to sustain hunger and nakedness, and with these to
be in continual peril, and last of all to dye by the sword, every one of
these last is greater then the former, yet all of them (says the Apostle, are
not able to separate us from the love of Christ. Our warning is here that when
we see unto how many crosses Christians are subject, and how few of them God
has laid upon us, we should acknowledge the Lords fatherly indulgence toward
us, who regarding our weakness has hitherto dealt tenderly with us. And
again it should prepare us for greater afflictions, so long as we have not
resisted to the blood, nor laid Heb. 12. 4.
down our lives for Jesus, we should remember that greater battles than any
which as yet we have foughten are before us, wherein we must sight, if it
please the Lord to enter us into them.

Shall tribulation?] Now he comes to the particular enumeration. The first is
tribulation: the word (...), which the Apostle uses, signifies a pressing
out, from the The afflictions of the godly and wicked differ in nature. For the
one in suffering communicates with the curse of Adam, the other with the cross
of Christ.
effect which it works in the godly, to wit, that it presses out and
makes manifest that grace of God which before was latent in them: like as in
the wicked it presses out their vile and filthy corruption, which before was
secret: for the afflictions of the godly and of the wicked differs in nature
and in effects: the wicked in suffering communicates with the curse of Adam,
cursed is the earth for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days
of thy life: but the godly in their suffering communicates with the Cross of
Christ.

They differ also in effects, for the godly man being pressed They differ also
in effects: for trouble makes the one to bless, the other to blaspheme. Greg.
Moral. in Job. lib. 2.
by trouble, brings out the fruit of praise and thanksgiving with patience:
Sicut aromata odor^m, non n^si cum accenduntur expandunt. As sweet spices
spreads not abroad their smell, till they be burnt or beaten; or as a grain of
mustard seed not stamped seems to be soft, where otherwise being brayed, it
renders out a strong savor: so the children of God who otherwise seem to be
weak and void of spiritual strength, when they are beaten by affliction,
sends out a sweet smelling savor of rich and manifold Affliction is Gods
wine press.
graces. And therefore I call affliction the wine press of God the great
Husbandman, by which he so presses the berryes of the fruitful trees of his
own vineyard, that out of their juice he may glorify himself and comfort
others, but the wicked are like unto a vile stinking puddle, which the more it
is stirred the worse it smells: for when they are troubled they send out
blasphemy, railing, murmuring, and in their impatiencie foome out their own
shame.

The second is Anguish. The word he uses is (...), 2 The Godly are not only
troubled but oft-times straited in trouble.
which properly signifies straitness of place, wherein a man is so pinched,
that he is not able to turn him. Now from the body it is translated to the
mind* to express the straitness of the afflictions of the children of God,
out of which oft-times they themselves can see no passage: that which David
said to Jonathan, As the Lord lives there is 1 Samuel 20. 3.
but one step between me and death. so sareth it many a time with the Children
of God, but the Lord comes in with unlooked for deliverance in their most
desperate distress, which not only relieueth them for the present, but does
confirm them for the time to come. We received (says 2 Cor. 1 9. 10.
the Apostle) the sentence of death in our selves, because we should not trust
in our selves, but in God who raises the dead, who* d^liuered us from so great
a death, and does deliver us, in whom we trust that he will deliver us.

The third is Persecution. The word (...), signifies 3 They are persecuted and
chased from place to place.
that sort of affliction, by which the Children of God are persecuted and
chased from one place to another: the world has never thought them worthy of a
room among them, and therefore have they been forced to live in caves, and
dens, and wildernesses: but our comfort is that the God most familiar with
his children, when they are banished by men.
Lord has always showed himself most familiar with his Children, when the
world has been most hard unto them, Jacob is banished from his fathers house
by the cruelty of Esau, and his heavenly Father received him into his house,
comforting him by such a familiar revelation of his presence, as he never had
felt before so long as he dwelt at home: and John being banished by D^mitian
into Pathmos, found also the Lord revealing himself unto him more familiarly
than he had done before. What part of the world is there, wherein tyrants can
banish the Children of GOD from access to their Comforter? they know that in
their own house they are strangers, as Abraham was in Canaan the Land of his
inheritance, and therefore can be the better content as strangers to live in
any other part of the world. Basil being threatened by Modest^s the Deputy of
the Emperor with banishment. Nihil (inqui^) horum quae Nazian de vita Basil.
dixisti timeo, I fear none of these things whereof thou have spoken* nihil
p^ss^^ens ab exilij m^tu liber sum, vnum hominu^ cognoscens esse patriam
Paradisum, Omnem autem terram commune ^spicimus naturae exilium, possessing
nothing I am free from the fear of banishment, knowing that Paradise is the
only country of men, and the whole earth is a common place of banishment to
us all.

The fourth is Famine, which of it own nature is one of the 4 Famine is one of
Gods ordinary plagues, and with it also the godly are tried.
plagues of God, but less than his other ordinary plagues of the sword, and
pestilence: therefore the Lord who best knows the weight of his own rods*
accounts three days of pestilence, three months of the sword, and three years
of famine equivalent. Many ways has the Lord by which he brings famine upon
a people: for sometime he makes Leuit. 26. 19.
the heaven above as brass, and the earth beneath as iron, so that albeit men
labor and sow, yet they receive no increase; Deu. 11. 14.
sometime again he gives in due season the first and latter rain, so that the
earth renders abundance, but the Lord by blasting-windes, or by the
Cater-piller, Canker-worme, and Grasse-hopper does consume them, who comes
out as exacters and officers sent from God to poind Miserable are they whose
gain is to ^ncrease Famine, they are Caterpillars in the Land. Basil. ser. 1.
in Auar.
men in their goods, because with them they would not honor the Lord: which I
mark by the way, that those unnatural men who do what they can to increase
famine in the Land, may know they are but Caterpillars, scourges, and rods of
the wrath of God, or a^ Basil, calls them, M^rcatores humanarum calumnitatem,
making their private gain a common calamity, and using that as a benefit to
themselves, which God has threatened as a plague to the people: assuredly
unless they repent the Lord shall cast them at length into the fire, as the
rods of his wrath.

But we are to know that famine, which in the own nature The Lord who changed
the serpent into a flourishing rod has changed cursed famine into a blessed
cross to his children.
is a curse and plague of God, to the godly is changed: the Lord who made the
bitter waters of M^rah sweet, and turned a biting serpent into a flourishing
rod, has changed the nature of all those evils which sin has brought upon
us, now they work for our good, and are become like Waspes wanting stings,
profitable to waken us and exercise our faith, but not able to separate us from
the love of God. Among those famine is a great* tentation, Nature being
impatient of the want of necessaries; and therefore Satan who picks out the
time and place of tentations as may be most for his vantage, tempted our
blessed Savior when he began to wax hungry. It is a rare grace in want to
praise the Mat. 4 3.
Lord and trust in his fatherly providence. Solomon never felt it, yet he knew
it was a rare tentation, therefore he Prou. 30. 8.
prayed that the Lord would neither give him poverty nor riches, least the one
make him full, and cause him deny God, and the other should cause him to
steal, and take the name of God in vain: yet no extremity of this tentation
can separate them from the love of God, for either in their greatest
necessities the Lord marueilously prouides for them or then strengthens them
with patience and inward comfort to sustain it.

For sometime the earth has been as iron, but the heavens How the Lord
prouides in famine for his children.
has ministered food to Gods people; as in that barren wilderness wherein
Israel soiourned, the earth yielded no fruit, but the heavens rained down
Manna and Quails: and sometimes the heavens have been as brass, yet in the
earth has the Lord provided nourishment, as he did by the Ravens and the
Widow of Sarepta for Eliah: and if otherwise it please the Lord by famine to
inflict death upon his children, then he strengthens their spirits with the
bread of life, and comforts their hearts with hid Manna, so that they can say
to Worldlings as our Savior said to his Disciples, I have bread to eat that
ye know not of: and so no famine can Ioh. 4. 32.
separate them from the love of God.

Nakedness.] This is also a great tentation, partly for the 5 Christians tried
also with Nakedness.
shame, and partly for the decay of natural life, which follows it. Before
the Jews crucified Christ they stripped him naked of his garments. Basil makes
mention of forty Martyrs who being striped naked were put forth in the night
to be pined with cold, and afterward burnt with fire in the day. Of these it is
evident that nakedness is one of those tentations whereby Satan seeks to
trouble our faith and patience: but he who has put on the Lord Jesus for a
garment, neither shame nor loss of natural life procured by nakedness, can
separate him from the Love of God.

Where we may perceive how different the dispositions The begged glory of
world lings is in their apparel.
of the Ch^istian and the Worldlings are. The men of this world esteems
nakedness their shame, and places a great part of their glory in gorgeous
garments; and no marvel, quia de proprio non habent decorem, necesse est vt
aliunde mendicent: Bern. in cant. sermon. 41.
for having no glory of their own they must borrow glory from others. From the
beasts of the earth they borrow skins and wool; from the Fowls of heaven they
borrow feathers; from the Worms they borrow silk; from the Earth silver and
gold; from the Waters pearls: and of these does man make up his begged glory;
whose glory in the beginning was to be clad in the image of God: but what is
it? decor qui cum vest induitur, vt cum vest deponitur, Ber. ad Soph. Virg.
epi. 113
vestis est non vestiti: that beauty which is put on and put off with the
garment, is not the beauty of the person, but of the garment.

Yet are these but licitae quodammodo insaniae, if they be Under pretense of
hiding their nakedness they show forth their Nakedness. Cypri. trac. 2. de
habi. virg.
compared with the madness of others who alter by artifice the shape and
color of the countenance which God has given them. Manus deo inferunt cum
illud quod formauit reformare conantur: for they put hands as it were into God,
while they prease to reform that which GOD has formed. N^scientes quia opus
dei est ^mne quod nascitur, diaboli quod mutatur. I know they excuse their fact
with the couerings of comeliness and necessity, but praetex^u t^g^ndae
turpitudinis Cyril. catch. 4.
in mat^rem turpitudinem incidunt, for worldlings are never so naked as when
they are best apparelled. As for men truly godly they will think shame of
wickedness but not of nakedness: impr^bum vocari te pudeat non pauperem Nazian.
sent.
aut ignobilem: blind Egyptians may account sheepekeepers abomination, but
true Israelits will think shame to be profane, but no man to be poor: those
godly ones in the wilderness clad with sheep skins, and goats skins, H^b.
11. 37. Acts 12. 21.
were more honorable in the eyes of God, than Herod in his royal robe of
shining silver, glancing the more brightly by the shining of the Sun upon it,
if we will credit Ios^phus. But what of all this? our unwillingness to want
superfluity of apparel, argues that we are evil prepared to endure
nakedness for Christ's sake. Crosses should not be assumed by our selves but
patiently borne when God lays them on.


Again, we learn here that seeing nakedness is one of those crosses whereby
the Lord tryes the faith and patience of his children, and that then it is time
for us to endure a cross when God lays it upon us, it cannot be good religion
to impone it to our selves, where God lays it not upon us. It is a hard thing
to keep mediocritie, not to be either too remiss in religion, or too
superstitious. Will Worship what ever show of godliness it has in the eyes of
men, is but abominable idolatry in the eyes of God; and we are not to place
true religion in those things which he has not False Prophets wears rough
garments to deceive, so they did of old, and so they do still.
required: the false Prophets ware a rough garment, but it was to deceive: the
Priests of Baal spared not to lance their own flesh, but it is rejected by God
as blind zeal: to walk barefooted, or wear a garment of hair without
linen or wool next the skin: to carry on our head a Franciscanes hood, and
at last to be buried in it: If these things have in them such holiness as they
pretend, is it not a marvel their holy Father the Pope is not careful to make
himself more holy, by changing his triple Crown with a Franciscanes hood? or
that his Cardinals are so inconsiderate as to redeem by so excessive prices a
Cardinals hat, the hair garment being better cheap, and much more meritorious
of eternal life?

Perils.] The life of a Christian is full of perils, every place 6 The
Christian in every place subject to perils. 2 Cor. 11. 16.
unto him is a palaestra: in the sea, in the land, in the city, in the
wilderness, go where he will he shall encounter with perils. These are so many
probations of our Faith and Patience, of Gods truth and providence. Our
preservation depends on our protector, even the Watchman of Israel who neither
slumbers nor sleeps. As a Father has compassion Comfort for the Christian in
all perils.
on his children, so has the Lord on them who fear him: and we know that a
natural Father does never look more pitifully upon his Child, than when he
sees him in greatest danger, and shall we expect less kindness from our
heavenly Father? The men of this world when they send out their servants in
commission, goes not with them themselves, knows not their danger, and are not
able to preserve them but the Lord our God when he sends out his servants
fore-sees the peril and goes with them to preserve them: Fear not, for when
thou passest through the water, I will be Esaias 43. 2.
with thee, and through the floods, that they do not over flow thee. The more
perils we fall into the more experience have we of Gods loving preserving us;
for the which we may say, perils may well make us grow in the sense of the
love of God, but cannot separate us from him.

Sword.] This is the last, and by it the Apostle expresses 7 The Christian
subject also to violent death.
any kind of violent death; for unto these also the servants of God and his
best beloved Children have been subject ever from the beginning. The Apostle
glories that no kind of death can separate us from Christ; yea as he says in
another place, it conioynes us more nearly unto him, as Nebuchadnezzars Dan.
3. 25.
fire loosed the bonds of the three children, but hurt not their bodies: so
death inflicted by man may loose our bodily bonds, but cannot hurt our souls.
Non sunt ^m^nda spirit^i quae fiunt in carne, quae extra nos est quasi
vestimentum: let not our spirit fear those things which are done in the flesh,
which is as a garment without us. Thus we see how no kind of cross can
separate us from the love of God.

Verse 36. As it is written, for thy sake are we killed all the day long, we
are counted as sheep for the slaughter.
THe nature of man does greatly abhor the That the christian is subject to
these crosses he proves by a testimony of holy scripture.
cross, and therefore the Apostle here, is the more abundant in furnishing us
with comforts against it, glorying in this that no cross can separate us from
Christ; a comfort exceeding great indeed: for seeing we know that the Lords
love toward us is unchangeable, having his favor which is better than life,
what other loss should we regard or make moan for? Now because he has made
an enumeration of sundry sorts of crosses, he proves here by a testimony of
scripture, that it is the lot of Gods children to be subject unto them; for
seeing they are not exempted from the greatest which is to be slain by the
sword, why shall we promise to our selves any immunitie from the smallest.

The testimony is taken out of the 44. Psalm, wherein Worshippers of God
howsoever disioyned in time or place yet are of one communion. Psalm. 44. 22.
the Church of God being heavily afflicted, as some thinks under Antiochus*
complained to God of her heavy trouble, that albeit they had not fallen away
from the pure worship of his name, nor lifted up their hands to a strange God,
yet they were counted as sheep for the slaughter: and this testimony the
Apostle applies to the estate of the Church in his time, wherein the Apostle
will teach us that howsoever the true worshippers of God live in sundry times
and ages, yet they are of one communion, maintaining all one cause: therefore
the Apostle uses that which is spoken of the afflicted Church of the Jews, as
competent to afflicted Christians.

As it is written.] Albeit the Apostles had their immediate A pleasant harmony
among the writers of holy Scripture.
calling from God, and spoke and wrote nothing of private motion, but by divine
inspiration, yet is it their custom to confirm their doctrine by testimonies
of the Prophets. This harmony among the Writers of holy Scripture is no small
confirmation of our Faith, that they who never saw one another in the face, yet
all together agrees to breath out one truth. As the Cherubines stretch their
wings one to Ezech. 1. 11.
another, so the Prophets and Apostles reach their testimonies one to another,
and as the Mariners in Peter's ship having Luke 5. 7.
a greater draught than they were able to hale in, beckned to their companions
to help them: so do the Apostles call on the Prophets, and require their help
for confirmation of the truth of God, that the more may be converted by them.
And their fact stands for a rule to teach us that Every Ecclesiastique teacher
is bound to confirm his doctrine by Scripture.
what-euer calling men pretend, they should confirm their doctrine by that
which is written: a necessary ground to be holden in these days, wherein the
name of the Church is abused to impugn the truth of the Church. The Apostles
after the example of their Master confirmed their doctrine by Scripture. S.
Paul was content that the Beraeans should Acts 17. 11.
try his doctrine by the Scripture: what pertnesse then is it that the Doctors
of the Romish Church challenge to themselves this singular exemption, as not to
be judged by the word: as though they themselves and not that which is written
should be the warrant of their doctrine, and all men were bound to believe them
side implicita.

Again we are to mark here how that one place of holy No book between
Malachie and Matthew to be received for Canonical Scripture.
Scripture does interpret and confirm another. Moses lays a ground to the
Prophets, the Prophets expounds them and delivers them clearer to the Apostles,
the Apostles builds upon them a plain and perfect doctrine for the edification
of Christ's mystical body. The two Testaments are as the two lips of the mouth
of God, by which he has breathed out to us his mind concerning his worship
and our salvation. And it is to be marked that out of these books which the
primitive Church of old, and the reformed Church now, has esteemed Apocrypha,
neither Jesus our Lord, nor any of his Apostles have brought out any testimony
for confirmation of doctrine, and therefore those Books interiected between
Malachie and Matthew are to be rejected as an uncouth breath. Malachie ends
the old Testament, with a promise of the coming of the Angel: Mal. 3. 1.
even the new Eliah, who should go before the face of our Lord to prepare his
way, John the Baptist, and Matthew begins the New Testament, with a
narration of the accomplishment of that Prophecy; but between these two the
holy Ghost employed no penne-man of the holy Oracles.

For thy sake.] In the testimony we have three things: Three things observed
in this testimony.
first, the greatness of the affliction of a Christian, when he says, we are
slain, subject not only to smaller crosses but to the greatest: Secondly, the
continuance of their affliction, All the day long, that is, not in one age but
in all ages of the world has it been our lot: thirdly, the cause of their
suffering, for thy sake.

It is necessary for our comfort that we mark the fountain, The causes for
which GOD sends affliction should be marked.
and from whence affliction proceeds to the Godly, for the ignorance thereof
makes many to err with the friends of Job, and judge wrong of the godly as if
they were stricken always for their sins, when indeed they are not: we are
therefore to know that sometime affliction comes to the Godly for sin past,
sometime for sin to come; sometime neither for sin past, nor sin to come,
but that the works of God may be made manifest.

The first way afflictions to them whom the Lord loves Afflictions laid on for
sin past are medicinal restoratiues.
are medicinal restoratiue, by which they are wakened to recover their health
by repentance for those sins through which they have become spiritually
diseased: for howsoever the Lord give loose reins to the children of wrath,
and delivers them up to their own hearts desire, yet will he hedge Psalm. 81.
12. H^s. 2. 6.
in with thorns the ways of those whom he purposes to save, and will waken
them by some sharp rod or other, when he sees them sleeping in security; so
taught he Miriam by Leprosy to leave her murmuring; so wakened he Jonas out of
his sleep by casting him into the sea; he cured Zachary of insidelitie by
striking him with dumbness; he diuerted Paul from his evil course by
blindness: blessed is the man whom the Lord this way corrects.

Sometime again the Lord sends affliction, as preservatives Afflictions laid
on to prevent sin to come are wholesome preservatives. 2 Cor. 12. 7.
to his children to keep them from sin, whereunto he sees of their
weakness they are ready to fall, if they be not prevented: and so he sent an
Angel of Satan to buffet Paul, not for any sin he had done, but for a
sin that he might do, least he should have been exalted out of measure.

And sometime the Lord lays on affliction, neither to But every affliction is
not laid on the godly for sin
correct sins past, nor to prevent sins to come, but that the works of God
may be made manifest, which our Savior plainly teaches us, when being
demanded concerning him that was more blind, whether it was for his own
sins, or the sins of the Parents: answered it was for neither of them, but
that the works of God might be made John 9. 3.
manifest in him. And these works of God manifested by affliction are of two
sorts; for not only his marvelous power and constant truth in preserving and
delivering his own Church in all troubles against the power, falsehood, and
malice of the world, are manifested that all men may see, it is not by the arm
of man, but by the power of God that his Church is continued upon earth: but
likewise these manifold graces of God, wrought secretly by his holy Spirit in
the hearts of his children, are made manifest to the world, such as their
constant faith; their invincible love toward God; their patience in the hardest
sort of crosses. And unto these kinds of afflictions do we refer that
which here is spoken.

These afflictions which are for Gods sake, require these two things, comprised
by the Apostle in these words, Faith and a good Conscience, that is, a good
Religion and a good 1 Timothy 1. 19. Two things required in those afflictions
which are suffered for Gods sake.
conversation: though thy life be so good that it be unreprovable in the eyes
of man, yet if thou be not found in the faith, thy suffering is not suffering
for Gods cause; and albeit the Religion thou professest be good, if thy
conversation be evil, though thou would give thy body to be burnt for
Religion, yet shall not thy suffering be suffering for Christ's cause: Let none
of you suffer as evil doers, but if 1 Pet. 4. 15. Cyprian de duplici mart.
any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed. Non supplicium facit
martyrem sed causa: it is not the cross makes the Martyr but the cause.

There has been no Heresy so gross, but some men That Gods Martirs may be
known from Satan's Martyrs.
have been bold to dye for it: which is not Christian fortitude, but miserable
hardness of heart. As the Lord Jesus has his Apostles and Martyrs, so Satan
has his false Apostles and Martyrs. Martires Satanicae virtutis: and therefore
we will conclude with Augustine, Non est ex passione Aug. l. 1. con. Parmen.
Epi. cap. 8. and 9.
certa Iustitia, it is not suffering that makes sure a cause to be righteous:
Sed ex Iustitia gloriosa passio, but it is righteousness which makes suffering
glorious.

For thy sake.] It is common to all the Godly to suffer with It is common to
all Christians to suffer with Christ, not so to suffer for him.
Christ as ye heard before: but to suffer for Christ is not a honor
communicated to them all; the rarer that it is, the more heartily should we
welcome it when God sends it. The Apostle rejoiced in the bonds wherewith he
was bound for Christ's cause: the golden chains of earthly Ambassadors are
nothing so honorable as chains of iron which are worn for Christ's cause. The
Emperor Constantine honored all the Fathers of the Counsel of Nice, but made
most of those who had suffered for the cause of Christ; as in particular, he
kissed the hole of Paphnutius eye, which had been put out in time of trouble
for Christ's sake, yet did he reverence it as the most honorable and precious
part of his body: no face so beautiful as that which is deformed; no man so
rich as he who has sustained spoliation of his goods, if it be for Christ's
sake, neither is any Heb. 10. 34.
death so glorious, as that which is sustained for his cause: Si enim beati qui
m^riuntur in Domino, multo magis qui pro Domino, for if they be blessed which
dye in the Lord, much more blessed are they who dye for the Lord.

But now because no Christian is persecuted without some How causes falsely
pretended by the wicked, takes not from the Christian this comfort that he
suffers for Gods sake.
cause alleged against him by his persecuters, and that also in every trouble
his own conscience says, that he has most justly deserved it; how can he
have this comfort that he suffers for Christ's sake? The first is easily
answered if we put a difference between the pretended and the true cause for
which the wicked do persecute us. If Haman bear malice to Mordecay, for his
sake he will forge a crime against all the people of the Jews: if Amazia can
cover his hatred against Amos, by pretending that Amos has conspired against
the King: If the Princes of Darius envy Daniels preferment, they can delate
him as a rebel to the Kings proclamation: If Jeremy exhort the Jews to go
out to the King of Babell, he shall be accused as a confederate with the
Chaldeans. It is a common stratagem of Satan's to stain the glory of Gods
Children in their sufferings with false pretended crimes, Vt qui conscientiae
suae luce clarescunt, falsis rumoribus sordidentur, that they who are cleared
by the light of their own conscience may be defiled with false reports. Sed
been sibi conscius non debet falsis moueri, nec putare plus esse ponderis in
alieno conuitio, quam in suo testimonio, but he who has a good conscience
ought not to be moved with false things, nor to think there is more weight in
any other man's traducing, than is in his own testimony. Our comfort does
stand sure, if we can say with David: They Psalm. 96. 4. Psalm. 59. 3. In
suffering we must distinguish between that which men, and that which our own
conscience lays to our charge.
hate me without a cause. And again, They are gathered togethered against me
not for mine offense, not for my sin, O Lord.

As for the other, the accusation of our conscience in trouble, charging us
with sins which no man can lay to our charge, if we will distinguish between
the quarrel which conscience has against us, and that wherewith the wicked
do charge us, it shall be manifest that the cause of our persecution is our
disagreement with them in an evil course, and not any sin committed by us
against God, and so shall our comfort still remain that we are sufferers for
Christ's sake.

We are killed.] How far forth this killing extends our Death cannot hurt the
man of God. Mat. 10. 28. Aug. de ciuit. dei. li. 13. c. 8. A godly man not
troubled in his own person, is partaker of Christ's afflictions by sympathy.
Savior does teach us, when he says they are able to kill the body and do
no more. Qui pro Christo moriuntur aliquid mortis accipiunt, ne tota contingat:
they may cast down this earthly tabernacle, but cannot hurt the man of God.

But here it is enquired seeing these godly ones were alive when they sent up
this complaint unto God, how is it said they were slain? To this I answer,
that two manner of ways are the godly partakers of Christ's afflictions, even
when they are not troubled in their own persons: first, by sympathy with
others that are troubled; for as the head of the mystical body accounts
himself persecuted when his members are persecuted, so among the lively
members thereof the grief and trouble of one, is the grief and trouble of the
rest. If we mourn with them that mourns and remember Romans 12. 15. Heb. 13. 3.
them who are in bonds as if we were in bonds with them, we are partakers of
their sufferings: but now the want of this compassion in many who resting in
their yuorie beds, sorrows not for Joseph's affliction, proves them to be but
dead Amos 6. 6.
and rotten members.

Secondly, we communicate with the affliction of our All true Christians are
Martyrs in affection.
brethren, when in our affection we are ready to suffer with them, if so it
would please the Lord to employ us, as they are Martyrs in action, so will the
Lord accept the others as Martyrs in affection; Deus enim non estimat quenquam
ex Cyprian. de dup. Martyr. How their ready will is accepted as a deed, is
declared in the example of Aquila and Priscilla.
euentu rerum sed ex affectu: for God esteems not one by the event of things,
but by their affection: Non fraudabitur Martyrij gloria per quem non st^tit quo
minus Martyrium peregerit: he shall not be defrauded of the glory of
martyrdom, in whose default it was not that he accomplished his Martyrdom:
therefore Aquila and Priscilla are commended, that for the Apostles life they
had laid down their own Romans 16. 4.
necks; their good will being reckoned unto them for a deed. But as Jacob
hazarded some of his family in the hands of Esau before others: so the Lord
sends out some of his servants to trouble before others. For the Lord is not so
prodigal of the lives of his children, that at one time he will hauock them
all in the hands of the wicked: though he send some out to the trial, he will
reserve others to be as it were the seed of the Gospel.

All the day long.] If we apply this testimony to the Persecuters in this
last age are most miserable.
whole Church, then this day shall be the whole course of time from the
beginning to the end thereof. Early in the morning Cain began to persecute his
brother, and ever since bloody persecuters in all ages have followed his way,
but among them all, the persecuters of this last age, which is the evening, are
most miserable: for all the blood shed since the days of Abell shall light
upon them. As in a good course his praise is greatest who is foremost, so in an
evil course his judgment shall be the greatest who comes hindmost, because he
subscribes to the wickedness of all those who have gone before him.

But if otherwise we apply this testimony to every Christian, The whole time
of our life is but a day of suffering.
then this day must be called the whole time of our life, from our birth to
our death; warning us that in no age of our life we should promise to our
selves immunitie from affliction: yet our comfort is, that the time of our
trouble Reu. 3. 10. Or an hour of tentation:
is here called a day, and in the Revelation, the hour of tentation, because
it is but short. That rebuke which our Savior gave his Disciples when they
were sleeping in the garden, could you not watch with me one hour? may serve
as a Mat. 26. 40.
check unto us when we faint in tentation; could ye not suffer with me one
hour? Again, seeing our trouble is short let us not in it limit the holy one
of Israel, to prescribe to the Lord the time of our deliverance. O how may we
be With what patience we should endure in suffering, referring the time of our
deliverance to the Lord.
ashamed of our impatience in trouble, when we look to Noah, who entering into
the Arc at the Lords commandment, after he had tarried a whole year in it,
yet sought not to come out till the Lord commanded him. And Joseph the
nourishing Father of our Lord Jesus, when the Angel commanded him to go to
Aegipt, and said further to him, tarry Mat. 2. 13.
there till I tell thee, though Joseph knew not when he should come out of
Aegipt the place of banishment, yet referring the time to the Lord, he yielded
himself obedient to the holy commandment. The Lord work in us the like
obedience of Faith.

And are counted.] This is added by way of amplification, Worldlings esteem
Christians but vile persons, and what comfort we have against their contempt.
Mat. 26. 15. 1 Cor. 4. 13.
we are not only slain, but slain as if we were slaves nothing worth. Wicked
men account the godly little worth, and therefore do handle them in a vile
manner, but shall we for that be discouraged? No, the Prince of our salvation
was esteemed among men no more worth then thirty pieces of silver, and that
for our sake: shall we then think evil for his sake to be counted less than
the doung or clay whereupon we tread? The Lord give us true humility, that we
may be content to be despised of men that we may be approved of our God; he
only has the balance in his hands, what ^uer weight worldlings have in the
eyes of men, when the Lord begins to weigh them as he did Beltasar, no honor,
no riches, no kingdom, shall help them to hold outwaight.

As sheep for the slaughter.] Wicked men accounts the In what respects wicked
men account the godly as sheep.
godly slaughter-sheepe, because they think nothing is lost when they are
taken out of the way; yea, also they reap a benefit thereby: a proof whereof
we may see in the primitive Church; for when Famine, Pestilence and such like
cala^ities were inflicted by GOD upon the Empire for the contempt of his
Gospel, the cause thereof was still imputed by men to the Christians, and
therefore they were persecuted to death, with no less opinion than that the
putting them out of the way was to put the plagues of God from the whole
Empire; yet did they not this way remedy the wrath due to their sins, but
procured thereby either double stripes to themselves, or then were handled in
the patience of God like unto Oxen fed for the slaughter.

And here it shall not be unprofitable to oppone the judgment How God also
compares his children to sheep, but in far contrary respects.
of the Lord concerning his children, to the judgment of men. The Lord also
compares his little ones to sheep, but upon plain contrary respects to those
which the world has: first for their innocence and simplicity they are not
like other beasts, that have either teeth in their head, Cyprian de simp. prael.
injured are far from revenge. The sheep of Christ (says Cyprian) has not
the bloody teeth of Wolves, cruelty is an argument of bastard religion: and
thirdly, for their utility,

Verse 37. Nevertheless in all these things we are more then conquerours
through him that loved us.
HEre the Apostle does now subioyne a negative answer to his former
interrogations with an amplification: these things whereof I have spoken are so
far from being able to separate us from the love of God, that by the
contrary, in them all we are more then conquerours, that is, victors out of
all doubt.

In all these things.] Then ye may perceive that unto all The Christian
compared to a rock in the sea.
those crosses enumerated before, the Christian man is subject: he is not
improperly compared to a Rock in the sea, which being beaten on every side with
waves raised by the wind, yet stands immovable, unbroken it self, breaks
them that assaults it.

Again, ye see that the Apostle who speaking of the estate In death
Christians are conquerours.
of Christians upon earth, said before we are slain all the day long, says
now, we are more then conquerours: strange it is that he who is slain should
be a conqueror; but so it is, the Christian battle every way is marvelous,
partly because it is foughten within and against himself, and partly because
then is he a conqueror, when he seems to be vanquished, being the member of
that head who obtained greatest victory when he suffered most shameful death.

Through him that loved us.] The Apostle does so give A Christian is not a
single man standing by himself, but a man incorporate in Christ.
comfort to the Christian that he reserues the glory unto the Lord, the
strength whereby we prevail is from him that loved us, not for our selves. It
is very comfortable to consider that a Christian is not a man standing or
living by himself, he has his being in Christ, as long as there is life in
him we cannot die: it is true that sometime being deserted and left to our
selves we fall away for a time, as we may see in Peter, who at the voice of a
Damsel denied the Lord Jesus; and this is to teach us that the praise of our
standing, perseuering, and ouer-comming pertaines to the Lord.

Verse 38. For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come. 29. Nor
height, nor any other creature, etc.
THe Apostle continuing in his triumph, mounts to an higher sort of enemies,
and he also proclaims defiance to them, affirming that neither death, nor
life, nor Angels, nor things present, nor things to come, nor any other
creature whatsoever, if any other be, are able to separate us from the love of
God.

Of the which we have first to learn, that a Christian man A Christian may be
assured of his salvation in this life, contrary to the doctrine of Papists.
in this life may be persuaded of his salvation, neither is it to be accounted
presumption, for as much as in so doing he leaves not upon himself, but upon
the word and promise of God, which the Lord has confirmed by an oath, that he
may make sure to the heirs of promise the stabilitie of his counsel. Where if
the adversary object, that the word of the Lord out of all doubt is true, and
that they who believes and repents shall be saved, but every one who says he
believes does not believe, and so cannot be persuaded of his salvation? To this
I answer, that he who repents unfeignedly and believes, knows as certainly
that he has repentance and faith, as he who has in his hand a jewel knows
that he has it; and therefore may conclude with himself that the promises of
salvation made to the penitent believers belongs unto him: for albeit it be
true, there be many in the Church like unto those five foolish Virgins, who
suppose they have that which they shall not be found to have in the end, yet is
there no reason to conclude that because some are deceived, all are deceived;
because some think they have faith and have it not, therefore none can be sure
that they have faith.

Out of all doubt where the Lord Jesus dwells by his Spirit, he makes
himself known to them in whom he dwells, according to that, Know ye not
that Christ is in you This is proved from the nature of the holy spirit, whom
the Christian has received. 2 Cor. 13. 5.
except ye be reprobates? and these names given to the holy Spirit of Adoption
does also confirm the same truth: for he is called the Seal, the Witness,
and earnest penny of God, which names he receives from his effects and
operations which he works in them to whom he is given: either therefore must
the adversary say, that there are none to whom the Spirit is given, or they
must grant that they to whom he is given are sure: the first they will not
affirm, the second they cannot with reason deny: for what is this to say that
a man Romans 8. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 22.
has the Seal, the Witness, and the Earnest of God given to confirm the
promise of God, and yet all these do not make him who has them sure of
salvation?

But here least that which I have said discourage them Comfort for the godly
when they cannot sinde this assurance.
who are of vveake consciences, let them know that this assurance of salvation
does not always continue with the Christian in a like measure: for here we do
so believe, that we want not our own unbelief, and albeit our faith when it
is in the full strength ouer-comes all doubting, yet is it oftentimes so weak,
that it is again disquieted with doubting, for which if we pray instantly
with the Father of that child, Lord I bele^ue, but help my unbelief, we may
be sure at Mark 9. 24.
length Faith shall overcome: and thus far teach we concerning the assurance
which the Christian man has of his salvation.

But as for that Religion which teaches doubtings, and A good religion may
have doubting, but it is an evil religion which leaves men in doubt.
pronounces them accursed who hold that a man may be assured of salvation,
we accu^se it as a doctrine enemy to Faith and Salvation; such as is the
doctrine of the counsel of Trent, Si quis dixerit hominem renatum teneri ex
side ad credendum se certo esse ex numero praedestinat^rum, anathema sit. It is
strange to see that where they teach a man is able to Sess. 6. cant. 15.
fulfill the who^e Law of God, and by his works to merit eternal life, yet
they accurse him if he say he is sure to be saved: so directly does one point
of their false doctrine impugn another. But indeed it is no marvel, if their
Religion can yield no comfort nor certainty of salvation to the weary
conscience, because they draw men from off the foundation Jesus Christ, in whom
only it is promised that we shall find rest to our souls, and would make us
to Mat. 11. 29.
lean upon rotten foundations, such as the merit of Masses* Why Papistrie
cannot make a man sure of salvation.
the virtue of our works and humane satisfaction; and because all these cannot
yet satisfy the doubting consciences of men, they suspend them with a vain
hope of greater comfort which they shall find in their forged and comfortless
Purgatory: thus do they hold the poor people comfortless both in life and
in death. But as for us we will abide on the rock, renouncing all purgation,
but the purgation of his blood; we will content our selves with Jesus It is
not presumption, but faith to show what we have received.
Christ, in whom the Father is well pleased, that in him we may find rest to
our souls, which neither in our selves, nor in any other creature shall we
ever be able to find. Let them call it Presumption, Non arrogantia est, sed
sides Aug. ser. 28
praedicare quod acceperis, non superbia est, sed deuotio, it is not
presumption but Faith: or otherwise if we say unto him who has begotten us
by the lauer of regeneration, Pater, bona praesumptio est, Father, this (said
Augustine) is a good presumption. And to the same effect said Bernard, Propter
Bernard in Septuag.
hoc data sunt signa quaedam manifesta salutis, vt indubitabile sit eum esse de
numero Electorum in quo ea signa permanserint, This is the truth of God
agreeable to Scripture and ancient Fathers which we do affirm, howeuer they
do accurse it.

That neither life.] By life we are to understand the pleasures Vanity of
worldly pleasures discovered.
of this life, strong tentations indeed: for in the hearts of many they
prevail against the love of God: that we may learn to despise them, and to
count with the Apostle, all things to be dung in regard of Jesus, let us look
unto those two things which discouers unto us the vanity of worldly
pleasures: first, they are most loathsome to them, who have 1 The abundance of
them makes the^ loathsome.
them in greatest abundance, and are most admired of those who have them not. A
proof of this we have in Solomon, who wanted nothing delectable under the
Sun, yet by the Eccles. 2. 10.
very use of them, he found the vanity of them, and was moved to abhor
them. It is far otherwise with heavenly pleasures, the more we taste of them,
the more we esteem of them, hungring still for more, we cannot be satisfied
with that which we have gotten already.

Secondly, vvorldly pleasures are of this nature, that if 2 If they be
continual they become painful.
they be continued without intermission they turn into pains; therefore is
it that those same things which now we choose for recreation, incontinently
they become vvearisome unto us, and we cast them away, so that it is not so
much by themselves, as by the change of them that we are delighted, Sola
vicissitudine recreamur: being weary of walking, we refresh our selves with
sitting; again being weary of sitting, we rise to refresh our selves with
vvalking, and so fares it with all the recreations of this life, being
continual they become wearisome. So often therefore as Satan by vvorldly
pleasures would steal away our hearts from the love of God, let us consider
how vain and small a pleasure it is which he would give us, in respect of
that unspeakable joy which he would take from us.

Nor death.] By death we understand not only death Remembrance of death
profitable to keep us uncorrupted with the pleasures of this life.
it self, but all those pains that go before it, and terrors which
accompany it. There was never life so long, but it has been concluded by
death: no life so pleasant but the pains of death shall swallow up all the
pleasures thereof. As the seven lean Kine devoured the seven fat, and the
seven years of famine consumed the fruit of seven years of plenty: so shall
the dolours and terrors of death eat up all the pleasure and delectations of
this vvretched life. If we suffer the pleasures of this life to bewitch us,
be sure the terrors of death shall confound us. It were therefore good that
as Joseph of Arimathia had his Sepulcher in his Garden, so we season all the
pleasures of our life with remembrance of our death, this is summa Philosophia.

Yet our comfort is, that if we live in Christ, no terror Comfort for the
godly against death.
of death can separate us from him; yea, death conioynes us nearer to the Lord
Jesus then we were before: we see ofttimes by experience that the children of
GOD have so triumphed in the very dolours of death, and rejoiced in the sense
of Gods love, that they have forgot all their bodily pains. As the top of
mount Pisgah, was to Moses the place Deuteronomy. 34. 1.
of his death, and the first place, wherein ever he got a sight of Canaan, so
shall death be to the children of God, where we lay down the sight of this
world, there shall we take up the sight of eternal life, which shall never
be taken from us.

Nor Angels.] By Angels here I understand not elect Reprobate Angels how they
are Gods messengers and to what end.
Angels, for they are not enemies to us but ministering spirits for our
salvation, but reprobate Angels: for these names of Angels, principalities, and
powers, are common both to good and evil Angels. And they are so called partly
from the power which GOD has lent them, and partly from the message wherein
he imployes them: for sometime they are sent out as messengers of his wrath
to punish the wicked; and so an evil spirit was sent from the 1 Samuel 16. 14.
Lord to punish Saul: and sometime to exercise the godly; and so an Angel of
Satan was sent to buffet the Apostle Paul for his humiliation: we are not
exempted from 2 Cor. 12. 7.
their tempting, but praised be God, we are exempted from their tyranny and
dominion. Their vvorking in regard Two sorts of Satan's operations.
of the wicked is (...), the efficacy of error; for the Lord has given them
up into the hands of Satan: but their vvorking in regard of the godly is but
(...), tentation. Always seeing so long as we live we must wrestle against so
strong enemies, let us vvatch and be sober; let us stand with the complete
armor of God upon Ephesians 6. 11. In Christ we are restored to a better estate,
tha^ that which Adam had in Paradise.
us.

Again we mark here how that our estate in Christ is better than the estate of
Adam by his first creation; for then an apostate Angel drew Adam to an
apostasy also from God, but now no Angel is able to separate us from the love
of God; the reason is, the covenant which God made with Adam was without a
mediator; he had the keeping of his own salvation in his own hand: but the
covenant of grace with us is bound up in the mediator Christ Jesus, to whom
the Father has committed us, that he might redeem and John 17. 12.
save us; he has taken us into his hand and none are able to take us from him;
our salvation depends not upon our selves, it is not in our keeping but in his,
and therefore is it most certain.

Principalities nor powers.] These names are not to terrisie How names of power
are given to reprobate Angels. Jude ver. 6.
or afray us, seeing as I said these reprobate Angels have no power but that
which is lent and limited of GOD. Therefore Saint Jude says, that they are
reserved in chains under darkness: and here for our comfort we are to
consider how that there are two chains wherewith they are bound, and other two
wherewith they are tormented: the first chain that binds them is their own
nature: the second is Gods providence: the first restraines them that they
cannot Satan bound with three chains.
do the evil which they would; the second restrains them that they do not
the evil which they can: Satan being a natural creature is bounded within
the compass of nature, his insatiable malice would do much more evil than by
nature he is able to perform, for above or contrary to nature can he work
nothing: and again, many evils is he able to do by natural means, which the
providence of GOD permits him not to do. The tormenting chains which are upon
him, are an evil conscience, and the wrath of God: for as he grows in evil
doing so grows his conscience worse and worse, and the wrath of God
accordingly increases upon him, with which two he is continually tormented.

Nor things present, nor things to come.] This is a great amplification In our
Christian warfare our greatest battle is the last.
of our surety, that neither present evils inflicted upon us, nor any evil to
come, can separate us from the love of GOD. And hereof we are warned that all
our ba^tailes are neither present nor past, some of them are ^o come; let us
not wax secure because of our fore-past victories. When Israel came out of
Egypt one nation followed them to pursue them, but when they passed Jordan,
seven nations came against them: sure it is the hindmost battle will be the
heauiest, and our last tentation greatest; the horror of hell, the rottenness
of the grave, the conscience of sins past, the dolours of their present
death, all standing up at one time to impugn our faith, but shall not be able
to separate us from that love of God wherein stands our life.

Again we are taught here that Christians are sure of Christians are sure of
perseverance.
perseverance, nothing to come can separate us from the love of God: this is
proved first from the nature of GOD who is faithful, and will conform us unto
the end, perfecting Phil. 1. 6.
that which he has begun in us: secondly, from the nature of the seed
whereof we are begotten again, for it is immortal: thirdly, from the nature
of that life which by that seed is communicated to us, it is the life of Christ
which is not now any more subject unto death.

Neither height nor depth.] By these I understand Satan Satan has two arms
whereby he wrestles, the one is presumption.
has two manner of ways by which he wrestles against men: some he mounts on
the charyot of presumption; others he casts down into the deep of
desperation: by prosperity he puffes up many to make their fall the more
shameful, those tentations which he used against our blessed Mat. 4. 5.
Savior do we think that he will spare them against other men? he set him up
upon the pinnacle of the temple, of How Satan tempts to presumption.
purpose if he could to have thrown him down: and again took him up to the
top of an high mountain, where making a show to him of worldly kingdoms, he
promised to give them if he would fall down and worship him: and albeit with
these tentations he did not prevail against our blessed Savior, yet how many
in this world are daily bewitched with them, that without any refusal they
fall down and worship him. But as Simon Magus while he assayed to fly from the
top of the capital up into heaven, was thrown down to his destruction: so
shall the prosperity of those men be their ruin, and their high estate as a
pinnacle whereupon they shall not continue. Happy is the man whose heart is not
exalted against God by any preserment that can come to him upon the face of the
earth: for he who rising in dignity rises also in pride against the Lord, is
raised up as Pharaoh was, that God may declare his power in casting him down.

Nor depth.] The other sort of Satan's tentations tend 2 His other arm is
desperation.
unto desperation: whom he sees he cannot puff up, he does what he can to
cast down, by fears, perturbations, wrong conceptions, but our comfort is
both by the Apostles testimony, and our experience, we may be cast down, 2
Cor. 4. 9.
but we cannot perish.

Nor any other creature.] Now in the end the Apostle No man is sure to
continue in his estate but the Christian.
does draw his speech to the height, his confidence is so great that not being
content with the enumeration of adversaries which he has made, he defieth
all other whatsoever, if any other be: for he speaks this by way of
supposition, if there be yet any other creature than those whom I have named,
I am sure be what they will, they cannot separate us from the love of Christ.
Here in the last room we do observe the surety of a Christian above all
other men in the world; only the Christian is sure his estate shall never be
changed. Worldlings may Esaias 47. 7. Luke 12. 19. No worldling shall abide in
the state wherein now he stands. Esaias 22. 18.
think with Babel in her prosperity, I shall never be moved, and with the
rich Glutton promise to themselves many years to come, but they shall be
deceived, none of them shall continue in that state wherein presently they
stand, the Lord shall drive them from their station as it were with wheels,
and shall roll them like a ball as he threatened to Sh^bna. Pharaoh his pomp
shall perish in the Red Sea: Nabuchadnezzar shall be changed from a Monarch of
men unto a companion of Beasts: Manasses from the Palace shall go to the
Prison, and all the men of the world shall go from the house to the grave;
their beauty and royal pomp shall consume as a Moth, only the Christian
shall stand for ever in that happy union and fellowship with God; this is the
state of the Christian, this is his life, this is his glory, and from it
nothing present nor to come, shall ever be able to transchange him. Everlasting
praise therefore be to the Lord our God through Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.
A TABLE DIRECTING THE Reader how to find out the principal points of
Doctrine contained in these Treatises.
A
ABraham and the rest of the Fathers shall not be perfected without us, page
213 Accusations of all sorts used against Christians. 416. 417. Accusations of
Satan, made against us for sin past, should be preservatives against sin
to come. 329 Accusation of the careless Christian 166 Adam had Euah for a
wife, a sister, and a daughter. 23 Admonition with a comfort for weak
Christians. 208 Adoption natural and spiritual, 194. how the Spiritual excels
the Natural, 194. 195. by adoption the sons of God know that God is their
Father, 195. Adoption twofold. 276. Affections of the Christian, and carnal
man, how different, 85. except we slay inordinate affections we cannot suffer
affliction, 218. if we slay not them they will slay us. See sin. Affliction
abhorred by nature. 219. It is Gods wine press. 230. 431. Inward, outward, and
their comforts. 225. Good to look to the end of affliction. 226 Afflictions
for sin past, are medicinal restoratiues. 440. For sins to come, are
wholesome preservatives. 441. Causes of affliction would be marked. 440. What
is required in afflictions for Gods sake. 442. Not ever inflicted for sin.
441. How profitable 330. Afflictions of the godly and wicked how different.
431. See Cross. See suffering. Allegory used by Christ, Luke 11. exponed. 285
Angels and men Apostates only false witnesses against God. 38. the fall of
Angels, of man, and of the creature compared. 259. Angels and men Apostates how
miserable. 260. how reprobate Angels has names of power given them. 454. how
they are Gods messengers, and to what end. 453. Anger of God toward his
Children how to be thought of. 327 Apparel of worldlings, how it hides not but
shows their nakedness. 435. Aquila and Priscilla, how they were Martyrs for
Christ. 444 Assurance of salvation. 449. it is no presumption in the Christian
to be assured. 451. that the christian may be and is assured is proved. 119
comfort against the want of feeling of this assurance in the godly. 449. It is
an evil religion that learnes doubting. 450. Papistry can make no man sure of
salvation. 451.
B
Battle Christian what it is, and how Naturalists have a battle between
flesh and flesh, not between flesh and the Spirit. 40. Battle must go before
triumph. 415. Difficulty of the christian Battle. 41. Our best estate is to
fight. 42. And how we should help that party in us, which we would have
victorious 42. Why Satan sights against us. 48. And what comfort we have
therein. 483. The last battle is the greatest. 454 Banishment secludes not the
children of God, from his familiarity. 432 Benefits of God are obligations
157. they increase our debt, and therefore should humble us, 158. but they are
abused by the wicked against God. 163 Bondage of sin how intolerable 50 three
things to be considered in it 51. 52. 53. a threefold meditation to make us
weary of it. 53. 54. Bodies are to be humbled in public exercise: 114. how
some abuse this. 115 Books of law, and conscience, how they shall be opened in
the day of judgment. 12 Brotherhood Christian how strait it is 378
C
Calling is the first manifestation of our election 382. what inward calling
is, 382. how it makes a difference between man, and man 383. it is a new
creation, 385. wrought without man. 385. Calling and conversion, are from Gods
purpose 356. it diuides between us, and our old sins 339. it makes a
wonderful distinction between man, and man, 386. miserable are they, who are
not separate by it 387. time of our calling 384. it is short 388. no calling
after this life. 388. If he cease to call, it is one token of his anger 360.
the calling of God, finds every man evil exercised. 367 Care should be
moderate 410. care without Gods blessing is vain 411 Two sorts of care. 412
Carnal professors how miserable 91. 294. they profess friendship to Christ,
but keep covenant with Satan. 404. See Professors. Carnal presence improued.
122 Certainty of salvation. See assurance. Communion threefold between
Christ, and the Christian. 27. 28. 29. Comforts, against the remanents of
sin, 102. 105. against the fruit of sin, 121. against death, 138. no
comfort gotten without the annexed condition. 140 Condemnation of the wicked
threefold. 10 Conscience her terrors 61. a wounded Conscience desires not
death 275. The book of Conscience 12. error thereof. 420 Concupiscence even
without consent proved to be a sin. 33. 34. 35. Confidence in God. 336
Conformity with Christ, wherein it stands 372. reasons moving us to a
conformity with him. 375. Some works wherein we should not proser to
conform our selves to Christ. 372. 373. Contentment of our estate, and reasons
moving us unto it. 411 Chain of Salvation, what sure comfort it renders. 362
Christian and carnal men, how different even under one Cross, and in doing
one work 131. as different as men and beasts, 82. wherefrom comes this
difference, 84. they are compared in their affections and understanding, 85. in
speaking and hearing 86. 87. either of them counts others fools 89. but not
upon like warrants. 90 Christian how far he exceeds the Worldling 108. his
glorious privileges 211. his prerogatives. 380. Worldlings can not match him
in glory 108. his end is better then his beginning, the Worldling is the
contrary 221. he is sure never to change his state, not so the worldling 456.
How worthy to be honored. 108 Christian has access to the chamber of the
great King, when he will: 318. none but he knows the mysteries of the Gospel
320. he is sure of victory 322. what is his best 337. when comes he to it
338. 339. his union with Christ marvelous. 24. Christian exempted from the
threefold condemnation of the wicked, 15. yet condemned by wicked men, 9. sin
is in him, but he goes not after it. See Sin. He wants never enemies, but
they cannot hurt him 404. he is compared to a rock in the sea, 448. he wants
not Canaanites to curse him 290. he is subject to perils. 437 Christian his
ingrafting in Christ, see Ingrafting. See Union. Christian freed from
wickedness, not from weakness 296. why weakness is left in him 299. A
sovereign rule, whereby to try him. 110. In the Christian are two men, 315.
God estimates him by the new man, 316. the new man lives in the body, like Lot
in Sodom. 317 Christian is not a single man standing by himself, but a man
incorporate in Christ. 448 Church how dear to God. 335 Creature how it waits,
sighs, and groans 250. threefold use thereof to man ward 251. how punished
for man's sin, 258. subject to a twofold vanity, 255. three ways abused 257.
we should blame our selves when we are crossed by the creature 259. they
shall concur to plague the wicked, 257. what creatures shall be restored 261.
to what use shall the creature serve in the last day 262. how will the creature
be delivered, seeing the Psalmist says they shall perish, 263. the creature
complains to God, God complains to the creature upon man: woe to man if he
complain not on himself. 264 Cross how comfortable Worldlings can not know,
330. small crosses are of Gods indulgence. 430 Crosses which are not Christ's
are accursed. 224 Crosses should not be sought by us. 436 Courts of justice
holden by God on man are two, in the first the sins of the elect was
condemned, in the second the persons of the wicked shall be condemned. 72. 73
Covenant of grace the godly had it even under the Law. 190 Curse increases, as
sin increases. 256. Christ has a twofold right to his fathers kingdom, 21.
214. this deliverance pertaines not to all, and how miserable they are, who are
not in him 18. the praise of our deliverance belongs to him only, 55. how he
is Gods own son 66. 408. his divine generation a great mystery, 67. he
came like a sinful man, but not sinful 68. he did his greatest works when he
was weakest 73. he is a powerful Savior, and our comfort therein. 74 Christ
is the first borne in three respects, 376. miserable they who acknowledge not
his prerogative 377. Christ and his Spirit are not sundred 117. his kingdom
increases by trouble whereby others are weakened 223. how the wicked give him
still a scepter of reed^. 353. Christ is the life, and the way to the life, 371.
he is the chief gift of God, all other gifts are but pendicles 422. his
exaltation 423. his sitting at the right hand of his Father 424. his
intercession 425. how he restores us to a better estate, then we lost in Adam,
453. his love to us 379. only Mediator of intercession 425. his mediation
should suffice us 427. his resurrection most comfortable. 422
D
Day of death, how it should be expected and waited for. 274 Day of judgment
should be waited for as the year of Jubilee. 275 Death first and second. 61.
Nature of the first death changed 62. to the Christian it is neither total
nor perpetual. 121. Second death has three degrees. 61 Death not presently
destroyed for four causes 136. Ethnickes comfort in death, not like ours, but
their courage better. 123. We are not only mortal, but dead 124. bound already
by the officers of death 124. yet have we in us a life, which is not subject
to death. 138 Death not to be feared. 144. It does but break the prison, and
let out the prisoner. 138 Dead body of the Christian honored by God 141. they
have a balm which preserues them to immortality. 142 Death second: why?
called a wrath to come, 147. the place of it, universality, and eternity of
it. 175. Death to sin restores life, which death in sin took away. 179
Death comes to the wicked, as Iehu to Iehoram, 274. how it works good to the
godly 331. compared to the red sea, 332. 333. can not hurt the man of God, 444
remembrance of it profitable, 452. how in it we are conquerors, 448. comfort in
death. 453 Death in the body should abate pride. 125. Necessary observations
concerning it. 363 Death of the wicked how miserable. 138 Debt double lying
upon us, the one we must pay, the other we must seek forgiven. 163. What
helps we have to pay the debt of obedience. 164 Deliverance from sin
begun shall be perfected. 60 Desertions spiritual, no comfort in them. 209.
210. Distinction of mankind three fold. 19. 20. Diseases and uncouth deaths,
come by uncouth sins. 128 Dwelling of Gods Spirit in the christian. 106. What
it imports 108. how marvelous it is 107. the christian should be honored for
it. 108. What benefits we get by Claists dwelling in us. 110. 111. 141. how
carnal professors lodge him in a wrong place. 114.
E
Election so sure, that no creature can disannull it. 370 Epistle to the
Romans why first placed. 2. Enemies of the godly, how they do them good. 332
F
Faith, and works not simply opposite but in the act of justification. 339. See
justification. Faith and hope compared. 279 Faith compared by Christ to the
fish, 286. the right place of faith, hope, and love, in the work of salvation,
281. the fortress of faith. 391 Famine one of God his ordinary plagues, 433.
miserable caterpillars are they who make gain of famine, 433. of a cursed
rod, changed into a blessed cross: 434. how in famine God prouides for his
children. 434 First fruits of the Spirit tells what the fullness will be. 397.
320. 270. First borne his privileges. 376 Fear of five sorts 191. from what
fears are the godly exempted 192. fear in the godly prepares a way to love,
then it ceases, but in the wicked it ^oes on to despair 193. how we should
fear so long, as we are in the body. 124 Flesh used to express sinful
corruption for three causes, 32. 33. M^^rable end thereof 46. 100. what it is
to be in the flesh, 101. falsely expounded by Syricius of the married. 101
Food should so be given to the body that sin be not nourished in the body.
168
G
God how he is the father of mercy, 66. not of judgment, 357. God both by
word and deed declares that he craves not our death, 169. What comfort have we
in that he is our Father. 203 God his goodness is extended to all, his
inheritance reserved only to his children. 212. His works are not to be
judged by their beginnings, but their ends, 324. his wonderful wisdom in the
harmony of contraries. 324 God rests from works of creation, not of
gubernation, 325. he works by contraries, 327. his purpose toward us, how it
may be known. 341. See presence. God painted in a man's image by Papists, and
how it is idolatry, 423. 424. Gods Martyrs, and Satan's different. 442 Godly
described, 267. oft-times straited in trouble. See affliction. 432 Glory to
come most certain, 229. prepared to be revealed, 237. by the glory already
revealed, we may judge of that which is not revealed, we shall see more there
then we can hear in this life. 238 Glory to come both great and certain,
249. how we should be changed for that glory. 263. Meditation of the glory to
come, recommended, 238. our estate in heaven expressed by sour words of great
importance, 239. excellency of that glory, 239. Four things concerning the
life to come, 239. how forty days company with God, changed the face of
Moses. 240. Since our bodies shall be glorious, how glorious shall our souls
be? 240. See inheritance. Glory of one, shall be the glory of another. 241.
Persons glorified there are all excellent and singular, 241. whether or not
shall we know one another there. 242. The place of it shows the greatness
thereof, 242. Three places of our residence compared, 243. the glory of the
outward court of Gods palace, being so glorious, the inward must be much more
glorious. 245. Eternity and prospecuitie of it. 245. Soliditie of it 246. why
we seek it not 248. glory of Worldlings how silly, 247. let us seek the
best 247. our highest and best estate. 395 Gospel, where it is preached, there
God has some toward whom he has a purpose of love 359. the gospel neither
comes nor goes by man's procurement, but by God his purpose, 361. how this
should work in us a reverence of the Gospel. 359 Grace comm^nded 96.
communicate to few. 370
H
Harmony of contraries wonderful in the creation. 324. Harmony of man his
soul, and body by creation, now turned into discord. 135 Heart known to God
only 307. why hidden from men, 310. herein appears God his sovereignty over
man, that he is upon his secrets. 311 Heart only puts a difference between a
Christian, and a counterfa^t. 310 Hardness of heart, great in this age. 272
Hope depends on sure warrants, 281. 282. 283. hope described 284. compared to
the Egg. 286 Humility commended. 30. 267.
I
Image of God, our eldest glory.. 374 Impatience in trouble. 289 Inheritance
heavenly, and the nature of it. 213. 214. Inimitie with God, how foolish are
they who keep it. 95 Insidelitie repressed. 28 Infirmities how manifold 297.
comfort in them 295. how we should strengthen our selves, where we are
weakest. 297 Ingrafting of a Christian into Christ, explaned, 24. 25. 26. how
he bears fruit as soon as he is planted. 31 Joy threefold 397. how it is not
found, but in the depth of a contrite heart. 397 Joy to come how tasted by
Worldlings. 248. Joy of things present, how vain. 340 Judgment general, how
it will proceed according to the books 12. how terrible it will be, 13. the
remembrance thereof, should keep us from sin. 14. No mercy will be offered
after the last day 15. the christian knows before hand, what will be his
sentence in the last day. 16. Judgment delayed, confirms the wicked 129. how
foolish they are in so doing. 129. Why judgment is executed on some, not on
others in this life 130. it is a great judgment, not to be judged in this
life. 130 Judgment threefold, which man may have of man. 104 Judas punished
before Caiaphas, and why. 40 Justification by Faith, 278. takes not away from
the Christian hope and love. 281. Calumny of the adversaries here-against
confuted. 281 Justification posterior in order to time not in calling: 389.
three manner of ways taken, 389. opened to condemnation. 390. State of the
controversy between us and the Papists, concerning justification. 190.
Destraction of first and second justification improued. 394 Justification and
sanctification distinct benefits, but inseparable. 395 Justice of God cannot
strike upon us, and why, 407. miserable are the wicked, who must bear it for
ever.
K
Knowledge neither of natural, nor moral Philosophy could profit to Salvation
88. can not prevent an evil end, 89. brings out death. 88
L
Laments of the godly turned into triumph. Law cannot save us, and why. 63.
Naturally men seek life in it but in vain 64. impotencie of tho law is of us,
not of the law, 65. how is it and shall be fulfilled in us: 75. how not
fulfilled in this life, 76. we are freed from the curse of the law, not from
the obedience thereof, 80. it discouers sin, and causes fear. 189. Life
profane is a great dishonor to Christ, 37. a false witnessing against Christ
38. full of sacrilege. 39 Life of a Christian is a mixed web, 5. a holy
life, a sure mark of our union with Christ: 38. it is the first martyrdom 38.
three helps of a godly life 47. our life should be a continual progress in
godliness. See walking: our life tells whose servants we are 166. they who
live in sin are in death, and shall die a worse death. 174 Life present a
through way to heaven or hell, 173. it is not the right recompense of
godliness. 180. 181. how it is a momentanian life, 232. by what similitudes
the vanity thereof is figured, 232. the pleasures thereof are worme-eaten. 233
Life present a point between two eternities (so to speak) 363. a stage play
246. it is neither the place of our rest, nor our glory: 430. our estate here
is neither the last no^ the best, 135. in this life he has fewest years, who
has lived longest. 234 Life eternal has three degrees, 396. S. Paul a strong
witness of the pleasures thereof, and why. 277. See glory. Liberty purchased
to us by Christ, binds us to himself. 160 Love of God toward us may be seen
in the price that he gave for us. 68. 407. 409. Love of the godly, 70.
compared to bread. 286 Love is the first affection that God sanctifies, and the
first that Satan peruerts. 344. it is not an easy nor common thing to love
God, 343. none can love him, but his elect, effectually called, 342. the
objects of our love, 344. 345. he cannot love his brother, who loves not
himself, 345. man has need to learn how to love himself. 346 Love to our
self, and others should be in measure, to God without measure. 346. Three
conditions required in the love of God. 347. We are far from the love of God
we should have. 348. Meditations to increase this love of God in us. 349 Love
tried by the effects, 349. he lou^s not God, who loves not the Word and Prayer,
350. and longs not to be where he is. 350. Love tried by obedience, 352. a
proof that many are without love 351. Love is bountiful, 353. our love to God
cannot be fully and finally bequeathed. 328 Lusts of the flesh compared to the
stream of Jordan, 172. and to the Locusts. 173
M
Martyrs in affection, 444. as God has his Martyrs, so Satan has his. 442
Martyrdom first and second. 98 Martyrs tears more pleasant to Christ, then
the Pharisees delicates. 271 Man his miserable estate by his fall. 83. a
compound creature 133. most marvelous in regard of his two substances, and
also conjunction thereof, 134. from estates of man's soul and body united, 135.
our estate here is neither the last nor the best. 135 Mankind placed in three
ranks. 358 Marriage banquet how excellent will it be. 224 Mercies of God
should move us, 215. mercies showed on others should confirm, 56. mercy is the
ground of all our comfort. 421 Mediator of intercession defined, 426. competent
to none but Christ. 425. Memory of sin after that sin is remitted remains,
and why. 420 Merits improued 165. No penman of the holy Ghosts ever used that
word. 165. further improued, 178. the fathers thought it presumption, 16^.
only Christ's personal works are meritorious, 234. See works. Merits
foreseen improued by Papists themselves. 366 Misery natural, whereunto we are
all subject, 22. how far man is fallen from his original glory. See man. 251
Mortification wherein it consists, 217. a trial of mortification. 178 Mourning
most go before comfort. 271. Causes thereof, 272. they who mourn not, shall
not be comforted. 267
N
Nature becomes worse by the law, 65. Naturals blinder then Sampson. 88.
compared to Howlatts, 89. No good in nature unrenewed, 95. a blind mind, and a
rebellious will. 96. 101 Nakedness is one of the crosses of a Christian, 435.
Worldlings show their nakedness while they hide it. 435
O
Offers made by men to corrupt us, would take more from us, then they can give
us, 230. ordinary means not to be neglected. 369
P
Patience Praised, 289. 290. described, 291. what sorts of men are excluded
from the praise of patience. 292. 293. Patience in suffering^ 445 Perseverance
of the christians is most sure, and the Christian sure of it. 30. 109. 455
Peace three fold, 39. interrupted but not taken away, 93. in peace with our God
stands our life 95. our peace is not perfect here. 16 Penitent sinners
confirmed. 414 Persecuters of this age most miserable and why. 445 Pilgrims
should not rest. 45 Pleasures of the life to come are most esteemed by them,
who know them best. 277. Pleasures worldly how vain, 451. if they endure they
turn into pains. 452 Prayer made by the Spirit, 196, how the godly are
transported in prayer. 196. Union of desires in the godly how helpful, 197.
they are bastard children, who pray for themselves, and not for the Church. 198
Prayer is a crying, 199. the parents of Prayer, 200. use of the tongue not
absolutely necessary in Prayer. 199. Prayers wings, 200. envied by Satan, 201.
efficacy of Prayer, 200. 302. neglect thereof inexcusable, 201. what
infirmities it causes. 299 Prayer returns our strength, 299. what it is, 300.
not easy to pray, 299. our natural inabilitie to prayer. 300. 301. Prayer is
both a gift and an obtainer of all other good gifts, 305. no man can forbid our
intelligence with God by prayer, 306. answer of our prayer sometime delayed,
303. and why. 304 Prayer should be with reverence, 312. preparation should go
before it, 313. attention in it, and thanksgiving after it, 313. our petitions
should be framed according to God his will, 318. to pray, and not prevail, is
Moabs curse. 313 Prayer to creatures improued. 203. Prayer in an uncouth
language. 205 Presumption blinds natural men, 22. how commonly Satan tempts
to presumption, 37. taken by carnal men for the testimony of the Spirit. 207
Preachers no partakers of mercy, of all men are most miserable, 56. they
should practice that which they preach. 159. Precepts should be turned into
Prayers. 185 Prescience and Predestination distinguished. 365. Prescience how
it is ascribed to God, 364. two ways considered. 364 Predestination two ways
considered, 365. objections against it answered, 368. it takes not away second
causes. 369 Presence of God judged by the wrong rule, 400. how it exempts not
his children from trouble. 401 Privileges of a Christian. 456. See Christian.
Profession of piety without practice helps no more, then Iehosaphats garment
did Achab, 36. 70. See carnal professors Promises of God are all conditional.
140 Prosperity breeds licentiousnes. 289 Providence of God turns all into
good to his children, 319. how it extends to the smallest things. 325 Prophets
false wear rough garments to deceive. 436 Purpose of God toward us how may it
be known. 343
Q
Question only between God and man is, whose will should be done. 99
R
Reprobation of any man not rashly to be determined upon. 97 Rebels to God how
miserable. 98 Redemption twofold. 276 Regenerate men have need to profit in
Mortification. 176. 177. Resurrection comfortable 145. confirmed by scripture,
146. 147. examples, 148. it is not the work of man but of God, 145.
comfortable Meditations concerning it, 149. how God his working in the
creatures shadow it. 150 Resurrection of the godly and wicked different in
causes in the manner in the ends. 154. 155. When resurrection is a benefit,
156. the same bodies shall be raised, 150. 151. but with new qualities, 152.
153. yea, mutilate and impotent members of the body shall be restored. 152
S
Salvation the beginning, progress, and perfection thereof is of God, 184. how
the ground thereof is laid in Jesus Christ, the tokens in us, 20. 21. 355. a
most clear sight of salvation. 362 Sanctification is an effect not a cause of
Predestination. 367 Sanctification begun shall be perfected, 81. it is the
mark of a living Soul, 137. a very d^fficult work, for it is a spiritual
birth, death, and circumcision. 180 Saints departed know not our necessities,
426. how the godly are called Saints, seeing they are sinners, 76. 78. 79. 318.
how it is that they sin not. 318 Satan daily confounded in the godly, 9. his
two arms wherewith he wrestles. 37. 455. 456. What a dec^iuer he is in
tempting to sin. 58. his impudency, 128. See Temptations. Satan's silly
offers not comparable to the Lords offers, 215. he has made no wound which
Christ cured not, 261. three objects of Satan's malice, 261. he is taken in
his own snare. 262 Satan's slight 323. his stratagemes are ouer-ruled by God,
328. a deceiuer. 374 Satan a thief of time, 389. he is an enemy to us, and
we to him. 483 Satan's divinity teaches men to despise the means of
Salvation. 369 Scripture commended page 1. Some books thereof meeter for us
then other, 2. harmony among the writers of holy Scripture, 438. all our
Doctrine should be confirmed by Scripture. 439. Canonical scripture discerned.
439 Satan an other Nehuchadnezar and Balak, 410. an accuser of God to man, and
of man to God, 418. 419. his end in all tentations, 429. what a traitor Satan
is, 419. his twofold operation, 453. how he is bound with chains. 454
Security carnal described, 92. how lamentable it is. 125 Servant of servants
is he who is not Christ's servant, 160. by what bands we are bound to be
Christ's servants, 161. how we are both swo^ne, and hired, and have received
wages in hand. 162 Servants should we be to Christ, 169. how other Lords would
have us servants to them, 168. it is a shame for man to seek service from his
inferior and refuse it to his superior. 161 Seek God, what comfort they have
who do so. 237 Sin suffered to remain in the godly, and why, 7. sin is in
the christian, but he walks not after it, 43. any service he gives to sin is
by compulsion. 43 Sin has a twofold power, 1. to command, 2. to condemn. 49.
A Law how ascribed to sin, 51. it seems sweet but it is bitter, 59. sin
and death are inseparable, 57. how sin is condemned by Christ, 71. cursed are
they who nourish it, seeing Christ came to destroy it. Sin multiplied how it
should humble us, 98. 99. how it causes the Lord disauow his own creature,
120. a sinner impenitent murders himself, 128. if we slay not sin it will
sl^y us. 171 Sin is the forbidden tree, 171. men seek fruits on it, which
they shall not find, and finds on it, that which they would not have, 172.
how the fruit and the deceit of sin are to be distinguished, 172. sin under
secrecy, 308. is great folly. 309 Sins multiplied how they grow into a
treasure, 337. Sin for given breeds great joy. 414. Sin evil in the
affection but good in the memory. 420 Sions beauty and Sinaies terror how they
should move us. 408 Soul immortal, 132. twofold life of the soul, 133.
compared to Abraham's house, 107. life of it flows from Christ his
righteousness, 137. it is Gods Temple, how it should be daily swept and kept
clean, 113. it should never want morning and evening sacrifices in it, 13. the
soul is first restored, and then the body. 143. See Temple. Sons of God are
not now revealed, 252. no man should judge of them by their present estate. 253
Sons of God how all of them are his heirs, 213. and has his Spirit. 187
Sheep, how the godly are compared to sheep both by God and by wicked men.
446. 447. Spirit how he is said to depart from the godly, 109. his twofold
operations, 117. his threefold notable operation in the godly, 118. how he is
Gods seal, his witness, and his earnest. 119 Spirit his operations
universal, 181. special of sundry sorts, 182. how he leads his children,
monendo and monendo, 182. 183. his threefold operation in the godly. 188 Spirit
is given and received by the word, 190. how in his first operation he is a
Spirit of bondage to fear, 189. we have in this life but the first fruits of
the Spirit, 268. why the Lord gives us not the principal here, 269. what
comfort have we through the earnest of the Spirit, 270 Spirit why he appeared
in the likeness of a Dove, and similitude of sire, 294. how he ^eares the
burden with us, 298. how h^e requests for us. 301 Sufferings are no
testimonies of Gods anger, 223. all the godly are subject to them, 222. three
things required to make our sufferings sufferings with Christ, 224. the three
persons of the blessed Trinity suffer with the godly, 224. all the sufferings
of Christians are not for Christ, 442 the causes of suffering. 443. Every
suffering renders not glory, 231. time of our suffering is short, 231. a
necessary observation in suffering. 443. Simpathy in suffering with Christ.
See afflictions.
T
Temperance. 126 Temple of God should be more beautiful within, then without*
115. See soul. Tentations to sin are of the deceiuer, 58. comfort in them,
59. a good answer to Satan in his tentations to sin, thou have deceived me
so often, why shall I believe thee any more? 127. See Satan. Tentations by
Satan unto sin should chase us to grace: See Satan. Standing in tentations
what comfort it renders. 298 Thankfulness to God should be declared in a
threefold duty. 69. 112. 267 Threatenings used by the Lord, argues our
rebellion. 170 Tongue of the wicked is a sire furnace wherein the godly are
tried, 416. tongues bended against the godly are accursed. 305
W
Walking from evil to good, is the life of a Christian. 44. What need in this
walking we^ have of a guide, 184. how we should follow our guide, 185. how o^r
way should be considered. 45 Wicked men how they walk in a circular motion.
44. How miserable they are, 98. their rebellion exempts them not from
subjection. 97 Wicked men compared to open sepulchers, 116. they dye miserably
and why? 138* 139. With what Spirit are they led. 186. 187. The wicked are left
for trial of the good, 291. A wicked man is at his best when he is first
borne, 337. all works for the worst unto them, 341. all creatures shall accuse
them. 421 Will accepted for a deed. 444 Will contrary to Gods will most
miserable, 100. all the strife between God and man is about this whose will
should be done. 99 Vbiquitaries improued. 424 Union of a christian with Christ
how strait it is. 23. 24. Worldlings wrong estimation of a Christian, 446. they
love immortality, but seek it the wrong way. 142. No worldlings shall
continue in the state, wherein he stands now. 456 Worldlings comfort is seen,
not so the Christians, 285. his fectlesse objection to the Christian, 286.
their rebuke, 287. they are cursed with the Serpent, 321. they speak of Gods
word like Birds counter fetting man's voice, 321. the pains they take on
trifles should shame us, that take no pains upon better things. 340 World
consists of two contrary factions. 401 Word should be applied, 103. by the
word we receive the Spirit, 190. it is as milk to some, as salt to others, 170.
rebukes thereof how not suffered. 171 Works wrought by God called our works,
177. our works no supplyments of Christ's merits, 235. how works of men
regenerate do not merit, 393. works both of the law moral and ceremonial
excluded from justification. 394 Worshippers of God in whatsoever part are all
of one communion. 438 Wrath to come will eat up all present pleasure. 235
FINIS.

