Faults Escaped.
In Epist. Didic. Line the 1. for the Word Read the World. Page 4 Line 11 for
blouldnesses r. boldnesses. p: 5 l. 20. for Vsull r. Usual p. 6 l. 28. for to
same ^ to the some p 7. l^ 2. for Athenian r. Athenians. p 8. l. 8 for outward
r. Outwardly l. 24. for Wa^es r wars. l. 37 for these word r. the sword. p.
9. ^, 9. for as r. is. l. 22. for inhabit r. enable. l.: 3. for so r, of. l.
38. for nor least. r nor of least p 13. l. 2. for putrified r. purified p. 15.
l. vlt. for but time. r. but in time. p. 16 l ^. for perhaps. r. perhaps. l. 9
for g^eauen r geauen. l. 26. for Cod r. God p. 18. l. vlt. for to the rest r.
to rest p. 20 l. 1. for Eternal r. External. l. 30. for a little r. so little.
p. ^1. l. 21. in ma^g for^ ennies r. Penries. p. 26. l 12. for cereful^ r.
careful. l. 14 for continue. r. convince. p. 27. l. 5. for were r. we are. l.
31 for with r which p. 50 l. 7. for only r. one. l 24 for receive. r. revive.
l. 25. for dwiseome r. wisdom p. 51. l. 3 for centention r. contention. p.
52. l. 6. for Propanenes r. Prophanenes. l 9. for Redemp^ion r. repetition. p.
53. l. 11 for fruction r, function l. 13. for their. r her. p 56. l. 18. for
them r t^en. p 59. l. 2. for her r. their. p 61. l. 17. for continued, r.
contemned. p. 62. l 27. for of r and p. 67 ^.27* for us can r. us l ca^. p. 82.
l. 28. for Grayer r. Gray. p. 83. l. 15. for they that r. that they p. 85 l.
37. for given r. giving. p. 124. l. 5. for mediation r. meditation. p. 125. l.
11 for dis^ict. r. distinct. p. 126 l. 19. for when r. when p. 127 l. 29. for
exart r. exhort. p. 129. l. 34 for were r. we are. p. 134. l. 34. for both. r
loath p. 137. l. 34 re^e. p. 143. l. 22. for person r. persons. l. 26. for being
r bring ^e other. r either, the other. l. 33. for occasion r occasion. p. 146.
l. 34. for thought r. though. p. l. 147.^.9. for reverent. r. (...) r either p.
162. l 2. for Pulralities r Plural; p. 164. l. 26. for. (...) p. 165. l. 19. in
marg. for co^mumis r. communis l 29. in (...). p 185 l 13. for Codly r Godly,
l. 17* for disented r ^^urches r. Churches, p. 186. l. 27. for Vgre r. urge. p,
187. l. 2^ ^. Communis p. 190 l. 7. for Mamerces r. Mamercus, p. 191. the
fifth. p. 192, l, 33. in marg. for Disperandi r. desiderandi. ^, r, abused. p,
196, l. 1^, for patience r. patience. l, 15, for ^ 197. l, 14. for chieffly r,
chiefly.

A BRIEF ANSWER UNTO Certain Reasons by way of an Apology delivered to the
Right Reverend Father in God, the L. Bishop of Lincoln, by Mr. JOHN BVRGES:
wherein he labors to prove, that having heretofore subscribed four times,
and now refusing (as a thing unlawful) that he has notwithstanding done
lawfully in both.

Written by William Couell, Doctor in Divinity.

Aduersus Ecclesiam, pugnatum est a filiis matris suae, and hostili animo, and
damno vtili.

Bernard. AT LONDON, Printed by G. S. for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Holy Lamb. 1606.

The Contents of this Book.
Sect. 1 A Preface to the Kings Majesty. Page 1. The preface of the Apology.
page 29 Of the intention of the Church of England in requiring subscription.
pap. 43 2 General exceptions to the communion Book in the intention. page 52
3 Of the Lyturgie in general. page 66 4 Of omission of the Canon. page 73 5
Supposed exceptions against some Apocrypha. page 82 6 Against false
Translations. page 92 7 Exceptions about Baptism. page 96 8 Exceptions
concerning Interrogatiues in Baptism. page 105 9 Of the Cross in Baptism.
page 108 10 Of kneeling at the Communion. page 142 11 Of Burial. page 147 12
Of complaints and conjectures. page 150
To the Right Reverend Father in God WILLIAM, by the Divine providence, L.
Bishop of Lincoln.
THE singular care (Right Reverend) which your Lordship has had in your own
Diocese, 1. Tim. 3.1.
confirms the sentence of Saint Paul. That it is a true saying, if any man
desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a worthy work; For the Church as
Saint Bernard says, has been troubled with three conflictes; from Tyrants,
Heretics, and Hipocrites. The first was incountered by the patience of
Martyrs, which victoriously conquered the cruelty of those times. Mallei
haereticarum.
The second, with the unanswerable learning of the ancient Fathers, many of
them being (as they are called) the hammers of Heretics. The last with the
synceritie and diligence of Bishops, for what other remedy remains for the
hypocrisy of these days (if that may be termed hypocrisy which cannot
lurk, by reason of the abundance, nor desires not by reason of his boldness)
but the singular integrity, and courage executing the discipline of the Church
in your Lordship and others of your place, Esto subiectus po^tifici, and quasi
parentem animae suspice* Herom.

Sermo aedisicatio, vita lust^^ia, presentia grata, and memoria in
Benedictione. Be^.


to whom Saint Ierom (although sower in many things) wishes us to be subject,
and give reverence as to the parents of our souls. For in a true Bishop in
deed, his words are edifications, his life righteousness; his presence
delightful, and his memory blessed. Thus shall your Lordship bring to pass,
that those who are not, may be made wise; that those who are, may not be
deceived, that such as have been deceived may be wise again: that unbelievers
may be converted unto the faith, that such as were converted, may not be turned
from it, that those who are, may return unto it, that men perverted may be
directed aright, that men subverted may be called unto the truth, and that the
subuerters themselves, may be convinced with strong reasons, either to amend if
it be possible, or if not, to loose their authority, that they hurt not
others. Of these I may say as Saint Bernard does, (but I will speak to their
own understanding) they are Canes ad scissionem, vulpes ad fraudem; and by
your Lordships care, and the rest of the Bishops: aut corrigendi, ne pereant,
aut ne perimant coercendi. Now particulerly under your Honors favor, I will
express in few words, why the answer of this Apology is directed unto your
Lordship, as to one to whom in many respects I am especially bound. First, it
was thought fit, that seeing the reasons were given unto your Lordship as an
account of that obedience, which a Minister under your own charge did owe unto
you, the answer (how mean soever) should be admitted to plead in the hearing
of the same Judge, which being finished long since, was by authority deferred,
in hope that silence and time, would have given satisfaction to all, who were
not fully resolved in this cause. Heereunto I add my own particular Motives (I
hope without offense) which are and shall be just reasons to make me humbly
observe your honor; Christ College, and Queens College in Cans.
the nearenesse of the same soil which gave the first air unto us both, then
the same two Colleges which gave furtherance to both our studies: and lastly,
the entrance into my Ministry, which with many favors I received by the
imposition of your Lordships hands, these all as they are, hopeful assurances
of your pardon for this boldness, so they are and shall be strong reasons to
make me remain in all duty at your Honors service. Lambeth. January 22.
1605.

Your Lordships to be commanded. WILLIAM COVELL.

A Preface to the Reader.
THERE are few resolutions that are filled with more hazard, then those which
are undertaken to give satisfaction to distempered humors; wherein whilst
every man would seem either not to err at all, or to have some colorable
excuse for that which they had rather call freedom of conscience and Christian
liberty then term error, the state of the Church hangs balanced with
some opposite contrarieties, as if it were the most profitable wisdom to stand
in consultation, and not to adventure to hold any thing. Doubtless no cause
has gained less to the defendants then this of the Church government; for
first being in it self barren, it has little wherein there can be use of the
ancient Fathers: for whilst men out of their own fancy will frame dislikes,
we can but in the general allege the constant moderation of our forefathers,
and without warrant for particulers, satisfy them so far as Religion and
reason will give leave: Secondly, all men are carried with a pity naturally
toward such whom they suppose to suffer for the testimony of a good
conscience, whilst others are suspected to flatter the present state; as if
nothing could be reputed honest, which were not a bold opposition (under color
of consciene) to a settled government, unto these may be added that which is not
the least evil, that whilst impatience and zeal opens the mouths of our
enemies for any fault in our answering committed by us; envy does open the
mouths of our supposed friends, for that which may be thought to be done well.
So that though the recompense has nothing in it to be desired, this only
remains as the comfort against all trobles, that it is a right use of our
small talent dispensed with Humility and duty for the benefit and peace of the
Church of Christ; where, first in the days of our late dread sovereign of
blessed memory some fearing superstition might return (like a troublesome
guest, neither long nor far absent) sundry of the most learned and most
sincere, not called to the honor and the burden of a Bishopprick were consulted
with all, to give satisfaction to such who seemed rather to follow the example
of foreign Churches, then to have just reasons to mislike their own.

To this end letters were sent from the reverend fathers of the Church, to
desire the resolution concerning the apparel of ministers, Ceremonies, and
other indifferent things to M. Bullinger, F. Martyr, Gualter, Bucer, and
others, men without comparison for integrity and learning equal to the best in
those times, and not much exceeded by any, to my knowledge that have lived
since; their answers to these questions for the contentment of our brethren (if
they love peace) we thought to have published in the end of this treatise. By
Master Cartwright Martin. etc
After these times, by the suggestion of some both from Geneua and Scotland,
the Church had not long rest, but that diverse admonitions, were written to the
Parliament, desiring a new discipline, sundry Inuectiues against the Bishops
and diverse unhallowed pa^phlets from the brood of Cham, who gloried in the
discovery of the supposed nakedness of their own fathers; a little more then
ordinary rigor (for their malypart boldness had awaked the accustomed cleme^cy
of a most gracious prince) by the execution of some few, stopped in a manner
for a time the mouths, and the Pens of all; letting the ages that come after
understand thus much, that writings how learned soever (as what could be more
excellent for modesty and judgment, D. Whitgift.
then the pains of that most worthy Archbishop) are able to do little good for
the quiet of the Church, if the magistrates be wanting to give aid: and that
they who at first make holiness and reformation the scope of whatsoever they say
or write, pretending to aim at nothing but to make men better; in the end, by
degrees fall to a vanity profanely to libel to make others laugh, and in my
weak opinion few things ever happened in this kingdom more auailable to breed
Atheism then that was. But the scope being for a Presbyteriall discipline it
found with the most of that faction this favor to be reproved no more
sharply then the sin of the sons of Hely: hitherto all strove for a
Presbitery, whereof at the first coming of our most gracious sovereign to this
kingdom many were filled with a vain hope, doubtle^ deceived by such men, who
either understood not the state of this commonwealth or had little care of the
happy prosperity of this Church.

But in the end, when authority was more blessed, and assisted from above, then
to be deluded with such mists or to give any hope to covetous affections
greedily longing for the fall of Bishops (which one Act of preserving their
state and honor) amongst many thousand arguments of favor showed toward them
shall stir up the prayers of all that now live for the continuance of his
state, and make his memory blessed amongst all posterities to the worlds end;
then I say many began to make a rent in the Church, and to break from us
(choosing rather (with what conscience they know) to forsake their function and
calling, then to yield their conformity to the ceremonies of this Church;
which hitherto by themselves were ever ^eputed as things indifferent; and
doubtless neither so many nor so dangerous, but in this time of light and
knowledge they may be admitted without superstition at all: forseeing (as Peter
Martyr says) we be so free as we have but a few Ceremonies, and those easy
and gentle, it would be an intolerable thing, and worthy to be condemned, P
Martyr. 20 C. Coun. part. 4. cap 11. sect. 9
if we should not perform them without corruption. I wish those to consider
well, who are desirous to make these things simply unlawful, both how they
differ from themselves and others at other times, and what bondage (under the
name of liberty) they impose upon the Church by denying her authority to
ordain ceremonies; in which if little or nothing be left unto her, neither
shall she need much the direction of Gods spirit to guide her consultations, nor
challenge any great obedience in her own name, if all things that are, be
simply either good or evil: to which error if Zeal or opinion shall tranport
any, he must either make the worship of God to be without Ceremonies, or those
Ceremonies simply necessary, without which there is no worship; none that I
know would have religion to want all Ceremonies, saving only those who would
have all men to want Religion: some there are which wish that these ceremonies
were simple, chaste, and few, that is not significant at all: It were doubtless
a great folly (if not an idleness in God service) either to admit or retain
those ceremonies, which they purposed should signify nothing; but moderate
minds do think otherwise, that neither ceremonies nor their signification, are
to be misliked as unlawful, whilst nothing is signified, but that which
themselves will account lawful. So then, neither depriving the Church of the
use of ceremonies in divine worship, nor making these of that unchangeable
nature as simply either her good or evil, but only as things of themselves
indifferent, (for better place and respect they never retained in our Church)
we will briefly set down for the satisfying of some men; that indifferent
things by Civil or Ecclesiastical constitution do change their nature, and by
virtue of commandment become necessary; so that either they must be not
indifferent, but simply unlawful; or being indifferent, such as by
commanddement are made necessary. To deny that there are things indifferent,
is to take Christian liberty from men: and to deny the ceremonies in their
own nature to be such, is to take al liberty from the Church for without these
what is there wherein the Church is not expressly and necessarily directed by
the word of God? we are taught that all things which happen under the compass
of human action are of three sorts; either good, or evil, or indifferent: of
the first and the second kind are all things commanded or forbidden in the
law of God, (except the ceremony of the Sabbath) commanded to the Jews but
not to us: Indifferent things are of that nature, that by themselves, and
properly they are neither good nor evil, but in respect of some other thing,
(...).
as to drink Wine, Ale, or Water, to use these or those garments which of
themselves have no holiness in the^, and by which a man is not made better: and
of these only, and such like, the Apostle speaks, all things are lawful
form: 1. Cor. 6.12. 1. Cor. 9.22.
wherein whilst he professed his freedom, yet he acknowledges that he became
bound, and to the Jew a Jew, to those that were under the law, as under the
law, to those that were without the law, as without the law, to the weak he
became weak, to conclude, he became al to al, that he migh win some: thus he
made a vow at Cenchrea, circumcised Timothy which he did not to Titus, by
reason of false brethren crept in to spy their liberty: so that all things were
lawful, not only which co^cerned common life, but also in ceremonies and the
outward worship of God, in which (as one well notes) the spiritual worship is
shadowed, but not contained. But when experience had taught, that such liberty
became dangerous to the Church and the co^monwelth, being turned oftentimes
into a lice^tious impiety or superstition, unless it were bounded with some
limits, the one sort aduenturing to do all things that seemed pleasing, and
thereby rejecting the ceremonies as too great a burden, being things not as
pleasing to God, who will be worshipped in truth: the other strictly observing
all ceremonies, as if the greatest holiness and principal parts of Gods worship
consisted in them: thus the one led to prophanenes, and the other to
superstition, the two dangerous extremes o^ true religion. For which mischief
necessity has only found out this remedy, to moderate this liberty that it
neither err on the right hand nor the left, that it neycome short nor go
beyond a mean; therefore the Apostle says all things are lawful for me, but al
things profit not, all things are lawful, but al things are not expedient,
wherein he touches the extemities at both hands. Now then the means to keep our
liberty, that it neither be too much, nor too little are of two sorts: general,
and special: the general is charity the principal direction of man's life. For
whatsoever we desire to do or omit (being in it self indifferent) charity must
consider how far to proceed without offense: for why should our liberty
(says S. Paul) be condemned of another man's conscience? and therefore in this
case we are rather to depart from that liberty we have, then to be offensive to
those who are more weak, and so give occasion for the^ to speak evil of us, and
of that which was left free: for charity wills us in these things to respect
others more then our selves, and rather to omit that which is lawful for us,
the^ to do that which is hurtful for them: the other rule to limit indifferent
things is special: which is not so distinguished from the other, as if it were
without charity, but that charity which ought to be in all, is here directed in
a special manner: for howsoever charity so extends it self that it may serve
to all parts of our life, as though we need not to be directed by any other
law, yet because al men are not so well sighted perfectly to discern what is
expedient at all times, and for that the offices of charity are sometimes
changed, (for times and occasions may fall out, that things just and to be done,
may be clean contrary) therefore there is required an experienced and mature
judgment to determine what is fit, least whilst we labor to profit we injury
the Church and the commonwealth, in which are contained the charities of all.
God therefore respecting man's weakness has appointed magistrates and Governors
in both, to serve as ^ies to guide and direct what is fit to be done, and to
this end to make laws concerning indifferent things, that so the whole body
may be governed with comelines, order, and edification. This no man can deny,
but such as desire to be exempted from all laws; For execution whereof God has
appointed Magistrates to be his Ministers to whom we must be subject, not for
fear but for conscience; obeying also our spiritual rulers, for they watch
over us to give account unto God for our souls. Romans 13 Heb. 13
And therefore no man can deny, but that in things of this nature, all men are
to be governed by their laws; which whilst they are in force, commanding or
forbidding bind the conscience as the Decalogue does. Herein if any would
seem to see more then those that do make laws (a thing not likely seeing the
most, and the wisest, and the best experienced are assembled to that end) we
cannot think it warrantable to be so presumptuous, nor expedient to dispute
(but in place of counsel) of the equity of laws when they are once
established: this moderation if all men had observed, doubtless long since
this Church had been blessed with a happy peace. But if any man be persuaded
that the ceremonies enjoined are not of this nature, it is but an opinion
lately sprung up, whereunto the necessity of obedience in indifferent things
has compelled them to fly, and it satisfies us (though it cannot then) that
with all antiquity, and the Church we do think otherwise: God grant us all in
due time truly to think and to speak the same things. Farewell.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT Majesty, James by the grace of God King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, and in all causes, and
over all persons supreme Governor.
APOLOGY.
MOST dread and gracious Sovereign, Gen 44.16.
when JOSEPH'S cup was found in BENIAMINS sack, IVDAH (assured of the fact,
ignorant of the means) falls to confession of a falt inexcusable, and yet there
was no fault. To subscribe, and to deny to subscribe to the same articles,
appears so manifest a fault, either of inconstancy, or vnhonesty, as were I
not privy to a just reason of both, I should say with IVDAH, What shall I say
unto my Lord? What can I speak? How can I justify my self? God has found
out the wickedness of thy Servant.

ANSWER.
TO every reasonable Spirit, the fountain of all goodness, has given a
twofold power, Reason and Affection. The one, whereby we discern, the other,
wherewith we love: the one leading man unto Truth, the other unto Virtue. From
the one, are derived right Counsels; from the other, upright affections. Man's
^elicity in his creation being this, that both had ability constantly to work
the owners happiness, if the owner had been willing to have kept his
affections, humbly obedient to the commandments of his own reason. But
suffering himself to fall from this government, he has found his affection a
false Counselor; dissentions and oppositions cunningly suggested, being the
continual conflict even betwixt those two nearest, whose first love was Union,
and the bond Peace: since which time, man, whilst he erreth (pursuing with
eagrenesse, what affections desire, rather then Reason does approve) he
labors even by contradicting himself, because he does not love what he
ought in reason: to find out reason for himself, for that which he does
love. And seeing, where the Intentions are right, our weakness does not ever
perform what it ought: by reason, Infirmity does accompany all the faculties of
man's soul, we neither understand rightly what is truth, nor (having been
deceived through the strength of some weak affections) are easily persuaded to
confess our error* for Truth and Virtue, by creation, being man's scope, that
which he wants ability to attain, yet therein he is not easily persuaded
to acknowledge that he does fail. For, that which was at first his duty,
cannot but be his desire still; shame driving him to make excuses, which may
cause him in the opinions of some men (though not to be) yet to seem
righteous. From hence have proceeded defenses, and Apologies, both tending to
this end, to show that we desire approbation in all we do; or that our
error (wherein we fail) might be thought less. This account, as we strive
to render unto all that either see faults, or surmise folly in the actions
committed by us, so especially to those, to whom we owe most duty, both
because such (discerning our follies) must prize us at a lower rate; and their
examples are usually the Rules of all others judgments. The ground of this
second corruption worse then the first, is only an Inordinate se^e Love; a sin,
as ever near in affinity to man's nature, so especially foretold to be (in a
manner) peculiar to these last times: 2. Tim. 3.1.2 3.^.5.
Wherein men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
cursed speakers, disobed^^t to Parents, unthankful, unholy, many other falts do
acc^^pany these, but the Apostles conclusion is, that they have a show of
godliness, but have denied the power thereof; of whom he gives this caveat, turn
away from such. But S. Austin, a man far beyond all that ever were before him,
or s^al (in all l^kelihood) follow after him, both for humane and divine
learning (those being excepted that were inspired) gained more honor unto
himself, and gave a better example unto the Church, in that small work of his
Recantations, then in all the rest of those admirable monuments that he left
behind him. Nihil est facilius quam non solum se dicere, sc^ etiam opinari
veru^ inuen^sse de vtil. credendi. Cap. 1. Animaduertiba^ plus in reselle^dis
aliis disert^s and copios^s esse qua^ in suis probandis sirmos et certos manner.
He knew well there was nothing more easy then not only to say, but to
think that they have found the truth. The strongest external motion which
caused him to forsake the Manichies, was that he perceived them to be more
cunning and eloquent to confute others, then sound or certain to defend their
own. If this moderation could in humility have possessed some (otherwise
profitable Instruments in this Church) then should neither their second excuses
have been worse then their first faults, nor our labor in answering have
been required at this time. To subscribe unto the orders of the Church of
England, and not long after to refuse (as a thing unlawful) to subscribe unto
the same orders, must imply (unless it be well excused) vnhonesty,
Inconstancy, or both; seeing it is not like the cup in the sack of BENJAMIN,
which IVDAH confesses a fault; their difference being this; that, in the one,
the fact was not done by him that was thought guilty, and confessed by him
that was not: and in the other, certainly done by him that cannot but confess
the fact, and yet excused to be no fault; so that the sum of this whole
defense, is; Whether a man subscribing to the orders and constitutions of the
Church of England four times, may afterward have reasons to deny a
subscription or obedience unto them. In all reason, it must require some
sufficient disjunction, that contradictories should both be, and both be
warranted to be lawful. Let us then hear him speak for himself.

APOLOGY.
But if it may appear that the compass of our Churches Intention (to which my
former subscription made reference) be either varied by some degrees toward the
Antartique, or newly discovered to be other then I conceived it, I may be
censured for former blindness, in not seeing, but not of falshoode, then, o^
now.

ANSWER.
IF it may appear, the Intention of the Church ever since the beginning of our
late Majesty's Reign, of most blessed and happy memory, even until this
present, to have been both for the Doctrine and ceremonies all one, and in
both as near as was possible proportioned to the state of both, in the days
of King Edward the sixth: it must needs be in all reason some uncharitable
collection, to pretend a difference, where there is none; or some sudden
alteration either in judgment or affection, to do and to deny the same
things, where there is no difference: nay, it must needs be an inexcusable
indiscretion to lay the fault of our own lightness upon the variation or
declination of our doctrine, and ceremonies, from that they were; as if we meant
either to conceal unthankfully the greatest benefit from God bestowed upon
this land (namely the zealous continuance under a new Prince of the old
ancient, and true Religion amongst us) or to lay an Imputation of some
declining upon his government, whose princely care zealously endeavored, that
there might be none. Nay, who (we may truly say, neither can we conceal it
without great ingratitude) has labored more to rectifye the Church from the
supposed blemishes, wherewith she was thought stained, and to give a more full
satisfaction by conference to the most zealous, and the best learned of the
adverse part, then any Prince in any Kingdom or age ever did before him; and
therefore recall that error which is the foundation of your defense following,
and say not, that the intention of the Church is either varied by some degrees
toward the Antartique, Or newly discovered to be other then you conceived
it, unless you confess your conceit to have been far otherwise then was
fit for one of your calling or judgment: fear not ingeniously to confess,
that the intention of the Church in urging these Ceremonies is, and has been
ever the same: And that your self have approved that which now you are afraid
upon some reasons, which to you in particular might seem good: It must be a
great fault rather to make the whole Church unconstant, then one man.

APOLOGY.
MY most humble suite unto your gracious Majesty, is, even in the bowels of
JESUS CHRIST, that you would vouchsafe to read a rude and long (but plain and
upright) narration of my proceedings past, and present, and motives to both,
which having too suddenly prepared to give up with my ministry and living
into the hands of my ordinary, and not having time to cast into another
moulde or fayrer hand, I make bold upon my knees to present (as my account)
unto your sacred Majesty.

ANSWER.
THat Princely Majesty which governs these kingdoms, has most comfortably
to us that now live, and most incredibly to those that shall live hereafter,
accepted, perused, and (if there were cause) allowed the several petitions of
those that any way desired relief from him: and I doubt not, but he has
perused this defense, which his Gracious clemency would have in his accustomed
manner both excused and pardoned for the length, rudeness, or the not being
cast into a fayrer mould (as you term it) had not both the fountain (from
whence it came) been thought to be worse troubled then the hand that wrote it,
and the unquiet example, dangerous now in the settling of the Churches
everlasting peace. It must needs be a fault (as Saint Austin says) To regard
whom you serve, Mayor enim causa criminis est videre cui seruias and contemnere
cui deheds seruitutem. Aust. de Alt. reat. Eccl. and Sinag.
and to contemn him to whom your service is due. Peradventure in the one you
respect some lesser circumstances, which time may inform you are not of that
nature as you think: but in the other you apparently decline even from that
obedience which is due, the first being no virtue, and the latter an
intolerable sin. But I would willingly excuse all with as much charity as
the cause will suffer, seeing as Saint Austin speaks: Si mihi per alios ve
stro^ ^oncederetur seismaticos voilibe^li^s quam hivetic^s dicerem. cout. Cres.
lib. 2. cap. 7.
If your fellows would give me leave, I would more willingly call you
Scismatikes then Heretics. So doubtless, if the indirect proceedings of a
number in this cause, had not manifestly discovered some other sinister ends,
then are pretended by you, it might be thought a weak Conscience, and strong
Zeal in some one, which now doubtless will be judged an intolerable,
ambitious, disobedient, Haecomnia sicut leguntur, praedicta, ita cern^^tur,
impleta, Aust. Epist. 3. voles.
and insufferable fellow of a great number: and surely all these things as
Saint Austin speaks in another case, as they are read, foretold, so now, they
are seen, fulfilled.

APOLOGY.
IF suspicion grow that I have studied better defenses of the Book to justify
my former subscription, then I saw before hand: I can clear that by many
witnesses; If on the contrary, that I now seek quarrels against it
(causelessly). I call God to witness that I mean it not, my reasons following,
that I do it not: and to say truth, upon what reason could I do it? Is it a
pleasure to be in the disgrace of the time, especially of your Majesty, whose
favors I do esteem as your person next unto God?

ANSWER.
IN the proportionable proceedings that reason makes, it were fit first to
study what we do defend, and after, if need be, better to study to make our
defenses better; that you have not followed this course, need not to be
cleared by many witnesses, seeing it appears that you could not have wanted
better defenses, if you had been willing; Seneat. Sapientia est semper idem
velle.

N^n potest idem placere nisi rectu^.


and being not willing, you have taken exceptions unto that which you should
defend. But the moral wiseman tells us, that true wisdom is ever to will
the same: for doubtless nothing can ever please but that which is right. But
experience proves that when a feruency (as they call it) of zeal has thrown
man headlong into dangerous oppositions against the Church, they are usually
more obstinate in that error (oftentimes upon no other ground, but only to
seem constant) whereas imbrasing a truth, and subscribing unto it either upon
coffeehouse, vanity, inconstancy, or the ordinary use and custom of man's
life, Variatur quotidi^ iudicium, and in contrarium vertitur, ac plerisque
agitur vita per vsum. deneca.

Bonus Circuitus est, si Iustit^^ quaerit, prudentia inuenit, fortitudo
veridicat, temperantia possidit, vt sit iusticia in asfectu, prude^tia in
intellectu: fortitudo in effectu, Temperantia in vsu.

Ber. de conside. No man can do evil with a good conscience. Hooker.


suddenly they slide and fall from the opinions which they held before: mortal
judgments even in the best varying daily, and man's life for the most part
being ruled by custom. But Saint Bernard gives a good direction, In this case
the path is straight, if Justice seek it, wisdom find it, courage maintain
it, and Temperance possess it: that so there may be uprightness in the
affection, wisdom in the understanding, fortitude in effect, Temperance in
use. For although as the same father says, a good intention cannot excuse an
evil fact, yet an evil intention is sufficient to condemn a fact otherwise
good. Neither will it be much available to search out with what intention
things are done, which manifestly appear to be evil, in that they are done:
And doubtless voluntarily to seek quarrels against that which before under
our hands we have approved, is not so much an instabilitie of mind (the
common infirmity of mankind) as a malicious folly bringing little advantage
unto those that do it, but I will not suspect so uncharitably of you, whose
wisdom and conscience I hope to be much better, then, that without great
reason you would incur the disgrace of so happy a time, or procure the
displeasure of so good a Prince; which being considered, doubtless the reasons
are great, that have made you adventure for to hazard both. And I am fully
persuaded that few men (not altogether careless of the Churches peace) would
so easily debar themselves from the manifold happiness of these times, or
so usually run into the Just deserved displeasure of the best King, and most
religious that ever this Island had, if very great, very weighty, very
apparent, and unanswerable reasons did not move them to it.

APOLOGY.
IS it nothing to loose all my living? to behold the daily misery of a wife
and ten dear children, besides the feeling of my own? If this were nothing,
it will be something to loose the life of my life, the use of my poor
ministry, and to see the stocks (at least for a time) either without
shepheardes, or under such as cannot suddenly know how to handle the sheep:
would God your Majesty would believe of us, that the only fear of Gods
displeasure hazard us upon your Majesty's, whom if we did not fear less then
God, neither should we long fear so much as we ought.

ANSWER.
IT seems you have well considered the manifold dangers which are like to
follow, but not so carefully endeavored that you may avoid them, the miseries
of a wife and ten children (which doubtless in you is intolerable cruelty
not to pity) are amongst the greatest calamities, and the heauiest of this
life, and not to provide for them when we can, 1. Tim. 5.8.
is to deny the faith, and to be worse then Infidels. What is it then to pull
this misery upon them? Here unto add that which is ( as you call it) the
life of your life, the use of your poor ministry to the hazard of your
^^^cke: must it not be some grievous transgression, a sin like the sin of
wi^chcraft that shall make you to adventure all this? let me tell you (which
peradventure in particular your own experience has not found) a number have
little esteemed either of the loss of living, of the misery of wise and
children, of their separation from their ^lockes: First, because an opinion of
persecution for their zeal to reformation of the superstitions of the Church,
has found such liberal contributions from the hands of many, that they have
made often advantage of this loss, and returned richer from imprisonments,
then when they were at liberty, nay, some have affected with all diligence
their own persecution (as they call it) in this kind, as the shortest and
easiest way to purchase, and to become rich; as for their flocks if their
zeal had been such as they pretend to the salvation of their souls, to how
many things (not vnreconcylably evil) would they have yielded, rather then
have brought them to so great a danger? yet give me leave without offense to
tell you that the happiness of your flocks depend not ever upon such
teachers, neither will the loss altogether be so great as they peradventure
imagine, but howsoever, undoubtedly the Church has little reason to value their
labors at any great price, who have not yet learned to be obedient to her
voice. But as the sore of disobedience grows to an ulcer out of the swelling
of pride, as HVGO notes, so there are three means (says he) only, left for
the cure of it, plaster, ointment, launcing: the first he calls example,
the second exhortation, the third, correction. When the two first fail, then
the last must be used. It may be thought (perhaps) severity to practice so
sharp censures upon the ministers of the Church, who do all that they do
upon a good ground, but what if no other means will serve to cure the great
swelling of this Church? have not playsters, oyntmentes, milder medicines been
practiced? And yet are not the swellings as great still? The knife only
remaynes to lance them. I exhort not to cruelty, but defend those who are
more grieved to punish with deprivation, and such like, then those that suffer
it: and I am heartily sorry that some (otherwise) men virtuous, and profitable
to the Church, should fall into these opinions with so strong an opposition,
as if God and the King did command two contrary things, I confess my self
the vnablest of many thousands in this Church to undertake the defense of the
proceedings of so virtuous and wise a prince, of so grave and so learned a
Clergy (none of all which I protest, would I flatter in a known error, to
gain the greatest reputation upon Earth:) yet when I see that in these
conflictes they make God and the King contrary; as if the fear of Gods
displeasure did hazard them upon his Majesty's: I cannot but tell them, that
their ^eale does want knowledge; and that obedience is better then the
sacrifice of fools.

APOLOGY.
IT may be, we are misled in opinion: (thanked be God, it is not heresy) but,
he that once will go against the unknown error of his Conscience, will at
last have no conscience to go against known error. The Conscience foiled, is
like a distemperate Lock, that no Key will open.

ANSWER.
IF you had opinion that you were misled, though it were in opinion and not
heresy; yet wisdom and Religion ought both to move you to hasten to that
truth, from whence, whilst you differ, although your doctrine be all one with
the Church of England, yet neither can you live with that joy in your own
soul, whilst you are at variance (though for Ceremonies) with those that do
rule over you; neither can the Church enjoy so good use of your labors, whilst
you are not careful to preserve the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
Ephe. 4.3.
False opinions concerning the government of the Church, doubtless are not
equal, yea, dangerous to those Heresies that are against the Faith; yet seeing
the least error cannot be maintained, but by broaching new, wisdom will
counsel us to hasten in humility to rest and repose our selves in the
judgment of the Church. But where the conscience either thinks it unlawful
(out of her own knowledge so supposed) or fears it not to be lawful, out
of the timorous care arising from her own weakness) there we can easily be
content to expect them with much patience, if their humility will give them
leave to learn; and rather to do what they ought not, until they be
resolved, then to do what they should, being not resolved. Because (as you
say) He that once will go against the unknown error of his Conscience, will
at last have no Conscience to go against known error. But, seeing al men
understand not aright what that is which they allege for themselves, In the
modest examination. Cap. 7 page 84.
when they say, the^r Conscience: we are willing to set down what we have
elsewhere noted, that the simplest may not be deceived with pretense of
Conscience.

There is naturally ingraffed in the heart of man that light of Nature, which
can never be put out, that tells him, that no evil is to be done. Now,
Reason, according to the knowledge that it has (which in some is more, and in
some less) delivers his Judgment of particulers, Censcientiae est
applicatio notitiae nostrae ad actum particularem Aquinus 22. did. ^4. Art. 4.
that they are good or evil; from whence the conclusion follows, they are to
be done being good, and not to be done being evil, and this is our
Conscience, which is nothing else, but an application of our knowledge to a
particular Act. This application is made in a threefold manner, as, 1 First, to
consider whether such a thing be done or not done, and surely in this, our
Consciences can best tell the actions and intention of those things, Eccl.
7.23 24.
which are done by us. Give not thy heart (says SOLOMON) to all the words
that men speak, least thou do hear thy servant cursing thee, for oftentimes
thy heart knows that thou likewise have cursed others. 2 The second
Application is, when we Judge of the fact which is done, whether it be well
or evil, the measure of our knowledge in this, making us mistake, as evil for
good: so that, sometimes to be evil, which indeed is good. 3 The third is,
that this or that is to be done, or to be left undone. Conscientia. 1.
Testis. 2. A^^ulator. 3. Vinctulum.




In this first, it is a witness which will not lie: In the second, it may
accuse, but not absolutely excuse: In the last, it may bind (though it want
strength) in this respect only, that we are weak. For those new cords (and
such are new opinions) which were not able to hold SAMPSON, Iud. 16.9.
may easily hold him fast, that is by many degrees weaker then SAMPSON was.
The first of these respects the time past; the second, the time present; the
third, for the well or evil doing, the having or suffering, the joy or torment
that is to come. As, if he that had made time the preciousest circumstance of
all our actions, had set our Conscience, as the severe and diligent watchman of
all our times.

Now, having set down the use of conscience, the next consideration is of the
errors of it. These are two, a false Assumption, and a false application. In
the first, we take those things to be good and true, which indeed, directly
are evil and false, (an error peradventure, which may appear hereafter to
have misled you in this point:) so those that put the Apostles to death, did
think in that action, that they pleased God: for the time was come that our
Savior foretold; Whosoever kills you, Job. 16.2.
will think that he does God service. In the second, a false application
arising out of a true ground: because he hears that God is to be loved
above all things, therefore he thinks it unlawful to love any thing but God:
these err not alike, but the error of Conscience does infect both. Neither
ought a Conscience that thus erreth, to bynd, seeing the force and strength of
Conscience is not built upon himself, but upon some Precept, (seeming so to it
self) bring no good reason, but either because it is commanded, or else
forbidden. Against which, contrarily either to do or to maintain, is to foil
(as you say) the Conscience, and to make it like a distempered lock, that no
key will open. But, let us hear your self lay down the greeuance, whereat
your Conscience does either truly repine, or in weakness stumble.

APOLOGY.
IF the matters be looked on which be imposed (I now speak of the Ceremonies)
they seem light, but if their deriuation from Antichrist, they are hateful;
if the simple use of them be considered, they are shadows, but if the late
abuse, which is hardly severed from the things, they are Giants. If their
nature be weighed, they are indifferent, but if their use, not so; while the
Papists insult, the zealous mourn, and both stumble at them, and both they
that like, and they that like them not, cast us (that have not used them) out
of their Consciences, as men ready to say Mass, rather then to loose our
livings, and the very boys and girls laugh at our most grave and reverend
Ministers, whom before they looked on with fear.

ANSWER.
THat which troubles your Conscience, seems to be the Ceremonies of this
Church; Secundae intentiones.
in show, light, but such as have their original from Antichrist; shadows,
but Giants; in nature indifferent, but in use not so. We account Ceremonies in
religion, if they be harmless, and tend to edification (such as are the
Ceremonies of our Church) the second Intentions of the Law, Intermediate
means, not to be despised of a better and more religious service: for as to
think that Ceremonies (without true and inward holiness) could cleanse from
sins, were to err; and to be lewish and superstitious, so to account them
of no use, were to be merely profane. For both the Judicial and the
Ceremonial Law, being in a sort Moral (as the scholemen speak) the one in
an order to our neighbors, the other, in an order to God; these have no other
allowance in Gods worship, but as they are virtuous furtherances of his honor.
In the Ceremonies of the old Law, there were three things to be observed.
First, that they were all ordained for the expressing of the inward and moral
worship, to serve to true holiness, Faith, Hope* and Charity, without which,
all the rest were rejected (even as a burden) by him that commanded them;
saying, I will have mercy, but not sacrifice. Secondly, if Ceremonies be
contrary to true holiness, 1. Sam. 15.22.
they were to be omitted (for their end was to further devotion and not to
hinder it). In this respect they were dispensable, when either by the place or
time, two violent circumstances of all our actions or for some Impediment they
could not well be used, this made, that even Circumcision was omitted for those
who were born in the desert; Ios. 5.
as being unfit to move Immediately after that wound, and being uncertain to
rest, seeing they must follow the fire and the cloud when they moved. Thus in
persecution we are content rather to exercise Religion without Ceremonies,
then to want it; which in peace to neglect or contemn, must needs be a great
offense. Those times being fittest to serve GOD with greater reverence and
more holy solemnities which are compassed about with greater rest, and more
happy blessings. Lastly, when Ceremonies are requisite to testify our faith
(as doubtless they are then when they are either upon malice or through
misunderstanding oppugned) we may not in conscience remit any part of them:
for the refusing of such can be no small sin, where the using is blessed with
the crown of Martyrdom. 1. Machab. 6.7,
Now, if you can show that those which for long time have been retained in
our Church (for we have not invented new, but reserved the old, used in the
Church before ROME was Idolatrous) are heavy burdens, derived from Antichrist,
Hateful Giants, not Indifferent, but unlawful in use, Scandals, and such like
(which we are sure neither you, nor the leardnedst in that cause, are able to
prove) then we shall think you have much reason to refuse them, in regard of
Conscience. All the actions of man are of three sorts; good, evil, and
indifferent. If our Conscience say, that is to be done which is naturally
good, it is no error: Eadem ratione prohibentur mala, qua precipiuntur bona.
If it deny that to be done which is evil, it is no error: For by the same
reason evil is forbidden, which commands good; but on the contrary, if it
say that to be done which is naturally evil, or not to be done, which is
good, it is doubtless a conscience which does err in both, likewise in
indifferent things (such as you say these are, if their nature be waighed, but
they are necessary if the lawful commandment be added) to make, I say, such
absolutely necessary, where authority has not determined, is doubtless a
Conscience that does much err. For every will that disagreeth from reason,
Romans 14.
either true or false, directly sins: for, whatsoever is not of Faith is
sin; and yet every thing which is done by the will giving assent to reason is
not void of Sin; because that Ignorance, which is a fault, cannot possiblye
make the action to be without fault.

Now, in things which naturally are indifferent (as these are) the Precept of
the superior does bind more then the Conscience of the inferior can; Aquinus
in disp. de ver. quest. 17. Art. 5.
for the subject has the Commandment of his lawful superior, whether King
or Bishop for his warrant; and in things of this nature, his duty is not to
examine, but only to perform what he sees commanded. Wherein we doubt
not, but the Consideration is and will be great of those, who are in
authority, what they do command. The conscience that does err (though it
bynd until it be reformed) ought notwithstanding to be reformed, because
either Ignorance, necligence, pride, Inordinat affection, fayntnes,
perplexity, or self love are the corrupt and original causes of the errors of
it; so that, if none of these have ouerruled you (as I dare not condemn
another man's servant): but that knowledge with due consideration, has directed
you in that ye did, there is great reason to hearken to your excuse, and to
regard you and others with much attention, whilst with reverence and humility,
you allege your Conscience. In the mean time, for remedy against these
errors, let them not disdain the Counsel which wisemen have found to be most
safe. If it be of ignorance, to say with IEHOSOPHAT; We know not what to
do, but our eyes are toward thee. 2. Chro. 20*12.
If of negligence, to come without partiality or prejudice, as NICHODEMVS to
CHRIST, Ioh. 3.
to those that for knowledge are fit to teach us. If of Pride, to submit our
selves one to another, and especially to those that have more learning, and do
rule over us. ^. Chr. 10.18.
For he that praises himself, is not allowed, but he whom the Lord
praises. A singularity in this kind has been the original of most heresies
in all ages, and not the least occasion of the troubles of these times: if from
Inordinate affection, making that lawful which we have a mind to do, we
must hearken to Judgment, and refuse our affections in this ^ase: Perit omne
Iudicium, cum res transit in affectum. Senec.
for judgment turned into affection, does all perish: If from faintness then
only to be scrupulous and fearful, when we have cause, least we think it
lawful, because we strain a g^at to swallow a Camel. If of perplexity,
when a man is closed as it were betwixt two sins, where he is not able
(though willing) to avoid both, that which will not make either to be lawful
will make one of them directly a less sin; If of humility (an error sure
of least danger), we wish them only to take heed of too much fear, for those
external lets (as that men cast us out of their conscience for using these
things, supposing we are as ready when time serves to say Mass) we esteem
not the vanity of such men's conjectures, whose proper guiltines is the
strongest motive to think and to speak evil. Neither do we desire a place
in their conscience, who cannot make a difference betwixt using of these, and
saying of Mass, which things though either they cannot or list not to
distinguish, yet we do, last of all, that boys and girls laugh at those for
the using of these things whom before they looked on with fear: It ought no
more to be any motive to a religious and grave man, then when Michol saw David
daunsing before the Arc, 2. Sam. 6.16. verse. 20.
and despised him in her heart, saying in derision, O how glorious was the King
of Israel this day, Or vain man.
which was uncovered to day in the eyes of the maidens of his servants, as a
fool uncovers himself. But rather confidently let us answer to Atheists,
profane and irreligious persons, children and ignorant people as he did. It
was before the Lord which chose me rather then thy father and all his house,
and commanded me to be ruler over the people of the Lord, even over Israel,
and therefore will I play before the Lord: and will yet be more vile then thus,
and will be low in my own sight, and of the very same maid servants which
thou have spoken off shall I be had in honor: So I doubt not but even those
who by reason of the discontinued use of these things, either sport themselves
at us, or think us ready to intertaine popery in the highest measure, shall
learn by these ornaments to be more religious, and in short time (even of
them) the ministers shall be had in far greater honor.

APOLOGY.
LEt the Kings Majesty please to remember how pardonably good men ^^ffer in
lighter things, and that our opinion is neither new nor vncountenanced from as
learned men as this age has known, nor so concluded up in the ministers
breasts as that the quenching of them, and the cause will prove one work. And
i^ your Majesty measure our desires and spirits by the scantling which you
took of some in Scotland, God and time will surely clear us, and it will
appear that we affect not any popularity or parity in the Church of God, nor
stand upon factions and partakings, and that a little of Abraham's indulgence to
his inferior would have drawn a peace more speedy and safe then can be
enforced. Your excellent Majesty is persuaded first to draw all into
conformity, and then set upon popery with a complete army.

ANSWER.
IF the long and eager contentions of this Church had all proceeded from a
pardonable difference in lighter things, the church of England might easelye
have hoped for a peace, but had little cause to have commended their Zeal, who
were willing so vehemently to dissent upon small occasions, there is little hope
that we should possess any great portion of inheritance in Gods church who
have not learned in patience to possess our own souls. In Math. 5.
Saint Chrysostom makes certain steps of this virtue (a virtue that none want
which possess charity) for charity is patient, it suffers long, it is not
puffed up, it suffers all things, It believes all things, 1. Cor. 13.4.
it hops all things, it indureth all things, the first step is not to offer
wrong, the second, not to revenge it upon our equals; the third, not to return
the like, but to be quiet: the fourth, to ascribe the desert of what we suffer
to our selves: the fifth, to yield our selves to him that does evil: the sixth,
not to hate him: the seventh to love him: the eight, to do good to him: the
last, to pray for him. Thus whatsoever we suffer, shall be a medicine, not a
punishment. But have you dealt thus? nay have you not complained of persecution,
whilst men in authority have, with grief of heart, but executed those laws
which were made for the Churches peace? have you not sought boastingly to
countenance your opinions, by as learned men (in your judgment) as this age
has known? Medicina no^ poena. Aust.
Let it not be a blemish to the Honorable memory of M. Calvin, M. Beza, Pet.
Martyr or any other of that time and place, that they favored the discipline
that you hold, who doubtless, if they had lived in this Kingdom, and in these
times, would have thought otherwise. For the ind^lgence of Abraham to his
inferior, which you desire, it is no example that superiors must ever yield:
yet surely, if the governors of our Church, save in these, the moderation of
Lot, they would say with all meeknes and love, which they have said often, but
with small Let there be no strife between you and us, neither between your
heardmen and our heardmen, Genesis 13.8.
for we are brethren.

And for the difference which you desire should be made betwixt you and some of
Scotland, I doubt not but his excellent Majesty, who in this (as an Angel of
God) is able to discern the beginnings, the proceedings, and the end of these
fancies, which though they be not alike violent in all, yet they ever serve to
this end that uniformity and order may cease, and private singularities
(dangerous in Gods service) may take place, and all to this end fondly to
please them, whose intentions are unhallowed, and their desires endless; for
if an ouerflowing mercy (which were nothing else but a merciless cruelty)
would frame it self to yield unto all things that you all desire, would you
not after this yet desire more? Doubtless the inconstancy of these men (so
often varying both in Doctrine and Discipline, allowing what immediately they
mislike, subscribing to what they disprooue) has laid from the mouth of our
adversaries those blemishes upon this Church, as if uncertainty and error were
the only supporters of our truth, whereas if severity of laws had wrought a
general uniformity in this Church, might we not with joint hands have
encountered our adversaries with a complete army: who in the mean time
looking with pleasure upon the violence of some amongst us, are ready to
afford coals and breath unto that fire, wherein without careful providence
our Church of necessity must needs perish.

APOLOGY.
IT is a probable course, but if it be suggested to your Majesty out of any
man's heart but your own, let me beseech you to consider if it may not be at
least in sequel like the advice of Hushay to Absolon, which first overthrowing
the good counsel of Achitophell did afterward overthrow the very intentions
which it seemed to support.

ANSWER.
IT seems things suggested to Princes from others, though the same be not the
same, as when they come from themselves, the usual evil custom of these times
is for all men to sit in counsel upon the actions of Princes: thus do we
direct their hands, their ears, their tongues, and what we cannot out of our
weakness comprehend, that we interpret boldly and falsely according to our
own fancies: if first all means be used to procure a peace by a general
conformity amongst those, whom neither laws nor religion have made different,
and after that to proceed against those which more earnestly and dangerously
dissent from us, can it bear any interpretation of such evil? And if evil,
how can it be compared to the counsel of Hushay which doubtless was from God
to overthrow the dangerous and irreligious counsel that Achitophel gave? 2 Samuel
17,
there cannot be in my opinion a greater commendation to this advise, then that
it should be like the counsel of Hushay, whom God stirred up to releive
David, let others affect unto themselves the Commendation and end that
Achitophell had, but God grant unto the King now and ever, both for the Church
and Commonweal, 2, Sam. 17.14.
such as Hushay was. For dowbtlesse the Counsel of Hushay the Archite, is
better then the Counsel of Achitophell.

APOLOGY.
Give me leave once to swear unto your Majesty by the God of Gods, that never
any thing in my memory more grieved the subjects, then the present course
against the Ministers: nothing (in my opinion) would gratify them more then
the contrary, which (if God please) I could wish derived immediately from your
noble breast, that your highness might receive this sole honor and thanks for
such a favor and refresh the affections of your most loving and loyal
subjects.

ANSWER.
I do easily think that it may be far otherwise then you swear, if you
mean by Subjects, either the most, or the wisest, or the most Religious in
this Land. Who undoubtedly have received far greater grief at the death of
our late Sovereign, when mercy looking upon the misery of this Land prevented
our gracious King with the blessings of goodness, and set a crown of pure
gold upon his head, Psa. 21.3.
so that the Nations that are round about us, may say, as Hyram when he heard
the words of Solomon; Blessed be the Lord this day, which has given unto DAVID
a wise Son over this mighty people; 1. King. 5.7.
unto Queen ELIZABETH an heir of her own house and lineage full of religion,
wisdom and understanding. As also their just sorrow for that mourning and
desolation through all our Kingdom, when the most part was stricken with a
plague, like the tenth plague of Egypt, when there were few houses, wherein
there were not some dead. When the mutual comfort of friends was denied, the
hearing of Gods word was as much as the hazard of man's life, these surely were
greater griefs in your memory then that for which you swear: but besides, I
see not how it can come within the compass of your knowledge, that never any
thing more grieved the Subjects, then the present course against the
Ministers. The relief whereof, would be so far from gratifying any that
were wise, virtuous, or experienced in the troubles of these times (unless
some sewe engaged in the same tempest) as that it would threaten danger to the
Prince, profaneness to the Land, Barbarism to learning, confusion to all
stares, and (without an infinite mercy) utter ruin and desolation both to the
Church and the commonwealth. We take not upon us to advise his excellent
Majesty, but power out our prayers, that al blessings, by his love to the
Church may in his days be powered upon his childrens children, and that peace
may be upon Israel.

APOLOGY.
WHat can I say more? the Lord God, the God that has made your Majesty so
great a King, inspire your heart with his own Counsel in these things, and
give us grace and wisdom to obey and suffer, as we ought.

ANSWER.
TO this with the plentiful addition of all graces, the whole Church of great
Britain lying prostrate at his Majesty's feet does say, Amen. Amen.

APOLOGY.
ANd for my self if your Majesty will pardon this boldness, and grant me to live
yet under your protection, though in a private life, and free me in your
thoughts from the blot of dishonestie, I shall promise in the word of a
Christian by all means to study the peace of the Church, and to pour out my
soul in daily prayers for your excellent Majesty, and all your blessed
posterity, that God may continue these kingdoms under your Highness, and
yours till Christ shall come and end all in one.

Your Majesty's Loyal and humble vassal, John Burges.

ANSWER.
IF this resolution continue, you need not doubt but to find mercy, but
wisdom would consult whether it be lawful first to disobey, and then to
forsake your calling, and live a private life: it were lamentable that the
state of our Church were such, as that men to avoid the severity of her
superstitious laws had no other safety for their conscience, but to forsake
their functions, we know better of her, and we will hope better things of you,
then you should think or write thus.

CERTAIN REASONS, BY WAY OF AN Apology, delivered to the Right Reverend
Father in God, the Lord Bishop of LINCOLN, by JOHN BVRGES. Wherein he
labors to prove, that having heretofore subscribed four times, and now
refusing to subscribe (as a thing unlawful) that he has (notwithstanding)
done lawfully in both.
The Preface of the APOLOGY.
RIGHT Reverend Father in God, according to my promise made unto your
Lordshippe, at our conuention, before you on the third of October, and since by
Letters, I now present unto you my determinate answer, and therein my refusal
of such subscription, as your Lordshippe and the late Canons do require. And
because it will seem strange that I should now stick at subscription; who have
already four times subscribed, I crave leave to perform unto your Lordshipe a
true and sincere report of what I have yielded unto, as of what I now refuse,
and the reasons of both. And because there go many rumors and some copies, and
both (perhaps) false of my late subscriptions. The now most reverend L.
Archbishopp his grace of Canterberrie.
I pray leave to set down those very words, which acquired (as from the King)
I sent by master Deane of the Ch^ppell unto his excellent Majesty; and the
report of that which I afterward performed before my Lord of London.

ANSWER.
THere is little hope in the sequel of this Apology to find that submission
and humility, which were requisite in the Ministers of Christ, when one of
inferior place dare adventure to make a determinate answer of refusal to
subscribe, having notwithstanding before subscribed, and yet maintains that
he is lawfully warranted to do both; doubtless if it had but been the
obedience to a private bishop in his own Dyoces, ought we not rather to have
yielded the^ either to have incurred the suspicion of contempt, or to have
hazarded by suspension, the use of our ministry? But when by your confession
it was that Subscription which his Lordship and the Canons did both require you
give a singular testimony of his Lordshippes Episcopal vigelancie, and
withal, run into suspicion of singular contempt, unless, your reasons being
examined, do prove good: for except the inferior Clergy be obedient to the
Bishop, and the Bishops to the Metropolitan, Tot essent scisma. ta quot
sacerdotes. Hiero. contr. Lucif.
there would be (says S. Hierome) as many Scismes as Priests.

And one of the most modest and most learned that seems to favor the cause
of discipline makes it a principal point of the ecclesiastical government;
that the Inferior clergy in things honest be obedient to the Bishop, Vt
peculiarem promitterent obedientiam, in rebus honestis suo Episcopa et Episcopi
Metrapolitano.

Zach. de Relig. Cap. 25. Sect. 38. Canon. 140.


and the Bishop to the metropolitan, so that you not only refusing obedience
in this unto the Bishopp but violating those canons whereunto in there
intendiment you gave consent, and which doubtless being so lawfully authorized
was the whole church of England by representation, you had need to afford good
reasons of this refusal or else to account this refusal a great sin, which the
rather I doubt not but your wisdom will be careful to avoyde as being not
only to render an account of your own obedience but to do it being required
by so humble, so learned, so virtuous a King, who in the midst of the greatest
affairs of his realm vouchsafes in his usual and extraordinarye love to his
clergy, to respect you and to require your answer by their message who if
they had spoken in their own names, deserved very much to have been reverenced
by you.

APOLOGY.
MY Answer to his Majesty's demands, touching the discipline, Ceremonies, and
Subscription. I do think and believe, touching the government of the Church
by Bishops, as with us in England, or by ruling Elders, as in other Churches of
God, that neither of them was prescribed by the Apostles of Christ; neither of
them is repugnant to the word of God, but may well and profitably be used, if
more fault be not in the persons, then in the callings themselves.

2 Secondly, I do hold and am persuaded of the Cross and Surplesse, I prayed
the Deane to Interpret my self for one of those unto his Majesty.
that as our Church uses them, they be not unlawful, though in some men and
places, so inexpedient, as that (I think) no man's ministry likely to do so
much good, as some men's sudden use of them might do hurt.

3 Thirdly, for the subscription to the Articles of 62. as the Law requires
it, and to his Majesty's Supremacy, I approve it without any exception or
qualification. And touching the third Article, about the book of Common
Prayer, and book of Ordination, do hold, that howsoever they have some
things in them, which cannot simply be allowed, as false translations, etc.
Yet, considered in the purpose, and intention of the Church of England, and
reduced to the propositions it publicly professes, they contain nothing
contrary to the word of God, and in witness that this is my unfeigned
Judgment in the premises, I have set to my name this second of July 1604. and
will be always ready to profess at his Majesty's command.

ANSWER.
I doubt not, but you have well examined what you have here set down, and wise
men in cases of this moment, deal not like unwise builders, but cast their
account before hand. We hear your opinion, which it pleases you to call your
unfeigned Judgment, my unfeigned Judgment.
concerning Discipline, Ceremonies; and Subscription, matters oftentimes
handled before, as be also the most things set down by you, wherein we must
crave pardon, if we allege our own words, even in that which we have been
occasioned to answer in another Treatise; Post malam segetem serendum est,
soepe quicquid perierat Infoelicis solisterelitate, vnius anni restituit
vbertas. Senec.
for wisdom tells us that it is necessary to sow again after an evil
harvest, seeing oftentimes that which perishes by the barrennes of some
badground, is abundantly restored in the fertility of some one year that
follows. In your first, concerning the government of the Church (which you
call discipline) neither is it undetermined what was prescribed by the Apostles
of Christ, nor what succession of Bishops was continued in all Churches, even
from their time, so that it must needs seem strange, that the government by
Elders or by Bishops should in your opinion, be a thing so indifferent, as
that neither being prescribed by the Apostles of Christ, neither of them
repugnant to the word of God, may well and profitably be both used. It seems
strange to my understanding, that after so many sharp conflictes for the
discipline of the Churh, after such bitter inuectiues against the authority of
Bishops; After so confident commendation of the government by Elders
maintained, as only warrantable and enjoined out of Gods word; fancies
wherewith ye have filled the Church for this fifty years, that you should now
confess neither to be commanded, neither to be repugnant to Gods word. What
meant the demonstration of discipline, and others, to endeavor to prove the
government by Elders not to be the invention of wise men, and not against the
word of God, but to be the express commandment (in every particular) of GOD
himself, accounting those to have no Church (this being as essential as either
the Word or Sacraments) where this is wanting: What meant the vehement
commendations of this discipline, in a book called the Humble Motion, Page
31.27.74.64.
that if this were established, God would bless our victuals and satisfy our
poor with bread, that he would cloth our Priests with health, and his Saints
should shout for joy, that it is best and surest for our state; that it would
cut off contentions and suites of Law; that it would norish learning; that then
there would be unity in the Church, that it would be strength and victory
and many other benefits like these. Why have they striuen so earnestly for it,
if it were not absolutely commanded in Gods word, Quod de scripturis sacris
authoritatem non habet eadem facilitate contemnitur qua probatur. Hier. in Mat.
26.
which seeing you now deny, give me leave to tell you, we will henceforth be
bold with Saint Hierom (seeing it wants this warrant) to reject it with the
same facility that it is alleged. And we hope (seeing it is not commanded in
the Scripture) that they will for ever now cease to poison the Church with such
opinions, or to cover the policy of their first teachers, with the unhallowed
contentions of all aftertimes. But though you have dealt so liberally with us
for the government of Elders, yet we dare not do so with you in the government
of Bishops. For, if Clement said true (whom Polidore alleges to that end)
that Peter in every Province appointed one Archbishop, whom all other
Bishops in the same Province should obey, if the name of Archbishop and
Bishop were not so unusual, that Volusianus was not afraid to say,
Volustanus wrote. Anno. 855.
that Dynosius Areopagita was by S. Paul made Archbishop of Athens; or
Erasmus to call Titus Archbishop of Creete, or Eusebius to give the authority
to John the Evangelist, Eusebius lib. 5. cap. 23.
who suruiuing the rest, brought this benefit unto the Church, that for
co^secrating of Bishops, and other uses, he was the Archbishop or Metropolitan
to the whole Church; for the Bishops (as Epiphanius reasons) begot fathers in
the Church, Haeres. 75.
but the Presbiters (only) begot sons. Bilson.
If this was the perpetual government of the Church (as that thrice learned and
most reverend Bishop has proved) even from the Apostles time, we dare not say
as you do, that it has but a tolerable alowance equal to Elders, and that
neither being repugnant, the Church may lawfully embrace either.

2 Concerning the second point, touching Ceremonies (you name only the Cross
and the Surp^ice) these you hold lawful; for so (I think) you mean, when you
say ( they be not unlawful) being used as our Church does, but yet
notwithstanding in some men and places so inexpedient, as that you think no
man's Ministry likely to do so much good as some men's sudden use of them might
do hurt. Consider (I pray you) the substance of these word^, the things are
lawful as our Church uses them. 1. Cor. 12. 1. Cor. 10.23.
What then? inexpedient, that is in respect of some circumstances not
convenient to be used* a discretion attending upon things indifferent by the
Apostles advice (all things are lawful, but all things are not expedient) even
then restraining the use, when it is like that the usage will do much hurt.
This hurt you set down to be, that no man's Ministry is likely to do so much
good, as some men's sudden use of them might do hurt. Is this your determinate
judgment of these things delivered under your hand unto the king? It is like
(nay, doubtless it is more then like) for it is sure (otherwise most lamentable
were the condition of this land) that the Ministry of some men shall be able to
save souls (for that Gospel which we preach, Romans 1.
is the power of god unto salvation) now, what hurt can you think of, equal
to this good, peradventure the destruction of souls, and do you think in
earnest, Ioh. 10.29.
that this scandal will be the destruction of men's souls? 2. Cor. 2.16.
Well, what are they? are they elect? then I am sure you will say they cannot
fall; for Christ says, In quantum possumus proximoru^ scandalum vitave debemus.

Si de veritate sca^dalum oritur, satius est vt illius scandal um nascitur,
quam veritas relinquatur. Hiero. in Math.


No man shall take them out of his hands, are they otherwise given over to a
reprobate sense? to such even the Gospel it self is the savor of death unto
death. I confess, we are to avoid scandal in what we may, but better it is,
that that should arise, then betray the truth, and (peradventure) by conformity
and obedience, your Ministry would receive those blessings which now it
wants.

But howsoever, seeing the number can neither be many, the most part of our
Land being better instructed under the long government of the most virtuous
Prince that ever England had, before it had her, nor the danger great, being
but the Scandal of such, who are not willing to seem weak, and therefore I
suppose, we need not be afraid to say contrary to that which you affirm:
that many men's Ministry is likely to do more good then yours, or any man's
sudden use of the Ceremonies can do hurt.

3 The third thing, whereunto you answered, was Subscription, and in this, to
some things without limitation, as to the Kings Supremacy, Anno 13. etc.
to others with, and in both, as the law requires. It has been the usual
evasion of a great number, to pretend an obedience to the law, in subscribing,
whilst (notwithstanding) they were not willing to subscribe, as the Law
required. Surely there can be little hope of peace in the outward government of
that Church, where the leaders of others are not willing or think it not
lawful, to be obedient, neither can there be any one act in the observation of
all wise men more avayleable, and in reason more likelye to procure this then
Subscription, which tyeth the tongue and hands from any way resisting those
lawful ordinances, that preserve peace, all other creatures observe that law
which their maker appointed for them, Psalm. 148.6.
for he has given them a law which shall not be broken: This being the
reproof of man (says Saint Ambrose) but most of all of us of the Clergy, In
Hexamer.
who being the children of the Church, nay, fathers in Christ to beget others,
are notwithstanding disobedient unto those laws which in great wisdom for
her own safety the Church has made. It is dangerous when we say: Surely we
will walk after our own imaginations, and do every man after the stubbernnes
of his wicked heart. Ier. 28.1.
But we find in you a better show of comformity then in many others, who
professing to subscribe to his Majesty's Supremacy without exception or
qualification, cannot in reason but yield obedience unto the laws which are
all of them authorized from his mouth, and for the censure of the communion
Book, notwithstanding you think something to be faulty in it, yet (we
desire you to remember it) considered in the intention of the Church of
England, and reduced to the propositions which it publicly professes,
Subscription being a kind of oath, I doubt whether private men have power to
make their own limitation.
it contains nothing contrary to the word of God. This then being your
approbation under your hand, do you not think it lawful to allow by
subscription what you think lawful? The truth of those things whereunto you
have been required to subscribe, has forced a confession of their
lawfulness, even from the mouths of her greatest adversaries, and yet for all
this, because they would be to others examples of disobedience, they have
refused to subscribe, to thrust others of less learning and greater moderation
into the like contempt. This being (as one notes) the principal unhappiness of
those men, Authoritatem habent senum, ^. tia pueroru^. S^nec. Ep. 4.
that they had the authority of the aged, and the faults of youth. Who being
in this (as they thought) to publish their virtue were supposed not without
cause to affect glory.

APOLOGY.
A Week after I was called before the Bishop of London, the Deane of the
Chapel being with him, and (after many sharp rebukes for my Sermon preached
before his Majesty) urged to subscribe to the three articles; we stood a time
in clearing some exceptions then taken: at last, I prayed leave to write down
the same limitation which I had written to his Majesty, and then read before
them. Which being denied as idle and needless to be expressed, because it was
always implied and understood, I (taking them both and God to witness that I
did subscribe in the same sense, and with the same limitations that I had
expressed in that sent unto his Majesty) did then subscribe. This done, I
pretested unto them that I had in the some manner, and with the same
protestation subscribed twice before, yet wished that my present subscription
might not be diuulged, but as I my self should open it, least I should be
thought to have done that at this time out of fear, and for desire of
inlargment (which God knew, I had done according to my judgment) and so become
less profitable in my calling, and less able to satisfy other men. The
bishop replied that the King must know it, otherwise for his part it should be
concealed, which the Deane also promised as well as he, I answered that I knew
well his Majesty must know it, and cared not who knew it but in the former
respect, and that my self would make it known, (which thing I did the same
hour and never yet denied) beseeching them to inform his Majesty that I had
done no more now then before, least his Majesty should think me carried by
fear as a man of an evil conscience, which they both promised to do: his
Lordship and Master Deane then exhorted me to conformity in practice, I
answered, that for my judgment of the ceremonies, they knew it (as did also
many of the ministers) amongst whom I had at sundry conferences discovered and
maintained my opinion of their lawfulnes: but for practice, I should yeilde to
have them used in my cure, but in my own person who had never used them, and
once lost my place for not using them, I durst not promise it (at least) until
I had done what I could to prevent offense. Two days after this, I was called
again before the Bishop to be discharged of mine imprisonment by order from
his Majesty's Counsel. At what time the Bishop exhorted me to conform my
self, and persuade other men, for conformity I besought his Lordship not to
expect it at my hands, nor to say, I doubled with him, if I performed it not so
long as the fear of scandal should restrain me, adding that his Lordship
might gain much honor to himself, and peace to the Church by showing
compassion upon the ministers in a few lighter things, when their hearts were
so inclinde to peace, his Lordship replied that I should have time to teach and
satisfy my people, I answered that I did not so much fear the offense of
those, with whom I now live, as of other places where I had lived. And as
touching the satisfying of other men I told him, I might not undertake to
persuade, but would be ready upon any occasion to profess freely what I
thought, as I had done already at sundry conferences, and that I had that day
received some objections of a friend in writing, to which I had promised
Answer. His Lordship wished to see the arguments, but I craved pardon, because
they were committed to me from a friend, and upon trust, he then required to
see mine answer before I should send it to my friend, which I yielded unto, and
have not yet broken, for I never sent answer to it, nor ever shall. And this my
Lord to my best remembrance is the whole sum of that which I have done, and
the world speaks of so much, and diversely out of all which this sum
arises: First, that I have four times subscribed to the Book of common
prayer with limitation and reference of all things therein contained, unto the
purpose and doctrine of this Church of England, and limitation I either wrote
down or protested before witness: Secondly, that I never promised present
conformity in practice, howsoever I confessed the ceremonies not simply
unlawful, as I did since also before your Lordship.

ANSWER.
IT is the desire of all men who are willing to continue the reputation without
wrong, to be able to give account of what they do, and to render a reason of
what they speak. The narration of your behavior and trouble, as also your
opinion concerning conformity with this Church, as we have received it under
your own hand, so we desire leave without offense to observe some few things
material to this end, and although your reducing the sum of the whole story
to those two heads: first, that you have four times subscribed to the book of
common prayer with limitation and reference of all things therein contained
unto the purpose and doctrine of this Church of England. Secondly, that you
never promised conformity in practice, howsoever you confessed the ceremonies
not simply unlawful; be the principal things contained in it; yet, because
some other things are pertinent to this cause, we will rather examine then
answer what you have alleged.

1 You have yielded to subscribe with limitatio^, which limitation is the
purpose and intention of the Church of England, a caveat (doubtless) not
needful to be expressed, seeing it is the same Church that requires
subscription, who would not have any within her own bosom require an allowance
to the fancies and opinions that others hold. And peradventure wise men will
think that the distinctions found out, are but euasions do what they would not
seem, whilst in the mean time they might lurk under some equivocal cloud as
the Jesuits do.

2 Further, you desire that your present subscription might not be diuulged,
but as your self might open it, a thing you see both yielded unto, and
performed by those, in whose power it was but doubtful what intention you had,
in concealing of it; I can easily afford you so much charity as to think it
was, least some sinister and false collections might be derived from it,
whilst some others (peradventure) more probably think, that you meant to bear
your brethren in hand, that you yielded not so far as in truth ye did.
Consider if the concealment of this subscription have not some proportion with
the hypocricy of Saul, 1. Sam. 15, 30.
but honor me I pray thee before the elders of my people: and that which you
fear would be taken to be an evil conscience, could not (but in the judgment
of so wise a Prince) be thought an obedient and an humble mind.

3 The third thing is, that notwithstanding your allowance of these ceremonies,
yet you could not conform your self, but would willingly allow the practice
of them by some other, even in your own cure, this in my apprehension does
seem strange, for seeing your flock have that good opinion of you as is fit
for sheep to have of their pastor, and that you fear not any scandal amongst
them (as your self afterward confessed) your example might have removed both
from them and others near unto you all offense (if there were any) who
peradventure might have stumbled at the same things being used by others, and
scandal being so, dangerous is not fit to be offered by a Curate.

4 Fourthly, you entreat compassion toward the ministers in a few lighter
things. Let me tell you that mildness in some other cases may be a virtue, but
in this a vice: and surely he fails in his episcopal courage, who through
remissness or pity suffers the laws of the Church (by being wilfully
broken) to be unhallowed disturbers of the Churches peace, and surely if the
urging of subscription which the law required, have been the cause of the
several dissentions in our Church, a worse effect could not have proceeded
from so good a cause, then that that which was a virtuous invention to make
peace, by the unquiet disposition of some few should become the original
fountain of so much war. Besides, experience tells us that the mildnes
which that Reverend Archbishop Grindall used in those times little auailed with
those men for to make them better, and the last Archbishop of famous memory
found it to be most true that such as were spared either from his own
compassion, Whitgif^.
the importunity of others, or a hope to win the^ by this means, the favor
showed them in that kind they esteemed but desert, and his mildnes and patience
to be their own merit: besides, the things are not to be esteemed few or light
which are manifold disobedie^ces to those peaceable orders and lawful
co^stitutions which the Church makes.

5 Fifthly, you fear not so much the offense of those with whom you do now
live, as of other places where you have lived. In Norwick.
This can be no good pretense for disobedience in this case, seeing they by
your example were most fit to be resolved of the true lawfulness of those
things, An alteration in the intent and purpose of the Church of England, in
requiring subscription.
of whose suspected unlawfulness they first grew jealous by your doctrine, who
since I hope have been better taught.

APOLOGY.
NOw because it may seem a part of dishonesty or leuity, SECT. 1.
now to refuse the conditions so often accepted, I beseech your Lordship to wey
this mine answer that for so much as the purpose (if not doctrine) of our
Church to which I referred my subscription appears unto me by the late
Canons, Book of conference, and some speeches of your Lordship and some others
to be varied somewhat from that which I before (not without reason) took it to
be, I hold my self to be where I wa^, but the state of subscription to be
changed from it self, partly in the end of requiring subscriptio^ partly in
the things subscribed unto, I euer-^ook our subscription to import an admission
of things so far tolerable taken in the Churches intention, that men not
otherwise prejudiced might lawfully use them being imposed: this conceit the
words of the subscription in which we acknowledge the book, such as may
lawfully be used, did breed in me and the Ordinary, speeches of your Lordship
and other Bishops strengthen as that the ceremonies were trifles, rags,
beggarly rudiments, that in the book were multae tollerabiles ineptiae, which
if it pleased the King to remove, they would be glad, which all are pleas
rather for tolleration then approbation of them. Neither did I mistake (if
mistake) that point alone, for there be many, some of geeat place that urging
subscription and conformity, never stick to say that authority ought to remove
some things, and sins, in not doing it, thereby showing that they think not
Subscription to approve the voluntary imposition, but the compelled observation
of some things in the book. Yet he does not tell us what he does perceive.
Cano. 36.
But now I perceive by the close of the third Article of Subscription, wherein
ex animo, we must profess to subscribe to all things contained in any of the
three articles, and by the sixth Canon where the approbation of the rites and
ceremonies is provided for, as well as the use, and by the whole tenor of the
Canons which apparently condemn and preiudge all claim made, or to be made
for any alteration: now my Lord, if this be the intention of our Church in
requiring Subscription, I cannot yield thereto, some things a man must
aequitate improbare (as Austin speaks) and many things may be well observed
that are not so well commanded says Beza, Li. 2. cont. parme: ^pist. 12.
be it that a man might do well rather to use the ceremonies then loose his
calling, shall I acknowledge your Lordship to do well in the ordaining of
them? has God in vain commanded dissimilitude with idolaters? were the
fathers unwise that called so instantly from conformity with the heathen, or
the sects of Jews or heretics in matters indifferent, such a garland or
habit, or keeping of Easter day, or thrice dipping? etc.

ANSWER.
THere is little hope of sufficient strength in the sequel of this Apology,
whose foundation is laid upon so false a ground; nature having taught all men
this truth, that where the beginnings of things fail, the deductions which are
(as it were) an issue proceeding from the same original, must needs be
worse, both because all virtue, which is communicated (except imediately from
the author of all virtue) must by participation be weakened, and all admission
of concurrence in other causes, cannot but make something which is weak,
Insimulari quiuis innocens a quouis nebulone potest, Apuleius.
cleave unto that virtue: besides, nothing is so easy (if there were either as
much honesty or safety in it) as for men evil disposed, to wrong those that
are innocent, whom if we clear from all fault, (as they deserve) we shall
either be thought to flatter, or else burden their modesty with their
deserved praises. A change in you, not in opinion, but in obedience can no way
be justified, but by an accusation of our whole state, as if that now upon the
sudden, we varied and declyned, not from the doctrine, but from the intention
and purpose, that the Church had. We accept very willingly, that which you
have granted, and which no adversaries to this Church, shall be ever able to
disprove, that as the foundation of our doctrine is the unchangeable word of
truth, so it is and has been like the author thereof, God himself, ever
constant and the same: neither can the usual imputations of difference laid by
our adversaries, be any blemish to us, seeing those things wherein we dissent
are rather the opinions of some few, then the settled consent of the whole
Church. It seems you have hitherto mistaken what subscription was, supposing
it to import an Admonition of things so far tolerable, that men not
otherwise priudiced, might lawfully use them being imposed. Where private
fancies adventure to interpret the limitations of their own obedience, the
wisdom of those that make laws, shall have little use, and men disposed not
to obey will find colorable excuses (under pretense of being prejudiced) for
that which they do refuse: could any man think Subscription to be a
Tolleration, only of things not to be approved, and not rather an allowance of
things to be tolerated, the intention (doubtless) of the Church in this, was
not to require a tolleration or approbation from you, or any inferior, of such
things as were thought fit for the Church to command, but to tie the tongues
and the hands of all men, from disturbing the Churches quiet, and from any way
resisting those lawful ordinations that preserve peace. Romans 13.
It cannot be the duty of inferiors to examine with what reason laws are
made (seeing other places and times wherein they are interessed, are appointed
to that end) but only by obedience, to give an allowance, and by subscribing an
approbation to what the laws command; which either by way of tolleration to
endure without approbation, or in show to approve without an hearty allowance,
were subtly (by conformity) to procure their own peace, and dangerously,
when occasion should serve, Cano. 36.
to disturb the Church. Would any man do that under his hand, which he is
loath to be commanded to do ex animo* surely, it cannot be severity in that
law, which requires the heart to consent to what the hand does, seeing reason
tells us, that in reasonable actions, the hands and the tongue should
express the heart, and whosoever desires to severe these, either intends to
dally with God, or to delude man. But many things (say you) are in the
Communion book, which may be tolerated, but not approved: Tollerabiles
ineptiae.

Discourse of the troubles a^ Franckford. page 35.


for therein are multae tollerabiles ineptiae. Indeed, it pleased M. Calvin
(writing his censure of that book from Geneua, to Knox and Whittingam at
Frankford) to say as you do, that in it were many tolerable follies. But we
see not how either (if they be follies) they can be tolerable in a Church
Lyturgy, or how any dispraises of ours have invented a Lyturgy of their own,
more absolute and perfect then ours is: but least the commendation of this
should be thought but the opinion* of such as were willing to flatter the
state, at that time the grave approbation of that holy Martyr Doctor Tailor, is
fit to be alleged in this place, a censure given in England, within two days
of that which before M. Calvin gave. There was (says he) set forth by the most
innocent king Edward for whom God be praised everlastingly) the whole Church
serui^e, with great deliberation, In his conference betwixt him and Bish.
Gardener. Ian. 22.1555. Act. and ^on. fol. 1521.
and the advice of the best learned me^ of the realm, and authorized by the
whole Parliament, and received and published gladly by the whole Realm, which
book was never reformed but once (note that seldom alteratio^s are their
virtues that were before us) and yet by that one reformation, it was so fully
perfected, according to the rules of our Christian religion in every behalf,
that no Christian conscience (I pray you mark it) can be offended with any
thing therein contained, I mean of the book reformed. Si ner ^mnia ^re^tionem
sanctorum verba discurra^ quantum existimo nihil.
And shall we now from the co^ceipt of so^e few, make light account of so
honorable a testimony, and not rather say of this book, as S. Austin does in
another case. If thou runnest through all the words of the holy prayers;
Inuenies quod no^ ista dominica co^tineat and concludat oration. Aust. Epist.
12. ad proba^ viduam.
I suppose, thou shall find nothing which the Lords Prayer does not contain
and comprehend, therefore we may in other words speak the same things in our
Prayers, but we may not speak contrary things. Those of great place, who
think some things fit to be removed, may peradventure be wronged by you: for
if their wisdom be answerable to their places, they know, and must confess,
both alterations with cause to be dangerous, and without (cause such as this
were) to be needless. No man would blame you to observe the moderation, Lib.
2. contr. par. cap. 2.
which you mention, out of Saint Austin: for, quisquis, vel quod potest
arguendo corrigit, vel quod corrigere non potest, saluo pacis vinculo excludit,
vel quod saluo pacis vinculo excludere non potest aequitate improbat, firmitate
supportat, hic pacificus est. In all which, if most of the refusers to
subscribe, have failed, we must needs say with the Prophet DAVID; The way of
peace have they not known. Et quia hoc credunt cum Impudenter dicunt
Christiani sumus audent di^ere nos soli sumus. Aust. contr. parmenianum lib. 1.
Cap. 3. Ipsa quippe mutatio consuetudinis, etiam quae adiuuat vtilitate,
nouitate perturbat. Aust.
And because they believe, when impudently they say, we are holy, they dare
say, we alone are holy: but if these things may be well observed, the faults
in commanding (doubtless) will not be required at your hands, and surely, the
wisdom in our Governors was great, who saw that in alterations of custom,
that which may help (peradventure) with the profit of it (doubtless) with the
nouelty of change will do more hurt, and yet in reason, you cannot but
acknowledge that their LL. have done well in commanding these Ceremonies, being
both ancient and serving for order, and to edefication, unless you can show
that they are unlawful.

But say you, has God in vain commanded dissisimilitude with Idolators? Were
the Fathers unwise that called so instantly from conformity with the heathen,
or the sects of Jews or heretics in matters indifferent, such as a garland or
habit, or keeping of Easter day or thryse dippings? etc.

In the weakness of my understanding these can be no warrents for your manifest
dissenting from the orders of this church; are the rulers Idolatours? are the
things commanded idolatrye? you yourself have cleared the^ from that fault.
Magnum Ecclesiae lumen nisi caduca stella fuiss^t. Lisp.
Tertullian a great light (surely of the Church (if he had not been a falling
star) reports of one (at whom peradventure you aim in mentioning the
garland) who chose rather to dye, then with the rest of the soldiers to be
crowned with laurel, only in this respect, that the Christians had a ceremony
not to do it. For to cast away (in time of persecution) the badge and signs
of their warfare, was to discover unto the world, that they were cowardly
soldiers, and (undoubtedly) in the Church, there would have been no difference
about thrice dipping, if the Arrians had not abused it, to establish their
heresy of the three natures of the three persons, Lege Gregor. lib. 1. Epist.
41. a^ Leandra. Council. Tol. 4. Cap. 5.
which made Gregory to command, that through all Spain, there should be but
once dipping, and this after was confirmed by the Counsel of Toledo: but speak
seriously without affection, is there any thing remaining in our Church of this
nature? Is there any thing exacted of this danger? Doubtless, if there were
most of these Reverend Fathers, who now are earnest exacters of obedience and
subscription in these things, would be humblysuters to his Majesty, that the
burden thereof might be removed from the shoulders of their brethren, and that
the beauty of the Gospel might not be blemished with these stains.

APOLOGY.
Page 125.
ARe the Judgments of the most learned of this age, which think them fittest
to be removed (even the garments) because (as Martyr says) they carry to the
lo^kers on, pestiferae missae expressam Imaginem, and that we might
demonstrat^ (as Bucer says) our renuntiation of that Roman Antichrist of no
moment? Is the general practice of the sister Churches in abol^shing these
things, and drawing themselves rather into conformity with the Apostolical
simplicity, a it were the pattern showed in the Mount, of no respect. Is not
that reason that P. Martyr gives, in saying, if we did hate Idolatry heartily,
Loc. com. pa. 1124
we would be careful to root out the very steppings of it, consonant to S.
Jude, to Esaias, and other Scriptures, which incite our zeal against (not Idols
only) but their very names and all their implements. Verse. 23. Es 2.20.30.22.
Deuteronomy. 12.3.
Is the experience of above fifty years contention about them insufficient, to
show us the great hurt (which without any fruit) we take by them? Or should
not the experience of incommodities alter these things, which sense or rather
hope of commodity brought in, Aust. ad Marcel. E^ist. 5. Ma^tyr. L^c. com
Class. 2. ca^. 2.
as S. Austin and others teach. Does not the observation of forty five years
together, showing that we gain no Papists, but loose Protestants by them, and
that Papists are fewest, where the use of the Ceremonies has been least in
this Land, teach us, that as the reverend fathers did well to retain them at
the first, in hope of winning the Papists, so we shall do better in removing
them now, when we find the Papists confirmed in their superstitions, insolent
in hope of more to come, many godly men offended, the Ministers divided, the
people distracted, and the Church upon this quarrel, like to loose many of her
worthy lights, and all for supposed ornaments, taken immediately out of the
wardrope of Antichrist miserably, in times past superstitious, in themselves
needless; in use, not unprofitable only, but scandalous, and by their long
disuse, even in the grauest and godliest persons, now scorned as much (almost)
as was the Mass after one and twenty years exile at Argentine, when the young
men laughed (says Sleydan) and could hardly be restrained, as in our parts we
find.

ANSWER.
IF the judgments of men had as much power to discern, as their opinions have
strength to apply, false causes would be no imputation to truth: neither
should innocence suffer as an evil doer: but where hurts are sensibly
perceived, and yet the grounds of those evils directly mistaken, Justice must
suffer as a transgressor, and minds virtuous must be punished for the faults
which are none of theirs. We cannot better esteem Good, then by that
goodness which it brings unto us, and in those things which are not easily
discerned what they are, that we may not be carried with a preposterous love,
we reverence the judgments of the learned: We dissent not easily from the
practice of the sister Churches: We are unwilling to tread even in the least
steps of Idolatry. We eschew the contentions of former times: We cast the
account of what benefits we have received by their means, and then we dare
deliver our opinion in this case: That the Ceremonies commanded in the church
of England (howsoever uncharitably traduced, as superstitious and
Antichristian) are neither disse^ting from the opinion of the best, and most of
the most learned in this age (both Universities having given their allowance of
them) nor disagreable to the practice of the sister Churches (unless you mean
Geneua, whom necessity drove to entertain that discipline, not as best, but
as then safest and fittest for her) nor so joined with Idolatry, but that all
men can make a difference, nor the cause of contention, had not men rather
loved that, then to be obedient, nor lately a hinderance to the Gospel in
this forty five years, wherein infinite numbers have been reformed, and many
more would have been, but for the contentions of these men, and therefore,
Bonus doctor est qui in humilitate seruat disciplina^, et per disciplina^ non
incurrit in superbiam. Isiodor. lib. 3. de summo bono. cap. 40.
until we come to the particular examination of the exceptions, that are made
against them, we answer these interrogatiues with negatiues, and allow him
to be a good teacher, who in humility observes discipline, and by discipline
does not incur pride.

APOLOGY.
MOre particulerly my Lord, how can I approve in your Lordship, General
exceptions to the Communion book in the Intention. SECT. 2.
that had power to help it, the continuance of the sign of the Cross, which
in popery was made an Idol even the transiant sign, and worshipped with
Letrea, and still worshipped by every Papist, with inward religious worship,
considering how the brazen Serpent, being descended of more noble birth, of
better use to be continued, for the only burning of Incense to it, not by all,
but by some of the people was commendably demolished, and with contempt, and
considering how God commanded the utter defasing of the Idolatrous things,
Deuteronomy. 12.2. Numb, 33.52.
and that not upon Typical or personal, but upon such moral and perpetual
respects (Deuteronomy. 7. least they should become a snar unto his people) as reach
unto our selves in things of our own devise, and no necessary use. And who can
commend in your Lordships the placing of it so near in situation and
signification to the Sacrament, when God forbad a grove to be planted near
unto his Altar: Deuteronomy* 16.2.
and generally who can in conscience approve the pressing of these things in
controversy, more then the great duties out of controversy, without regard of
charity toward the weak, Zanch. com. (...). 14. de tradit. page 631.
or scandal to the blind, and under far sorer penalties then the breach of
Gods commandments, which Zanchius makes a note of impious traditions: and
finally my Lord, how can I approve under my hand your course herein, that have
reinforced a needless war about those things, which were almost at rest in
the grave, and still hiding your own selves under good words and seemings to
pity us, and to wish the things were gone (if it pleased his Majesty) to draw
upon his excellent Majesty the vehement and general grieuance of the subjects,
whose honor in the hearts of his dear servants, it were fitter for us to
purchase with loss of our not honor alone, but lives if need required.

ANSWER.
SEeing the principal cause of our departure from the Church of Rome, was that
idolatry which like a canker has infected the best parts of their worship, we
cannot but think it an accusation both unreasonable and strange to lay this
blemish upon those that do rule over us, as if they meant (by retayning some
ceremonies) to bring us back again to the Idolatrous slavery of that Church.
But first to think the opposition ought necessarily to be so great betwixt
them and us, as that nothing were now lawful for us that were used by them
were peradventure to traduce to our posterity without cause, as the corrupters
of all religion in all parts, and to deny unto our selves the just
furtherances of piety and holiness, only because Idolatry and superstition
had corrupted those means amongst them, but if neither they esteem so of the
Cross, that the transiant sign (as you call it) is to be worshipped with
divine worship, nor that we have proportioned our selves in the same ceremony
to the supposed or manifest Idolatry amongst them: The injury must needs be
accounted great upon an opinion of zeal, to wound even through the sides of
her enemy, the vital parts of that Church that does give us life. Peter
Martyr (from whence it seems you have taken this accusation) says that the
Church of Rome teach, Part. 2. cap. 5.
That the sign of the Cross is to be worshipped with Latreia. Which surely by
him was understood not of the sign transiant, but of that very cross,
whereon Christ suffered, which they make a relicke, we will not stand to
examine their error in this point, Non est dicendum imagines vllas adorari
debere Latria. Bellar. Tom. 1. lib. 2. d^ imag. cap. 22.
only let me put you in mind what Bellarmin says, That it is not to be taught
that any Images are to be worshipped Latreia. And to this end he alleges the
authority of diverse councels. What then must we say to your reason which is
grounded upon that which they say not? but we will suppose, seeing Peter Martyr
does join with you that it was their opinion, although they have reclaimed it
at this day, must it therefore needs follow, that either it is so used by us,
or by us not lawful to be used at all? has there been any greater idolatry
in the Church of Rome, then that which they exhibiting to the bread in the
Supper, upon an opinion of Transsubstantiation have therewith unhallowed and
profaned the blessed Sacrament, and yet may not we (nay ought we not)
lawfully to retain it as a thing holy? Nay, Peter Martyr himself confesses,
whom sundry times you allege as your patron in this cause, That the sign of
the Cross is worn by Princes upon their crowns without superstition, because
by that sign, they only testify and profess that they honor and maintain
the religion of Christ. But peradventure you will say we ought not to make it
a significatiue ceremony to express that warfare which we undertake when we
are baptized: Loc. Com. part. 2. cap. 5.20
hear what he says: If it be lawful for a man to bear in his arms the
badge of his own famimily: It is also lawful for him by the sign of the
cross to profess Christian Religion, there is some difference from them
whilst we use it in Baptism which you give us occasion fitly to handle in
another place, only let me tell you, that if the Papists worship the Cross
more than they ought, must the Church of England neglect the use thereof more
then the ancient Churcher have done, or then any moderate and wise Christians
would do, who glory in nothing so much as the cross of Christ, which was not
understood of afflictions (although we may glory in them) but even of the
sufferings of Christ upon that cross whereon he died. See the Reave. Bish. of
Winch. in his last boo^.
Neither has the cross as it is used in our Church any proportion either with
the brazen Serpent, when it was broken, or the groves forbidden, seeing the one
continued until it was strangely profaned by insence from their hands, Deuteronomy*
16.2^.
who were not allowed at any time to offer any, and the groves not simply
forbidden, but when they were near the altar. In this respect virtuously
restraint has been made of the over frequent use of that sign tending to
Idolatry, to avoid superstition, and yet a discreet admission of some use
thereof, to eschew prophannesse. Neither can we commend your unwillingness to
approve the Reverend Fathers of the Church for the continuance of these things,
seeing they had power to help them, we will not examine their power (we wish
it were far greater) we know their discretion and wisdom has and shall
infinitely beenefit the Church by the late Canons; and for those who
peradventure allow the things as you speak, but approve not the commanding
of them, we must say as Saint Austin does, Non est amicus recti quando si fieri
posset mallet id quod rectum est non fieri. Aust. inps. 66.
he is not a friend to the truth, who had rather if it were possible that that
which is truth were not commanded. Neither is the war about these things so
needless as you think, seeing it is like that if ever there were out of mild
patience strongly and vehemently (even with much hypocrisy) importuned any
truce, the Church has received more hurt by that, then by all the severity
which requiring obedience does bring peace.

APOLOGY.
SO again my Lord, admit that we may lawfully read that Apocripha, See the
Calendar in the new edition of the book.
which is not corrupt, being so commanded can I allow in your Lordship, that
care of keeping even the parcels of those Chapters, some parts whereof we
reject as dross, as if we must needs gather all the broken pieces of brass
into the treasury of the Church of God, and leave so many golden plates which
bear for letters of credence the stamp of Gods Spirit sleeping in the deck,
as if they were neither current coin nor good metal. Yea (my Lord) who can
with judgment allow the ordayning of any Apocripha to be read in the
congregation, in such sort as it is appointed, that is, at the same times with
the Scriptures, under the name of Holy Scripture, as parts of the old
Testament, and as parts of divine service, and without any manner of difference
or distinction, for when as the book prescribing to say only at the reading
of the Lessons, Rubric. Cano. 4. and 14.
here begins such a Chapter taken out of such a book, and the 14. Canon
forbids any addition to this order in matter or for me. It is plain, that
we are not allowed to discypher the difference betwixt the base metals and the
Lords own stamped coin. Now my Reverend Father, howsoever some of these
books have many godly and divine sayings, yet seeing the sacred Scripture
only is principium (...), 1. Pet 1.25. 2. Timoth. 3.16.
Inspired of God, and therefore of sole power to command the conscience, and
that Scripture is so large in volume, that we cannot often read it all, never
do: so rich im matter, that we need not for a groundwork any other, who can
commend that order which is taken of reading some Apocripha oftener then any of
the Canonical, much of it twice, and as much of the Canonical not once, and
that upon high days the Son of Sarah must give place to Agars Son, The
Canonical to the Apocriphall Chapter, Rubric. Eld. 2.62.
whereas it s^emeth as fit to dismount the usurper from that dignity, as it
seemed to Ezra to abandon from the priesthood all such as could not draw their
pedigree from Aaron. And though in Ruffinus and Hieronus time, Cyril. Hieros.
Chap. 4. Chrisost. in Mat. Homel. 38. Athanas. in Synops.
when they went safely under the name and knowledge of Ecclesiastical or
Apocriphall books, they were read for information of manners, yet seeing in
those ancient times, some of the fathers did inhibit the reading of them, some
say they were used by the Catechistes (as we permitted base coin to the
Irish) some (even Councels) forbad the reading of them, and seeing by their
first more innocent then prudent admission of them to be read in assemblies,
Three co^uersions and ^ther Papists.
they won (as appears in the third Council of Carthage) the style first of
Canonical Scriptures, and afterward the full dignity, and have since iustled
with the Canon as Ismael did with Isack for precede^ce, and having won it by
this stratagem do maintain their style from the some reason of being read, and
that even amongst us, me thinks there was never so great cause of advancing
them so near the Chayr of estate, as is now of teaching them to know their
distances either by sylencing their voices in the assemblies as most of the
reformed Churches do, or else by teaching them to speak in a different time,
as do those Churches that read them while the congregation is gathering, not
as parts to divine service, or at least that every Minister were joined to give
them their note of difference, that the people might know and discern the
voice of God, from the voice of good men. Veru eoque iugulante notauit.
And if Hierom, translating some of them, did give them a brand of difference,
why should not we in the reading? Or if the elder brother suffer not the younger
to give the arms of his house without a Crescent to distinguish them, how will
God (that is so Jealous of his Honor) put it up, that we put no sensible
difference betwixt the children of his spirit, and the baser sons of men
(though good men). Page 60.
In which cause (my Lord) I am the more earnest, because I find at the
Conference Hierom taxed for calling them Apocripha; and there (though not
truly, for Cyril did it before him) said to be the first that so termed
them, and his exceptions called the old evils of the Jews, and I find the^
also termed Canonical ad mores, as if any writing but Gods could be properly
Canonical, which is co ipso canonica quo authentica, as D. Whitaker well says,
which make one fear, that which I am loath to fear or speak, must make me by
so much the more afraid of allowing their admission, by how much they incroch
upon the prerogatives royoll of the Scriptures, either in titles or in usage.

ANSWER.
THe custom of accusing the lawful ordinances of this Church has imboldened
some men (above both duty and reason) to continue still vehement in their
first opposition, which peradventure at the beginning was undertaken without
cause, this land as it neither does, nor I hope ever shall profess any other
doctrine, but that which is sincere and true. The learned discourse of (...).
Our home adversaries confessing, that for the substance of Religion it
maintayneth the true and the holy faith, so for our public Lyturgye which now
is misliked by you, we will first take the censure of one as strickt as any
that lived either since, or before him, and after (if we be further urged)
enter into the particular defense of all that justly can be misliked in our
Church, not that we are willing to give any strength to this last error, or
to flatter for advancement the eye or the hand of this time, (an infirmity
which we hope shall not cleave unto us) but because we are persuaded in
conscience, that the holy Spirit has directed the consultations of the fathers
of our Church (even then when first they banished superstition) to frame by the
assistance of a Divine power, a public service of God in this land, purer for
the matter, more effectual for use, more chaste for ceremony, more powerful
to procure devotion, then any Lyturgye publicklye established since the
defection from the primitive Church: Deering against H^^don in his book called
a sparing restraint.
Of which (as I promised) I must tell you what Master Deering said, Look if
any line be blameable in our service, take hold of your advantage, I think
Master Jewel will accept it for an article, our service is good and godly,
every title grounded upon holy Scriptures, and with what face do you call it
darkness? But men are ashamed to seem guilty, Erubescit aliqu^^do s^ri reus,
qui semper fuerat Index. Chrisost.
who always have been Judges, or at least accusers. That then which you
mislike in this place (for the rest we shall endeavor to defend, when we come
unto them) is the reservation, even of the parcels of those Chapters, some
parts whereof we reject as dross, that is, to sum up your whole accusation
in few words, that no Apocripha is publicly to be read in divine service. The
Church of Christ according to her authority received from him, has warrant to
approve the Scriptures, D. Whitaker.
to acknowledge, to receive, to publish and to command unto her children: so
then, that the Scriptures are true to us, we have it from the Church, but that
we believe them as true in themselves, we have it from the holy Ghost. By this
power the Church has severed those parcels of Scripture by the name of
Apocripha from those, which undoubtedly were penned from Gods Spirit. In this
division, neither has the light nor the approbation been all one, seeing even
some parts penned by the holy Ghost, (and so now generally approved both by
the Church of Rome and us) have had some difficulty, not without great
examination to be admitted into the Catalogue of Gods Canon. As the Epistle to
the Hebrews, of S. James, the second of Peter, the second and third of John,
the Epistle of Jude, and the Revelation. And howsoever those that were never
doubted of, may seem to have (in some sort) greater authority then those that
were: Zanch. de Res. Ca. Hiero in praefat. in. lib. Salom. Cyp. in Simb. Con.
Laodi. cap. 59.
yet we give them (says M. Zanchy) equal credit with the rest, and to the
Apocripha, the next place of all other to the holy Scripture. The Canonical
only we allow for probation of the doctrine of Faith, but the other (being
proved) for the confirmation thereof: Nay, the Church of Rome confesses
(howsoever they and we differ, Apocriphis non est da^dus in Cano ne locus.
Dryedo. lib. 4. cap. 1. de lib. Apocriphis.
which are Canonical) that the Apocripha in the Canon are to have no place.

Saint Austin calls by a larger acceptance of the word Canonical, even
those, which though they had not perfect and certain authority, yet
accustomably were read in the Church, to edefie the people: a custom (as it
seems) neither now, nor differing from the practice of our Church.
Chatachumenis Page 27. Contro*. 1. de scriptura.
Athanasius allowed them to some men. The third Counsel of Carthage not at al.
Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem reiectes them from being read in the Church, of
whom Doctor Whitakers (whom you allege) gives this censure, Hiero. in
praefat. in libros Salo.
in this Cyrill (peradventure) was over vehement which forbad these books to
be read at all. For other Fathers, although they accounted them Apocripha, yet
they permitted them to be read. And Saint Hierome speaks of the book of
wisdom and of Ecclesiasticus (out of which two is more read in our service
then out of all the Apocripha besides) that they may be read to the edification
of the people not to confirm the authority of Ecclesiastical opinions or
decrees, this (peradventure) was not unfit, Quodam simitudme Salo monis esse
dicuntur Council. Trudent. sissi. 4. de Scripturis.
seeing antiquity thought as the counsel of Trent has set down, that by a
kind of similitude, they might seem to be Salomons. Wherein
(notwithstanding) because there are thought to be some errors according to the
grave moderation of our dread Sovereign, whose wisdom appeared in this, like
the wisdom of Solomon, Conser. at Hamp. page 61. Lect 26.46 are le^t out.
Nouemb 7.17. Harmonia Cons. Gallia. Belgia.
we reject such parcels as are faulty, and retain the rest. And yet those,
which according to the example of the most reformed Churches (for you rule us
in all things by the tyranny of example) are retained amongst us, are neither
read nor esteemed as the rest of the holy scriptures, seeing liberty is left to
all men in their several charges, to inform their people in the different
valuation of these writings (which though the Canon forbid in the Lyturgy,
Canon. 14.
both because our additions are unseemly, and often unsafe) yet it is lawful
in your Sermon, to instruct your pa^ish, what respect and authority is to be
given unto these books: and therefore your fear (in my opinion) is needless,
seeing the very naming of the book from whence the lesson is taken, to the
most of your hearers, will be difference enough. Non ^unt conte^nenda quasi
par. na sine quibus magna constare non ^o^^unt. Hierom. Epist. ad Laeta.
S^pes^ect^t Humililitas quoduce virtus po^uit s^per are nic ratio. Ambros.
Let me advise you therefore, according to the counsel of Saint Hierom, not to
contemn those things, as small, without which things, that are greater cannot
well stand. And therefore it is wisdom, to leave both the reading and the often
reading of these books, to the wisdom and direction of those that do rule
over us, and (I hope) humility will conquer you in this case, if neither virtue
nor reason could overcome, only I must tell you before I end this point, By my
Lords Grace that now is.

Confer page 60.


that if Saint Hierom were taxed at the conference, as the first that gave them
the name of Apocripha, there wanted both duery and thankfulness in you, to
interpose that clause (though not truly, for Cyrill did it before him),
Chatech 4. in fine Hiero. omnium a^tissim^ e Cano. reijcit. Whitak. page 25.
contro. prima de Scrip.
Seeing all men know that Hierom was the first, that of all other did openly
term them by that name, and (without all exception) amongst the Latin
Fathers, for any thing that I know, was the first, neither was Cyrill his
opinion equally sound to S. Hieroms in this case, seeing all men know, that by
him B^ruch was accounted Canonical, which worthyly is refused by our Church.
Sisentis beneficium, reddedebitu^, si ac. ^pis benign^ tatem, read charitatem.
Hug, C^ntra rationem nemo sobrius, contra scripturam nemo Christianus, contra
Eccle* nemo pacificus senserit. Aust. de Trinita. lib. 4. cap. 6.
And therefore, if you acknowledge the benfit you have received, discharge your
debt, and having received favor as at his hands, return love, as Hugo
speaks. For as S. Austin says, none that is sober, will strive against
reason, None that is a christian, against the Scripture, and none that loves
peace, will think contrary to that which the Church does. And if beyond this,
you will needs fear, it may argue your love, but not your knowledge. Besides,
what wisdom (even in the greatest safety) can make a freedom from fear, in
the minds of some melancholy humors.

APOLOGY.
Again, Rubric about Confirm. and at the Communion.
though we bear, and with the best, rather then likliest expositio^s, admit
some speeches as we find in some Rubricks, Collects, or translations in the
book, being in show dangerous, or in sense idle, or (perhaps) false yet (my
good Lord) who can with a good conscience, allow your part, I mean, the
reverend fathers therein, Collect on Innocent day. Epiph. first Sond. in Lent.
that in so many Impressions of the book, could correct none of them, but
rather still leave them upon improbable defenses, then remove them with ease,
as who can Commend in your Lordshipps, still to call those pieces of Scripture
Epistles which are taken out of Ieremye, ^sayes, the Acts, and Revelation, when
the very counsel of Trent that absurdit^ in the M^sse book. And though the
eagerness of some spirits, to innouate to many things, may somewhat excuse
your ten^citye of them, yet in yiedling to nothing you seem to have forgotten
Augustus Level of hating equallye morositie and novelty as equal faults,
Cacozelos and Antquarios Sueto de Aug.
yea, to forget how easy it may be in time for the papis^s to ingrosse our own
speeches, as by name, that of confirmation, That it gives strength against
temptations to sin etc. As the Goths made the laws of the Romans to become
theirs by a Gothish interpretation. C^i* in. Epist. ad Ranconem.
And in all this stiffnes, what is more manif^st then the difficultye of
denying our selves, and of aiming simply at the glory of God, when we are
once engaged and het in the quarrels of our own.

ANSWER.
SEeing it pleases you to repeat the same things, as new, which often
heretofore have been answered, both by us and others: It shall not be (I
hope) offensive to any If we say again what (else where) we have uttered,
which peradventure has not come unto your view. That because men are easily
wearied in those duties that are best, and prayer making us apt to fall into
speculations concerning God, both that our wearines may be less, and our
thoughts more sound and more agreeable to the present business, those wise men
that have been before us have chosen lesso^s for the church (fitting several
occasions) that as prayer make us fitter to hear, Just. Mart. 2. Apoleg.
Tertul. in Apoc. 39.
so the hearing of these may make us fitter to pray. To read scriptures in the
time of divine service, we hope being ancient and of such use, their wisdom
will not much mislike, Coloss. 4.16. 1 Thessalonians. 5.27. Saint Austin in many
places mentions this custom to be ancient, and usual.

De ciuit. lib. 22. Ser. 236. Luke 4. Act. 13.15.17.18.


and if the name of epistle do offend, you cannot but know that the original
of this (both for the name and the thing) was from Paul himself, commanding
the same Epistle which he sent unto the Collossians to be read in the Church of
the Laodiceans, and of that to the Thessalonians (he says) I charge you in the
Lord that this Epistle be read unto all the brethren the Saints* from which
custom the Church having appointed that portion of scripture, whether out of
the prophets, Acts of the Apostle, or Revelation, which circumstances
considered, was thought then fittest to be read unto the people, as if it were
sent directlye unto them, thereby procuring their attention, is not unfitly
termed by the name of Epistle: to these as Saint Chrysostom notes, the
minister stood up and cried with a loud voice. Let us attend: this practice
has resemblance to the practice of the Jews even until this day, amongst
whom some thing is read every Sabbath out of Moses, or the prophets, besides
these, if any thing offend through the seueritye of some expositions (as what
scripture so holy that some expositions will not corrupt) we desire more
charity at their hands, seeing the cause we defend is the Honor of our
church, the wisdom of our forefathers, the worship of God, and not our own
wills, for which only if our Reverend fathers had been engaged, they would (I
doubt not long since) rather have relinquished their own right, then with so
much prejudice have hazarded the Churches peace: as for the Church of Rome, we
are so far from being unwilling, that they should ingrosse our speeches, as
that we daily and heartily pray, that they would in all things both think
and speak as we do.

And if you, or any other (notwithstanding all this) shall labor to make the
world believe, that the courage of Bishops for defense of the Church, is but a
stiffness in their own quarrels, we must let the world understand, which we
know to be true, that greater moderation and patience joined with careful
thoughts of what was to be altered, has by many degrees more appeared in them,
then in the meanest of the Clergy besides, wherewith if you cannot rest
content, but desire them to follow the Counsel of Trent, in the alteration of
these things, Proprietamen loquendo nulla Epistola est de veteri t^stamento,
sed illae lectiones vocantur. Stephanus Durantus lib. 4 cap. 16. Sect. 6.
we are sorry that out of love to example, you will rather propound them then
none, and to please you, we can be content to say as Du^antus does, that to
speak properly, there is no Epistle out of the old Testament, but rather they
are called Lessons.

APOLOGY.
Of the things subscribed unto: And first of the Ly^urgy in general. SECT. 3.
Canon. 14.
AND now my Lord, from the intention of subscription, which I dare not answer
until I come unto the things subscribed unto. Wherein, I pray to have considered
first the Liturgy in general, and the^ some particulers in it. In general
(acknowledging the book to be a good and godly book: I take exception at that
new imposition of the Canons, which does absolutely command against all
exceptions the whole Lyturgy to be read every Sabbath, and that at the usual
hours. The Book at the first, was ordained in part to supply the want of a
learned ministry, and (until now) some parts might be omitted lawfully for a
Sermon, as the Lord Chief Justice of England judged lately at Thetford in
Norfolk in Tylneys case. And in this intention, who could condemn the
Churches godly care of supplying some means of Gods service, where all could
not be at once provided? But this intention is so changed, that by the Canons,
no piece of the service must give way to a Sermon, or any other respect, which
computed with the accessorie occasions of Christinings, Buryals, marriages, and
Communions, which fall out all at sometimes, some at all times in many
congregations, does necessarily pretend if not a purpose, yet a consequence of
diuorsing Preaching and so not widows houses, but Gods house, under pretense
of long prayers, while neither the time, nor the ministers strength, nor
peoples patience can bear that task of reading and preaching to, of which
intention, if we be afraid, who can marvel, that either shall observe my Lord
of Londons motion at the conference, for a praying ministry, as more needful
in a Church planted, then Preaching, as his speech since also have professed,
Page 53.54.
or that shall mark how some Canons are planted against Lectures in market
towns, whereby the light has spread to many other dark places, and withal
how skilfully all his Majesty's godly purposes against the ignorant, Canon. 27.
negligent and scandalous Ministers have been not so much delaid, as deluded,
and the offenders covered (as the Flauians in the battle at Cremona by the
rising of the Moon at their backs, Tacit. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 6.
which casting long shadows upon, which the blows being spent, fell short of
the bodies themselves) of which there remains an indigne abuse to his Majesty,
a foul sin to your Lordships, a heavy plague to the Church, and to the
offenders intolerable insolency, in stead of deserved shame. Now (my Lord) I
that could well subscribe to the use of the Lyturgy, as it was before intended,
cannot do so now, the intention not being somewhat shifted, but to the contrary
point.

ANSWER.
FEw things are likely to escape unreproved, where the best things in our
Church are reprehe^ded, there is no duty upon earth, that concerns man, with
a greater nearnes then prayer does; Mook. lib. 5. Sect. 23.
which vsuallye expresses even all the service that we owe unto God; for in
religion (as one wisely notes) there is no acceptable duty, which devout
invocation of the name of God does not either presuppose or infer: Math.
21.13.
neither can there be greater approbation of this action (being public) then
that the Temple being appointed for this end: in this respect God vouchsafes,
it to be accounted his house, as if Sermons, Sacrifices, Sacraments, and all
other services performed in that place, were but second intentions for the
building thereof, in respect of Prayer. Now for the better performance of this
duty, the late Canons have renewed that care which in all ages was found in the
governors of Christ's Church, that the strange desire of some few to hear
themselves speak, might not banish from amongst us an institution of that use,
a duty of so much profit, an ordinance so holy, as if for fear to displace
preaching, our Temples ought not now to be accounted a house of prayer. We must
first for answer to their injurious accusation in this case, tell them that
never any (saving some few and mean persons) have disliked a form of public
prayer; those which mislike ours, even with the greatest severity that either
malice, or (at the best) the most scrupulous conscience could invent, have
been able, but to allege some few shadows of faults, all which have been
often heretofore answered, and if any in the feruencie of a zealous conscience
remain as yet unsatisfied, Bucerus in cens^ra de primo libv. sacrorum.
we will be bold to use the words unto him of Bishop Ridley (after his
condemnation) to Master Grindall then beyond the seas. (Alas) that our brother
Knox could not bear with our book of common prayer, in matters against which,
although I grant a man (as he is) of wit and learning, may find to make
apparent reasons, but I suppose he cannot be able soundly to disprove by Gods
word, the reason he makes against the Leteny, and the fault per sanguinem and
sudorem, he finds in the same. I do marvel how he can or dare avouch them
before the learned men that be with you. As for private Baptism, It is not
prescribed in the book, but where solemn Baptism for lack of time and
danger of death cannot be had, what would he in that case should be done?
Peradventure he will say, it is better then to let them die without Baptism:
For this his (better) what word has he in the scripture? and if he have none,
why will he not rather follow that, that the sentences of the old ancient
writers do more allow? from whom to dissent without warrant of Gods word, I
cannot think it any godly wisdom. And as for purification of women; I ween
the word purification is changed, and it is called thanksgiving: surely
Master Knox in my mind is a man of much good learning, and of an earnest
zeal, the Lord grant him to use them to his glory. Thus far Bishop Ridley:
Bishop of London, and a blessed Martyr, with whom, we say of a great number,
they are learned, they are zealous, the Lord grant them to use them to his
glory, for we will confess as Master Bucer does, there are not some few
things wanting in the Lyturgye of England, which if they be not charitably
interpreted, may seem to dissent from the word of God. But accessimus (as
Master Jewel confesses) quantum maxim potuimus ad Ecclesiam Apostolorum and
veterum Catholicorum Episcoporum and patrum, quam scimus adhuc suisse integram
atque (vt Tertullianus ait) incorruptam vi^ginem, Joel. Apoc. cap. ^6. part. 16.
nulla dum idolclatria nec errore graui ac publico contaminatam, nec tantum
doctrinam nostram, sed etiam sacramenta, praecumque publicarum formam ad
illorum ritus and instituta direximus. In all which, doubtless there is nothing
wanting, which is requisite in a religious and reformed Church, saving the
charitable construction of our brethren, who will needs (either out of
singularity, or fear) be our adversaries in this cause. And when nothing can
be said against the form of that Lyturgy which we use, they blame the orders
of our Church which inioyne the whole Lyturgy to be read at the usual hours.
And under pretense of long prayers to banish preaching out of the Church: I
marvel that any man will object it now, seeing it was an untrue imputation
long since by Master Cartwright laid upon this church (but as one tells him)
neither advisedly nor truly spoken: T. C. lib. 3. page 184.
we will not compare two things of that nearenes and use together, but if some
men's discretion could have tempered their Zeal so far, that their own pains
(which they call Sermons) might have been shorter, and the orderly prayers of
the church wholly read, I doubt not, but the religion of the people would have
been much greater: the worship of God more sound, and the unseasonable
contentions of the Church far less, and if they continue but (as some before
them have done to allow) an hour and half, according to the pattern of
reformed Churches, for the whole Lyturgy or service (we are persuaded) it will
both be time sufficient for performing the intention of the Canon, Canon. 14.
which forbids all diminshing, in regard of preaching; and yet no man shall
have just cause (if he be willing to preach) to complain that he wants time,
or that the length of prayers has devoured the Church, for by this means
(having time, which the wisdom of authority thinks sufficient for both) all
extemporall invention of unsound prayer, shall be utterly banished out of
christ's Church, and in Preaching the shortness of time shall necessarily cut
off all impertinent discourses, whilst they are sorced to comprize abundance
of matter in few words.

But if any man think the Communion book at first to be ordained in part, to
supply the want of a Learned ministry, which being obtained, may beomitted
either in part or in whole, as men please; It is an error greatly mistaking the
first use; and overmuch differing from the modesty and humility of ancient
times; Wherein the Apostles came into the Sinagogue of the Jews at Antioch and
sat down, Act. 13.14.15.
and after the Lecture of the law, and the prophetts (which I take was their
ordinary service) the rulers of the Sinagogues sent unto them, saying: ye men
and brethren: if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on: read
the ordinary marginall note upon this place, and it will seem that the Sermon
expected the finishing of ordinary divine service, as neither all ways
necessarily following, when this was, nor at any time presuming to be (upon the
Sabbath) when this was not: nor if the unhallowed boldness of some in our
time, has adventured to thrust the grave, religious, discreet, deliberate,
and judicious prayers established by authority out of our Churches, and forced
them (against all reason) to give place to an unlearned, unorderly, and bold
exhortation without wisdom or sobriety (only somewhat glorying in the show
of a hot zeal) was it not a petition necessary and seasonable, humbly at the
conference to entreat of his Majesty for a praying ministry? From the
contempt whereof have directly proceeded the prophannesse, the Atheism, and
all the want of Religion in this land, yet let no man think, that either the
Canons or any of the Reverend Fathers desire that preaching may be less, but
rather that with all modesty God being honored in our prayers as we ought, we
may the better be able to profit by those lessons that sermons do give unto
us. And therefore it is over great boldness of our adversaries in this, to
accuse any man in authority in the church as an adversary to preaching, Read
Can. 33.34.42.43.44.45.46.47.59. etc.
seeing the whole scope of sundry of these late Canons provides better, for
more and more learned Sermons, then any laws heretofore concluded in this
Kingdom; so that we banish not preaching for prayers as you would make the
world believe, but say as our Savior does in another case, this ought ye to
have done, but not to have left the other undone. For doubtless the children of
God find continually an excellent use of both, Math. 22.23. Orationibus mun.
damur, lectionibus instruimur vtr^mque bo^um est si liccat,
by prayer (says Isiodore) we are cleansed, by reading and hearing we are
instructed: If both may be had, they are both good; If both cannot be had, it
is better to pray. So then, to say less, then their uncharitable accusation
deserves in this cause, ^i non liceat vtrumque, melius est orare. Hesiod. de
suo bono. lib. 3. cap. 1 D. Bridges. Page 634.
we affirm that they surmise us to seek to have preaching neglected, but we
know too well, that prayers are contemned by their means, from which at the
last, without great care, the neglecting of preaching must needs follow, and
therefore the restraynt of the one, with discretion, to give way to the other,
is neither to delay, or delude the Kings purpose against an unlearned and
scandalous ministry; Tacit. lib. 3. cap. 6
or like the shadow of the moon at the battle of Cremona, or an abuse to his
Majesty, a sin to bishops, aplague to the Church, or to the offenders,
Intolerable Insolencye in stead of deserved shame, but rather to speak truly,
and as this wisdom deserves in the upright sinceritye of a good conscience,
an execution of the Kings virtuous and religious care, an honor to his
Princelye Majesty, a holy discretion in the reverend Bishops, a happiness to
the Church, and a bridle strayt enough to such as deserve shame, for now all
may learn to be longer in prayers, and shortter in Sermons, because speeches
over much enlarged want understanding (says Saint Austen). Frequenter in
longum protractus sermo caret intelligentia. Aust. de doctr. Christi.

Alteri ignoscito, tibi i^si nunqua^. Senec.


And you may be advised heareafter to blame your self and to pardon others.

APOLOGY.
ANd thus from the general, I descend to some particular exceptions,
Particular except^ons in the Liturgy, and first of omission of the Canon. SECT.
4.
as first, those about the Scriptures to be read which are three, 1. The
omission of the Canon, 2. The appointing of some corrupt Apocripha: 3. The
translations. It is manifest that 160. Chapters of the Canon, and therein some
whole books, as the Chronicles, Canticles, and most of the Apocalipse are
omitted in the Rubric, as least to edifying. This I excused in my own heart
thus, that because most of these chapters omitted, were either obscure or
obnoxious to evil hearts, if read without interpretation, Iuni^s Ar^t. in Bed^
(...) lib. 1. cap. 9.
the Church (in good discretion making a choice of Scriptures which the learned
allow) did omit them in the direction of the Calendar, but made no doubt, but
any able Minister might read them, over and above the appointed Lessons, with
some exposition of their difficulties; or for a need exchange any of them for
some other chapter. But now the Canon (inhibiting all addition and exchange)
does not only silence for ever those chapters omitted, but so many more also in
our Parochial and country Churches, where our people will not come, but on
holidaies, and where reading is most needful in public, because ^ewe can,
fewer do read in private, as that a great part of the Bible shall never be
read; which, as it crosses the practice of the Jews, and of all Christian
Churches, the end of the holy Scriptures, which are all written for our
learning: so it directly crosses the first intention of the book, which
proiected the reading of the old Testament once, Act. 13.15. John. 8.34. 2.
Tim. 3.16. Romans 15.4. Preface except cer^aine Chapter^*
and New thrice every year, accounting of four chapters in every day, which
takes place in Cathedral Churches only, not in Parochial. Now how the Church
may ordain a course of drowning so much of the Canon, and be innocent, I do
not see.

ANSWER.
IF the Church of England, for blessings the most happy, for learning the most
sufficient, for sincerity of Religion the most reformed, and for Laws and
ordinations that concern piety, the most upright (be it spoken without envy)
of all the Churches of Europe at this day, have no greater blemish to stain
her with, then the drowning of the Canonical Scripture, which you impute unto
her. We are and will be ever ready (although the meanest of many thousands
that live in her bosom) to prove her Innocent. Whereas, if she have wilfully
silenced Gods truth, and uttered unto the people vanity and Lies in stead
thereof, we will mourn for the sins of our mother, with hearty sorrow, and
not enter into the defense of so great a fault: for, God forbid, that any
partial affection to her (who whilst she is upon earth, may err) should make
us transgress against our father in heaven, who is truth it self, but if
she have done nothing in this case, which well befitted not the wisdom and
care of a mother (howsoever it please others to mistake her meaning) then let
her great wisdom be justified of her own children: to read in the Church of
God, the Scriptures have been the honor of our Liturgy, the happynes of our
people, and the true and readiest directions to a better life; but either to
read them all, or only to read them, our forefathers (in discretion) did not
think safe; seeing the one might be to small use, the other not without great
profit, and both most agreeable to the wisdom and practice of former times: for
if a hundred and threescore chapters of the Canon be omitted, as you say (for
we can be content to take your account in this case) and therein some whole
books, as the Chronicles, Canticles, and most of the Apocalipse be left out,
we nether do in this, without warrant what otherwise refuse, nor refuse to
do with warrant, that which reasonably was practiced by those that lived
before, and yet are neither some things in all the books of Apocripha, nor all
things in some of them, by authority permitted publicklye to be read in our
Church, and those which are (as often you have been told) are not for
confirming of faith, but to reform manners. And so (as Saint Austen speaks)
from the customary phrase of the Church we retain them and read them as parts
of the old Testament. Ad exempla vitae and forman^os* mores, non ad dogmata
cofirmanda.
All which (we confess) inpropryat you of speech only to be written by
Moses, and by the prophets, but from the time of Artaxerxes, to the age, wherein
Josephus wrote, the want of prophets was supplied for the continuance of the
History of those times, by other men godly and zealous that were no Prophets,
which was the true cause, that they were of less estimation, then all the rest
of the Scriptures are; but if we show the reputation that the Apocripha had,
and that (as Saint Cyprian speaks) these anciently were accustomed to be read
in the Church, Cyprian de symb.
then neither does this Church devise any new custom, nor by the admission of
these, can worthily be judged to silence the holy Scripture: Saint Austin
writing against some Pelagian Libertines of his time, alleges a place out of
the book of Wisdom, whereunto exception was taken, that this book was not
Canonical; hereof thus Saint Hilary wrote unto him: Illud testimonium quod
posuisti (raptus est ne malitia mutaret intellectum eius) tanquam non Canonicum
definiunt omittendum: Upon this occasion, amongst some other reasons, to
justify his allegation, he shows first, that excepta hu^us libri
attestatione, August. de praedist cap 14.
the thing that he proves thereby is otherwise manifest; then he says, that
many worthy men (such as Saint Cyprian was etiam temporibus Apostolorum
proximis) alleging, nihil se adhibere nisi diuinum testimonium crediderunt:
and again, non debuit repudiari sententia libri Saptentiae, qui meruit in
Ecclesia Christi tam longa amositate recitari, and ab omnibus Christianis, ab
Episcopis vsque ad extremos laicos fideles, poenitentes, Catechumenos, cum
veneratione diuinae authoritatis audiri: So that if in Saint Austins time, who
lived not much above four hundred years after Christ, some of these (which we
call Apocripha) were of long continuance read in the Church, and of all (even
from the Bishops to the meanest layitie) heard with the attention and reverence
of divine Scripture; how can we justly be blamed to retain them, or be thought
in this so ancient and so warrantable a custom, wilfully to silence the Canon
of holy Scripture? Saint Hierom (who of al other was most earnest to
distinguish these books from the Canonical, Hiero, in praefat. in Proverb.
yet) shows that they were anciently read: Sicut Judith and Tobiae and
Machabaeorum libros legit quidem Ecclesia, sed eos inter Canonicas scripturas
non recipit: sic and haec duo volumina (intelligit Sapientiam and
Ecclesiasticam) legit ad aedificatione^ plebis, non ad authoritatem
Ecclesiasticorum dogmatum confirmandam. But if Saint ( Hierom who was most
earnest against these books) cannot move you to approve (as warrantable) their
reading in our Church, the consent (peradventure) and the practice of the
Churches reformed may. Harmo. Confess* Sect. 1. Confess. H^lum.
In the harmony of confessions set out at Geneua this article of the Belgic
confession is there approved. Differentiam porro constituimus inter libros
istos sacros, and eos quos Apocriphos vocant, vtpote quod Apocriphi legi quidem
in Ecclesia possunt, and fas sit ex illis eatenus etiam sumore documenta,
quatenus cum libris Canonicis consonant: At neutiquam ea est ipsorum authoritas
and firmitudo, vt ex illorum testimonio aliquod dogma de fide and religione
Christiana certo constitui possit, Articul in Synod 1562. Zanch. de Relig. cap.
1. art 4.5. Pellic. in praes. in Apocriph. Chenis. exam. Council. Trid. de
Script. Can. Kimedo. de scrip. vero. dei. lib. 6. cap. 9.
tantum abest vt aliorum authoritatem infringere vel munere valiant: Hereunto
agrees the confession of this Church Zanchy gives them the next place to the
Canonical Scripture, and this (as himself confesses) not without warrant
both of the Greek and the Latin Church, hereunto we may add the testimony of
others, as of Pelican Chenitius and Kymedencius, all not over great favorers
of us, and whom our adversaries may not refuse in this case: all consent in
this: Sciendum maioribus placuisse vt preter libros vere Canonicos ex quibus
fidei nostrae assertiones constant, Ecclesiastici quoque ad plebis
aedificationem public legerentur vt sunt liber Sapientiae, Ecclesiastici,
libellus Tobiae etc. From all antiquity, it then appearing many things
profitable to edification, to be read in the Church, both in the time of the
Jews before Christ, as also since, which the Church did not esteem
Canonical, how can it be a silencing of the Scripture in us, who only after
the example of all antiquity, read some writings which were called
Ecclesiastical, and more profitable to edification then some Scriptures,
although not of equal authority for doctrine of faith, as the rest of the
Scriptures are, neither was this custom ever thought until now of late
unlawful and idle, Hook. lib. 5. page 37.
but lawful, and of much use, nor as one well notes, can it be reasonably
thought, because upon certain solemn occasions some Lessons are chosen out of
those books, and of Scripture it self, some Chapters not appointed to be read
at all, that we thereby do offer disgrace to the word of God, or lift up the
writings of men above it. For in such choice (considering the intent of the
Church) we do not think but that fitnes of speech may be more respected then
worthiness. And therefore although for the peoples more plain instruction (as the
ancient use has bin) we read in our Churches some Apocripha, besides the
Scripture, yet as the scripture we read them not, all men know the difference
that the Church of England makes in this point. But men shall easily fall into
error when they once oppose their private judgment against the Reverend
authority of their own Church, neither is their conclusion altogether sound,
that seeing Moses amongst the Jews was read every Sabbath day in their
Synagogues, that therefore such Scripture should be only read, which had the
same authority that the writings of Moses had, unless they be able to prove
that it was not lawful for any books to be read of them, but the books of
Moses, which if it were true (as all men know it is not) then either there was
no Scripture, but the books of Moses, or elfe all parts of the Scripture was
not read in the Jewish Synagogues. If they urge us further with the council of
Laodicea, which forbids any thing to be read, that is not Canonical, we
must tell them that the same council accounts that Canonical which is not.
Further, we must crave leave of those who urge so strictly the reading of the
whole Scripture in Churches, in what part of the world; or in what tongue the
new testament was read in the purest times. Besides, if the authority of Saint
Hierome (which you urge against us) may be accepted as sufficient in this case
against you, he will tell you that some part of the beginning of Genesis, In
praefat. in Ezech.
the Canticles, the beginning of Ezechiel were not amongst the Jews permitted
to be read of any, unless they were comne to the age of priesthood, which was
thirtye, from whence (paraduenture) the governors of our Church have restrained
their voices from speaking (by bare reading) to the common people, who either
understand them not at all (being so read) or else pervert them to their own
harm, this is not to silence them (as you say) but rather to reserve them to a
better and safer use, that those (who for soundnes of Judgment and knowledge
are able) may read and expound them at seasons, which are more convenient.
This, if it wear not by laws strictly commanded to be observed of all, but
should give liberty (as you seem to desire) to some able ministers to do
otherwise, Ignorance (which is ever boldest) would take advantage continually
to be reading the obscurest chapters, whereby the church of necessity could not
choose, but receive great harm, and therefore the desires of a few
(peradventure) by reason of their sufficiency not hurtful, ought to be no
motive why laws should not be made or executed, which prevent that the worst
disposed may not have liberty to do harm, or the weakest to receive. The
Chronicles (some part) the Canticles, the Apocalipse, the chapters of some
Genealogyes (things wherein ignorant men have been ever most forward to deal)
contain (in the judgment of wise men) many things not so requisite for silly
people to know, because they are not bound to give an account of those things,
and their employment therein, does not only distract them, but make them
unable to know such Scriptures as are of more use, and nearenesse to their own
salvation. Prou. 20.3
I may say as Solomon does in another case: It is modest humility to abstain
from these, but every fool will be meddling: so that what safely peradventure
might be admitted to able ministers (such as it may be you are) ought not to be
a reason, either, why laws should not be made at all, or why liberty for not
usage should be granted to those that are able, seeing experience tells us,
that every man will be a Judge to account himself able, and so exemptions
(perhaps) reasonable from the strict observation of some Canons granted to a
few, shall become warrants for the intolerable boldness of others, and in the
end bring a contempt to all uniformity in order, from whence must needs
follow a ruin and desolution to the government of the whole Church. And surely
if men well considered either the general weakness of many that take upon
them to expound, or the common ignorance of silly people mixed with a pronnesse
to evil, when such Scripture is read, he must needs think the wisdom of
our forefathers in this choice of Scripture to be great, and esteem the
instruction of the people to be the principal end that was propounded by them,
this made the University of Cambridge to give permission only to such, to
interpret Saint Paul's Epistles, as were thought in divinity fit to be
admitted to the degree of Bachelors, because Saint Peter says, that in them
are many things hard to be understood, which they (that are unlearned and
unstable) wrest, as they do all other Scriptures unto their own destruction,
1. Pet, 3.16.
and for the Canticles, which every man now undertakes to expound: Aquinus
being requested by the example of Saint Bernard, to write something upon them,
he gave this answer, give me the Spirit of Saint Bernard, and I will do it,
yet our Church goes not so far to forbid any (that is licenced to preach) to
expound these, but only for reading unto the people, admit in their room (with
out stopping their voices in due season) other writings ever accounted
Ecclesiastical to be read, not as better, but as better serving for reformation
of manners. Yet, howsoever, they have wrongfully accused our Church, in this
point, we are glad to see them now so earnest intreaters, for reading the
Scriptures in the Church, seeing heretofore, the most of them have been
content for a Sermon of small edification, but of great length, to omit the
reading of many Chapters, which might have been done at that time, so that, in
true understanding, the silencing of the Scripture, was rather to be feared at
their hands, who desired to have it indifferent, and left free for to read it
at all.

APOLOGY.
Some supposed exceptions against some Apocripha. SECT. 5.
AS for the corrupt Apocripha appointed in the Calender, it made to me no
scruple of subscribing to the Book, with reference to the Churches intention
and doctrine, for, besides that our doctrine was, and is pure, touching the
dignities of the Canon, the reformers of the book, professing to have ordered,
that nothing should be read, but either the pure word, or that which is
evidently grounded upon the same, gave me reason to think, that howsoever,
Proem to the second Tome of Ho^elies.
some unmeet Chapters kept their old standing in the Calender, yet our
Churchment not to urge the reading of them, in which, I was the more confirmed
by that provision, which under the Queens authority was published with the
Homelies, that the minister might excha^ge any one or other, less profitable
Chap. of the old Testament, for any of the new testament more profitable,
Abbots against Hill.

Iunius annot. praef in Dany.


and if (as Doctor Abbots says) of the Cano^, much more of the Apocripha. But
now I perceive by the Rubric, that the tale of Susanna must be read to the
last verse, which helps to manifest the falsehood of the whole fable, as Ierom
calls it: and I see by the order of the Canons, our former liberty of
exchange, 2. Pet. 1.16.19. Whitak. cont. 1. qu^st 1. cap. 11. Luther in his
Almain Bible and pro^me to these Apocripha.
and all ^iberty of ce^sure to be repealed. Now, how can I su^scribe to the
reading of an uncertain tale in stead of the more sure word of the Prophets,
which Peter bids us attend and not to Jewish fables, such as is that of
Judith, for which no time can be found out to father it upon: And that of
Tobit, both which Luther (as I have heard) thought to be pla^es at the first,
and after made st^r^es. How can (...) for instruction of Gods people, read
these fictions better then the popish Legends, or so well as Holinsheds or
Eusebius Chronicles? for what ground is there for conscience to build upon,
when nothing can be certainly observed for doctrine, where nothing is
certainly known for truth? Finally, in the 13 of Daniell (as it is unfitly
called) is a repugnancy to the true story of Daniels age, and beginnings of
honor. In the ninth of Judith, a commendation of Simeon and Leuies bloody act,
as ordered and blessed of God, and undertaken with prayer, yea, even of that
most outrageous cruelty, Deuteronomy. 14.16.
in which for the offense of one, they executed many innocent and harmeles
persons. Genesis 49.6.7.5.
And this woman blessed that zeal which Jacob cursed, and God plagued as a
rage. And this exception our men took against Campian in the Tower. So in the
7. of Tobit, 3. the Angel makes himself of the tribe of Nepthaly, in the 12.
one of the seven Angels, that offer up the prayers of the Saints to God, in
both, a liar. And in the latter, a lying usurper upon that office, which none
but the Angel of the covenant may meddle with. Now knowing that God has no
need of lies, I dare not read (as a part of divine service) these tales, in his
presence, and the presence of his Angels and people, much less allow the
appointing of them to be read, especially, observing how idly we shall tell
the common people of their baseness, while yet we read them out of the Bible.

ANSWER.
WE are glad to hear you confess that the intention of our Church was, and is
pure (and I hope ever shall be touching the dignity of the Canon) which in my
opinion ought to have been a strong motive both to you and others, neither to
have dissented from the practice of the Church in reading things, Whitak Page
37. de scriptur.
ancient, profitable, and such as were called by the fathers, Scripture, though
not Canonical, nor to have quarrelled with these books, as if all that were
in them, were thought by us to be of an infallible and undoubted truth: we say
the^, first, concerning all these books, that neither do we, nor any in our
Church retain them, as Canonical truths for doctrine, nor of equal
authority with the other Scriptures, and yet peradventure we may give some
reasons, why these things misliked by you, are not of that moment, that thereby
they ought to be accounted of no better authority the^ Hollinsheads or Eusebius
Cronicles. Dani. 13.
We confess that we read (by apointme^t) the History of Susanna to the last
verse, but the last verse (which is the greatest exception to the History) we
read not: and the Church of Rome confesses, Sextus Synens. Bibli. lib. 8. Her.
5. page 643.
that it ought to belong to the beginning of the foureteenth Chapter. It is
known that Africanus wrote to Saint Origin concerning the truth of this book:
but what he wrote, we have yet no warrant, neither can Origin or S. Hierom be
justly proved to be adversaries to our opinion in this case, for he that is
most earnest against them (which was Saint Hierom) affirms as Doctor
Whitakers collecteth, that this story of Susanna, Vulgata and lect. passim
suisse. Whitak. de Scrip. page 38.
of Bell, and the Dragon, the Hymn of the three children was commonly read in
the Church of God, which is al, for which we desire your allowa^ce as a thing
not new or lately invented, but ancient, warra^table, and so practiced by our
Church. I could willingly enter into a defense of the truth of this History,
if our adversaries of the Church of Rome were not ouerapt to make this
conclusion (which is not sound) that whatsoever was aunciently read in the
Church, and is true, ought to be esteemed as the Canonical Scripture; so
that, they from truth co^cluding scripture, we are forced against them, to
accuse them of some faults: Whereas, if confessing them to be no canonical
Scriptures, they or others would have given us leave to read the^ in the
Church, as profitable to manners, we could (without violence) have afforded
them the reconcilement of other Scriptures, and (undoubtedly) have proved them
to be most true. But howsoever, the Church of England requires not the
Subscription of you, or of any other to warrant the falsehood, and untruth of
any Jewish fable, but to approve the form of our Liturgy, so far, that
those books, which anciently were read in the Church, or at least, those parts
which contain nothing contrary to faith, may still retain their ancient
place in the Church, for edifying of manners, which was given them in the first
and the purest times. In which (doubtless) the liberty of exchange, formerly
left to the discretion of the minister, might have continued still, if men would
have tempered themselves from indiscret and causeless neglect of public
order: for, as Saint Austin well notes, That surely he hates his country, who
thinks himself never well, except he travel. So, little obedience or love
appears in those men, who account it their greatest perfection, to oppugn
the Church. Now, if Luther thought Judith and Tobith to be plays at first, and
after made Stories, we must tell you, that we are glad to hear you ascribe so
much, to the thought of Luther, but sorry to see you ascribe so little to the
judgment of our whole Church; and yet, it is no reason to esteem them of
less value, except we will follow the steps of the Anabaptists, and reject
likewise the book of Job, seeing the Rabbis in their Talu^d, have taught them
to account it as a Tragical Comedy, and no true story. Concerning the
exception of Daniels age: answer first Bellermin and others, who hold that
there were two Daniels, and then you may think your objections stronger then
as yet they are. It little concerns us to prove the Apocripha to be true,
who ever have confessed that they are not Canonical scripture, and therefore
may be false: but howsoever they are, I must tell you in humility and love, it
was a bold and an vnreuere^d comparison to make the^ no better then
Holinsheads, or Eusebius Chronicles, seeing their greatest enemies have
willingly confessed thus much: Aprocriphis qui in voluminebiblioru^ habentur,
primum post Canonicos locum tribuimus.

Zanch. de Relig. cap. 1. Act. 4.5.


that of all writings, that are, they have, and ought to have the next place of
estimation to the Divine Scriptures: and not only these, but all the rest
termed by S. Cyprian E^clesiasticall: by S. Hierom Apocriphal: and by S.
Austin Canonical, have bin red in the Church, with the other parts of the old
Testament; if not in the Apostls times, Ruff.
yet euersince. If Ruffinus be not deceived, they were approved as parts of the
old Testament by the Apostles: for when S. Hierom writ so scornfully of the
history of Susanna, and the song of the three children, he charge him therein
to have robbed depositu^ sa^cti Spiritus, and instrume^tu^ diuinu^, quod
Apostoli Ecclesiijs tradideru^t. and S. Hierom (who is not usually slow to
defend himself) leaves that point unanswered, pretending, that what he had
spoken, was not as his own opinion, but what the Jews objected. And for his
pains in tra^slating the book of Judith, Chemnisius in ex. Council. Trident. de
saer. Scrip.
he gives this reason: Quia hunc libru^ Synodus Nycenain numero sa^ctaru^
scripturrau^ legitur co^putasse. Che^nisius (a man deserving well, of the
religion professed by our church) having proved against the counsel of Trent,
these books (whereof we speak) not to be canonical, propounds unto himself a
question. Number quid igitur simpliciter abiiciendi and da^nandi sunt libri isti?
and he answers, that we are not to cast them away, where we think they have
some thing in them, which are not consonant to the Canonical scriptures, but
rather so to expound them, as that they may agree with them, therefore
concerning the fact of Symeon and Leui, for which (as it seems) you are not
willing to read the book of Judith, Judith. 9.2,
because she confesses that GOD put a sword into their hands to take
vengeance of the strangers, blessing the zeal which Jacob cursed, and God
plagued as a rage, we must answer as others have done, that the king of Ashur
is called the staff of the Lords wrath, Genesis 49.6.7.5.
and his hand was the rod of the Lords indignation, Es. 10.5.6.
the Lord sent him to rob, spoil, and tread down his people like mire in the
streets. God, therefore put a sword in his hand, and armed him, and not him
only, but as many also as were stirred up against any country, or Nation, or
peculiar persons, good or badde, when it pleased the Lord, either to chastise
his children for amendment and trial, or to punish the wicked to their
destruction. Now then, the Sichamites without all controversy had grievously
offended, and a heavy judgment of GOD (for their offenses) falls upon them;
therefore may we say, that the Lord did arm those instruments, by whom he
did execute his vengeance against them. And Master Calvin confesses, that
Vnius puellae stuprum horribili totius vrbis strage Deus vltus est. Calu. in
verse 15 Genesis 34.
And Musculus says, voluit Deus insignem hanc contumeliam, tam graui and
insigni vindict a punire, vt euidentissimo exemplo monstraret, non fore impunes
omnes eos qui contumeliam, and ignominiam Israeli inferrent, modo cord erga se
integro esse perseueraret: therefore against reason and the judgment of
learned men in our church, you seem to deny that God did arm Simeon, by whom
he did execute his punishment. Besides, Judith does not commend that which
Iocob condemns, or curses; for, Jacob reproves there the fact, Genesis 34.
ver. 30. Genesis 49.
for that they did exceed in anger and cruelty; but Judith commends the zeal
which they bare unto the Lord and his law, for the villainy that the Sichamites
had committed, and yet, as concerning the fact of Simeon and Leui, such as were
not ignorant of that which Jacob does utter in both places, are bold to affirm
thus: Non est nosirum, de hoc facto filiorum Jacob far sententiam, Musculus
in cap. 34. Genesis
haud enim secundum externam faciam considerandum est, quem admodum in foro
Iadiciifieri solet, sed totum relinquend^m Iudicio Dei, qui dubio procul hunc
illius zelum, ad sumendum de reprobis vltionem indidit. Of like judgment were
some long since, that lived in the church, of whom Beda says, alij dicunt hanc
vindictam, quae facta est a Simeone, and Leui, domino non displicere, quod in
hoc ostenditur, quia liberati sunt de manu inimicorum suorum: Sieve quod Legem
dei, and circumcisionem vindicauerunt, eo quod vim fecit incircumcisus super
illam quae de Circumcisione fuerat. Lyra (writing upon the ninth of Judith)
says thus; hoc videtur falsum, nam Jacob reprehendit illud factum tanquam
malum. Genesis 34.49. Dicendum quod in facto illo duo fuerunt, scilicet zelus
vlciscendi s^uprum, and illud fuit licitum and iustum, quia non habebant
Iudicem, qui vellet factum punire, cuius author erat ^rinceps ciuitatis, and
populus eius fautor. Et sic loquitur hic Judith, Judith commend. in the fact.
Aliud quod fuit ibi fuit modus vlc^scendi, qui fuit malus and proditorius, in
quantum filii Jacob fregeru^t pactum habitum cum Sychamites, and sic
reprehendit illud Jacob. All which considered, with that which many other
Divines have written in this cause, you cannot but confess that Jacob and
Judith (in diverse respects) might censure the same fact in a diverse manner,
Jacob condemns the manner, and both truly.
and yet both true. The next thing which you mislike; is, that in Toby, where
the Angel makes himself of the trybe of Nephthaly, and in another place, one
of the seven holy Angels that offer up the prayers of the Saints to God; Tob.
^.3. Tob. 12.45
which it pleases you to censure thus, perhaps with greater zeal, then either
discretion, or modesty (in both a liar and in the latter, a lying Usurper upon
that office, which none, Revel 8.3.4. Heb. 8.2.
but the Angel of the Covenant may meddle with.) Iunius is the first (to my
knowledge) that finds an untruth in the first place, but so hard a judgment
(in wisdom) might have been well spared, considering that he confesses the
place to be corrupt, which might have moved him, either to acknowledge, that by
reason thereof, he is ignorant of the true sense of the place, or to allow of
the interpretation of the learned, before him, that have delivered such sense
as may be admitted without allowing any untruth. Lyra says, It is a figurative
speech, like that in Tob. 6. verse. 12. Where Azarias is interpreted adiutor Dei,
and so are the Angels: Ananias is interpreted gloria Dei, whose sons are the
Angels. Now, if it be an usurping untruth, for the Angels to offer up the
prayers of the Church unto God in the mediation of his Son, we shall
(peradventure) deprive our selves of a great part of their ministry, and
dissol^e that communion of Saints, which we profess to believe as an Article
of Gods truth. We doubt not, but Christ makes intercession for us, and
offers our prayers in another manner, more powerful and effectual then
Angels can Zanchie concludes thus: Zanch. de oper. lib. 3. cap. 22.
Si hos non licet inuocare, qui nos audiunt, nostraque spectant, and nos
curant, quomodo igitur dem^rtuos homines? And in the same book, he alleges
this place (not doubting that this was a true Angel, Zanch. de over. page 206.
and lib. 3 cap. 20.

Ignorantia Iudicis plerumqu^ est calamitas innocentis. ^^st. ta (...)
perfecti, (...) ^e^fectia^ (...) dolores al^e. (...).


to whom you give the lie) to prove that the Angels are both sent unto us, and
yet have their abode (especially) in the presence of God himself: so that,
these books (being in some sort innocent) have tasted of much evil through the
ignorance of such, as have bin their judges. But we cannot show our charity
better, then heartily to be sorry for those, who will needs err. To conclude then
this point, I must entreat you in the spirit of meekness, to take a second
view of this your irreverent and uncharitable ce^sure, both of his Angels in
heaven, and his Church on earth: for if the Angel had made the same answer,
which you allege, that he was one of the seven Angels, that offer up the
prayers of the saints to God, he had not bin a lying Usurper (as it pleases
you to term him): for says P. Martyr: If thou read in the scriptures (note
that he calls them Scriptures, and in the margent quoteth this place) that
the Angels offer up our prayers, Luc. Com part. 1 cap 13. Tob. 12.15.
this is not done of them to instruct or teach God, but by discovering and
laying them open, we our selves be the more earnestly bent to crave the help
of God: And what discommodity should arise, if we affirm this self same thing
of Angels? Thus far P. Martyr, which was taken of S. Austin: so that, you see,
there was small reason to account those bles^ed spirit (the Angels) Lying
usurpers, having spoken no otherwi^e then truth may warrant: or else to what
end were that speech of our savior: Lib. 15. de Trin. cap. 13.
Se that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto you, that in
heaven, there Angels always behold the face of my father, which is in heaven.
But you cannot with a safe conscience subscribe to a translation that utters
so usurping an untruth. Math. 18. ver. 10.
I doubt not, but you have well considered, that it is (as you say) or else, as
in the doctrine you have wronged the Angels: so, for the translation, you will
be found, for to wrong the Church. You cannot be Ignorant, that the approved
translation authorized by the church of England, is that which comes nearest
to the vulgar, and is commonly called the Bishops Bible, wherein according to
the Latin, the words are only read thus. I am Raphaell, one of the seven
Angels, which stand in the presence of GOD. I confess the Geneua translation
reads it as you reprove, but it was a translation never for the notes or the
text, publicly authorized in our Church, so that modesty and due consideration
ought to have examined accusations of this Nature, with greater care, least
others rightly judge, that the assertions of such cannot be sound, that
wrongfully, without conscience, dare adventure to accuse both the church, on
earth, and the Angels in heaven.

APOLOGY.
TOuching the corrupt tra^slations of the Psalms, Epistles, or Gospels in the
book, Against false transla^ions. SECT. 6.
they made before, no bar to my Subscription, because I supposed that our
Subscription exte^ded, but to the form of Divine service. In which, such
portions of scripture were appointed to be read, A true supposition.
ledd thereto partly by the words of Subscription, wherein we acknowledge in
the book, such a form as may lawfully be used, and promise to use the same;
partly by the Doctrine of our Church, which justly taxing the Papists, Jewel,
Fulk. Whitak. and others.
for adhering to the vulgar Latin, and maintaining, that all translations
ought to be corrected by the Original, made it to me improbable, that our
Church would impose an allowance of any corrupt translations, and chiefly by
the practice of our Church in authorizing another translation, The BB. Bible.
of the Church Bible; by which I made no doubt, but any man might correct the
translations in the Communion book, where they obscured or crossed the sense.
But you (my Lord) gave me in this point another light, telling me, that we
must use only, and subscribe to the tra^slations in the book which I also
understood to be avouched, by some other of your brethren, and lately found out
to be intended in the Canon for subscription, wherein it is said, that the book
of Common Prayer, contains nothing in it contrary to the word of GOD, and
may lawfully (So) be used, so (a word now put in) as containing in it nothing
contrary to the word: and after, that I do ex animo subscribe to all things
contained in the three articles. Now my Lord, if Austin (upon the credit of
many Latin copies) would not admit one word (palam), where the sense rather
required, then received it, because it was not in the Greek, how shall I
approve under my hand a translation, which has many omissions, many additions,
which sometime obscureth, sometime peruerteth the sense, being sometime
senseless, sometimes contrary; of which I pray your Lordship to take a taste
in the last page of this book, where I will muster them together.

ANSWER.
IF you had continued in your former resolution, not to have feared to
subscribe, although some faults were justly to be found in the translation
used, in our Church, you had neither opened a way to your own wrong, hazarded
for your curious disobedience, the Churches censure, nor procured our labor in
defending her at this time. It need not to be supposed by any, that the Church
of England desires to impose an allowance of any corrupt translation, neither
are you, or any other, as we have often told you, required to allow by
subscription the translation, but only to approve the form of divine service;
and yet surely the care of this Church, since the light of the Gospel did
shine in it, was never wanting to publish the scriptures, translated as
agreeable to the fountains, as they could devise; and to this end, authority
did command the allowance of that translation, which for their (...) and cost
in it, is commonly cal^ed the Bishops Bible, from whence if you, or any man
collect that, because a new translation is authorized, and the papists justly
taxed by our men for adhering to the vulgar, Jewel, Fulk whitakers etc.
that any man might correct the translations in the communion Book, where they
obscured or crossed the sense: we must tell you, that, first for the vulgar
translation, Ital translat.
we disable not so far, but that we are ready to confess (whether you
understand the Italian, or that which goes under the name of Saint Hierom)
that they were used anciently in the Church, a thousand and three hundred
years ago, Lib. 2. dedoct. chr. Cap. 15. in praefat In Non test.
one of them (by Saint Austin) preferred before all the rest, the other highly
commended by Beza, and that of the vulgar (though with Pagian and Dryedo) we
think it were not Saint Hieroms, but mixed, yet we can be content to say as
Isiodor does of it, Lib. 6. Etimolog. cap. 7.
Interpretatio eius ceteris anteponitur, his translation is to be preferred
before others: but for all this, both you, and the Church of Rome must know,
that these, neither are so pure, as the fountains themselves (for no
translation (whatsoever) is Authentical Scripture) and that from hence, In
praefat. in I^s. Tot esse apud latinos exemplaria quo^ codices, cum quisque pro
suo arb^irio vel addiderit, vel subtraxerit quod ei videretur: Ecclesia falli
potest in locorum quorundam versione, vt interim non desinit esse vera Ecclesia.

Whitak cont. 1. de script. quest. 2. ^ap. 7.


every private man must not take liberty unto himself, to correct and amend
at his own pleasure, least we have just occasion to complain, as Saint
Hierome does, that there be as many varieties of translations, as there be
books, whilst every man (according to his fancy) adds or detracteth as
seems good to himself. Neither can an error in translating, in any Church,
be an argument sufficient to prove it to be no Church. And concerning the
Church of England, it has not wanted a care, and a religious care in this
point, and therefore it were no reason for you, or any to reprove her, for that
wherein she deserves praise, only your patience is required, to forbear all
private corrections of translations, until authority from the diligent labors
of learned men (wholly employed in that business) may establish a better and yet
the faults in this, are not such, but they may be tolerated without offense,
though (peradventure) corrected with more benefit. And seeing there is no error
in faith, contrary to the doctrine of the Church, that can be in pretense
confirmed, by any reading, which we allow, me thinks the article of
subscription may well say, that the book of common prayer contains nothing in
it contrary to the word of God, and that it may lawfully be so used. But say
you, if Austin (whom I call Saint Austin) upon the credit of many Latin copies,
would not admit one word ( palam) where the sense rather required, the^
received it, because it was not in the Greek, how shall I approve under my
hand, a translation which has many omissions, etc. If your moderation had
been like unto Saint Austins in this case, we should have little cause to
mislike your doing, and yet the example, which you bring for your best warrant,
being stretched so far, as you do, cannot justly be reckond amongst S. Austins
virtues. For in that place which you allege, he says: Multa latina exemplaria
sic habent (et pater tuus quividet in absconso, reddet tibi palam,) sed quia in
Graecis quae priora sunt, non inuenimus (palam) non putauimus huic aliquid
disserendum esse. Now, I see not, what can be directly gathered from S. Austins
example, for ( pala^) was not in some Greek copies, but I hope you know what
(...) is, which sometimes they translate in propatulo, sometimes palam, and if
the old Latin translation want it, and the Greek have it (as Doctor Whitakers
notes) Judge whether you ought to imitate Saint Austin in this, De script.
cont. 1. quest. 2 cap. 12
whom the Rhemistes follow, rather then the original which is followed by our
Church, and therefore the blemishes in our translation, which your zeal has
published, of omission, addition, obscurity, Ostendere hoc non pet^s quia
iugeniu^ d^est, sed quia bona causa. Aust cont ^e^il. lib. 2. cap. 98.
perverting as senseless, contrary, and such like; we are willing to answer
them, when we come to your objections in the last page, whch we know you
cannot prove, not that you want wit, but because you are not assisted with a
good cause.

APOLOGY.
Exceptions about Baptism. SECT. 7.
FRom the exceptions concerning the Scriptures, I come to those which arise
about the Sacraments. And though there because to speak of private Communions,
as on the Churches part, not so well ordained; yet I will insist upon private
Baptism, and will draw unto it that Rubric, which says (that it is certain
by Gods word, that Infantes baptized have all things needful to salvation, and
are undoubtedly saved. This speech I did interpret as spoken not simply, but ex
hypothesi in opposition to the popish conceit of the necessity of confirmation
in this manner, that the child (has al things necessary) that is, all outward
means, and needs no confirmation (and is undoubtedly saved) that is as
undoubtedly, as if it were confirmed. And unto this construction the precedent
part of the Rubric directed me, and the sound doctrine of our Church against
the simple necessity of Baptism, and grace inseperably annexed thereto, did set
me in it, and then the speech seemed like that of Christ in the ninth of John,
where he says, (neither has this man sinned nor his father) that is not in
such sense as the question was asked, whether he or his father had sinned. As
for private Baptism by a lawful minister, being acccompanied with such
doctrine, as our Church hitherto has generally received about the same. I
thought, it might be inexpe^tent, but not unlawful. But (my Lord) observing
since in the book of conference, Page 16.17.
that my Lord of London (leaving the state of the child unbaptized, as
uncertain) says: that if it die baptized, there is an evident assurance, that
it is saved (without any exception made of Gods eternal purpose) and further,
that the place in the third of John (Except a man be regenerate of water, and
of the holy Ghost, etc.) must be vnderstord of the Sacrament of baptism, which
conceit (if we draw the text to infants) must necessarily thrust us, as it di^
Austin, and other Fathers, upon the simple necessity of that Sacrament unto
salvation as the like words in the sixth of John: Except ye eat the flesh, and
drink the blood of the Son of man, ye cannot be saved: being understood of
the other Sacrament, A^st Epist. 23. and saepe. Ambros. de iis qui I^it. ca.
7.8. (...). 1. e^. 95 apud August.
drew on the Administration thereof to Infants: perceiving (I say) the grounds
laid in that conference, and by whom, and adding thereunto that addition to the
Catechism, that there be two Sacraments, as generally necessary to sal^uation;
and the sixty ninth Canon, which under pain of suspension binds the Minister
(in case of necessity) to have to the baptising of every weak child (the very
night not excepted): It seems to me, that our Churches doctrine, in this
point, is declining to that opinion of the simple necessity of that Sacrament,
and grace annexed thereto, which we formerly opposed. The second days Confer.
in the Tower, and all ou^ writers against the papists.
And if this be the present intention of our Church, I dare not subscribe to
such an use of private Baptism, neither to the former Rubric, which being
capable of a good sense, may also be taken, and hereafter pleaded (under our
subscriptions) in a bad one.

ANSWER.
WE cannot but wish that the holy pretenders of zeal had so much discretion,
that those things were justly blameable, for which they are so willing to
forsake the execution of their divine function, and so boldly without
conscience to transgress the lawful ordinatio^s of a religious King, whose
commandments, either to limit to their own fancies, or to censure after
those opinions, which they apprehe^d to be virtuous and just, were both to
commit an act never warrantable in any age, and to vsurp upon that throne,
which they must not touch; all men that live in the bosom of a Church, whose
peace to the^ ought to be dearer then 1000. lives, are to be carried with that
charity toward the doctrine and laws, which it publikly professes, or
wherewith it is well governed, that all endeavors of reconcilement, are to be
be^ded to this scope, to make it seem both to teach and to govern like the
Church of Christ; for there is nothing of that evidence in the word of god, nor
ever was of that use in the family of Gods house, which oppositio^ unbridled
could not pervert, or unhallowed boldness misconster; there is nothing left upon
earth to the Church of greater use, then the Sacraments; whose chiefest force,
and virtue consists in this, that they are heavenly ceremonies, which God
has sanctified and ordained to be administered in his Church: first, as marks
to know when God does impart his vital or saving grace of Christ, Hook. lib.
9. page 126.
unto all that are capable thereof: and secondly as means conditional, which
God requires in the^, unto whom he imparteth grace: for (as elsewhere we have
noted) It must needs be a great unthankfulness, In the defense of master Hooker.
page 95.
and easily breed contempt, to ascribe only, that power to the^ to be but as
seals, and that they teach but the mind by other senses, as the word does by
hearing, which if it were al, what reason has the Church to bestow any
Sacrament upon infants, who as yet for their years, are not capable of any
instruction: there is therefore, of Sacraments (undoubtedly) some more excellent
and heavenly use. Sacraments (by reason of their mixed nature) are more diversely
interpreted, and disputed of, the^ any other part of religion besides, for that
in so great store of properties, belonging to the self same thing, as every
man's wit has taken hold of some especial consideration, above the rest* so
they have accordingly given their censure of the use and necessity of the^, for
if respect be had to the duty which every co^municant does undertake, we may
call the^ truly bonds of our obedience to God, strict obligations to the mutual
exercise of christian charity, prouocatio^s to godliness, preseruations from
Sin, memorials of the principal benefits of Christ. If we respect the time of
their institution, they are annexed for ever unto the new Testament, as other
rites were before to the old: If we regard the weakness that is in us, they are
warra^ts for the more security of our belief: If we compare the receivers with
those that receive the^ not, they are works of destinction to separate Gods own
from strangers: and in those, that receive the^ as they ought, they are tokens
of Gods gracious presence, whereby men are taught to know what they cannot see:
for Christ and his holy spirit with all their blessed effects (though entering
into the soul of man, we are not able to apprehend or express how) do
notwithstanding give notice of the times, when they use to make their access,
because it pleases Almighty God to communicate (by se^sible means) those
blessings which are inco^prehensible; seeing therefore that grace is a
co^sequent of Sacraments; a thing which acco^panieth the^ as their end: a
benefit, which he that has, receives from God himself, the author of
Sacraments, and not from any other natural or supernatural quality in them.
It may be hardly both understood, that Sacraments are necessary, and that the
manner of their necessity to life supernatural, is not in all respects, as
meat, drink, and such like, unto natural life: because they contain in
themselves no vital force or efficacy, but they are duties of service and
worship which unless we perform, as the author of grace requires, they are
unprofitable: For all receive not the grace of God, which receive the
Sacraments of his grace, neither is it (ordinarily) his will, to bestow the
grace of sacraments upon any, but by the Sacraments: which grace also, they
that receive by Sacraments, Non enim is it* tribuunt quod per ipsa (...) Hugo de
sacr. cap. 3.
or with Sacraments, receive it from him, and not from them: for (as Hugo
says) These do not give, that which is given by these, and yet ordinarily (as
necessary) to receive these, as those graces are necessary, which we receive by
these: so that, Baptism, though it be not a cause of grace, yet the grace
which is given by Baptism, does so far depend upon the very outward
Sacrament, as that God will have it embraced, as a necessary means, whereby, we
receive the same: and howsoever we dare not judge those, that in in some cases
do want it, for the want of it, yet we may boldly gather, that he, whose mercy
now vouchsafes to bestow the means, has also long since intended us that,
whereunto they lead: so that, we think in this discourse of yours concerning
private, and the necessity of baptism, that some things are misunderstood,
some things misconstrued and some things false: misunderstood, where you make
this to be the opinion of our Church, that all, who are Baptized, must
necessarily be saved, or of the contrary: whereas, it is but understood, as,
either man has evidence left to direct his judgment, or the Church has
power, to admit into the house of GOD. And for others, who want this Sacrament,
although we cannot Judge of the secret election of God, yet we have reason to
fear a denial of that Grace, Hook. li. 5.
where we see a manifestation of the want of the means, appointed for the
obtaining of it: for (doubtless) as one notes, the sacrament of Baptism in
respect of God, the author of the institution, may admit dispensation, but in
regard of us, who are tied to obey, there is an absolute necessity: for it is
in the power of God, without these to save, but it is not in the power of man,
without these to come to salvation. And yet our Church holds constantly, and
truly (notwithstanding your doubts) as well touching other believers, as
Martyrs, that Baptism taken away by ne^necessity, takes not away the
necessity of Baptism; but is supplied by the desire thereof. For, as the
visible sign may be without true holiness; so, the invisible sanctification
(says S Austin) may sometimes be without the visible sign, Lib. 3. Quest. vel
Test. cap. 84. Canon. 69.
and yet these are no reasons, either to debar the Church from imposing
private Baptism, upon great peril, from this necessity: or to conclude out of
this care, that the Church declyneth to a necessity, over rigorous, and such
as formerly was oppugned in our Church.

2 Misconstrued the speech of the most reverend father, the now Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, who (as you say) made no exception of Gods eternal
purpose. D. Barlow Deane of Chester. Confer page 16.
It cannot be ignorance, but want of charity, which makes you to misconster
him thus, seeing even from that learned Deane, who penned the whole conference,
you might have collected what manner of necessity, was urged by him, his words
are these: which word (Necessity) he so pressed not, as if God without Baptism
could not save the child; but the case put, that the state of the Infa^t dying
unbaptized, being uncertain, and to God only known: but if it die baptized,
there is an evident assurance, that it is saved. What could be more religious
and agreeable to the doctrine of truth, or more necessary in these presu^ptuous
times, wherein a Sacrament of so absolute necessity (by practice of some) is
grown into such contempt: which necessity, if at any time we have denied
(dealing with those of the church of Rome), It is because ouerstrictly they
bind ( from the act done) grace to the Sacraments, as if none that receive
them, could want it, or none receive that grace that do want them. Ioh. 3.6.
Read our dese^ce of master Hooker. page 110.


3 False; that the plac^ of S. John, is not understood of the Sacrament of
Baptism, which you seeking to shun, least you should magnify Baptism overmuch,
ought to take heed, least you run into the contempt thereof: the one being that,
wheru^to al me^ are inclined, and the other bringing less hurt to the church,
by a necessity over absolute, which serves but to make al men careful, not to
neglect a thing of such institution, and so great use, whilst a fear to
establish an absolute necessity, bredeth (by degrees) a contempt of that, which
is the only ordinary way into the church of Christ in heaven, and the only way
into the church upon earth. And because the Jews had many rites, which in a
larger acceptatio^, were called Sacraments, but in a strict acceptance (as we)
only two: to distinguish betwixt these and the other, it is added (not without
cause) to the catechism; that there be two sacraments, as generally necessary
to salvation: noting, that ours (succeeding two of theirs, Circumcision and the
Passover) retain a necessity as theirs, more and above the rest: so that, the
inte^tion of our church, being neither differing from it self, nor from the
doctrine of truth, in this point, you need neither fear by subscription to give
your allowance, nor doubt least your subscriptio^ might justly be pleaded to a
bad sense. Exceptions concerning interrogatories in Baptism. SECT. 8.


APOLOGY.
MY second exception, about the Sacraments, is to the interrogatories in
Baptism, made to the child, and answered by the suretyes, that this fashion
was causlesly and needlessly tra^sferred from those of years, and foreru^ners to
Infa^ts free born in the church, I hold with Beza, Bullinger, Zepper, and
others; yet thought it not unlawful in this co^struction; namely, that this
profession (made in the child's name) should not import, either such a distinct
faith in the child, which (says Austin) were Insanus error: or that the faith
of the sureties should avail the Infa^t, which the word rejects: or, that
the sureties undertook that the child shall hereafter make good this
profession, which were Insana presu^ptio: but that this profession was thus
made by the mouths of the Godfathers, partly to admonish the understanding
congregation of that covenant, which Baptism really inioyneth to every
Christian, even as the Prophet spoke to the dead Altar, to admonish living
Jeroboam, and the Prophets (as Chrisostom notes) spoke to the unreasonable
creatures, 1. King. 13.1. Homel. 3. de paenit.
to teach reasonable men, how unreasonable they were become: and secondly, to
cast upon the Godfathers, a kind of charge, and with it, an advantage of
calling upon this child, when he came to years to know and answer that
stipulation of Baptism, which they made profession of, as in his name, when he
was Baptized, to show what he should have done himself, if he had bin of
years: and in this sense, I think it lawful though (perhaps) too obscure and
unnecessary. But my Lord, if the Catechism, which making Faith and Repentance
(that is, the profession of Faith and Repentance) necessary to those that are
to be baptized, proceeds to say, that Infants perform this faith, and
repentance by their sureties. If (I say) this intend (as it does insinuate) a
necessity of such a profession to be made in the childs name, before it might
be admitted to the Sacrament, as I reject that conceit as an error favoring
this Anabaptisticall opinion, that faith must fore-goe the Sacrament of
Baptism: so, I dare not subscribe to the practice so enjoined, and intended,
and would wish it changed into that course, Cons^^r. cap. 14
that Bucer advised.

ANSWER.
IT seems, there is a curious desire of reprehension in those men, who are
willing to reprove the practice of their own Church, for that which is a
custom ancient, necessary, and of much use: wherein we reprehend not alone
the disposition of such, but we are ready to let the world see, that the
things themselves are most innocent, which they do reprove. Most of them are
not yet come so far, as to deny Baptism to Infants (an arrour which may
follow from their former opinions, if they suffer Scisme to grow in them, and
humors to be rules for conscience but they are ready to profess, that there
is no says in the child required to Baptism, and that to be borne of
faithful Parents, is as much for their admission into the Church, as the
profession of the faith, which they make by the mouths of others. This, as it
is unthankful to spurn at the indulgence of the Church; so, it is a contempt
of duty, which God requires on our part: there is no attainment to life, but
through the only begotten son of God, nor by him otherwise, then being such
for belief as we ought: as if those Articles in the judgment of God, were
set down for all men: first, to subscribe unto whom, by Baptism, the church
receives into Christ's school; and seeing no religion inioyeth sacraments, the
signs of Gods love, unless it have also that faith whereupon sacraments are
built, could there (as one well notes) (which I am sorry you observed not
before you stumbled at these doubts) be any thing more convenient, Hooker lib.
5. Page 152.
then that our first admittance to the actual receipt of his grace in the
sacrament of Baptism, should be consecrated with profession of belief, which
is to the kingdom of God as a key, the want whereof excludes Infidels both
from that, and from all other saving grace; And howsoever we say with S. Austin
that Infants have not a present Actual habit of faith yet they have then the
foundation of that whereupon afterward they build, the first ground whereof was
laid by the sacrament of Baptism; so that without any madd presumption (as you
term it) we may say truly of infants, that they are then believers, because
in Baptism they begin to be, which continuance of time does afterward make
perfect. For if we call them believers for their outward profession sake who
are much further from faith then infants, why may we not without madness or
presumption, account infants to have faith which have that grace given them,
Quem potuerunt illi nosse nec habere, isti potuerunt habere antequam nosse*
Aust.
which is the first and most effectual cause, out of which our believe grows:
and whilst others that know him believe not in him, these believe in him before
they know him. Now seeing then that Baptism implies as Circumcision a
covenant betwixt God and his people, it is to be thought that as God in that
sacrament bestows remission of sins and the holy Ghost, binding himself as it
were to bestow all other graces requisite in time to come; so every infant
receiving the same sacrament at the hands of god tyeth himself likewise for
ever, to do and believe what the Lord commands. Now, who is there
(considering this contract) that can blame either the interrogatories, or the
suretyes which undertake in this stipulation, seeing the thing is required,
nay, enjoined with such necessity for the Church, to exclude infants, because
they cannot by their own tongues contract, were over rigorous: and not to take
security at all, for those who cannot answer for themselves were to be to
careless; for the profession of faith, being necessary to a public
admittance into the house of God, what cause is there why suretyes may not
lawfully do it, seeing they know they are the children of fathfull Parents,
and so consequently partakers of the promise, and that they are such as would
make the same profession themselves, if they were of years, or that the Church
should not require it, even to put men in mind upon what condition they admit
them into the Church, and to manifest a reason, why they refuse others: so that
for any thing I see alleged against it, as faith and repentance are necessary
to make the Sacraments effectual, so this faith in this case is lawfully
professed by the sureties, and effectual for the infant, whom to accept into
the Church without this, were to wrong the Sacrament, and not to receive with
this, were to wrong those infants, to whom the covenant belongs by an
everlasting promise. Genesis 1^


APOLOGY.
Of the Cross in Baptism. SECT. 9.
THE last thing about Baptism, is the sign of the Cross which though I long
held otherwise, yet of later years I held lawful to be used, taken in this
construction that after the child was incorporate into Christ and his Church
by Baptism; the congregation, by the mouth of the minister, as their Agent in
this and not Gods, as in Baptism, should acknowledge their acceptance of him
into their society* and sign him with the sign of the cross, as with an
ancient token of christian profession, in token of that which the congregation
hereafter expected and hoped for at the hands of this child newly made one of
their fraternity by Baptism. In which use, I held it no sign from God to
men, as be the Sacraments: nor of men to God, as the bowing of the knee in
prayer, but of men to men, as the Kiss of Love, or the Ring in Marriage; no
part of Gods worship, no part of the Sacrament, no consecrating or operative
sign, no Symbolicall or Sacramental sign, no not so much as explicatorie to
set out the virtue of the Sacrament, as oil, milk, honey, and other old
devised, but well rejected ceremonies did; but to be a simple significatiue
ryte, to express the congregations hope, and expectance of this child. And in
this have defended it, not as well imposed, but as lawful to be used, at
sundry meetings before and since my Subscription; and to persuade me that our
church intended it in this sense, I have these reasons. First, because it
follows after the very act of Baptism finished. Secondly, because the words
are in the plural number (we receive this child etc. Thirdly, in private
Baptism, where the company expecting present death, could not hope for such a
christian profession to be, after made, that Sign was omitted, which if it had
intended any consecration or operative virtue, might and would then have been
used; and lastly because the Godly fathers which reformed the book cast it out
of the sacrament of the Supper, and all other uses where it assumed any
superstitious purposes, I believe they meant here to reduce it to the very first
use and only good use which it had to make it a simple token of christian
profession, and no more.

Answer.
It little avails in the consideration of wise men, either to publish our own
former true opinions which afterward we endeavor to disprove, or to afford just
excuses for the lawful practice of that church, with which notwithstanding we
are not willing to consent; It being either decept in us to allow what in
conscience we think not to be good, or an inexcusable weakness not to consent
unto that which we do allow; In this respect of the practice of sundry men
(who are willing to seem and peradventure in truth are virtuous) the church of
England may justly complain as Saint Hierom does ab, Hieronimus Epist. 133.
aemulis nos frustra Lacerari, qui malunt videri contemnere praeclara quam
discere: doubtless the number is great (and yet a number deservedly not of any
great account) which will rather seem to contemn, Maximum iudicium ma^oe
mentis fluctuatio. Senec.
then to learn wholesome things. Moral wise men have thought wavering to be
the greatest sign of an evil mind. For wisdom cannot better appear, then
ever to will and to nill the same things; this being as one notes the
foundation of that truth, that the same thing cannot ever please, Non potest
idem placere nisi rectum. Sen.
if it be not just. Let those the^ that be wise consider of your speech. You
first for a long time held these Ceremonies not to be lawful (we take you
first from the beginning of your resolution in matters divine) then after that
lawful; now upon the third change unlawful, and paraduenture heareafter we
shall have better hope; I can in all humility and charity grant unto you the
same favor, which upon such inconstancy I would desire to be granted to my
self in the like case: but surely wise men not so easily moved with the same
passions that we are, do well discern that it is not safe in matters of this
nature, to rely upon their fancies at all, whose opinions in things for which
they contend with so much earnestnes, are continually subject to so much
change; reason ever by collection concluding thus, that whasoeuer has been may
be, and those who have thrice changed are not at all times when they seem so
guided by the truth which is ever the same, but rather may fear the imputation
of a double mind, James 1.8.
which as S. James faith, is unstable in all his ways. Yet notwithstanding,
we are willing and desirous to hear from you such speeches, as are arguments
of that love and obedience which all men ought to bear unto that Church
wherein they live: we are content to allow (although you have not fully
expressed the intention of the Church of England in this point) That to sign
the Infant with the sign of the Cross, was to sign him with an ancient token
of Christian profession: that it is not a sign from God to men, nor of men to
God, (and therefore no idolatrous worship invented in our Church) but of men to
men (as the Ring in marriage) no part of the Sacrament, no consecrating or
operative sign, no Symbolicall or sacramental sign not so much as
explicatory but a simple significatiue rite expres to the Co^gregations hope
and expectation of that child; which no man can doubt to be the virtuous and
religious intention of our Church: both because (as you confess) It is after
Baptism, 2. It is said, we. 3. It is omitted in private Baptism. 4. And
lastly the sign is omitted in the Lords Supper, as not giving either virtue to
the Sacrament or holiness to the action, which were (in these latter times)
insufferable errors, superstitiously brought in by the Church of Rome: wherein
all indifferent men may see the moderation of our church, which having left the
ordinary use of the Cross, in all actions at all times, (for which the practice
of antiquity might have been some warrant) have only admitted the same in
Baptism, as then chiefly requisite for a signification of that profession,
which at that time the Infant undertook, and therein meant to continue for ever
after. In this sense (which is the warrantable intention of our Church) if you
have held it lawful heretofore, and now do not, we may say as S. Paul to
the Galathians; Gal. 5.7
Ye did run well, who has hindered you, that you did not obey the truth? but
we will not censure you, but rather hope better things of you, desiring all
men to remember the Apostles peremptory conclusion; If any man teach otherwise
and consents not to the wholesome words of the Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
Doctrine which is according to godliness, 1. Tim. 6.3.4
he is puffed up and knows nothing, but doteth about questions and strife of
words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmises, froward
disputations of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, which think
that gain is godliness.

APOLOGY.
But now my Lord observing duly the 30. Canon, made of purpose to explain the
lawful use of the cross, to which we are now tied, Canon. 140.
as to the judgment of the church (though for my reverend opinion of that
assemhly I could easily believe that in this explication they have bin used as
were the good fathers at the counsel of Arimine, under great penalties;) I
find that our Church professes to retain it for the very remembrance of the
Cross, which is precious to all that truly believe in Christ, and in such use
as did the antique fathers and churches, and by name, that by that cerimony and
honorable badge the infant is dedicated to the service of him that dyed upon
the cross; In which construction I do not see how I can subscribe unto it, as
before I did; for confessing that I grudged the name of an honorable badge,
remembering to what dishonorable Idolatry, it served of late and yet does in
Popery, and being thereupon attainted by the Pears and neighbor Churches is
not yet restored in blood, and think we may say of it, as Jacob of Reuben; Thou
wast fair, but have lost thy bewty by clyming up unto thy fathers bed. I
protest against that memoratiue use of it in the congregation and in the
Sacrament, to call to mind the Cross of Christ (whether thereby his
sufferings, or his Altar be meant) as that which opens a gappe to crossings in
daily use, and crosses and crucifixes, and so any Imagery in the church and
worship of God; and think that this which has bin abused with spiritual
fornication, as a common harlot, may easily prove in that use a cunning baud to
solicit the unstable hearts of men to their old superstition, and therefore
seems to me to be against the second commandment, which forbids all
prouocations unto Superstition, as well as the seventh does all incitations to
Adultery.

ANSWER.
FRom dislikes seeming as grievous in show, and for a long time as vehemently
persued by a great number, we are now come at the last to that one point (the
Cross in Baptism) wherein alone both antiquity is thought to be too
superstitious, and this present age, for following the same example,
inexcusable of a dangerous and insufferable idolatry: but as the Church of
England, hitherto has not found it sa^e to follow the reformation of those
men, who know no other means to purify Churches, but to pull them down; so in
this she esteems it safer and more virtuous, to free the sign of the Cross
from the stains of superstitions, contracted in these later and corrupted
times, rather then altogether to reject the more ancient and purer use
thereof, as men ashamed of that which was. Saint Paul's rejoicing at the Cross
of Christ. Galat. 6, 14
We are not desirous in things of this nature, to satifie the Reader with
empty words, b^. as far as we are able in truth, to let all men see, that
both the Church has reason to exact an obedience to that which it does
lawfully command, and that their curiosity is without excuse, who either of
singularity or ignorance, seem to pretend holy reasons to warrant them, in
that which they do refuse: and surely it must needs be thought, an
unthankful and ouer-bold accusation of those men, who dare adventure to
accuse a whole Church, a sincere and religious Church, a Church wherein they
have bin borne, nourished and brought up; whose true doctrine has bin the
foundation of their-iudgements, if they have any, rather then they will be
thought to like others or in what things they refuse obedience to her Laws,
not to be warranted by Gods word, as the unstained actions of a sanctified,
grounded, and pure zeal: as if the Church of England, which in the true
opinion of the world is more settled, more reformed, more virtuous, under the
government of so sincere and so religious a prince, had by an universal consent
conspired as it were to increase Idolatry, and established constitutions for
the unjust recalling of the justly banished superstions of the Romish Church,
and therefore observing duly the 30. Canon made of purpose to explain the
lawful use of the cross, to which we are now tied as to the Judgment of the
church, Can. 140.
you do not see how you can possibly subscribe unto it as before you did. We
desire all that are indifferent to view the reasons and uses contained in that
Canon, and we doubt not but it will appear that their motives were sufficient
to ratify the use of the Cross in the intention of our Church, and to free
that learned and religious assembly from the imputation, you lay upon them, by
comparing it to the Counsel of ARMINE; First, Jewish and heathenish blasphemy
derided our fathers in the christian faith, for preaching and believing in him,
who was crucified upon the cross, by which all virtuous and pure both men and
times were so far from being discouraged in their profession, by the
ignominy of the cross, as that thereby they rather rejoiced and tryumphed in
it, yea, the holy Ghost so far honored the despised name of the cross
amongst the Jews, that under it, was contained all the suffering, the merits,
the fruits, and the comforts of Christ's death. From hence proceeds a
reverend use and estimation of the sign of the cross, in the Apostles time,
signing hereby not only themselves when they met with the Jews, but their
children which were baptized, to dedicate them by badge, as it were to his
service, whose benefits bestowed upon them, were contained under that name, and
procured unto man by Christ's death upon the cross. But time corrupting often
with stains of superstition the best things (for if Christ tell Peter, If I
wash thee not, Ioh, 13, 8, 9.
thou shall have no part with me; Peter will answer, Lord not my feet only,
but my hands and my head) so apt are we to ouerdoe that which we find to be
profitable unto us) The sign of the cross in the more ignorant times of the
church that followed after, became so laden with a continual and necessary
observation, full of superstitious Idolatry, as if it had been for all
occasions, a complete armor to every Christian, and that nothing could be
well, either begun, continued, or ended, that was not first hallowed with this
sign. From which ignorant opinion, blemishing a thing of virtuous and good
use, the Church of England desiring to free the sign of the Cross, does not
command or allow the public use at any other time but in Baptism, and that
first, as no part of the substance of that Sacrament, adding any thing to the
virtue or perfection of Baptism. Secondly, nor as a means of admitting of any
into Christ's flock, but as a lawful outward ceremony, and honorable badge,
whereby the Infant is dedicated to the service of him that dyed upon the
cross. In respect whereof, the very name has and shall be honorable amongst
all true christians to the worlds end: and therefore your comparison, of those
in the convocation for making of this Canon, to them in the council of ARMINE
might have been well spared, seeing the perticulers of both being duly
waighed, wise men may easily perceive the beginnings, the proceedings, and the
conclusion to be far unlike: and therefore I must tell you, though not with so
much severity as the cause deserves, you could not with all your study, have
found out a comparison more unbefitting this cause, and more presumptuously
injurious to the King and the whole Church; which, that the reader may better
understand, we will briefly set down as others have done, from the beginning
to the, end the proceeding of that council. After CONSTANTINES death, whose
wisdom suppressed the greatest heresy, and whose virtue taught the whole world
religion; CONSTANTIVS his son reigned, one rather seeming not so evil as he
was, then being in truth, so virtuous as he seemed, whom to have settled in a
right opinion in his Fathers time, had been a duty of good service toward
God, a mean of peace and quietness to the church of Christ, a labor easy,
and peradventure, as pleasing as the suggestion of those, who were the
unnatural corruptions of a well disposed son, of so virtuous a father.
CONSTANTIVS, by the persuasion of the ARRIANS, devised to assemble all the
Bishops of the whole world, about their great controversy; but in two seue^all
places: the Bishops of the West at ARIMINA in Italy; the Eastern at SELVCIA the
same time; amongst them of the East there was no stop, they agreed without
any great ado, gave their sentence against heresy, excommunicated some chief
maintainers thereof, and sent the Emperor word what was done: whom doubtless
it much offended not, that an heresy of that nature could not from the
authority of wisdom obtain strength, which it is like had not been so much
favored by him, if he had not esteemed the danger in the word to be little,
whilst their meaning, as they pretended in sense, was all one; but I lay the
greatest part of the blame for this evil upon AELIV^ LEONTIVS Bishop of
ANTIOCH, that favored the ARRIANS (for mildness and yielding in some Bishops
made the whole church be troubled with that herisy) who scratching his head,
white for age, said when this snow is melted there will be much dirt; Sozo^.
lib. 3 cap. 19.
as if the bishops which were to succed him, would not suffer the same Hymns
(it is like of gloria patri) agreeable to the Nycen council which he did, they
had at Armine four hundred which held the truth, scarce of the adverse part
four score.

But these obstinate, and the other weary of contending with them thereupon,
by both it was resolved to send to the Emperor, such as might inform him of
the cause, and declare what hindered their peaceable agreement; Ex part nostra
leguntur homines adolesce^tes, parum docti and parum cauti^ab Arrianis autem
miss^senes callidi and ingen^o valentes veterno perfidiae imbuti, qui apud
regem facile superiores extiterant, Sulp lib, 2, Sozom. lib, 3, cap, 18,
Ruffin, lib, 10, cap, 2, Hiero, iu dialo, contr. Lucifer.
there are chosen on the Catholic side such men as had in them nothing to be
noted but boldness; neither gravity, nor learning* nor wisdom. The Arrians
for the credit of their faction, take the eldest, the best experienced, the
most wary, and the longest practiced Veterans they had amongst them: the
Emperor coniecturing of the rest on either part, by the quality of them whom
he saw, sent them speedily away, and with them a certain confession of faith
ambiguously and subtly drawn by the Arrians, whereunto unless they all
subscribed, they should in no case be suffered to depart from the place where
they were; whereby many vexed with hunger, and violent detention, yielded up
their conscience as captive to those penalties that were urged upon them: yet
as it seems by some others, what error soever was concluded in that council,
was rather from the obscurity of the Greek word, then from any penaltyes: of
which Saint Hierom says thus; Ingemuit totus orbis and se Arrianu^ esse
miratus est. Now, what can there be in the late grave and reverend convocation
of the clergy of England answerable to this council? First, for any thing
that I know there was amongst them no faction* Secondly, they dealt not
deceitfully with the king to obtain an allowance of what they concluded.
Thirdly, no mn was urged by compulsion, or detained upon penalties to give his
consent; only in this one thing, peradventure not unlike, that the council of
Nyce had on her side four hundred, whereas the Arrians (these inuentors of new
opinions) had not four score: besides I doubt not, but what was practiced with
the Emperor in this council, the contrary was done with the King at the
convocation, and so consequently you have little reason to think that they
were used as the good fathers at the council of Armine, for all men see that
such as the Catholics made choice of as Ambassadors for their part, to the
Emperor at that time, such the Scismaticks selected as solicitours of their
cause, and followers of those petitio^s which were delivered up: some in whom
nothing was to be noted, but boldness, neither gravity, nor learning nor
wisdom. Which if you confess, and thereby would conclude your selves to have
the truth, but to have also the same evil choice of Agents, as the
catholics at that time; we say this were to wrap his sacred Majesty in the
oversight of Constantine, and for excusing of your selves, to lay an injurious
imputation upon one of the grauest, the most religious, the most learned and
virtuous conuocations that ever were assembled in this church: wrong not your
pretended sincerity and zeal over much in your uncharitable and uncomely
ce^suring of that meeting from which we doubt not but holiness and piety
shall receive strength and comfort, Signum domini^^m. Insigne Regni* Symbolum
patiennae, humilitatis, mortis Christi triumphi.

Bucer. in censu. cap. 11.


and the church very shortly shall be blessed with a consent and happy peace,
strive not against the retaining of that which the auncientest fathers so much
commend, called it the Lords sign, the badge of Christ's Kingdom, the note of
patience, of humility, of the death of Christ, of his triumph, from these
beginnings men may not ignorantly proceed to become in the end direct enemies
to the cross of Christ, this made master BVCER modestly to speak concerning the
retaining of the sign of the cross in Baptism in our church; Signum hoc non
tam quod est vsus in Ecclesia antiquissimi, quam quod est admodum simplex, and
presentis admonitionis crucis Christi, adhiberi nec indecens, nec in vtile
existimo, Bucer in cer^. cap. 11,
si adhiheatur, modo pure intellectum and religiose excipiatur, nulla nec
superstitione adiuncta, nec elementi seruitute aut vulgari consuetudine: all
which considerations are and have been observed in our church, and therefore I
cannot but marvel how you should compare it to Reuben ascending to his fathers
bed, the one being an agent of much evil, for which he lost his beauty, the
other only an innocent sufferance of some evil, by which, if any blemish were
contracted to a thing fair, for you say, ( Thou wast fair) It is more fit the
spots to be put to an everlasting banishment: and therefore discretion would
have forborne those speeches, which follow, seeing we must tell all the world,
which often by others has been proved already, That the Cross in Baptism
as it is used in the Church of England was never either a spiritual harlot
heretofore, or a band now, and consequently his use no way forbidden by the
first table, which will better peradventure appear in that which follows.

APOLOGY.
Again, if by it the child be dedicated unto Christ, then is that done by it
(at least externally) which was before done both effectually and solemnly by
the Act of Baptism it self, which must embrace either the sacrament of
insufficiency to the same point, Act. 15.28. 1. Cor. 14, 26, Gal. 4, 9

Bafil. de natali Chri.

Zanch, Com. pend* Loc. de tradit,


for this addition of idleness and superstition in either, whereof it is made
unlawful (at least in the imposers) and upon as good ground to be refused, as
those other ceremony, which Popery drained from antiquity, and all reformed
Churches have religiously cast out.

ANSWER
WHere men are willing to dissent from the ancient lawful practice of their
own church, either because they are desirous to be like others, or because
they cannot long endure to be like themselves, It is strange with what care
they are subtly cunning, to ^inde out probable excuses whereby they may seem
to the common capacity of man, for to err with reason. If when we admit into
the church the Infant by Baptism, we than also sign him with the cross, in
token of that warfare which he promises to undertake: shall we therefore
conceive that either the Sacrament is impeacht of insufficiency in that point,
or that this addition is idle and superfluous? It is over much confidence and
rigor to conclude thus; we derogate nothing from the sacrament of Baptism,
when we call the cross a token of our warfare for Christ. For there may be
many signs of one and the same thing, though notal alike excellent. Baptism
is a Sacrament ordained of God, and a seal of his promise, teaching us also
that we are Christ's soldiers and must fight under him, choosing a ceremony
ordained by the church in the purest times, in sign and token also of the same
warfare, and as it was not superfluous in the Law to declare one thing by many
signs, as namely, man's uncleanness by circumcision, purifying etc. So it must
not be accounted needless under the Gospel to make that plain by words or
signs, that at the first cannot so easily be understood. Saint Austin says
that the whole action of our Redemption, is signified unto us by the day of the
nativity of Christ yearly celebrated, and also by the Sacrament of the supper,
but after a diverse sort: Aust. Epist. 190. ad lanuarium.
for the day of the Nativity is only a memorial thereof, the other a
Sacrament. The same may be said of crossing in Baptism, and of baptism it
self; the one is a more external and accidental sign the other a
substantial Sacrament, Act 15.28, 1. Cor. 14, 26. Gal. 4, 9
neither is this sign in the numbe^ of those unnecessary things which are a
burden, or not to edifying, or one of those beggarly rudiments which bring us
into bondage again; or one of those which Popery drained from antiquity and
all reformed churches have cast out: but a sign for use of great antiquity in
the Sacrament of baptism: now things that are significant are not all equally
significant, for a sacrament says Saint Austine, is when there is such a
remembrance of the thing done, that there is also something signyfied which is
holily to be received, Sacramentum est autem cum reigestae ita rememoratio fit,
vt aliqnid etiam significari intelligatur. Aug.
so that howsoever many ceremonies are retained in the church significant for
those ends, furtherances of piety whereunto they serve, yet we neither do, nor
dare account them significant as the sacraments, which represent christ, and
are rather to be received then done, the other rather to be done then to be
received by us. If this sign then of the cross have not been drained from
Popery, as you imagine, but of ancient and public use in Tertullians time, who
lived within less than a hundred years after Saint John; If Bucer in his
censure of our Lyturgy, P. Martyr, Hemingius, Beza, and diverse others of the
reformed Churches (as shall appear hereafter) account it to be lawful as it
is used and retained in this Church; we cannot but tell you and the whole world,
that the curiosity of some few, is no just prejudice to antiquity: nor these
slight occasions either warrant to your conscience for disobedience, or in the
opinion of wise men, any great imputation to our Church.

APOLOGI.
IF by this sign the Infant be dedicated to Christ, then is this sign a
means by which Christ is worshipped, Mat. 15, 9 Col. 1, 20, 22, Zach. de Read.
in precept. 2.

P Mart. lo Co. Clast. cap. 9

Hos. de Origin. templor. lib. 4. cap. 1 and 2.


and so will-worshippe is raised repugnant to the word; for this is plain,
that every action referred to God, to set out any part of our devotion and
duty to him, is worship. And again, it is confessed by the learned, that in
dedication of the Temple at Hielrusaem, men's houses, the Priests, the Altars,
or whatsoever was dedicated (...) Gods service or protection, the very
ceremonies, as being then built upon a word of God, were parts of Gods worship,
and concluded against the Popish dedicating ceremonies, that we now may use no
other means or rites of dedication then the word, Sacraments thanksgiui^g and
prayers, such as Constantine only used at the dedication of the Temple which
he built at Jerusalem. Add hereto that the Papists which abound in significant
ceremonies for dedication do hold them all to be mean; and parts of Gods
worship: finally yet if he that dedicated an Altar to an Idol were, Lib. 6. de
S. ^om.
as Austine says, the worshipper of an Idol in that dedication: the^ they that
dedicate a child unto God are in that dedication worshippers of God, and then
the means of that dedication, must be the means of his worship, which for man
to devise de nouo and impose, is to teach for doctrine, men's traditions.

ANSWER.
THere is no plea we so willingly hear, as that which strives for the
sincerity of Gods worship, for that being man's duty and happiness, yet
because easily corrupted, least of all permitted to man's liberty (God having
prescribed an exact form how he will be honored) we ought all of us, both to
search out and to further those holy observations, which are free from
superstition, and do serve unto this end. To dedicate the infant by this sign
to Christ, is to make this sign say you a means whereby Christ is worshipped,
and so will-worshippe is raised repugnant to the word of GOD, a thing surely
not fit either to be commanded or performed by any that are virtuous in our
Church.

It seems that in this more then ordinary curiosity of zeal, you have
neither rightly waighed what it is to dedicate in that sense which the Church
takes it, nor how many, and of what nature are the parts of external divine
worship. For every action referred to God (of which kind pearaduenture this is
not) to set out any part of our devotion and duty to him, is not of necessity
worship; for as in Baptism we are incorporat into the death of christ, which
was ignominious upon the cross: so by this sign we do externally testify to
the world, that we have commended our selves (for it does not please you to say
dedicated) unto his service, of whose death, merit, and profession we are not,
nor ever purpose to be ashamed; all which we testify by signing this sign
in the seat of shame, without any proportion or resemblance with divine
worship. Only we acknowledge (as D. Whitakers notes) that this is an ancient
ceremony from the first beginning almost of Religion, Whit. contra. Quest. 6
and the christian church; the reason whereof, as he notes was this; Vt
Christiani qui tum inter Ethnicos viuebant qui a fide alienissimi essent, sese
omni ratione Christianos esse declararent, atque testarentur public, That
christians, who then lived amongst the Heathen, and such as were aliens from
the faith, might publicly restifie and declare themselves that they were
christians.

For with this sign (by reason of the contempt of the cross which all others
had) the christians were accustomed to mark and sign themselves, as with the
ensign of their own profession; which being the custom of those times (as
Doctor Whitakers notes) and no more then is performed at this day, we cannot
but wonder at the cauelling of such as make it any part of Divine worship,
and at the peevishness of those who from hence would conclude a will worship
invented from humane reason.

All men may know that there was unto the Jews, and so is and shall be in
all Churches until the end of the world, besides the Sacraments in the
external worship sacrifices, oblations, and such like, which are not the
inventions of men, but traditions of the church which (in matters of this
nature) has authority to appoint days, places, and things furtherances and
parts, though not of the immediate, yet in a large phrase, of the external
worship of God* of which external worship, some parts belong to obedience,
doing and fulfilling the moral precepts, some other to the observation of
outward ceremonies, and yet even these are not all of one nature, nor of equal
nearnes to the principal parts of the outward worship: for the ceremonial
worship, which has and shall be in the Church in all ages, consisting in
things and actions, is thus distinguished: into those wherein the worship
consists, and into those which are annexed to it. These amongst the Jews
were Temples, Altars, Persons, Garments, Vessels, Times and such like, but with
us (as one notes) they are for number fewer, Zanch, in Deca. page 41^.
for signification more famous, for virtue more excellent, for^ observation
more easy. Numero pauciora, significat^one Aug. ^o^a v^rtute ^rae^^a^tiora and
obseruatu taciliora, Aust. Zanch.
And howsoever we can be content, to say and think, that it is not lawful
to worship God with any other external and ceremonial worship then is
warranted in his word, by his own allowance: yet if any thing be varied,
which is not commanded of God, or added, not as essential, but accidental,
and not as necessary, but as indifferent, pertaining to comeliness, order,
and edification, we cannot think that there is any change in the worship
commanded, nor any new worship brought in without warrant. For example, Christ
celebrated the Supper at e^ening, the Apostles and the Church after the^, in
the morning; shall we say therefore any thing is added or detracted in this
Sacrament? no because Christ did not command that this should be celebrated in
the evening as he did, but only that we should do that which he did, not at
that time wherein he did it, so that the ancient Church (as we may read in
Justin Martyr) mingling and delaying the wine with water* did not therefore or
thereby change the institution of the Supper, whereof there may be a twofolde
reason; one that the wine which Christ gave to his disciples, might be so
allaid for any thing we know, seeing the Apostles have set nothing down to
the contrary, and therefore probable that the ancient Church received it from
them. Secondly, because the ancient Church did not add ^his in the Sacrament,
as an esse^tiall necessary thing pertaining to the substance of the Supper,
Blood and water out of the side of Christ.
but as accidental to signify a mystery; the like may be said of many
things in Baptism, where either by adding or detracting to alter things
otherwise not essential in Baptism, and therein still following the laws and
ceremonies of that Church wherein we live, is not to change either the
sacrament of Christ, or to profane it by addition of any will worship; to
ordain then new divine worship, is to add unto his word: which thing is not
lawful, seeing the word is necessary, binds the conscience, delivers the
substance of divine worship, and has nothing in it expressed indifferent.
Now to add hereunto is to ordain somewhat, as a thing absolutely necessary,
and pertaining to the essence of worship, and which so binds the conscience
as the word it self, and therefore they add not to the word, which by the
consent of the Church, do ordain any ceremony in the external worship
(observing the limitations of order, comeliness, and edification) not as
necessary, but as a thing indifferent and free, binding the conscience not out
of the quality of the thing, but only from hence, that it is commanded: for
as there are (as the schoolmen say) somethings which are mala quia prohibita,
somethings which are prohibita quia mala, so there are some things mandata quia
necessaria, some things necessaria quia mandata, of which kind in Baptism we
account the cross.

But as we neither allow unmeet, nor purpose the stiff defense of any
unnecessary custom heretofore used in Baptism, so we know not yet any
reason why infants should be the worse, if at their first admission into the
Church of Christ, if at the time when they are delivered as it were unto Gods
own possession (for the Church and every member thereof, as Master Zanchy
notes, ought first of all to offer it self to God) ceremonies fit to betoken
such intents be usual with us, as in the purest times they have been. Hereby
putting the whole congregation in mind that the Infant thus admitted into the
church, has by the promise of his ^ue^ties renounced all obedience to the
enemies of God, and surrendered up himself for ever unto his service who
suffered for his redemption upon the cross. This being then our innovation, and
the beginning of that profession wherein we purpose to continue to our lives
end, to have either besides the thing, which is Baptism, a significant sign
which is the cross, or to call it a dedication (seeing the Greek word (...)
is by the old translatour of the Bible, Vnde Encoenia noualia.
sometimes translated dedico, sometimes initio or innouor (which Quintinus
observed at the fifth canon of the council of Gangren) cannot be, in my
opinion, from the word Dedicate to make the cross any part of divine worship:
for though our dedication be not such as the dedication of the Temple was (and
therefore the comparison unfitly alleged in this place) yet godly men (as P.
Martyr notes) are then visibly consecrated unto God when they be washed in
holy Baptism, Loc. Com. part. 4. cap. 19.
and hereof to have a sign externally to signify their intention, or this
sign to be the cross cannot in any, reasonable construction be the
invention of a will worship.

And if this sign be less lawful at this time, by the blemish it may seem
to receive from Popery; It is not impossible, but that sometimes they may judge
as rightly, what is decent about such external affairs of God, as in some
greater things what is true.

The Hebrews did dedicate and initiate their things not by simple and bare
words, but by adding of outward rites, signs I mean, and tokens which might
be seen, not that they taught any holiness or divine quality to be in those
things (for seeing it is in the soul, these are not capable of it) but so they
thought because the rites being instituted by GOD (whose authority in this
case the Church now has) those things which were consecrated, might become
instruments of the holy spirit, Loc. Com. lib* 4 19. lib. 4. cap
by which the faith of men might be stirred up; this is the opinion of P.
Martyr. Seeing then our dedication, as shall appear afterward, is not as you
imagine, we conclude, that it is neither unlawful for the church to add
ceremonies, significant in this kind, as accidental parts of the external
worship, nor (though we yet grant you not so much unlawful amongst those
for to account the cross, being neither by our church esteemed as a means)
of divine worship, nor imposed for Doctrine, being but the tradition of men.

APOLOGY.
IF the child be dedicated by this sign, then either initiated as the (...)
imports or consecrated hereby as the word (...); Chanack* Chadash.
If the former then Baptism is made void, if the latter, then the cross is
operative, and to say truth, in use of speech, to dedicate unto holy use, and
to consecrate is all one; nor can it be replied that dedicated is as much, as
declared to be dedicated (though if it were so, this sign should come into a
needles office, yea into that for whih Baptism was ordained) for beside that
the phrase is not used, the very words of the Canon do reject that sense,
Illir. Clauis. script.

Bell* I Would cult. sanct. lib. 2, ca. 5 Martyr, lo. Co* Clas. 4, 9*

Orig. Homil. 8. in diueri. Ter. de Co^o. mil. Cypr. Epist. 6. and ad Demet and
test. advers 9. Iud. lib. z. cap. 1. Hier. epist. ad Demetriadem Amb. Ser. 49.
and 90.

Athanas. de Incar. vbi. Basil. de Sp. san. cap. 37. Aug. tract. in Ioh. 110.
and others.

Maashal of the Cross. fol. 24. Bellar. de Imag. lib. 4. cap. 30.

Confer. page 73.74.

Rhem. Anno^. in ^. Tim. 2, Stapt. prompt. part. 1

Belar. demis. lib, 2. cap. 15.

Marshal of the cross. Missase, in benedict* crucis.


by confessing our Dedication by this sign to be such, as the ancient fathers
before Popery did use.

Now it is plain, that saving the very point of adoration and worship, with
which popery crowned this Idol, there is nothing ascribed to the cross, in or
out of Baptism, by the ranckest Papists, but the fathers are as deeply engaged
in the same. So, if we use it as the fathers, we hold it to be so necessary
for our defense, as was the blood of the passover upon the Israelites posts, or
as the mark on their foreheads in the ninth of Ezechiell without which none
can be safe. For so did the fathers, and we take the soul to be fenced by the
crossing of the body, and the cross to have virtue of consecrating the
sacrament or the child: of driving away devils witchcraft and diseases, of
strengthing against temptations. And if we will excuse the fathers by saying
they spoke thus relative, with reference to the cross of Christ and his death,
neither will all their speeches hear this relief, nor have we at all
distanced them from the Papists, who say as much for themselves: and then what
Popish superstition is that, from which we have purged it? Specially if his
majesty were truly informed at the conference, that in Ba^tisme the Papists
never ascribe any power or spiritual grace thereto (as indeed he was not)
witness their writers, and how either skilfully or negligently have we under
the faier name of the Primitive and Apostolical Churches, reduced it to that
use of holiness and consecration, which in the name of the Papists could not
have been borne: I confess my Lord, I had rather think some committies to
whom the penning of this Canon was betrusted to have failed therein then
misdeeme all that reverend assembly to have intended such a meaning. But so
long as this interpretation stands as the mi^de of our Church I shall fear it
justly, knowing how under the covert of phrases, the maine points of truth
have been surprised, and therefore may be again. So I conclude, that as the
Israelites bore that alter for a sign, which for Sacrificing they could not
have suffered, so for a simple significatiue sign, I could have borne that of
the cross, which for an altar of dedication I cannot approve.

ANSERE.
WHILST some men, in the sincerity of an upright mind, have labored with
humility to give satisfaction to contentious spirits, both those persons run
more speedily from us, whom we desire to overtake, and also a common enemy
surpriseth us with advantage, making us to seem in the eye of the world to be
of their mind, because with greater moderation we abstain from that vehement
zeal to reformation, that others more rashly are tra^sported with; so that in
this case, the labor is neither easy nor safe. For to answer our brethren at
home with that truth and freedom, which both the cause and our love to their
persons does challenge from us, is but to open the mouth of the common
adversary, as if we spoke and thought as they do, and out of this fear, to
suppress our answer, were with much weakness to betray the truth.

This consideration, as it is not of small importance in the whole cause, so
especially in this point concerning the cross, where the diffence of a lawful
ceremony, may easily be thought the erecting of that Idol, whereunto the most
superstitious in those later times have been corruptly persuaded to give honor.

For mine own part in satisfaction to the Church of Christ (whereunto I owe
the uttermost of that simple talent which GOD has given me) I Protest, that
neither out of malice I oppugn our brethren at home, nor willingly would be
thought to Patronize the least error of the Church of Rome; neither, I hope,
has any thing ever passed my pen with so slight consideration since I was
able to deal in this cause, whereof I cannot give a sufficient reason that it
is far from the defense of any error of the Romish Church.

And therefore in my opinion, the late Author of the Protestants Apology
has dealt somewhat unkindly with me and others, to allege us as witnesses
for their side, but most inconsiderately, to the disadvantage of his own
cause, who now in the latter end being driven from Scriptures, Fathers, and
Councelles, are compelled to support themselves with the wrested mistaken
Testimonies of such as have and are willing to fight against them, and yet if
we err of what valewe are our errors to convince a truth?

The danger of this evil, if it were fully considered by our brethren that
will needs strive with us, would make them forbear all further contention in
this cause; and Join with our Church in cerimonyes, as they do in doctrine,
that all like the children of the same womb might be ready as with one heart
and one voice, to resist their subtle and malicious attempts, who under color
of Religion, and the Catholic faith, seek treacherously the ruin, and
subversion both of this Church, and this commonwelth.

And therefore (in the Judgment of all wise, and religious men) inexcusable is
their pains, and travel, who extend their wits to the uttermost of that they
are able, to derive an envy upon that government, (as Infected with Popish
superstition) wherein, hitherto they have lovingly peaceably and plentifully
been brought-vp.

It seems that the use of the Cross in Baptism offends not so much, as
that the Infant by this means is dedicated to Gods service; because (say you)
If dedicated (at which word you take all your offense) then either Initiated or
consecrated (for the words in the Hebrewe do only signify one of these two)
of which if we grant the first, you peremptorily conclude that Baptism is
made void, if the second that then this sign is operative and has virtue in
it: and yet (say you) in the true use of speech, to dedicate and to consecrate
is all one; I am sorry that in matters of this consequence for which men can
persuade themselves that it is warrantable to forsake their flocks, that at
the last, the conclusion being summed up, it should be only a contention of
words; yet I must tell you that to speak properly, and as men of Judgment
have done before us; to consecrate is to make of profane things holy; to
dedicate is when they are appointed to some certain GOD; P. Martyr, loc. Com.
Par. 4.9
for to dedicate or Initiate the Greeks called (...) and (...) but to
consecrate (...) and to sanctify (...), for to sanctify as Peter, Martyr
says, is nothing else but to apply to divine and religious uses, or to prepare
himself to offer some thing to God.

Now if it may appear (as doubtless it will) that not only religious things
were dedicated, but other things also, and that their dedication was in another
kind, without any worship divine, but by first using; what inconvenience will
follow, if in the whole action of baptism, and those prayers that are used,
the Infant be dedicated, which in the canon is ascribed unto the cross, that
being the only external cerimonie expressing the intention of the whole act?
Thus David's house was dedicated, for which was made the thirtieth Psalm: the
walls of a city. Nehem. 12.27. were dedicated, which was nothing else, as P.
Martyr says, but that the walls of a city being made up, the people together
with the Levites and Priests, and also the Princes went thither, and there gave
thanks unto God, because the wall; were reedified, and prayed that the city
might be righteously used. This kind of Dedication was called by the Hebrews
Canach. The other which was Chadash, was to consecrate things holy to God. Now,
which of these you understand to be done by the cross in Baptism, it will
not be greatly material against us, seeing the very act of Dedication or
consecration depends not upon the sign of the cross, but yet so said,
because the cross is an ancient significant convenient sign of that act of
dedication or consecration which is done in Baptism, by the word and prayer.

For our Dedication in Baptism is as it were, a surre^dering of all that tight
which our parents, or our selves might have in our selves into Gods hands:
wherein as in the dedication both of the Temple and the Tabernacle, God gave a
manifest sign that he took possession of both: so it stands with reason,
that on the Infants behalf, hereafter to put him in mind, and for the present
to admonish those that are lookers on, that the minister sign him with that
badge, which is the ensign of his merit and victory, whom the child must
serve. The ancient use of the cross at all other times was for infidels, but
in Baptism for the good of believers, which is intended still: but as they
have done in this, so they exclude the cross in the dedication of Temples, as
if it were all one to build a house to God, and a parlour or Kitchen to our
selves; wherein though I allow not greatly, the superstitious number of twelve
in the building of Churches: yet I am not altogether of their opinion, who hold
crosses unmeet at the dedication of Temples, which if some corruptly have used
to a false end, we cannot but mislike their superperstitious intention, and
yet retain that warrantable sign, which well becomes that place, which ought
to be the religious Schoole-house of Christ's death. If we may credit antiquity
in the story of Julian, when he looked the intrals of beasts (for
south-saying, Sozo^. page, 108. Nazian, or ^ in Iul. 1. P. Diac. etc.
inuenit crucem coronatam, he found a cross with a crown, from whence some
collected Christian religion to be perpetual, and that Julian could not
overcome it, others Angustias and quasi carceres crucis; but peradventure more
truly, to signify an everlasting Crown purchased by his death, that suffered
upon the cross; besides, in the garments of those Jews which sought to
reedifie the Temple at Iulians commandment, there were imprinted crosses, as
if that power that suffered ignominiously upon the cross, would testify the
strength of his arm, even in that which they most contemned, shall we then
be ashamed of that badge? or be unwilling to dedicate our selves unto his
service by that sign, which was the note of his fearful power to such as
resisted his right hand, and so far honored by the holy ghost that it often
expresses the whole meritt of his passion, by the blood of the Cross, so
that if strange conclusions be not urged upon us, It is neither to make
Baptism void, to say we are dedicated by the Cross, (ascribing that to the
sign which is done in the whole act) nor to make it, or Baptism operative in
that sense, to say that by Baptism and so manifested by that sign, we are
consecrated to gods service, and that consequently, our dedication by this
sign, is such as the ancient fathers before poperye did use.

But least the Innocencye of the ancient times, should seem to be a warrant
for the simple use of the Cross among us, (who thought it ever Honor and
virtue enoughe to tread in the harmeles steps of our forefathers) you lay
an equal burden for this corruption upon them, as if nothing were ascribed to
the Cross, in or out of Baptism by the rankest Papists (saving the very point
of adoration) but the fathers are as deeply engaged in the same; this If I had
uttered, the Church of Rome would Justly have thought, that I had done them a
great honor, in allowing their superstitious abuse of this sign, saving only
in one point, to be the very same ^or virtue, and power, as the auncyenter
fathers did ascribe unto it; so that whilst you desire to make the Church of
England as guilty of superstition in the use of this sign, as they are now of
the Church of Rome, you Inconsiderately and perhaps untruly make the rankest
papists no less Ignorant in that point, then the auncyentest and purest
fathers have been before them: whatsoever is capable of corruption (as the best
things and actions wherein man concurreth, of necessity are) (for we have all
corrupted our own ways) comes not upon the sudden to that height of evil
but that more evident marks of the former Integritye remain, which in
continuance of time, are not only blemished, but whollye turned into another
corrupt nature.

This is evident in that great and Antichristian defection of the truth, which
was not all eclipsed or ouershadowed at once; but Ignorance breeding
superstition; superstition never satisfying it self in the surmised acts of
religion, but erring in the excess, as prophanenes in the defect, has added
daily to the first corruptions, that she is now as the head of a small
river, which sends forth but one stream, which cannot know her own
daughter in, continuance of time, being grown like unto an Ocean, by the
manyfold additions of sundry and strainge waters.

The Histories of former ages do record unto us the beginning, the increase
the perfection of the grouth in the superstitious corruptions of the Church of
Rome; and howsoever all agree not, when this defection began, yet most men
know, that there was a time in the priatiue age of our fathers, when few or
none of the ceremonies of the Church were infected with such corruption as now
they are. So that the severity of those is over great, who would wrap the
fathers immediately succeeding the Apostles time, with the same superstition
(save only in the point of adoration) wherewith the Papists are justly accused
to be infected at this day: I confess, when the Papists are charged by us to
have corrupted the truth, by rehearsal of many false miracles done by the
sign of the cross, they allege the testimonies of all fathers, Bellar.
Marshall.
saying (which you confess, but I do not) that they have esteemed no
otherwise of the cross then the fathers of the Church have done before them.
We then say for satisfaction in this point, that it had been equal and right
in you, before the imputation of so much corruption to the blessed memory of
those holy men, to have showed what the Papists ascribe unto the cross, what
the fathers, and what we; No man can deny, but that God, after the death of
his son, manifested his power to the amazement of the world in this
contemptible sign, which peradventure gave just occasion, being the
instrument of so many miracles, that corrupter times, as those that succeeded
were, did ouerburden it with fables and worship, the one false, the other
Idolatrous, both serving to poison the after ages with dangerous superstition:
the Church of Rome at this present, differs from the ancient fathers, as we
differ from them, in making the very cross whereupon Christ died, to be a
relick, and all other crosses to be as Images: and lastly the vere figure made
in the air, to have a spiritual and divine virtue, to cast out devils and to
work miracles, Beller. lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 30.
and as Bellermine says Terret and fugat daemones, pellit morbos, and omnia
mala; sanctificat ea quibus imprimitur; which virtues or some of which, if God
manifested in the cross in the days of our forefathers, Sanctit as accedit
rebus cum signantium cruce.
to ascribe the same unto now, is not to say truly as they fathers did, but
superstitiouslie to err with the church of Rome, as if the power of healing
which followed annoynting in the primitive church, might be a warrant either
for the anointing used amongst papists at this day, or imbolden any man to say
that nothing is ascribed by the rankest papist (for that is your phrase) to
anointing, but the fathers are as deeply engaged in the same; so that whilst
our church professes the use hereof as the fathers did, they neither tie
themselves to the example of all, nor can be justly denied to have the warrant
of the soundest fathers for the use hereof. For the moderate use as now it is
retained in the church of England seems to be an apostolical constitution,
being accounted as a thing auncyently and generally received in Tertullians
time, who was within two hundred years after Christ, and within less then a
hundred years after, Saint John, Conser. page 73 74.
in which shortness of time, it were Injury to think, that a superstitious
Idolatry, should gain that honor, to be accounted an ancient and a reverend
sign. And therefore in my opinion less excusable is their fault, who lay the
imputation of false dealing with his majesty by the Bishops at the conference,
being informed (but as you say) ( untruly) that the papists never ascribe any
power or spiritual grace in Baptism unto the Cross; surely wisdom must
account it if not malice, yet great rashness to give the ly to those reverend
persons, in answer whereof I only say thus much; that what the Bishops had
informed his majesty in this point, his profound knowledge like the oracle of
God, Rhem. Test. in 1. Tim. 4 Bellard. de miss. Lib. 215 Signum crucis est
ceremonia omnium communissima et antiquissima Aust Tract. 118, in Johan.
adds ( and I find it to be true); and questionless those places alleged
in your margent, do not prove that in Baptism the papists ascribe any power or
spiritual grace unto the cross: but only make it a most ancient and most
common cerimonie, without which no Sacraments can rightly be performed. Wherein
if following Saint Austin they go to farr^ yet it is injury to charge them with
that which is none of theirs; and for our selves we say, and I doubt not but
shortly it will be proved to all the world, we have purged the cross in
baptism from all that popi^^ superstition which did cleave unto it, and
therefore you need not excuse that reverend assembly by laying the fault upon
some committyes, seeing a little before you are not afraid to accuse them, for
dealing with others, for the making of the Canons, as the fathers were used in
the council of Arimyne, and whom immediately in the words following, you
iealously susspect, under the covert of phrases to surprise the truth; but as
wisdom and judgment is their honor, so reverence and obedience is our duty.
So then to draw to a conclusion in this point (leaving the full defense of the
cross to others of more Judgment) we cannot but confess that we have read
many things in the ecclesiastical histories, and the fathers in commendation
of this sign, which at first peradventure not evil gave occasion of
superstition to those that followed: many things we confess to be fabulous and
untrue, so^ethings perhaps counterfeited by Satan, other things true but not
available to warrant the blindness of after times: some things which in those
times might well be tolerated but not now: some things which even in these
times, and in our church may justly warrant the use of the cross amongst us:
Hooker. Lib. 5. Sect. 65. Page 165.68.
for) as one learnedly observes (which may give the indifferent reader
satisfaction in this cause) between the cross which superstition honoreth as
Christ, and that ceremony of the cross which serves only for a sign of
remembrance, there is as plain and as great a difference, as between those
brase^ Images which Solomon made to bear up the cestern of the Temple and
(since both were of like shape but of unlike use) that which the Israelites in
the wilderness did adore* 2. Chro. 4.3.
or between the altars which Josias destroyed, because they were instruments
of mere idolatry, Exodus 32 4.
and that which the tribe of Rube^ with others erected, near to the river of
Jordan, for which also (as you do) they grew at the first into some dislike,
and were by the rest of their brethren suspected yea hardly charged with open
breach of the law of God, accused of backwardnes in religion, vpbrayded
bitterly with the fact of Peor, and the odious example of Achan* as if the
building of their Altar in that place had given manifest show of no better then
intended Apostasy, till by a true declaration made in their own defense, it
appeared that such as misliked, misunderstood their enterprise, in as much as
they had no intent to build any altar for sacrifice which God would have no
where offered, saving in Jerusalem only, but to a far other end and purpose,
which being opened satisfied all parts, and so delivered them from causeles
blame: so likewise touching the sign and ceremony of the cross (which for a
simple significatiue sign your self can allow) we no way find our selves
bound to relinquish it, neither because the first inuentors thereof were but
mortal men, nor least the sense and signification (namely to dedicate) should
burden us, as the authors of a new gospel in the house of god nor in respect
of some cause which the fathers had more then we have to use the same, nor
finally for any such offense or scandal as heretofore it has been subject
unto by error now reformed in the mind of men. Of kneeling at the Communion
SECT. 9.


APOLOGY
My last exception about the sacrament is about the kneeling at the communion,
which for my own part I never stuck at, as at a thing unlawful to be used,
because it is administered with a prayer over every receiver, and for that it
is not unlawful, nor (if superstition had not staynd it) unfit to take such a
token of Gods favor (as well as the favors of a prince) upon our knees. But my
reverend Lord this so extreme urging of it, in the Canon as to make the only
omission of it (in a poor man who of a tender conscience and in detestation of
the late popish and Idolatrous use thereof shall forbear it) so deep a cause
of seperating a man from all part in Christ's death, as that the minister
himself shall be suspended if he suffer him to communicate, seems a charge of
more weight, then an indifferent cerimonie should bear, and such as thrusts
me^ upon a breach of gods commandment, Math. 15.6. Zanch. compe. de Trad.
Histor. Lib. 1. Cap. 11.
either in doing against persuasion, or forbearing the Lords table. And this
makes me dout how I can subscribe thereto, and calls to mind Tacitus
observation, that the mutual hurtes of the men of Lions and Vyenna were so
often and cruel, that a man might easily see, they fought not alone for Nero
and Galba.

ANSWER.
Where the weakness of man has no other strength, and his soul by reason of
sin, no other means of salvation, but In and By the covenant betwixt God and
him; there we are especially to make account of those duties, which are Signs,
and means, of all that which religiously is to be performed on our parts:
this the fathers have expressed under this one name of Devotion, which some of
them not unfitly term the marrow of our burnt sacrifices as if our burnt
sacrifices without this, Medulla Hol^ caustorum, Lib. 4. Orthodox. fid cap. 3
were like the offerings of Caine, without fatnes. Now as man (as Damascen
speaks) is composed of two natures, Intellectual and sensible; so he owes
and is to offer unto god a two fold devotion, the one spiritual, which
consists in the inward mind, the other corporal in the outward humiliation
of the body: this latter is rather for the furtherance of our selves and
others, John. 4.
in the ways of piety, the^ as a thing of it self acceptable to God, who
being a spirit, is to be worshipped in spirit and truth: yet by this external
gesture (the bowing of the knee) as by the manifest figure of our humility
which corporally we perform: our inward affection cherefully is stirred up,
with alacrity and diligence to discharge what belongs to his inward worship:
the use of bowing the knee, when we either beg or receive any thing from Gods
hand, has been ancyent and warrantable in Gods church, and it is no less
comely and behooueful for us upon our knees, to beg that the cupp of his blood
may profitably and effectually pass to us, Luke 23
then for our savior himself prostrate to in treat, that the cupp of his
passion might pass from him.

For seeing all men in the time of that action, whilst the minister uttering
the words in the administration of the sacrament pray, that they may be
preserved in body and soul unto eternal life, are then (unless they be
careless of so great a benefit) humbly prostrate in their hearts, and begging
with all, the assistance of his grace to receive it worthily: all other offices
of religion may better want the bowing of our knees then this one, whereof by
reason of our sins we may justly fear to want the benefit, and wherein we
hope to receive our savior and all his merits, at whose name all knees are to
bow both in heaven and earth; and therefore our kneeling at the communion, as
one well notes, is the gesture of piety, Mr. Hooker. Lib. 5 Doct. 68. Page 183.
for if we did there present our selves but to make some show or dumb
resemblance of a spiritual feast; it may be that sitting were the fitter
ceremony: but coming as receivers of inestimable grace at the hands of God,
what does better beseem our bodies at that hour, then to be sensible
witnesses of minds unfeignedly humbled? and if the example of our savior
ouersway any man's conscience in this case, we must tell them that the church
has varyed even with allowance, both the time and the place from those which
our savior used; and in this our Lord himself did that which custom and long
usage had made fit, we that which fitness and great decency has made usual:
which external decent humility if any ignorantly have stained with
superstition, it is not their voluntary service without warrant in doing more
then they ought can priuiledg us contrary to reason and the commandment of
our own church to perform less then we should* For seeing, all local bodies
must have some position in all that which they do or suffer, what could be
thought of in this action more convenient for both, then kneeling, which fitly
serves to express our humility in receiving so unspeakable a favor, and
withal to set forth the offering up of our thanks, which, prostrate upon our
knees we desire god to accept in his own son? wherein doubtless if all men
had been well instructed (nay if many had not been taught the contrary) without
laws even reason it self would have ^ould them that nothing was better
beseeming there uerence of this act, then heartily to beg and humbly to give
thanks, for so unspeakable a benefit upon their knees. And therefore you have
truly considered (waighing the thing it self) that it was neither unlawful nor
unfit upon our knees to take such a token of gods favor, wherein how far even
at ordinary times, others in former ages have gone before the presumptuous
stubbernes of our days, de viris Illust. in Iacobo, et epist 15, de laud, bu^
Marcellae, Tertull, ad Scap, ce Lib, 3, ad Ver. Mark, cap, ^8. Ille interior in
uisibilis qui ^o^ fecit auge^ur ac per hoc ^ordis affectus qui vt fierent illa
precessa quia vt facta sunt cressit quia facta sunt crescit Aust. de cura p^o
mort, cap. 5
saint Hierom and others may witness. For howsoever the motions of the body
cannot well be, unless the mind before be prepared with the same affection,
yet even that inward invisible humility of the heart which gave strength to
this outward receives strength from it: and that which went before that it
might be done, receives increase from it in that it is done: which decent
behavior if any mislike because what the church thinks fit to be done it
punishes sharply when it is not done, these take unto themselves a liberty,
that whilst the church censureth worthily the disobedience of such as hear not
her voice, these over boldly censure the church in that her voice, is not
guided by their tongues. And if the punishment of excommunication be thought by
any over grievous for the omission of so indifferent a ceremony (which in your
opinion is a small offense) you must know that wise men cannot account the
offense small, where the disobedience is great; and the disobedience cannot be
little, where there is a contempt of those laws which the church does make:
nay as the servants answered Nahaman the Syrian, if you had been commanded
any great thing especially in the humility of our souls to receive so great a
benefit, ought we not to have done it? and therefore howsoever we pity their
case, yet inexcusable is the error of those men who choose rather to want the
food of their soul by this blessed sacrament, then to receive the sacrament
prostrate upon their knees, as if an opinion of that superstition wherewith some
others had stained it, could hurt him that kneeleth in obedience and humility,
especially knowing his own heart to be upright in that point, and seeing no
reason sinisterly to suspect the virtuous intention of this church which
professes an utter abolishing of al superstitious ceremonies. And therefore if
you think the reverend fathers of the church to deal with you and others in
urging of these things, as the men of Lions and Vyenna, whose hurts being often
and cruel, showed that they fought for some further end the^ for Nero and
Galba: it is but your want of charity and not their fault. Neither do I se how
that act can be fitting to this purpose, seeing as the tra^slatour of Tacitus
does tell you in the margent; the first inhabitans of Lions had been driven by
force out of Vyenna and therefore were justly to hate them as unjust usurpers
of that which was theirs. Tacit. Histo. Lib. ^, cap. 11.
Which in my small understanding can bear no proportion betwixt the bishops
and those which refuse subscription, against whom if severity be used (I date
protest for some of them upon my knowledge) it is with much grief, Math.. 18.
Excomunicatus hosti non datur quasi damnandus sed corrigendus. Aquinas.
and for no other end but for the unity and peace of this church. And if any
man be excommunicated in this case, I dare not excuse him seeing our savior
commands us to account him as a heathen that will not hear the church, who
notwithstanding does not give him to Satan to condemn him but to correct him,
and therefore I hope we may be bold to conclude as the church does, that
kneeling at the communion is a ceremony lawful, and fitly commanded to be
used etc. and that those justly are excommunicate who refuse to do it.

APOLOGY
TO end, Of burial. SECT. 11
my last exception is at those words in the order of Burial, wherein we
pronounce a sure and certain hope of resurrection to eternal life over the
departed, and pray to have our perfect consummation and bliss with him. ^^was
wont to defend the book herein thus, that the church providing a general
order therein for her children, meant not to urge the application thereof to
every person, Canon, 58
and in that sense subscribed thereto; But now I find by the Canon that a
minister is bound to bury every corpse, unless the party stood excommunicate
with the greater excommunication, Matthew. 16.1^ John. 20.23 Canon, 26,
and then to use the form prescribed in the book: whence will issue that be a
man never so haereticall or exorbitant, never so vile in life, or in death
impenitent, unless he stood excommunicate etc. The minister who should discern
betwixt the clean and unclean, whose power is to bynd and loose, who by an
other Canon is tied to suspend from the communion every notorious offendour,
must pronounce an assured hope of this man's happynes, Esaias, 5, 20 Proverbs, 17,
13
and pray to be consummate and blessed with him, which is to speak good of
evil; and (which god abhors) to justify the wicked.

ANSWER.
AS in a great variety of Jewels, affection and judgment do not easily agree
which to value and esteem of most worth, so amongst al those virtues (the true
ornaments of a Christian life) which severally are divided unto Christian men,
all being excellent, it cannot easily be determined, which exceeds; but
leaving the rest, and following the blessed contention which Saint Paul makes
concerning Faith, Hope, and Charity; we say Abraham testifyeth for the first,
who believed, and it was accounted unto him for righteousness. Enoch taught
the assurance of Hope, who religiously expecting a better life, Genesis 4.26.
gave beginning to the public invocation of Gods name; Lastly, the pattern
of true Charity was Christ himself, whole love being stronger then death,
Amor tenuit in Cruce, que^ mors non tenuit in sepulcher. 1. John. 4
held him upon the cross whom Death was not able to hold in the grave; nay God
makes Love, to be himself, in that he makes himself to be love, and who
so abides in love, to abide in God, and God in him, and howsoever there can be
no Christian life, where these three remain not, Faith, Hope, and Charity,
yet the greatest of these is Charity. 1. Cor. 13.
For if we had all faith, so that we could remove mountains; yet if we
wanted Charity, we were nothing: Faith is the foundation of the Spiritual
building of Gods house, (...)
Charity the roof, without which the best are, but as houses uncovered that
cannot long continue: there is no just reason to deny our love unto our
brethren of the same promise, (who are the sons and hoyres of the same life
with us) except sin: nay though they sin, which we ought not to love in
them, yet we are not warranted to leave off our love; though they leave not sin.
For even out of this virtue of charity we can afforde them a covering to make
their sins in our opinion to seem less, Charitas oberit multitudin^m
peccatorum 1. Pet. 4.8.
Charity still directing us in other men's falls for to hope the best. And
therefore even those whom we ought to excommunicate (if we had authority) we
dare not pronounce as absolutely cut off from the attainement of everlasting
life; the one is the discipline of the Church, to cut off for a time that which
is evil; the other is our peculiar charity to hope that that may be good,
which is cut off. And therefore such men who have no other interest in their
brethren, but to hope and to speak the best things, can no way receive
prejudice, if (following the commandment of the Church) they pronounce of all
living within her bosom, a sure and certain hope of resurrectio to eternal
life. And pray to have with them their perfect consummation and bliss, not
taking unto them the exact judgment of God himself, who only knows such as
belong unto him, in which men may err as well (though not so easily, In
Ecclesia sunt ^^ulta lup^, extra ecclesiam sunt mul^a en^^
nor so often) in those of much outward holiness, as in them that are openly
profane, and therefore in both we think and speak only as we are warranted
by Hope. Wherein if our charity shall exceed the happiness of any that so
dies, it shall be no hurt to our soul to pray to have our perfect
consummation and bliss with him, of whom charity made us so to hope and to
speak, though he be not saved: this being the intention of our prayer, that
all dying in the bosom of the Church shall have part in the triumphant (with
whom we desire from the communion of Saints to partake, not as they in Gods
secret judgment may be, for so we think it not lawful to speak of the
best that are, but as our charity makes us to hope of them, and as the church
teaches us to speak) with this our brother, and all other departed in the true
faith of his holy name) for so we suppose him to be; for howsoever his sins
may be manifest and public in this life, yet we dare not esteem him in death
impenitent; neither can any authority belonging to us, so warrant us to
distinguish betwixt the clean, and the unclean, but that in charity we may
both hope and speak better then the secret justice of god will permit: and yet
neither speak good of evil, seeing we think as we speak, nor justify the
wicked seeing we acquitt but them, whom we have no authority to condemn;
following in all things a christian charity which there is little fear should
be overmuch, especially in these days wherein it it is prophesied that it
shall wax cold.

APOLOGY
Of complaints and conjectures. SECT. 12
THese are mine exceptions, for as for some incommodious phrases and speeches, I
hold it my duty to take them in the fairest sense, till cause be given to
suspect a worse; and now (my Lord) I humbly beseech you to consider that I have
not revoked my former subscriptions, but only refused a new; that I had reason
for that I did and that which I do, that the interpretation of ambiguous
things make them good or evil, that it is neither strange nor unfit, to
change the judgment as the evidence changes. And if I can obtain any thing
of your Lordship, let me crave the repute of an honest man, how ignorant or
deceived soever you take me to be. And for the rest I will now speak as a dying
man counting my self after twenty years ministry (painfully I thank god
peaceably as his church knows, would god I could add fruitefully) spent in
the churches service, utterly cast out of service and of all me^^^s of
maintenance, charged with a wife, and ten children in a poor estate.

ANSWER
THere are few considerations that more effectually do move pity, then where
the innocent are wraped in a misery procured by the offense of others; and I
confess for my own part, I never heard or thought of the just deprivation of
any of tolerable desert, but I heartily lamented, that those things should
seem so grievous in their judgment, as to defraude the church of God, of their
best endeavors, and to silence themselves from the preaching of the gospel,
that might be through a blessing so benificiall to many, and being imposed by a
woe, could hardly be neclected without a curse. This has made me earnestly and
often to pray that the thirst of Innovation increased in many by the coming of
his majesty unto this kingdom, did not enforce men through the evil counsel
of some hypocritical brethren, Iealously to suspect, and maliciously to
deprave the ceremonies and government of the church, when they had least cause.
And amongst those manifould mysteries which accompanied the King into this
land, this is not the least, that when a strong continuance of a settled truth,
dispersing all wandering opinions under a learned prince, was more then
hopefully assured to be the blessing of our Land, that then, even then there
should be an increase both of papists and puritans, as if both had discovered
an extraordinary favor, to be showed to either; but I can better satisfy my
self in those of the church of Rome, then in the other, for all men in
affliction (which surely though not simply, yet comparatively was their case)
are over apt to flatter themselves in all changes of a state, that some thing
will ease them, but most especially then, when they see favors and mercies
almost not denied to any. But it is the distemper of evil humors that makes
false constructions, or collections from a merciful Prince.

Now for your self and others, who inioyed your liberty, favor, preferment,
and all other benefits with, and beyond men of your own time, and perhaps of
your own worth, yielding your obedience and subscription to the government and
rites of this Church, in the days of Queen Elizabeth of famous memory: after
a learned conference for satisfaction, wherein the best and most Judicial that
desired reformation, yielded: after exceeding care, and Zeal manifested in our
dread Sovereign, after the most religious and sincere convocation of the
clergy, that ever was in this Church: wherein the whole scope was a purer
reformation of all that in manners and ceremonies wa^ thought faulty: now I
say, to refuse to subscribe, whereas before you had often done it, upon some
suspicious fear without cause, that the intention of the Church was altered, I
wish you could as well satisfy others, and the whole flock of Christ, then
committed to your charge, as I can believe that you are persuaded that you
satisfy your own conscience. A wife and ten children are strong motives,
but to flesh and blood: think I pray you, and think seriously of Christ's
Church, how many of her children (as far as in you lies) are frustrate of
nourishment by your means; and think that the ground of this loss either to
your self, or to the family of Christ, is your own want of conformity, which
more justly is to be lamented, by how much more, God has blessed you with
excellent gifts, but I trust the Church shall never need their pains, that
love not her peace, nor desire them to speak, that have not yet learned to
harken unto her voice.

APOLOGY.
I Now beseech your Lordship to remember, that most of us have been peaceable
in Israel; and that if some men's rashness, draw revenge upon us, Aemilius
has faulted, and Rutilius is beaten; one Mardochey has not stouped, and all
the Jews must perish for it: And say we cannot conform in every point; you
know who said, the variety of Ceremonies did commend the unity of faith: and
would God you would think that our labor in the Church might do more good in
one year, then the Ceremonies will while the world stands: and though in
your wisdoms you think the retayning of them to make unto the Churches
increase and benefit, is it unpardonable that we should think another course
better? have not our men sought Chyna by the North-east* and by the North-west
passages? Do not some Physicians set upon the Chollicke by cold medicines,
other by hot, the one Sedando, the other Discutiendo? Do not maryners seek
the safety of the ship, by persuading some to hoyse sail, others to strike it
in a tempest? And what though now you have great advantage over your poor
brethren, yet may it be good Counsel which Hanno gave upon Hannibals victory,
that it should be used as occasion of making the better peace, Leui. Deca. 3.
lib. 3.
with the Romans, Cum pacem dare potius quam accipere possent. O my good Lord
will it not be enough to keep safe and well fenced your jurisdictions and
persoall dignity? not enough to divide the honors to your selves, and labors
to us? Is their no fear that upon the casting out not of Caananites, but borne
Israelites at once, which this subscription will do (for I know you are
nothing near the reckoning in your own diocese) wyld beasts should multiply
and devour the land? pardon me if I prophesy that when all is done, Curt.
Holling.
and the heat spent, your lordship will find some want of us as did Alexander
of Pa^meno, King Henry the eight of his Cromwell: and then perhaps either not a
mind, or not means to remedy that which might have easily been prevented. In
which your Lordships shall not be able to divide either faults or comforts with
us, seeng we as the Lord knows, forbear upon the point of conscience, your
Lordships seem to stand upon terms of your pleasures, I say yours, as
persuaded that his excellent Majesty would deny you nothing that you should
jointly and earnestly seek, for the peace of the Church of God. The Lord God
direct your Lordship and your brethren, as becomes your great years,
learnings and functions; as for me I shall pray always for the Kings Majesty,
and the state, for you and the Church of God, and henceforth strive to live as
an honest and peaceable private member of that Church, in which I was not so
happy as to stand a public, though honest and peaceable minister.

Your Lordships always to command in the Lord JOHN BVRGES.

ANSWER.
THere is no part of this whole Treatise, which so unwillingly I answer as
this last; wherein many things are uttered with so much passion, as either our
severity in replying, must exceed the usual moderation which we desire to
hold, or else we may justly be suspected, to betray the cause and the persons
whom we should defend. And therefore without any other answer, we will only
put you in mind of those harsh speeches, which may peradventure in this
coffeehouse be agreeable to your fancy, but are no way suitable to your
cause, nor very well beseeming a man of your place. First in these words: I
now beseech your Lordship to remember that the most of us have been peaceable
in Israel, and that if some men's rashness draw revenge upon us, Aemelius has
faulted, and Rutilius is beaten; one Mardochey has not stouped, and all the
Jews must perish for it. Can you believe that your deprivation is a revenge
which some men's rashness has drawn upon you? Is the proceeding of the reverend
Fathers, for the unity of the Church, as if Aemilius had faulted, and Rutilius
should be beaten? or can you in your own conscience compare it with the
perishing of the Jews, for the not stooping of one Mardochey? assure your
self none of them are so transported with ambition, nor so incensed with any
particular contempt offered unto themselves, which they could not easily have
remitted, if their remissness in this had not hazarded the Churches peace.
And therefore doubt not but your self and others can well testify that some
of them have dealt with your self, and diverse in your case like fathers with
their own children, leaving nothing unattempted to reform your opinion,
before they proceeded to give sentence. A duty that lies upon their
shoulders, with as much indispensable necessity, as conformity and obedience
upon ours. Like unto this surmise, is that which follows; And say we cannot
confirm in every point, you know who said, the variety of ceremonies did
commend the unity of faith: But doubtless it had been much better for the
Church: more warrantable for your selves: more pleasing to the state: more
profitable to your own families: to have conformed your selves in every
point, then by refusing to hinder the Church of that good, which by your own
confession might have been more in one year then all the Ceremonies will do
whilst the world stands. For if any thing be imposed by authority
contrary to the word of God, let some men take upon them to prove it; and
far be it from us for any man's cause to maintain an euicted error; we may
be deceived, and have our infirmities as other men, but we are not unwilling,
who will needs be our adversaries, to account them our masters, if there be
just cause.

But if these ceremonies be only unlawful to some men, for want of true
resolution, and so contrary to conscience (which yet is no warrant for
disobedience) let them learn to know that in things not unlawful; It is
better to obey, then to offer Sacrifice. Amongst men of equal authority in
place of freedom, diversities of opinions may safely be published without
offense, but where men want authority and place to advise, and when Jaws have
set down what is though fit, there, to think otherwise then the Church does,
it is, as if common passengers would sail to Chyna, by the North-east, when
the masters and governors had determined to sail by the North-west.

Wherein if both parts remain equally stiff in their own opinions, a
mutiny must follow for want of Discipline: sometimes I confess variety and
alteration of ceremonies are thought fit; both to show the authority of the
Church, (for you self have confessed when you read your articles that every
particular or national Church has authority to ordain, Articles of 156.
Artic. 34.
change, and abolish ceremonies, or rites of the Church ordained only by man's
authority, so that all things be done to aedifying.) Secondly, that they are
but furtherances of devotion, and no parts of divine worship.

But when they are established as thought fit for decency, edification, and
order, by such as have authority from Christ to moderate those things: then
by inferior persons (such as we are) either to be oppugned, misconstrued,
despised, or disobeyed, it is daungerouslye, to kindle a fire of Rebellion in
the principal parts of Gods house. But that which follows, is much worse.

O my good Lord, will it not be enough to keep safe and well fenced your
Jurisdictions and personal dignities? not enough to divide the Honors to your
selves, and labors to us? Have the last Canons no other end, but to fence the
Jurisdictions, and personal dignities unto the B B. Doubtless the diminishing
of their honors, which could never have been without wrong unto the Church, was
little to be feared (though the Canons had not been) where so wise a King
ruled over us, who had thoroughly tasted the calamities and miseries of that
Church, which placed the greatest part of their Zeal in suppressing of
Bishops; and whilst they labored that none might have too much, they
presently brought it so to pass that scarce any had what was reasonable
enough: besides if you knew the unwearied pains, the intolerable burdens,
that diverse of the Reverend Fathers, who watch over us daily, sustain for the
peace and the happiness of this Church, Episcopi.
you would plainly acknowledge preaching not to be the greatest pains, and
that it is a misdeeming of their care to think, That they have divided the
honors to themselves, and the labors to you. Surely there is no greater or
more vehement exercise of faith amongst so many perils, then prayers for the
public peace of the Church, and it is our parts to understand those perils,
and to judge them to appertain to our own safeties.

Besides it is our duty to ascribe to the Magis^rates, Wisdom and Justice,
that is, that we do not prefer our private judgments before the laws, and
decrees of the Church, but obey them: This honor is most agreeable to public
peace, not to cavil against the laws, nor to interpret them with Jealousy
or Envy; but to cover, to excuse, and mitigate the ouer-sightes of Magistrates
and laws if there be any. This as it is in private the ornament of a
Christian, so it is in public the honor of a good subject. 1, Cor. 13
Coloss. 3
Love bears all things: Love is the bond of perfection, to prevent
dissolutions of a Church or a commonwealth. And herein if the requisite
severity which the palsy of the Church exacteth from the Reverend Fathers,
draw them to punish, whom they desire to favor, to advance and cherish, it is
not a casting out of borne Israelites (as you term it) but a just
reprehension, setting a mark upon that son, that has made no conscience to
discover the supposed nakedness of his own father. Cha^^.
In whose place it any wild beasts (Papists you mean) shall multiply, I doubt
not but their religious care, will be as ready to suppress the one, as
deprive the other: And if in the end (as you prophecy) (which God forbid)
unfortunately it happen, that the Bishops shall want you, as King Henry did
Cromewell, it shall be much safer to endure the hazard of those times, then to
buy an advantage at so dear a price. In the mean time believe (which it is
fit for you to acknowledge) that if you forbear upon the point of Conscience,
their Lordshipps have better reasons for that they do, then to stand upon
terms of their own pleasures. Now to conclude this unpleasing work, which
we laid aside, in hope to have rested without trouble, until such time as we
saw their books of this argument to increase still, and heard that as much of
this as was then printed, was by them confuted; we desire all men to think of
us, as of those that account the infirmities of our brethren our own harms,
and the modest directions of men as mean as our selves, to be no blemish unto
us, who propound not victory, A prayer.
but truth, and the Churches peace. The God of all love, and the giver of all
graces multiply his blessings upon this land, let them be poured (O Lord) as an
ointment upon the Kings head, strengthen the weak hands of the reverend
fathers, the chief builders of his Temple; give unto us all unity and peace,
as the bonds and sinews of the communion of saints; make us to think and to
speak the same things; grant unto you and others that refuse conformity upon
conscience a better light: peace in your hearts* remorse for silencing your
selves; comforts against all worldly afflictions: and if it so seem good to
his infinite wisdom (seeing our Church has so many traiterous and seditious
enemies without) that all within her own bosom, may think, love, desire, and
behave our selves in all things as be. comes the Saints of God. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
COurteous Reader I kindly entreat thy patience and thy labor; the one to
excuse, the other to correct the senseless faults com^mitted in the printing
of this book; I call them senseless not only because those may seem so that
made them* but because the most being in the false pointing, they make the
period often to bewith out sense* this we cannot now amend; some other faults
it may please thee to correct thus.

Faults Escaped.
Page 4. line. ^. for. recantations* r. retractations. l. 28. for disjunction.
r. distinction p 8, l. 8. for fellow^r. fault. p. 9. l. 7. for man. ^, many.
p. 16. l* 17. ^or bring ^ being p. 24. l. 5. for who. r. leau^ out who p. 47.
l. 12. for. dispraises. r, dispraisers, p. 46* l, 4, for. admission, r,
admonition, p, 52, l, 19, for Letrea, r, Latteia, p, 53, l, 14, for to ^, do,
p, 54, l, 15. for* teach, r, teaches, p, 50, l, 25. for counsel, r, council,
p, 57, l, 29, for Hyeronus, r, Hieroms, p, 58, l, 1^, for joined, r, enjoined,
l. 31, for evils, r, cauils. p. 64. l, 4, for T^entth (...), r, Trent has
reformed that* p, 7^, l, 2* for nor, ^. now. p. 73, l. 3. for ^at, r, that, p,
76. l. 4. for otherwise, r, others: l, 14, for impropriat you, r, in
propriety: p. 77, l. 9. for a nositate. r, annositate. l, 26. for
ecclesiasticam: r* ecclesiasticum, p 78: l, ^4: for chemtius: r, chemassius, p:
82, l, 5. for, Aquinus. r, Aquinas^ p. 89, l* 4, for ^aciam. r: f^saciem. p.
89, l. 22, for ^^ch^mites, r, sychamitis, p. 91, l, 15, for taken of, r, ta^ken
out of, p. 94. l. 15 for pagian, r. p^g^iue. p, 111, l, 23. for Express to, r,
to express, p, 113. l, 23. for persued, r. piersed, p, 115. l. 11. for
counsel. r. council. l. 26. for by bage r, by a badge. p. 116. l, 14. for nor,
r, no^, p, 117, l. 10, for. corrupte^us, r. corrupters, p. ^^ 8, l. 33, for m^.
r, man, p, 119. l, 31, for called, r, calling, p, 120, l. 18, for to be put r*
^o be cleansed then p^t, l. 33, for embrace, r, impeach, p. 121 l, 1, for, for,
r, or* l, 26, for chosing, r, crossing, p, 122, l, 9, for more, r, m^ere, p,
123, l, 23, for yet r, that, p. ^^ 6. l. 19, for here, r, bear. l, 33, for
mi^d* r, mind. p, 131. l, 27 for, those, r, these. p, ^38, l, r* for priaeiue.
r, primative, l, 31, for vere, r, very, p. 139. l, 4, for unto now, r, unto
it now. p 141. l: 7: for verasen: r: brazen: p: 157: l 9: for you: ^: your: p:
156: l: 7: for confirm: r: con^^rm^.


