Present Remedies against the plague.

Showing sundry preservatives for the same, by wholesome Fumes, drinks, vomits
and other inward Receipts; as also the perfect cure (by Implaisture) of any that
are therewith insected.

Now necessary to be observed of every Householder, to avoid the infection,
lately begun in some places of this City.

Written by a learned Physician, for the health of his Country.



Printed for Thomas Pauyer, and are to be sold at his shop at the entrance into
the Exchange. 1603

To the Reader.
FOR as much as the force and infection of the ordinary diseas called the
Plague or Pestilence, has heretofore been too well known and felt in sundry
places of this Realm: and considering that it has of late begun to increase
in many chief Cities and populous places; I thought it good to publish to you
in time, sundry preservatives against the said disease, the better to defend
those that are in health, from the infection of the diseased: And also to cure
those that are any way infected, grieved, or troubled with the same. And to
this I was imboldened, the rather for that it was written by a very learned and
approved Physician of our time, who desires more the health of his Country,
than by discovering his name seem vain glorious to the world. Accept the same
I pray you in good part, and thank God for the Physicians pains, who has his
desire if it may do but that which he wishes: namely expel sickness, and
increase health to this Land. Which God for his mercy sake, prosper and
preserve from all plagues and dangers for evermore, Amen.

These things ought duly to be looked unto. (Viz.)
RIght necessary and convenient it were, that you keep your houses, streets,
yardes, backesides, sinks, and kennels, sweet and clean from all standing
puddles, dunghils, and corrupt maystures which engender stinking savors that
may be noisome, or breed infection: nor suffer no dogs to come running into
your houses, neither keep any (except it be backward, in some place of open
air, for they are very dangerous, and not sufferable in time of sickness,
by reason they run from place to place, and from one house to another,
feeding upon the vncleanest things that are cast forth into the streets, and
are a most apt cattle to take infection of any sickness, and then to bring it
into the house.

For ayring your Rooms.
Air your several taimes with Charco^le fires, made in stone pans or
Chasingdishes, and not in Chimneys: set your pans in the middle of the Rooms:
air every room once a week (at the least) and put into your fire a little
quantity of Frankincense, Juniper, dried Rosemary, or of Bay-leaues.

A Fume of great experience.
Take Rosemary, and put it into strong Vinegar, steep it in a Basin or bowl
heat four or five Fl^ntstones red hot and cast them into the Vinegar and so
let the Fume ascend into the middle of every room.

Another.
Air your apparel in the same sort, and with the same fume: and bear in
your hands some handkercher, Sponge, or Cloth, wetted in the juice of Wormwood,
Hearbegrace, and red Rose-vineger, mixed together.

To smell to.
The root of Enula Campna steeped in vinegar and lapped in a handkercher, is a
special thing to smell unto, if you come where the sickness is.

Another.
Hearbgrace, and wormwood steeped in vinegar, in some powter piece close
slopt, is to be used in like sort.

To taste or chewe in the mouth.
The root of Angelica, Setwall, Gencian, Valerian, or Sinamond, is aspeciall
preservative against the plague, being chewed in the mouth.

To eat.
Eat Sorrel steeped in vinegar, in the morning fasting, with a little bread
and butter, Sorrel sauce is also very wholesome against the same.

Another.
Take the kernel of a walnut, mince it with three or four leaves of
Hearbgrace, and a corn or two of Salt: then put it into a Fig, warm it and
eat it fasting: fast three hours after, and take it twice a week. A special
thing to eat, found very comfortable.

Take strong red Rose-Vineger, sprinkle it upon a tossed of white bread, spread
Butter thereon, and then cast ye powder of Cinamond upon it, and eat it
fasting: or eat bread and butter with Hearbgrace.

Another.
Give to the diseased for their ordinary food, some broth made with a neck of
Mutton: boiled with a good quantity of Burridge, Sorrel, and Buglosse.

To comfort the stomach.
Aleberries are very comfortable, made with Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Saunders,
Ginney grains, and such like.

To drink.
Take Rue, Wormwood, and Scabias, steep it in Ale a whole night, and drink
it fasting every morning.

Another.
Take the water of Carduns Benedictus, or Angelica, and mix it with
Methridatum,

Another.
The root of Enula Campana, beaten to powder, is a special remedy against the
plague, being drunk fasting.

Another.
Drink the powder of Turmentill, in Sorrel or Scabias water.

Another.
If any feel themseules already infected, take Angelica-water mixed with
Methridatum, drink it off, then go to bed and sweat thereon.

Another to drink.
Take a spooneful of Bayberries, and husk them before they be dry, heat them
to powder, and drink it in good stale Ale or Beer, or in white wine: then
sweat upon it, and forbear to sleep.

to procure Sweat.
Take Posset-Ale sodden with Sorrel, and Burridge, mixed with Triacle of
Diatesseron and get you to your naked bed.

A special preservative against the Plague.
Take of the root of great Valerian, a quarter of an ounce: of Sorrel a
handful: an ounce of the root of Butter-bur: boil them in running water,
from a quart to a pint, two spoonefulls of Vinegar to it, and let the patient
drink it so hot as he may, and then sweat upon it.

An other special Preservative.
Take an Egg, make a hole in the top of it, take out the white and the yolke,
and fill the shell only with Saffron, roast the shel and Saffron together, in
embers of Charcoales, until the shell wax yeallow: then beat shell and
altogether in a marter, with half a spooneful of Mustard Seed: Now so soon as
any suspicion is had of infection, dissolve the weight of a French crown in ten
spoonefuls of posset-Ale, drink it luke warm, and sweat upon it in your naked
bed.

An other Preservative to be distilled.
Take half a hundred green Walnuts being new taken off as they hang green
on the tree, and a pound of the inner Bark of an Ash-tree: then take
Petimortell, Housleeke, Scabias, and Veruin, of each a handful Saffron half
an ounce, and mince al these small together: then put a pottle of the strongest
Vinegar on the^ boil them over a soft fire in a close pot, and after distill
them in a limbecke: keep the distilled water, and give the Patient two ounces
to drink thereof, four times in four and twenty-houres, when he is in his
naked bed, and let him be provoked to sweat, and he shall find great ease
thereby.

If the Patient be bound in the body.
Take a suppositor made with a little boiled Hunny, and a little powder of Salt:
let this be put up at the fundament with a little butter until it move him to
ye stool.

Drink for ordinary Diet.
So near as you can let the patients ordinary drink be good final ale of
eight days old.

For Vomitting.
Vomitting is better then bleeding in this case and therefore provoke to vomit
so near as you can.

To provoke Vomit.
Take three leaves of Castrabecca, stamp it, and drink it in Rennish wine,
ale, or posset ale.

Another.
A little quantity of (...) Helibor, grated and drunk in the like fort
procures vomit.

A special Vomit.
Take two ounces of Oil of Walunts, a spoonefull of the juice of Celandine,
and half a spoonefull of the juice of Reddish roots: Let not the party sleep
for two hours after, and in so doing it is better then any purging.

For purging.
If the party be full of gross humors, let him blood, immediately upon the
right arm, on the Liver vein or on the median veyn, in the same arm: so as no
sore appear the first day.

A very wholesome purge.
Put into the pap of an apple, a sixepennie weight of Aloes, and so take it: or
the pills of Rufus.

A wholesome water to be distilled.
Steep sorrel in vinegar, four and twenty hours, then take it out and dry
it with a linen does, then still it in a Limbecke, drink four spoonfuls with
a little sugar, then walk upon it till you sweat if you may: if not, keep your
bed and sweat upon it. Use this before supper on any evening.

If the patient happen to be troubled with any swellings, Botches, Carbuncles,
or Gods tokens: let him sweat moderately now and then.

Outward medicines to ripen the sore.
Take the root of a white Lilly, roast it in a good handful of sorrel,
stamp it and apply it thereto very hot, let it lie four and twenty hours,
and it will break the sore,

Another.
Take of old swines-grease salted, two ounces, with the yolke of an egg, and
two handfulles of Scabias, stamp them together, and lay it warm to the sore.

Another.
Take a small quantity of leaven, a handful of mallows, a little quantity of
Scabias, cut a white Onion into pieces, with half a dozen heads of garlic,
boil these together in running water, make a poullus of it and then lay it hot
to the sore.

Another.
The like may be made of two handfuls of Valerian, three roots of Danwort, and
a handful of smalledge, sees them in sheep suet and Rose water, with a few
crumbs of bread, and apply it hot to the sore.

Another.
Take a hot Loaf, new taken forth of the Oven, apply it to the sore, and it
will doubtless break the same but afterward bury the same loaf deep enough
in the ground, for fear of any infection: for if either dog or amy other thing
do feed thereon it, will infect a great many.

Other Observations.
Let the sick and infected persons be separated and kept from the whole,
until the sore be healed: but generally let them be kept within the space of a
month.

For a Fume.
Take a new burnt Brick, and heat it red hot, then put it into a Basin of
Vinegar, and let the fume thereof ascend into your houses.

For Ayring Apparel.
Let the apparel of the diseased persons, be well and often washed, be it
linen or woollen: or let it be ayred in the Sun, or over pans of fire, or
over a Chasingdish of Coals, and fume the same with Frankensence Juniper, or
dried Rose-mary.

A perfect good Plaster for the Cure of the sore after it is broken.
Take vnwroght Wax, white Turpentine, the yolke of an Egg, a little fresh
butter, and a quantity of English honny, boil all these together to a salve,
and apply it to the sore, being thin spread upon a cloth, in manner of an
ordinary Plaster.

Additions.
To preserve from the Infection of the Plague.
Take Garlic peele it and mince it small, put it into new milk and eat it
fasting.

To take the infection from a house infected.
Take large Oynions, peele them, and lay three or four of them upon the
ground, let them lie ten days, and those pieled Oynions will gather all the
infection into them that is one of those Rooms: but bury these Oynions
afterward deep in the ground.

Another.
Take new milk and set it in a Basin in the middle of the infected Rooms, and
the milk will draw the infectious vapor into it, letting it stand two days
in the said Room,

Against the new burning Fever.
If the Patient be in a great heat as most commonly they will, take of fair
running water a pretty quantity put it on a Chasingdish of Coals, then put
thereinto a good quantity of Saunders beaten to powder: and let it boil half
an hour between two dishes: that done put a couple of soft linen clothes into
the dish, wet the clothes well in water and Saunders, and apply the same so
hot as you can suffer it to your belly.

To drink for the whot Fever.
Take two handful of Sorrel, and a handful of Violet leaves with a bunch of
sour Graps, beat them together stalks and all: then strain it into
Butter-milke, then make a posset of the same Butter-milke, and let the Patient
drink thereof so much as he will.

To procuresleepe to the sick Persons that are diseased either with the Plague
or the hot Fever.
Take of a woman's Breast-milke a good quantiti, put thereunto of the like
quantity of Aqua-vite, stir them well together, and moysten therewith the
Temples of the Patient and his Nosthrils, lay it on with some feather, or some
fine thin ragge.

Butter-milke in this contagious time is generally wholesome to be eaten, and is
a good Preservative against either the Plague or the pestilent Fever.

Finis.

