A VERY SOVEREIGN OIL to restore DEBTORS; being rightly and seasonably used.
Extracted out of that most tried and Quintessensed OIL, by the Prophet ELISHA.
By virtue whereof the VVIDDOVV indebted, (mentioned in the second Book of the
KINGS) was restored out of debt, and her Children released of the bondage
whereof they were in danger.

Written by Samuel Cotesford, late Minister at Stepney: AND Now newly published
by W. CRASHAVVE, Minister of Gods word at White-chappell, near LONDON.

PROVE. 20. 18. Establish the thoughts by Counsel. LONDON: Printed by T. S. for
GEORGE HODGES, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Greyhound, in
Paul's Churchyard. 1622.

TO THE HONORABLE Knight, Sr. Edward Sackvyle, a worthy member of the COMMONS
House of PARLIAMENT.
Honorable Sir;
AMongst the many honorable motions and worthy intentions of the present
Parliament, you did great honor to your selves in hearing the cries of so many
hundred poor prisoners, whose blood, and the blood of their Children, cries I
fear, for judgment merciless, against those merciless Creditors, that value
not the precious life of a man, at the rate of an Ox or a Horse: But for far
lesser sums, do keep many able and active men in Prison, till they either
dye, or become unable to serve the Commonwealth. Heavy and bitter are the
lamentations, cries, and complaints, that are daily brought to us, the
Preachers of this City, by the poor wives and Children of those distressed
prisoners, of whom some lie in prison for a blow giving, some for a word
speaking, some for a quarters rent, some for a small remainder of an old debt,
some for a debt paid already, but the Bond could never be got out of the
Usurers hand, some for a just debt, but some small matter; some for no debt of
their own, but only other men's, and that for which they would be content to
strippe themselves of all they have, so they might but enjoy their life and
liberties. But what say many of these greedy cormorants, It shall cost me more
then my debt, but I will have him; I care not so much for my money, as that I
may have my will of the villain: Now I have him, he shall lie by it, I will
have his skin, I will make Dice of his bones? Such unmerciful and unmanly
words are uttered by these cruell-hearted men. We brag that we have no
Galleys, nor Gally-slaues: If it be a glory to our Nation, then woe to them
that make many a poor man live so in prison, as they had rather be a slave in
the Galleys. We boast we have no Wolves in England; but if it be a blessing,
then pity is it we have such woluish and wicked natured men, that like
hungry Wolves devour their poor neighbors; They say, that ravenous creature
will dare to set upon a man, if he be alone, and will howl and yell to call
together his fellows, that they may eat him amongst them. So, if a decayed
Gentleman come within their clutches, or the honest Merchant (whose estate is
lost by Sea) fall within their danger, forthwith one of them gives notice to
another, like Wolves, one howling for another, presently they all fall upon
him, and strive who shall first have his heart out, like so many Ravens,
Vultures, Kytes, or Cormorants, that eat up amongst them and tear in pieces
the silly dying horse, which happily a little before carried the King.

You cannot better commend your selves to the present, and your memories to
future ages: you cannot amongst temporal things more advance the honor of the
English Parliament, then by taking away one of the foul stains of this our
Nation, even by taking some wise and godly order for the releasing of the poor
prisoners of this kind. It is said by the wise, and I fear it is too true an
observation, that all Europe hangs not up so many proper men, nor keeps in
bondage so many men fit for employment, for unjust or small debts, as England
does. Deep, and foul, and large, are these stains, they be dyed in grain,
nay alas, in the blood of many thousands. Oh happy, and to be honored for
ever, they that have skill, and will, and power together, to wipe off these
unworthy stains from off the face of our State! Some rich ones have the skill,
but want will, they know well enough how this might be helped, but for certain
carnal and worldly respects they would not have it so. Some good honest men
have the will to reform this, but want the skill; they know not how it may be
done. Some learned, wise, and godly men, have both skill and will, but being
private persons, they want power. You of this high and thrice-Honorably
assembly of the Parliament, being so many godly men, cannot want will; being so
many learned and wise, cannot want the skill; being the Council of the
Kingdom, and having especially so wise and merciful a King to second you, you
cannot want power; nay, the high and Sovereign power is in your hands. Put to
therefore your powerful hands, for the furthering and effecting of this worthy
work of God, and the Commonwealth, for saving the lives of some hundreds, and
redeeming the liberties of some thousands. How to save the lives of so many
executed yearly in this Land, and yet to redress the evils, I will not
enter, nor venture to set down to them that know better then my self; and now
I hope have taken that consideration to heart before this day; at least I will
reserve it for another, and happily a more seasonable time. That which the
present Subject puts us principally in mind of, is the helping of those many
poor prisoners, that consume their best years in prison, for Debts either of
an ungodly nature, or of a trifling quantity; for such are they only that here
are spoken for, or else such as being of moment, and just also, and yet too
cruelly sought for.

I confess there are an evil generation of such as care not to get men's goods
into their hands, and then take prison, as a Sanctuary, and can pay well
enough, but will not; and others worse then they, that wilfully break when
they need not, or take men's monyes or goods, when they have a purpose to
break, and consequently a purpose not to pay: These two sorts of people are
plain thieves, and many lesser before God go to Tyburne every year: Even
with the same breath, I beg mercy for the former, I crave justice and
revenge upon those, as being one of the worst kind of Caterpillars, that eat
out the life of this Cities Commonwealth: Draw the sword of Justice against
those, and spare not; let them be known and used like great thieves, and
robbers, as they are, and much worse then many by the highway: But pity and
relieve those poor men, whom Gods hand, by fire or water, or the inevitable
misfortunes of Sea and land, have made poor, such as would gladly pay it if
they had it, and are well content to pay all they have, or can make, nay, would
be glad to work, and yield the benefit of their labors to their Creditors.
That such honest poor men, and some poor Gentlemen, should not in these cases
be relieved, and either set at liberty, and put into employment (paying all
they can presently, and more as they may hereafter) or else those made to
maintain them that keep them in prison, let others consider how it stands
with civil policy and good government; I am sure it is far from the rules
of Christianity, and (I take it) worse then the custom and practice of other
Nations.

You of this noble Parliament, that have Power in your hands, Mercy in your
hearts, Experience before your cies, and the cries of the oppressed in your
ears every day, help forward this blessed work: If they shall be so highly
rewarded at the last day, that visit poor prisoners, how glorious shall those
be that move a means to redeem them? If this Treatise may stir up your
zealous and noble hearts, or set the least edge upon your godly affections
hereunto, I shall hold it a happy hour when I found it amongst the writings
of that deceased Divine, that good man that wrote it.

You, noble Sir, have had a noble name for standing up, and opening your mouth
in good causes and charitable motions, at Sessions in Parliament, and other
public meetings; Go forward in the name, and with the blessing of the God of
mercy; Add this to the manifold honors God has already laid on you, and to
the love that thousands bear you: Thus shall you purchase the prayers and
praises of many hundred poor men, their wives and children, and hereby shall
you gain one poor friend more, and ever bind me to remain

White-chappell Noue^b. 3. 1621. Your Servant in Christ, W. CRASHAVVE.

2 KINGS 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 ANd one of the Wives of the sons of the
Prophets cried unto Elizha, saying: Thy servant (mine Husband) is dead, and
thou know, that thy servant did fear the Lord: and the Creditor is come to
take my two sons to be his Bond men.

2 Then Elizha said unto her, What shall I do for thee? Tell me what have thou
at home: And she said, Thine Handmaid has nothing at home, save a Pitcher of
Oil.

3 And he said, Go and borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy neighbors empty
vessels, and spare not.

4 And when thou art come in, thou shall shut the door upon thee, and thy
sons, and power out into all those Vessels, and set aside those that are full.

5 So she departed from him, and shut the door upon her, and upon her sons,
and they brought to her, and she powered out.

6 And when the Vessels were full, she said unto her son, bring me yet a
Vessel; And he said unto her, there is no more Vessels: and the Oil ceased.

7 Then she came and told the man of God, and he said, Go and sell the Oil,
and pay them that thou art indebted unto; Live thou and thy children with the
rest.


THE Argument of this History is this, Debts must be paid. The circumstances
are thele: First, The Persons: Secondly, The means whereby the Debt is to be
paid: Thirdly, The issue of the means. The persons are the Widow, her two
sons, the Prophet, and the Creditour: The means, by the miraculous work of
God in the ministry of Elizha, out of the vessel of Oil: The issue of the
means, twofold: First, the Oil is increased. Secondly, the Debt is paid.
The manner of handling this is by Bill and Answer, the complaint of the Widow,
and the answer of the Prophet.

In the circumstances, the first concerning the widow, are to be examined as
they are laid down in the first Verse, and they are motives of compassion,
whereby she draws the Prophet to tender her indebted estate: These motives
arise, first, from her self, and her two sons: secondly, from the condition
and credit of her husband: thirdly, from the Creditour, in demanding of his
debt by the extremity of Law then to be executed upon those who were no way
able to pay, that is, in requiring her two sons to be his Bondmen.

The first motive in these words, And one of the wives of the sons of the
Prophets, wherein she lays down her self to be a sole-woman or widow; a
good motive of compassion, as in the Law of Moses and throughout the whole
Book of God is to be seen. Exodus 21. 22, 23, 24, verses.
Ye shall not trouble any Widow, nor fatherless Child: If thou vex and
trouble such, and so he shall call and cry unto me, I will surely hear his
cry, then shall my wrath be kindled, and I will kill you with the sword, and
your Wives shall be Widows, and your Children fatherless. The other part of
this motive concerning her two sons, in these words: And the Creditour is
come to take my two Sons to be his Bondmen: A wonderful motive to enforce,
from the naturalnesse of a mother; wherein she first complains that she was
to be deprived of her special joys and comforts in her widdowhood, viz. of
her two sons, who were to her as the Images of her Husband, by whom also she
found perhaps some means of help for their mutual relief, as small helps
from children to the fathers and mothers seem great: Besides she complains
that she should not only be deprived of them, but they should also be taken as
Bond-slaues, their bones and tender bodies day and night to be worn and tired
out with most hard and grievous labors. A very strong argument to break a
stony heart that otherwise would not be moved.

Another motive from the condition and credit of her Husband; first, a Prophets
son. Prophets seldom have means to leave their wives and children rich:
Secondly, a man also that feared God, (and therefore seldom without the
cross,) whereby she binds the Prophet the more strongly to her suite. Gal. 6.
10.
Good is to be done indeed to all, but specially (says the Apostle Paul) to
the household of faith.

Another motive from the person of the Creditour, who came to take her two
sons to be his bondmen, whose severity (or extremity rather, because
either so he must do or loose all) is not so much to be censured, as she was
to be pitied who was no otherwise able to discharge the debt but by the loss
of these her two sons.

Now that I may lay down some Lessons as they arise out of the Text: The first
general Lesson from the Widow to all sorts of people oppressed is this, That
in any wise they fail not in their miseries and comfortless estates to use
all good helps and means, both for their comfort, and the curing of their
decaies. In this the manifold examples in the Scripture are Presidents for our
instruction, according to proportion in the like, even from the greatest
persons to the least, and so relatiuely of all to all, Genesis 41. 14.
as each stands in need of other. Pharaoh and Nabuchadnezzar are not reproved
for seeking the one to Joseph, Dan. 2. 1. 16.
the other to Daniel, for the persuading of themselves in their fearful and
troublesome dreams, by the interpretation of them: Yea, how often was Pharaoh
enforced to use and call for the ministry of Moses, in praying to God for him,
and his people, to deliver them from the plagues that justly befall them. Genesis
20. 7.
In the 20. of Genesis, God by a dream informs Abimilech King of Gerar, to
deal well with Abraham as concerning Sarah his wife, because (says God) he is
a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee that thou may live. How necessary
means the Prophets are between God and his people, the very wicked are driven
to confess and against their wills to seek to them: As Jeroboam stretching out
his hand to lay hold upon the Prophet that had denounced Gods judgments
against him, and his idolatrous Altars; that persecuting hand of his, that
stretched out it self, being dried up, he was enforced to entreat the Prophet
to pray for him as it is said, 1. Kings 13. 6.
I beseech thee, says he, pray unto the Lord thy God, and make intercession
for me, that mine hand may be restored unto me. Likewise in the New Testament,
Math. 8. 11 verse 5.
the Leper came to Jesus for himself, Matthew. 15. 22.
the Centusion for his servant, the Canaanitish woman for her daughter: Acts 3.
23.
Likewise to the Disciples of Christ came the Creeple, even to Peter and John
to receive an alms.

But some perhaps may think this lesson needless, because every one is
forward enough to promote his own cause, and to seek help for himself.
Whereunto I answer negatiuely, because what in the pride we have of our selves,
as thinking that God does overmuch wrong us, when he does any way take us down
short, or on the other side, by an ouerweening of our too great abasement,
under our afflictions through the corruption of our distrustful hearts, we,
in the days of our peace, wealth, and welfare, not having once sought for any
means to succor us in our adversities, as if it should always go well with
us, do many times both shrink and sink in the necessary suits for our
relief, especially in the changes of our estates from riches to poverty. To
omit them who in the matters of fleshly and inordinate love, because they
cannot attain to their burning and lustful desires, never using any good,
lawful, holy, and commanded means, do most Heathen-like, as people without
God, as by faithless despair, desperately untwist their threede of this life:
To omit all them, who, because they cannot be liked, favored, and counsels,
are ready with Achitophel to cut themselves off from the world, as we read of
him, etc. Now when Achitophel saw that his counsel was not followed, 2 Samuel
17. 23.
he sadled his Ass, and arose and went home unto his City, and put his
household in order, and hanged himself, and dyed. Such are the dangers that
will fearfully befall them, who in not acquainting themselves with God in his
holy Word, do fail in depending upon him, according to the ordinary means
prescribed by himself, and to be used by all his people, in and under the
burden of their griefs and calamities: The not using whereof, causes one
misery to follow another, to the increase not only of miseries here, but to
the procuring most commonly of endless miseries of soul and body after this
life for ever.

Indeed many are the discouragements that step in betwixt us and our
afflictions, as first the base conceit that we are brought into of our selves,
as if we were the less in Gods favor, because of our present punishments,
which (we being of Gods chosen in Christ) is but a conceit of ours, arising
from the frailty of our faith, without any just ground of the word of truth.
Secondly, the slacknesse, (nay, the fear of the slacknesse) and delay of
justice by our superiors; for we complain many times without a cause.
Thirdly, the unmercifulness of the time. Fourthly, the disdain of our
neighbors, brethren, and friends. Fifthly, the readiness of the wicked
cormorants, that still seek to prey upon our miseries, (they be of many sorts)
judge who they be, who never give over so long as there be any thing for them
to prey upon. Sixthly, the hard account that the World makes of us in their
sinisterly judging us to be so much the more wicked, by how much the more the
Lord does humble us: All these to undergo, being sore and grievous
temptations, is not in our own power, without the lawful and timely use of
the Ministers of God, or of the Magistrates, or of both, whom respectively
used, and in their due seasons, God has sanctified for the comforts of our
souls, as also of our bodies during this life.

Another danger may befall us, a forerunner of these extremes before
mentioned, which is a contempt of Gods holy Commandment, the very path way to
Anabaptisme, an heresy wherein the most necessary use of the Christian
Magistrate is denied, whose use and end God, by Moses, sets down to his
people, in all manner of trespass, (whither it be for Oxen, for Ass, for
Sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing which another challenges
to be his, the cause of both parties shall come before the Judges, and whom the
Judges condemn, (for every one may not be his own Judge) he shall pay the
double unto his Neighbor. Exodus 22. 9.
Likewise the Apostle Paul sets down the cause why tribute is to them paid:
Romans 13. 4. and 6. verses.
For this cause ye also pay tribute, for they are Gods Ministers, applying
themselves for the same thing; that is, as in the fourth verse he says, He is
the Minister of God for thy wealth. To conclude this point, doubtless as we
cannot continue long in our bodies in this life without food, or such like; no
more can we (considering the disordered course of our wrangling and contentious
dispositions be, or hold out long without the Magistrate, or the Minister.

The use then that we must make of this doctrine, Use.
is first to make trial of our selves, (by calling our former ways to
remembrance, especially how it has fared with us in our sundry afflictions)
whether we have fainted at any time under the burden: For as Solomon says;
Prou. 34. 10.
If thou be faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small: or whether
we ever found comfort in the Cross, and thereafter to proceed with our
selves by humble and hearty prayer unto God to arm us with patience, and to
teach us the best ways under our troubles, and to lead us on chearefully to
use them, whereby we may not only be comforted, but also (if God see it good
for us) be restored. Herein also we must proceed with continuance, waiting
the happy issue of them, (yea, and that until the Lord have mercy upon us)
whereunto let the widow that importuned the unjust Judge, and yet (though long
first) in the end prevailed; stir us up to steady proceeding on in our
suites, which Judge though he neither feared God, nor reverenced man, yet
because this widow says he, troubles me, I will do her right, lest at the
last she come and make me weary: And so much the more to hearten us on, let us
not forget in our prayers our Magistrates, then especially when any of our just
causes are upon trialls to the which purpose the Psalmist directs us in these
words; Psalm. 72. 1. 2.
Give thy judgments to the King, O God, and thy righteousness to the Kings
Son: Then shall he judge the people in righteousness, and the poor with
equity. This is the way to keep our faith upright in God, still to rely upon
him in the blessing of the means to us. Last of all, let us look back to
Gods former care over us, and from an experimental feeling of that his
goodness, let us quicken up our dull and heavy souls, ^aying confidently, as
from the assurance of faith, Psalm. 27. 12.
with David; Though my Father and Mother forsake me, yet the Lord will gather
me up. And with the Apostle Paul, to testify of God in this sort: 2 Cor. 1. 10.
Who has delivered us from so great a death, does deliver us, and in whom we
trust that he will deliver us. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
Again, God is faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted above that
you be able, but will even give the issue with the tentation, that you may be
able to bear it.

Now let us proceed to some particular observations further, to be drawn out
of the words of her Petition: Thy servant mine Husband is dead, and thou
know thy servant did fear the Lord, and the Creditor is come, etc. It is as
clear as the Sun that her Husband left her indebted, and not that she fell
into debt after, because the words are inseparably conjoined, as also from the
custom of creditors, who immediately upon the death of their debtors do seek
into their estates, and with all expedition call home their own. But the thing
to be observed upon this place, in the mention making of her Husband to fear
God, and therein appealing to the testimony of the Prophet himself, is this,
that against the practice of most women she forgets her poverty, prevailing
mightily against the male-contentednesse of her estate, or rather the hard
estate her Husband left her in, and with the comfortable remembrance of her
Husbands piety, and fear of God, she does as it were feed and satisfy her
self.

The lesson that is taught women above others in this place, is, that in their
chaste and sincere love they ought (inasmuch as in them lies) to cover the
trespasses of their Husbands, especially they failing but in matters of worldly
wants, or in such like, whereof God depriues them for some thing best known to
himself. Doubtless, worldly encombrances do breed much discontentednesse
between Husband and Wife, where Gods fear ouerrules not in each; to which
purpose, the Apostle Paul speaks as by way of comparison between the married
estate and single life; 1 Cor. 7. verse 33.
The married man (says he) cares for the things of the World, and how he may
please his wife; which in the things more indifferent of this life to do, is
no disparagement to the Husband at all, being done in knowledge: according also
to which the Wife is to walk, yea, so far as behooves her place, and that
for the nourishing of household peace, yea, as a teacher of honest things; which
lesson howsoever it concern; specially the elder women, yet all women are
(being come to that holy degree of the married estate) not only to know for
themselves, but for their Husbands, Children, Servants, and Neighbors: and
herein the Apostle Peter does affirm, 1 Pet. 3. verse. 1.
that the knowledge of the Wife how to walk in all good and due subjection to
her Husband, and so to do, (for there be too many that know and do not,) is
as an excellent means preparatory to draw on an untoward Husband to the
profession of faith, to which purpose these words tend: Likewise let the Wives
be subject to their Husbands, that even they which obey not the Word, may
without the Word be won by the conversation of the Wives. But what if the
Wife do in some good measure of knowledge go beyond the Husband, and able
perhaps to direct her Husband? (God willing it should be so upon some
occasions) not ordinarily: 1 Pet. 3. 7.
for the Husband is the Wives head, and Husbands should dwell with their Wives
as men of knowledge. Such a Wife had Manoach the Father of Sampson, Judge. 13.
23.
as we read; such a Wife was Abigal to Nabal, that man of Belial: few such
Wives, but too too many such Nabals. I fear this age is replenished with,
separating, to the end Husbands may follow their strange lusts: But to go on,
herein let not the Wife in her knowledge usurp a dominion over her Husband,
nor yet in pride of heart insult over him, for that is rather to destroy then
to build, and builders ought, good Wives to be, as Solomon teaches. A wise
woman builds her House. Prou. 14. 1.
This then is required further of a Wife, that she do carry her self in all
temperance and sobriety, with a meek and quiet spirit, which is before God a
thing much set by, and therein as a fellow-helper, comforter, and counselor,
so speaking to and for her Husband, as if he knowing all already, and more then
she can tell and advise him, may be, and so stand, as his remembrancer, seeking
with this widow in all she may, the honor, credit, and estimation of her
husbands good name, though dead, much more living; not admitting (though perhaps
there be some cause) any one, though unjustly, to estrange her heart from her
Husband.

The consideration of this Doctrine may serve all good and Christian Wives,
Doct.
either so being, or having been Widows, those especially unto whom (upon
too sudden a change of their estates) oftentimes there fall out many
discontentments, to teach them by all means to avoid all unseemly,
quarrellous, and contentious speeches, and no way distemperately to vex,
grieve, thwart, and cross their Husbands, but in all good peace so to carry
themselves toward them, though perhaps irreligious and far out of order, as
that they rather learn to take, and so take these troubles of theirs, which in
want of foresight they have brought upon themselves, as not only trials of
their faith and patience sent from God, but also medicinable corrections for
their further amendment. If this then be the duty of Wives to Husbands who
fear not God, what is then to be required of those Wives, whose Husbands, in a
good and conscionable regard of them and theirs, do labor in their
profession, and according to their place, to walk according to all godliness
and piety? These I say, (by the wives in all mildness) are much more in all
subjection to be yielded unto.

Thus then you see this woman, upon the love to her Husband, not so soon
forgotten, was comforted to solicit Elizha in her own behalf, by an
argument drawn from the fear of God, that was in him well known to Elizha
himself, as she says; And thou know that thy servant did fear the Lord:
whereby also the Prophet was so much the more willing to listen carefully to
her suite. Good indeed is to be done for all, Gal. 6. 10.
but especially to them who are of the Household of Faith.

Another doctrine also out of the words of the woman do issue, Doct.
in that she speaking to Elizha, calls her Husband his Servant, and afterward
her self his Hand-maide; and it is this: That the Prophets of God, as now the
Ministers of the Gospel, are each to respect other with a special respect,
and that between themselves, with difference, according to age, gravity,
knowledge, understanding, and the differing gifts of Gods grace in them; as is
here somewhat to be seen: A lesson slenderly respected in these days, wherein
all things go out of square, so great is the pride and disdain each of other,
yea, and that among the teachers themselves. But to the purpose in hand: It
appears that her said husband deceased, brought up in one of the Schools of
the Prophets, whether Bethel or Jericho, as an ordinary Minister of the Church,
accordingly trained up, did, whether in prayer, interpretation of the
Scriptures, doctrine, or exhortation, perform his duty in the Churches
service, according to the ordinary calling whereunto he was, and that by
ordinary labor and travail, prepared. But in that she submits her husband so
low, as to term him Elizhaes servant, she may seem too much to abase her
Husband, and too highly to advance Elizha: Nothing less: She speaks of them
both, according to the several gifts that were in them, wherein Elisha
extraordinarily called, did thereafter shine in gifts extraordinary, worthy
therefore in her account of double honor. By occasion whereof, somewhat may be
said as concerning the titles of the Lord Bishops now amongst us, and that very
fitly, although they can no way approve themselves equal to Elisha: neither
do they seek it, in respect of that calling, and those extraordinary gifts of
working miraculously being ceased. But the rather to lay it down, not as an
answer to those who do dispitefully in terms carry themselves toward the
Church-gouernours, disdayning them for their titles sake (for they are such as
will never be answered) and indeed are not worthy an answer: but for the
further confirming of them in the truth, who are in the same already; this is
the thing. It is not forbidden simply to give to the Ministers of the Church
honorable titles; provided always that it be not done in flattery, or besides
true knowledge: Neither are those places; Be not called Rabbi; Matthew. 23. 8. 9.
10.
Call no man Father upon earth; Be not called Doctors, any way of force to
abridge the Ministers of the Gospel of their due honor: It served indeed to
restrain the ambitious Pharisees' who hunting after vain titles, desired so
to be called; and would also that the people should wholly rest themselves upon
whatsoever was propounded under their names, as merely authentical, and no
way to be gainsaid: Job 32. 22.
Neither that of Elihu; For I may not give titles, left my Maker should take
me away suddenly. James 3. 1.
Neither that of James; Be not many Masters so to be taken? as if all title of
honor, or reverend estimation, were taken away, or forbidden to be given to
the Ministers of the Church: This is only forbidden them and thee; Them, that
they do not ambitiously seek and hunt after the titles of those places and
callings, for the honor and titles sake, without purpose to do the duties
beseeming those places and callings; or, as if under that name or title of
honor, whatsoever seemed good in their eyes, they might propound, and it not
to be refused; which to do were mere Papal and antichristian: Thee, that thou
also do not tie thy judgment, or faith, (concerning God and holy things) to
men; for their outward respects sake: But let them be called Fathers of the
Church, and so call thou them, 1 Cor. 4. 15.
for so Paul was called, and so called he himself: For though ye have ten
thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many Fathers (says he) for
in Christ Jesus I have begotten you, through the Gospel: yea, he called
himself the Doctor and teacher of the Gentiles; and thus they are, and may be
called, so as they do wholly and simply submit themselves to Christ, as to
their only Master, sent of God; and seek also to subject and bring thee and
thine, by their authority, under the obedience, sovereignty, and dominion of
Christ himself, their teacher, and thy teacher; their Lord and thy Lord; their
Master, and thy Master. And thus much by the way, upon that the Widow called
her Husband, Elisha his Servant, and herself his Hand-maide.

There is further upon this point, that he feared God, notwithstanding he
died in debt, this Doctrine to be observed, that a man may be indebted, and yet
be free from the common fame of the World, that is, to be an ill Man: Which is
no more true, then on the other side to say such and such are wealthy, rich,
and of good credit in the World, and therefore they must needs be good,
honest, and godly men, when as yet perhaps they never knew what true godliness
meant. But how can this agree then with those places (will some say) where God
makes a large promise to his people, upon condition that they hearken to the
voice of their God, to observe and do all his commandments, as by Moses is
written: Deuteronomy. 15. 6. and 28. 12.
Then thou shall lend to many Nations, and not borrow thy self. And again the
Prophet David says, A good man is merciful, and lends. Psalm 112. 5.
And on the other side, the Prophet David, he sets it down as a special
mark of a wicked man, to borrow and not to restore. The wicked man borrows,
Psalm. 37. 21.
and (says he) pays not again? etc.

I answer. Howsoever the promise of Gods blessings to the whole body of the
people of Israel, is no longer proper to them, then they shall jointly and
together bind themselves sincerely and simply to keep, and in so being bound,
do indeed keep Gods Commandments; yet in some other respect God both may,
and at his pleasure does oftentimes temporally punish the godly with the wicked
(as the Apostle Peter lays it down in these words: 1. Pet. 4. 17.
) For the time is come, that judgment must begin at the house of God: Yea,
and amongst other punishments, with this as one, God punishes thee, it being
incident to the children of God, rather to want then to abound, and this as he
does justly inflict upon man for sin, as Jeremy says; Man suffers for
sin: Lament. 3. 39.
Yet some other ends there may be and are with God* as the trial of the faith
and patience of his servants under the cross, whereby, to the further glory of
his name, some hidden virtues may more fully appear out of them which before
were not known. A second end may be, a greater manifestation of Gods care over
them under present wants, 1. Kings 17. 4. 9.
as over Eliah the Prophet, for whose relief God had provided the Ravens to
feed him; and by the widow of Sareptha; and his mighty protection, which
never shows it self more, then when his people are in the greatest danger, as
in the time when the people of Israel were in the Red Sea; as also, whilst in
the change of their condition and estates from wealth to poverty; he again, of
poor makes them rich, by restoring them to their first or former estate, as
he did Job. Job 42. 10.
Thirdly, for the taming or restrayning of some one or other sin, God
oftentimes meets with his children (after their long security and careless
regard of the Word, calling them to repentance, they not repenting) by the rod
of affliction: Whereupon he having, as Elihu says, set to his seal, ordaining
it as the pruining-knife, to the cutting off the superfluous branches, for the
causing of them to bring forth fruit the better, he faith: Then he opens the
eyes of men, Job 33.
even by their corrections, which he had sealed. Whereby he having (as the
Proverb is) struck the nail to the head, the heart and the affections once
renewed and changed, then he brings under obedience all those wandering lusts,
which before-time went astray from Gods holy Commandments: to the which
purpose the Prophet David confesses, as is 119. Psalm: Before I was
afflicted, I went astray: as for that of the good man, to be merciful, and to
lend, it rather describes the true property of a good man already enriched,
for the disposing of his riches to the good of others, then otherwise in any
ungodly care to get or increase his wealth: which (by occasion of the next
place) viz. Psalm. 37. ^1.
(The wicked man borrows, and pays not again) as before is more fitly met
withal; which words of the Prophet do not concere those who ordinarily being
poor and needy, are enforced to borrow directly for the supply of their
present wants, being also godlily minded, upon good foresight, and hope of
means in like manner to make restitution by: But it concerns all sorts and
degrees both of rich and poor, who any way unjustly minded, do take into
their hands the goods of other men, for their present use, without any purpose
of restoring; of whom those monsters amongst men, who immediately borrowing
without need, upon purpose to break, do (by the spoil of other their
creditors, enforced to stand at their courtesy for present payment,) hastily
become rich upon other men's goods: Some other there are, who under the name of
a more strict course of godliness in the profession of the Gospel then others,
having yet a mind that they live, but are dead, (being indeed ashamed to
acknowledge their mother, in whose womb they had their first conception unto
life) these in like manner (omitting their honest and lawful callings, being
weary of well-doing) as busybodies, whilst they will become planters, and
reformers of Churches, strayning beyond their Last, till all crack again,
having run themselves out of breath, are brought to borrow; and this also they
hold they may do, not purposing ever to make restitution, accounting in their
Anabaptisticall community, as a special point of Divinity with them, the
goods of them of whom they make thus bold with, even the goods of the Church
(the spoil of Babel, as they term it) as if they had by some Oracle from
Heaven, with the Israelites, Exodus 3. 22.
received a warrant from God so to do. To omit all other needless borrowers
for the cunning ingrossement of commodities of all sorts into their hands by
way of Monopoly, not caring what become of the Commonwealth so they alone may
live; to omit all other borrowers upon usury, to the end they may to a further
and greater exacting again, upon usury, lend, All these, join them in one,
are of the number of those, and may well so be reckoned, of whom David
speaks; The wicked borrows, and pays not again.

Out of this which has been spoken, every true member of the Church is to
learn; first, for his settled course of conuersing and making traffic with
men; Doct.
That if he desire to have the report of one that fears God, Col. 3. 22.
and that in singleness of heart; he must take heed (as the Apostle Paul
teaches) that he oppress not, 1 These. 4. 6.
nor defraude his brother in any matter. And then, that he try and examine
himself by the two looking-glasses of the Law, and the Gospel, the two parts
of the Word of God, wherein he may find out whether he truly fear God, or
no; a point very necessary to be stood upon. Doubtless in the one and first,
which is the Law, he shall find out in himself nothing but sin and iniquity,
and thereby that he stands in the severity of Gods extreme justice, in and
under the danger of eternal death and condemnation: In the other, he shall
find that God according to his own goodness, will look upon him with an
amiable and cheerful countenance, and discover unto him Jesus Christ his
Son, as the only washer, purger, and cleanser of him from his sin, not
only by forgiveness, but also by his sanctifying Spirit; taking away the
power of sin, that it shall not rule or reign any longer in his mortal
body, Romans 6. 12.
to obey it in the lusts thereof: And because there is just occasion offered to
speak of this point in these words (And thou know thy servant did fear
God) it is not from the purpose, that I set down thus much more upon it,
before every one that reads it; (viz.) that according as God did work
formerly in men a true care of performance of the duties, whatsoever of equity,
honesty, or charity between themselves, so he measured his own love to
them-ward, by an assurance of faith unto eternal life accordingly: For men are
reputed no further to have profited in the sound knowledge of God, according to
the rules of the first Table of the Law, then they are ready to express the
same by doing the duties of the second: For by this rule did both the holy
Prophets and Apostles measure out the assurance of the love of God to
themselves, and the people. Micah the Prophet expostulating this point with the
people of Israel in his days, who satisfied themselves, as they do now, with
an outward show of serving of God, by their sacrifices; when in the mean time
they were full of cruelty, and oppression, void of all mercy to their
Neighbors. Will the Lord (says he) be pleased with thousands of Rams, Micah
6. 6. 7. 8.
or with ten thousand Rivers of Oil? shall I give my first borne for my
transgression, even the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? And
thereto he answers. 8. He has showed thee O man what is good, and what the
Lord requires of thee; surely to do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble
thy self to walk with thy God: And thus must every debtor, yea, and creditor
also, try himself whether he fear God, or no; even by the Offices of
borrowing and lending, according to good and pure love, laid down in the
Word. For says the Apostle John; Whosoever does not righteousness, 1 John 3.
10.
is not of God; neither he that loves not his brother. All which duties of the
Law also, concerning God and man, must be done in like manner wholly, and that
from a sound heart: And therefore if thou shall soothe up thy self in some
duties doing, and shall in the mean while fail in other; know this from the
Apostle James, who says: James 2. 10.
For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet fails in one point, is
guilty in all. Where then the true fear of God is, there is first integrity of
heart, and then whole obedience, that is, a continual striving unto the
performance of all and every duty, with care of doing what we do for Gods
cause, or because of the love that we do bear to God constrayning us
thereunto.

But because in either getting, or keeping a good report, whilst men dealet
together in matters of this World, as in borrowing and lending, there be many
windings and turnings, so that it is hard for a man to pass away without some
stain of his credit (especially if he be one that strives unto godliness,
whom all the World seeks to speak ill of,) it stands every man in hand
therefore, so much the more truly to ^ift himself, especially when Gods hand
is upon him in this affliction of being in debt. He therefore that will not be
deceived in himself, in looking upon the Law of the ten Commandments, as upon
a looking-glass, wherein he desires to behold the errors of his life; let him
cast his eye aside, and with good care look into the extreme part of that
Glass, even the tenth Commandment: Thou shall not covet, etc. Or as the
Apostle says, Romans 7. 7.
Thou shall not lust; and there shall he learn this lesson, that if he have
given but way to any sin to make proffer to him, and so suffer it to rest,
and Satan the first mouer or suggester to sin, with any, though never so
small an entertainment of him; yea, if he have but granted time, (upon the
motion and first suggestion thereunto) to demurre, and as it were to advise
whether it be best to think, or not to think, to do, or not to do, thereby
calling the Law of God into question or doubt, put the case it be upon this
point of borrowing, upon a deceivable purpose to serve thy present need; if
that party whosoever has not given either in the point in hand, as borrowing
upon deceivable purposes, or any the like motion or prompting unto sin, (as
our Savior Christ) did unto Satan, the present auant or avoid Satan, Matthew.
4. 10.
and with David, Away from me all ye workers of iniquity; Psalm. 6. 8.
or rather with the same Prophet, in the like words; Away from me ye wicked,
Psalm. 119. 15.
I will keep the Commandments of my God; let him know that he has sinned
already against his own soul, even in this, that by demurring with Satan, as
by way of counsailetaking, he has given him some hope to prevail at the last;
which to do is sin with God: and therefore to this purpose speaks the holy
Apostle Paul: Ephesians. 4. ^-7.
Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the Devil.
For how small soever a sin (not to resist sin upon the first sight,) in
outward seeming appears to be, because the beginnings of sin are very
deceitful, it being a common saying, A little is not so much: Yet so great it
is doubtless, as once being entered upon thee, hardly after, if ever, until
thy dying day, will it be got out: for the very regenerate have their sins,
under the which they do continually labor, which makes them go heavily
mourning all the day long, and oftentimes to water their couch with their
tears, as David did, who complained saying; Psalm 6. 6.
I fainted in my mourning, I cause my bed every night to swim, and water my
couch with my tears: and this does the looking into this first glass of the
Law cause, yea, in them who truly fear God. But here they must not stand:
There is another more clear cristalline and comfortable glass of the Gospel,
which also they must with all good speed look into, where they shall even upon
the very first view, so suddenly behold Christ Jesus, that only comforter of
them that mourn in Sion, and the refresher of those that go heavily laden
under the burden of their sin, and seek their refreshing where it is to be
had: for faith in Christ Jesus, is the only mark of that filial, son-like,
and true fear of God, without the which faith, there is no true fear of God
at all; and when thou see him, go to him, lay hold on him, make thy moan to
him, show him thy soars, thy wounds, certify him of the foyles thou have had
since thou entredst thy self a Soldier under his Banner, challenge him for
thy Captain, acknowledge thy strayings and wandering out of his Camp; let him
know thy several and particular sins, hide nothing from him, (though he know
all before) it shall be his greater glory, and in the end thy greater comfort:
bewail his so long absence from thee, with the great dangers thou wast in
whilst thou wast left to thy self: Say with the Church in Salomons Song. I
sought him, Song of Solomon, 5. 6.
but I found him not; I called upon him, and he answered me not. Give me leave
a little longer, because this fear of God, Ecclesiastes 12. 13.
as is said; Hoc est totum hominis: it is all that God requires of man, and it
is that thou must have, and it is a point whereupon thou must try, and often
examine thy self; even King, Queen, Prince, Nobles, Governors, Ministers,
Husband, Wife, Father, Children, Masters, Servants. I cannot therefore end, I
am as in a maze; give me leave yet in a word, who is it that as the Church
before says, has not called upon God often, and yet has not prevailed; and
what then, shall he therefore give over? No, shall he not still pray? Yes. Will thou ask how long, leave him not until he have mercy upon thee; let not the
terriblenesse of thine enemy (although he be as a roaring and devouring Lion, 1
Pet. 5. 8.
laid down by the Apostle Peter before thee, let it not daunt thee, but awaken
thy spirits the more, the rather; and therefore to the purpose it is, that the
Apostle says: Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith; quit you like men, 1 Cor. 16.
13.
and be strong. And as in the Ephesians: Having finished all things, stand, and
to thy greater hope of prevailing, add (as the Apostle Paul in that very place
immediately after says, Verse 18.
thereunto Prayer: And pray always (says he) with all manner prayer and
supplication in the spirit, and faint not. And howsoever every sin, whereof
Satan will (having been the first mouer of thee thereunto) be thy accuser,
shall appear to thy wounded conscience as a most fearful and terrible
monster, greedily, and with open mouth gaping wide, do seek to swallow and
devour thee up even alive; yet as thou fear God, and desire the report
thereof in the World, in life, in death, and after death, as this poor
Widows Husband, have faith in God, and shrink not; behold his love to thee
in Christ, and be of good cheer: although thou have lived in the ways of the
World, without regard of God and his Law heretofore, yet upon this thy faith,
fruitful in repentance, be comforted with Paul; It is not thou, but sin in
thee, Romans 7. 17. and 15.
as is said: It is no more I, (for now thou beleeuest, thou art another person
in Christ Jesus before God, thy sin is not looked upon) but says he, It is
sin that dwells in me: For I allow not (says he) that which I do, for
what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I. It is that natural
corruption, which doubtless cleaves to them who are regenerate, and although
daily in conquering, yet not clean conquered. But in this trial of thy self,
as concerning the true fear of God to be in thee; if thou feel that thou
have thus far profited, go on still with the blessed Apostle, as one wearied
with these miserable conflicts of Satan, and show thy faith more and more, by
still going to God, as thy only helper, and cry aloud with groans and
sighs; Verse 24.
Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? And
again, to despite Satan to his teeth, as if thou had already gotten the
victory, (for Faith, whose object is Christ, with all the graces of his Spirit,
gives to each believer things absent, as already present) be bold to outface
him, Psalm. 118. 13.
and say as David to Saul; Thou have thrust sore at me, that I might fall; but
the Lord he has helped me. To the end then that all just suspicions of
deceitful shifts in borrowing may be taken from thee, and that thy name may be
free from all just slander, Psalm. 119. 22.
pray with David to God, and give not over; Remove from me shame and contempt:
and again in the 39. Verse 39.
verse. Take away my rebuke that I fear, etc. And in thus doing, and
prevailing, thou shall reap unto thee, for thy comfort, both living and dead,
this report; that thou haft feared God. Now to proceed to that which
follows, concerning the Creditor, in these words of her complaint: And the
Creditor is come to take my two Sons to be his bondmen.

The Law of bondage, as appears both by the Scriptures, as also by the Law of
Nations has been ancient; which also may be found to have been amongst us, as
by certain Instruments of Manumission for the release of bondmen or
villains; and this before the time of the Gospel may evidently appear. By
the Law of Nations it appears so to have been. Aul. Gell. lib. 20. cap. 1.
It was decreed (says Aulus Gellius) by the Judge, that after the Debtor was
demanded by the Creditor his debt, he not having to pay at the instant, that
then he should have thirty days more given him, and if within that time he
could not make satisfaction, then the poor man was fettered by the feet; and
further, being fast bound with a cord or long line, was so delivered over to
the Creditor; who leading him home as an Ox or an Ass, he put him to what
servile work soever, until that by his most slavish and more perhaps then
Egyptian-like bondage, he had by all toylesome labor wrought out unto his
Master full satisfaction of his debt; and thus for the time of their bondage
were they bought and sold from one to another, as beasts are sold in a market:
For proof whereof, under the law of Moses, we read, If thou buy an Hebrew
servant, Exodus 21. 2.
he shall serve six years, and in the seventh he shall go out free for
nothing: Gene. 37. 27.
Before the Law written, we read of Joseph, who was twice sold; once by his
brethren to the Ishmaelites, Genesis 39. 1.
and then after by them to Potiphar, an Eunuch of King Pharaohs. In the Book
of the Psalms, the Prophet David, setting down as by way of bewayling the
misery of Gods people, to God himself, under the hard servitude wherewith
they were oppressed: Psalm. 44. 11.
Thou sellest thy people for naught. (says he) and thou do not increase
their price: And in the Prophecy of Esaias, says the Prophet, as in the person
of God; Esaias 50. 1.
who is the creditor to whom I sold you? Behold, for your iniquities are ye
sold, etc. As if he should say; You are indeed under bondage, but your selves
have made slaves of your selves, by your own ungodliness. Likewise, under the
New Testament, where our Savior likeneth the Kingdom of Heaven to a certain
King which would take account of his servants, Matthew. 18. 23. 24. 25.
and when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him which ought him
10000. talents, and because he had nothing to pay, he commanded him to be
sold, and his wife, and his children, and all that he had, and the debt to be
paid, etc.

So that the creditor did the widow no wrong* she being insufficient, to take
her two sons to be his Bondmen; and yet she complains to the Prophet, I
will not say of the cruelty of the Creditor, the Law then so requiring it, but
rather of her own distressed estate, who was in danger of the loss of so
great comforts, the loss whereof how great it was, may appear by the example
of a poor man, of whom Saint Basil writes, who having many children, in a
heavy time of Famine, was with all of them even at the point of a famishment,
ready to starve for want of food: for the relieuing of whom, one of them must
be sold, to buy corn and victuals withal, to save all the rest alive. The
father calls his wife, and causes her to call all his children together, they
advise each with other which of them they should depart from, and so, not
without tears, the father beholding the eldest, the beginning of his strength,
the excellency of his dignity, the first that called him father; the second,
too young; the third, like the father; the fourth, the mothers darling; the
fifth, the express image of the grandfather; the sixth, well made, and like to
prove a soldier; the last, witty, ingenious, and very fit to make a Scholar:
so tenderhearted was this kind and natural father, as that he could not find
any one amongst them, from whom he might depart, choosing rather to redeem all
their lives with his own peril and danger, then to suffer any one of them to
depart upon so hard conditions. Blame not then this poor woman, although she
complain for this her loss of the hope of her comfort in both her sons, at
once; considering that the sodainenesse of her change upon the death of her
husband, together with the hastiness of the Creditor to see his own, perhaps
was such as it could not but move her greatly to labor every way for her
release. But on the other side, (to this of debts to be paid by the taking of
the debtor, his wife and children, to be as bondmen to the Creditors behoof,
by their labors and travails, so to be employed until the debt be
satisfied,) I hear some careless altogether of all good credit, and just
dealing, to say and give out; Tush I fear no such bondage, the Gospel has
taken away all the straitness that was in the Law, of that slavish servitude
in former ages; I will deal well enough, although I pay not any thing. I
answer thee, Thou do greatly abuse the liberty of the Gospel, which is
inward, and stands most in the peace of a good conscience, by our Lord Jesus
Christ, whereof thou have made ship wrack, whilst thou give thy self
liberty to live in all injustice, upon the spoil of other men's goods: Yea,
know this in time whilst thou may know it, that thou art but a profane and
an unbelieving wretch; thou do blaspheme God, and take the name of the
Gospel in vain in thy mouth, whilst having borrowed, and out of other men's
estates have gathered unto thy self Lands and living, goods and money, which
upon a false trust into other men's hands, as ill as thy self, thou have turned
over, to deceive by, and utterly refusest to pay, or at least will pay at thy
pleasure what thou see good: Know this, that howsoever it fall out with thee
to escape the hands of men, and perhaps under color of Law do impudently
cover thy deceits, yet assuredly in seeking to rid thy self from the dangers
of men, thou have sold thy self, and art become a very villain and bond-slaue
to the Devil, whose hands thou can not escape; under whose custody if once,
(not preventing thy fearful estate in due time, by returning to God whilst
thou art called to repentance) be assured of it, hell having received thy soul
and body, thence, there neither is nor ever can be redemption; but as in the
Parable of the Rich-man and Lazarus, as under the speech of Abraham to the
Rich-man being in hell in torments, lifting up his eyes, seeing Abraham a far
off, and Lazarus in his bosom: Luke 16. 23.
Then he cried, and said; Father Abraham, have mercy upon me, and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the tippe of his finger in water, and cool my tongue,
for I am tormented in this flame: But Abraham said; Son, remember that thou
in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasure, but Lazarus pains; now therefore he
is comforted, and thou art tormented. Besides all this, between you and us
there is a great gulf set, so that they which would go from hence to you
cannot, neither can they come from hence to us, etc. So that once with the
Devil in hell, thy Mittimus being once under seal, and charge to the Iaylor
given, Take him, bind him hand and foot, with that most woeful sentence of the
Judge: Depart thou cursed one into Hell, there to be tormented with the Devil
and his Angels for ever, never after look to be released.

But, what is laid down in the case of an unjust Debtor, is and may fitly be
applied unto a hard, merciless, and unconscionable Creditor, who is like to
drink of the same Cup, even the Cup of Gods eternal wrath; whom to lay down
I cannot better, then from the outcry of a poor, honest, and well-minded
Debtor, whose pitiful moan and complaint goes in this manner: Alas, (says
he) I do indeed owe much, and have not presently to pay, but as it arises out
of my trade, and honest labor; little I have, but that little I am willing to
depart from unto satisfaction: Yea further, my self, my wife, and children,
all of us, will join together in one* freely, to the uttermost by our labors
and travails, to work out what is in our power for the Creditors best profit:
But alas this will not serve his turn, he will have all (and all he may have
in time under Gods blessing, if he would but a while depend with us upon Gods
providence, whose blessing alone makes rich, Prou. 10. 22.
but he will have it presently, or else no way with him but one: all his Song
is, To prison with him, I will have my penni-worths of his carkeise, I will make
dice of his bones: And thus, like the unmerciful Creditor in the 18. Matthew.
18. 28.
of S. Matthewes Gospel, 28. verse, he vrges all extreme courses that may be.
Besides, he has made me spend as much in Law for the keeping of my liberty,
and the freeing of my body from hard imprisonment, as would have paid a
quarter of the debt: He can no way endure to hear of the mitigation of
justice, letters of Commission from the supreme Magistrates, for the ordering
of the debt to the equal good of both parties, by indifferent men, lawfully
appointed to that business, he cannot abide: Is it true (says he) does Law
consist upon two parts, (viz.) of extreamitie, and moderation? I will then do
well enough with the beggarly knave: He will have what Law will give him to the
uttermost, body and goods, yea all will not serve his unmerciful and
bloud-thirstie humor: And whereas we are in hand with the Law of bondage, (as
before) wherein Husband, Wife, and Children, were by their honest labors to
travail every way at the Creditors pleasure, and for his best avail: he will
no way yield to have his money paid in that sort by peecemeale: He will rather
(if by and under the Letter of the Law he may have it,) see him rot in prison,
and wife and children starve all at home, then to accept of such beggarly
payment, wherein I may compare this bloud-thirstie wretch unto a certain Jew,
of whom we read, who having lent money to a Christian, the day being come,
and the poor Christian not able to make payment, the Jew was contented, so he
might have a pound of the Christians flesh, to loose the nine hundred crowns,
for so much was the debt that the Christian ought him. But this hard and
unequal course is no way befitting the Church or people of God, in a Christian
Commonwealth: Nay rather, the rich Creditor abounding in all wealth, if he
will approve himself to be a good man, not before men, (because of his wealth,
for that may deceive) but before God in Christ Jesus, (being merciful as
Christ is merciful) he must rather forgo all, and simply forgive the debt,
then upon a wilful revenge to attempt to do any thing that may endanger the
life of that his poor Debtor: or if not wholly to forgive, which is an
extreme on his part, yet at the least to have a conscionable regard of his
inability, and therein so to accept of his debt, as by day and day he may at
the last (God so seeing it good for both) receive his own in part or in whole,
without the hurt of any one of them both.

Whereunto if parties cannot be drawn between themselves, rather then by their
own violent and delatory courses, for the gain only of time, without the
good of any one of them, they shall spoil each other, it is not amiss the
Judge himself upon the just notice of the cause does do, by enforcing
whithersoeuer of them is faulty by his power and authority, immediately to
yield to what indifferent course, for both their goods he shall at the very
instant assign them unto.

For doubtless it is generally supposed, that every Law of Justice, especially
amongst us Christians, has these two things in it; that is, the very extremity
in plain terms, according to the letter of the Law, and the mitigation of the
extremity, according to circumstances employed in it; because otherwise, Summum
ius (cannot be) but Summa iniuria.

And this seems the Prophet David to teach from himself, in his own person,
when he says; I will sing mercy, and judgment. But to what end is all this,
will some say? Truly not beside the matter in hand, wherein my purpose is to
justify the execution of both these parts of the Law (viz.) Extremity and
Mitigation, each of them, according to their times, and this to do, as in
other cases, so in the case of the Creditor and Debtor: first as any one of
them shall be spyed out to exceed in oppressing each other, that then
according to the express letter of the Law, (the intent of the Law being the
good of the people) they be so dealt withal, thereby to break the neck of
the stubborn and contentious party, to make him to know himself, as yet the
other point of mitigation closely concealed, without the which no Law intented
to be, may for the joint good of either, according to equity, be duly also and
seasonably by the Judge executed; provided always that this moderation of Law
in the extremity thereof, come not too late, when (if not at all) yet the
greatest part of that worth of that which is sued for, is come already into the
Lawyers Coffers, a little perhaps remaining behind for the suing party
himself, and this doubtless is the general complaint throughout the Land.

I know again it will be said, that I go ouer-far in this point, meddling with
the Law, beyond my limits: To this I answer, that when a mere cruel
oppressor shall under color of Law to get his own, where perhaps it is not
possibly to be had, and in all extremity to wreake his wroth by it, keep that
his poor debtor in prison so long until he be ready to starve, and so
endanger his life, which is an entrance upon the Kings freehold; yea, and this
to do as under the Kings name, in the abuse of the Kings Writ, making the Law
and the King jointly partakers of this their cruelty, to the overthrow many
times of a better Subject to the King then himself is: It is time then that
equity, the fountain whereof is the Word of God, and we as the buckets by whom
ye all must draw forth, as out of the holy and heavenly wells, Isay 12. 3.
the comfortable waters of your salvation, it is high time for us to put in
fact, considering that it is a doctrine which Solomon as from Gods special
instinct has left us to teach; Prou. 14. 28.
In the multitude of a people, is the honor of a King (says he) and for want
of people, comes the destruction of the Prince: Whence thus I reason; If
Kings themselves by all equity and clemency are to increase, and not by tyranny
to lessen their people, as doubtless they are, and good reason, because where
this care is not, their Territories and Countries are easily subdued, and the
borders of their government diminished: Much less are they to suffer the
people one to eat up and devour another; yea, if so be the people will, and
do generally condemn tyrannous cruelty and oppression in their Kings to them,
much more were it to be condemned between themselves.

The doctrine then hence is, that all Kings, Magistrates, and people, must by
all means avoid all occasions of bloud-shedding, or wilful murdering of any,
because God will not suffer the life of a man to go unrevenged: as it is said;
Genesis 9. 5. 6.
At the hand of a man's brother will I require the life of man. Who so sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: For in the Image of God he made
man. Whereunto let me add this, that not only murder it self is forbidden,
but every tracke or path that leads to it.

The use that we must make of this point is, always upon the troublesome and
furious motions of our wrathful and reuengefull affections and fiery
passions, to look back to the holy Word of God, and thereby so to temper our
selves, as that we suffer not our rage in any wise to break out; because, if
God, (as it is said) will put the tears of his Saints into the bottle of his
remembrance, much more shall he avenge himself of the blood of any of his
people. But now to return again to the Widow, so pitifully complaining to
the Prophet upon the Creditor, his taking her two sons to be his bondmen,
concerning whom, her sorrow being then so great upon the loss of her two
sons, if thou shall by comparing time past with the present time, and the
courses which then were used for the satisfying of debts to the Creditors, with
those straight courses that now are used, and shall find, and as it were
sensibly feel, that the Creditors of these days, and the means they use
toward those poor debtors of theirs, are more hard and grievous; learn thou,
first, whilst thou art at liberty and thy state sound, learn betimes to
avoid all occasions of falling into the hands of so unmerciful men, and no
further deal with them if it be possible, then thou may at thine own
pleasure easily escape out of their hands. If thy liberty, thy state, thy Wife,
thy Children, yea, thy life be so dear unto thee, and the loss of them so
sharp and grievous, let not present pleasures, nor the serving of thy turn to
prodigal, or unnecessary uses, or any way besides the duties of thy calling,
so soon, or so easily draw thee to buy repentance at so hard a rate.

But does this lesson come a little too late, art thou already caught by the
heel? learn then from this Widow a second lesson; lie not thou still in thy
woeful and perplexed estate, but speedily repair for remedy and comfort where
it is to be had, to God first by prayer, for the remedying or reforming rather
of what master-sinne soever is in thee, or for patience under this thy cross;
then to the Minister, to the Magistrate, to thy Creditor, to thy Friends, as
helpers and sollicitors for thee, loose no time, redeem it rather, it is the
Wisdom of God by Solomon; Prou. 6. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. verses.
Do this now my son, and deliver thy self, seeing thou art come into the
hand of thy neighbor, go and humble thy self, and solicit thy friends,
give no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eye-liddes, deliver thy
self as a Do from the hand of the Hunter, and as a Bird from the hand of a
Fowler. What thou do herein do speedily, (Mora trahit periculum) make
proof at once of the lawful means, and leave the success to God; knowing
this, that he it is that has the hearts of men in his hands, yea, and for thy
good: Prou. 21. 1.
So says Solomon. The Kings heart is in the hands of the Lord, as the Rivers
of waters he turns it whithersoeuer it pleases him. Let nothing step in thy
way to discourage thee in the lawful and seasonable using of these means for
thy remedy, for, for thee, even for thee, and for thy relief are all Kings,
Princes, Judges, Magistrates, Ministers, appointed, and by him set up: Romans 13.
4.
For he is the Minister of God for thy wealth.

But because where such popular oppressions do grow, and as by way of example
one from another they do daily increase, it argues remissness both in the
Governors and government, and some heavy judgment (of what kind he best
knows that is the Judge of all) to hang over that Land; for so it appears to
have been in the days of the Prophet Esaias, who prophesying of a desolation to
fall upon the people of Jerusalem and Judah, as is to see in these words: Esaias
3. 1. 5.
For lo the Lord of Hosts will take away from Jerusalem and Judah the stay and
the strength, etc. In the fifth verse he says, to the purpose I have in hand:
The people shall be oppressed one of another, and every one by his Neighbor:
the children shall presume against the ancient; and the vile against the
honorable. But because when these grievous sins of oppression and
undutifulness do exceed, it stands the Magistrates in hand first in
themselves to begin to reform, and then to proceed not only to make Laws of
reformation for the cleansing of the Church and Commonwealth of their
enormities, but to proceed with all severity and celerity unto execution; and
because hereunto examples do much provoke, let me be bold a little to lay
down before all, who are in place of Magistracy under the supreme Magistrate,
the example of that worthy Governor Nehemiah: It is yet time, while then it is
called to day (as is said.) All you who would be accounted the Fathers of your
Countries, read him, and follow him. Fathers must not be oppressors; Fathers
must be helpers, comforters, and nourishers of their Children: Fathers must not
suffer oppression in their Families, one Child to oppress another; so the
Fathers over Churches and Commonwealths, must not take upon them those places
of honor and renown for their own credit, gain, or ease, but to be good
ouer-seers of their people, careful punishers of oppression; and not to suffer
(inasmuch as in them lies) one to oppress another, one to lay ouer-heauy
yoakes or burdens, one vpou another. Nehemiah 5. 1. verse, to the end of the
13. Read it I beseech you, mark it, make use of it, and God assisting you,
do it; the words are these.

Now there was a great cry of the people, and of their wives against their
brethren the Jews. 2. For there were that said, We, our Sons and our
Daughters, are many; therefore we take up Corn, that we may eat, and live. 3.
And there were that said, we must gage our Lands, our Vineyards, and our
Houses, and take up Corn for the famine. 4. There were also that said, we have
borrowed money for the Kings tribute upon our Lands, and upon our Vineyards. 5.
And now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, and our sons as their
sons, and lo (says he) we bring into subjection our sons and daughters as
servants, and there be of our daughters now in subjection, and there is no
power in our hands; for other men have our Lands, and our Vineyards. 6. Then
was I very angry, when I heard their cry, and these words. 7. And I thought in
my mind, and I rebuked their Princes and Rulers, and said unto them; Ye lay
burdens every one upon his brethren, and I set a great Assembly against them.
8. And I said unto them, We (according to our ability) have redeemed our
brethren the Jews, which were sold unto the Heathen, and will you sell your
brethren again, or shall they be sold unto us? Then held they their peace,
and could not answer. 9. I said also, that which you do, is not good; ought
you not to walk in the fear of God, for the reproach of the Heathen our
enemies? 10. For I, even I, my brethren and servants do lend them money and
corn: I pray you let us leave off this burden. 11. Restore unto them, I pray
you, this day their Lands, their Vineyards, their Olives, and their houses, and
remit the 100. part of the silver, and of the corn, of the Wine, and of the
Oil that you exact of them. 12. Then, said they, we will restore it, and will
not require it of them: We will do as thou have said. Then I called the
Priests, and caused them to swear that they should do according to this
promise. 13. So, I shook my lap, and said: So, let God shake out every man,
that will not perform this promise, from his house, and from his labor: even
thus let him be shaken out, and emptied. And all the Congregation said, Amen,
and praised the Lord, and the people did according to this promise: Oh blessed
Ruler, O blessed People; and so much for this point. Now follows, the Answer
of the Prophet to the Widow, by way of conference together, which is a
declaration of the means whereby the debt is to be paid, in these words:

Verse 2. Then Elizha said unto her; What shall I do for thee? Tell me, What
have thou at home? And she said, Thine handmaid has nothing at home, save a
pitcher of Oil. Verse 3. And he said; Go, borrow thee vessels abroad of all
thy neighbors, empty vessels, and spare not. Verse 4. And when thou art come
in, thou shall shut the door upon thee, and upon thy sons, and power out
into all those vessels, and set aside those that are full.

In this answer to her complaint by the Prophet, there are two things to be
observed: First, a Question: Secondly, a Counsel. The question, twofold:
First, What shall I do for thee? Secondly, What have thou at home, etc. The
Counsel, Go, and borrow thee vessels abroad, etc. From the Prophets example,
we are to observe a general point for our practice (viz.) The care that he
had over the poor widow, which appears in his first demand; What shall I
do for thee? We ought to do the like, a question most fit for all fathers of
Countries, Cities, and Commonwealths; For all the reverend Fathers of
Churches, as Bishops, Pastors, and Teachers, yea, for all whom it concerns to
be as the Ears, Eyes, Mouth, Hands, Feet, and what not, for the poor
fatherless, the stranger, the oppressed, the widow, and who are no way able
to help or speak for themselves. Such a one was Job; I was (says he) the
Eyes to the blind, and I was the feet to the lame; I was as a Father unto the
poor, and when I knew not the cause, I searched it out diligently; I brake
also the jaws of the unrighteous man, and plucked the pray out of his mouth:
This is, to do for the oppressed, not barely to speak for; and yet in some
respect, speaking may be doing, as this very same Prophet, in a care he had
for the woman of Shunem, and in part of requital of her kind care over him in
his travail: He said to his man in these words, Verse 13. Then he said to him
(that is, to his man) say unto her now; Behold, thou have had all this great
care over us: What shall we do for thee? Is there any thing to be spoken for
thee to the King, or to the Captain of the Host? Under which words, speaking
for, and doing, are joined together, as of like nature and condition: as also,
the Ministers of the Gospel, men of Law in the cases of their Clients, who in
no wise are to spare to speak in the cause of the distressed, what repulse
soever they have; so it be according to equity, whose speaking may be (being
thoroughly and seasonable performed, in a case of justice and judgment) as a
deed done; for certainly words avail not, where deeds are not: Deeds are the
testifications of a fruitful and lively faith, which faith, if it have no
deeds, is dead in it self. James 2. 15. 16. 17.
So says the Apostle James: For if a brother, or a sister, be naked, and
destitute of daily food, and one of you say to them; Depart in peace, warm
your selves, and fill your bellies, notwithstanding ye give them not those
things that are needful for the body, What helps it? Even so the faith, if
it have no works, is dead in it self. But this spe^ch of the Prophet,
doubtless, was powerful and fruitful: Bare words would have done to her
small comfort; they were then, and are now, Deeds that must cheer up the
hearts of the affl^cted; or, (as I may say) words that carry deeds with them,
as these of the Prophets: What shall I do for thee? But, alas, words tending
to the good of the poor, especially in cases of suit, are grown to so high a
rate, as they can hardly reach.

But let each party that reads this, upon view-taking of the slender deeds of
charity that these days afford, (especially where the Lawyer must be used in
the helping of the distressed, and oppressed, to his right) let him not weigh
with himself what the World does, but let him see into the example of this
Prophet, what himself should do, and do it; and having considered what,
when, to whom, and in that kind he may do good, let him resolutely, and
speedily, as occasion serves, do it: For true is the Proverb, Qui cito dat,
bis dat, He gives two gifts at once, who gives one speedily: and let Solomon
herein be thy director, who teaches thus; Prou. 3. 28.
Say not unto thy neighbor, Go, and come again, and to morrow will I give
thee, if thou now have it. Luke 10. 36. and the 34.
Be not as the Priest, and Leuite, to him that fell among Thieves; the one of
them, making dainty to give so much as the cast of the eye; the other, though
crossing the way to look on him, yet not sparing a word of comfort to the
distressed; does of them leaning him helpless; But with the good Samaritane,
go to him, and do to him (as the Prophet says) What shall I do for thee?
And as it follows, 34. Verse; He came near to him, he had compassion of
him, he bound up his wounds, he powered in Oil, and Wine, and put him on his
own beast, and brought him to an Inn, and made provision for him, to the end,
etc. Thus, upon the proffer of a poor man that wants thy help, when God will
make proof of thy faith, according to thy fruitfulness in mercy; bethink
thee then with this Prophett, and say: What shall I do for such a one for his
relief? and do it; for assure thy self, what fair show soever thou make
in the profession of the Gospel, denoting thy self to all holy exercises of
faith and holiness, without works of mercy to testify the same, woeful is
thy profession: for, as Saint James says, Pure Religion, and undefiled before
God, James 1. 27.
even the Father, is this; To visit the Fatherless, and Widows in their
adversity, and to keep himself unspotted in the World.

Seeing then we can no further approve our selves to God, then we find and
feel our hearts inclinable to pity, and mercy, and such other fruits of the
spirit, and to the vnreuocably, resolute execution of them; because it in not
enough to think, purpose, and resolve to do good, but we must do it.

Let every one, great and small, make a holy and a good use of this point,
examining our selves, what we have been formerly, what we should be, and how
unapt and unready we have been and are to that which we should both be, and
do: and as thou feel thine error, finding out thine unmerciful and hard
heart, how unready to do any good to the poor and needy, how strait a hand
thou have held over thy Tenants, thy Workmen, thy Servants, thy Debtors, and
all other thy poor Neighbors; making always gain out of the dunghill (with
him that said, Lucri suavis odor est ex re qualibet) to be thy godliness,
acknowledge thy self, and lay down thine own ways, as David did, before the
Lord in these words: Psalm. 119. 26.
I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me; for God loves men when they
can confess against themselves their sins with remorse, and as in touch of
conscience, Job. 33. 27.
to say as it is in Job, speaking in the person of a true Convert: I have
sinned, and perverted righteousness, and it does no way profit me. And having
gone thus far in examining thy self, both of what thou have been in former
time, with a dislike of the ways of sin, wherein thou before thy effectual
calling walkedst, especially those thy sins of cruel, hard, rigorous, and
unmerciful dealing with all men; as also, if thou find in thee a desire to
be rid of all those old and tattered rags of worldliness, which thou
did wear in the days of thine oppression, and cruelty, at what time thy
money, thy lands, thy cattle, thy corn, were as thy gods: and do on the
other side desire to be merciful, and tender hearted, putting upon thee a new
livery, even the robe of Christ's righteousness, and the livery garment of
Christ Jesus himself, in all tender compassion, then shall thou, upon this
sudden change of thy affections, bethink thy self, and seek how thou may
from henceforth with thy wealth, money, lands, and living, do good to the
Church, to the Commonwealth, to the poor, miserable, and needy; how thou
may bestow thy goods to the restoring of the decayed, setting at liberty
the poor, that are indebted, out of hard bondage, and imprisonment: Luke 19. 8.
Then with Zaccheus, (as it is written of him) so soon as Jesus has taken up
his lodging in thy heart, as he did in Zaccheus house and heart, also thou will not think it any loss for thee to say, and do as he did: Lord, Behold,
the half of my goods I do give to the poor: and if I have taken from any man
by forged cauillation* I restore him fourfold, etc. But in thus being
minded, if thou find it hard for thee to perform, and art driven to say
with Paul: Romans 7. 18.
For to will is present with me, but I find no means to perform that which
is good, etc. Go on yet still, and lay down, as before, thy wants, and
weaknesses, never give over to confess against thy self, against thy
best-beloued sin, and pray withal, and say: Lord, thou that have set at
liberty the feet of the lame, have commanded the sicknesses and diseases of
men and women to depart and to leave them, and have made them, by the word of
thy mouth, whole and sound, to go and walk about their affairs: so I come to
thee, O Father, I come to thee for my sick, sinful, leprous, blind, halt,
lame, covetous, and adulterous soul, possessed with a legion of unclean
Devils: and I say to thee, and beseech thee, with the Centurion, Matthew. 8. 8.
speak thou the word only, and I shall be healed, cleansed, and delivered
from the power of sin: set my soul at liberty, and give me thine holy
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 17.
then shall I be free: For, as the Apostle Paul says: Where the Spirit of the
Lord is, there is liberty, yea perfect and full liberty indeed. Then, and
never before shall thou be able to prevail against all thy corruptions, then
shall neither Idolatry nor Blasphemy, nor Sabboth-breaking, no Rebellion, no
dishonorable account of thy natural Fathers, of Magistrates, or Ministers, no
malice, no murdering affections, no deceit, no adultery; then shall neither
sin nor Satan prevail over thee, to thy destruction. Acknowledge God
mighty in mercy, and say to him in Prayer from thy heart: Lord, say Lord to
me, speak but the word, and command my heart to fear thee, command thou my
soul and body to leave off to do evil, and to do the thing that is just and
upright, and I know I shall fear thee. Yea, with the Prophet David say to God
as he said; Psalm. 119. v. 32
I will, yea I shall, run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall
enlarge my heart. And let thy loving kindness come to me, and thy salvation,
according to thy promise. And in this thy asking, make sure to thy self, that
thou may be able to charge God with his promise, and that thou art of them
to whom all Gods promises do appertain, that so thou may be able to say
and pray to thy Lord God with feeling, as David, and doubtless thou shall
find a comfortable change upon this thy thus examining, and further proceeding
with thy self in form aforesaid.

Now it follows; What have thou at home? Whereof, as briefly as I may, and
so to the Answer of the Widow, and the Counsel of the Prophet upon this her
answer. Wherein, as well may be gathered out of the Prophets words following
her Answer, this, in the 3. and 4. Verses, that each person that is indebted,
is, out of that which remains over and above his ordinary provision for meat,
drink, and necessary apparel, to make state of the rest, to the Creditours
best behoof, without further fraud, couin, or deceit: This always reserved,
that nothing of present use, wherein rests the continuing estate of present
life, as meat, drink, and necessary apparel is to be taken away, or detained
from him: and to that purpose speaks Moses: Exodus 22. 25. 26. 27.
If thou lend money to my people, that is, to the poor with thee, thou shall
not be as an Usurer to him, ye shall not oppress him with Usury. 26. If thou
take thy Neighbors raiment to pledge, thou shall restore it before the Sun
go down. 27. For that is his covering only, and this is his garment for his
skin: Wherein shall he sleep? Therefore when he cries unto me, I will
hear him, for I am merciful. Doubtless, the Prophet did not ask her, of her
estate, to the end he might fleece her to his own behoof, as the present age
of this World does, that is, to lie in wait for advantage, and so long as there
remains any flesh at all upon the bone to pick, yea so long with the Crows,
Cadowes, Kites, and Cormorants in the World, to be praying upon it: But, as a
man of God, by godly counsel, in due season, taking occasion to help her
distressed estate, and out of that her small store that remained, he aduises
her in the fear of God, and ioynes with her unto God, that as by his special
help (when all helps fail) he will (as the event shows he did) so
vouch-safe her deliverance, out of this her present grief, to the glory of his
own name, the comfort of her, and credit of her children; as also, to the
continuance of her Husbands good report, in the full satisfaction of the
Creditor. He does not herein, as the men of the World in their self-love,
narrowly searching by themselves, and their spies, factors for that purpose,
where and whence any gain, never so course, vile, base, shucking, and
abominable, is to be had and gotten, usually to lay hold of it: He does not
enquire of that small remainder she had, to buy it of her for little or naught,
taking occasion of her necessity, that afterward he might make his boast of
his great penniworths: For this is the World; happy is he that can ouer-reach
others in bargaining, that can buy cheap, and sell dear, having a tongue that
can change note upon a sudden: as before he buy the thing, when he sees
commodity to be had, to say it is naught, the time serves not, it will decay in
your hand; the longer you keep it the less you will make of it; the sooner
you make it off, the better: but having laid wait for it by some other (if his
own persuasion will not prevail) and so by cunning slight, at the last
having got it into his hands; then, at an instant, it is good, and very good,
and so according to the person that enjoys any matter of commodity, the
price to be, as doubtless it is and may well be in some cases, the things with
the circumstances and persons well weighed. Solomon to the like purpose speaks
of the crafty and deceiuable fashions of the World, where he says: Prou. 20.
14.
It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer; but when he is gone apart, he
boasleth: So do men in these days, (sin and iniquity having got the upper
hand,) they sin, and that egregiously, in what kind (suppose it) whatsoever,
as the Prophet Isay says; They declare their sins, as Sodom, and hide them
not: But this Prophet in his demand of the Widow what she had at home, does
it wholly with respect of the care he had to relieve the Widows distress by
his counsel, and by what comfortable manner he might indeed perform the same.
In whose example rests a good instruction for all whom in such a case it may
concern, especially the very Creditor himself, because this Scripture is
occupied wholly in the things concerning the Creditor and the Debtor, that he
do not by casting his eye too much upon what his poor Debtor has left,
(having nothing left, but what must serve present necessity perhaps) to lust
after it, and to seek to wind it wholly out of his hands to his own use; but
he must rather forget himself, and set up all his thoughts how that which
remains may be disposed of to the mutual good of them both, according as God
may bless it in time to both their goods, choosing rather to loose all his
debt, then so hardly to draw from the poor distressed man that thing, the
loss whereof cannot but withal hazard his life. There be that make
godliness, in the profession thereof, to be a very large cloak to gain by,
but such persons are condemned as hypocrites, according as the Prophet Esaias
sets them down in their colors; seeking as it were to outface God, by
justifying their holy Fasts against him, when indeed there was nothing but
cruelty in their hearts, and unmercifulness in their deeds: Esaias 58. 3.
Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see it not? (say they) on the one side we
have punished our selves, and thou regardest it not: the Lord answers them as
a just Judge and searcher of their hearts: Behold, in the day of your fast you
will seek your will (says the Lord) and require all your debts: As if he
would say; The true fast that I make reckoning of, is to fast from your own
gain, and testifying it by releasing of your poor Debtors of the straight
bonds you have them in: and thus much for that point. Only I add this with
the Apostle Paul; 2 Cor. 9. 7.
God loves a cheerful giver, to stir thee up, that whatsoever thou do
in any work of Christian compassion to thy Neighbor, to do it freely and
chearefully, knowing that what thou do so, thou do it to the Lord, who
will recompense it again, as Solomon says: Prou. 19. 17.
He that has mercy upon the poor, lends to the Lord, and the Lord will
recompense him that he has given. And thus having set down that both the
Debtor and the Creditor are each to respect other, according to the rule of
Christian equity; I will proceed to the answer of the Widow, with the
Prophets reply, wherein he counsels her what to deo for her relief, upon that
poor remainder of her Pitcher of Oil: Her answer in the end of the second
verse; Thine Hand-maide has nothing at home save a Pitcher of Oil.

It appears in the holy Scriptures that Oil was of special use, and
thereafter also in great request, and according to their several uses, so the
kinds were sundry, some serviceable unto the sacrifices, some to the
anointing of Kings, Priests, and Prophets, some other to the chearing and
refreshing of men's countenances, some more common to the service of their
cakes, or bread-making, instead of other liquour, to that of sacrifices as
Moses prescribes: After, Leuit. 2. 15.
thou shall put Oil upon it, and lay incense thereon, for it is a meat
offering. In the anointing of Kings, 1 Samuel 10. 1.
it is said; Then Samuel took a Vial of Oil, and poured it upon Saul's head,
etc. For the chearing of the heavy countenance: It is said; And wine that
makes glad the heart of man: Psalm. 104. 15.
and also in the 92. Psalm and the 10. And I shall be anointed with fresh
Oil: Oil that makes the face to shine. And to this our Savior opposes
sour looks, when he says, to the beating down of hypocrisy in religious
fasts; But when thou fastest, Mat. 6. 17.
anoint thine head, etc. to common uses, where the Widow of Sareptah said to
Eliah: 1 King. 17. 12.
As the Lord thy God lives, I have not a cake, but even a handful of meal in
a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse: Of this Oil, which appears to be of
the most usual and common kind, she had but a small quantity, far unfit to
pay debt withal, even one poor Pitcher of Oil.

But thus does God most usually deal with his dearest servants, to bring them
very low, yea, to beggars estate; wherein our Savior himself did seem to
walk, and that to special purpose: first, to teach that his Kingdom was not
of this world, neither came he to abound with earthly riches, as where he
affirms to the Scribe; Mat. 8. 19. 20.
The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air have nests, but the Son of man
has not where to lay his head: which also he does as to another and second
end, that is, to teach his Disciples not to set up their rest in him, as under
hope to obtain, as from him, either profits, promotions, or pleasures, here on
the earth; but rather to look upward to Heaven, and there setting their
affections where he is, to seek the endless comforts of everlasting joy,
according to which purpose, the Apostle Paul speaks. 1. If ye be risen then
with Christ, seek those things which are above, Col. 3. 1. 2.
where Christ sits at the right hand of God. 2. Set your affections on
things which are above, and not on things which are on earth, (says he.) Which
whilst men shall seek to do unfeignedly, it cannot possibly be avoided, but
that by how much they shall find out his goodness in small things, by so much
the more their tongues shall be occasioned to acknowledge the greatness of his
power, Majesty, and mercy toward them, and so finally to return the praise of
them all to him again. Which is a special use that we must make of this point
(viz.) that although we are poor, not to esteem the more meanly of our
selves, as in Gods presence, considering that he has sent his own Son our
Lord and Master Christ Jesus, in a base estate, to fulfill his service here
upon earth, to his glory and our good, unto whom as his servants we to
conform our selves, are not to account of it as any disparagement at all.
These lessons are to be labored upon, very much: first, the corrupt judgment
of the World, which does make reckoning of men who are poor, needy, indebted,
and out of credit with the World, to be no otherwise with God; besides (the
fear that many men have to fall into poverty thereby) keeping them from the
performing of the works of mercy and just dealing, arising from the great
distrust that is in them to Godward, because of the care over their own:
These two are mightily to be withstood, upon this point, that this poor widow
had no more then one poor pitcher of Oil.

But now to proceed, to show to what end the Prophet would know what she had
at home, which was doubtless to this end, that he might advise her, as also
deal for her with God, how out of that little which she had remaining, some
release of her self from care and grief, as also some satisfaction of the
Creditor might be wrought; and indeed that is the maine point that
ouer-spreadeth it self in this Treatise (viz.) Debts (in all that possibly may
be) must be paid.

To the speeding whereunto, one general point is to be observed upon the
Prophets counselling of her, as in part has been laid down before, and it
does concern principally all Ministers, and as from them all other Christians;
the Ministers to stand up as in Gods behalf, to minister words of divine and
holy comfort to all Gods afflicted people, and that in due season: To the which
purpose the Prophet Esaias does in the person of Christ Jesus himself the true
comforter, represent them who are called to the Ministry of Gods Word. The
Lord Gods has given me (says he) a tongue of the learned, Esaias 50. 4.
that I should know to minister a word in time to him that is weary; that is,
to him who is any way distressed in conscience, or oppressed by affliction and
misery, and that so wearyed comes to me: and of this mercy of God in Christ,
the Ministers should be able, as from not only knowledge out of the Word of
God, but upon experience also, to speak comfortably to the souls of the
people. The Apostle Paul speaks to that purpose, 2 Cor. 1. 4. 5.
when he says; Which comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be
able to comfort them who are in any affliction, by the comfort wherewith we our
selves are comforted of God; for as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so
our consolation abounds through Christ. Heb. 2. 18.
The like is said of Christ: For in that he suffered and was tempted, he is
able to succor them that are tempted. What comfort also the people do reap
from the Ministers, they are mutually as need requires each to comfort other,
which are under any heaviness or affliction; and this is the general point to
be observed upon the Prophets counsell-giuing to the Widow: Now let us see the
counsel it self.

And he said, go borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy Neighbors, empty
vessels, and spare not. 4. And when thou art come in, thou shall shut the door
upon thee, and upon thy sons, and pour out into all those vessels, and set
aside those that are full. The general observation in this counsel of the
Prophet, and the putting it in practice by the Widow, is this: All persons, in
all cases of extremity, are mutually to aid and assist each other, in the
restoring of any decayed amongst them; as here first the Prophet in his
counsel-giuing, then Neighbors in their lending, the Widow in her working,
together by her sons, upon the empty vessels of Oil, her sons in going up
and down, fetching, carrying, pouring out of the full vessel, sorting, and
setting aside the empty from the full, to their right ends: And this is taught
by way of similitude, in the Epistle to the Romans, where the Apostle speaking
of the Church in Christ, as of the members in one body, Romans 12. 4. 5.
says; For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not one
office; so we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one another
members: and as one member in the natural body, according as it is in want and
weakness, is to be respected with care by that other which is above it in
power, and ability; so it ought to be much more in the mystical body of Christ
Jesus, who are mutually to serve one another in love, But that the members
should have the same care one for another (says the Apostle: 1 Cor. 12. 25. 26.
) 26. Therefore if one member suffer, all suffer with it; if one member be had
in honor, all the members rejoice with it: and to this purpose each person and
thing, in Gods providence, are ordained for the succor and relief of his
Children under the Cross. Thus God wrought for David by Jonathan, by Ionathans
boy, and by the arrows that Jonathan shot beyond the mark, for the informing
of David how Saul stood affected toward him, each person and thing working
together for David's safe delivery out of the malicious hands of Saul, who
sought his utter overthrow. If this were duly observed by all, that none, no,
not the mightiest can stand alone by themselves without help, in case of
extremity, it would make them more careful, and ready to relieve each other
in their miseries.

The use then that is to be made of this point is, upon the knowledge thereof
to remember our selves how dead spirited, and dull we have been in former times
to discharge this duty, and thereupon to go to God by, and in, prayer, for the
gracious assistance of his holy Spirit, thereby to quicken us up unto a further
and more compassionate care in all Christian love, to and for the good of
others, for the time to come.

Now where he says, Go, and borrow thee vessels abroad, of all thy
Neighbors, empty vessels, and spare not; or not a few, but as many as thou
may get, that there be no want of vessels to work into; The Prophets
counsel as a command from God, does animate and encourage the Widow to use
all her Neighbors, as helpers with her unto this her restoring again: Wherein
give me leave by the way to set down from the Prophets counselling of the
Widow, and the Widow her acceptance of his counsel, and putting it in
practice, with the happy success of the same, this undoubted truth; that is,
who so hears the Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers of God, teaching them the
way to everlasting life, by Jesus Christ alone, the only door thereunto, and
that by the written Word of God, the holy Scriptures, so called, must so hear
them, receive them, and believe them and their doctrine, as in full persuasion
of their hearts that what they have heard, and do hear, is the very speech of
God himself, as our Savior Christ Jesus assures his Disciples, when he
says; Luke 10. 16.
He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me; and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me. The want then of such hearers
and thus hearing, is it that causes so little practice in doing the will of
God; for many, if not the most, do hear, but do not: This is the cause why
Papisme, Athiesme, Turkisme, Heathenisme, yea, Sathanisme, the fullness of all
sin, (O woe is me to say it) does so fast and speedily creep into, and grow
up in the Land, threatening from day to day, as we grow worse and worse, the
remouall of the glorious light of the Gospel, which God forbid, out of this our
most glorious, glittering, and golden Candlestick of the Church of God, in
this our happy England. Oh happy long, to his good pleasure, may it be, yea, so
happy, as that the glorious light of the Gospel that makes it to shine so
gloriously, may be so far from ever being extinguished, as that it may be
rather like to the light of the righteous, whereof Solomon speaks, when he
says; Prou. 4. 18.
The way of the righteous shines, as the light, that shines more and more
unto the perfect day: so oh Lord, if it seem good in thine eyes, let not this
light of ours, how outragiously soever the wicked enemies, both without and
within the Land, do oppose themselves to it to extinguish it: let it not O
Lord, be ever put out, until that perfect and everlasting Son of
righteousness, Christ Jesus himself do come triumphantly in the clouds to
make a full end of all! for the accomplishment whereof, let every one that
waits for, and loves his appearing, say with me, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly, 2. Tim. 4.
Amen; Even so be it: Lord, so be it.

But now to return to our Widow again. Had not the Prophets Counsel
wrought in her, as the command of God himself, and that by his special
instinct through faith, and animating or encouraging of her, to the using of
her neighbors, she might have been dishartened at his Counsel, in willing
her to go to her neighbors, and to borrow of them: Alas, she might have said
to her self; No neighbor will lend me ought, they will be jealous of me, that
I should make it away; and because my debt is so great already, I may perish
before I get ought: Nay, this is the course of the World, they will answer
negatiuely, and by way of prevention; they will discourage me from asking,
before ever I ask: But if I do ask, they have their Answer ready: Nay
truly, I cannot lend, I have sworn to the contrary, I have bound my self in
bonds, I have promised all my friends, not to lend: So far are men from the
true knowledge of walking in that golden mean, between two extremes: Or else
they will (not with the Prophets mind, but for their own gain) ask of me,
what I have, if I have a fair pawn, a pledge, or a surety, perhaps somewhat
may be had: or if I have any thing to sell outright, they will then try their
friend to buy it, if they may have a penniworth, or if I will use reason: Now
this reason, upon extremity, you must understand is as much as little or
nothing: For it is commonly held, that those goods of the decayed, though as
good as the Rich man's every way for value, and price, yet being in a ruinated,
decayed, and a poor broken man's hands, is worth some fourth part or less
perhaps: This is the fashion of the World, whereunto every man fashioneth
himself; that is, rather to keep him down, that is down; or, if not down,
but going in the way, to beat him down altogether, rather then to help to
raise him up again.

This is one discouragement, that might have stayed this Widow, (especially
had she lived in this Iron or steely age of ours) from following the good
Prophets Counsel: Another stay, (arising also from the frailty of an
unbelieving heart) had not God wrought faith in her, might have stopped her
course of being contented to be directed by the Prophet (as thus:) Alas, might
she have said, what should I do thus troubling so many of my neighbors, in
borrowing so many empty vessels? Why, what good will empty vessels do me?
mine own poor pitcher of Oil is not able to fill it self, how then shall it
be able to fill any one other, much less so many as may amount to the price or
value of my debt?

Unfaithfulness, or distrust in God, is able to discourage flesh and blood from
using means seeming unlikely to man's conceit; yea, it has bred great
doubtfulnesse in the very dear children of God; yea, so far it has prevailed,
as that they have expostulated the matter with Gods messengers, as in a thing
not possibly to be effected: Luke 1. 18.
as that of Zachary, about the birth of John Baptist, where he reasons with the
Angel thus: Then said Zacharias to the Angel, Whereby shall I know this, for I
am an old man, and my wife is of great age? Likewise the blessed Virgin Marie,
upon the salutation of the Angel, Luke 1. 28. 31.
Verse 28 where the Angel certifies her, that she shall conceive, and bear a
son; 34. verse.
in the 34. Verse, she enquires of him about the point: How shall this be
(says she) seeing I know not man? This troubled the blessed Virgin greatly,
as is set down in the 29. Verse; so as after she had heard the salvation of
the Angel, as is written, she said thus: And when she saw him, she was
troubled at his saying, and thought what manner of Salutation this should be:
So that we see, where faith in God is not fully settled (as in a continual
groath it must be in us during life) by many turbulent distractions, unbelief
will break out, and cause many times a yielding to do that which may be very
ill for us, and a leaving off to do what otherwise may be and is warrantable
for us to do, the doing whereof may turn to our great good; the not doing, to
our greater hurt. Indeed this increase of Oil, as out of it self without
further means, by the power of God in the ministry of Elizha, was miraculous,
and may seem incredible, wherein if I should take occasion to speak of
miracles, how they were then, and afterward under the days of the Gospel, and
to what end they tended, and unto what time they were limited; If also I should
speak of the abuse of the Church of Rome, in that point of miraculous working
(a mere illusion to deceive the people by,) I should not take my self up in
any good time; yet thus far to say, because they only are the
miraclemongers, we seek not to take the credit of working miracles out of
their hands. If counterfaited signs, and lying wonders, by the working of
Satan, with all power to deceive by, (which they arrogate to themselves) and
that among them that perish, spoken off by the Apostle Paul, as purposely to
set forth in some of his colors their Antichrist, be miracles, I yield it to
them: For we of the Gospels profession, do not require any iuggling, or apish
tricks, to bleare our peoples eyes withal; we hold them close to the holy and
only Word of truth, for the working of faith in them, and that by the
preaching of the same, as the Apostle Paul says: Gal. 3. 2.
Received you the Spirit, by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith
preached?

A time there was, when before the whole truth of Gods Word, in the holy
Scriptures, was come in, and digested into those two Testaments, the Old and
the New, as they now are, and so have been miraculously preserved, through the
dangers of many ages, and reserved to the Churches perpetual use, as also,
propounded to the view of the whole World, to the end that the preachings of
the Prophets, as also, the Doctrine of our Savior Christ himself, and of his
Apostles, might be the more believed and rested upon, as the very truth of God
himself, they had power to work miramircales, as this Prophet three times in
this Chapter did, besides this in hand, thereby to testify to the people, that
he was the true Prophet of God. Concerning the which point, the Prophet Eliah
upon the trial of the true worship of God, and the idolatrous worship of Baal,
between him and those four hundred and fifty false Prophets, does ratify
and confirm both himself, and his religion, and his Doctrine, to be of God,
and from Heaven, by having power from that God of heaven and earth, to command
the fire to descend from heaven to consume the sacrifice, 1 Kings 18. 36. 37.
according as we find it in that his most divine and holy prayer in these
words:

36 Let it be known this day that thou art the God of Israel, and that I am
thy servant, and that I have done all these things at thy commandment. 37.
Hear me, O Lord, hear me, and let this people know that thou art the Lord
God, and that thou have turned their heart again at the last. By which it may
appear also, that miracles were not to be done at the pleasure of man, but at
the will and pleasure of God: Of which miracles, we read there are two
kinds; one pure, and the other mixed, as one writes very learnedly of them:
The pure, are they which without means or creatures, God works alone: he
calls them mixed, where God by the ministry of any of his servants, does work
strangely, in and by creatures, as in stretching out beyond nature their vigor
or strength, in causing them extraordinarily to increase, to the serving of his
will at an instant, for the good of any of his people. The like did our Savior
Christ himself, in that kind of pure and simple miracles, when by his Word
alone he commanded the Devils, and diseases; Matthew. 8. 3. and 13.
the one, and the other, to come out of them, and to leave the possessed and
diseased. The like did Peter to the Creeple, that was so from his mothers
womb, when he said to him: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazaret, Acts 3. 5.
rise up, and walk.

But in speaking upon the counsel of the Prophet given to the Widow, in
these words: Go, borrow thee vessels abroad; and if it shall be further asked
by what warrant the Prophet did this, to command, as in the name of God, and
to assure the Widow of these vnlikelihoods; first, to borrow of her
Neighbors, etc. and then, how that one full vessel of Oil should hold out to
fill those other empty Vessels that were borrowed. The answer is made by the
Prophet himself, in the 43. Verse of this Chapter, where the Prophets Servant,
questioning with his Master about the twenty Loaves to be distributed to an
hundred men, as if they were unlikely to suffice so many: The Prophet replies
again upon him with a second command: Give unto the people, that they may
eat: For (says Elisha) thus says the Lord, They shall eat, and there shall
remain: So that (thus says the Lord) is the Prophets warrant: and that beyond
Gods Word he went not, the sequel of the success does manifestly declare, he
not being able any way to perform so strange a work, to the comfort of this
Widow, in her sons, and the satisfying of the Creditor, had not God himself
graced him with his own power, and as it were stouped down to work together
with him. Mighty then is this word of God, where God himself inforceth it by
his Spirit, yea, mightily it prevails both in that executing his judgments
in justice upon the wicked contemners of his servants, as in that where Eliah
called for fire upon the two captains of the fifties, 1 King. 1. 9. 10.
and thereafter it fell upon them: As also, Acts 5. 1. 2. 3.
in that of Peter, where Ananias and Saphirah, were stricken dead upon the word
immediately spoken by the Apostle, for their sacrilegious lying and hypocrisy:
As also, in the strange and wonderful means, whereby he extraordinarily
works by his servants for the Churches good, as where Peter, by the power of
the Word (God working with him) to the comfort of the Church, Acts 9. 40.
raised up Dorcas from death to life.

Yea, but I hear some say me thinks, Tush, the ministry of men under the
Gospel, is weak enough, there is none of them all can do any such strange
work, we need not fear; their big thunderbolts are but crackes: But the
reason of their so blasphemous speeches, in their careless regard to fear
God, is because God meets not with them in their present sinning, as he did
with Zimri and Cozbi, even in the committing, of fornication together (by the
hands of Phinehas he slew them both) in their Tents, as is written in the
Book of Number, 25. 9. They presumptuously think, and say in their hearts,
there is no God, no Devil, no Heaven, no Hell, they be but tales that our
Preachers do tell us: But of these like persons, the Apostle Peter
prophesies, 2 Pet. 3. 4.
and these are the days of the fulfilling of his prophecy. This first
understand, that there shall come in the last days, mockers, who will walk
after their lusts, and say, Where is the promise of his coming? etc. Thus the
Devil is very busy to withdraw men's minds, yea let every one observe it;
the more the ministry of the Gospel increases, the more he rages, by
causing men to seek after that that is not necessary, and to leave unsought
after that which makes most for the salvation of soul and body eternally: For
Satan has his instruments in every place, who labor to obscure in what they
may, and to make inglorious the eternal Word of our immortal, invisible, and
only wise God, in the holy ministry of the Gospel, which presages, and that
truly, that he fears that his time is not long, but that he is near, and very
near, to his utter and final casting out. Let them therefore know, and that
speedily, and let them assure themselves, that the Word of God is no less
effectual now, neither is his arm any whit more shortened in the powerful
Gospel of his Son Christ Jesus, although it appear so to be to the wicked
world: Only this is the difference, the judgments of God, (for I speak now
to them only that make a mock of God) do not to them appear so great and
heavy, because he comes not so immediately and presently upon their several
wickednesses committing to execute those his judgments; yea, he seems to them
to have forgotten to be just; but let them know, that not one jot, or tittle
of Gods word shall fall to the ground; for whatsoever wants in the execution of
these his punishments for the present, shall be doubtless doubled, and
redoubled, according to the delay and putting off the same: so that when he
does or shall strike indeed, his hand shall fall so heavily, having been long
in lifting of it up, and when he begins to lift it up, he will lift his rod
so high, to the fetching of a greater stroke, that he will make the proudest
Ruffian of them all like to a Potters vessel, which he will so break to
shiuers, that there shall not be found any one sheard to carry fire in. Psalm.
2. 9.
Thou shall crush them (says David the Prophet) with a Scepter of iron, and
break them in pieces like a Potters vessel.

But what matters it to answer the profane minded, utterly answerlesse? Let so
many then as are contented to stoop down to the holy Word of God, in the
Ministry of men, and to learn thereby soberly to be wise, know of a surety,
that howsoever God did limit the times and seasons past, wherein those persons
whom he had also more specially given power unto, as the Prophets and Apostles,
to work strangely in and about the things of this life, for the confirmation
of that Doctrine which they brought unto the World, whereof men being more
earthly minded, did also take a greater view, then thereby to be led to the
apprehension of the truth in Christ Jesus, for everlasting life; yet is not the
power of God in his Word any whit abated the more now, but rather advanced to a
further and a more eminent working in, and about, the turning of men's hearts
from gazing or looking upon the things of this life, unto the longing, lusting,
and thirsting after the righteousness of God in Christ Jesus, to their
everlasting comfort in the Kingdom of Heaven. And yet give me leave, his care
is no less for us now, (if we fear him) then it was in former times, and
according to his care over us, so his power and will, yea, in providing for us
in our wants; indeed we are blind and see it not, because we do not
continually refer our selves in the things we have, or in the things whereby
he has relieved us beyond expectation in our distresses; we do not, I say,
refer our selves to Gods providence, for the beholding of it as we ought: for
truly howsoever he do not increase our Pitcher of Oil so miraculously as we
see here he did to the poor indebted Widow, and in that manner, yet when he
works men's hearts toward thee, for thy relief, yea, to make thine
adversaries thy friends, is it not worth the observation? He is the same God to
us that he was in Jobs days, who speaking of the wicked, Job 27. 16.
faith; Though he should heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as
the clay; he may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent
shall divide the silver: Prou. 13. 22.
and again, where Solomon says; The riches of the sinner is laid up for the
just: and this he has done, and does daily perform, only our unbelief, our
unthankfulness, our deadness of faith, keeps us from seeing it, to our
shames.

But to end this point ordinarily, the work of the Ministry of the Gospel,
is a greater work then healing, or curing the bodily diseases of men, by
speaking the word, whither from Peter, or from Paul, or by whomsoever, although
it be indeed miraculous; yea, as much as the soul is beyond the body in
excellency, by so much is the holy work of the Gospel of Christ, conversant
wholly in the restoring of the dead souls of men from death to life, more
excellent; for lo, now the dead souls of men and women, that have long slept
in sin, and have been dead, as doubtless all are until by the power of the
Word of God, they have life put into them, even the life of the Spirit, whereof
Paul speaks, when he says: Gal. 2. 20.
Thus I live, yet not I now, but Christ lives in me; and in that I now live in
the flesh, I live by the faith in the Son of God, who has loved me, and
given himself for me. Of this life speaks our Savior himself: John 5. 25.
Verily verily, I say unto you, the hour shall come, and now is, when the dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it, shall live.

The Use to be made of these last and former doctrines, is this, that
whenever the word of Faith has entered the possession of Jesus Christ into
our souls, whenever you think of him, meditate upon him, seek him in your
prayers, follow after him in the public preachings of that his most glorious
and comfortable Gospel, be sure so to think of him as of your Savior and
deliverer, not from bodi^l sicknesses, or other perils or dangers of this
life, but as he is indeed, by God his father, appointed to save thee, and
deliver thee from hell, death, and eternal condemnation, as a Savior of thee
from thy sins, and a deliverer of thee from those miseries whereinto thou
have ouer-plunged thy self in soul and body by thy sin: as Paul the Apostle
teaches thee in these words, concerning Christ lesus, and the working by the
Gospel in all those that believe, 2 Timothy 1. 10.
Who (says he) has abolished death, and has brought life, and immortality
unto light, through the Gospel. 1 Timothy 1. 15.
And as again he says, Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners, of
whom I am chief. Let the thought of his very name be comfortable to thee, from
the remembrance of his being first named by the Angel at his entrance into the
World, Mat. 1. 12.
as is written: And thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins. Finally, think and meditate upon him, as upon an
heavenly, not an earthly King; he is come for thy good every way, but
especially to deliver thee, so as that after the fullness of thy deliverance,
thou might never be in danger after; his deliverance being spiritual, not
corporal, heavenly not earthly, as he is further described, where it is said:
First unto you (meaning the Jews) has God raised up his Son Jesus, Acts 3.
and him he has sent to bless you, in turning every one of you from your
iniquities.

Seek then to him, as to one in whom you are begotten again, and in him cast
as in a new mould, to become new creatures, 1 Pet. 1. 3. 4.
(as the Apostle Peter says:) Blessed be God, the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which, according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a
lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an
inheritance immortal, undefiled, and that fades not away, etc. For to this
end is his coming into the world: first, to take the burden of thy sin,
lying heavy upon thee, upon himself: secondly, to discharge thee from the
guilt of sin: thirdly, to take away the power and strength of sin, that after
once thou art a true member of that his body the Church, whereof he is Head,
Romans 6. 12.
sin may no longer have that dominion over thee, as before.

Now it follows in the Text. 5. So she departed from him, and shut the door
upon her two sons, and they brought to her, and she poured out. 6. And when
the vessels were full, she said unto her son, bring yet a Vessel; and he
said unto her, There are no more Vessels: And the Oil ceased.

Now we are come to the third point, which is, (the issue of the means,
consisting upon the words or command of the Prophet, in the obedience of the
Widow.) This issue of the means being twofold, the increase of the Oil,
and the paying of the debt; from that the obedience of the Widow in these
words: So she departed from him, and shut the door, etc. As the words lie in
the Text, they all are liuelily described, the mother, and her two sons, to
settle themselves to their business; her sons they bring, the mother she
powers o^^, no hand at all idle amongst them. Whence I gather for instruction,
from the Woman's example, this; that she in finding out the readiness of her
Neighbors to help her with those empty Vessels which she borrowed of them,
is heartened on cheerfully to proceed in her labors, and that without delay,
assuring her self that God, who had begun so favorably with her, would not
give over until he had performed what he had set her about, not doubting but
that the Prophets Counsel was as the Lords own commandment, and the
command of the Lord, as the deed done.

We then, from her, being thus advised by the Prophet, and so resolutely and
readily putting his Counsel in execution, we are taught in all our honest
and necessary affairs to do the like, and after mature, holy, and deliberate
Counsel taken, not to delay to perform what we have well advised upon, for
delays often prove dangerous. Solomon in those words, Prou. 20. 18.
(Establish thoughts by counsel) does teach indeed this, to be well advised
upon men's thoughts first, before they be set on foot, but after once counsel
is advisedly taken, then to settle, stablish, and to execute, not giving over
until we have attained the end of our first well-aduised purposes. Well (said
he) whosoever he was, That as an unconstant, changeable, and wavering minded
man, is unfit for society, because there is neither assurance of his words,
nor of his purposes: so he makes himself ridiculous to the world, in
enterprising that, to his ouer-great loss, which he never brings to any good
end: whereas the end of a thing is said to be better then the beginning. Upon
the which point, our Savior does severely tax all those that undertake the
profession of the Gospel, and give over in the midway: Luke 14. 28.
and this he does under two similitudes, the one of a Builder, the other of a
King, (read the places.)

The Use that we must make of this Doctrine, arising from the Widows
resolution, is to examine our selves, concerning the ill successes we have had
in our former business, and whence they have arisen (dealing soundly with our
selves,) and then if we find that either they have come from a rash, heady,
and indiscreet proceeding, without counsaile-taking, or else from an unstable,
wavering, and a cowardly mind, that yet durst not resolve upon good counsel
had; let us then proceed with our selves, according to the finding out of our
errors, to repair to him who is able to repair in us all our decays, and
will at his pleasure; (if once we can assure our selves, and make good to our
souls that we are his children, to whom all the promises of God in Christ
Jesus do appertain) let us then without delay, go to him, and ask a greater
measure of wisdom for the going on in our business, then before time we had.
The Apostle James teaches so to do: James 1. 5.
If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, which gives to all men
liberally, and reproacheth no man, and it shall be given him. 1 Kings 3. 9. 11.
12. 13.
So did Solomon, he asked a wise and an understanding heart, and had it
granted him, with riches, and honor, beyond all that were before him. Let us
also crave a stable and a settled heart for execution, after that by good advice
we have attained unto resolution: let us do this with David, seeing also all
that we do is evil, and cannot but be so where the heart is evil, that is,
let us go to God, and say with him; Psalm. 51. 10.
Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me: and again,
stablish me with a free spirit.

There is further from the obedience of this Widow, in settling her se fe and
her sons so readily and upon the instant to labor, a good lesson to be
learned by all Fathers and Mothers, to bring up their Children as in all good
knowledge, and nurture; so from the very Cradle to acquaint them with, and
accustom them unto all good and honest labor and travel: and this to do,
for the anoyding of idleness, because in doing nothing (as one says) we
learn for the most part to do evil, and to be idle is very dangerous,
especially to youth. Therefore Solomon in his Proverbs gives a good precept to
all Fathers and Tutors over children and young folks: Prou. 22. 6.
Teach a Child in the trade of his way, and when he is old, he shall not depart
from it. It is a fit lesson to be renewed in this age, and upon our people,
because many walk as if they were privileged to live out of any calling at
all, and so to live as no way helpful, but hurtful both to the Church and
Commonwealth; they think they may do it in all licentious idleness,
inordinately, without the check of the Magistrate. Against this idleness,
oppose this Law of God set to Adam after his fall: In the sweat of thy face
thou shall eat thy bread, Genesis 3. 19.
till thou return to earth: Not that Adam was before idle, or wrought not at
all, but that the labor he took after that he had broken Gods Commandment,
was not without wearisome tediousness, whereof before he was free. To live
idle, and in no good, set, certain, and lawful calling; the Apostle Paul
calls it an inordinate, 2 These. 3. 11.
or disordered kind of living: We hear that there are among you some (says
he) who walk inordinately, and work not at all, but are busybodies. This
great sin of the Land, as it is severely to be met withal, by the continual
teaching and sharp reprehension of the Ministers, so in no wise to be
permitted in the Houses of our Church-Gouernours, who by occasion of their
large and spacious mansions, and their many businesses, by reason of their wide
circuites, are to retain and intertaine many followers, and therefore to take
heed, may I be bold to speak, (Bona cum venia) that not one be toward them,
whom they may not, or do not apply to some ordinary businesses in their
places; not fostering this sin of idleness within their walls: and
howsoever the common desire of those who will be toward them in service is,
that they may live at ease, or idly; considering that the holy Apostle Paul,
enforming Timothy concerning a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3. 2. 3. 4.
that he must be watchful himself in his place, as also one that loves
goodness, having faithful children, which are not slandered of riot, Tit. 1.
6. 7. 8.
neither are disobedient: much more is he, yea, with a more straight eye, to
see that none about him, as a servant, be without his place of employment, and
that to good purpose. It was one of the sins that Ezechiel reports to have
been the great sin of Sodom, fore-running the destruction thereof; and this
he does, thereby to take up roundly the people of Israel and Judah, affirming
that the sins of Sodom were not greater then their sins: Ezech. 16. 47. 48.
Behold (says he) this was the iniquity of thy Sister Sodom* pride, fullness
of bread, and abundance of idleness, was in her, and in her daughters: neither
did she strengthen the hands of the poor and needy, etc. But when this sin
shall grow up (notwithstanding the teaching of the Ministers, and the care of
Church-Gouernours, inasmuch as in them lies;) The civil Magistrate is then to
step in, even from him that is in the highest and most honorable place of all,
unto him who is the most inferior in respect of government, according to the
Laws provided in that case, for the remedying of this sin, as also for the
providing relief for the poor, to see that execution without intermission of
those Statutes be had; and not to spare to punish the idle and unprofitable
person within his or their liberty or liberties; and beyond all, first, to
provide that themselves be watchful, diligent, and careful in their own
places of government, as also over those who are within their roofes, because
themselves are exemplary presidents, and as high Beacons set upon the tops of
the highest places of advantage, to give warning by to the Country, of any
danger present, or near it is lamentable to see and hear the inordinate and
more then Sodomitish behavior of those persons and servants in Noble and great
men's Houses, who for want of employment, being idle, yea, very babes new out of
the shell, do exceed in all manner of impiety and abomination; such as I am
ashamed once to name: Let it suffice in a word, only this as a watch word
(give me leave to set down to the view of all great ones;) Consider I beseech
you, consider how your Houses are receptacles of the sons and daughters of
many Families in your Countries, who desire to live under your service, and
that many Fathers and Mothers do make great suite that their Children may be
your attendants and servants, perhaps they look no further then that they may
in time get somewhat under you to live upon; but to live honestly, soberly, and
religiously, perhaps they never look after; yet how careless soever they have
been, in you must (and God requires it at your hands) O ye noble persons,
whose greatest honor it is, and ought to be to fear God, with your whole
Families; you must see (I say) that all within your walls, without exception,
even all your sons, your daughters, your menseruants your maid-seruants, every
one of them so to bestow themselves under your gouernements, as that according
to their places above and under each other, they may be fitted to the Church or
Commonwealths uses, as God shall see it good for them, to the service of the
Age succeeding: If otherwise there be any that will not fall to some business
or other, but live of the sweat of other men's labors, then do as the
profitable and most laborious Bees in their Commonwealth do; let every one as
he is in place, take those idle luskes and slothful droanes, within his
limits, and cast them out as not meet for the society of men. For thus are the
Bees said to do, Ignauum fucos pecus a praesepibus arcent; They take the
droanes, and jointly they hurl them out of their Hiues: Much like as we use to
do with our vagrant rogues, whip them out at a Carts arse to the Towns end,
and so let them go.

But to this Widow, in her employment, let me return. She seeing her own
present misery, and the miseries of her two sons, whereinto they were likely
to fall, on the one side; as also that God had offered her so great hope,
first, by the Prophets aduising of her, and then by the success in her
neighbors joining with her willingly, every one to help her by the loan of
their empty caske of vessels, tending to all their goods; on the other side,
she loses no time, she spares no labor, her sons in like manner as ready at
hand, it being every one of their cases, they shake off idleness, and give not
over their work, until they had attained the thing they labored for.

But because all Scripture is written for us, even for us to use, let us every
one from the highest to the lowest, especially those of us who have been
endangered by debt, howsoever befallen upon us, because debts must be paid; let
us I say, use the example of this Widow and her two sons aright, let us do
as they did, work upon the remainder of that which we have, be it but one
poor full pitcher of Oil; let us go to work, and make trial what may be
done; let not one hand be idle, considering there remains still a promise unto
us, as to our forefathers, God will undoubtedly bless thee in using all good,
holy, and commanded means. The wise man Solomon tells thee; Prou. 14. 22.
In all labor there is abundance; and again in another place, he encourages
thee who have made thy self a bond man to thy Creditor, if thou instead of
being bound, would be free and a commander in thine own house, and have
power over thine own goods, and comfort in thy wife and children, hear his
counsel, and follow his direction: Prou. 12. 24.
The hand of the diligent shall bear rule, but the idle shall be under tribute.

Make then this use of it, every one that bears the name of a Christian; for
I tell thee howsoever by the Law of nature thou art tied to give suum cuique,
that is, to every one his own, and to make difference between meum and tuum,
yet thou art doubly bound in the Law of Christianity, and that to thy further
condemnation (if thou do not perform it,) for there is afforded unto thee by
the Gospel (if thou receive it) the holy Ghost, for the inabling of thee to
do what by the Law of nature thou can not have, which if thou attain not
unto, it is thine own fault: Examine thy self in this point, and see into
thine own first estate, how thou have lived out of any commendable and lawful
calling before time: for to be a Gentleman, which is the thing that many base
livers do challenge to themselves, and no way to have been either publicly,
or privately serviceable to the Church, the Prince, the Commonwealth, or any
one private family for the government thereof. If thy conscience therefore
accuse thee in this behalf, return betimes, repent thee of thy former ways,
and take a more Christian course, and instead of walking wholly after thy
delights and inordinate pleasures any longer, see into the wants of the Church
and of the Commonwealth, and give thy helping hand to repair the ruins or
decays either of the one, or of the other, which way soever God shall incline
thy heart unto, and make thee fit for; knowing this for a surety, that
idleness, is a step unto all manner of wickedness: yea, the eight
Commandment, Thou shall not steal, will take thee suspicious as a
transgressor thereof: Be well advised therefore, and follow the holy Apostle
Paul's counsel, who says to thee, to me, and to every one that lives, or has
lived, or been a nourisher of them who have lived inordinately: Ephe. 4. 28.
Let him that stole, steal no more; but labor the thing that is good, that
he may have to give to him that needs. And thus much for that point; Now it
follows:

And the Oil ceased, stood at a stay, or left off to increase.

Now that the Widow has gotten into her hands the possession of means
enough, out of this Gods good, (as I may call it) this so plentiful increase
for the release of her self from care, from debt, and of her sons from
servitude or bondage, God stays his hand, he knows what is enough, the Oil
gives over and increases no more Doubtless God is wise in the performance of
the work of mercy, according to time and measure, upon whomsoever of his
Children; neither is any other reason to be rendered thereof, besides his good
pleasure; as also in the execution of his judgments, when he sees meet to
punish them whom he means to punish: wherein for the measure and time of
staying of these his judgments when he pleases, he is not to be questioned
with. 2 Samuel ^4. 15.
In the second Book of Samuel, it is recorded, that after the Lord had slain
with the pestilence threescore and ten thousand of the people of Israel,
because David had caused his whole people in the Land to be numbered, as a great
pride; and the Angel of the Lord stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to
destroy it; Verse 16.
it is said, that the Lord repented of the evil, and said to the Angel that
destroyed the people; It is sufficient, hold now thy hand.

The first thing that is to be observed upon this point is, that all Creatures
are at the command of the Creator, to live or to die at his pleasure, they have
their time to serve him in for the good of his Children, they have their spring
time, their harvest, and their fall of leaf, their time to live and grow up
in, their time to cease growing, or any way increasing; and this comes to
pass wonderfully, although ordinarily man knows not how: But as the Apostle
speaks of the Corn that is sown, Each Corn has his own body after he is
sown, 1 Cor. 25. 38. 41.
even to every seed his own body, at Gods own pleasure: So that it is not
the wit of man, nor his labor, with all his skill; it is not the goodness of
the soil, it is not the seasonablenesse of the weather, but it is God himself
who brings these mighty things to pass. It is he, even he alone, and none
but he that makes this increase.

Observe it also in another thing: Man feeds upon bread and other food, which
of themselves have no life at all, whilst they feed him; nay, every thing
must change, and be changed, before it prove, or can be meet nourishment for
him, it is by God that they turn as the preservative Instruments of life:
Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
To this purpose speaks Moses to the Children of Israel, and as from him our
Savior, to stop Satan's mouth: Mat. 4. 4.
Man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. How then this Oil increases, and stays from increasing, let
us not stand as at a gaze to admire, and go no further; but go on to make a
holy and profitable use of it, thereby to be led to glorify God, who is, as
the Lord of Heaven and Earth, so of the times and seasons, wherein his
Creatures are to serve him to their several ends, or to rest from doing any
service at all.

Whereas these words (And the Oil ceased) do seem to yield small matter, let
me be bold yet in the power of the Spirit, even of the Spirit of our Lord
Jesus, who has taken me (unworthy though) into his service, and according to
my poor measure and place, has given me to be faithful, who also upon this
Scripture has drawn me along thus furre, whereof in the many days of my
distractions, in the case which presently I do here handle, I have made some
use, and received some comfortable hope of the goodness of that God, even my
God (give me leave) the God of us all, the merciful God of this Widow; yet
upon this very ceasing of the Oil, arises most worthy doctrine, tending to
the teaching of every Christian man and woman contentedness of his, her, or
their estates, even that wherein God has set them.

The doctrine then is this. That as God does give or take away from thee, as
God increases or abateth of thy stock or store, be thou always ready to set
up the rest in Gods good pleasure, and not as the World does, in that
Heathenish and Idolatrous goddess, blind and unstable Fortune, an utter enemy
to Gods most certain, and undoubted providence. It is a lesson fit for this
time, wherein the bottomless and insatiable hearts of covetous men and women
of all sorts, rich and poor, may be met withal, whose nature is so repining,
that if the Lord do but stop the course of any earthly increase, by what
means soever, forthwith they fall into such grudgings, and untoward repinings
against God himself, as if he denied them once to be their own caruers, and
did cause them to stand to his appointment, he then could not but do them
great wrong. Such male contents all the sort of us do, and will prove, if God,
as he do withdraw his hand from relieuing us, and from the increasing of our
store, he do withdraw our hearts in like manner from a settled and quiet
contentment of enjoying what he sees good for us.

But to the curing of this malady, this example of the Widow, and of the Lords
hand, in staying further then her need was to relieve her, with some few other
Scriptures that follow, may be, if they be used accordingly, very sovereign
and medicinable remidies. Let us then with this, use also that prayer that is
set down for our instruction in the Proverbs; Give me not poverty, Prou. 30. 8.
nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me, lest I be full and deny
thee, and say, who is the Lord? or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the
name of my God in vain. When those empty vessels, (and borrowed) of the
widows, were once filled, the Oil ceased, as if God said; It is enough, use
it well, and be content. The care then which we ought to have for the things of
this life, is, as from the teaching of the Apostle Paul, by God himself
limited: Therefore when we have food and raiment, let us therewith be
contented. The holy Patriarch Jacob, although conditionally as the words do
import, did solemnly bind himself to God, and as by prayer entreating God to
testify himself to be his God: Genesis ^8. 20.
In these words; If God (says he) will be with me, and will keep me in this
journey which I go, and will give me bread to eat, and clothes to put on, so
that I come again unto my Fathers House in safety, then shall the Lord be my
God. As if he should say; I desire no Kingdoms, nor Lordships, I desire but
competency, with Gods favor. Let us also to the same purpose, behold Paul in
himself, for us to follow: Phil. 11. 12.
For I have learned (says he) in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content; I can be abased, and I can abound, every where, in all things; I am
instructed both to be full, and to be hungry, and to abound, and to have want.
All which lessons, how far they are off from having learned, who resolve
themselves they will be rich, and do make their reckoning before hand, that
they will not leave until they have attained to so many thousands, giving
themselves liberty to get or gain howsoever? This is the great sin, both in
Church and Commonwealth, and such there are doubtless too many. These are
they of whom the holy Ghost speaks: 1 Timothy 6. 9. 10. 11.
For they that will be rich, (says he) fall into tentations and snares, and
many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction:
For the desire of money is the root of all evil, which while some have lusted
after, they have erred from the Faith: And have not many amongst us done so?
Have they not turned Turks, Papists, Athiests, and what not, for Lands,
living, honor, and credit?) and then says the holy Ghost, and have pierced
themselves through with many sorrows. How far are these from this
contentedness, or that before spoken of Jacobs meat, drink, and apparel,
who by inordinate covetousness, and usury of all sorts, deceit and oppression,
idleness, and such like, have gone out of the way of Gods Commandments? let
every indifferent Reader judge uprightly. But to thee I speak, to thee I
write, who art desirous to return out of these ill and perverse ways, who art
not wilful and obstinate, but desire to walk with an upright heart, to the
well-pleasing of God: before thee it is that I have laid down the example of
this Widow and her two sons, learn then from her, for the redeeming of thy
self, if thou have endangered thy estate by debt any way* to labor from hence
forth so as thou may in thy honest and just travails both live and
satisfy; and as thou do taste of Gods goodness toward thee, so lift up
thine heart and glorify God, being contented with whatsoever God in his
providence shall prepare for thee; and when thou see thou art at a stay, God
not pleasing that thou shall abound with wealth, but only have from hand to
mouth, bread for the day; with this (and the Oil ceased) set up thy rest
wholly in the Lord. Thus much for that point. Now it follows.

7. Then she came, and told the man of God, and he said; Go, and sell the
Oil, and pay them that thou art indebted unto, and live thou and thy children
of the rest, etc.

The thing that is to be observed in the Widow in her coming the second time
to the Prophet, is, that she does not satisfy her self in requiring the
Prophet as at the first which way her present need might be supplied; but her
turn being served, she goes to him again, and desires advice how she may
dispose of that to her best avail. Whence we are to learn in every several
action to go to God for his counsel, and not to suffer any thing to be done
by us without the further direction of his holy Word: Indeed to ask at Gods
hands we will be ready, and to take also all that he gives with a common or
course acknowledgement of the giver, asking perhaps of him, what if we obtain
to consume it on our lusts; James 4. 3.
which also is the cause, that often we ask, and go empty away, and receive
not.

But when we have gotten of him ought any way, how then to dispose of it,
therein we will make stay to go to him: for every one thinks that being
interessed, or possessed of ought, it is then his own, and lawful for him to
dispose of it at his pleasure. Is it not the common answer of every one; May I
not do with mine own what I please? I answer thee no: for thou art under the
subjection of the Almighty, who has thee and all thine under his command, to
dispose of, according as he has prescribed thee in his holy Word: Otherwise
thou art an usurper, howsoever perhaps thou will not stick to equal thy self
to Christ Jesus, who to stop the mouths of the envious, murmuring, and
repining laborers, Mat. 20. 15.
recorded in Matthewes Gospel, answers them as by right he might, being Lord
of Heaven and Earth; Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine
own? There is a difference between Christ Jesus thy Sovereign Lord and
Master and thee, he being out of all command, and thou altogether under him:
for no otherwise can thou challenge a property in the least of Gods blessings
upon thee, but as thou art in him.

But to the further proof of the matter in hand; how that in each particular
action, both for the having what we want, and the using it when we have it
aright, we ought not to go without counsel. There is one example in Scripture
to confirm us, in the Book of Judges, Judges 13. 4. 5.
and it is of one Manoah, whose Wife was barren, to whom the Lord sent his
Angel, even to the woman to certify her, that she should conceive and bear a
son; whereof when she had certified her Husband with every circumstance, as
in the 3. 4. and 5. verses: Manoah not so satisfied, as in the 8. verse, prayed
to the Lord that he would send the Man of God again to him, which accordingly
the Lord did, and sent his Angel the second time to his Wife, as in the 9.
verse: which coming of his, when his Wife had discovered unto him, he then
went with her, as in the 11. verse, and in the 12. verse, Manoah said; Well,
be it so, we will expect a child, as thou say: But as if Manoah should say
further; It is not enough for one to have a child, but (says he) how shall we
order the child, and do unto him, etc? Many desire to have Husbands, Wives,
Children, Lands, livings, and goods, but to advise out of the Word of God how
to order or behave themselves in the rightly using of them to the glory of God
and their own good, that they care not for at all; which is a principal cause
that makes all go wrong in Countries, Cities, Towns, and Families. Herein the
very Children of God have been overtaken by an ouer-great persuasion they have
had of the goodness of the matter purposed upon. 2 Samuel 7. 4. 5.
David being purposed to build an House to God: The Prophet Nathan in like
manner approving his intent, because it seemed to be a worthy thing to build
God a House, they both were deceived: for as it is in the 4. and 5. verses; The
same night the Word of the Lord came unto Nathan saying, 5. Go, and tell my
servant David, Thus says the Lord: shall thou build me an House for my
dwelling? As if the Lord should say; Thou shall not. But speaking of Solomon,
he says; He shall build a House for my name. So that how good soever our
matters seem to be, God will have us in them all to take his Law to be our
Counselors, yea, as well in the manner, as in the matter; otherwise, the
failing in the manner of proceeding, and that in a good cause, it self may
work the overthrow of the cause.

It follows in the answer of the Prophet: Go, and sell the Oil, and pay to
them thou art indebted unto, and live thou and thy children of the rest.

In these words, the holy man of God counsels her, as from God, what use
she must make of the supply that God had made unto her out of her small
store: The first is, Pay thy debts. The second, Live of the rest. The first use
is, the shutting up of the point; that is, the maine argument of this History:
viz. Debts must be paid. Whereof to speak more fully, I will set down some
reasons to enforce thereunto: the first is drawn from our selves, in our own
desires, who would not willingly permit any man to withdraw from us, or to
incroch upon us, for any part of those our goods, which God has given us for
our necessary uses, and that against our wills. To this purpose our Savior
speaks: Luke 6. 13.
As ye would that men should do to you, so do you to them. 2. Reason,


A second reason is from Gods Commandment in things of less account then
borrowed goods are, as in finding things lost of another man's, in keeping
things committed to his custody. Again: In finding thine enemies Ox or Ass
going astray, Exodus 23. 4. 5.
thou shall bring him to him again; or if thou see thine enemies Ass lying
under his burden, will thou cease to help him up? (as if it were a most
inhumane point) and then he enioynes him straightly; Thou shall help him up
again: Much more then it behooves a man or woman of God, with care and great
consideration, nay, conscience also of that which was lent to him upon love,
and whereof he has had long use perhaps, to make to the uttermost of his power
honest, just, and seasonable restitution. 3. Reason.


A third reason may be drawn from the wrong that thou offerest thy self, or
any other that stands, or shall so stand in need for the time to come; for
thou causest thy merciful friend, a pitiful and compassionate lender perhaps
to many in former times, now to close up his heart, and stiffely to strengthen
it from respecting thee, or any other in thine, or their necessities: for
doubtless a chief cause of so little lending, is evil and unjust payment.

Fourthly, 4. Reason.
thou have opened a door of liberty to thine own heart, unto all fraud,
subtilty, and deceit, if not to flat theeuery, at one time or at other, by thy
careless regard over thy living Neighbors goods, in not repaying that again
which thou had borrowed, for no liberty at all must any man give, no, not to
himself of doing the least wrong, if it be but once in his life; because
custom in evil, if it do but savor of any present good to the flesh,
breeds hardness of heart for the continuance in the same: yea, know for a
certainty, that these kinds of wrongs are brought under the compass of the
breach of the eight Commandment. Thou shall not steal: Wherein whatsoever
Lands, living, or goods, not thine own, but another man's, subtly, secretly,
cunningly, and unjustly incroched upon by thee, whereinto thou have entered
possession, as from a false claim or title, and do only enjoy it by might,
against right, and that under color of Law only, gayning time upon the
innocent, not being able to match thee by the purse, or otherwise by some
ouer-sight in not timely seeking his own; know this, that howsoever the Law of
man may privilege thee to hold that which thou have unjustly gotten, yet the
Law of God will not take from thee the guilt of that sin, until that faith
of thine, having opened thy heart unto true remorse for that sin of thine,
do wash thee thoroughly from the same, in the blood of Jesus Christ, for thy
full forgiveness.

A fifth reason, 5. Reason.
why thou art to regard the paying of debts, arises from the slavery or
bondage a man brings himself into, by either borrowing ouergreedily, or unto
ill and unnecessary purposes, what bitter reproaches, taunts, checkes,
reproves, slanders, do thou make thy self subject unto, of the greatest
company of lenders, those especially who in their lending respected no way
love, but their own gain, if at the very day thou have not to repay them
again? These reasons might induce thee to have a better regard of thy credit,
liberty, ease, and comfort of heart, then formerly thou have had; whereof, by
thy carelessness, thou have deprived thy self. Prou. 22. 7.
It is a most true saying by Solomon: The rich man rules the poor, and the
borrower is a servant to the lender; The latter part of the sentence is it that
serves this purpose, wherein the Holy Ghost does not justify the pride, and
tyranny of those unmerciful lenders; but rather sets it down as a caveat for
Gods Children to take heed how they enter into the hands of such unmerciful
men. I do the rather press this point, and urge it upon unjust and base
minded borrowers, toward them who are conscionable and neighbourly friends,
who vopn mere love were willing to depart from their goods for a season, to
pleasure the borrower with; because, such is the iniquity of the time, that
there are that take other men's goods into their hands, howsoever in fair
words, and colourably, under cloak of Religion, they carry the matter with
fair promises, till their turn be served; yet, beforehand, they resolve to
break time, yea, and that although they need not; some other, not ever
purposing to pay: but whereunto may such deceitful debtors be compared? they
are like to a fair Horse of some hope, whereupon, when the Master has
bestowed all his cost by prouandar, and other keeping, to his great charge;
even then, when he thinks him fit, and looks for service at his hands, he
proves a very Jade; and withal, suddenly turns up his heels: Even so is a
dissembling debtor to an honest lender; or rather, like to a piece of ground,
whereon a man setting his hope, and thereafter bestows his labor; first his
rent, then his labor, his manure and his seed in all good Husbandry, with
long expectation; even then, when he should receive the fruits of his tedious
toil, he looses all, and scarce receives his seed again. Take heed then to
thy self, if thou will not be accounted of as a stinking lade, of whose
carkeise comes carrion for the Kites and Crows to pick on; or, if thou will
not be as the ground, which is reproved, and is near unto cursing, whose end
is to be burned; keep then a good conscience, that may be thy comfort when the
World speaks ill of thee; know thine own from other men's, fear God, deal
justly, give to every man his own, having especially received (as this Widow
has, although not in that manner) some good increase from God: let not in any
wise the fear of thine own want, make thee corrupt in paying to them that
thou owe. God is rich both for the one and the other: (Pay says the Prophet)
to them thou art indebted; for debts must be paid. But if thou will say, thou
have it not, and in so saying, speak simply; I yet advise thee with him who
said it, and that most truly: Si non effectu, affectu tamen: If thou can not
come any thing near to pay the whole debt, yet come as near as thou can;
show thy readiness out of that little that thou have remaining, if not any
thing near to a full, yet toward satisfaction: and howsoever it will not
perhaps please men, yet in having a good conscience, God will be well pleased.

One other reason may induce us to restitution, and that is, that love of God
wherewith he has loved thee, and caused thee by the power of that his love, to
love him again; let this love of God infinitely showing it self to thee both
for soul and body, work in thee a care of just and equal dealing with men,
according as God is just, and requires it of thee, that therein thou resembling
him, may also reap the comfortable witness fo God and thine own
conscience, which never goes without her true and endless joy.

Besides these reasons already, let me be bold to stir up all sorts and
degrees of people, both Honorable, Worshipful, and others, by the example of
a mean and poor labourer, to discharge this duty of equity and uprightness,
in making care to pay to every man his own, neither let the meannesse of the
person cause thee less to esteem the truth, but rather respect it highly,
under whose person soever it be brought to thee, because it is the Word of the
only true, and eternal God. The thing is this: 2 Kings 6.
A poor labourer being taken to fell timber for the building of a House for
the Children of the Prophets, as is said, verse 5. As he was felling of a Tree,
the iron fell from the helue into the water: Then he cried, and said to Elizha;
Alas Master, it was but borrowed: as if the poor man should say; The loss of
the Axe head does not so much grieve me, as that I borrowed it, and must
restore it again. The example of Paul to Philemon, brought in before, to teach
all lenders mercy to their distressed prisoners, for debt, where no means is
otherwise to be had for satisfaction, may also serve to this purpose of just
dealing, without oppression any way of any man: Where mention being made of
Philemon, Philemon.
having an untrusty servant, called Onesimus, who had run away with his
Masters goods, being caught up in the prison where Paul was, by Gods
providence, being there stayed, became (as appears) Paul's convert, for whom
Paul writes to Philemon, that he would receive him agine, and that very
earnestly; and lest that Philemon should grudge so to do, unless there were
withal made restitution of those things that Onesimus had purloyned away; the
holy Apostle, who made care of every thing that he did, and person to whom to
do it, without offense, in the eighteenth verse of that Epistle undertook for
Onesimus in these words; If he has hurt thee, or owes thee ought, that put on
my accounts, I Paul have written this with mine own hands, I will recompense
it: As if the Apostle should infer thus much; I should Philemon, I confess,
do thee great wrong, if as I do entreat for thy servant, I should not withal
either draw him to restore what he has deceived thee of, or else assume my
self to satisfy thee.

The use that may be made of these reasons and proofs of this point, (that
debts must be paid) from this Widow, is first, as of a Looking-glass for all
the loofe, careless, uncharitable, vnnaturll, (many of them) and
unconscionable Widows in all parts of our Countries to look themselves in;
such Widows as in whom there in little fear of God appearing, nor any true
love to Husband while he lived, without care or conscience of the Creditors,
who without all equity or honesty, (instead of going to the Prophets, the
Ministers of God, such as are men of God, who dare not but give good counsel)
seek out to themselves the most subtle, cunning, and crafty-headed mates, by
whom they may learn how to strip, if possibly they may the Creditors of the
whole; or else by delays, when they need not, (having enough, if not some of
them more then enough) to put them off from their own until they can be at
leisure. This Widow, if they look well into her, will reach them another
lesson; that is, as before is said, to conceal the Husbands weaknesses, to
do all what may return him credit, yea, after his death, so often as occasion
is offered to speak of him: this Widow, will teach them to go to God, and by
their Ministers to be informed to do what is meet to be done, concerning
having or leaving the things of this life, and how to use them in all good
conscience, for the good of those with whom they have to deal, as also for
their own both credit and comfort. And as for Widows (for such there are)
this is a good looking-glass, so it may be used by all manner of persons
whomsoever, to behold themselves in, thereby to discover unto them their
manifold blemishes in the matter of borrowings and lendings, of the which
kinds, there are of borrowers, if I should say one hundred for one, I might
perhaps be thought to ouer-reach far, but who sees it not, and that too
plainly? and herein who sees not withal, the very lively portraiture of a
declining and decaying age, enery way both in Church and Commonwealth
approaching very near, and that under these happy days of prosperity and
plenty, both of Preachers and preaching, blessed be God, wherein yet (might I
speak freely without offense) what I fear, (Oh were it but one man's fear) I
would say, not to the laying of any stumbling block before the profession of
the Gospel, and the Professors, there be too many stumbling blocks already,
(Oh woe is me) there be too many rocks of occasion, and stones to stumble at,
there be too many lies in the way; the reports of these occasions are sounded
throughout the World, Fame with her light and swift wings has soared aloft,
and cries out, and cannot be stopped, to the heartening of our adversaries,
under hope of a day, which hope yet of their God destroy, as he has hitherto
done, and rather (as David desired, when he was put to the choice which of the
three punishments he would rather require) for God had decreed, and punished
the Land and people must be, for David's sin, in the numoring of his people,
the decree was already out, and not to be called in: Hear the words of David,
and let us making use of them all, even all of us say, and that with the spirit
of David; I am in a wonderful straight, (says he) Let us fall now into the
hands of the Lord, for his m^rcies are great, and let us not fall into the
hands of men. But what is the cry in the Land? The cry is this, that Popery,
and all manner of profane wickedness, couers it self under the cloak of
holiness; yea, and where it enters, it preuailes beyond holiness and the
thruth it self: this is the cry; but to the purpose in hand. The cry is as
the Prophet I say sets it down. Isay 24. 2.
Behold, there shall be like People, like Priest; like Servant, like Master;
like Maid, like Mistress; like buyer, like seller; like lender, like
borrower; like giver, like taker to usury, etc. This is the cry of the
Prophet, fore-speaking the curse of God ready to light upon the people for
their sins.

But my purpose is (after this parentheticall digression) not altogether from
the purpose, to be unto you (Oh ye rich and wealthy of the Land, who have huge
Territories, and great possessions) an humble suitor, that yet I may be to you
as the poor Israelitish Maiden, taken captive in the Host, was unto Naaman
the Sarian, and a Captain, a great man, honorable, mighty, and valiant, yet a
Leper: She was as an occasion of the healing of the leprosy of him her Lord
and Master, by the report she made of Elisha the Prophet unto him. Let me also
as by the way of passage, and walk through the Wilderness of this wretched
life, the full period whereof I am almost at; let me be to some of you and
yours, Oh that I might but be, as an occasion any way of your good, either for
soul, or body, or for both: For doubtless there is a creeping leprosy, a
spiritual and a soule-leprosie entering into your houses, if not entered,
(Principijs obsta:) it is this leprosy of oppression, of this kind whereof my
Treatise is, that is; Debts must be paid: Oh that I might (if not by my self)
which I cannot, my physic being (although I dare assure you it is of the
right balm in Gilead) not so fit for your Honors perhaps.

Yet Oh that I might be as this poor wench was unto Naaman, an occasion, by
report unto you of some one or other, such as Elisha was, as doubtless there
be among you men of great worth, to whom I would breed no disparagement; yet
because the malady is dangerous, and no leprosy so infectious as it is, Prou.
11. 14.
and as the Wise man says; Where many Counselors are* there is health: And
why should I be so foolish as to require the nomination of him unto you, who
might work out the cure thoroughly? Give me leave therefore, there is but one,
and he alone, who can make the medicinable potions ministered unto you by your
skillful Physicians effectual, unto the curing of this disease, even God
himself; to whom David prayed, Psalm 119. most earnestly: Psalm. 119. 3^.
Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to covetousness; if it be for
the leprosy of voluptuousness and inordinate pleasure, for the curing whereof
we your Ministers are appointed to make you medicines, and to lay them to your
running soars: yet the same Prophet in the same Psalm also craves of God,
that he will cause it to work effectually, to the curing thereof, where he
prays. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, Verse 37.
(and where is more vanity then in Kings Courts, nay, can there be any Kings or
Princes Courts without vanity?) and quicken me (says he) in thy way. He it is
that I must make report of to you, for where he works not, there is no
prosperous hope of doing good by the Physicians of your souls, nor of your
receiving good from them without him: Entreat him therefore earnestly, that
himself will take you his Patients to cure, and doubtless you shall be cured.

But you must not then (Oh ye Sons of Men) you must not let your greatness
privilege you against your Teachers, but you must hear them, believe them,
and follow them: give not ear to any Sirens charm, let not the counsel of
Wife, Friend, Counselor of Law; let no Steward, Bayliffe, or Officer, nor
ought else prevail with you in this point, to cause you at any hand to
oppress your Tenants ouer-heauily, to borrow of them and not to pay again:
Bear them not down with your greatness, nor let any toward you, in your
names, detain from them what is due debt on your parts to them, but pay them,
and they shall the better be able both to pay you, and ready to serve you in
all necessary services they may. Far be it from us that you, or any of the
Church-Ministery, should give us cause to cry out so bitterly against you, as
the Prophet Micah did against the Rulers and false Prophets of his time. Micah.
3. 1. 2. 3.
2. They hate the good, and love the evil; they pluck off their skins from
them, and their flesh from their bones. 3. And they eat also the flesh of my
people, etc. Read further at your leasures. And for the Prophets, Verse 5.
he says, (But can this time of the Gospel breed any such covetous false
prophets think you?) Such there were then, and such may be where God takes
away his grace: Thus says the Lord, concerning the Prophets that deceive my
people, and bite them with their teeth, and cry peace; but if a man put not
into their mouths, they prepare war against him. But you wealthy ones, who
cannot endure bondage on any hand, keep your selves then free, and discharge
whatsoever any mean person can justly challenge of you: pay your debts to the
meanest person, yea, the rather, because he is base or mean, be you the less
beholding to him. A woeful Age we live in, who looks abroad, sees it, yea, he
sees more then he that is shut up: Every one cries out of wrong, when in the
mean while, who is it, if advantage may be had upon never so small a strain,
but will be ready to offer it, and that without remorse. And so to have to an
end of this point; Would God there were not just cause to cry out with the
Prophet Jeremy: Ier. 8. 10.
Every one from the least to the greatest, is given to covetousness; and from
the Prophet to the Priest, every one deals falsely.

That last lesson (somewhat spoken of before in this Treatise) which arises
out of these words (and live thou and thy children of the rest) is to be
renewed again upon us for our further instruction.

First then God will have the poor comforted, with this example, that they in
whom it pleases him to work a good conscience, and in it a care of just
dealing with every man, and means that so it may be (videlicet) in this one
kind, that the poor man do testify his uprightness, by living of himself
by his labor, and paying where he borrows; he shall not then, neither his,
be destituted of what necessary provision is meet for him, and his to live
upon during life: always this provided, that having food and raiment
according to his, or their places, without excess, therewith to learn to be
content.

Another lesson as naturally issuing out of this bountifulness of God to this
Widow, in providing for her maintenance, besides for her and hers, over and
above that which paid the Creditor: The rich man as from God himself, is to
learn a lesson of tender pity and compassion, to be extended by them unto
their Debtors, when they shall come to make restitution of what they borrowed
being not so able as willing to make satisfaction, without their great hurt,
that the man of wealth do not so narrowly deal with him or them, as utterly
to strip them of all, but rather (if not to forgive) yet to leave until a
further time, what is most necessary for their present use, until by their
honest and seasonable labor they have gotten somewhat more to work out in the
end full contentment.

Whereunto, that Gods Spirit may work in all an honest heart, for just and
upright dealing between man and man; as also in the rich, a good care of
showing themselves pitiful where God requires it at their hands; let them be
well pleased to hear what charge God has given to them in that first Epist. 1 Timothy 6. 17 18. 19.
of Paul to Timothy, in these words: 17. Charge them that are rich in this
World, that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain
riches, but in the living God, which gives us abundantly all things to enjoy.
18. That they do good, and be rich in good works, and be ready to distribute,
and communicate. 19. Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come. Hear also, O ye, whose state is very low, who are
oppressed with poverty, in the dangers of men indebted, and near to utter
overthrow; hear O ye who are of an honest heart, and love just and upright
ways, to walk in them. Hear what David teaches you. Psalm. 37. 3.
3. Trust in the Lord (says he) and do good, dwell in the Land, and thou
shall be fed assuredly. 4. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give
thee thine hearts desire. 5. Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him,
and he shall bring it to pass. 7. Wait patiently upon the Lord, and hope in
him: fret not thy self for him which prospers in his way; nor for the man
that brings his enterprises to pass: These, and such like, meditate day and
night upon; let them be unto thee as special preservatives against pride,
disdain, envy, grudging and repining at the rich, because they are rich, and
against thy murmuring at the Lord himself, because thou art poor: for what
thou art, thou art by his providence, and it is a fruit of our original and
natural corruption, to envy and repine at other men's prosperity.

And thus I end this Treatise, wherein you have heard the prosperous success
of this Widow in her suite, and in the use of all good means by her,
according as she was prescribed by the Prophet; and of her being made able to
pay, where she was left by her Husband indebted; whom when we began with, we
found very poor, and full of heaviness, having but one poor Pitcher of Oil
to serve all her turns withal: Now we must leave her joyful, with many full
vessels plentifully increased by the LORD, whereby all her turns more fully
served, the History of her is now ended.

Now let us pray unto our gracious and bountiful Lord, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that he will vouchsafe to all persons, (whether borrowers, or
lenders, giuers, or takers, buyers, or sellers, rich and poor,) that in all
Christian moderation they may walk together to the well-pleasing of GOD, in
the whole course of this life.

The God of Peace, Heb. 13. 20. 21.
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the
Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in all
good works to do his will; working in you that which is pleasant in his
sight, through Jesus Christ: To whom be praise for ever and ever. Amen. *


