THE Unmasking of a feminine Machiauell. By THOMAS ANDREWE, Gent.

Est nobis voluisse satis. Seen and allowed by authority.

LONDON Printed by Simon Stafford, and are to be sold by George Loftis, at the
golden Ball in Popes head Alley. 1604.

D. Langworth, Archdeacon of Wells.
ALCIBIADES, right Worshipful (as Plutarch reports) coming to speak with
Pericles on a time, was answered, that he could not then have access unto
him, being very busy in studying how to make up his accounts with the
Athenians. Alcibiades knowing he was deeply in their debt, said, his studies
would have more profitably been employed in devising how to auoidreckoning at
all. Which his saying of Pericles, may not unfitly be applied to my self, that
am inuenting what account to yield for the receipt of your manifold favors, for
which being in no small arrerages, I might better study how to pass them over
with silence, the^ to be found so far engaged above my ability of merit, yet
knowing that you expect nothing but acknowledgement of the same, which you
accept as a sufficient satisfaction, I am content, by confessing your bou^ty,
to have exceeded the measure of my weak deseruings, rather to bewray my
defects i^ public, then justly by silence to be taxed with the imputation of
base unthankfulness. And therefore as well in testimony of my remembrance of
your courtesies, as in pledge of my ^utious affection, I make bold to present
these papers to your patronage: Not doubting but under your tuition, my tender
Muse shall be as safe from the sting of Detraction, as was Ulysses secure from
the Greeks, being covered with Ajax Target. And thus loath longer to detain you
with my rude lines, I wish you as much happiness, as you can desire, or I
devise.

Your worships loving Nephew, Thomas Andrewe.

To the virtuous, Mistress Judith Hawkins.
TO thee that well deseru'st that Epethite,
As a sure witness of my spotless love,
These lines my true affections fruit I write,
My faithful zeal in public to approve,
Of thee no tongue (unless of envy hateful)
Can speak but well, so well do thou deserve.
My pen, unless I should be too ungrateful,
Must make thine live, when vulgar names shall sterue
Thy virtues shall by me in serious lays,
Be caractred for every eye to view.
No time shall set a period to thy praise,
That our ingenious Muse shall still pursue:
For thy perfections powerful vigor lent,
Unto my thoughts even languishing and spent.
Thomas Andrewe.

To the Reader.
REader, being as uncertain of thy quality, as unacquainted with thy
condition, I stand doubtful how to entitle thee: if thou be gentle, I most
willingly afford thee thy due attribute* if otherwise, I will not, to
insinuate, give thee one jot of addition undeserved. But howsoever, be thou
friendly or froward, since this fruit of my Muse is (by the importunity of
diverse to her Essays entirely affected) now committed to the Press, I desire
thee to know thus much from me, that I wrote not to get vulgar applause. Non
ego ventosae plebis suffragia venor. Neither have I set pen to paper for
profit, holding it base for a freeborn Muse to be a mercenary. I have
scribled to please mine own conceit, and not seruilely to fawn on the
unknown humors of other men. Some may imagine, I have written of malice to
some particular person, by reason of my Titles strangenes, wherein whosoever is
opinionate, is far wide: yet if any guilty conscience (that perhaps I know not)
will wrest my writings, and interpret my meaning in other then the right sense,
I am not to be blamed, if that creatures corruption accuse it self. As it is,
accept it, and where I conclude abruptly, censure not wrongly: and so without
further Ceremonies, I willingly leave my labors to the judgment of the
austerest, if indifferent opinion.

T. A.

To Detraction.
ILL tongued Detraction, that upon my Book
Do cast a hateful vituperious look,
Read and deride, deprave and carpe thy fill,
Say that my Verse is harsh, my lines are ill:
I pass not for thy censure, better men
Shall judge the worth of our industrious pen.
In spite of thee, and all that thou can say,
My lines shall live, when steel shall wear away:
And when that thou raked up in dust shall lie,
Then through the spacious Orb our Muse shall fly:
Although that yet she has with motion slow,
Taught her hiewing to keep a course but low.
I must acknowledge, these unpolished rimes
Suit not the nature of our curious times,
When each sharpe-sighted Critic does disdain,
What is not bred in his fantastic brain:
Yet will I not with supple fawning words,
Seek for more praise then merit just affords.
My pen is free, and whatso'ere I write,
Proceeds essentially from my delight:
Then let whose will, or praise, or discommend me.
Neither can make me proud, nor yet offend me.
In laudem Authoris, magistri Thomae Andreae, Generosi, (...).
FLos nouus en laetis musarum crescit in hortis
Aspectu dulcis, dulcis odore suo:
Laetantur musae, nil non laudabile cernunt,
Gratus odor tentat, grata figura placet:
His Phoebus, galeae flos hic fuit optima Martis
Pluma, fuit galeae fama decusque suae:
Abripui, vitamque dedi, floremque dicaui
Vobis, en vobis crescet honor nouo.
Crescet in immensum flos hic, dicetur and olim,
Gloria Musarum, Pieridumque decus.
Rob. Hunt Heath-fieldensis.

To his worthy friend, M. Thomas Andrewe.
STill may thy vpreard Muses happy fruit
In the fair bosom of this Island flourish,
And never may thy golden tongue be mute,
Whose speech sweet seasond eloquence does nourish.
Do thou proceed but as thou have begun,
And thou shall live, after thy life is done.
E. B. Gent.

To his respected and kind affected Friend, Mr. Thomas Andrewe, Gent.
NO hungry vain of profit or of praise
Inuites thy Muse salute the Printers Press:
Thou do disdain those Hackneyes of our days,
That pawn their Poetry of mere distress:
Thy pen is but a quill of recreation,
Which serves not thee in stead of occupation.
But with dear bought experience tuter'st time,
By true unmasking an incarnate Devil,
No fiction is the subject of thy Rhyme,
But a damned monster of deformed evil;
Whose portreict so to life thy pen does touch:
I know no Pensill can perform so much.
Samuel Rowlands.

Veritas non quaerit latebras.
The unmasking of a feminine Machiauell.
The Argument of this Book.
Possessed with sleep, in silent night,
Me thought I found a woeful wight,
Whose heart was heavy, look was sad,
In sorrows colors being clad,
In a vast desert all alone,
For his desaster making moan,
Filling with plaints the tender air,
Who, when to him I did repair,
His various fortunes and estate,
To me did mournfully relate:
And did desire I would unfold,
What unto me by him was told.
Hapless Andrea was he called,
Whose heart with sorrows deep was gal'd.
What e're I saw in that strange dream,
My Muse has chosen for her theme.
Black vapory clouds, the gloomy night attending,
From Acheron to the star'd sky ascending,
Twixt heavens bright lamps, and the earth were interposde,
Darkning the rays clear Cinthia had disclosde:
To point the wandering Pilgrims out their ways,
Whilst Titan to the Antipodes displayes
His glorious splendour, when from us a space
His wel-breath'd Coursers run another race.
I seeing thus the sable Curtaynes spread,
Before the glittring Windows, over my head,
Hearing nights Sentinel, the unlucky Owl,
Shricke loud, thou feareles of the wondering foul,
Who in the day pursuing him with spite,
Made himdetest and not endure the light.
The green wood left where Philomel did sing,
The lustful rapine of the Thracian king, Ovid. Met. li. 6

And warned by the Even that forsook me,
As time requirde, unto my bed betook me,
Wherein, poor I, of love left and forlorn,
Did mean to rest me till the purple morn.
By the shrill music of the timely Lark,
Should be awakte, to drive away the dark,
And make night in her smoaky Chariot drawn,
To yield her place to the delightful dawne,
Ah, but though me the days long course had tired,
I found not then the rest that I desired:
For when light Morpheus, that gentle god,
Had touched mine eyes with his sleep-charming rod,
I saw such apparitions in a slumber,
As filled my heart with pity, fear, and wonder.
Do thou, my Muse, my drooping thoughts inspire,
Touch my sad soul with true Promethean fire,
And be propitious to mine Artlesse pen,
That I may show the visions unto men,
That in the obscure and melancholy night,
Were strangely represented to my sight:
Into my Verse such eloquence infuse,
That whosoever does my lines peruse, Tib. Foelix quicunque dolor alterius
disces posse carer^ tu^

May learn to shun false friends, finding by reason,
The dearer trust, proves often the deadlyer treason:
Guide my weak hand, to bring to end my task,
From falsehoods face pull thou the whited mask.
AT first me thought upon a sedgie bank,
Where fennish Reeds, and Bulrushes were rank,
That walked in a River that did glide,
With pleasing murmur by a Forest side,
I stood, where on the Cristall waters brim,
Snow-whiter Swans ruffing their plumes did swim.
Upon this fair and delectable stream,
Might beauteous Cithareaes silver Teame,
Have drawn their mistress in her lightsome Carre,
That in the Air shines like a glorious star:
So even and clear this fluent River was,
As purest Cristall, or the smoothest Glass,
Through whose transpare^ce piercing with mine eye,
A thousand fishes of all sorts I spy.
On the sand bottom playing here and there,
Securely swimming* being free from fear,
On which, poor fools, as earnestly I look,
Sporting themselves in the soft sliding brook,
On their delights meaning to gaze a while,
For a short space my sorrows to beguile,
Such a sad sound did enter in mine ear,
As canceld joys, and did recall my care:
For there (me thought) a man in deep despair,
I heard breathe forth suspires into the air,
Whose earnfull accents were no sooner gone,
But in this doleful wise he'gan to moan:
To plain of Time, of Fortune, and of Fate,
Lothing his life, delight being out of date.
My sad afflicted soul, break from my breast,
Thy loathed prison, harbor of unrest:
Fly from that horrid place, that does enclose,
Of joys not any, but a world of woes:
So that time cannot with his course conclude,
The pains by whom thou ever art pursude:
But still each hour upon his ayry wings,
The sad memorial of my sorrows brings:
Vain is their judgments that conclude and say,
Time either takes the greatest grief away,
Or at the least, when woes have long been borne,
They seem the less, their anguish is outworne:
For now the Sun has passed seven times,
In his progression through the watery signs,
Since ceaseless grief did enter in my breast,
Content that banished and excluded rest:
In the consuming of which woeful years,
Still cares increase, but comfort none appears:
In stead of lessning of my sorrows vigor,
Time gave them greater strength, and more stern rigor.
And with Time, Fortune that respectlesse Dame,
Conspired to work the downfall of my fame:
Yet of all other why should she torment me,
That never gave me wherewith to content me?
To tread on him, Qui iacet in terram, non habet vnde cadat.
no glory can she gain,
That to lay lower, she but strives in vain,
To insult over me a wretch, can never raise her,
But will make all men justly to disprayse her,
And hold her base, that on so poor a wight,
Would exercise her cruelty and spite:
For when sh'ath done her worst, and deadliest frownd,
She cannot drive me lower then this ground,
In whose cold bosom were I once invested,
My thoughts should then have ease, that yet n'ere rested.
I neither hope for honor, gape for wealth,
Nor wish to live, although in perfect health.
The thing that I desire, for which I pray,
Is tha^ ^y time may soon be past away.
O let my days of life be short and few,
And even vanish, as the vaporous dew,
That from the grass exhaled by the Sun,
Is soon forgot, as it is quickly gone,
And let the hours appointed till I die,
New impe their wings, more speedily to fly,
And till that I have run my weary race,
Let time not turn unto his wonted pace.
This mournful speech, to which I well attended,
Begun in grief, in sighs being sadly ended.
Wondering thereat a while I stood amazed,
Like him that on Medusaes head had gazed,
Knowing that he whose passion I did hear,
Although I saw him not, must needs be near.
At length I did resolve, (doubts set aside)
To find him out, what ever did betide:
From the fair River, to the thick-leau'd wood,
I hasted then, and often listening stood
There in a covert, wherein he did hide him,
I walked not far, but suddenly espide him:
The sight of whom would have enforst to moan,
The stern Dolopian, or the Mirmidon.
Under a broad Oak on the earth he lay,
His head down cast (as loath to see the day)
His guiltless hear was like his garments ren^
Such the sharp anguish of his discontent.
Attired he was in tawny, as forlorn,
Despisde, disgraced, rejected, held in scorn.
The ground whereon he lay, was watered well
With tears abundant from his eyes that fell:
His callow chinne did silently declare,
He was too young to have to do with care.
I coming near him, he raisde up his head
With heavy motion, as a man half dead:
And even as I was ready for to speak,
He sighed again, as if his heart would break.
I grieved then to see so sad a sight,
Thus framed my speech unto that woeful wight:
What e're thou art, in whose bleake look appears
More sign of sorrows, then of many years:
Thy deep complaints that in mine ears did enter,
Were the occasions of my bold adventure,
To find thee out, not to deride thy state,
But for to comfort thee disconsolate,
Whose mones being heard, if charitably felt,
Might make th'obdurate Ithacan to melt.
Let me entreat, although I am a stranger,
To know thy state, misdoubt not any danger,
By the discovery of thy cause of grief,
Which being conceald, can never have relief.
Fea^^ not deceit in me, for first that Sun,
Which gloriously before our eyes does run,
Shall from his lofty sphere fall to the ground,
Ere faithless I, or treacherous be found:
And if my best endeavors may assuage
The burning fury of thy passions rage,
On my unfeigned word thy self assure,
With speed I will thy remedy procure:
For he griefs vigor can the best discern,
That their effects has felt, and needs not learn.
Herewith he raised his dejected eyes,
That on the earth were fixed, and thus replies:
Unhappy I, whose wretched state affords
A greater multitude of woes then words:
So that my speech unable is to express,
For thy great kindness, my true thankfulness:
Yet from my breast shall sooner fly my spirit,
Then the impressed memorial of thy merit.
Thy faith I fear not, for even in thy eye,
Me thinks pure Truth securely I epsy.
The cause of my arrival here was thus:
My fortunes ever inauspicious,
Forced me in solitary Groves to range,
My self entending from the world t'estrange,
Meaning to shun community with men,
And rather chose in some forsaken den,
To spend th'irreuocable course of time,
Clipping my hie thoghts wings that once did clime,
Imped with expectations fiery plumes,
To Honors Mansion, whom no age consumes:
Then failing of my hopes, being overtaken,
With treacherous practices to live forsaken;
Or being an object to all vulgar eyes,
Each Hind might descant on my miseries:
Wherefore long wandering through uncouth ways,
To find a place to consummate my days,
Whereas no eye might ever find me out,
At my heartbreaking discontent to flout,
That I unheard to the deaf woods might plain me,
Where of my raging fits none might restrain me:
At length in this vaste Forest here I found
A Cave deep mined in the solid ground,
Whose entrance black as the foul mouth of hell,
Seemed to inuit my sorrows there to dwell:
Where I unseen might long obscurely rest,
In sable darkness my mind fitting best.
For he that has a melancholy spright,
Before clear day preferres the darkest night.
About it round were bushes ouergrowne,
Where any path had been could scarce be known*
Which showed the same was Desert, unfrequented,
The meeter Mansion for one discontented.
Within, it well cohered with my mind;
For every place for want of light seemd blind;
Except that through a clift appeared a spark,
Sent from the Sun to fright the fearful dark.
Here did I mean the posting hours to spend,
Till with my death my dolours should have end.
At this he stops, when suddenly again,
His eyes let fall a shower of tears amain.
Then I replide, Though moisture now be scant,
Thy shady ground none of thy tears does want:
They comfort not, but the earth do rather burn,
Which were it sensible, for thee would mourn:
Preserve them then, spend not thy store in vain,
Be not too lavish of such dear bought rain.
We see each day, that the fond prodigal
Lives unregarded, having wasted all.
Stay now thy tears, it is woman-like to weep,
Concealment of thy case no longer keep;
But unto me doubtless participate
Thy fortunes crossed by some angry fate:
And all my whole endeavors shall be bent,
These ills to cure, or future to prevent:
Harken to counsel, be not obstinate,
Lest good advice do after come too late.
Oh but (quoth he) When on some shelfe of sand,
Lying not far off from the harboring strand,
A luckles Pylot, being there a stranger,
His Bark has burst, unskillful of the danger.
His counsel then would be but all in vain, Mant. Vtile non est, consiliu^
post facta dare, quod oportuit an^

That would cry out, You should have kept the maine.
Yet for thy kindness and thy loving offer,
All that I have, my humblest thanks I proffer,
Which as my self, low at thy feet I lay,
And for thy better hap will ever pray:
And to declare that I do hold it hateful,
For such great courtesy to be ungrateful,
My tragic haps to hear, since thou do long,
I Will briefly tell thee. By a Sirens song,
Or by a voice worse then the Mermaids sound,
That made Ulysses fear to run a ground,
I was allurde to anchor in the road,
Where cursed policy made her abode,
In woman's habit that her self did hide,
Such her deceits, as scarce could be espide:
Yet would I not, the noble female sex
Should think in her I modeld their defects:
For I protest, I hold, in all their kind,
Not such another any man can find:
As soon the single Phoenix might be found
To have a mate, as she her match on ground.
That damned Politician Machiauell,
That, some say, had his Maxims out of hell,
Had he but been a scholar unto her,
To learn his Art, need not have gone so far.
She of her own would have imparted store
Of cursed plots, never thought upon before,
Such and so deep, as none could e're devise,
But her great Grandsire, father of all lies,
With the Hienaes voice can she beguile,
And weep, but like the Nile bred Crocadile,
That on the pray she instantly deuoures,
Dissembling tears in great abundant powers.
With the Cameleon can she change her hiew,
Like every object that her eye does view.
Proteus was never half so mutable,
As she unconstant, of her word unstable:
Her eyes like Basilisks dart poison out:
Her oyled tongue assists to bring about
Her plots to their inevitable end,
Which to contriue, she all her time does spend.
She has a conscience (full of guilty dread)
Will stretch like Cheuerell in her working head,
Dwell damned thoughts to mischief ever bent,
And in her brain are all ills resident:
She, whose false heart for to Annatomize,
Volumes importable will scarce suffice:
She, that in youth was bad, in age far worse,
That had some ravenous Tiger to her nurse;
With the sweet strain of her alluring tongue,
Drew silly me, my years though very young,
Never before acquainted with deceit,
Not able to discern th'inticing bait,
To follow her, till in a fatal toil,
Which she had pitched, my poor estate to spoil,
I was ensnarde: and when she saw me taken,
She plainde on me of all my friends forsaken:
For leaving them, their speeches not respecting,
To follow her, their counsels grave neglecting,
I felt just plagues, yet had my wealth bin all,
That I had lost in my unlucky fall,
I should not have disquieted my foul
With such sad thoghts, as no joys might control.
But with my means at that unhappy tide,
My reputation hazzarded beside:
The worth of which fair jewel I held more,
Then Europes magasins unvalued store,
Since that my name in country and in town,
Has given argument to every Clown:
By which rude Peasants to be censured,
Whose best conceits like them are basely bred,
Who could endure this? made me hither fly,
Loathing to live where every vulgar eye
Should stare on me, where every abject Slave,
With tou^gs enuenomd should my worth deprave:
For such the nature of the rascal Hinds,
That have no other then dejected minds,
That crossed by Fortune the best tempred spirit,
Shall Be by them held most deuoyd of merit.
O pardon me, that thus I break the bounds
Of helpelesse patience; for the yet green wounds,
By trechry made, though ever angry sore,
Now being new handled, do rage ten times more,
Which makes my tou^g, that of my woes does speak,
Vrgde by sharp anguish in extremes to break.
The sum in brief, of all that I can say,
Is, that a cursed creature did betray
My infant fortunes, my hopes blossoms blasted,
My native stars, with black clouds ouercasted.
Why but, quoth I, if thou no more disclose,
Then this compendious abstract of thy woes,
Like Tantalus, who for his punishment,
Is doomed to stand in the moist Element
Up to the chinne, yet can by no means drink:
For as he strives to taste, down the waves sink:
His vnstauncht thirst, although exceeding sore,
The sight of water aggrauateth more.
So I, before thou spak'st, hot with desire
To hear thy haps, am now set all on fire:
To quench which ardor, oh let me entreat,
That from the original thou will repeat
The true cause of thy grievous discontent,
Wrought by some inauspicious accident*
If, as thou say, some daughter to the Devil,
Borne to do mischief, exercisde in evil,
Have by some wicked plot betrayed thy youth,
Abusde thy trust, under pretense of truth,
From female Machiauell pull thou the mask,
Tell me her name, and it shall be my task,
Her person so to portreyt with my pen,
As I will make her odious unto men:
The blazon that my vpreard Muse shall give her,
Shall make her infamy long to out-liue her,
That babes unborn, which aftertimes shall breed,
Her shames memorial in my lines shall reed.
"Though wrackful time brass momuments devour,
"Verse shall survive unto the latest hour:
"And when the proud Pyramides to dust,
"Age shall outweare, and steel consume with rust:
"Then like Apolloes Laurel, ever green,
"Shall Verse be verdant, and unchanged be seen;
"Such is the power of high-bred Poesy, Ovid. Carminae que^ tribuunt, fama
perenuis erit.

"That it can even to perpetuity
"Either make glorious, or as much disgrace
"The noble minded, or th'abiected base:
" Alcides labors, Theseus lasting fame,
" Achilles deeds, and Hectors noble name,
"A thousand years had now in silence slept,
"If Poesy their gloryes had not kept
"In her great Register, nor had this age
"Known Tarquins rape, nor mad Orestes rage.
"Who could have told fair Lucrece chastity,
"Or wise Ulysses wives great constancy?
"Even in her tomb had Cleopatraes pride
"Been now interred, the fame had never did.
"If Poets had not in their Tables pend,
"All for examples to this purposed end,
"The good might imitate the good, and they,
"From virtues paths that run their course astray,
"Might back return into the way again,
"That leads to the fair Elizian plain.
With Scilla, Mirrha, and Calipsa fell,
With Messaline, and Heccate of hell,
With the Bellides and the shame of Greece,
And her that did betray the golden fleece,
And all those infamous that lived of old,
Whose names by sacred Poets are inrold,
As a companion shall thy foe be placed,
Whose memory by time shall never be ra^'d.
Then let not former passed times more grieve thee:
But hope of future better hap relieve thee.
A mischief meant, perhaps may be prevented:
But once hapt, it is in vain to be lamented.
Cease then with bootlesse words for to complain.
Then he revived his sad discourse again.
A woeful Tale thou vrgest me to tell,
Whose heavy Accents like the passing Bell,
Such melancholy Music forth will sound,
As thy attending ears will deeply wound:
Nay, if my sorrows give me leave to speak
Unto the end, tears can not choose but break
From out thine eyes that formerly restraind,
Longer in limittes will not be containd.
Full twice seven times from my unhappy birth,
The comfortable Spring had cheerd the earth,
And thawd the frosty bosom of the ground,
Wherein all Plants in Icie cheines were bound:
When presently in coats of green appear,
All trees and herbs that beautify the year:
The Spring soon past, April and gorgeous May
Declared how swift earths pleasures post away.
The lusty Summer proudly coming on,
Was as the former soon dispatched and gone,
Who by the withering of the garish Flowers,
Showed how consuming time vain toys deuoures:
Which Note to men might be th'remembrancer,
Before light follies virtues to prefer.
Then mellow Autumn that declines to cold.
Not young as Summer, nor as Winter old,
By whose rough blasts all trees before fair leau'd,
Of their green liueries were soon bereaved:
For which the Birds from their mellifluous throats,
Sadly did sound full many mournful noates,
Even then when all things sensibly did moan
The sharp approach of cold frosts coming on,
Began the ground of my intestine grief,
That long expected, but never found relief:
When by the wan inexorable Death,
My dearest Parent lost his vital breath,
Whose tender care, whose counsel being reft me,
Content took leave, joys fled, and pleasures left me:
For like a ship that lucklessely had lost
Her skillful Pilot on an unknown coast,
With wrackfull tempests being roughly driven,
Her sides by proud waves ready to be riuen,
Fearfully strikes all her swelling sails,
Her Flagges lett's fall, her hie top-gallants vayles,
Best course to steare for safty knowing not whether,
But lives at mercy of the wind and weather:
So fared my self and my unsettled state,
My Parents lives third being clipped by fate,
Who was that Pilot that my course did guide,
Secure from danger of that stormy tide,
He thus deceasd, for me in fatal time,
I not contented in this peaceful clime,
To spend my youth determined to range,
Of foreign lands to see the various change:
Youth being full of wandering appetites,
Nature it self to novelties incites:
At length, the rumor of the bloody iarres,
Th'vnkind discensions, th'vntamed wars,
That then the fertile Netherlands afflicted,
Where peace was exild, quiet interdicted,
Made me resolve my freedom to forsake,
My self intending solely to betake
Unto a Soldiers life, hoping to gain
Honor and Reputation for my pain.
It was not want that made me leave the soil
Where I was borne, in Belgia to turmoyle,
For lack of means, but an enflamde desire
To raise my hopes, that did too hye aspire:
Knowing if raging storms of war should rise,
Their fury in our I Will to exercise,
(Where vnaffrighted peace had long time flourisht,
The land enriching where she had been nourisht,)
In foreign broils experience I should learn,
The feats of Arms expertly to discern,
That in my countries and my Princes right,
I might be able with advice to fight:
From happy England with no ill intent,
To try my fortunes suddenly I went.
A Southwest gale for Flushing fitly blew,
When from the Rode the little Pinnisse flew,
Wherein I was embarkt, fair Dover leaving,
When as black night her head was first vp-heauing.
Safely arrived, to Gelderland I hasted,
That sword and ardent fire had welnigh wasted,
There did I march in cold, in scalding heat,
By night and day in Armor all complete;
Lay on the ground, in frost, in snow, in rain,
Exposde my self each minute to be slain:
All travails I delightfully endurde,
To which addicted I was soon inurde.
In these tumultuous sturres did I remain,
Till that great conflict with the powers of Spain,
Where the high Archdukes army on the sands
Were fought withal by those unconquered bands,
Led by Nassaw. Here could I tell the Story,
How either Host was ranged in all their glory,
How each Esquadron marched, and by whom led,
The glorious acts of those alive or dead,
The true form of the fight, did not my grief
Enforce my tongue to stay or be but brief:
Yet shall not that great day be clean o'repast,
Whose fame no time can e're have power to waste,
But in compendious manner will declare
The fight wherein my Fortunes had a share. Newport battle, In. 22,1600

The morn looked red, whose blushing did bewray
The fatal bloodshed should ensue that day:
The rackie clouds on the earth distilled dew,
In pearly drops, which plainly did foreshew,
Heaven grieved at that sacred day profaned,
That by the Lord for prayer was ordained.
Assist my Muse, my fainting tongue direct,
Breathe a new spirit in mine intellect,
That by thy wondrous power and glorious might,
I may be able to unfold the fight
'Twixt two great Armies both alike engaged,
Both with stern fury terribly enraged:
The one contending for the Sovereignty,
The Other resolved to die for liberty.
The Duke of Brabant clad in angry Arms,
Of warlike Soldiers leading wondrous swarms,
That suddenly unlooked for he withdrew
From Venlo, Derst, and Herntalls, to pursue
Th'vnited Provinces undaunted powers,
That razd his Castles, overthrew his Towers,
Destroyde his Villages, spoyld all his Corn,
Leaving the Country as a land forlorn:
Seeing fair Flaunders girdled all in fire,
Moved with pity and repleat with ire,
Revenge to his great courage giving wings,
Him after us like a black tempest brings:
But comne near Newport he was roughly met
By hardy Scots, and Dutch, that thought to let
His passage over a Bridge that he had past:
Such their ill fortunes, or their little haste.
Betwixt these powers, at the first enterview,
Was bloody greeting, fatal Bullets flew,
Like storms of Hayle, till lucklessely at length,
Our Regiments being ouerprest with strength
Of th'Archdukes multitudes, were put to flight,
Of whom eight hundred there were slain outright.
Proud of these fortunes, our insulting foes
Aduaunc'd with speed to deal more deadly blows,
Of their own powers superbiously presuming,
Of our whole force to have the full consuming:
But our great God, his chosen that defends,
Brought their hie hopes to unexpected ends.
When now both armies on the even sands
Were come in sight, and proudly took their stands,
Then all the Regiments of either side
Were ranged in order, near the surly tide.
Both furnished well, both rich in their array:
Which was most glorious, it was hard to say:
The place being couerd with such armed crowds,
As seemed to menace heaven and dare the clouds.
Of either part, Courage, the Captains cry,
By your true valors win the day, or die.
Unto our English Troop, hie-sprited Vere
Did use persuasions to extinguish fear.
But e're the resolute Battalians came
To downright strokes, --
Cannons dischargde bullets in fire wrapped round,
Circled in smoke, whose terror-breathing sound,
Like the black bolt of Jove's Imperial thunder,
With hideous noise the thin air shakes asunder.
There might you see a deadly shot that strikes,
In a thick sand our strong embatteld pikes,
Renting the ranks, make shattred Splinters fly,
As they were sent to bandy with the sky:
Soldiers some slain outright, some deadly torn,
From the thick prease confusedly are borne.
Whilst over the sands these brazen Lions roared,
And interchangeably the soil begoard,
A ship of war was come into the Bay,
That opposite unto our foe-men lay,
Who from her armed side, her stern, her chase,
Sent iron posts into their troops apace,
So thick she shot, that he which had been nie her,
Would have conceived she had bin light on fire.
Another, that the Holland Ensign bare,
That on her poope played with the wanton air,
This former there did second in such sort,
As in the adverse camp made bloody sport.
The angry Duke against those stormy ships,
His deadly Cannons turned, from whose black lips,
Flew forth the black Ambassadors of death,
That raged like suries in the vaults beneath,
To whose dire message they would have replide
In terms alike, had not the falling tide
Made them stand off, and bear into the Maine,
Who thus being gone, to us began again
Their thundering language, answered with the same,
Their shot with shot, their fire with burning flame.
At length began the stern and horrid fight,
Whose smoke and dust made day like dismal night,
When as the powers that long had stood opposed,
Ran altogether, and with fury closed,
Pikes, Pikes encounter, shot at shot let fly,
All Nations on their several Patrons cry,
The Trumpets clangor and the Drums hoarce sound,
With Soldiers shout, each others noise confound.
There murdrous Muskets like quick lightnings flasht,
Whose balls ones face with tothers blood bedasht:
Of either part the Ensigns bravely flying,
Some nobly fighting, some as nobly dying:
In the Armies both was hope, Virg. Inter vtrumque volat dubiis victoria pennis.
whilst unto neither
Proud Victory enclind, but favored either:
With various fortunes, full three bloody hours,
Endured the sternerage of these warlike powers:
Till at the last, the ouer-mastered foe,
From field was forced with greatest loss to go,
To quit their arms, their Ensigns leave forlorn,
That but even now by them were proudly borne.
When they the field had thus abandoned,
Most flaine, some wounded, and the remnant fled,
Upon the sandy banks and in the fields,
Lay broken Pikes, bruz'd Helmets, batterd shields,
The proud Burgonian Crosses kiss the ground,
Their Bearers lying in a deadly swound,
And hardy Captayns striving for the day,
Even in the places where they fought, they lay,
With troops of Soldiers, whom they stoutly led,
Some killed outright, some dying, but not dead:
One gaspes for breath, another mercy cries,
And begs of him upon whose sword he dies. Virg. O ter, quaterque beat^

Retreit being sounded, those of ours remaining,
Came to their colors for their friends complaining,
Of whom some buried, others not interd,
Whose funerals were longer time deferd.
Who dies with honor, though he want a grave, Virg. Facilis iactura sepulchri.

No greater happiness at all can have.
But soft, where am I now? me thinks too far
I have discoursd the fortunes of the war.
When I began, I briefly meant to tell
The Battles fury, where ten thousand fell:
But being entered, I could not conclude,
Till to the end the story I pursude.
This euer-famous day thus bravely won,
The Troops dispersed, each to their Garrison,
Adorned with honor, and inrich't with spoil,
To take their rest after laborious toil:
I then determined, whilst the wars did cease,
To visit England, crowned with golden peace:
To give more speed to my resolved intent,
From thence a Letter came, unto me sent
From one that ever I accounted dear:
Whose faithful love I thought had never Peer.
One, for whose sake I other friends neglected,
Was ruled by him, still did what he directed.
Which Paper, as the Post to me delivers,
My hand unwont, as in a fever shiuers:
At which (being strange) I could not choose but muse;
And as the smooth Indorsement I peruse,
Breaking the seal, the wax so fastened cleaues,
As seemed unwilling to let loose the leaves:
But forced open, as they had been half blind,
Mine eyes 'gan dazzle, and no way could find,
Where to begin the sweet sour Lines to read,
From whence my fatal sorrows ground proceed.
Men's senses, sudden altering out of reason,
Do bode ill luck, or do fore-shew some treason.
At length my hand 'gan stay, and eke mine eyes
On th'obiect fixed, that before them lies,
Thus I begun. Since happy Fates ordain
Thou have suruiu'd, where multitudes were slain,
From out those Lands, breeding dissension black,
Unto thy native soil with speed come back:
Whereas my euer-waking industry,
Has gotten means to eleuate on hie
Thy tender fortunes, which if thou neglect,
Succeding times will never have power to effect.
If thy estate, thy Country, or my love
Thou would increase, hold'st dear, or any ways may move,
Leave tedious toils, and wars affording pain,
And write not back, but come thy self again.
This letter read, the messenger of light
Not thrice from the earth had chased away black night,
Who sunk to hell, the father of the day,
To all the world his glory did display:
But in a small boat plide with striving Oars,
I bade adue unto the Belgicke shores,
Unhappy farewell, and disastrous fate,
To leave bright honor, and overthrow my state:
Being come aboard, our sails a stiff gale stretches,
Which holding fair, the ship soon England retches,
On which clear coasts in safety thus arriu'de,
Many rejoicing that I there suruiu'de,
Free from the loss of limbs that others felt,
That likewise in the late stern conflict dealt,
Gave me kind welcome more then I deserved,
Ioying from danger that I was preserved.
Preserved from danger, said I? no, not so,
But was reserved to a greater woe:
O had I did where Yaxley, Honniwood,
And more brave Gallants in their hie blood,
Courageous fighting, fell down all imbrude,
This homebred mischief had I then eschude!
But since the Destenies did thus ordain,
I must confess, it is bootlesse to complain.
Long time e're I returned, the means was plotted,
Whereby my reputation was bespotted,
That shook my state betwixt that friend of mine,
Whose words I held as Oracles divine,
Who to my soul and secrets still was near,
Apollo n'ere held Hyacinth more dear:
And her whose tongue for cunning may compare
With Greekish Sinon, and with Circes share:
Each hunny word she spoke, like Magic writtes,
Were able to enchant the deepest wits:
She for the hope of Auaricious gain,
Will swear and forswear, flatter, lie and feign:
Her own child a Polygamist she made,
By her vile counsel. Cursed be her trade,
That hopes not heaven, nor respects hell,
Where, in dire torments, less offenders dwell:
Each circumstance (quoth he) should I entend,
T'vnfold to thee, discoursing to the end
Her practices, as well may undertake
To number Libick sands, and firm land to make
Of Thetis playnes, where on a Dolphin rides
That aged god, the surly sea that guides.
Let this suffice, that she is such a one,
As but Medea there was never none.
Write what I say, though I conceal her name,
It pleases me enough she read her shame
With blushing cheeks, if any spark of grace,
(Which I misdoubt) be living in her face.
Scarce had he ended, when we saw from far,
As we imagined, a waiged Carre,
Which coming near us, presently I knew,
'Twas Morpheus Coach that four night Raue^s drew,
The wheels did make no noise, yet so fast ran,
As could beguile the very sight of man:
With soft Arabian silk 'twas ouer-couerd,
About the which, light dreams and visions houerd:
The Curtains of the same were made of Rings
Of the quick Battes that Vesperugo brings,
To fly as Harbengers before the night,
When to the inferior Sphere the Sun gives light.
His Teame being come unto us, Morpheus staid,
And looking forth, even thus (me thought) he said,
Lo, I the son of griefe-beguiling sleep,
That never any certain form do keep,
But in what shape I list assume, can fly,
From earth to hell, from thence unto the sky,
To thee Andrea, have my course directed,
Who of all other holdst thy self rejected:
Thou know, a thousand visions I presented,
In gloomy night, thinking to have contented
Thy grieved soul, yet all was but in vain,
Shadows of joys more did increase thy pain.
But now I come to carry thee, even where
Thou shall behold objects repleat with fear:
Yet I well know, the sight thereof will please thee,
And of the burden of thy sorrows ease thee:
Stand not to answer, but with speed ascend
Up in my Coach, and take with thee thy friend,
That may with us such wonders strange behold,
As seen, as dreadful, fearful to be told.
Mournful Andrea and my self being placed
By Morpheus side, the Chariot ran in haste,
Till suddenly upon a bank it stands,
Whereas the sleepe-god took us by the hands,
And going forth, thus comfortably said,
What sight soever you see, be not afraid,
I Will go before your footsteps to direct,
Dangers at all by no means do suspect.
Him as our guide, we follow to a place,
I think scarce seen by any mortal face:
For in a vale, where Titan never displayes
The radiant brightness of his golden rays,
Where neither lowly shrub, nor lofty tree,
Nor leaf, nor grass, nor any plant we see,
We found a vast and melancholy Cave, Virg. Facilis descensus Auerni.

That opened like a hollow wide-mouthed grave:
Wherein we enter through a passage made,
Easily descending to the infernal shade.
At length we saw (was never such a sight,
Amongst all the ghastly visions of the night)
Far underneath us, such a place to lie,
As could affright the most undaunted eye;
Where Thunderclappes and fiery lightnings flash,
Where boystrous tempests storm, dread hailstones dash,
From whence did come a sound astonishing,
Of woeful shreekes, that fearfully do ring
Into our ears. Then 'gan Andrea thus,
Where are we now? speak, gentle Morpheus:
Oh, wherefore have thou brought us, where our eyes
Meet such stern objects? Then the God replies:
The place that underneath, far off you see,
Though strange to you, is not unknown to me:
It is that Chaos, that confused Den,
Where are the eternal punishments for them,
That surfeiting in sin even from their birth, Inferni poenarum descriptio.
Cal^r.

Without true penitence do leave the earth:
Here all lewd actions, fruits of foul desire,
Tormented are with everlasting fire,
Whose burning fury vnextinguisht powers,
Being but compared unto that of yours,
Would make it seem or nothing, or scarce warm,
Like Winters Sunbeams, not of power to harm.
Aetna still covered with sulphur fume,
And ardent Hecla shall by time consume:
But this, whose fervor waters n'ere assuage,
Shall have continual and vnceasing rage.
Then are there likewise euer-freezing lakes, Frigus.

As sharply cold, where amongst the Icy flakes,
That cut like razors the unhappy wights,
Are tossed like red-hot bloomes, by ugly Sprights,
Whose horrid looks most fearful to behold, Aspectus daemonum

Torment as bad, as the congealing cold.
Dragons, Morsus serpentum
fell Serpents with enuenom'd stings,
That plague alike both slaves and tyrant kings,
There in each place in such abundance crall,
As Insula serpentum plena. Auerni fetor.
Ophiusae never saw at all.
Their wounds are worse then Adders, earth-bred Snakes,
Or Basilisks, or Aspes, or Ibis makes.
The loathsome savors of this Acheron,
Never exhaled by th'attractiue Sun,
Are there far worse, in the earth then any bred,
Then strangling brimstone, or th'vnburied dead,
And there imprisoned in the vault of hell, Obscuritas loci.

Does nights black Nurse, Cimerian darkness dwell:
Whose pitchy temples are ingirt with clouds,
That in her look affrighting horror shrouds:
Whereas vnstaunched Famyne wanting bread, Fames.

Eats balls of wildfire, drinks scalding lead:
To aggrauate which woeful pains, the place
Removed from God his favor and his grace: Dispositio loci.

There terror, fear and desolation,
Have their eternal habitation:
Gnashing of teeth, howling, and woeful weeping,
Are in the dismal concaue never sleeping.
There wights afflicted, still for death are crying,
Deadly tormented, yet are never dying.
There bloody Nero, cruel Commodus,
Luxurious Tarquine, drunk Vitellius,
Tarpeia false, Semiramis unchaste,
Are every one in their due order placed:
There perjured slaves, beastly Adulterers,
Accursed Atheists, biting Usurers,
With murdrous Ruffins that delight in blood,
Shall all be plagued in the Sulphurean Flood.
Thither that foul stain of the female kind,
Whose deep fetched oaths are lighter then the wind,
That by dissembling and abusing truth,
Blasted the blossoms of thy tender youth,
Her lives course finished (if deep penitence
Wash not away her foul offense)
Shall come but in her flint-vnyelding breast,
Where lives a guilty conscience wanting rest,
Are wicked thoughts, that in a mighty band,
In order placed as Sentinels do stand,
To bar good motions entrance, that driven thence,
In worthyer places search for residence:
She, the true pattern of detested pride,
There shall not borrow an old Coach to ride:
But in a fiery flaming Chariot,
By Dragons drawn insufferably hot,
Shall progress thorough Hell: for her false hairs,
Snakes in their folds shall wind about her ears:
In stead of hired cheynes of burnisht gold,
Shall Iron linkes her wretched corpse enfold,
And torments more then this: for none can tell
The tenth of tortures that are used in hell.
But for thy self, if I divine aright,
Thy hopes shall mount with an auspicious flight,
Thy fortunes that late crossed, thou still holdst vain,
Shall have a time to flourish fresh again:
I know the means by which thou shall advance
Thy own estate, even in despite of chance*
-- Vt quondam Te^thrantia regna te^enti,
Sic tibi res eadem, vul^us opemque fer^^.
Does not my prophecy rejoice thy spright?
And bonds of sorrows cancel with delight?
Speak man: But why thus holdst thou down thy head?
Why is thy look so sad? thy color dead?
Quoth he, I grieve for her unhappy sake,
I fear e're long shall come into this Lake,
Though my attempting hopes she laid in dust,
Though she be most perfidious and unjust:
These pains I wish her not but do desire,
If yet some small spark of celestial fire
Be vnextinguisht in her breast, it may
Breed quick repentance, and avoid decay.
But, gentle Morpheus, if thou be of power,
Transport her Genius hither but one hour,
That with an intellectual feeling sense,
May see all sins eternal recompense:
And then (no doubt) the vision will control
The wicked motions working in her soul.
This said, our guide ascends up again,
Whom we attend, leaving the place of pain:
And being from the dusky den come forth,
Cold Charlzis Wayne was set directly North,
When winged Morpheus once more silence brake,
And to Andrea thus the God he spoke:
When I am gone, think not thou art deluded,
Thy fortunes are by desteny concluded:
Into whose secret brasen-leaued book,
They courteously did give me leave to look:
Wherein by fate undoubtedly I find,
Time shall effect according to thy mind.
By this, broke from the mornings cold embrace,
Saturnes bright sun aduaunc'd his royal face,
Whose glorious look, pale night astonished,
That fearful of his presence swiftly fled*
He mounting then his Carre damaskt with fire,
Made his free horse gallop th'accustomd gire,
When sleep departing, did unlock mine eye,
Whereat my dreams like mistie vapors fly:
And only left the memory behind,
Of the strange Vision that disturbed my mind.
FINIS.

