A HOLY ALPHABET FOR SION'S SCHOLARS;

FVLL OF SPIRITVAL INSTRVCTIONS, AND HEAVENly Consolations, to direct and
encourage them in their Progress toward the New JERUSALEM:

Delivered, by way of Commentary upon the whole 119. Psalm.

By WILLIAM COVVPER, Minister of Gods Word, and B. of Galloway.

PROVE. 1. 5.

A wise man shall hear and increase in knowledge: and a man of understanding,
shall attain unto wise counsels.

Amb in Psalm. 119. NVN.

Intelligimus ideo per literas Heb ^rum Psalnium ^unc esse digestum, vt home
noster tanquam pa^vulus and ab insantia per literarum element a for^atus. (...)
at as puer^'is assueu^: v^q, ad maturitatem virtutis ex^scat.

LONDON.

Printed by H. Lownes, for John Budge; and are to be sold at his Shop at the
great South-^oore of Paul's, and Britannes Bursse. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, DAVID, LORD OF SCONE, ONE OF HIS Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council in this Kingdom.
MY Lord; when I dedicated to the Earl of Dunbar, of good memory, my Treatise
of the Anatomy of a Christian, I was then of purpose to have presented to your
L. this Holy Alphabet for Sions Scholars; but could not perfect it till now. Ye
lived together in his Majesty's most honorable service, like a pair of
faithful friends; loving and pleasant in your lives, and shall not be divided
in your deaths for me. As my other Treatise went forth for a witness of my
favor without flattery toward him (for the Dedicatorie Epistle was printed
after his death) so will I that this stand as a testimony of my love toward
your L. partly for that which ye are* and partly for that which I hope ye
shall be: Ille enim veraciter amat amicum, qui Deum amat in amico; aut quia est
in illo, aut vt sit in illo. For he does truly love his friend* who loves God
in his friend: that is, either for the good which is in him; or else, that the
good which he wants may be in him.

There are many in this age, with whom Satan has couenanted, as Nahash the
Ammonit would have done with the Israelites of Iabesh Golead, upon this
condition, That he put out their right eyes. These men have an eye to see, and
a tongue to speak of that, which is evil in another; but none to se* that which
is good: compared properly by Nazianzen, to venomous flies; who passing by the
part that is whole, light upon that which is sore, and make it worse then they
sound it. For mine own part, I never mind to be one of these. If I should
praise you for the good which ye want, I know I should neither please you nor
prosite you; your under standing being more solid, then that shadows in stead
of substance, can content you: neither yet also, on the other hand, will I so
look unto that, which ye want, that I pass by the good which ye have; under
hope also that this shall make you better.

There are none who know your L. but have marked an affection toward Religion
so indiuert^ble, that no man contrary minded, durst ever attempt to alter it:
which in this declining age deserves no small commendation. A heart in like
manner toward execution of justice, s^ inslexible, that ye have preferred the
law to the love of men, who otherway have bin most dear unto you: for the
which howsoever ye have been misliked of many; yet have you proved a
profitable servant to your Master in most difficill times: for By justice the
Throne is established. Your natural judgment in discerning between right and
wrong, may justly be admired: specially since your education has not been by
precepts of arts, in the Academie; but by practice of them in the Palace:
where unto ye could also hardly have attained, if ye had not learned vnden
such a King, as is not only a patterns of virtue himself; but a solid Thealog
and Philosopher, ever discussing to his Domestiques of that which is good and
evil, both in Religion, manners, and policy.

But my Lord; howsoever these be good things, and worthy commendation, yet have
they need to be strengthenea with better: for all gifts, were they never so
excellent, if they be not crowned with godliness, may well increase
conviction; but can render no consolation in the day of trouble. This is it
therefore which now I have to recommend unto your L. that ye grow in
knowledge and in the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ: whereunto, beside these
common reasons that should stir up cuerie Christian; there are three which
more particularly provoke you unto it.

The first is, that GOD by your first generation has brought you forth a man
of honor in this earth: for in regard of natural descent, your honorable
Father, the Lord of Baluaird, was a brother of the Earl of Tullibardin; whose
house is as a noble stock, from which has sprung out, like branches,
exceeding many honorable Families, all of the name of Murray, and has
continued in this Land these fifteen hundredth years.

Your Mother, a Grahame, daughter of the right Noble Earl of Montrose; whose
house has continued with honor since the beginning of this Kingdom.

Your Mothers mother, a Keith, daughter to the right noble Earl Mershell;
whose House and Family being long before honorable in this Kingdom, was six
hundredth years ago decorated with the Office of the Marshalship of Scotland*
for their virtue and valor in batteil; where^ they continue unto this day
among the chiefest Peers of the Realm. Your Fathers Mother, a Lyndsay,
daughter to the right noble Lord, the Lord Lyndsay; whose Hou^e not inferior
to many in honor, may above many most justly he commended for their earnest
z^ale, and sincerr affection toward the advancement of true Religion.

All these should greatly increase your care, that ye be no found less
honorable in Christ, then ye are in this world: For this world properly is
compared to a Stage Play, wherein oftentimes Nobles are clad in beggars
garments, and the beggar takes on the habit of a King; but when the guise is
ended, and the maskes removed, then every one appears to be that which he is:
and the man of base estate was not so much comforted with his temporal
representation of an honorable man, as he is now grieved to see he was but
honorable in sport and show, not in effect. Yet many such are there in the
world, who go in the state of honorable men, but shall be found in the end
vessels of dishonor, To be honorable in both, is rare; yet such as may be
obtained by godliness: for godliness has the promise both of this life, and
of the life to come.

The second reason; Ye have served his Majesty, these eight and thirty
years: not as a Domestique only; but as a Counceller and Officer of estate
also: and that with so constant an affection, that ye have not spared to
incur the displeasure and malecontentment of any whatsoever; so be it ye
might procure pleasure and contentment to your Master. My Lord; at ye have
learned to serve most faithfully a King on earth, and for good service have
received the recompense of his Princely liberality: so think with your self
how greatly ye shall be convinced, if ye do not learn to serve the King of
heaven; whose wage to his servants does as far exceed any thing ye have, as
the heavens are above the earth.

The third is; Ye are now stricken in years, your Almond tree is flourished:
these fifty and eight years has God spared you, and not taken you away in
your ignorances and sins, as he has done many others, both at your right
hand, and at the left. My Lord; the patience of God is called long, but his
mercy everlasting: the use of his mercy toward his own, is to bear with them,
till they be delivered into the hands of his mercy: then are they out of all
danger; for his mercy endures for ever: and whom once he receives, he never
casts away again. But woe is to the wicked: for they abuse Gods patience, to
fulfill the measure of their iniquity; heaping up wrath to themselves by the
multiplication of sins, as it were in a treasure against the day of wrath.
Thus as the Fish of Jorden go sprinkling and playing in the stream thereof,
till at length they fall into the Loch or salt Sea of Sodom, where they die:
so are all the wicked, abusing Gods patience, carried on by their deceitful
pleasures of sin, to a miserable end. For where in their young years they will
not repent, in their old age custom of sin so confirms them in evil, that
they cannot repent; no more then a Leopard can change his spots, or a Black
Moore his color. Of this your ^may perceive that God his long pattence,
whereby he spares a man, is not a blessing, if mercy to pardon sins past, and
grace to run for the time to come, do not follow it: yea, rather, quo
diutius expectat* districtius iudicabit; the longer he tarry and spare, the
sharper will he strike when he comes. Let this waken in your L. a care to
redeem the time, and a resolution to sacrifice the residue of your few years
unto the Lord your God.

For which cause it shall not be unprofitable your L. remember these counsels:
first, that ye examine diligently your by-gon life; No man knows the things of
a man, but the spirit of a man: this will tell you more of your self, then all
the world can tell you. In this examination spare not your self, if you would
have God to spare you: judge your self, accuse your self, correct your self,
and GOD shall not judge you. Remember when ye come to judgment, there will be
none to stand against you, if it be not your own sins: so long therefore as
you have time, fall upon them, fight with them, and do all that ye can to
undo them.

Where, if your L. would know how is it that a man may undo the evil which he
has done; The answer is, that two manner of ways ye may do it: first, if
with good Ezechia ye recount your by-gon sins in the bitterness of your
heart; mourning for them ever when ye think upon them* and with the eyes of
faith look to him, who being righteous, died for our sins: sending up strong
supplications to God, that by the merit of Christ's death your sins may be
buried in the grave, and have never place to stand against you in judgment. If
they be such as may be m^nded by restitution, fail not to do it, after the
manner of good Zaccheus: if they be not of that nature, mend them by doing the
contrary good. This is that holy revenge which the Apostle commends as a not
able effect of repentance, That we should be revenged of our by-gon evils, by
doing the good which we know is most contrary unto them.

This being done for annulling of your by-gon sins; let your next care be to
rectify your life for the time to come* Solomon says, The end of a thing is
better the^ the beginning thereof. His meaning is of good things: for evil men
wax worse and worse; but an elect man by grace makes his latter end better
then his beginning; and they who are planted in the Courts of the Lords house,
flourish and bring forth fruit, even in their old days.

And here again I recommend to your L. a three fold duty. First, remember
how many are the obligation* wherein ye stand bound to the Lord your God:
think upon that question of godly David; What shall I render to the Lord for
all his benefits to me? Take an answer for it, out of these words of Solomon;
My son give me thine heart. Every morning offer unto the Lord Primitias
cordis, and oris tui; the first fruits of your heart and mouth: think upon
nothing before ye think on him; speak of nothing till first ye speak unto
him; be fervent and continual in prayer. Si non semper precamur* semper
debemus habere paratum precantis affectu^; ^f we be not always praying, we
should always have ready a heart disposed to pray. The vessels of mercy should
smell of mercy; and the Temples of God should never want the sacrifices of
God: give to the Lord both the thanks, and the service of all the good ye have
received from him. Many give him verbal thanks for his benefits,
acknowledging themselves debitors to him for the good which they have; who will
not serve him with his own benefits. Let these men know, that their thanks
are not acceptable to him.

The second point of your care, I would have intended to the poor and needy:
as ye have received mercy from God, or look to get it, show mercy for Gods
sake to such as are under you. Solomon says, The mercies of the wicked are
cruelty; but the mercies of a righteous man extend even toward his beast: how
much more then will he be merciful to his Christian brother? Remember what
comfort Job found in the day of his trouble, arising from this, That he Job 31.
restrained not the poor of their desire, and caused not the eyes of the
widow to fail: that he did not eat his morsels alone, but the fatherless
eat thereof: that he saw none perish for want of clothing, nor suffered the
poor to be without a covering: that the loins of the poor blessed him,
because he was warmed with the fleece of his sheep. It is a great grace,
where a man, not only sets his own heart to praise God; but hyreth the heart
and tongue of others to praise God with him, and for him: therefore To do good
and to distribute forget not, Heb. 13.
for with such sacrifices God is pleased.

And with these, think it a piece of your honor to honor the servants of the
Lord. Beautiful, says Esaias, are the feet of those, who bring the glad tidings
of peace: If their feet be beautiful* what should their face be? Look not to
their weakness; but for their Master and their message sake, esteem them
alwayesarorthy to be welcomed. And since they pray unto God for your L. be loath
to refuse them in their reasonable requests to you; remembering that reason
which Ambrose used to Theodose the Emperor: Si dignus non sum qui a te audiar,
nec etiam dignus qui pro te a deo exaudiar; If I be not worthy that I should be
heard of thee when I speak unto thee, far less am I worthy that I should be
heard of God, when I speak to him for thee.

The third is, that ye have a continual care of your self. Nature can teach
you to care for those things which are yours: but it is grace must learn you
to care for your self. Satan is a restless tempter; but yet so subtle, that
he can frame his temptations according to the ages and states of men: he tempts
not children as he does young men; neither tempts he young men as he does the
aged; neither tempts he the aged as he does any of the other two. He tempts
children with folly, and plays with them, as the Proverb is, at the belly
blind; seeking no more of that age, but that it be passed over with foolish
and frivolous things. Young men again he tempts to wickedness, many ways, by
the fury of their inordinate concupiscence: these are called by the Apostle,
The noisome lusts of youth. Aged men most commonly he tempts them with
covetousness, and excessive cares of the world. Omnia in homine cumsenescunt
vitia, sola iuuenescit auaritia: When all other sins wax old and feeble in
a man, only covetousness waxes young, and increases her strength. And who
can tell how miserable that man is, who in his childehood lived like a fool*
in his youth vva^ filthy, in his old age a vvorldling; unless God by grace
bring him out of that fearful bondage?

I speak not this as if I for ba^ the use of this world, or ^id condemn all
care thereof, or those lawful pleasures your L. takes in building* planting;
or other such (...) virtues, wherein ye stand unto all that are about you a
pattern of policy: but to warn you, that ye walk cere ^spectly* using this
world as if ye used it not. What-euer your actions be about it, set your
affections upon better things; knowing, as says the Apostle, that the shape
and figure of this world goes away. It is wisdom to forsake this world
with our will, before we be forced to forsake it against our will: to leave
it even when we do possess it. Abraham lived not so long as did many of his
fathers; yet when he died, it is said of him that he died full of days,
because he desired no mo. Since ye know ye must remove, be prepared like Israel
in Egypt, with their loins girded, and their staves in their hands, ready to
march forward from Egypt to Canaan. Be content with the days ye have gotten:
line so, as not needing any more; but use every day, as if it were your last
day: after which, if God give you another, take it as a super-plus, and be
thankful to him for it.

For all these causes which I have premitted, and that the seed of godliness,
which these many years I have known in you* breeding spiritual remorse with
tears, and godly holy desires, may at length be cherished and brought forward,
both to the flourishing and further fructifying; I hau^ here presented to your
L. these Meditations, which I ordinarily delivered to my people, in time of
their evening Prayers; and have (...) it, A holy Alphabet, or A. B. C. of
godsinesse: so plain in it self, that children may understand it; and yet
(...) plentiful in heavenly instruction, that the mest (...)* godly, and
ancient may every day learn something by it.

Accept it, read it, practice it, right Honorable: step forward in the godd
course which now ye have happ^y begun: and these good conclusions, which I know
ye have (...) with your self, may (...) ^orth ^to (...); that so the world may
see by the fruit, that the tree grows euerth* longer the better. Such of your
ways and works, as your L. ^nowes have (...) others, (...) now ^o amend them;
that all rea^ (...) satisfaction and such as before mistiked you for your
evil, may now thank God for your good; and you, by well-doing bringing forth
fruits worthy of amendment of life, may make sure to your self your calling
and election. Which mercy the Lord more and more confirm toward you for
Christ^ sake.

Amen.
Your L. in Christ Jesus, William Cowper, B. of Galloway.

A HOLY ALPHAbet for Sions Scholars.
My help is in the Name of the Lord.
THere is no way, by which a So many waie^ does God te^ch man, that man is
inexcusable if he learn not.
man may learn, but by the same God does teach him: by precepts, he instructs;
by requests, he exhorts; by promises, he allures; by threatenings, he
terrifies: and ^herfore has he sent his servants, of sundry qua^ities,
according to their several gifts, unto us; ^ome like Moses, to teach us; some
like Esaias, to ^omfort us; some like Jeremy, mourning to us; ^om like David,
singing to us. If when they teach, Matthew. 11. 17.
we learn not; if when they mourn, we lament not; if when they pipe, we dance
not: yea, if the sweetest songs of the sweet Singer of I^rael ( Qut Euthym.
noster Orpheus est) delight us not, to ra^e up our affections to the Lord; are
we not inexcusable?

By the deceit of vain pleasure, Satan* steals Gods courle in dealing with
man, contrary to Satan's.
the heart of man from God: and the Lord most artificially by the sweetness of
true pleasure, al^lures him home again; What could the Lord have Esa. 5. 4.
done any more unto us, that he has not done? He propones most profitable
things for us in his word: and to make them the more welcome, he seasons them
with pleasures. Nam quod gratum est, iucundius recipitur, and constantius
ret^netur.

Unto this use serves the whole book of the A commendation of the book of the
Psalms. A^ib.
Psalms, which is Commune quoddam medicinae promptuarium; but in special this
Psalm, which, in the judgment of Ambrose, exceeds the rest, as far as the
light of the Sun excels the light of the Moon. It was written by one of the
Saints of God, but in so marvelous a manner, that the words thereof convene
and agree unto all; Quod huius operis proprium est. So that it is, Veluti penu
doctrinae publicum, vnicuique apta and conuenientia distribuens; and therefore
should be in no less account with those, who love the spiritual lise, then is
the use of the Sun, the air and the fire, for the entertainment of this
natural life.

The Author of this Psalm, was most properly David both the heart, and the
tongue, and the pen of the great King.
called by Euthymius, Primi regis and cor, and lingua, and calamus: for he
received this testimony from the heavenly Oracle, That he was a man after Gods
heart. Now because no greater joy can come to the children of God, then to know
that God esteems of them, as he esteemed of David, that they are also men
after the heart of God; let them here learn a ready way whereby they may know
it. It was promised, that under If we be partakers of David's disposition, we
shall also be partakers of his approbation.
the Kingdom of Christ, the meanest or least should be like unto David. If
therefore by grace thou be partaker of David's disposition, recorded to thee in
this Psalm, thou may be out of doubt
thou art also partaker of his approbation: for the Lord is no accepter of
persons; what he approues in one, he will also approve in another.

This is it which Pontius the Deacon records A notable sentence of Cyprian to
this purpole.
of Cyprian, that when ever he heard or read any person commended in the Book
of God, he warned us, to make diligent inquisition of their actions, for which
they were commended: as namely, when we hear, said he, that Job received Job
1. 1. 8.
this praise from God, that he was an upright and ^ust man, one that seared
God, and eschued evil, and how none was like him on the earth, let us turn
over to the 31. chapter; where we have a Pontius.
short compend of his life: and let us endeavor to order our lise as he did
his* Vt dum and nos paria facimus, simile in nos Dei testimonium prouoce^us. We
need not then go up to the counsel We should mark these ver^es for which God
has commended his servants.
of God, to enquire there, whether or not we be beloved of him; let us come
down to our selves, Make sure our calling and election by well doing: let us
try our selves by this disposition, which here is in David; where we find a
conformity: let us give thanks for the beginnings of Gods grace in us; where
not, let us prease to amend: being assured, unless we follow David in the
practice of piety, we cannot be partakers of his praise, which he received
from God.

Now among many points of godliness manifest In every verse of this Psalm,
except one, David makes mention of Gods word.
in him, there is one here throughout the whole Psalm, more evident then the
rest; and that is his fervent affection toward the word of God: for in every
verse, except one only, to wit, Vatablus.
the 122. he makes mention of the word of God, under some of these names, Law,
Statutes, Precepts, Testimonies, Commandments, Word, Promises, Ways,
Judgments, Name, Righteousness, Truth: the reason hereof is, because in every
state of life he found light, life, and comfort in the word of God; and
therefore was his affection inflamed toward it. Even as children, newborn by
the instinct of nature, have an appetite to milk for conservation of their
life: so the children of God, once regenerate by the instinct of grace, have a
spiritual appetite to the word of God: according to that of Saint Peter; As
newborn babes Such as are regenerate by the word, live by it, as by the food
of their souls.
desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby. Neither is
it possible that any man can esteem of that word as a food for their
nourishment, but they to whom first it has been a seed of their new birth:
and the only cause, why the cold professors of this age esteems it not as a
food, for which they Others cannot account of it.
hunger and thirst, but rather be weary of it more then Israel was of Manna;
is, that it was never unto them a lively seed of their new birth: and so
since they have neither gotten life nor light by it, what marvel is it, they
have no delight in it? The order and division of this Psalm.


As to the order of this Psalm, it is divided into two and twenty Sections;
every Section has in it eight Verses, and every Verse begins in the Hebrew,
with that letter, wherewith the Section is entitled: as, all the Verses of the
first Section begin with Aleph; the Verses of the second with Beth, and so
forward, according to the Hebrew Alphabet: for which we may call this Psalm
an A. B. C. of godliness. Another method of this Psalm can we not lay, save
that every Verse contains in it, either a praise of Gods word, from some
excellent quality of it; or a protestation of David his unfeigned affection
toward it; or else a prayer for grace, to conform himself unto it: for unto
one of these three, Praises, Prayers, or Protestations, may all the Verses of
this Psalm be reduced. And so we enter into it.

ALEPH.
VERSE. 1. Blessed are these that are upright in their way, and walk in the
Law of the Lord.
THis verse begins the Psalm, with a The felicity of man stands in a
conformity with God.
summary proposition of the blessed estate of all Gods children. Properly only
God is blessed: God over all Basil. prae^in Psalm.
blessed for ever. For this word (...), signifies Romans 9. 5.
Immortale^; vt sit (...) ide^ quod (...), id est immortalis, the letter (...)
in both the syllables being turned into (...) for the pleasantnes of the sound:
yet this name is also attributed to Gods children, who of his mercy are
delivered from death, and allotted unto eternal life.

The blessedness of man is four manner of Four ways is man's felicity
described in holy Scripture.
ways described in holy Scripture: First, from the original thereof, and
fountain from which it flows; and that is our election: so the Apostle, when
he blesses the Lord, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
Christ, he begins Ephesians. 1. 3.
at this; As he has chosen us. Secondly, from the beginning thereof in us; and
that is our calling and justification: Blessed is the man whom Psalm.
thou chusest and causest to come unto thee. Again, Blessed is he whose
wickedness is forgiven, Psalm. 3^. 1.
and whose sin is covered. Thirdly, from the progress thereof, which is made
by sanctification; as, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for Matthew. 5.
righteousness: and so here, Blessed are they that are upright in way. Lastly,
from the perfection thereof; which shall be done in our final glorification:
unto one of these may be referred every sentence of holy Scripture, which makes
mention of the happiness and felicity of man.

Upright in their way. We have here first to see what is this Way; next, who
are upright in it. By the Way, understand Transitoriam hanc vitam; Euthym.
and so indeed properly man's life on earth is Every man's life is a Way, wherein
without intermission, he walks to the grave.
called a Way: for in it man walks from the womb to the grave, by so
continual a motion, that there is no resting nor returning for him into it.
But as a Ship, which goes right before the wind, makes haste (without staying)
toward her hauening place, what-euer they do that are in her; whether they
eat, or they walk, or they rest, still the Bark that carries them goes on to
her proposed end: so is it with man in the body, so soon as he comes out of
the womb, he is carried by a continual course to the grave, whether he sleep
or walk; whether he have mind of it or not, he is carried on in his course to
his end, without intermission. And in this sense the life of every man, whether
good or evil, is a Way, Via vita est, hanc siquidem ab vtero ad sepulchrum
Basil.
ambulamus omnes.

But in this Way there is a great difference; for some are upright in it: these
are exponed to be such as walk in the way of the Lord; others again turn
as^e after their crooked ways. So Psalm. 125.
that in the life of every man there are two motions The different courses of
good and evil men in it.
and courses: the one seen, which is common to good and evil; the other more
secret: the seen course, is the way of a man from the womb to the grave; this
is common, and as Joshua calls it, The way of all flesh: this is so sensible,
that all men perceive it; the growing of a man from infancy to child hood,
from childhood to young age, from young age to old age: the other I said is
more secret, wherein some by the crooked ways For there is one common to them
both, which is seen: one other proper to each of them, which is secret.
of sin, walk on unto perdition; others by the way of holiness to
glorification. And this way I call more secret, because the course of wicked
men is oft-times covered with hypocrisy: the course again of godly men
obscured by calumny; both of them being esteemed among men, the one for good,
the other for evil, that which indeed they are not.

Who walk in the Law of the Lord.] What before A godly man directs his course
by the word.
he spoke obscurely, he now delivers more plainly; namely, that they who walk
in the Law of the Lord, are upright in way. The Law of God is the rule of our
life; that narrow rod, within the limits whereof, we should always contain
our selves, neither declining to the right hand nor to the left; but ever
proceeding, by this one rule, we should forget that which is behind, (...). 3.
1^.
and endeavor our selves to that which is before: and truly, seeing by the
law only our actions will be judged, wisdom requires that by the law only
our actions should be squared.

VER. 2. Blessed are they who keep his testimomonies, and seek him with their
whole heart.
EVery man desires to be blessed; even they Man's felicity stands in God his
approbation.
who had but the light of nature sought after it, but could not find it: here
the Lord, who in the last day will pronounce some to be blessed, and some to
be cursed, does now tell us who they are. What can comfort them, to whom the
Lord shall say, Depart from me ye cursed? Where away shall they go, whom the
Lord shall command to depart from him? And what greater joy can com to a man,
then to hear the Judge of all saying unto him, Come to me ye blessed? Oh that
we were wise in time, to think of this, that so we might endeavor to become
such men, as to whom God, in his word, has promised the blessing.

The doubling of the sentence, Blessed blessed, in the first verse and second,
is to let us see the certainty of the blessing belonging to the godly. The word
of God is as true in it self, when it is No malice of Satan, no wrath of man,
can curse where God has blessed.
once spoken, as when it is many times repeated: the repetition of it, is for
confirmation of our weak faith. That which Isaac spoke of Jacob, I have
blessed him, and he shall be blessed, is the most sure decree of God upon all
his childen. Satan would feign curse Israel, by the mouth of such as Balaam
was: but he shall not be able to curse, because God has blessed.

Keep his Testimony. The word of God is called Why Gods word is called the
Testimony of God.
his Testimony, not only because it testifies his will, concerning his
service; but also his favor and good will, concerning his own in Christ Jesus.
If the word of God were no more but a Law, yet were we bound to obey it,
because we are his creatures: but since it is also a Testimony of his love,
wherein as a father he witnesses his favor toward his children; we are twice
inexcusable, if most joyfully we do not embrace it.

And again, since the word is Gods Testimony, Every man should take heed what
Gods word testifies to him.
let us take heed what it testifies unto us. Achab complained to Iosaphat on
Michaiah, that he never prophesied good things unto him; but the blame was in
Achab himself. Are not my words, Mich. 2. 7.
says the Lord, good unto him that walks uprightly? If the word of the Lord
witness no good unto
us, it is because we are not good our selves* Vtilis enim aduersarius est, it
is enemy to none, but Aug.
such as are enemies to themselves. Let us therefore take heed unto it; for if
the word condemn us, then our conscience, and the Lord who is greater then
them both will much more condemn us: but if we repent of our sins, and
continue in mourning, seeking mercy, and amend our lives, then shall the word
bring unto us the glad tidings of peace; yea, not only shall the word without,
but the spirit also testify to our conscience within, that our sins are
forgiven us.

Now, as concerning the keeping of Gods Testimonies, How the children of God
keep his word in mind, affection, and action.
the children of God do it in mind, in affection, in action. In mind, as Mary
laid up the words of the Angel in her heart, and David laid up the promises of
God in his heart, that he should not sin against the Lord: in affection, they
have ever a godly desire, and a purpose to practice it; joyful when they do
the commandments of God; sorrowful when they transgress them: in action,
they have a begun obedience, which God at length shall perfect in them; for The
righteousness Romans 8.
of the Law shall be fulfilled in us also.

And seek him with their whole heart. The How necessary it is for us to seek
the Lord.
seeking of God so often recommended in holy Scripture, imports, that naturally
men are strangers from God, divided from him by sin: for what needs a man
to seek that which he has not lost? This is man his most miserable condition
by nature; he has lost the familiar presence of his God: ^or lo they that
withdraw themselves from thee, shall perish; thou destr^yest all them Psalm. 73
27.
that go a whooring from thee. What shall we do to remedy it? but practice
that which there David protests he had concluded with himself; Ver. 28.
As for me, it is good for me to draw near unto God: we lost him by sin, let
us seek him by grace: we went a whooring from him by our iniquity, let us
return unto him by repentance: other-way, as he that will hide himself from
the Miserable are they who seek him not.
Sun, empaires not the light thereof; he may well shut himself in miserable
darkness: so he that departs from the Lord, shall derogate nothing to his
all-sufficient Majesty; he may well plunge himself in the bottomless pit of
remediless misery.

But this evil, the loss of Gods familiar presence, With what affection God
should be sought.
is not felt by carnal men, so long as they enjoy the comfort of his
creatures: and therefore is it, that where they can seek any other thing they
want, with solicitude and care, either else they seek him not at all; or then
seek him not as they should. As he that seeks a jewel which he has lost,
looks still to see it, with so earnest an attention, that what ^uer other
thing is in his way, he sees it not; casting all other things out of his mind,
Vnum illud intendit, Chrysostom. in mat. hom. 24.
quod solum requirit: so is it with him that seeks the Lord, Mundana omnia
pertransie^s illum solum inquirit; passing by all other things Euthym.
in the world, he makes inquisition for God only.
And truly, if it be the Lord whom we seek, it will appear by this; no other
thing shall content us, but still we will go on, seeking himself, till we
find himself.

But we must remember six conditions, required Six conditions to be observed
in the seeking of God.
in them, who would seek the Lord rightly: First, we must seek him in Christ
the Mediator. No man can come to the Father but by the Son; 1 Seek him in
Christ.
and He is able also perfectly to save all that come unto God by him. And this
excludes Papists (who Heb. 7. 25.
content them not with the Mediator) from the right seeking of God. 2 Seek
him in truth.


Secondly, we must seek him in truth: for God is a God of truth; he will be
worshipped in Ier. 10 10.
spirit and truth: for God is a Spirit, and loves Ioh. 4. 2^.
truth in the inward affections. And this is the P^l. 51.
condition which here is required; Blessed are they who seek him with their
whole heart. And this excludes hypocrites. 3 Seek him in holiness.


Thirdly, we must seek him in holiness: Let every one that calls on the name
of the Lord depart from iniquity: and again, says the Apostle, Follow Heb 12.
peace and sanctification, without which no man can 1 Ioh. 3.
see the Lord. And, Whosoever has this hope in himself (namely, that he shall
see God as he is) purges himself, even as he is pure. And this condition
excludes from seeking of God all Atheists, unclean, vnpeni^ent persons. 4
S^eke him above all things, and for himself.


Fourthly, we must seek him above all things, and for himself: not as the
carnal Jews did, with whom the Lord was angry; They howl upon me for wine
and oil. It is a great dishonouring Hos.
of God, when any thing is sought from him more then himself, or not for
himself: Quisquis a deo, praeter deum quaerit, non cast deum quaerit; Aug.
as if his creatures served not to this end, principally
to lead us unto himself, or among them all there were any thing more precious
then himself: and this excludes mercenaries and worldlings.

Fifthly, we must seek him by the light of his own 5 Seek him by his own light.
word: the Gentiles sought to find him by the light of nature, but they became
vain in their imaginations, Romans 1. 21.
and their foolish heart being full of darkness, could never find him. As the
Sun without the light, of it self, cannot be known; so God, without his own
light, which shines in his word, cannot be known: No man has seen God at any
time: the Son who has come from the bosom of the Father, he has declared
him; and the direction of the Son is, Search the Scriptures. And this
excludes all those children of darkness, who disdayning the light of the
word, depend upon fantasies, or presumptions of their own.

Last of all, we must seek him diligently, and 6 Seek him without wearying.
with perseverance; never resting till we find him, with the Spouse in the
Canticles. We must not seek him by startings, casting off all ca^e when we
find him not at the first; but without wearying, we must wait upon him: They
that Psalm. 34. 5.
look unto him (that is, constantly attend upon him) their faces shall not be
ashamed. And this excludes careless Christians, and temporizers, who seek him
by starts, but continue not.

VER. 3. Surely they work none iniquity, that walk in his ways.
THis Verse contains a commendation of If we keep Gods word, it keeps us.
the word of God, from this notable fruit and effect thereof: that they who
keep it, are kept by it from iniquity; and so made partakers by it, of the
third degree of man his felicity, which is sanctification.

If it be demanded here, How is it that they How it is that the Saints of God
work no iniquity.
who walk in Gods ways, work none iniquity? Is there any man who lives, and
sins not? And if they be not without sin, How then are they to be blessed?
The answer is, as the Apostle says of our knowledge; We know but in a part:
so is it true of our felicity on earth, we are blessed but in a part. It is
the happiness of Angels, that they never sinned: it is the happiness of
triumphant Saints, that albeit they have been sinners, yet now they sin no
more; but the happiness of Saints militant, is, that our sins are forgiven
us; and that albeit sin remain in us, yet it reigns not over us: it is done
in us, but not by our allowance: I do the evil which I would not; not I, but
sin that Romans 7.
dwells in me.

Secondly, to the working of iniquity, these Three things concur to the
working of iniquity.
three things must concur; first, a purpose to do it; next, a delight in
doing it; thirdly a continuance in it: which three, in Gods children never
concur; for in sins done in them by the old man, the new man makes his
exceptions and protestations against them: It is not I, says he; and so far
is he from delighting in them, that rather his soul is grieved with them:
even as Lot, dwelling among the Sodomites, was vexed by hearing and seeing
their unrighteous deeds. In a word, the children of GOD are rather sufferers of
sin against their wills, then actors of it with their wills; like men
spiritually oppressed by the power of their enemy: for which they sigh and
cry unto God, Miserable man that I am, who will deliver me from this body of
Death? And in this sense it is, that the Apostle says, He who is borne of GOD
sins 1. Ioh. 3.
not.

In his ways.] The course of man's life, ordered Why the life of a godly man is
called Gods way.
according to the word of the Lord, is called the way of GOD; first, because
it pleases him; and next, because it leads us unto him. There are many
desirous to be where the Lord is, that shall never com there; and all because
they delight not in the way, that leads unto him: blessed are they who walk in
this way. Confirm mine heart, o GOD, that I may keep it unto the end.

VER. 4. Thou have commanded to keep thy precepts diligently.
ALL the sins which in this age men commit The sins of this age, are either
of oblivion or rebellion: excuse of ignorance is taken from them.
against the Lord, proceed either from rebellion, or at least, from oblivion of
his commandments: for now in this great light, all excuse of ignorance is
taken away. None of the former two are good; but of the two, rebellion is the
vvorst. Gods children abhor it as a devilish evil, to rebel against God:
how-euer by oblivion many times they fall, both in sins of omission and
commission; so long as they remember what God has commanded to be done, and
what reasons they have to obey him, they are not easily snared: but being once
By oblivion men are easily carried to rebellion.
prevented by oblivion, they are easily carried unto transgression. It is good
therefore to keep in our hearts with David, this short remedy against oblivion.
Thou have commanded to keep thy precepts diligently. As the eyes of servants
look unto the hand of their Masters: so should our Psalm. 123. 2.
eyes vvait upon the Lord our GOD, ever looking to that way, vvhere-vnto his
countenance ^oth direct us.

Diligently.] In worldly affairs no weighty Three reasons to move us to a
careful diligence to obey the Lord.
thing can be done without diligence: far less in spiritual. Cursed be he
that does the work of the Lord negligently. For three causes should we keep
the commandments of the Lord with diligence: first, because our adversary,
that seeks to snare us by the transgression of them, is diligent in tempting;
For he goes about, night and day, seeking to devour us: next, because we our
selves are weak and infirm; by the greater diligence have we need to take
heed to our selves: thirdly because of the great loss we sustain by every
vantage Satan gets over us. For we find by experience, that as a wound is
sooner made then ^ is healed: so guiltines of conscience is easily contracted,
but not so easily done away.

VER. 5. O that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes!
IN the former verse, David has meditated The godly answer Gods pre^epts with
a prayer.
upon the commandment of God. Now the fruit of his meditation is, ye see, a
prayer unto God; wherein he wishes, that all his actions were answerable to the
commandments of God* this is customable unto the godly, to answer all the
precepts of God by prayers; what he commands them to do, they seek from
himself grace to do it.

My ways.] In this Psalm, sometime ye see It cannot be well with man, when
his way is contrary to Gods way.
mention is made of Gods ways, as Verse. 3. and sometime of man his ways, as
Verse. 5. It is well with man, when his ways and Gods ways are all one: for if
man have another way then the way of God, of necessity his end must be
miserable. God is the fountain of life; he that walks not with God, abides in
death: God is the father of light; he that will go from him, shall go to
blacknes of darkness, yea, to utter darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing
of teeth: Lo, all they that withdraw themselves from thee shall perish;
therefore will we resolve with David, It is good for me to draw near unto the
Lord.

David knowing that naturally man is divided It is a work of Gods mercy and
power, to draw a man from his own way to Gods way.
from God, and has a way of his own, which will not fail to lead him unto a
miserable end: he wishes from his heart, to be united with the Lord; that Gods
will were his will, and Gods way were his way. This is a work above the power
of nature: and therefore he humbly prays, that God Euthym.
would work it, Dignoscens quod ex seipso nihil possit efficere, nisi Dei open,
and gratia adiutus fuerit; humbly acknowledging, that in the framing of his
ways to Gods will, of himself he was able to do nothing, without the help of
grace: We are not of our selves able to think a good thought; our sufficiency
is of God: neither is it in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God
that shows mercy.

VER. 6. Then should I not be confounded, when I have respect unto all thy
commandments.
Sin has many evil fruits: it offends The miserable effects of sin.
God, and grieves his Spirit; it hurts thy neighbor: for by it, thou temptst
some, and infectst others; but the sosest wound it gives to thy self: for it
brings upon thee shame and confusion, and in the end eternal death; For sin
Iam. 1.
when it is finished, brings out death. Thy own It offends both God and man;
but hurts him most that did ^ommit it. Ierem.
wickedness shall reprove thee: and thou shall know that it is an evil thing
and a bitter, that thou have for saken the Lord thy God. How were Ad^m and Euah
consounded after their fall? how ran they away from the Lord, in whom they
delighted before? How lurked they among the b^shes? thinking shame of
themselves, they sought to cover their nakedness. Praeuaricationis enim fructus
^asil.
est co^fusio. If we think to pluck better fruit from the tree of sin, we do
but deceive our selves. It stands true in all, which the Apostle spoke of the
Romans: When ye were the servants of sin, ye were freed from righteousness:
what fruit had ye then of those things whereof ye are now ashamed* The end of
these things is death. If therefore we think evil to be confounded with
shame, let us bevvare we be not perverted by sin.

Respect to all thy Commandments.] We must not make a division at our own
hand of the commandments of GOD; making a show to We should make conscience
of all God his commandments.
keep some, and taking liberty to transgress others: as Naaman did, who
resolved that he would offer no sacrifice unto any other God, save only to
the Lord; only this he reserved, that he would bow with his Master the King of
Assure to the Idol Rimmon. The half obe^ience of the wicked, is like the voice
of an Echo.


Like him are many now; who profess they will serve the Lord, but still
reserve an Idol of their own, to the which their heart enclines: so answer
the Lord with half obedience; like the Echo, which makes not a perfect
respondence of the voice of men, but of some part thereof. But the
commandments of GOD are so united among themselves, that he who fails in
one point Iam. 2. 10.
of the law, is guilty of all: and therefore, to every one of them should we
give obedience; wherein, if we cannot do what we should, yet at least should
we have a respect, a purpose, and a care so to do, having a begun obedience to
them all, not exempting our selves from any. And this for them who think all
is well if they be not adulterers, when in the mean time they are idolaters;
and so forth of the rest.

VER. 7. I will praise thee with an upright heart, when I shall learn the
judgments of thy righteousness.
IN this verse we have a prayer for further Thankfulness to God commended for
four causes.
knowledge; together with a protestation of David his thankful affection for
it. Thankfulness is a duty, wherein we are all obliged to the Lord. It is a
good thing for upright men to praise Psalm.
thee Lord. It is good, first, in regard of the equity First, for the equity
of it; since we take good things from God, why should we not give him glory?
of it. Since the Lord gives us good things, shall not we give him praises
again? especially seeing the Lord is content so to part all his works between
his Majesty, and us, that the good of them be ours, the glory of them be his
own. When we have taken good things from him, why shall we defraude him of his
part, that is, glory by thanksgiving? Surely, the earth, which renders
increase to them that labor it, the ox that knows his owner, and every beast
in their kind, that bows to the hand of him who gives it meat, shall condemn
unthankful man, who receives daily from the Lord, but never returns praises
vnvnto him.

Secondly, it is good to praise the Lord in regard Secondly, for the object
thereof; which is God, the treasure of all good.
of himself, who is the object of our praises. Since he is the treasure of all
good, the author of all blessings, it cannot be but a good and blessed thing to
bless him.

Thirdly, it is good in respect of our associates Thirdly, for the associates
we have in this exercise; namely, Angels, and our elder brethren.
and companions in this exercise: the Angels, Cherubins, and Seraphins, delight
continually in his praises. Our elder brethren, that glorious congregation of
the first borne, are described unto us, falling down on their faces, casting
their crowns at the feet of the Lord, to give him the glory of their
redemption. Now, seeing we pray that the will of God may be done in earth, as
it is in heaven, why do we not delight in these exercises of praising God, by
which we have fellowship with them who are glorified in heaven? Lastly, for the
great good we get by it.


Lastly, it is good in respect of the great benefits we receive by it:
nothing thereby accrues to the Lord, all the vantage is our own; Gratiarum
actio, est ad plus dandum in vitatio.

With an upright heart.] Many musical instruments The best musical instrument
for Gods praises, is an vprigh: ^are.
had they under the law, wherewith they praised God, as ye may see in the last
Psalm: but such as were spiritual among them, knew that all these availed
nothing, unless the heart had been well tuned, and prepared. This is to make
them ashamed, who now in a greater light, come to praise GOD, but forget their
heart behind them; or else bring it very evil tuned, full of so many discordant
desires, that they cannot (as they are commanded) make melody to the Lord in
their hearts. Both the matter, and the grace of thankfulness is from God.


When I shall learn.] But when, says David, he will be thankful? even when
GOD shall learn him: both the matter and the grace of thankfulness is from
God. As he did with Abraham, he commanded him to worship, and gave him the
sacrifice: so does he with all his children; for he gives not only good things
for which they should thank him, but in like manner grace, by which they are
able to thank him.

VER. 8. I will keep thy Statutes, forsake me not ouer-long.
THis verse contains a protestation, that Purposes would be seconded with
prayers.
he was resolved to keep the Lords Statutes: which because he knew of
himself he was not able to accomplish; with this protestation of his purpose,
he ioynes a prayer, wherein he craves to be assisted, and not forsaken of the
Lord.

It is a great help to godliness, to resolve that A resolution to be godly,
is a great beginning of a godly life.
we will live godly; for that which is not concluded, how shall it be
performed? or what hope is there we should attain to the end, that is, to the
perfection of piety, when we are careless of the beginnings thereof? which
are purposes, intentions, and resolutions that we will be godly? Where, when
of weakness we fail in following forth our resolution, it shall be well
done again to renew it: for by often renewing of our resolution to do any
good, we become the stronger to accomplish it. A fearful plague to be
forsaken of God.


Forsake me not ouer-long.] It is a fearful thing to be utterly and finally
forsaken of the Lord, as Judas was, who therefore Parata inimico praeda factus
est. For man left utterly to himself, becomes ^asil.
a prey to the enemy, and can no more stand by himself, then a staff not
sustained by the hand of man: and therefore does David pray that the Lord would
not forsake him.

And yet because he knew, that the Lord exercises Gods children many times
exercised with temporal desertions.
his dearest children with temporal desertions, forsaking them for a time, and
withdrawing his helping hand from them, ex eo commodu^ ipsorum procurans (as is
evident in Peter, who was left for a time to himself, that the proof of his
own weakness might make him more humble* and less confident in himself)
therefore he craves not simply to be freed of desertion; but that, if the Lord
will desert him, to try him, or to humble him, he would not desert him ouerlong.

Such as know what help and comfort the presence To a godly man, a ^hort time
of Gods absence is long
of the Lord in mercy brings to his children, they think a short time of his
absence a very long time. Absalom spoke out of his policy, that it was better
for him to die, then live and not see his Fathers face: but in truth, it is
more bitter then death to the godly, to live in the body, and not be refreshed
with the favorable beams of the countenance of God: and therefore they prevent
the desertion with prayer, as here David does, Forsake me not ouer-long. And
when they are exercised with it, al other comforts are loathsome to them: they
sigh and cry continually, How long, o Lord, how long? Will the Lord absent
himself for ever, etc. They run with the Spouse in the Canticles, to and fro,
seeking him; and with the mourning Mary's, they shed tears incessantly, till
they find him again, and he show his favorable face unto them.

BETH.
VER. 9. Wherewith shall a young man redress his way? in taking heed thereto
according to thy word.
SAint James compares the word of God Gods word is a glass, representing to us
both Gods image and our own.
to a glass, whereinto he, who looks rightly, may see two images; the image
of God, to the which we should be conformable, and our own natural image.
What we are by nature, and how far altered from that first exemplar of God
his image, whereunto we were created, may be evident to any man that will
consider himself in the glass of the word, and that especially will try
himself by this Psalm. When we read it, and dare not in a good conscience say
that for our selves, which David protests of himself, let us thereby know how
far we are from that which we should be, and study to amend it.

As the first section, marked with the letter (...), contains eight verses,
every one of them beginning with that letter: so the eight verses of this
second section, begin all with this letter (...). For here is delivered unto
us an A. B. C. of godliness, As words and sentences cannot be without letters:
so no good in religion or manners without the word.
consisting of 22. letters; and eight times in every letter is the word of GOD
commended to us; to teach us, that as words and sentences cannot be without
letters: so no good in any religious duty can be performed, without the word
of God.


This ninth verse contains a commendation David edifies others with that which
had done himself good.
of the word, from the profitable effect thereof: and it is proposed by way of
a Dialogue, a question asked, and an answer given. David being a young man in
the Court of Saul, and refrained from that licentious conversation, whereinto
others deborred, now he delivers that for the edification of others, which he
had learned by experience had done good to himself.

The word is needful for all sorts of men; but The word is needful for all,
specially for young men; and why.
specially for young men, because this age of al other, is most subject to the
dangerous disease of inordinate lusts: Vicina lapsibus est adolescentia. And
therefore, as they who are sick of the Amb. lib. de viduis.
Fever, have need of cooling things, and young undaunted colts have need of the
stronger bits: so is the fury of youth to be tempered, and bridled by the word.

Iuuentut is assecla est stultitia; stultitia autem Nazi^n. orat. 46. in
Ecclesiast.
ad exitium ducit: the Page of youth is foolishness; and foolishness if it be
not cured, leads to destruction. Foolishnes, said Solomon, is bound Prou. 22.
15.
in the heart of a child: but the rod of correction will drive it away. And
what better correction can be to cure it, then the wholesome information of the
word of GOD: this is the yoke which Lam. 3. 27.
is good for a man to bear in his youth. But alas! Youth commonly most profane.
it is lamentable, that no age does so much despise the word, as this, which
most stands in need of it.

It is now a rare thing, to find among young men a Joseph, or a Samuel: where
they should live as Nazarits, consecrate to the Lord, they are Amos. 2.
rather like men who have vowed and dedicated themselves unto Satan. As the
sons of Eli despised the rebuke of their father: so young men now (for the
most part) are impatient of the rebukes of the word; contemning the medicine,
which David by experience found most effectual, to cure the disordered
affections of youth. It is an evil division, when young years are given to
Satan, and old age to the Lord.


Among those sacrifices wherewith God was honored in the law, he required
their first fruits to be consecrate to him; ears of corn dried by the fire,
and wheat beaten out of the green ears: teaching us to honor the Lord, not
only with Leuit. 2. 14.
the first fruits of our increase, but of our selves also. It is an evil
division that is made by many, who give their young age to Satan by the service
of sin, and behight their old age to the Lord: for so they incur that curse
of Malachie; Cursed be he that has a strong beast in his slocke, and Malach.
vows, and sacrifices a corrupt thing unto the Lord.

The feruency and strength of youth should be employed, not in the satisfaction
of their lusts, but in How the strength of young age should be declared.
the service of their God, and in fighting against Satan. This is it which
that youngest Disciple of our Lord, requires of young men; that having the Word
of God abiding in them, they may be 1. Ioh. 2. 14, 15, 16.
strong to ouercom the wicked: not loving the world, nor things that are in the
world (such as) lust of the flesh, lust of the eyes, and pride of life. These
are not of the Father, but of the world; and the world passes away and the
lust thereof: but he that fulfils the word of God abides for ever.

But how-euer mention be made here of young It a double sin and shame for old
men to be ungodly.
men only; yet as no age is without the own tentations and blemishes: so have
they all need to take heed to the word, that they may learn to redresle their
ways. It is a double shame and sin for an old man to be of an unclean life,
or ignorant of the word. Such as had lived long without making progress in
knowledge and godliness, were properly called by Philo, Longaeui pueri. The
nearer we draw unto Canaan, the further should we be from the delights of
Egypt: otherwise it shall come to pass in God his righteous judgments, that
when in regard of thy long journey, thou art at the very borders of Canaan,
thou should be put further back again A miserable evil, to come to
Canaans borders and be put back again.
with these carnal Israelites; yea, never suffered to enter into it. O
miserable condition of that man, whose body is declyning to the grave, but his
spirit has not learned to ascend to him that gave it: he comes, as I said, to
the border of
Cana^n, to the very point of time, wherein Gods children make their happy
transmigration; but by reason of his sins he is thrust back again: when he
should die and ascend to the blessed fellowship of God the Father of light, he
dies and descends to the pit of utter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing
of teeth. Knowledge to govern the life aright, is the good gift of God.


Now the manner of the answer, which he makes to his former Interrogatiue,
commends the certainty of his counsel: for he answers by turning his speech to
the Lord, from whom he had obtained by prayer this knowledge, How to govern his
life; Vt sic non praesumptionis humanae sed dignationis Amb.
diuinae remedium crederetur, that so it might be known unto others, that this
remedy came not from humane presumption, but divine revelation.

VER. 10. With mine whole heart have I sought thee: let me not wander from thy
Commandments.
WHat David delivered by way of David practiced that which he taught to others.
instruction unto other young men, he now shows that he practiced himself: for
this Verse contaynes a protestation of that earnest desire he had to have his
life ordered by the written word of God. That he says I have sought thee
with my whole heart, imports no presumptuous boasting of his own perfection;
but rather, a He was far from Pharisaicall boasting of his own perfection.
sense and feeling of his own wants, which made him the more earnestly to
seek: for seeking is of those things, which a man wants, and feign would have.
And where he says, he sought the Lord with his whole heart, he speaks it by
comparison; Ad differentiam eorum qui Deum non toto cord quaerunt, Basil.
sed illud in curas seculares, et concupiscentias absurdas partiuntur.

Let me not wander.] As our first calling, so The beginning, continuing, and
perfecting of our salvation, is of God.
our continuing in the state of grace is of the Lord: for he is both the
author, and finisher of our faith.

Customablie in holy Scripture, elect men Heb. 12.
are called the Sheep of Christ; to tell us, that all our welfare, consists in
the provident care of our Pastor: who first, must keep us that we wander not;
and next, when of infirmity we wander, must reduce and bring us home again.

VER. 11. I have hid thy promises in mine heart, that I might not sin against
thee.
IT is not David's meaning, that he had hid David hid not the talent he
received.
the talent which he received from the Lord, after the manner of that
unprofitable servant: for that he did put his talent to the uttermost profit
for the edification of others, he witnesses both by this Psalm and many
other; specially Psalm. 40. I have declared thy righteousness unto the great
Congregation: lo, I will Psalm.
not refrain my lips, O Lord, thou know. I have not hid thy
righteousness within my heart, but I have declared thy truth and thy
salvation: I have not concealed thy mercy and truth from the great
Congregation. What is this then David affirms, that he has not hid Gods
righteousness within his heart? Here he protests, that he hid Gods promises
in his heart. Surely here is no contradiction: for in the one he shows how his
first care was to comfort and He that edifies not his own heart with mercy, is
not meet to speak of it unto others.
confirm himself by the promises of GOD; and next, to benefit others. And
truly, he that does not first edify his own heart in the assurance of Gods
mercy, can never be a meet instrument to declare the mercies of God unto others.

There is great difference between Christians Christians have their treasure
within, Worldlings without them.
and Worldlings. The Worldling has his Treasures and Jewels without him: the
Christian has them within. Neither indeed is there any recepracle, wherein to
receive and keep the word of consolation, but the heart only. If thou have it
in thy mouth only, it shall be taken from thee: if thou have it in thy Book
only, thou shall miss it when thou have most to do with it: but if thou lay
it up in thy heart, as Marie did the words of the Angel, no enemy shall ever
be able to take it from thee; and thou shall find it a comfortable treasure in
time of thy need.

They who possess earthly riches, expose The godly make not a vain show of
grace, but lock it up in the heart, to hide it from their enemies.
them not to the eyes and hands of every one; they lock them up in their
surest places, to conserve them from thieves and robbers: it is even so here
with holy David; he knew no good spiritual, can be possessed here in this
earth, without temptation That subtle Serpent, who stole from our first
parents the glorious Image of God, wherein consisted their original felicity
and happiness, does yet envy and rage, when he sees the children of Adam,
restored to the possession of any spiritual graces: and therefore David, like
a wise man, Abscondit illas Basil.
in animo suo, ne eas per inanem gloriam, aut incuriam, animarum depraedatores
furentur.

This one example may condemn the folly Worldlings careless of the heavenly
treasure convinced.
of worldlings: the smallest jewel they have, yea, the Charter of their
smallest possessions, they can hide well enough, and lay it up sure from them
who would defraude them of it; but as for the promises of God, which are the
Charters of our heavenly inheritance, they neglect them altogether. For alas,
how many be there, who affirm in word that heavenly inheritance to be theirs?
who if they be examined upon their warrants, cannot bring out of the treasure
of their heart, so much as one promise of God, whereby it is made sure unto
them.

That I might not sin.] Among many excellent If we keep the word it will
keep us.
virtues of the word of GOD, this is one; that if we keep it in our heart, it
keeps us from sin, which is against God, and against ourselves. We may mark
it by experience, that the word is first stolen either out of the mind of
man, and the remembrance of it is away: or at least out of the affection of
man; so that the reverence of it is gone, before that a man can be drawn to
the committing of a sin. So long as Euah kept by faith the word of the Lord,
she resisted Satan; but from the time she doubted of that, which God made most
certain by his word, incontinent she was snared.

VER. 12. Blessed art thou, O Lord: teach me thy Statutes.
THE soul of a man truly godly, when The soul of the godly cannot be
satisfied in this life.
he comes to seek God, finds in himself so manifold wants, and in the
Lord so plentiful mercies, that he can never be satiate with seeking, till he
be filled: and therefore is it, that having sought much, yea, and gotten much;
yet he seeks more: as through all this Psalm we may see, David can make no
end of prayer: and this may make us ashamed of our cold, faint, and feeble
prayers.

This Verse contains a prayer, with a reason Men are careless to seek God,
because they know not what a jewel he is.
of the prayer. The prayer is, Teach me thy Statutes: the reason, moving him to
seek this, arises of a consideration of that infinite good which is in GOD.
He is a blessed GOD, the Fountain of all felicity; without whom no welfare,
nor happiness can be to the creature. And for this cause, David earnestly
desiring to be in fellowship and communion with GOD, which he knows none can
attain unto, unless he be taught of GOD to know Gods way, and walk in it:
therefore, I say, prays he the more earnestly, that the Lord would teach him
his Statutes. Oh that we also But seek the creatures as if their happiness
stood in them.
could wisely consider this, that our felicity stands in a fellowshippe with
GOD. This meditation would weaken or diminish in us those unquiet and
fruitless cares we have to enjoy the creature: for, alas, man seeks the
creatures as if his life, and happiness stood in them; but is negligent in the
seeking of the Lord: and all because he knows not, that his blessedness
stands in a communion with the blessed God.

Teach me.] David wanted not Prophets, To be taught by man is nothing, if God
teach not.
such as Nathan and Gad, and Leuits his ordinary Doctors to teach him: but he
knew all these were nothing, unless he were taught of God. Man his teaching, if
there be no more, cannot remedy the ignorance of the mind, far less the
corruption of the heart. Paul's planting, Apollo his watering, is nothing, if
God work not the increase: and therefore David so uses the one, as knowing it
could not profit without the other; Amb.
Hac a Domino quaerit discere quae homines docere non poterant. If this were
practiced now, to join Doctrine should be delivered and received with prayer.
prayer with hearing; that when we offer our selves to be taught of men, we
would there with send up prayer to God, before preaching, in time
of preaching, and after preaching, we would soon prove more learned and
religious, then we are.

Again, David was a Prophet himself, and a Such as have solid knowledge of
salvation, desire to know more.
man of great knowledge, and yet often craves he that God would teach him more.
Far was he from the presumption of this age, which procures the perdition of
many; with whom if ye speak concerning their knowledge, ye shall hear nothing,
but that they know their God, their duty, And none think they know enough,
but they who know nothing.
their conscience, and all: they will seem ignorant of nothing, though indeed
they do nothing aright. When they hear so excellent a Prophet, so desirous of
further knowledge, and so desirous to be taught; let them be ashamed to boast
of their knowledge. Vaemiserae huic generationi, cui sufficere videtur sua
insufficientia. Bern.


VER. 13. With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.
Here is a protestation of the thankful Benefits received being well used,
may make us bold to seek more.
use he had made of the benefits of God, already received: he had told unto
others, what God had done to his soul: he had not kept close God his loving
kindness. And truly this is a strong reason to back our prayers unto God, when
we dare say out of a good conscience, that the benefits which we have received
already, we have used them to the glory of him, who gave them.

But here it may be demanded: seeing the How says David he declared Gods
judgments, (...) the Apostle says they are unsearchable?
Psalmist says, that the judgments of God are as a great deep, and the
Apostle says, that they are unsearchable; How says he now that he has
declared all the judgments of God? To this we answer, Non impugnat se velut
contrarijs Scriptura Psalm. 35.
venerabilis: and therefore we must here make a Romans 11.
distinction, Sunt iudicia occulta, quae Deus ^obis Ambrose.
Judgments of God are twofold, secret and revealed.
non patesecit, and iudicia oris quae annuntiauit, and per os Prophetarum
loquutus est; there are secret judgments, and these David leaves to the Lord:
there are again the judgments of his mouth, which God has declared and
revealed himself, by the mouth of his servants the Prophets. And of these
David speaks here; I have declared all the judgments of thy mouth.

So then here David protests, that what the Men should learn before they teach.
Lord taught him, he also taught others. Some will teach, who themselves are
not taught of God: these are in the Church, non Conchae, sed Bern.
Canales. Others, what they have learned of God, declare not unto others: these
are guilty of hiding of the Talent, they have received from the Lord.

With my lips.] The tongue is a most excellent Man made with such wisdom,
that no member in the body can say to another, I need thee not.
member of the body, being well used to the glory of God, and edification of
others; and yet it cannot pronounce without help of the lips. The Lord has
made the body of man with such marvelous wisdom, that no member in it can
say to another, I have no need of thee: but such is man his dullness, that he
observes not how stedable unto him, the smallest member in the body is, till it
be taken from him. If our lips were clasped for a time, and our tongue
enclosed; we would esteem it a great mercy, to have it loosed again: as that
Cripple, when he found the use of his feet, leapt for joy and glorified God.
Speech taken from good men for two causes.


It is one of the works wherein God declares his sovereign power, That he
takes away the speech from the faithful, or from them that speak Job 12.
truth. This he does for two respects: sometime 1 For punishment of their people.
for a punishment of their hearers; so he threatened to make Ezechiel his tongue
cleave to the roof of his mouth: sometime for a correction to themselves; so
was Zachary stricken with 2 For correction of themselves.
dumbness for his mis-beliefe. This should learn us to be thankful for the
benefit of speech, and to use it in fear and reverence, to the glory of God.

VER. 14. I have had as great delight in the way of thy Testimonies, as in all
riches.
Here is a protestation of his great delight, The joy gotten by Gods word,
surmounts all worldly joy whatsoever.
which he found in the way of the Testimonies of GOD: greater then worldlings
can find in the possession of riches; yea, of all riches. Sunt enim multa
diuitiarum genera; Basil.
sed haec omnia complexus Propheta cum diuinis Testimonijs contulit: for there
are many sorts of riches; but the Prophet here, comprising them all in one,
sets them far inferior to the Testimonies of God. For we are not to think
here that he makes any equality between these two; Non quasi pro gratiae
qualitate cum spiritualibus Ambrose.
comparatur corporalis voluptas, sed quasi ad testimonium suauitatis
accersitur: but to show the greatness of the joy, arising from the Testimonies
of God, he shows, that it alone surmounts all the pleasures, which of any
external thing can arise to worldlings.

It is a great argument of progress in Religion, when godliness becomes a
delight. Malachie complains of the carnal Jews, that the service In a
miserable estate are they, to whom Gods word is a weariness.
of God was a weariness to them: and alas, so is it to many carnal
professors, who think no time long, but that which is spent in the exercise of
the word, and prayer; all because they have not yet learned with David, to
delight in it.

All the baits of Satan, whereby he allures Satan's baits ^e pleasure or
profit; but we should not be moved with any of them: and why.
men to sin, are pleasure or profit: if we be moved with these, it is
wisdom to be most allured with the greatest pleasure and profit. The Apostle
says, Godliness is great gain: a godly man is in omnibus dives, tanquam omne
possidens patrimonium. Amb.
And again, David affirms that he 1. Cor. 1.
found unspeakable joy in godliness. Since it is so then, that the profit or
pleasure of other things moves us to go after them; are we not inexcusable, if
the profit and pleasure of godliness move us not to embrace it?

In the way of thy Testimonies.] The Testimony It is not the hearing or reading
of Gods word that will work us joy, if we practice it not.
of God is his word; for it testifies his will: the way of this Testimony, is
the practice of his word, and doing of that which he has declared to be his
will, and wherein he has promised to show us his love. David found not this
sweetness in hearing, reading, and professing the word only; but in practicing
of it: and in very deed, the only cause why we find not the comfort that is in
the word of God; is, that we practice it not by walking in the way thereof. It
is true, at the first it is bitter to nature which loves carnal liberty, to
render it self, as captive to the word: Laboriosa
virtutis via, and much pains must be taken Basil.
before the heart be subdued; but when it is once begun, it renders such joy,
as abundantly recompenses all the former labor and grief.

As in all riches.] A Commentary to this we Of the vexation and vanity of
worldly riches.
have in the fourth Psalm; where he glories that the joy, arising of God his
favorable countenance, does far surmount all the joy that worldlings can have
of their best things. Worldly riches vex men to get them, and vex them more
how to keep them; but most of all do they vex when they depart from men
unlooked for: as it is sure they are no permanent goods, but of a flowing
nature, like water; and in their own time take wings and fly away: and that
with so speedy a course, that quickly they go out of his sight, whom foolishly
they delighted before. Alienae a Ambros. in Luc. cap. 16.
nobis sunt diuitiae, quia praeter Naturam sunt: neque nobiscum nascuntur,
neque nobiscum transeunt. But They fly farthest from us, when we have most
need of comforts.
the word renders joy in the first seeking of it; more joy in keeping of it;
most of all in this, that it endures and abides for ever. The comforts of the
world are false comforts; they forsake a man when he has most need of comfort,
to wit, in the hour of death: but the word like a faithful friend lies
nearest our heart, to comfort it most, when all other comforts are farthest
from it.

VER. 15. I will meditate in thy precepts, and consider thy ways.
THese two last verses of this Section, present A threefold internal action of
the soul about the word.
to us a threefold internal action of David his soul, toward the word of God:
first, Meditation; secondly, Consideration; thirdly, Delectation: every one of
these proceeds from other, and mutually strengthen one another. Meditation
brings the word to the mind: Consideration views it, and looks at length into
it; whereof is bred Delectation. That which
comes into the mind, word it never so good, if it be not considered, gods as
it came; leaving neither instruction, nor joy: but being once presented by
meditation, if it be pondred by consideration, then it breeds delectation* which
is the perfection of godliness, in regard of the internal action.

Thus we see, that a godly man is ever fruitful How a godly man is ever
fruitful in good.
in good: like that tree, planted by the rivers of waters. For at that same
time when his external good actions cannot be seen, he is not without
internal good motions, breeding good in the root of his affection; which
shortly brings out good fruit in his action, to the glory of God, and good of
others.

As mea^ re^iued in the stomach* profits not, if The necessity and vtility of
meditation.
conc^ction follow not, to turn it into wholesome nourishment: so the word
received by hearing, or reading cannot avail us, if it be not digested by
meditation. In the law, beasts that did not chew their Cud, were accounted
unclean: figuring these to be of all others most unclean, who having heard
the word, are not made clean by it; and all because they digest it not by
prayer and meditation, to make it a convenient food for their famished souls.

In thy Precepts.] The mind of man is restless, The mind of man is restless,
and vexes it self with evil, if it be not exercised with good.
and cannot lie idle. As a Millstone, moved by the wheels, grindes and
consumes it own self, if ye cast in no convenient matter, whereupon it may
work: so the mind of man, if good be not furnished unto it, shall work upon
evil, vexing and annoying the own self.

A meet subject for meditation to the mind of Gods word should be the matter
of our meditation.
man, is the precepts of the word of God: because, as they are from God unto
us; so are they for us, and we must be answerable to God for them. Earthly
Lords, in their commandments to their servants, seek their own advantage: it is
not so with the Lord our God; all his commandments are for the vantage and
benefit of his servants: Nihil iubet quod sibi profit. May a man be August.
Marcellin^.
profitable unto God? Is it any thing to the Almighty, that thou art righteous?
Or is it profitable Job 22.
to him, that thou make thy ways upright? yet are we bound to obey; and we
must be countable for them: and therefore should they never go out of our mind.

And consider thy ways.] David his second The word is Gods way because by it
God comes to us and we go to him.
internal action concerning the word, is Consideration: where mark well, how
by a most proper speech he calls the word of God the way of God; partly,
because by it God comes near unto men, revealing himself to them, who
otherwise could not be known of them: for he dwells in light inaccessible; and
partly, because the word is the way which leads men to God. So then, because
by it God comes down to men, and by it men go up unto God, and know how to
get access to him; therefore is his word called his way.

Of Consideration, see Ver. 59.

VER. 16. I will delight in thy Statutes, and will not forget thy word.
He protested before, that he had great The more good a godly man does, the
more he desires to do.
delight in the Testimonies of God: now he says he will still delight in them.
A man truly godly, the more good he does the more he desires, delights and
resolves to do: Temporizers on the contrary, who have but a show of godliness,
and the love of it is not rooted in their heart; how soon are they weary of
weldoing? If they have done any small external duty of religion, they rest as
if they were fully sanctified, and there needed no more good to be done by
the^* True Religion is known by hungring and thirsting after righteousness; by
perseverance in weldoing; and an earnest desire to do more.

But to this he adds, that he will not forget the The graces of the Spirit are
linked together: lose one, lose all; keep one, keep all.
word. The graces of the Spirit do every one fortify and strengthen another;
for ye see Meditation helps Consideration: who can consider of that whereof he
thinks not? Consideration again breeds Delectation: and as here ye see,
Delectation strengthens Memory: because he delights in the word, he will not
forget the word; and Memory again renewes Meditation. Thus every grace of the
Spirit helps another:
and by the contrary, one of them neglected, works a wonderful decay of the
remnant. Fail in Love, or in Patience, etc. Prayer decays: fail in Prayer,
all decays. We have therefore so much the more carefully to eschew the neglect
of any one grace, because in the losing of one we lose many: and if we want
grace, we are altogether inexcusable; because if we have a care to keep any
one principal grace, one shall keep many graces unto us.

GIMEL.
VER. 17. Be beneficial unto thy servant, that I may live and keep thy word.
IN the end of the former Section David Our best estate upon earth, is, that we
have not that which we should, and yet want not altogether.
had protestations: now in the beginning of this he has prayers. In his
protestations he acknowledges the beginnings which by grace he had made in
godliness, to the praise and glory of God: in the prayers he acknowledges his
wants, that he was far from that which he should be; and therefore still
beseeches the Lord to bring forward to perfection, that which he had begun in
him.

If ye mark the course of this Psalm, ye The strength of a Christian is in
his prayer.
shall see, David cannot long abide in any purpose without prayer: he learned
by experience, that prayer is the life of the soul. No more can the Soul live
without prayer, then the Body can without breathing: and as Samsons strength
was in his hair; so a Christians strength is in the grace of prayer. If this
be taken from us, we soon become a prey to the spiritual Philistims.

Now the first thing he craves as a special benefit, The greatest benefit men
receive from God, is grace to obey him.
is, that he may live and keep the word of God. Many benefits had the Lord
bestowed upon him: of a Shepherd he made him a King to them all: he seeks
this benefit, grace so to live, that he might keep the word of the Lord: he
knew that without this, all other benefits are nothing; and so do all Gods
children, illuminate with the light of God, if they were preferred to be
Monarchs of the world. They count more of Constantine the great his notable
saying, It is more to be a Christian then a Monarch of the world.
this, To be Christians, wanting earthly Kingdoms, then To be Kings, wanting
Christianity. As, good Constantine, albeit he knew he was obliged to the Lord
for making him an Emperor; yet much more bound to his mercy, for making him a
Christian. And indeed this life without the other grace, though it were
seconded with the highest honor and wealth that ever befell to any man in his
life, what is it? Not an Introduction only to eternal death; but a procuring,
and just deserving of it.

Thy servant.] That he styles himself so So David rejoices more in this,
that he was Gods servant, then king of Israel.
frequently the servant of GOD, notes in him two things: first, a reverent
estimation he had of his GOD; in that he accounts it more honorable to be
called the servant of God, who was above him, then the King of a mighty,
ancient, and most famous people, that were under him. And indeed, since the
Angels are styled his ministers, shall man Since Angels serve him, shall we think
shame to serve him?
think it a shame to serve him with them? and especially, since he of his
goodness has made them our servants, Ministering spirits to us? Should we not
joyfully serve him, who has made all his creatures to serve us; and exempted
us from the service of all other, and has only bound us to serve himself?

That I may live.] David ioynes here two together, Natural life makes a
reprobate man in a worse case, then if he had never been.
which whosoever disioynes, cannot be blessed. He desires to live; but so to
live, that he may keep Gods word. To a reprobate man, who lives a rebel to his
Maker, it had bin good (as our Savior said of Judas) that he had never been
borne; that the knees had not prevented him; or, that incontinent after his
birth, he had been buried. The shorter his life is, the fewer are his sins,
and the smaller his judgments.

But to an elect man, life is a great benefit: for But to an elect man, even
natural life is a great benefit.
by it he goes from election to glorification, by the way of sanctification.
The longer he lives, the more good he does, to the glory of God, the
edification of others, and confirmation of his own salvation; making it sure
to himself, by wrestling and victory in tentations, and perseverance in well
doing.

Without grace, this life is but a death: so the This life without grace, is
but a death.
Spirit of God accounts of it; and therefore gives to most lively natural men,
the name of dead men. Omnia hic plena mortis sunt. By the law, if a living man
had touched the dead, he was defiled: Number. 19.
and we, beside that we carry death in our selves, where can we go and not
touch the dead? Great need therefore have we, with David, earnestly to seek
this grace, that we may live keeping the word of God: aunswering that
commandment of our lord, Relinque mortuos; and of his Apostle, Math. 8.
Awake thou that sleep, and arise from Ephesians. 5.
the dead.

For, as to the^ who love to live in the body, for Miserable are they, who
desire to live for love of the pleasures of sin.
no other end, but that they may enjoy carnal pleasures in the body, no tongue
can express their misery. To a godly man, sin makes his life bitter: so the
Apostle protested, O miserable man! who shall deliver me from this body of
death? And if they love to live, it is that they may mourn for sin, and break
off the course of their sins by ame^dement of life. This straited godly
Nazianzen, that A worthy meditation of Nazianzen.
he knew not whether to make choice of death, or life: when he considered that
death makes an end of sin, he desired to die; but when he remembered that after
death there was no time to mourn for sin, he desired to live.

VER. 18. Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy law.
MAn by nature is blind in the matters of Satan by experience is found a false
deceiuer.
salvation: He understands not the things of God, neither can he, because they
are spiritually discerned. Satan promised man great knowledge, both of good and
evil: but experience may declare what a false deceiuer he is. By nature we are
all borne blind, ignorant of things which concern the kingdom of God: and by
reason of our darkened mind, so wicked is the heart of man, that by looking to
the best works of God, miserable How blind man is by nature.
man contracts evil. So evil does he see, with the eyes which are left him,
that by looking
to that which is good, the heart of him is wakened unto evil. So traitorously
has this adversary dealt with mankind, that where he promised the^ more
knowledge, he spoiled them of that which they had; and has brought now upon
them all, a greater shame then that which Naash the Ammonite would have done
to Israel. For he has put out their right eye, that no light remains in them
vvherby they can see that which is good to salvation, till the Lord restore it
again unto them.

And here if it be asked, seeing David was a Our regeneration is wrought by
degrees.
regenerate man, and so illuminated already, How is it that he prays for the
opening of his eyes? the answer is easy; That our regeneration is wrought by
degrees. The beginnings of light in his mind, made him long for more: for no
man can account of sense, but he who has it. The light which he had, let him
see his own darkness: and therefore feeling his wants, he seeks to have them
supplied by the Lord. Neque enim medicu^ Ambrose.
rogat, nisi qui remedium agritudini suae poscit.

But the word which here David uses, imports If we be ignorant of the word,
the blame is in our dark mind, not in it.
the taking of a veil from his eyes; detrahe velamen oculis meis. So that the
blame of his ignorance he lays not upon the word, which is clear enough in it
self; as he confesses, ver. 130. The Vatab.
entrance of thy word, gives light to the simple: but he blames himself, and
the veil which covered the eyes of his mind. Till this be removed, no
reading, no hearing, no teaching, can make a man understand the wonders of the
law of God. This is it, says the Apostle, which hinders the Jews, that in
reading the old Testament, 2. Cor. 3. 14.
they cannot see Christ, because of the veil that couers their hearts. And this
same is it, that this day hinders many wise and learned men, that Why many
learned men attain not to the knowledge of the truth.
albeit they read the most clear prophecies of Antichrist, whereas S. Paul and
S. John points him out, as it were with the finger: yet can they not perceive
him. The doctrine of Christ, is the mystery of godliness: the doctrine of
Antichrist,
is the mystery of iniquity. Who can learn it, till God remove the veil
that couers the mind? Non omnes, qui diuina eloquia legunt, quae in illis Basil.
admiranda sunt considerant, nisi illi qui coelesti splendore potiuntur.

But whose work is this to remove the veil? Who is able to do it? Certainly,
neither Angel, Illumination of the mind, is Gods work.
nor Power, nor Dominion. It is only the work of GOD, who gives sight to the
blind. He sends forth his spirit, and renewes the face of Psalm. 104.
Luk 24.
the earth. He opened the disciples eyes, and made them to know him. He made
scales to fall from the eyes of the Apostle Paul when he converted him. These
two benefits he gives together to his own; the opening of the eyes, and
conversion of the heart. So long as a man abides under the servitude of sin, and
earthly affections, he can never have eyes to see the secrets of Gods word.
Therefore, says the Apostle (speaking of the blinded Jews) when their hearts
shall be turned to 2. Cor. 3. 16.
the Lord, then the veil shall be taken away.

The wonders of thy law:] The wonders of the Every Article of our faith, ^s a
wonderful mystery.
works of God are many and great: the wonders of his word are greater. Every
article of our faith, is a mystery to be wondered at: that a Virgin conceiues
a child; that GOD is manifested in the flesh. If we will be fruitful scholars
in the learning of these mysteries, let us pray for the opening of our eyes,
and for grace to believe.

VER. 19. I am a stranger on earth: hide not thy commandments from me.
THis petition in effect is one with the former; Man on earth is a stranger,
and knows not the way he should walk, till God shows it unto him.
having no more but an annexed reason, which is this: I am a stranger on
earth, and know not the way may lead me to heaven, unless thou teach me;
therefore hide not thy commandments from me. The like of this he has, Psa.
43. Send thy light, and thy truth; let them lead me, and bring me to thy holy
Mountain.

This is not the voice of every man, I am a stranger on earth; Sed eius qui
terrenis renuntiauit Ambrose.
voluptatibus, and mundanae cupiditatis exuerit Worldling^ shall not continue on
earth; yet cannot say they are strangers in it.
affect us. It is the voice of him who has renounced pleasures of the earth;
is weary of this life; and desires to be dissolved: not fearing when his
dissolution approches; but rather rejoicing, because he knows he shall be with
Christ, vtitur hac vita vt transitoria, ad aliam nimirum vitam festinans. He
uses this life as a transitory life, because he makes have to a better.

It is true, in regard of time and continuance, And that because in affection
they be content with this, and desire not a better.
the wicked are also strangers on earth; but in affection they are not so: for
neither know they of a better City, neither desire they a better. But the
Christian accounts himself a stranger, not so much for his short continuance
upon earth, as for that his (...) is above: that City whereof he Phil.
is Burges and freeman; that country from which he came; that fellowship
wherein he reioiceth, is above; and therefore longs he to be where they are.

But as to the wicked, they are called by Gods Spirit, inhabitants, or
indwellers of the earth: Revel. 8.
Men of this world, who have their portion in this Psalm. 17.
life; they have received their consolation here; their generation is of the
earth; they speak of the earth; their whole disposition is earthly. Higher then
Worldlings ^e inhabitants of the earth; Christians are ^ut strangers in it.
the earth, in thoughts and desires they cannot go: Praesentibus bonis quasi
diuturnis inflati insolescunt. The godly are not so: they are (as I said)
pilgrims on earth, not indwellers. Suppose they Basil.
walk on earth, their conversation is in heaven: they are risen with Christ,
and set their affections on those things, which are at the right hand o^ God.
They use this world, as if they used it not: knowing, that (...), the shape or
figure thereof, passes away; they soiourne in it, but will not dwell in it.
But like unto the Eagles (as they are Luke.
figuratively called in the parable) they see, and sent things which are above,
and mount up toward their prey Christ Jesus; counting the most excellent things
on earth, to be but doung, in respect of him.

On earth.] He makes no exception here: the The whole earth is but a place of
banishment.
whole earth he acknowledged a place of his pilgrimage. Not only when he was
banished among the Moabits, and Philistims, was he a stranger: but even when he
lived peaceably at home, in Canaan, still he thinks himself a stranger. This
consideration moved godly Basile, to despise the threatening of Modestus, the
deputy of Valens the Emperor, when he braued him with banishment: Ab exilij
metu liber sum, vnam hominum cognoscens Nazian* in vita Basil.
esse patriam, paradisum, omnem autem terram commune Naturae exilium. And it
shall move us to keep spiritual sobriety in the midst of pleasures, if we
remember that in our houses, at A man even in his own house should esteem
himself a stranger.
our own fire end, and in our own beds, we are but strangers, from which we
must shortly remove, and give place to others.

Hide not.] The manner of David his reasoning, This world can neither will nor
teach men a way to go out of her self: we must seek a guide from heaven.
we touched before to be this: I am here a stranger, and know not the way;
therefore Lord direct me. The similitude is taken from passengers, who coming
to an uncouth country, where they are ignorant of the way, seek the benefit
of a guide; but the dissimilitude is here. In any
Country, the country people can guide a stranger to the place where he would
be; but the indwellers of the earth, cannot show the way to heaven: and
therefore David seeks no guide among them, but prays the Lord to direct him.

Thy commandments.] We are not to think The right knowledge of the ten
Commandments.
that David was ignorant of the ten commandments; no doubt he knew them, and
could distinctly repeat them: but he craves that GOD would further teach him
the use, the necessity, the vtility, the obedience of them. And this for our
carnal professors, who if they can repeat the belief, and the commandments,
think they are religious enough, albeit they neither believe nor obey, but
remain ignorant of the use and practice of the^ both: without which, ignorance
is better then knowledge; for the servant that knows his Masters will, and
does it not, is worthy of double stripes.

VER. 20. Mine heart breaks for the desire of thy judgments always.
HEre is a protestation of that earnest desire Two things required in true
obedience.
he had to the obedience of the word of God; he amplifies it 2. ways: first,
it was no light motion, but such as being deeply rooted, made his heart to
break when he saw that he could not do in the obedience thereof as he would.
Next, it was no vanishing motion, like the morning dew: but it was permanent,
Omni tempore, he had it always. Both the word and the plagues of God, are called
his judgments; and how.


Thy judgments.] Gods judgments are of two sorts: first, his Commands; so
called, because by them right is judged, and discerned from vvrong. Next, his
plagues executed upon transgressors according to his word. David here means of
the first. Let men who have not the like of David's desire, remember, that they
whose heart cannot Such as are not moved by the first, shall be confounded by
the second.
break for transgressing Gods word because they love it, shall find the plagues
of GOD to bruise their body, and break their heart also. Let us delight in the
first sort of these judgments, and the second shall never come upon us.

Now, that David this way presents his desire, A heart full of spiritual
desires, is an argument of great grace.
is an effectual manner of supplication; for desire of grace, is a great
grace: Non est potestatis nostrae desiderium sanctum, sed gratiae; and the Lord
Ambr.
has bound himself by his promise to fulfill it. Blessed are they who hunger
and thirst for righteousness, they shall be satisfied. And again; The Lord will
fulfill the desires of them that fear him. Cum oblectarinos viderit Deus
cupiditate iudiciorum Ambrose.
suorum, sobrium auget affectum. And therefore David here presents his heart
full of desires to the Lord, that he may fill it.

And here, because the profane world makes a Comfort against contempt of men,
whereby they scorn the godly for sighing and tears.
scorn of the contrite disposition of the godly, laughing at their tears,
taunting them in their sighs and sobs; let us look here to David. If it
cannot always be an argument to move men to godliness, yet is it forcible to
move God to mercy. The broken heart, for the grief of sin, and love of
righteousness, how ever the world despise it, the Lord will not despise it: yea,
it is the sacrifice of God, acceptable to him in Christ Jesus.

VER. 21. Thou have destroyed the proud. Cursed are they that do err from thy
commandments.
HEre David confirms himself in godliness, The begun wrath of God on them,
should confirm us against their contempt.
by meditation of the miserable estate of the wicked, who lead a life contrary
to Gods word: whereof the sum is; The begun judgments of God executed on the
wicked, may let us see the curse of God on them, who follow their footsteps.
Walking in the trade of their sins, how-euer they seem to prosper and
flourish for the present, there is a curse of God upon them, which will consume
and destroy them.

Begun, or present judgments of God upon the But many wax worse with Lamech,
when they see evil men spared.
wicked, should move us to abhor their sins. But in this great security we
have many Lamechs, few David's. Lamech saw the impunity of Caine: because he was
not punished for his cruel murdering of his brother; therefore his heart was
provoked to the like impiety, and he rejoiced in it. I would slay a man in my
wound, and a young man Gene. 4. 24. Few become better with David, when they see
them punished.
in mine heart: if Caine shall be avenged seven fold, truly Lamech seauentie
times seven fold. Thus in the pride and profaneness of his heart, did he mock,
and abuse the patience of God. And so fares it with many, of whom Solomon
speaks; Because judgment is not speedily executed on the Eccles.
wicked, therefore the heart of the children of men is set in them to do evil.
But few are like David, who when he saw Vzzah stricken to death, for vnreuerent
touching of the Arc, was moved in his heart to a greater reverence of God.

The proud.] This is a style commonly given Wicked men commonly styled proud
men, and why.
to the wicked: because as it is our oldest evil, so is it the strongest and
first that strives in our corrupt nature, to carry men to a transgression of the
borders appointed by the Lord. From the time that pride entered into Adams heart,
that he would be higher then God had made him, he spared not to eat of the
forbidden tree. And what else is the cause of all transgression, but that man
in his ignorant pride, vvil have his will preferred to the will of God?

Satan in his presumption, usurped to be equal Proud Satan has made disciples
prouder then himself.
with GOD; Similis ero altissimo, like unto the most high: Cum sit ne quissimus
peiores tamen discipulos erudiuit. He himself is a Prince of spiritual Esaias
14.
Ambr.
wickedness, yet has he trained up disciples more wicked then himself; such
as That man of sin: who, as if it were little to be equal with GOD, extolls
himself above GOD. And like him, are many blinded captives of Satan, who in
the pride of their heart, do all they can, to subject the Lord, his throne,
his will, to their wicked and corrupt will.

These are fools, and of all fools the greatest, The miserable condition of a
proud man. Iam.
they set themselves as parties against the Lord, for he resists the proud; not
considering that he is stronger then they, and they cannot stand before him.
The Lord is the most high GOD: but it is
not height makes a man stand before him. None so sure to stand in his sight,
as they who are humble, and little in their own eyes, to them he gives grace.
Humilis non habet vnde cadat: where it is the just recompense of the proud,
that because they usurp to be before all others, the Lord puts them behind
all, and casts them down to the lowest room, for mounting to the highest. A
notable example hereof, we have in that Pharisee, who was not so far before
the Publican in his own estimation, as he was behind him in the account of
Christ, who judges of things according as they are: O quantum crimen
superbiae, vt ei etiam Ambrose.
adulteria praeferantur.

Cursed are they which do err from thy commandments.] Every error is
dangerous, but proud error accursed.
Here first we have to see how these words must be understood. Says not
David of himself, that he wandered like a lost sheep? Says he not also of
others, Who knows the errors of his life? How then does he pronounce them
cursed, which err from the commandments of God? The answer is easily made, if
we conioyne his words together; The proud which err, are cursed.

Here then we must put a difference, between Sins of pride and of
infirmity, should be distinguished.
sins of pride, and of infirmity: he that of rebellion and pride departs
from Gods comman dements; not so, he that sins of weakness: in whom every
sin committed, increases a grief for sin, a hatred of sin, and a care to
vvithstand it; for these, there is no condemnation. These are not under the
law, but under grace. Mercy always waits on them, as a refreshing medicine to
restore them, when of infirmity they fall.

But as for the wicked, who sin and are proud Curse of God on the wicked* is
like a secret consumption.
and impenitent in their sins, the curse of God is upon them, though it be
not seen at the first. Like a Moth, or secret co^sumption, it eats them up;
it shall devour their substance, and shall quickly turn their glory and
prosperity, into shame and confusion.

VER. 22. Remove from me shame and contempt: for I have kept thy testimonies.
David, being a young man, lived godly David his appellation to God, from the
wrongful judgments of men.
in the Court of Saul: and for godliness was mocked and disdained of others.
For so the blind world counts religion a matter of mockery: which in the
estimation of Gods Spirit, is man his greatest gain and glory. But from time
they saw that Saul the King was displeased with David, then did all his
flatterers speak against David, doing what they could to sley his honest name
with calumnies and slanders: And he, borne down with the iniquity of time,
commits his cause to the Lord; beseeching him, who knew his conscience, to
clear his innocence. Which he also did: for the shame and contempt which they
thought to bring upon David, God poured it upon themselves.

For I have kept thy testimonies.] Sometime How David iustifies himself before
God, and man.
David iustifies himself in regard of men. And if at any time he rejoice in
his uprightness before God, it is not a boasting of his own perfection, but
rather a comforting of himself, from the honesty of his affection.

VER. 23. Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant did
meditate in thy statutes.
THese two last verses of this section, contain A trial of true religion.
two protestations of David his honest affection to the word. The first is,
that albeit he was persecuted, and evil spoken of, and that by great and
honorable men of the world, such as Saul, and Abner, and Achitophel; yet did
he still meditate in the statutes of God.

It is a hard tentation when the godly are troubled A hard tentation to be
troubled by men of great authority for two causes. 1. For their power. Prou.
by any wicked men; but much harder when they are troubled by men of honor and
authority. And that first, by reason of their place: the greater power they
have, the greater peril to encounter with their displeasure; therefore said
Solomon, The wrath of a King, is the messenger of death.

Next, because Authorities and Powers are Romans 13. 2. (...) place.
ordained by God, not for the terror of the good, but of the evil. And
therefore it is no small grief to the godly, when they find them abused to a
contrary end: that where a Ruler should be to good men, like rain to the
fields new mowen; Psalm.
on the contrary, he becomes a favorer of evil men, and a persecuter of the
good. Then justice is turned into wormwood: that which should bring comfort to
such as fear God, is abused to oppress them.

And therefore, it should be accounted a great Princes godly and r^us, are a
great blessing of God.
benefit of God, when he gives a people good and religious rulers. The
Christians in the Primitive Church, being sore troubled, by the bloody
persecutions of Nero and Domitian, thought it a great benefit unto them, when
under Nerua the persecution was relented. Albeit he did not profess Christ
with them, yet he did not persecute them. What then should we account of such a
Great cause have we to be thankful for the King he has set over us.
King, as is not only a protector of the Church, but a professor himself? so
far from persecuting Christian religion; that for professing of it, many
times has his Majesty been persecuted to the death, but blessed be the Lord,
who has given many glorious deliverances to his anointed. Psalm.


Always we learn here to arm our selves against christians measure not the
verity of religion by the number or greatness of them that are with it or
against it.
the like tentation, if at any time it shall please the Lord to try us with it.
It was an argument the Pharisees used against our Lord, Does any of the Rulers
believe in him? The Apostle confirms us against it: Brethren, ye see your
calling; Not many wise men, not many noble has God chosen, etc. We must not
have our faith in respect of persons, nor measure religion by the authority of
men, that are with it, or against it; but resolve with Joshua, Albeit all the
world should forsake the Lord, yet we will worship him. No Number, no
Greatness of men, can take out of the hearts of such as are truly godly, the love
of God, and of his truth.

And speak.] In external actions, the first weapon Such as persecure the
godly with their tongues, will not fail to loose their hands against them if
they may.
whereby the wicked fight against the godly, is their tongue. Where Satan
loses their tongues to speak evil against us, we may be sure, if he be not
restrained, he will also loose their hands to do evil. And where otherwise it
falls out, that we are persecuted by their tongues, not by their hands, let us
give thanks to God: who as he commanded the fire, that it could not hurt
Daniels companions; and bridled the fury of Lions, that they could not hurt
Daniel himself: so he restraines the wicked, that they cannot do unto us,
according to the malice of their hearts. Where we find that God binds their
hands, we should bear their tongues the more patiently.


And therefore, finding this goodness of our God, we should be the more
confirmed against the railing of their tongues. Since the Lord binds their
hands, shall we be moved at the breath of their mouths? or shall the stroke
of their tongues put us out of patience, which preserues peace in
our hearts? But great is our weakness. David suffered this injury of Princes;
and we cannot suffer i^ of the basest people. When shall we be prepared for
greater tentations, that will not learn to despise the smallest? If thou be
weary in running Ierem. 12.
with footmen, how shall thou match thy self with horses?

But thy servant.] Perceive here the armor Armor of godly men, is the word
and prayer.
by which David fights against his enemy. Arma iusti quibus omnes
adversario^u^ repellit impetus, are the word and prayer. He renders not
injury Ambrose.
for injury; reproach for reproach. It is dangerous
to sight against Satan, or his instruments, with their own weapons: for so
they shall easily overcome us. Let us fight with the armor of God; the
exercises of the word, and prayer: for a man may peaceably rest in his secret
chamber; and in these two, see the miserable end of all those, who are enemies
to Gods children for Gods sake.

VER. 24. Thy testimonies are my delight, and my Counselors.
THe other protestation David makes, is The word, renders us both counsel for
government, and pleasure for delectation.
of the great profit, and fruit he had found in the word: that it was both a
delight to him, and a counselor of him. Saul had his Nobles and Counselors,
by whom he ruled his affairs. David protests, that he had no other for the men
of his counsel, but the testimonies of God. These are two great benefits,
which commonly men crave: Pleasure to refresh the^; Con^sell to govern them.
David protests he found them both in the word: and sends all other, who would
have them, to seek them there where he found them.

As for joy and recreation of mind, commonly Comfort gotten by other
recreations, continues not.
men seek it in other Cisterns; but with no good success: for as a man in a
hot Fever, is eased no longer by drinking strong drink, then he is in
drinking of it; for then it seems to cool him, but incontinent it increases
his heat: so is it with the troubled and heavy heart, which seeks comfort in
external things; how-euer for a time they seem to mitigate the heaviness,
they do
but increase it. Only solid and permanent comfort must be drawn out of the
fountains of the word of GOD.

The other is wisdom: which without Gods No wisdom without the word.
word can never be obtained. As Jeremy spoke of the wicked in his time, They
have rejected the word of God, and what wisdom then is in them? So is it true
of all the wicked: The wisdom of this world is but foolishnes. Achitophel his
end, with innumerable more, may teach all men, that he shall never be found
wise, who is not godly. The beginning of wisdom, is the fear of the Lord.

DALETH.
VER. 25. My soul cleaves to the dust: quicken me according to thy word.
MAny states of life did David change: The word of God is convenient for every
state of life.
but his heart never changed from the Lord, and the love of his word. In his
doubts, the word was his counselor; in his griefs, the word was his comforter:
therefore was he not cast down, or overcome with grief. In his greatest
prosperity, the word was his greater joy: therefore was he not puffed up with
pleasure; teaching us, that in every state of life we shall find comfort, if we
will rule our life by the word.

In this verse, David has a complaint; My soul cleaves to the dust: And a
prayer; Quicken David sore troubled with a spiritual oppression.
me according to thy word. The prayer, being well considered, shall teach
us the meaning of the complaint: that it was not as some think, any hard
bodily estate which grieved him, but a very sore spiritual oppression (as I
may call it) bearing down his soul; that where he should have mounted up
toward heaven, he was pressed down to the earth, and was so clogged with
earthly cogitations, or affections, or perturbations, that he could not mount
up. His Tentations of the godly, sometimes cannot be told: sometimes it is not
expedient they should be told.
particular tentation he expresses not: for the children of God many times
are in that estate, that they cannot tell their own griefs; and sometime so
troubled, that it is not expedient, albeit they might, to express them to
others.

And hereof we learn, how that which the In a worldling the very heavenly
part is become earthly.
worldling counts wisdom, to the Christian is folly: what is joy to the one,
is grief to the other. The joy of a vvorldling, is to cleave unto the earth;
when he gripes it surest, he thinks himself happiest; for it is his portion:
to take heed to his worldly affairs, and have his mind upon them (in his
estimation) is only wisdom. For the Serpents curse is upon him, he creepes on
the earth, and licks the dust all the days of his life. This is the miserable
condition of the wicked, that even their heavenly soul is become earthly.
Ambrose.
Qui secundum corporis appetentiam vi^it ca^ est, etiam anima eorum car^ est;
as the Lord spoke of those who perished in the Deluge, that they were but
flesh* no spirit in them: that is, no spi^uall or heavenly motion.

But the Christian, considering that his soul is The contrary disposition of
Christians.
from above, sets his affection also on those things which are above: he
delights to have his conversation in heaven: and it is a grief to him, when he
finds his motions and affections drawn down, and entangled with the earth.
His life is to cleave to the Lord: but it is death to him, when the neck of his
soul is bowed down to the yoke of the world. Erecta ad Deum ceruix, and ^ugo
Christi Ambr.
habilis, quae nulla in terrarum illecebras, inflexione curuetur, regalis
Christi turris est. The neck of the Spouse of the Lord JESUS, is raised
vptoward Cant. 4. 4.
The royal tower of christ, is a soul mo^^ting up to heaven.
God, meet to receive the yoke of Christ* but will no way bow for any earthly
allurements, to bear the yoke of another; such a soul is the royal tower of
Christ Jesus. By this disposition, let men try themselves, and see of what
Spirit they are. Again, the vicissitude and change of estates, whereunto the
children of God are Change of estates, whereunto the godly are subject.
subject, comes here to be marked: sometime^ they are borne down by carnal
affections to the earth: sometimes raised up by spiritual desires to the
heaven. This comes to pass of the battle that is between two irreco^cileable
parties, the old man and the new; Nature and Grace. For as in them who wrestle
with any equal strength, sometime the one is above, and sometime the other,
till at length one be overcome: so is it in this combat, In the Christian,
sometime the power of Nature, othertimes the power of Grace prevailing: but
this comfort we have, that at length Grace shall
prevail; and the power of corrupt Nature, shall be captiued under the
obedience of Christ.

Quicken me.] David being sore oppressed, as I said, and dead in himself, does
now beseech the Lord to quicken him, and raise him up again: Godly men, by
(...) wa^ts, falls, and infirmities, become more godly.
for he knew, that not only the beginnings, but the continuance of our life,
must come from the Lord. Thus we see how the children of God are wakened by
their wants, stirred up by their falls and decaies, to a greater feruencie in
prayer. And truly, these changes of our life, which this manner of way wakens
us, and prouokes us to prayer, we are to account them as the merciful hand of
God, stretched out toward us, to draw us home to himself. ^et no man think
evil of that trouble that chaseth him to the Lord. Yea, I may say, his falls,
which make him more humble and fervent in prayer, are of Gods dispensation: who
when he will, in most maruailous manner, can bring light out of darkness.

But seeing he was alive, how prays he that The life of a Christian, wherein
stands it.
God would quicken him? I answer, The godly esteem of life, not according to
that they have in the body, but in their soul. If the soul want the sense of
mercy, and a heavenly disposition to spiritual things, they lament over it,
as a dead soul: for sure it is, temporal desertions, are more heavy to the
godly then temporal death.

According thy word.] This is a great faith; that It is great faith to belieu^
when there is no feeling of mercy.
where in respect of his present feeling, he found himself d^ad, yet he hopes
for life from God, according to his promise. Such was the faith of Abraham, who
under hope, believed above hope. And truly, many times are Gods children
brought to this estate, that they have nothing to uphold them but the word of
God: no sense of mercy, no spiritual disposition; but on the contrary, great
darkness, horrible fears and terrors. Only they are sustained by looking to
the promise of God, and kept in some hope, that he will restore them to life
again; because it is his praise to finish the work which he begins.

VER. 26. I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me: teach me thy
statutes.
THis verse contains a prayer, with a David's argument to move the Lord unto
mercy.
reason after this form. O Lord, I have often before declared unto thee, the
whole state and course of my life, my wanderings, my wants, my doubts, my
griefs; I hid nothing sro^ thee, and thou, according to my necessity did
always hear me: therefore, now Lord, I pray thee to teach me, by thy light
illuminate me that I may know thy st^tutes, and receive grace to walk in the^.

This is a good argument in dealing with the Where God begins to show mercy,
he cea^ not t^ll he crown with ^cie.
Lord; I have gotten many mercies, and favorable answers from thee: therefore
Lord, I pray thee to give memo; sor whom he loves, he loves to the end; and
where he begins to show mercy, he cease not til he crown his children with
mercy* And ^o gracious is the Lord, that he esteems he^ is honored as often as
we give him the praise, that we have found comfort in him, and therefore come
to seek more. It is far otherwise with men: if they do unto us any small
good, they think it discourteous importunity, to require them to do any more.
But as the Strand is easily emptied where the Ocean can never be exhau^ted:
Man's liberality is but like a Strand, Gods like the great Ocean.
so man's liberality is soon dried up; but the goodness of the Lord remains for
ever: who has not the less because he has given, but still delights ^o give
more to such as are thankful unto him.

Next, is to be marked how he says, I have declared Happy is the soul wherein
mercy and truth meet together.
my ways, and thou heardst me: these two go well together, Mercy and Truth;
Truth in the near^ of man confessing; Mercy in God, hearing and forgiving:
happy is the soul wherein these two meet together. Many there are who want
this comfort: they cannot say, God has heard me; and all because they deal
not plainly and truly with the Lord, in declaring their ways unto him. An
evil conscience hides it self from God.


For the wicked neither will nor dare manifest heir ways unto the Lord. As the
eye which is ^urt, dare not look to the light; so the conscience of him that
does evil, dare not look to the Lord: ^ea, they do what they can to hide
their ways from him, and to conceal the iniquity of their bosom: against
such the Prophet denounces a woe; ^o to them that seek in the deep to hide
their Esa.
counsel from the Lord, their works are in secret, and they who sees it.
Their turning of devises, and flying to refuges of vanity, in the infidelity of
their hearts, will no more avail them then the fig leaves did Adam to hide
his nakedness; For the Lord will bring every work to judgment.

Better were it for us to judge our selves in time, What a great benefit it is
to manifest our ways to God in time.
and with David to examine our hearts in our secret chamber, and to declare
truly our ways unto the Lord (that if they be good, he would by his grace
confirm us in them; if they be evil, he would divert us from them) then that
otherwise we should sleep securely in our sins, and tarry till our adversary
accuse us, and the Lord enter into judgment with us: nay, rather let us tell
our sins our selves, that the Lord who is gracious may forgive, and Satan who
is a most shameless and malicious accuser, may be confounded. Qui se
accusauerit, vocem parati accusatoris excludit, qui solet acer^are Ambrose.
peccata and vniuscuiusque exaggerare ^agitia: Satan confounded when we
confess our sins.
obstruit ^s eius qui de seipso fuerit ante confessus; This is the great
vantage we have by declaring our own sins to the Lord, Qui sua delicta non
ta^uit,
videtur in se doluisse quod fecit, in diabolo prodidisse quod suasit; that in
so doing, we show our selves sorrowful, and penitent for the evil we have
done, and therwithall also become accusers of Satan, by whose subtle
instigation we did the evil.

Last of all, we learn here that then our life is well governed, when we
declare the course of it A profitable rule to make us live godly.
to the Lord, and lay open our hearts nakedly before him. This David protests of
himself, Acta mea Basil.
tibi Domine manifestani omnia: and in another place, that he set the Lord
always before him. And this is it which is praised in Henoch, that he walked
with God. Happy is the man, whose ways are so ordered, that before his actions
he consults with the Lord; in his actions, he remembers the Lord; and when he
has done, presents them to the Lord: if they be good, seeking his approbation;
if they be evil, seeking pardon and forgiuene ^of the^.

Teach me thy Statutes.] Now follows his prayer, After confession he ioynes
prayer for amendment.
wherein he seeks light from God to direct him in his ways Non satis est vt
confiteamur errorem; verumetiam si corrigi volumus, a Domino Ambros.
postulemus, vt doceat nos iustificationes suas ne postea See ver. 12.
errare possimus: It is not enough to confess and declare our former errors
to the Lord, but ^e should seek to be coriected by his grace, in ^ime to come.
These two benefits the Lord gives Remission and renouation are two inseparable
benefits.
them together; ^emission of sins; and renoua^ion of their sinful nature:
and his Saints seek them together, Mercy and Grace; Mercy for remission
of former sins, and Grace for renoua^ion of their hearts in time to come.
And this is to be marked for careless and carnal professors, who seek pardon
of former sins, but have no care of amendment for the time to com: these
^buse the mercy of God, and turn his grace into wantonness; seeking, as it
were, a liberty to sin, and not a deliverance from sin. More concerning this
petition, see out of the twelfth Verse in the second Section Beth.

VER. 27. Make me to understand the way of thy precepts, and I will meditate in
thy wondrous works.
DAVID yet continues in his former supplication, We have great need to pray for
further light.
for further illumination of his understanding. If the light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is the darkness? Where the mind is darkened, the heart can
never be rightly ordered; therefore prays he the more instantly for light unto
his mind.

The ways of sin, we know them, and can We can walk the ways of sin
without a teacher, not so the ways of God.
walk in them without a teacher: yea, man out of his own corruption has been
the first inuenter of many sinful ways, which before him have not been
known; but as for the ways of God, we can neither know them nor walk in
them, unless we be taught of God.

Again in this continual opposition, which he Miserable is man so long as his
way and Gods way are different.
makes between his ways, and Gods ways; let us remember, how by nature man
has a way of his own, different from the way of God. This division began by
the first transgression, wherein man preferred the way of Satan to the way o^
God: and yet the division continues, because man naturally is inclined to walk
in a way contrary to that which God commands him; which if in time it be not
remedied, will not fail to bring man to a miserable and unhappy end: for he
who walks not in the way of God, can never come where God is; but must be
divided from the light and joys of God, and have his portion in utter
darkneesse, in that lake that burns with fire and brimstone.

And I will meditate.] If we seek good things Good things should be sought
from God for good ends.
from God, we should secke them for good ends, specially that we may be enabled
by them to serve God; so will the Lord be entreated to give them, when he sees
we seek them that we may return them to himself. Ye ask, says S. James, and
Iam 4.
receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume them on your own
lusts: therefore David seeking knowledge from God, promises to use it well; not
as many do, who by knowledge wax proud, seeking knowledge to get glory to
themselves. David seeks it that he may be the more able to meditate on the
works of God, and in them to show forth his glory.

He styles the works of God, marvelous works: The works of God are all
marvelous.
and so indeed they are; both his works of creation, whereby he made the things
which are; and of his administration or providence, whereby he conserues them:
but most of all, marvelous are his works of man's redemption; that is the Great
mystery of godliness. But some of them we admire not, because we know them not;
others of them custom draws in contempt.

VER. 28. My soul melts for heaviness: raise me up according to thy Word.
THe meaning is, that he was sore weakened The godly sore humbled by affliction.
by the greatness of his grief; and therefore prays the Lord to revive,
strengthen, and confirm him. Even as a thing which melts, consumes away by
piece-meale, till nothing be left; Vires eius paulatim difflu^hant sicut aquae:
so did he find the life and strength of his soul docaying, through the
extremity of his grief.

In the first part of the verse, his eye is upon A Christian is either looking
to his own necessities, or to God his mercies.
him self: in the second it is up to the Lord. Happy is the man, whose whole
care is about one of these two; that either he is looking to himself,
considering his necessities; or looking to the Lord, attending his mercies.

Heauiness.] There is nothing may comfort a Natural comforts cannot sustain a
man i^ spiritual troubles.
natural man, but David had it: yet cannot all these keep him from that
heaviness, whereunto, as witnesses St. Peter, the children of God are subject
in this life, through their manifold tentations. 1. Pet. 1.
The men of the world are so far from this disposition, that if they have
health and wealth, they marvel what it is should make a man heavy: they are
not acquainted with the exercises of a feeling conscience; they know not the
defects of the spiritual life, and are not grieved at them: being dead in
sin, they feel not that they want life: all their care is to eat and drink,
and make merry. But miserable are they; for in their best estate, they are as
Oxen fed for the slaughter. Woe be to them who laugh now, they shall Luke 6.
mourn: but blessed are they who mourn now, for they shall be comforted.

The particular causes of the heaviness of a Christians should not think that
their tentations are singular.
Christian* are according to their particular tentations; which no man is able
to rehearse: where because it is a common disease to them all, that every one
of them thinks his own tentations singular; let them remember that warning of
the Apostle, No tentation has overtaken you, but that 1. Cor. 10.
which appertains to men.

But seeing our Savior says, that His yoke is Christ's cross is such a
burden, is eases them on who^ it ^eth*
easy, and his burden light; how is it that his children find such heaviness
in bearing of it, and following him? It is true indeed, the burden of Christ
is light: Quidenim leuius eo o^ere, quod ^ern Epist. 72.
non solum non oneraet, sed portat omnom cui portandum
imponitur? for it is such a burden as is not burdensome, but rather bears up
every man who bears it: not unlike the wings of a foul, which are so borne by
the body, that they bear it, and make it more agile or light.

If then we find any heaviness, it is because If we find it heau^, blame ^ur
corruption.
our corrupt nature will not conform her self to the similitude of Christ,
and refuses to submit her neck unto his yoke. This is it that breeds in us
heaviness and grief, that we find a power of corruption in us, which will
not subject it self to him whom our soul loves.

Raise me up according to thy word.]

They have not all learned to pray, who use They have not all learned to pray,
who use to pray.
prayer: many in this age send up unto God confused prayers, rising from the
sense of their miseries, whereof they desire to be relieved. Pagans do as
much; when they are in trouble, they lift up their eyes to God, and desire to
be delivered from it: But we must remember first to Rules for prayer.
offer up our prayers in the name of CHRIST; whom because Pagans know not, the
Father cannot be well pleased with them. Next, to frame our petitions
according to Gods promises, as here David does: otherwise, to offer prayers
for that which GOD has not promised, or are not according to the word, it is
to offer uncouth fire to the Lord, as Chore, Dathan and Abiram did, to their
own destruction.

VER. 29. Take from me the way of lying, and graciously grant me thy Law.
IN the remanent four Verses of this Section, Our life should be ordered by
the word.
there is a continued prayer; wherein David craves grace of God to order his
life: not according to the counsel of Nature, which is a lying way; but
according to the word, which he only acknowledges to be the way of truth,
adding these protestations: that he had chosen it; his heart cleaned to it; and
he would continue in it.

In this Verse, we have first to see what is this way of lying, that we may
understand the meaning of his petition. By the way of lying is to be All the
ways of sin are long ways.
understood all that is in man his nature, not agreeable to the word, whether
it be counsels, or conclusions of the heart, or external actions: and it is
called a lying way, because nature promises a good to be gotten by sin, which
man shall not find in it.

And unto this deceit of sin David acknowledges The deceitful way of sin
is within every man by nature.
himself subject with the rest; for why? he would not pray the Lord to take
that away from him, which were not in him. In nobis est, and interius manet via
iniquitatis, ideoque studiose agendum Amb.
est, vt eam a nobis separemus. David was a regenerate man; but there are none
so well renewed in this life, who may not find something in themselves that
need further reformation: Sed quia haereditarium iniquitatis glutinum mentibus
inhaesit humanis, opus est liberantis auxilio: but this separation of a man
from the way of iniquity, is a work of great difficulty, to be done only It
is a work of Gods power to separate us from it.
by the power of God, both because the way of sin is within us, and as an
heritable evil is glewed to our minds. For as it is Maiorum nostr^rum attrita
vestigijs, pathed and trod with the footesteps of our fathers; so are we
naturally inclined without a teacher or counselor, to follow them in it.
Ideoque quia vulnus grande ac vetus est, and diu serpens, perfectioris
medicinae remedia deposcit. And therefore, because it is a great wound and an
old, it requires the remedy of more perfect medicine, then the wit or power of
man is able to afford: which David well knowing, beseeches God of his mercy
to take away this evil from him.

And further we see here, that what-euer was Every sight a godly man gets of
himself, is a spur to prayer.
David his disposition, he gathers always out of it, an argument to move him
to prayer. It is wisdom for a man* above all things to take heed to himself.
But sure, he has never learned this aright, who when he has looked to
himself, looks not incontinent up to God; moved with the sight of his
manifold necessities, to seek mercy and grace to supply them.

And grant me graciously thy law.] He oppones The law of God, the way of
truth in three respects.
the law of God, to the way of lying. First, because it is the only rule of
all truth, both in religion and manners: that which is not agreeable 1.
to it, is but a lie, which shall deceive men. Secondly, it destroys, and
shall at length utterly 2.
destroy all contrary errors. As the rod of Aaron, devoured the rods of the
Enchaunters: so the word, which is the rod of the mouth of
God, shall in the end, eat up and consume all untruths whatsoever. Thirdly,
according to the 3.
sentence of this word, so shall it be unto every man; it deceiues none. Men
shall find by experience it is true: he who walks in a way condemned by the
word, shall come to a miserable end. And on the contrary, it cannot be but well
with them who live according to this rule; Non est Ambr.
via veritatis honor saeculi, sollicitudo mundi: vanitas temporalium est,
veritas aeternorum.

But had not David the law already? No doubt Then have we learned Gods law,
when it is written in the table of our heart.
he wanted not the book of the law. He heard it, he read it, he professed it:
yea, some-way he understood it. What then is it he craves? Surely, that the
law might be so imprinted in his heart, that it might abolish that natural
vanity, and deceit of sin, which carried him to the offense of God. A
necessary petition for these days: vvherin the knowledge of the word is
exceeding A warning to the professors of this age.
great; but the zeal, spiritual life, and feeling of the hearts of men is not
answerable unto it. They think all is well, in that publicly they profess
it. They hear it with their ears; they speak of it with their mouths; they
read it in their books finely bound; though in that duty many fail also. But
certainly, when they think they have it, they want it; so long as it is not
printed in the table of their heart, to frame their motions, affections and
actions conformable to it. And this is it which David here craves.

VER. 30. I have chosen the way of truth: and thy judgments have I laid before
me.
IN these last three verses we have the reason of If we have not good purpose*
and desires, let us not look that God will bless us.
his former petition, from his honest affection toward the word of God: wherein
he declares that he had chosen it, he did cleave unto it, and was determined in all time to*com more and more to cleave unto it; therefore prays he God more
and more to confirm him in this purpose. Non enim diuina gratia datur bonu^
propositu^ non habentibus, the grace of God, is not given to such as in their
heart purpose not to do good: and yet And yet good purposes have we not till
God by grace work them in us.
this purpose and desire to do well is not in the heart of man by nature,
unless God work it by grace; for we are not of our selves sufficient to think
a good thought: It is God who works in us, both the will and the deed. Nos
volumus, sed Deus Aug. de done persevere. ca. 13.
operatur in nobis, and velle: nos operamur, sed Deus in nobis operatur, and
operari; hoc nobis expedit and credere, and dicere: hoc pium, hoc verum; vt sit
humilis and submissa confessio, and detur totum Deo. We will indeed; but it is
God, who works in us that will also: we work; but it is
God who works in us that working of good also; it is expedient for us both to
believe and to say so: this is godly, this is true; that there may be in us a
submisse and humble confession, and the whole prais of well-doing may be ascribd
to God.

And because man is ingenious to defraud God Another notable testimony of
Augustines, to prove that our good desires are of grace, and not of the power
of nature.
of the praise of grace, and to magnify the arm of Nature, let us mark
another notable testimony this same Father gives to this truth, whereby the
idle distinctions of the Adversaries are dissolved; Deus qui lux est interior
is hominis plus illi praestat, quam lux oculo: nam lux oculum ad se Augu.
contra Pelag. lib. 2. cap. 5.
conuersum illuminat, auersuma se, and clausum deserit; Deus vero non solum
mentem ad se conuersum
illuminat, sed etiam mentem ad se conuertit, quod lux oculo non praestat: GOD
who is the light of the inward man, does more to him, then the light does to
the external eye: for the light illuminates the eye that looks unto it, but
forsakes the eye which is closed and turned from it. But the Lord does not
only illuminate the mind converted to him, but he also converts the mind unto
him. Which thing the light cannot do to the eye. Diligenter itaque notandae
sunt hae loquutiones Conversion to God, is not of any free will in nature.
in scripturis, Conuertimini ad me: and cum his comparandae, Convert nos Deus
sanitatum nostrarum; ne putemus libero arbitrio nos ad Deum conuerti. We have
diligently therefore to observe these manner of speeches in the Scripture,
wherein God commands us to convert to him: and to compare them with others,
wherein we are taught to pray, that the God of our salvation would convert us,
and then shall we be converted; least otherwise, we think that we convert
to God of our own free will.

This choice which David makes here of Gods Our election of Gods word, proceeds
from his election of us.
truth, proceeds from that choice and election, whereby the Lord before all
time made choice of David, in Christ, to be one of his Elect. For as it is true
of love; Herein is love, not that we loved God first, but that he loved us:
vvec could never have loved him, if first he had not loved us: so is it true of
election; if he before time had not chosen us to be his people, we could never
in time have chosen him to be our God. And this I mark What great comfort they
have, who sincerely love the Lord.
in them who love the word of God, and delight in it, who can say out of a
good heart that the Lord is their portion, and the joy of their heart: this is a
sure seal of their election, imprinted by the finger of God in their heart;
assuring them, that what they are in love and affection toward him, that has
he been first toward them: and so much the more abundant in his love toward
us, How far Gods love is above ours.
as he himself is greater then we. What is the eye to the sun? what is the
Well to the Ocean?
what is the earth to the heaven? By infinite degrees is man less then his
Maker; and as far our love and affection to him, inferior to his love and
affection toward us. As far as the heavens Esaias.
are above the earth: so far are my thoughts above yours, says the Lord. This
does some-vvhat shadow it: but how far his thoughts are above ours, no
similitude can express it.

And thy judgments.] Gods word is called his Gods word called his judgment,
and why.
judgment, because it discernes good from evil, and is not a naked sentence:
but as it points out evil, so it pronounces plagues against it; which shall
be executed according to the sentence thereof. The remembrance of this, scrued
as an awband to keep David from sin; and shall keep us also, if as says
he, Psalm. 16. we set the Lord still in our sight: and if, as here he does, we
lay his judgments before us.

VER. 31. I have cleaued to thy testimonies: O Lord, confound me not.
THe protestation of his former affection, Constancy in godliness, an effect
of grace.
is amplified by this; that as he had once chosen the testimonies of God: so by
a constant affection he cleaued unto them. David was not a Temporizer; to make
choice of the word this day, and reject it to morrow: as were those Jews, who
for a time rejoiced in the light of the Gospel, brought to them by the Baptist,
and after rejected his testimony.

True godliness, wants never upon her head True godliness, wants never the
crown of perseverance.
the garland of perseverance: where the hypocrisy of temporizers, who make a
show of beginning in the spirit, and end in the flesh, is expressed by our
Savior, by co^n which springs, and shoots to the blade, but grows not to
perfection, because it was never well rooted. And Basil compares Basil in
princip. Preuerb.
these, qui been coeperunt, and no^ perseueraru^t, who begins well, but
continues not, to unhappy passengers, qui naufragium prope portum patiuntur:
who suffer shipwreck, not far from the harbor.

Confound me not.] Forasmuch as David, in a Confusion, which godly men fear,
is either desertion of God.
good conscience, endeavored to serve God, he craves that the Lord would not
confound him. This is two ways done: either when the Lord forsakes his
children, so that in their trouble, they feel not his promised comforts; and
then great confusion of mind and perturbation is upon them: Or contempt and
oppression of men.
or otherwise, when he leaves them as a prey to their enemies, who scorn them
for their godly and sincere life, and insult over them in time of their
trouble; when they see, that all their prayer, and other exercises of religion,
cannot keep them out of their enemies hands. He trusted in God, let him
deliver him. From this shame and contempt, he desires the Lord would keep him;
and that he should never be like unto them, who being disappointed of that
wherein they trusted, are ashamed.

VER. 32. I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge mine
heart.
HIs affection toward the word of God, is No constrained, but cheerful service
pleases the Lord.
yet further amplified by this; that as in time past he had cleaued to it: so
he promises with joy and alacrity to continue in it for the time to come;
which he expresses by the word of running. But he adds this protestation, or
rather condition; that the Lord would enlarge his heart: without which grace,
he grants he can make no progress in the way of godliness.

Hereof we learn, how we should do the will of God, not by constraint, but
cheerfullie, and willingly: as one that runs a race, intends the whole force
of his body to advaunce himself forward, toward the end thereof.

But here we may stand and lament; Alas, we Better not to begin then to break
off the course of godliness.
run not with David; oh that we could halt to Canaan with Jacob: or at least,
creep forward like children, to our fathers house. But many, in steed of
running, lie down; and which is worse, go backeagaine, like dogs to their
vomits; or carnal Israelites, to their fleshpots of Egypt: for whom it had
been better, not to have known the way of rightcousnes.

HE.
VER. 33. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes: and I will keep it to
the end.
THE life of man is compared by the Apostle, Our life is a race, and a
restless battle.
to a race; wherein all must run that look to obtain the high prize of the
calling of God: and so run, that all the way they must fight with sundry
adversaries, that stand up against them. There must be no declyning, neither to
the right hand, nor to the left: but as soldiers direct their way according to
the commandment of their Imperator, Ambr.
Non ipsi pro suo arbitrio viam carpunt, nec voluntaria In it we should follow
the direction of our Captain.
captant compendia, ne a signis recedant: so must it be with Christians; we
should steadfastly look to JESUS, the author and finisher of our Heb. 12.
faith: who for the joy set before him, despised the Cross, and endured shame:
let us remember, our life should be a following of him. As Israel, in the
wilderness, removed, or remained according as they were directed by the
cloud in the day, and pillar of fire in the night: so should all the ways of
our life, be ordered by the direction of God. Otherwise, as the warrior, qui
praescripto The loss of such as walk not, and sight not by direction of their
Lord.
non incedit ordine, armatus non ambulat, rectaque via iter non conficit,
mansionem paratam non invenit; who walks not the way prescribed to him, and
goes not into it armed to resist the enemy, comes not to that mansion prepared
by the Imperator for his followers, to enjoy such furniture, as he has caused
to provide for them: so shall it be with the straggling Christian, whose way
is a declining from Christ; he cannot come to those mansions, which he has
provided for his followers, in his Fathers house; nor be resreshed with his
delicates. David knew this very well: and therefore is he so inquisitiue to
know the way of his Commander, and earnest to seek grace, that he may walk
in it.

David, as we said before, was a Prophet, endued The wisdom of Gods book can
never be sufficiently learned.
with great understanding; yet does he earnestly desire to be further taught
of God: for the treasures of manifold wisdom locked up in the word, are so
rich, that no man can attain to such measure of knowledge, but still he has
need to learn more. The Angels, who are full of eyes within and without,
so figured for the greatness of their understanding (for which also Nazian.
by Nazianzen, they are called, Secundaria lumina) Angels are scholars in the
school of the Church and shall we think evil of it?
are scholars in the school of the Church: for those things which are preached
to us in the Gospel by the holy Ghost, sent down from heaven, The Angels desire
to be hold; and shall we not delight to 1. Peter 1.
learn with the^, seeing for our salvation (whereof
they are surealready) these things are preached?

And I will keep it unto the end.] Here is a promise If God continue our
teacher, we shall continue his servants.
of thankfulness, not in word, but in deed. (...) lege^ tu^m ser^are studui
prosequar have cursum, neque fatigab^r in medio itinere Vatab.
vbi tu perrexer is me d^cere. If thou continue a teacher of me, says David,
I shall continue a servant to thee. Perseverance cannot be, unless
continual light and grace be furnished to us from the Lord. As the tree which
has not sap Perseverance is of Gods grace.
at the root, may flourish, but cannot continue: so a man, whose heart is not
watered with the dew of Gods grace continually, may for a time make a fair
show of godliness, but in the end, shall fall away. We bear not the root,
but the root bears us: let us tremble and fear. If we abide not in him, we
become withered branches, good for nothing but the fire. Let us always pray,
that he would ever abide with us, to inform us by his light, and lead us by
his power, in that way which may bring us to him.

VER. 34. Give me understanding, and I will keep thy law: yea, I will keep it
with mine whole heart.
HEre follows a prayer agreeable to this Wisdom should be sought from the most
wise God.
purpose; with a promise of thankfulness amplified. When God appeared to Solomon
in a vision, and offered to give unto him whatsoever he would ask; Solomon as
he had learned here from David his father, seeks a wise and understanding
heart: which thing so pleased the Lord, that because Solomon did so, and sought
not riches nor honor, the Lord promised not only to give him wisdom, which
he sought, but riches and honor which he sought not. Let us also be moved, if
we be the sons of David, to seek best things from the Lord our We are most
welcome to God, when we seek greatest gifts from him.
God, specially knowledge and understanding how we may serve him. Certainly so
great and gracious is the Lord, so rich in mercy, that then our prayers are
most acceptable to him, when we seek most excellent blessings from him.

And I will keep thy Law.] True understanding Knowledge which reforms not is
dangerous.
rests not in speculation, but breaks out in practice. Naked knowledge breeds
conviction; it were better to want it: for greater knowledge makes the
judgment of the wicked greater, because that when they knew God, they
glorified him not. But true understanding changes the heart; for by it not only
do we behold the glory of God, as in the mirror of his word, but are changed
into 2. Cor. 3. 17.
the same image from glory to glory, by the spirit of the Lord. And this is
that excellent knowledge of Christ, wherein the Apostle reioyces, to know the
virtue of his resurrection, the fellowship Phil 3.
of his afflictions, and be made conformable to his death. And indeed then
only is knowledge a blessing, when it works these happy effects in us.

Yea, I will keep it with mine whole heart.] As True godliness with
perseverance, has sincerity.
he promised before perseverance in Gods service; so now he promises
sincerity. Some are temporizers in Religion; these persevere not in service.
Some are hypocrites; these are not sincere: they draw near the Lord with their
lips, but are from him in their hearts. David promises both perseverance, and
sincerity; but so, that still he craves grace of God to perform the^. When
David offered materials, as gold and silver for building of the Temple, he
blessed the Lord, and ascribed to him the praise, both of the things which he
had offered (they were Gods own) and of the heart whereby he offered them. Now
therefore, my God, we Any good we do, is from God.
thank thee, and praise thy glorious Name. But who am I, and what is my people,
that we should be able 1. Chron. 29.
to offer willingly after this sort? For all things come of thee: and of thy
own hand have we given thee. But how much more should we acknovvledge this in
spiritual graces? Have we any thing that we have not received? And when we
do any good by his grace, should not the praise be returned unto him? Yea
indeed, let us all say with
David, all comes of thee, and of thine own hand have we given unto thee.
David no presumptuous boaster.


And where he promises that he will keep Gods law with his whole heart; it
is not a presuming Phil. ^. See ver. 10.
of perfection: Not as though I were already perfect; but a protesting of his
sincerity, that he had not the false and divided heart of hypocrites.

VER. 35. Direct me in the path of thy commandments: for therein is my
delight.
AS before he craved light to his mind: so It is not enough for us to have
light; we have also need that God be our director to walk after it.
now he craves grace to direct his heart, that he may follow it. Naturally, man
is ignorant of the way to eternal life: and if any light or knowledge he have
of it, yet is he easily miscarried to wander from it. Even as water, if it be
not walled in, ad decliuia fertur; of it own nature declines to lowest
places, if the smallest passage be made unto it: Ita and humana natura Bafil.
diabolo viam ad peccatum aperiente, ad id quod peius est proruit: so the
nature of man rushes downward to sin, when any way thereto is opened to him
by Satan. And therefore David, fearing his own infirmity, prays so
earnestly that God would guide him, and not leave him to himself.

Now the way which David chooses to walk The narrow way that leads to heaven.
in, is the path of GODS commandments: not any new way; but the old, and
pathed way wherein all the servant of GOD have vvalked before him: and for
which, the Graecians (as Euthymius notes) called it (...), Euthym.
quasi viam tritam. But how-so-euer this way be pathed, by the vvalking and
treading of many in it, yet he acknowledges it is but one, yea, and a narrow
and difficil path to keep; and therefore seeks he to be guided into it. As to
The broad way that leads to hell.
the broad way there are many rodes and pathed ways into it, although they
meet all in one end: all men go not to hell by one way; for we see many men
abhorring a sin in others, who yet intertaine a far more odious sin in
themselves: but the narrow way that leads to heaven, has but one path or road
into it, from which if we decline, we fall incontinent into some road of the
broad way that leads to hell.

Let us therefore walk circumspectly, considering our natural disposition to
decline, and the Our guide in the way is Jesus, and how we should follow him.
dangers and difficulties of the way: let us wait upon our guide, and follow
his footsteps. Praecedit Christus vt sequamur nos: he has gone before, that
we should follow; he fasted and prayed, to train us up in the like exercises;
he suffered, to learn us patience: Ascendit Crucem, vt doceret mortem non esse
metuendam; he went up to the Cross, that he might teach us death is not to be
feared. By this way of innocence, holiness, humility, patience, contempt of
death, let us follow our guide, nothing doubting but this path shall lead us to
his Paradise.

For therein is my delight. Of this see Verse 47.

VER. 36. Incline mine heart unto thy Testimonies; and not to covetousness.
THis prayer, among the rest, no doubt Man stands between two Suitors, that
seek him: happy are we, if we incline to the best.
flowed out of David his sense: he found his heart evil inclined, at least
tempted to bow a wrong way. For we stand between two parties that seek us: the
one for our weal, the other for our wrack. The Lord on the one hand allures
us; My son, give me thine heart: and offers us more for it then we, yea, or
ten thousand worlds can be worth; and I shall be thy portion.
On the other hand, Satan the deceiuer, by fair, but false allurements, seeks
to have our heart drawn after him. Happy is the man can consider this; that he
may offer his heart to the Lord, and seek it as a grace, as here David does.

Unto thy testimonies.] Gods word is called his Miserable are they, to whom the
good word of God testifies evil tidings.
testimony; because in it he testifies his will, concerning his worship,
and our salvation: and witnesses also, how he is affected to every man. For
out of it, to some men he speaks as a loving Father: to others, as a fearful
Judge. Men need not run up to Gods secret counsel, to enquire how he is
affected toward them: if they list, they may learn it out of his word.

But, as Achab desired not to hear Michaiah, because he prophesied not good
things unto him: so many now, because they do evil, can not abide the light
of the word: they find no joy in the hearing of it, but are stricken with fear
and trembling; as Felix was at the hearing of Paul. But in truth the blame is
in thy self. Are not my words good to him that walks vprightlie? Mich.
says the Lord. No doubt, if thou were good thy self, the word of the Lord
should testify good things unto thee.

And not to covetousness.] He prays in particular, Covetousness a vile sin.
that his heart may be di^crted from covetousness; which is not only an evil, but
as says the Apostle, The root of all evil. David here oppones it as an
adversary to all the righteousness of Gods testimonies: it inverts the order
of Nature, and makes the heavenly soul earthly. It is a handmaid of all
sins; for there is no sin which a covetous man will not serve for his gain.
We should beware of all sins, but specially of
mother sins.

VER. 37. Turn away mine eyes from regarding vanity; and quicken me in thy
way.
Having prayed for his heart, now he prays Why a Christian should take heed
how he looks with his eyes.
for his eyes also: Omnia a Deo petit, docens illum omnia efficere. By the eyes
oftentimes, as by windows, death enters into the heart: therefore, to keep the
heart in a good estate, Three things requisite to keep the heart.
three things are requisite. First, a careful custody of the senses, specially
of the eyes: for it is a righteous working of the Lord, Vt qui exterior^
Gregor. in Job. lib. 2.
oculo negligenter vtitur, interiori non unjust caecetur; that he who
negligently uses the external eye of his body, should be punished with
blindness in the internal eye of his mind. And for this cause, Nazianzen,
deploring the calamities of his soul, Nazian.
wished that a door might be set before his eyes and ears, to close them when
they opened to any thing that is not good; Malis autem sua sponte vtrumque
clauderetur. The second thing is, a subduing of the body by discipline. And the
third is, continuance in prayer.

Every creature of God is good: and the beholding Every creature we see, should
waken us to praise God.
thereof, should waken in us an affection to praise God. Oculi idcireo dati
sunt corpori, vt per eos intueamur creaturam, a^ per huiusmodi mirabilem
Athanas. contra Gent.
harmoniam agnoscamus opificem: for this cause were eyes given to the body,
that by them we might look to the creature, and by the maruailous harmony
which is among the^, we might learn to know the Creator. But since the fall,
the creature also is become subject to vanity: in every
one of them has the Serpent laid his deceiuable snare to entrap man, and
steal his affection ^ut corrupt nature makes them snares to entangle us.
from GOD: so that now, Inter tot passiones huius corporis, inter tantas
illecebras huius saeculi, difficile est tutum, and intemeratum seruare ve
Ambrose.
stigium: in the midst of so many passions, of so many allurements of this
world, it is a dissicile thing to walk, and not to be snared. He that looks
on a woman, says our Savior, and lusts after her, has committed adultery.
Behold in how short a time great guiltiness is committed. Male sic vidit
oculus: videat ergo and fungatur suo munere; non lubricae mentis imperio
dirigatur ad lapsum, vt vitiu^ referat pro officio. David knew this, he found
the evil of it by experience: let us learn of him to watch over our eyes, that
we may keep the heart the better.

Quicken me in thy way.] Man by nature is Natural man quick enough to works
of sin, but dead to works of piety.
quick enough to walk in his own ways; and the works of nature, he can do
them without a teacher: but unless the Lord put life in him, and keep life in
his soul, quickening him at all occasions, he has neither knowledge, nor
strength, nor pleasure to walk in the ways of God. Of this petition, see ver.
88. 145.

VER. 38. Stablish thy promise to thy servant, because he fears thee.
Here is a prayer, with a reason. The Gods promises are sure in themselves:
but it is a great point to make them sure unto us.
prayer is, that God would make sure his promise to David. The meaning is, I
know o Lord, that thy promise is sure enough in it self, but I pray thee make
it sure to me. Sure it is, the promises of God are most cercertaine, the earth
may move, and mountains may fall: yea, the earth at length shall be shaken,
and the heavens wimpled up like a garment; but one jot of the word of GOD shall
not fail. This is the maine point, vvhereat in all our life we should aim,
To make sure our calling, and election; that the promises of God, most sure in
themselves, may be made sure unto us.

Many ways has GOD confirmed his promise Many confirmations of Gods promises
have we.
to us: First, by the blood of his son. Next, by his own oath: he has not
only spoken that he will give mercy to the penitent belieuer; but he has
sworn it, that by two immutable things, Hebr. 6.
wherein it is impossible that he should lie, he might show to the heirs of
promise, the stabilitie of his counsel. But for all this, never is his promise
sure unto us, till we receive the seal of the spirit of adoption. For this let
us pray. To remedy our natural infidelity.


For so long as we are in this body of sin, our infidelity will ever be
sending out fears, and doubtings, and distrusts; against which, we have
need to pray the Lord always to confirm us. Omnes enim Dei benignitate
indigemus, et qui Bafil.
extremum consequutus est virtut is apicem hac indiget continuo. No man has
made such progress in faith, but he has need further to be confirmed: Lord
incrcase our faith: Lord help our unbelief. And therefore, let not our wants
and great weakness drive us to despair; but so much the more vvaken and
provoke us to fervent prayer.

To thy servant.] David frequently uses this style as very honorable: and
indeed so it is. The It is an honorable style to be called Gods servant.
servant of God only is a free man, yea, and a King; but he who is not the
Lords servant, though he were a Monarch, and ruler of the whole earth, he is
but Satan's captive, and a servant of servant. O quam multos Dominos habet,
A^lrose.
qui vnum non habet!

Because he fears thee.] He who has received He that fears and loves the
Lord, may boldly seek grace from him.
from the Lord grace to fear him with love, may be bold to seek any necessary
good thing from him; because the fear of GOD has annexed the promises of all
other blessings with it.

Sometime, David brings the reason of his petition Gods promises are
co^ditionall^ if we have not the condition, we have no interest in the promise.
from the Lord; as from his mercy, or his truth: sometime from himself; as
from this that he trusts in the Lord, ver. 42: or that he has a great desire
toward the Lord, ver. 40: or that he fears God; as here. All the promises of
God are conditional: if the condition be no way in us, how shall the promise
be performed unto us? It is true, the Lord is gracious and merciful, ready to
forgive, etc. But what is that to thee, who repentst not, belieuest him not,
love him not, and trustest not in him?

VER. 39. Take away my rebuke, that I fear: for thy judgments are good.
THere is a rebuke which comes upon the Rebukes of men, how to be borne.
godly, from men, without a cause: and this, suppose it grieve the godly, yet
they fear it not, but rather rejoice in it, according to that of our Savior;
Blessed are ye when men revile you, and speak all manner evil of you for my
Math. 5.
names sake: be glad and rejoice, for great is your reward in heaven. With this
meditation did Augustine confirm himself, against the detractions of his
Adversary, who sought to empair the credit of his name: Quisquis volens
detrahit August.
famaemeae, nolens addit mercedi meae: He that willingly would empaire my
name, against his will increases my reward. And David glories in this, that
the rebukes of them, who rebuked the Lord, had fallen upon him. The rebukes of
God, how they are to be eschewed.


There is again a rebuke and shame coming from God, as the fruit and just
punishment of sin; and for this the godly are afraid: if they look to their
begun sins, they know they have deserved it; they fear it, and therefore
pray with David, Psalmo 6* Lord rebuke me not in thine anger. If again they
look to the time to come, they fear, least their infirmities bring them to
shame, every one of them according to their several tentations. And this also
they prevent by prayer; as here David does.

For it is to be marked, that a godly man is A godly man is more afraid for
sin that he may do, the^ the wicked is for sin he has done.
more afraid for sins which he may do, then a wicked man is for sins
that he has done: as he lives in a continual sorrow for begun sins, so
also in a continual fear of sins wherein he may fall. Semper est in dolor
et tremore: the
one for repenting of sin; the other for preventing of sin.

For thy judgments are good*] This reason David afraid of Gods rebuke, not of
man's.
here subioyned, declares that the rebuke which he feared, was Gods rebuke.
The meaning is; As to man his judgment, it is so perverse, that I pass not
for it at all: I know he condemns where thou vvilt absolve. It is high many
a time in man's eye, which is abomination to thee: but as to thy rebuke, I
know Lord it comes never undeserved; for thy judgment is good. And therefore
prays he, that the Lord would keep him from those sins which may bring
shame and reproach upon him.

VER. 40. Behold, I desire thy commandments: quicken me in thy righteousness.
SOmetime he confesses his natural inclination Motions of sin in the godly
are not without motions of grace.
to evil, as ye may see out of his prayers, in the verses preceding; sometime
his new disposition by grace, unto that which is good. The children of God
find in themselves motions of sin, but not without motions of grace to
restrain them; the one fights against the other: and in this battle are we
militant here upon earth; let us mourn for the one, and give thanks for the
other with the Apostle, Romans 7.

He offers his desires to the Lord to be looked It is a good heart which dares
present it self to the Lord.
upon. It is an argument of a well set, and disposed heart, when a man dare
present it unto the Lord, that he may look upon the desires and intention
thereof. An evil conscience dare not do this: for as an eye, when it is hurt,
craves some covering to hide it from the light; so the guilty conscience flies
from the Lord, and has no desire to come before him: let us refuse to live in
that course of life, wherein we dare not be bold to look to the Lord, nor
content that he should look unto us.

I desire.] Our perfection in this life is rather Our perfection in this life
is rather in desires then in deeds.
in godly desires, then in a full obtaining of things desired, Phil. 3. yet
have the godly this comfort; that where desires go before, satisfaction shall
follow: for the Lord has promised to fulfill the desires of them that fear
him; Blessed are they who hunger and thirst for righteousness, Matthew. 5.
for they shall be satisfied: yea, sure it is, how great soever our desires be,
we cannot desire so much as the Lord has to give us; for he is rich in mercy,
able to do abundantly, above all that Satisfaction shall follow desires, and
God shall give us more then we desired.
we can ask or think. Example hereof we have in Zaccheus; he desired but to
see Christ, and he got not only a sight of him, but familiar speech of him:
yea, Christ went to his house and dined with him, and made him by grace the
child of Abraham. So shall the Lord do to all his children; he shall give them
more then either they desired or looked for at his hands: For the heart 1. Cor.
2.
cannot understand those things, which God has prepared for them that love him.

Thy commandments.] He says not I have done God accepts from his children a
will for a deed.
thy commandments; but, I desire to do them. Let this serve as a Commentary
to other places, wherein he makes protestation of his begun obedience: so
gracious is the Lord, that in his children he accepts their will for a deed.

There is no man so wicked but he desires mercy: As the godly desire mercy,
so they use the* means.
but the godly do so desire mercy, that first they desire the way to mercy.
They know, that without sanctification no man can see the Lord; therefore all
their care is to purge themselves, even 1. Ioh. 3.
as God is pure: as here ye see for this end David prays for the grace of
obedience. It was a preposterous desire of Balaam, who wished the Not so to the
wicked.
death of the righteous, and would not live the life of the righteous: no
better are the desires of wicked men.

Quicken me.] He acknowledges that his desires Desires without grace are like
a false conception.
were nothing, unless the Lord gave him life. As a false conception, which
evanisheth and comes not to the birth; so is the desire of man, not quickened
nor continued by the grace of God. More of this see ver. 149. 159.

VAV.
VER. 41. And let thy loving kindness come unto me, O Lord; and thy salvation,
according to thy promise.
OVt of this Psalm we see how fervent, The fervent prayer of David may make us
ashamed.
and continual David was in prayer. Every third Verse he turns him to
prayer. No marvel he was enriched with a great measure of spiritual grace:
for he sought it diligently. Not like the cold professors of our time, to
whom a cold morning prayer is sufficient for the whole day; and of that also
oftentimes they are weary before they have done it. A lamentable evil, that
having all good for the seeking, yet we should not seek.

If we would consider how many sins we Four notable motives to make us more
earnest and diligent in prayer.
have contracted, which we must crave to be forgiven, and would offer up but
one supplication for every one of them: and again, that albeit all our sins
were presently forgiven, yet how
readily should we fall into new sins, if we get no grace daily to reform
us: and thirdly, how difficil a thing it is, against so many strong enemies, as
Principalities, Powers, and spiritual wickedness, which with restless
tentations pursue us upon the right hand, and the left, to enter through them
all into the kingdom of God: and lastly, how our time is short; and when it is
done, no more place of supplication will be left unto us: If all these, with
many more, we did consider, they would waken in us a more earnest care, to call
upon our God, while we have time.

This whole section consists of petitions and It is not enough to seek from
God, we must also promise to give him.
promises. Petitions are two, ver. 41. 43. Promises are six. This, among many,
is a difference between godly men and others: all men seek from GOD: but the
wicked so seek that they give him nothing back again; nor yet will promise in
sincerity to give. Their prayers must be unprofitable, because they proceed
from love of themselves, and not of the Lord. If so be they obtain that which
is for their necessity, they have no regard to give to the Lord, that which is
for his glory: but the godly, as they seek, so they A trial of men truly
religious, from counterfeit.
give praise to God when they have gotten; and return the use of things
received, to the glory of God who gave them. They love not themselves,
for themselves, but for the Lord: what they seek from him, they seek it for
this end, that they may be the more able to serve him. Let us take heed unto
it; because this is a clear token, whereby such as are truly religious, are
distinguished from counterfeit dissemblers.

Let thy loving kindness, etc.] In his first prayer The kindness of God, ever
brings salvation.
he ioynes these two, Gods loving kindness, and his salvation: and so it is,
they go together inseparably. As for the kindness of man, thou may have it,
and not be the better for it: the friend may love his friend, and not be able
to help him; But man may be kind where he is not able to help.
yea, the Father may look with compassion upon his child in danger, and not be
able to relieve him; but the kindness of the Lord ever works salvation: he can
do what he will, and none is able to resist him. All creatures in heaven and
earth are under his command; health and sickness; life and death; heaven and
hell: for he has the keys of both. Let us seek his favor, that we may be
saved: let us feel his love, and none evil present, nor to come, temporal,
nor eternal, shall make us afraid.

According to thy promise.] As David seeks As comfort should be sought from
God, so for Gods sake only.
his comfort in GOD only, so seeks he it for Gods sake: alleging nothing in
himself, for which he should obtain it; but that the Lord, as of his mercy
he had promised, so of his truth he would perform.

And this is first for Papists; who either do Papists reproved.
seek from others beside the Lord; or if they seek from him, they seek for
others sake then for his: founding their prayers upon the merits of others, not
upon the mercy of God, and merits of Christ only.

And next, it gives this warning unto all men, that seeing the chiefest
argument we can use in Such as would have God to remember his promise should
remember their promise.
prayer, to move the Lord to pity, is his own promise; we should remember
alwaie to make conscience of our promise of service and obedience, which we
have made to the Lord; otherwise, we can not with boldness seek comfort in
that promise which God has made unto us.

VER. 42. So shall I make answer to my blasphemers: for I trust in thy word.
SEe what great effects the sense of Gods loving The kindness of God, is a
sufficient defense against all evil will of man.
kindness works in the hearts of his children: he fears no malice, nor power of
man, who finds the Lord kind and merciful to him. This works gloriation
against evil men; a bold confession before all men, as after follows; and
toward God an holy conversation, in all his obedience to the law.

For I trust.] Confidence in the promises of Faith in Gods promises, is the
Anchor of the soul.
Gods word, is the anchor of the soul; which holds it fast, that it abide
stable, not driven to and fro with the wind of tentations: nay, not with the
fears and terrors of death. I know whom I have believed.

VER. 43. And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth: for I wait
for thy judgments.
BY the word of truth, Euthymius understands David prays for continuance of
the grace of prophecy.
the grace of prophecy: by which David comforted his own heart, and was able
to speak to the edification of others, and to stop the mouths of his
Adversaries. This grace the Prophet craves, that the Lord would never utterly
take it from him. If at any time, in thy wise dispensation thou relent it, yet
I beseech thee, never utterly to remove it.

This judgment which David here craves to A great judgment, that men cannot
use Gods word which they have learned, to the edification of others.
be averted from him, lies upon many: who do not mark nor perceive it, that
they are so much the more miserable, that they know not their misery; in this,
that having, and hearing the word of GOD so plentifully, they can neither use
it to their own consolation, nor to the edification of others. And this
proceeds from the evil conscience which is in them, that neither can they
hear it with comfort, no more then Achab could hear Michaiah, because he
never prophesied good unto him; nor yet can they speak it to the comfort of
others: Unto the wicked, God says, Psalm. 50.
What have thou to do to take mine ordinances in thy mouth, seeing thou hate
to be reformed? Obmutescit Ambrose.
facundia, si aegra sit conscientia: cloquence becomes dumb, when the
conscience waxes diseased.

For I wait.] Gods judgments are sometimes God at length will declare that his
word is a judgment, and that he will execute it.
taken for his plagues, executed according to his word upon the wicked; with
the which is ever* conjoined a performance of his promised deliverance to the
godly: whereby he makes known, That there is fruit for the righteous,
Psalm. Malach.
how ever for a time he suffer them to be evil entreated; and that there is
a difference between them who fear him, and them that fear him not.

And this David here prays for; that the Lord would so deal with his
enemies, that the truth of his word being declared upon them, the godly might
have no cause to be ashamed for taking that word of truth in their mouths.

VER. 44. So shall I always keep thy law for ever and ever.
HEre is a protestation of thankfulness to Because the Lord changes not, we are
not consumed.
his God; which he promises to declare in obedience. Whereof first we
observe, how our standing, and perseuering in the obedience of Gods law,
proceeds from Gods loving kindness toward us, keeping his word of truth in
our hearts and mouths. He is the stock, we are the branches; we bear not
him, he bears us: let us abide in him, and give him the praise of all our well
doing, and perseverance in it.

Now, the doubling of the word, notes his The resolution of the godly, is not
limited within terms, but extended to eternity.
promptitude to Gods obedience, and willing resolution to pers^uere in it; not
for a day, or a year, but always, yea for ever and ever: not in this life
only, but in that also which is to come, as Ambrose expounds it; Pollicetur se
and hic and Ambrose.
ibi legem Dei custoditurum: hic in exemplari, in speculo, in aenigmate; illic
in ipsa facie veritatis.

And the same also has Euthymius. Custodiam legem tuam non tantum in hoc
saeculo, sed and in Euthym.
futuro; quod saeculum saculi appellatur, tanquam praesenti saeculo honoratius.

VER. 45. And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy precepts.
THere is a liberty of the flesh, taken by Carnal liberty is but thraldom.
men, not given by God; falsely so called: for it is not liberty indeed, but
thraldom; where men casting off the yoke of GOD, give over themselves to
follow their own affections: which can never but breed them doubts, fears,
and horrible terrors, wherewith they are straited, so that they know no outgate;
Improbus in seipso coarctatur malitiae suae Ambrose.
laqueis strangulatus.

Take to you for an example, a covetous wretch, every day extending the borders
of This is evident in men given to covetousness.
his possession, excluding his neighbors: does the enlarging of his bounds,
enlarge his heart? does he therefore walk at liberty, because he has more
ample rooms? No, no: Quantumcunque domus suae spatium porrexerit, clauditur
angustis opinionis suaefinibus, eui quod habet non est satis. But how-soeuer
large his possessions be, he is still enclosed in the straits of his own
narrow heart, which thinks he has nothing at all. And so is it in all other
sins; the giving
of liberty to the will of man, draws on a thraldom: whereby he is not only
captiued of his own affections, but straited with the sense of wrath in his
conscience, which always follows evil doing. Esaias 28.


This is that strait bed, wherein God threatens In men given to concupiscence.
to cast the wicked, in a punishment of their carnal liberty. Herod took
this liberty to defile his brothers wife: he beheaded John for reproouing of
it; and so thought the more freely he might enjoy his sinful pleasure: but
did he by this means walk at liberty? No: on the contrary, he cast
himself into the straits of a terrifying and accusing conscience; he could
never be quit of John, whom he had beheaded: for he conceited, that Jesus
was John risen again from the dead. What ever mirth he pretended in his
countenance, he found himself sore straited with anguish in his conscience.

True liberty is that which GOD gives, and True liberty, wherein it
consists.
whereof our Savior speaks, saying; Then are you free, if the Son make you
free: he loses us from all other bondage, that he may bind us to himself
only. And this liberty consists, first in our deliverance from the tyranny
of our own lusts, by which all those are thralled, who shake off the yoke of
God: and next, in the freedom of a peaceable conscience, which is a Christians
Paradise on earth.

VER. 46. I will speak also of thy testimonies before Kings, and will not be
ashamed.
IN these three last verses, David promises a A threefold duty of
thankfulness, promised by David.
threefold duty of thankfulness. First, the service of his tongue. Next, the
service of his affections. Thirdly, the service of his actions. Bona
conscientia maximum semper praestat solatium: Euthym.
a good conscience, renders always great Basil.
consolation: and vitalegitima fiduciam procreat, A good conscience makes great
boldness of speech.
and an honest life, makes great boldness, to speak without fear or shame: as
ye see in David toward Saul; in Elias to Achab; in Paul to Agrippa, to Festus
and to Felix.

The first duty that here he promises, is to speak of the testimonies of
God before Kings. This is not a small thing, if we do consider, that albeit
no sort of men be more obliged to No sort of men more obliged to God then
Kings: yet commonly, none more unthankful.
God, then Kings are, yet unto none is Gods word more vnwelcom then to the^:
for the most part, they are so accustomed to command, and to give out words
for laws unto others, that they think strange to hear of a word which should
stand in steed of any law to them. It is a rare thing to find a Josiah, whose
heart melted at the hearing 2. Kings. 13. 25
of the law: like unto him was no King before him, who turned unto the Lord
with all his heart. Where such are given to a people, they are the exceeding
great blessings of God.

If David was not ashamed to speak of Gods The subject of out talk, should be
Gods word.
word before Kings; far less may we think was he ashamed to speak of it
before his familiars and companions: as he protests he would do in another
place; Come unto me, all ye that fear God: and I will tell you what God has
done to my soul.

This may convince the unthankfulness of this age, who has tongues for every
purpose, but none to speak of the testimonies of God: yea, they are ashamed to
speak of that subject, who without shame or measure speak of all other
things.

VER. 47. And my delight shall be in thy commandments, which I have loved.
THe next thing he promises, is the service Delight in Gods word, is a proof
of true godliness.
of his affections. It is not a small progress in godliness, to delight in
the commandments of God. Our corrupt nature counts them burdenable: but the
grace of Christ makes us find his yoke easy, and his burden light. And
indeed, so do his children esteem of it; who have found by experience, there
is more solid joy in the obedience of Gods commandments, then in all the
perishing pleasures of sin. And would to GOD, they who of a long time None can
discern between worldly and spiritual pleasures, but they who have proved them
both.
have proved the pleasures of transgression, would turn them, and prove by
experience on the other hand, what comfort there is in mourning for sin; what
is the joy of a good conscience, and the sweet inward pleasures of a godly
conversation: they should then easily perceive, that the delights
of the one, do by infinite degrees surmount the pleasures of the other.

Natural men, do some external works of Actions of Gods worship, are nothing
without a delight in them.
Gods worship; but not with an inward delight: this is no acceptable service to
GOD. They assemble themselves on the Sabbath with the godly, to hear the word:
but what the one does of delight, the other does of custom, or compulsion. The
Lord looks to the affection, moreth^n to the action: and we should not only
consider what we do, but how we do it; ^o to come to the Temple, that we come
with Simean, by motion of the Spirit; so to hear the word, that it be with
spiritual joy and delight, as David did. And this also condemns those of our
age, to whom the word of the Lord is a reproach and weariness.

VER. 48. Mine hands also will I lift up to thy commandments, which ^haue
loved: and I will meditate in thy Statute.
THe thi^d (...) pron^h, is the service The world is now full of ^outilate
Christians.
of hi^ actions; that he will lift up his hands to (...) practice of Gods
commandments: Dabo open in vt sactis exprima^ Vatab.
mandatatua. The kingdom of God, is not in word, but in power: we are the
d^ciples of that Act. 1. 1.
Master, who first began to do* then to teach. Qui fecit and docuit hi^
magnus v^cabitur: but Basil.
now the wo^ld is full of mutilate Christians; either else they want an ear,
and cannot hear
Gods word; or if they hear, they want a tongue, and cannot speak of it; or if
they have both, they want hands, and cannot practice it.

Concerning his protestation of the love of Gods commandments, and his
meditations of them, see ver. 15. 103. 111.

ZAIN.
VER. 49. Remember the promise (made) to thy servant; wherein thou have caused
me to trust.
THe first verse of this section contains a prayer, that God would perform the
promises he had made unto him When he prays God to remember, How God is said
to remember.
we must not think that he charge the Lord with any oblivion. Nulla in
Deum cadit aut obliuio, Euthym.
aut reminiscentia. The godly sanctify the Lord in their heart, and think more
reverently of his Majesty then so: but his Memor esto, is all one with this;
Perfice et ad finem deducito: Remember, that is, perfect and accomplish, the
promise made unto me.

Made to thy servant.] As David beseeches the Gods promise made to us, and our
promise made to him, would be remembered together.
Lord to remember his promise; so he protests verse 52. that he remembered the
judgments of GOD, and was comforted: and verse 55. that he remembered the
name of the Lord in the night. It is but a moekerie of GOD, to desire him
remember his promise made, where we make no conscience of the promises we
have made to him. But alas, how often fail we in this duty, and so in our
own default diminish that comfort we might have of Gods promises, in the day
of our trouble? David had a promise of an earthly Kingdom, but his comfort was
not in it.


But what promise is this that God made to David? There is a promise made him
concerning the Kingdom of Israel; and for this he prayed, 2. Sam. 7. Who am I,
O Lord God, and what is mine house, that thou have brought me hitherto, etc.?
2. Sam. 7. 18, 25, 28.
And now Lord, confirm for ever the word that thou have spoken concerning thy
servant, etc. For thou art God, and thy words are true, and thou have spoken
this goodness concerning thy servant. But his comfort in trouble stood not in
this promise, nor performance of it.

The promise whereof he means here, is the In the promise of mercy stands the
comfort of the godly.
promise of mercy and grace, which God in his covenant has made to his
children: and this, as every one of Gods children accounts their own by a
particular application of it, unto themselves; so David not excluding others,
and yet including himself, speaks of this promise, as properly and
particularly belonging to him. And so also did In the general promise, there
is included a particular to every believer.
that woman of Canaan rest in the general promise of Gods mercy, as if it did
contain a particular promise to her self. And therefore by no temptation;
yea, not by Christ's contrary affirmation, made for her trial, could she be
removed from this ground, That the general promise of mercy, made in the
Covenant, contained a particular promise unto her; howsoever not under the name
of a child, yet under the name of one (albeit unworthy) belonging to the
family of God.

And this proceeds from the nature of faith, The nature of faith.
by which the godly apprehend God as their Father, Christ as their Savior; and
in him all Gods promises made generally to his people* as if they were made
particularly and by name unto themselves, How faith collects out of Gods
promises assurance of salvation.
collecting hereof the certainty of their own salvation. The proposition being
furnished by the word, the assumption is made by faith, and makes the
conclusion most ce^taine; the ground of all being Gods unchangeable truth, and
the stability of his counsel* which he will not change for the changes which
are in his weak servants, but constantly performs for his own names sake.
Sanctis quodeunque spoponderit implere Ambrose
consueuit, nostraru^ immemor iniquitatum, suarum non immemor sponsionum: the
Lord perfits that which he promises to his Saints; unmindful of their
iniquities, not unmindful of his own promises.

Wherein thou have caused me to trust.] This is It stands with the honor of
Gods truth to perform his promise.
a most forcible argument to move the Lord to the performance of his promise,
When his children declare unto him, that it stands with the honor of his truth
to do ^o. The like of this argument is used by Jeremy: O Lord, i^ ^e
deceived, thou have deceived me; which is, as he would say a thing impossible
that so should be. And so David confirms himself here; that he could not be
disappointed of his hope, unless that the Lord did fail in his truth: which
cannot be.

Thus ye see, when the godly rest assured of Assurance of salvation in the
believers, is no arrogancy.
their salvation, they are neither presumptuous nor arrogant, but give glory to
God, and the praise of undoubted truth to his promises. Non Ambr.
est arr^gans vsurpatio; sed fidelis, quia veru^ Deum non posse fallere
confitetur; It is no arrogant usurpation, but a faithful depending: for he
acknowledges, that the most true God cannot beguile him. And again, Non
vsurpatorie speraui quae vt sperarem ipse fecisti: I have not hoped by
usurpation, bu^ it was thou Lord, who caused me to hope. Seruus sum, expecto
alimentum a Domino:
miles* sum, exigo ab imperatore stipendium: vocatus sum, postulo ab invitante
promissum: I am thy servant, and wait for nourishment from thee, who art my
Lord: I am thy soldier, and require wages from thee, who art my Captain: I am
called, and seek from thee who called me, that which thou have promised.

Let this serve for an answer to the adversaries An answer to (...), who so
speak of it.
of the truth, who say it is arrogance and presumption, for any man to affirm
the certainty of his salvation: Propter hoo da^sunt digna quaedam and Ber^ in
Septuagesi^. Ser. 1.
indicia manif^sta salutis, vt indubitabile sit eum esse de numero electorum in
quo ea signa permanserint; For this cause some signs and manifest tokens of
salvation are given, to the end it may be out of doubt, that he in whom they
remain, is of the number of the elect. Non arrogantia est, Aug. Ser. 28.
sed fides, praedicare quod acceperis: It is not arrogance, but faith, to
speak of that mercy which thou have received.

To this purpose, let us remember, that the Arguments to confirm us in the
certainty of our salvation.
promises made to us, are of Gods free mercy: that the grace to believe, which
is the condition of the promse, is also of himself; For faith is the gift of
God: thirdly, that the arguments by which he confirms our faith in the
certainty of our salvation, are drawn from himself; not from us. As first,
from the nature of God: He is faithful 1. Cor. 1.
who has called us to the fellowship of Christ, and will also keep us
blameless to the day of Christ. And again, He who has begun that good work
Phil. 2.
in you, will also perfect it against the day of Christ.

Secondly, from the nature of that life which Christians are sure of
perseverance; proved by four reasons.
Christ communicates to his members: they live in him, or rather he lives in
them; Now in that I live, by the faith of Christ I live: yet not I any more,
but Christ lives in me. Now this is the nature Gal. 2.
of the life of Christ; that it is no more subject to Romans 6.
dying, as witnesses the Apostle.

Thirdly, from the nature of that seed, whereof we are begotten: for as the
seed is, so is the life which it gives. Now the seed, ^aith Saint Peter, 1.
Pet. 1.
is immortal: and beside, that holy unction, by which the Lord corroborates
and strengthens 1. Ioh. 2.
his children, is called a permanent and abiding unction. All these prove a
perseverance of Gods favor.

VER. 50. It is my comfort in trouble: for thy promise has quickened me.
THis Verse contains a commendation of Commendation of Gods word.
the word of God, from the excellent effects and fruits thereof; to wit, that
the comfort thereof vpholds Gods children in trouble, when all other comforts
fail them. The lawful comforts of nature, such as meat, and drink, and
recreation, become loath some to men in heavy diseases. And as to the unlawful
pleasures of sin, they are so far from helping our comfort, that they
increase our terror in the day of trouble; only the word of the Lord sustains
us, and assures ^t will uphold us when all other comfort will fail.
us, that our light and momentanean afflictions shall cause to us at the length
an infinite weight of glory: Facile superant^ aduersa, si sit spes quae
consoletur: Ambrose.
quisquis enim meliora sperat, leuioribus non frangitur.

In trouble.] He tells not what kind of trouble If we make no conscience of
Gods word in prosperity, it shall not comfort us madue^sity.
he was in; neither was it needful: for there is no sort of tentation can
befall us* for which the word of God does not furnish unto us sufficient
consolation: Providing always we make conscience of it in prosperity; otherwise,
it shall be a comfortless word to us in our adversity.

For thy promise has quickened me.] As the The Word of God is the life of our
soul.
life of our souls, at the first comes by the Word; so is it conserved by
the same Word. When tentations oppress us, so that we faint, and our life is
gone, it is the Word that reuiues us: Vt connexio ista animae, and corporis
nostri, spiritu vitali animatur, alitur, and tenetur: ita verbo Dei, and
spiritali gratia anima nostra viuifi^atur. As the connection of this body and
soul is made, and conserved by natural breath; so is our soul quickened by
the Word and spiritual grace. As therefore we love our life, let us love the
word of the Lord. If such fruit be in his promise, what is in the performance?


And if the promises of God render such joy to the believing, what joy may we
look for in the full performance of them?

VER. 51. The proud have had me excedingly in derision: yet have I not declined
from thy law.
Here is a protestation of David his honest Mockeries and tauntings of evil
men, is a part of Christ's cross.
and constant affection toward the word of God; That albeit he was sore tempted
by the derisions of the proud, yet he declined not from the Law of the Lord
his God. Let no man who is truly religious, think that he can eschew the
mockeries and derisions of the wicked: this is a part of the cross of Christ
Jesus; they railed upon him, they nodded with their head, and fleered with
their mouths, and mocked him: but patiently did he suffer this contradiction
of sinners.

Ismael was the first, for any thing we read, Ismael first began this kind of
persecution.
who began this kind of persecution: but ever since, Satan has continued it
in his cursed instruments, like unto him. As he that was borne after Gal. 4.
the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the Spirit; even so is it now.
Let us take up the cross of our Lord, and follow him, and be content to bear
with him the rebuke of the wicked.

Concerning this style of the wicked, whereby they are called proud, see ver.
69. 78.

VER. 52. I remembered thy judgments of old, O Lord, and have been comforted.
MAny are the impediments of godliness: Godliness has many impediments.
for beside the corruption of our own nature within us, we have the corruption
of other men fighting against us. By their profane speeches they corrupt us; by
their evil example they infect us: and if that way they cannot come to speed,
then they speak evil of us, they lie, they rai^e, they mock us, leaving
nothing undone that may disquiet us in our selves, and disgrace us to others.

Against this impediment, David here shows how he was sustained by remembering
the judgments of God, which in former ages he had poured If we remember time
begun, forethinke time to come, the tentations of the time present shall not
readily overcome us.
out upon the like profane men. If we shall only look to the present time,
forgetting the by past judgments of God, and not fore-thinking of the wrath to
com upon the wicked; their present prosperity shall be witch us, and we shall
be in danger to be carried away with them, after deceitful vanity: but let us
go with David unto the Sanctuary of God, and with Abaeue to our Watch-towre,
where we may look out, and see what has bin the miserable ends of the wicked:
and we shall say, they buy full dear their short and perishing pleasures; for
their prosperity is Prou. 1.
their ruin.

VER. 53. Fear is come upon me, for the wicked that for sake thy law.
LEast it might seem out of the former Godly men pity the wicked.
words, that David's comfort stood in the destruction of the wicked by the
execution of Gods just judgments upon them; he adds this, that their impiety
was the cause of his fear and grief, and that he was partim iratus quod
Euthym.
legem Dei contemnerent; partim dolens quod ipsi perituriessent. This is the
meekness and love which the godly carry, even toward those who have offended
them; they are touched with a commiseration of them: not so much for any wrong
done to themselves, as for the evil they Not so much for wrong done to them,
as for the evil that redounds to the^ who do it Ambr.
see their enemies incur by wronging them. Nam qui fortior est, non proprtam
dolet contumeliam, sed aliena peccata; et in sua iniuria lapsum alterius
ingemiscit. As a loving father offends at the contumelious words he receives
from his frantique child, not so much sorrowful for the wrong done to
himself, as for the disease of his
child, which for^eth him to speak that which he should not: so godly David;
Dolebat, non quia contemnebatur, sed quia lex Dei relinquebatur, and eorum qui
hoc faciebant damnu^ dolebat, quod Deo perirent. He was afraid and grieved at
the sins of the wicked, who scorned him; not because he was contemned, but
God was offended* nor yet for any loss he suffered by their sins, but for
the harm they did unto themselves.

The impiety of wicked men, is here described The weight of sin aggrauated by
this, that it is a forsaking of Gods law.
to be a forsaking of Gods law; thereby letting us know, what is the weight of
sin. The law is holy and good, containing in it a most perfect rule of
righteousness; and therefore, the forsaking of it, cannot be but a very high
crime. And sure it is, many of this age are guilty of it, in regard of their
deeds; how ever it be, that in regard of their words, they will not hold with
it: but when God shall judge the^, what ever liking of the law they pretend in
word, they shall be found indeed forsakers of it.

VER. 54. Thy statutes have been my songs, in the house of my pilgrimage.
HE still insists in a commendation of the They who count Gods word a wearines,
which David accounted a refreshment, are in a hard estate.
word of God, from the comforts which he found in it in the time of trouble.
Naturalists, refresh themselves in their griefs, with profane Ballades and
Songs; but these increase guiltiness, and consequently grief, but mitigate it
not. As to David, he protests he sought his comfort in the word of God:
worldlings count it a melancholique subject; but he found joy in it: let men in
this take heed unto themselves.

David was a man after Gods own heart; that is, approved of him: and they who
count that to be a wearines, which he found to be a refreshment, how can they
have this comfort, that they are also approved of God?

Again, see how the Lord in his wise dispensation The word is convenient for
every state of life.
attempers himself to our infirmities. Our life is subject to many changes:
and God by his word has provided for us also many instructions and remedies.
Every cross has his own remedy, and every state of life his own instruction.
Sometime our grief is so great that we cannot sing; then let us pray: sometime
our deliverance so joyful, that we must break out in thanksgiving; then let
us sing: If any man among In it we have prayers for crosses, and psalms for
every deliverance
you be afflicted, let him pray; if he be merry, let him sing. Prayers for
every cross, and Psalms for every deliverance, has GOD by his own Spirit
penned unto us: so that now we are more then inexcusable if we fail in this
duty.

In the house of my pilgrimage.] Vatablus expounds Bodily banishment brings the
godly nearer to the Lord, how ever it put them further from men.
this, of his banishment among the Philistims; that when he was put from his
native Country and kindred, and all other comforts failed him, that then the
word of the Lord furnished matter of joy to him. And indeed, the banishment of
Gods servant, may cast them far from their kindred and acquaintance: but it
chaseth them nearer to the Lord, and the Lord nearer to them. Proof of this in
Jacob; when he was banished, and lay without, all night in the fields, he
found a more familiar presence of God, then he did when he lay in the Tent
with father and mother.

But we may rather with Basil, refer it to Our life upon earth, is but a
banishment.
the whole time of his mortal life: Omnem vi^am suam peregrinationem vocare
arbitror. So Jacob acknowledged to Pharao, that his life was a pilgrimage: and
Abraham and Isaac dwelt in the world as strangers.

S. Peter therefore teaches us, as Pilgrims, to abstain from the lusts of the
flesh; and S. Paul, to use this world, as if we used it not: for the fashion
thereof goes away. Many ways are we taught this lesson: but slow are we to
learn it. Alas, what folly is this, that a man should desire. to
dwell in the earth, when God calls him to be a Citizen of heaven?

Yet great is the comfort we have of this, that It were a sore punishment to
dwell for ever in our bodies as they are.
the houses wherein we lodge upon earth, are but houses of our pilgrimage. The
faithful Israelites, endured their bondage in Egypt the more patiently,
because they knew they were to be delivered from it. If the houses of our
servitude were eternal mansions, how lamentable were our condition? but God be
thanked, they are but wayfaring cottages, and houses of our pilgrimage. Such a
house was the womb of our mother: if we had been enclosed there for ever, what
burden had it been to her? what bondage to our selves? Such a house will be the
grave: of the which we
must all say with Job, The grave shall be my house, Job. 18.
and I shall make my bed in the dark: if we were there to abide for ever,
how comfortless were our estate? But GOD be praised, our mansion house is
above; and the houses we exchange here on earth, are but the houses of our
pilgrimage: and happy is he can so live in the world, as esteeming himself in
his own house, in his own bed, yea, in his own body to be but a stranger, in
respect of his absence from the Lord.

VER. 55. I have remembered thy name, O Lord, in the night; and have kept thy
law.
THis verse contains a new protestation of his honest affection toward the
word Private exercises, are surest trials of true godliness, and why.
of God. Wherein, first let us mark his sincerity; he was religious not only
in public, but in private: for private exercises are the surest trials of true
religion. In the public, oftentimes hypocrisy caries men to simulate that
which they are not; it is not so in the private: for then, either does a man,
if he make no conscience of Gods worship, utterly neglect it, because there is
no eye of man to see him; or otherwise, if he be indeed religious, even in
private he presents his heart to GOD, seeking it to be approved by him: For
his praise is not of men, but of Romans 2. 29.
God.

Again, this argues his feruencie in religion: This age convinced of coldness
in religion.
for as elsewhere he protests, that he loved the word more then his appointed
food; so here he protests, he vvanted his nights rest, that he might
meditate in the word. But now, so far is zeal decayed in professors, they
will not want their superfluities, far less their needful refreshment, for
love of the word of GOD. Every man's life declares if he remember God, or no.


And have kept thy word.] David was not a naked professor of the word, but a
practiser of it also: his life declared that he remembered the Lord; Fides
probitas innocentiae memorem Ambrose.
probant.

VER. 56. This I had, because I kept thy precepts.
AS sin is a punishment of sin, and How the beginnings of godliness, are
ever blessed with increase.
the wicked waxes ever worse and worse: so godliness is the recompense of
godliness. The right use of one talent increases more: and the beginnings of
godliness, are blessed
with a growth of godliness. David's good exercises, held him in memory of his
God: and the memory of God, made him ever the more godly and religious.

CHETH.
VER. 57. O Lord, that art my portion, I have determined to keep thy word.
IT has pleased the Lord to teach us, God teaches us both by precepts and
examples.
not by precepts only, but examples also: in the one, he teaches us what we
should do, if we would be saved; in the other, he lets us see what the godly
before us have done, that they might be saved. If we were the first, who have
entered into that narrow way that leads to eternal life, our faintings,
fallings, backslydings, were somewhat excusable: but that way is now Via trita;
in every part of it we see the footsteps of our brethren, who have trod it
before us. All of them entered into Canaan, All the godly who (...) before us.
call upon us.
standing on the other side of Jorden, and calling upon us by their example,
who yet are i^ the wilderness, and on this side of Jorden, Come
forward, fear not, faint not; the way indeed is hard and difficile, but the
end is sweet and joyful. We have felt with you the pains of the one, come
ye forward, and enjoy with us the pleasures of the other. Thus being compassed
with so great a cloud of witnesses, who have trod Heb. 12.
the way before us, and by faith have inherited the promise; we are altogether
inexcusable if we do not follow.

Among many, we have here the Prophet David, who has gone before us; and by
his Among the rest David calls us to follow him,
counsel and instruction, teaches us how to follow him. There is no doubt,
but (as we spoke in the first Section) if we follow him in disposition, we
shall also be partakers of his approbation. Some part of his disposition we
have seen already: let us yet go after him foot by foot, neither turning to
the right hand, nor to the left; not as Asahel followed Abner, that was for
evil: If we would be partakers of his approbation.
and therefore in this course he perished; as many shall do, who seek from
David a patrocinie for their sins, but make him not a pattern to them of
repentance.

But let us follow him, as the Prophet Elisha 2. Reg. 2.
follovved his Master Eliah; whom having once found, he would never again
go from him. Let us walk with David in one way, that we may be partakers,
with him, of one happy and blessed end.

O Lord.] This verse contains a twofold A twofold protestation in this verse.
protestation. In the first, he protests that God was his portion. In the
second, that he had determined to keep the word of GOD. And this he
conceiues in such manner, that he directs his speech to God. Laying open his
heart to God, he dare make bold, out of a good conscience, that God was his
portion.

It is a thing common to all sorts of men to It is a common thing to speak of
God, not so to speak to him.
speak of God; but to speak to him, is a grace proper to his children, even
to them only.

Either the wicked dare not come unto him; their conscience being so evil,
that it is afraid to look unto the Lord, no otherwise then a wounded eye,
which can not behold the light: or if at any time forced by necessity they
would, yet they cannot come to him being void of faith, without which there
can be no prayer.

Access to the throne of grace, that we may Access to the throne of grace
in the body, is the first degree of eternal life.
speak with God, while we are in the body, is the first degree of eternal
life: he shall never be afraid to go out of the body, and ascend to the
Lord, who when he was in the body, went up by prayer, and got access to the
Lord. This is the comfort of the children of God, that sometime they get such
joyful access to God by prayer, that they wish and desire, that their soul
at that same instant, might go out of their body with their supplication.
(...), Macar. him. 8.
Vt simul egrediatur anima cum precatione. David a great King, yet glories
only in this, that God was his (...).


But who is this that glories, the Lord was his portion? Even David, a King of
a most mighty people; of a flourishing kingdom, and a fertile land, flowing
with milk and honey: but in this he rejoices not; all his comfort is here,
that God was his portion. This I mark, to make Worldlings may be ashamed, who
having less portions on earth, yet for them neglect the Lord.
those worldlings ashamed, who have less portions of the earth then David had,
and yet rejoice so in them, that they neglect altogether the Lord their God.
They brag with Nabuchadnezzer of their buildings; Is not this great Babel, that
I have built for honor of my Majesty? They talk foolishlie with Nabal; Shall
I take my flesh, and my bread, and give away? As if all that they have, were
their own. And they glory with that Glutton, when their Garners and Barnes
are full; Now my soul, thou have enough for many days: but a short time
shall declare, that they have nothing at all, who have not the Lord to be their
portion.

Now, that we may be moved to make this Why we should choose God to be our
portion.
same election, which here David makes; let us first consider the loving
kindness of the Lord our God toward us, who passing by all his creatures, has
set his heart upon man: all things he has made for man, and man for himself,
and for no other thing beside himself.

This is evident in the creation: when he had God rested not in his work of
creation, till he had made man.
made his glorious works, the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth days, he
considered them all in their kinds, and saw they were very good; but still he
proceeded to create more, and could not rest, till he had made man. When man
was created, then is it said that the Lord rested. No sight of the creature,
could content the Lord, till he had seen man: all the thoughts of the divine
mind
aimed at him. When the Lord had created man, as the perfection of his works,
the compend of his creatures, and the end whereunto he looked in creating all
other creatures, then it is said, that he rested.

O man, wherewith shall thou require the And man should not rest content with
any creature, but set his heart upon God. Psalm. 73. 25.
kindness of the Lord thy GOD? but by resolving with David, that thou will
choose none for thy portion, but the Lord. Whom have I in heaven, but thee? And
I have desired none in the earth with thee.

Let us look to the creatures, and consider how they are very good; let us use
them also: but so, that we remember always, how with them a greater
good then they are, is offered unto us: namely, that good GOD that made them.
What is the creature, if it be compared with him that made it?

Can the work of a man's hand, be so excellent as man that made it? And why
then should thou think, that there is either beauty or virtue in a
creature, for which it should be more desired and loved, then the Lord who
made it? Pulchrum coelum, pulchra terra; sed pull* August.
chrior qui f^cit illa.

Ethnicks saw by the light of Nature, specially the Platoniques, that
whatsoever good is in the creature, it is but Splendour quidam summi illius The
greatest good in the creature, is but a sparkle of that infinite good in the
Creator.
boni; a certain beam of that great and infinite good which is in God: and
that then only was the good which is in the creature rightly used, when by
it, men learned to go up, and return to the Creator.

But alas, such is our wretched corruption, that the same things which should
carry us upward toward God, draw us down; and we are oftentimes so snared with
the love of the creature, that we forget the Creator: not that any blame is in
the creature, but as I said, in our own corrupt Every creature sends us from
it, up to him that made it.
nature; for every creature in the own kind, sends us to him that made it,
speaking with such
a voice as it has, Seek not rest nor contentment from us: Go up, and seek
it in him that made us; no contentment, no satisfaction have we to give you.
The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor Prou. 1. 8.
the ear filled with hearing. This then is the first motive; that as the Lord
would not rest till he had made man: so man is bound of his duty, never to
rest till he find the Lord.

The other motive is; It is impossible that Man was made for God, and no other
thing but God can content him.
man can get rest or contentment to his soul in any thing, but in the Lord his
God. Man was made for God, and to the image of God, and therefore can no other
thing fill and content the desires of his soul, but GOD himself. Caeteris
rebus occupari potest, repleri non potest: Other Bernard.
things may busy and vex the spirit of man; but cannot fill or replenish it.
Fecisti nos Domine propter August.
te, and semper in quietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te: thou made
us, o Lord for thy self, and our heart is always unquiet till it rest in thee.
As the point of the Mariners compass, touched with the Adamant, trembles ever,
till it be directed toward the North; so does the heart of man, till it be
directed to the Lord. And as the Dove, which Noah sent forth of the A^ke, went
flying abroad, and could find no rest for the sole of her foot (the earth being
covered with
waters) till she returned again to Noah: so the soul of man may go through
the world, carried in the body as a chariot, or otherwise flee abroad, and view
all the creatures upon the wings of contemplation; but it shall find no place of
rest, no creature to content it, till it return to the Lord. Otherwise,
anguish of spirit, and sore tribulation shall be the portion thereof.

But here it is demanded, whether or no is God is not the less portion of
one, because he is the portion of another.
this prejudicial to the rest of Gods children, that David says, The Lord is
his portion? I answer, no manner of way: for the Lord shall not be the less
the portion of one that fears him, because he is the portion of another; he
is sufficient for all. Earthly heritages are the less, when they are Earthly
inheritances are diminished being co^muncated to many, heavenly are not so.
communicated to many; and therefore oftentimes is there st^ife among them
about the division: here it is not so; there needs no contention about the
division of this inheritance: one shall not have the less, because another has
much; the Lord shall be all in all: every one of his Saints shall be filled
with his glory.

We see, the Sun in the firmament shines unto all the world; neither is
there any man who thinks that the light is the less, because it is common to
many. If GOD have created the Sun with such maruailous wisdom, that the
light thereof is not the less to every one, because it is common to many, what
may we look to find in himself?

The general use of this toward us all, is to How the assurance of our
election may be gathered.
assure us of our election. If from our heart we have made this choice, that
we can say in sincerity with David, O Lord, thou art my portion: we may be
assured, that first of all he did choose us to be his inheritance. Ye have
not chosen me, but I have chosen you, says Christ. Herein is love, says
Saint John, not that we loved him first, 1. John 4.
but that he loved us. If the Lord had not chosen us to be his peculiar
people, we should never have chosen him to be our portion.

The particular use of it is, first to those who Comfort for such as are poor
in worldly things.
are poor in worldly things; let this comfort them, that GOD is become their
portion. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want: what Psalm. 23. 1.
matter is it who have the greatest measure of Gods mooueables? since the
permanent goods of the inheritance are ours. His mooueables I call the things
of this world, which go from hand to hand: the permanent good is himself, his
favor, his love toward us in Christ Jesus.

It was the infirmity of our father Abraham, Abraham's infirmity, should
learn us to gather strength.
when the Lord said unto him, Fear not, I shall be thy buckler, and exceeding
great reward; that he answered, What can thou give me Lord, seeing I go
childlesse: As if this were no more,
then all children, or gifts temporal whatsoever, that the Lord promised to
give himself to him for a reward. It is marked in him, that by his weakness
we may learn to gather wisdom and strength, never to think we can want
any thing, seeing we have the Lord himself for our portion.

The other particular use of it, is toward those Information for such as are
rich in the world.
who have received a greater measure of worldly things from the Lord, if with
it they have also grace to love and fear him. Let them know they have gotten
a double portion, which obliges them in a double service beyond their brethren.

I wish of God, men of honor in the world, Shame that they are more zealous to
maintain their earthly portion then the heavenly.
professors of the Gospel, could show as much holy zeal for the maintenance of
the gospel, which is the testimony of God, witnessing that he is become their
father* and portion in Christ, as they can declare carnal zeal against those
that would prejudice them in the smallest portion of their earthly
inheritances: yea, for a foot breadth of their land. But this is the time
wherein men are fallen from their former zeal: not only is the fruit
decayed, Ierem. 8.
but the leaves also are fallen away, and there is no courage for the truth.

I have determined to keep thy word.] This he It is not enough to say God is
thy portion, unless thou qualify it.
brings in by way of probation of that which he said in the former words. Many
will say with David, that God is their portion; but here is the point, how do
they prove it? If God be their portion, then they would love him: if they loved
him, they would love his word: if they loved his word, they would live by it,
and make it a rule of their life.

If it were demanded of these bastard Christians, Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 4.
as Chrysostom enquired of the like, Whereby An Interrogatio^ of Chrysostoms,
meet for professors of this age.
shall I know you to be Christians? their only defense behooved to stand in
their tongue: for if ye look to the works of their hands, ye shall not
discern them from Infidels. Look to their
eating and drinking, they are like Epicures; look to their garments, they are
vainglorious; look to their feet* they delight in any place, more then in
the courts of the Lords house. Is not this then a small defense? all the parts
of their conversation testify against them; only their words speak for them:
let them beware; for this will be no sufficient proof of true Christianity,
when God shall judge them.

He says not only that he will keep Gods word, but he had determined to
keep it. Many enter into religion, but not upon determination: Such as enter
into religion, without determination cannot continue.
these do no otherwise, says our Savior, then if a man should go to
battle, and not consider if he may fight it out: or as if a man should build a
house, and not lay his count, whether or no he is able to finish it; for this
man leaves it at the last, with more shame, then if he had not begun it: so
fares it with many, who embrace religion lightly, and as lightly fall away
from it, they not being rooted, nor grounded, nor built upon Christ Jesus.

Three helps of a godly life are here used by Three helps of a godly life. 1.
Determination. 2. Supplication. 3. Consideration.
David: the first is, Determination; this makes a man to begin well. The second
is, Supplication; this makes a man to continue well. The third is,
Consideration; and this makes a man when he goes wrong, to come home again to
his determination. He that begins to live well, not laying his grounds by
Determination, is easily altered: and he that upon Determination begins to
do well, if by instant prayer he obtain not grace from God, shall over readily
faint and fall away; for what are best purposes, if grace from above strengthen
us not to perform them, but vanishing Iam. 3.
motions? And in the third room, because in many things we sin all, we have
need of Consideration; whereby we do examine our ways, and return again to
our first course, when we have wandered from it.

VER. 58. I have made my supplication in thy presence, with my whole heart: be
merciful to me according to thy promise.
THese words stand of a protestation and Our purpose perishes, if God bless
it not.
prayer. They teach us to second our determinations with prayers: both because
our purposes shall perish if God bless them not, as Psalm. 127; as also, for
that Satan then does most busily impugn us, when he sees we have most
resolutely concluded to serve the Lord.

Three things are to be observed in David's prayer. Three things observed in
David's prayer. 1 His Reverence.
1. His reverence. 2. His sincerity. 3. His faith. His reverence is here,
that he made his supplication in Gods presence: if we did so think when we go
to pray, we go to show our selves in Gods presence, how would it humble us in
our selves, and make us reverent toward God? We know what we do when we come
before Kings of the earth; we prepare our selves, we come with the reverence
of Hester to Ahasuerus; of Bathsheba to David* and good reason so we should
do. But how much are we bound to do as Abraham did, when we come before the
Lord, to remember we are but dust and ashes? and that it is a great benefit
that we should get license to speak to the Righteous The like reverence
recommended to us.
Judge of all the world. And this reverence our Savior commends unto us, when
in the preface of the prayer which he has taught us, he remembers us, that our
father, to whom we speak, is in heaven: we should not be rash with our mouth,
nor hasty in our heart to utter a thing before God: For God, says Solomon, is
in heaven, and we are Eccles. 5.
in the earth. Let faith move our hearts to go to him when we have need: let
fear bridle us, that we be not sudden, but first temper our hearts, ere we
speak with our tongue to so reverent a Majesty. It is abomination to offer
unto the Lord the Sacrifice of fools; that is, words without affection: and
yet, alas, how often does our infirmity miscarie us to do so! Magni certe
ingenij August.
est seuocare mentem a sensibus, and cogitationem a consuetudine abducere. It
is a work of great difficulty in prayer, to sunder our soul from our senses,
and to withdraw our cogitations from their custom.

The second thing to be observed in his prayer, The second is his Sincerity.
is his sincerity; in these words, With my whole heart. Hypocrisy is a vile
sin in dealing with men: but much more abominable, when by it men presume to
mock the Lord; making a show in his presence of that which they are not.
Rebecca decked up Jacob in so subtle a manner, that Isaac his father mistook
him: but Satan, now pranks up his cou^terfet Christians in more subtle manner;
for there Isaac took some notice of him by his voice: but now men have learned
to speak so cunningly Against a false heart, under a fair tongue.
and Christian-like, that hardly can a man think, how a false heart should lodge
under so fair
a tongue. But let not men deceive themselves, God will not be deceived: his
eyes are not dim
as Isaacs; but lively, quick, and pearcing, like unto flames of fire: he can
see they are but a potshard over laid with silver dross; and a little time
shall Pro. 26. 23.
discover them. Certum est, nihil simulatum aut fictum verae esse virtutis, sed
nec diuturnum: for it is sure, that a counterfeit thing can never have solid
virtue, nor continuance in it. Let us study with David, to make our heart good
and upright before God.

The third thing to be marked in his prayer, is The third is his faith.
his faith, grounded upon the promises of God, in these words, Be merciful
unto me, according to thy promise. He protested before, that he sought the Lord
from his whole heart; and now he prays he may find mercy. So it is indeed;
boldly may that man look for mercy at Gods hand, who seeks him truly:
there Mercy and Truth meet together, and embrace one another: where truth is
in the soul to seek, there cannot be but mercy in GOD to embrace. If truth
be in us to confess our sins and forsake them, we shall find mercy in God to
pardon and forgive them.

Again, we see that as our prayers should be sent Prayers of bastard
Christians, nothing different from the prayers of Turks.
up in Christ's name, so should they be grounded on Gods promises. It is a shame
that the prayers of many Christians, are nothing different from the prayers of
Turks: for what shall ye hear among them, but the like of these voices, God
help us, God be merciful to us: these are prayers which
any Ethnique will make in time of his distress, but we must learn to frame
our prayers another way; when we pray, we must pray in the name of Christ, and
to be heard for Christ's sake, because he is the Mediator, and peacemaker
between God and man, and in him the father is well pleased. And again, we
must not take liberty to seek what we like, out of our corrupt humors, as
the custom of many is; but we must ground our prayers upon Gods promises,
which in Christ Jesus he has made unto us.

And lastly, seeing this is an argument which God promises of mercy, we
promise of duty.
commonly we use to move God to be merciful unto us, Because he has so
promised; if we would have this argument forcible, let us make conscience of
those promises which we have made unto God. Offree mercy has the Lord made
promises unto us: but of bound duty we have made promises If we would have the
one effectual, let v^ make conscience of the other.
unto him. With what face can that man desire that the Lord should keep his
promise to him, who had never any care to keep his promise unto God. More of
this, see ver. 76. 116. 176.

VER. 59. I have considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.
NExt unto determination and supplication, consideration would be used in all
our actions, to try and examine, whether or no, we Consideration so necessary,
that without it, no estate of our life can be well ordered.
have done according to our purpose and prayers. Consideration is so necessary,
that without it, no state of life can rightly be ordered. The Mariner considers
his course by his Compass; if he neglect
it, he runs into remediless dangers. The Merchant, who advises not his
affairs with his Count-book, becomes quickly a bankrupt The Pilgrim, who
has proposed to himself an end of his journey, considers every hour, whether
or no he be in the right way, that may bring him to his proposed end: and if
he see many ways before him, stat and cogitat ipse secum vtram debeat eligere;
nec prius adoriendum iter, quam animo definierit, et pleniore mentis intention
deciderit: he stands and advises with himself, which of them he should
choose; neither will he go forward, till he have by inward consideration,
resolved what is best.

How much more should he, whose course is to the kingdom of heaven, consider
his ways, and think with himself, Non omnis via illo ducit, non omnis via
dirigit ad Jerusalem illam quae in coelis est: that every way directs not a
man to that Jerusalem which is in heaven.

Seeing no estate of life can be rightly ordered without consideration, shall
only a Christian be so careless, as to think he can go from earth to
heaven, and not use consideration?

But what is that which David did consider? I We should not use the eye of the
mind, as we do the eye of the body.
have, says he, considered my ways. He was not like them who use the eye of
their mind, as they do the eye of their body; for with it, they look
unto all things, but not unto it self: so is it with many, careless of
themselves, curious to censure By the one we look to others, by this we should
look to our selves.
others; judging of every man's ways, and not regarding their own. The godly
indeed, they look into all things, and make their advantage of all; but so,
that first they look into their own estate.

And here is wisdom; All men are naturally It is a lamentable folly for a
man, to take heed to any thing that is his, more then to himself. Basil de
verbis Mosis, Attend tibi.
wise enough to look unto that which is theirs: only religion teaches a man
to look to himself. Take heed to your selves, says Moses to Israel: the same
said the Apostle to Timothy; and in them the warning stands for us all. Aliud
tu, aliud tua; there is a great difference between thy self, and that which
is thine: but this is a pitiful folly, that a man shall take a time to
consider and take heed unto all that is his; his houses, his fields, his
rents, his garments: and shall take no time to consider himself, that he may
amend his ways, where he has gone wrong, and repair his decayed estate,
which before he has hurt by inconsideration. As often as we ^oke to our
selves, we shall find something (...).


And turned my feet unto thy testimonies.] As often as David considered his
ways, he found always some defect that needed redress. Who can ^ay, he has
in such sort cleansed his heart, that he has not need to make it more clean;
Quis ita ad vngue^ omnia a se superslua, reseca^it, vt nihil se habere putet
putatione dignum? Who has so cut away his superfluities, that he may think
he has nothing that needs to be cut away? Creed mihi putata repullulant,
effugata Bern.
redeunt, reaccenduntur extincta; Believe me, when sins are lopped, they grow
again; when they are chased away, they return again; and their fire being
once quenched, kindles again. Sape putandu^ est, imo (si fieri possit) semper:
quia si non dissimulas, semper quod putari oporteat, inuenis. Wherefore we
should often loppe our superfluous affections; yea, if it be possible, always:
if a man will tell the truth as it is, he finds always something in himself,
that needs to be reformed.

Thy Testimonies. Of this see ver. 79. 95.

VER. 60. I have made have, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.
Here is another protestation of his earnest Delay of repentance dangerous.
love and affection toward the Lord, That he delayed not to keep his
commandments. It is one of Satan's customable policies, to tempt men with a
delay of repentance: he dare not plainly say, that repentance is not
needful; only to deceive the simple, he craves a delay: and so after one he
steals away another, till all the time be past, wherein man should repent.
And in this snare many one perishes; How it brings many to damnation.
that where in their young years they will not repent, but delay till they be
older: in their old age they cannot repent, the affection through long custom
of sin, waxing strong, even then when the body is weak. So that the day of
death, which they thought to make the day of their repentance, becomes to them
a day of fearful perturbation; by reason of the great debt of sin, which
oppresses their souls, that would not take order with it in time. Thus the
miserable man, for lack of timely repentance,
ends not his pilgrimage in peace, but in fearful perturbation; under this
punishment, that Moriens obliuiscitur sui, qui dum viueret, August.
oblitus est Dei; When he dies, he forgets himself, because when he lived
he forgot his God. Against the delay of repentance.


In things perteyning to this life, delay of good is dangerous. If a wound be
not cured before it rotte, it becomes incurable: if the fire be not quenched in
time, it becomes unquenchable: and if flesh be not salted before it stink, it
becomes so unsavory, that it cannot be mended. If a motefal in the eye, or a
thorn in the foot, we take them out without delay: but in things perteyning to
the health of the soul, delay is much more dangerous.

The Lord, when he exhorts to repentance, Satan seeks but ^ delay: God cr^ues
present repentance.
cries, My son, delay not to turn to the Lord. This day, while it is called
upon you, harden not your hearts: but Satan's voice is, Tarry till the morn. Let
me first go, and kiss my father; that is, delight yet a space in the
pleasures of this life. It was offered by Moses to Pharao, When shall I pray for
thee? and he answered, To morrow. It is offered by the Lord, to man, When will thou that I have mercy on thee? and in effect it is answered by many, Not till
mine old days. Miserable was Pharao, who delayed Moses but one day:
and more miserable are they, who delay the Lord for many years, when he
offers them mercy.

I know no difference between the wise All men seek the Lord at length, wise
me^ seek him in time.
Virgins and the foolish; but that the one did that in time, which the other
would feign have done out of time, and could not. The most profane men of the
world, are forced in death to make their refuge to the Lord: then the eye, and
the hand, are lifted up unto him; then they cry for mercy, and desire all
others to pray for them. If we be wise, let us do that in time, which al men
are feign to do at the length.

VER. 61. The bands of the wicked have robbed me: but I have not forsaken thy
law.
TRue godliness will endure great tentations: True godliness, endures great
tentations.
even as trees well rooted, abides the blast of strong winds; and gold that is
fine, abides the trial of fire. Many ways was David tempted: and among the
rest, the wicked by troops and multitudes, combined against him; yet did he
not forsake the law of the Lord.

The godly live in this world like sheep among What the wicked are to the godly.
wolves: every wicked man in whom Satan rules, is like a Cananite to an
Israelite* a thorn in our eye, and a prick in our side; yea, and as a dart of
Satan shot at us, to drive us away from the fear of God: if so we can take
them, it should greatly
strengthen us, to endure all troubles that come from them. There will never be
peace among those two parties, between whom the Lord himself in Paradise
proclaimed inimity.

And howsoever, to strengthen themselves in The combination of the wicked,
shall not help them.
an evil cause, the wicked go together by bands and companies, yet shall it
not avail them, nor hurt us. Babels builders, Moab, Ammon, Edom, conspyring in
one, may tell us, Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not escape
unpunished: the wickd are like thorns before the fire: their multitude may
well embolden it, but cannot resist it.

VER. 62. At midnight will Irise to give thanks unto thee, because of thy
righteous judgments.
IN this verse we have a protestation of David Three things to be marked in
this verse.
his thankful affection toward the Lord; wherein we have three things: 1. The
duty promsed; namely, to give thanks. 2. The time; at midnight. 3. The cause;
because of thy righteous judgments. As for the duty of thanksgiving, we
spoke of it verse 7.

As for the time, he says, he will rise at midnight, Our necessities hinders
our spiritual exercises, that they can not be continual, as it is with them in
heaven.
and give thanks to God. We pray that we may do Gods will on earth, as it is
done in heaven: now in heaven, we know they praise God continually, without
ceasing; we should do so upon earth: but our necessities of sleeping, eating,
and such like, interrupt us, that we cannot do it as we should; yet happy
shall we be, if we season all our dyets and doings with prayer and
thanksgiving. That as God in nature has made Yet we should endeavor unto it.
the knee to bow at every step, so the heart in every action might bow, and
bless the Lord: acknowledging our Maker and Redeemer, and directing all our
doings to his glory.

When Solomon made harps, and other musical Why Solomon made Harps of Almuggim
trees.
instruments for the praise of God, he made them of Almuggim trees; that is, of
such trees as rotte not. Teaching us, by like signification, how enduring
should be those instruments of We soon faint in prayer.
our heart and affections, wherewith we praise God, that we should not suffer
them to decay. But alas, how soon do we fail! Oftentimes we begin the day
with some feruencie, in praising and prayer, but we faintere even; yet shall
we have great comfort, if when our performance Though our performance fail,
our purpose should remain.
fails, our purpose remain: for this will revive our former zeal, and make
us to return unto an earnest calling upon God, and that with the greater
feruencie, That we find our great infirmity has carried us away from our
former purpose.

Let us again consider here, how David spends Time a most precious jewel.
the time of his life; that we may learn at him to be wise. Time is a most
precious thing; not such a jewel among all things perteyning to this life. By
this it may be esteemed: that in a small point of time, an infinite weight of
glory may be acquired; and men who have been prodigal of it,
spending years and months without consideration, would have given great
riches, yea, all the jewels of the world, if they had been in their
possession, for prorogation of their life one year, yea, one month.

Let us therefore learn at David, how he used How the time of the day and
night should be spent after David's example.
his time: when he lay down at night, he watered his couch with tears, after
the examination of his heart. At midnight again he rose up to give thanks:
there-after he prevented the morning watch, that he might meditate on the word
of the Lord: then in the day time; morning, noone, and even, he made a noise
to the Lord: yea, seven times in the day he called upon God. Our Savior has
commended the like care unto The same Christ teaches by his example.
us, both by his precept, and practice in the Temple, at the table, in the
garden: in the mountain did he pray all night; Vt te proprio ad de Ambrose.
precandum inuitaret exemplo. Happy were we, if so we could spend our days:
for certain it is, when our last day coms, we shall have comfort of no bygone
time, but that which we have spent in the service of God.

Sleep is most necessary for the intertainment Sleep is the deaw of nature.
of bodily health: it is Ros naturae, the dew of nature, more necessary then
meat or drink; yet as David protests, ver. that he loved the word of God
more then his appointed food: so here he preferres the praises of God to his
sleep and rest in the night.

This may make us ashamed, when we see how Yet we should quit it to keep the
deaw of grace, or else worldlings and Idolators shall accuse us.
wicked men cannot rest except they have done evil; and how they defraud
themselves of sleep, that they may commit iniquity; and how again the
superstitious Priests of Baal, can wake in the night, to attend upon their
Idols; that Christians, professing Gods true worship, should so
pamper themselves, that they will not rise out o^ the bed, to bow their
knee to the Lord: yea, scarsely lying still with their bodies, will raise up
their spirits to praise him.

Sleep is compared by one to a sorry customer, that either takes up more then
we should give, Sleep compared to a sorry customer, that takes up more then he
should.
or then his Master allows him. The Lord allows a certain time for our
sleep and rest, as he does to all the rest of his creatures, Psalm. 104. But
this is intolerable, That under pretense of a little time allowed unto us, the
half of our time should be exacted from us. Ethniques in this point may make
us ashamed: It is written of Alexander How Alexander and Caesar parted the
night.
and Caesar, among many more, that they parted the night in three; the first
they took unto rest, the second to the works of Nature, the third to their
studies, for increase of knowledge and learning: and that, because they were
forced to spend the day time in government of their Kingdoms, and
administration of their warlike affairs.

Yet we have now such a number, whom we Monsters of Nature turn the day into
night.
may call Monsters of Nature, who are not content to spend all the night over
in works of darkness (such as Drunkenness and Gluttony, and Chambring and
slumbring) but they turn also the noon-tyde of the day into midnight. Per diem
Ambrose.
illis fit media nox: yea, not sparing the holy Sabboths of the Lord, they
sleep by themselves like Howlets in their holes, when the Saints of God are
assembled together to praise him: but miserable are they; for as they took no
part of Gods service, so shall they be strangers from the recompense.

The third circumstance, pointing out the What God promises with his mouth, he
performs with his hand.
cause or matter of his thanksgiving, is here, because of Thy righteous
judgments. Where, by judgments he understands Gods just working according to
his word, both in executing threatened plagues upon the wicked, and performing
promised mercies to the godly. And for this cause David praises God, because
he found him always as good as his word: and what he promised with his mouth,
he performed with his hand.

And this cause which moved David to praise Sin punished now, tells there is a
Judge.
God, should move us all: for we have felt his promises kept to our selves,
and his judgments executed on the wicked, in so manifest a manner, that men
might say, as in the Psalm; Verily there is a God that judges righteously on
earth, and there is fruit for the righteous. There is no transgression of Gods
law, which in some wicked men Sin spared now, tells there is a judgment to
come.
we have not seen punished. If the Lord did only speak and never punish, men
would say, There is not a God: and if, on the other hand, all transgressions
were punished here, men might say, we need not look for a judgment to come. Of
such sins as we have seen punished, let us learn that there is a Judge; and
of such sinful men as we see spared, let us also learn that there is a
judgment to come.

VER. 63. I am companion of all them that fear thee, and keep thy precepts.
HE said in the first verse of this Section, He that loves God, will love his
Saints.
that God was his portion: now he says* All the Saints of God are his
companions. These two go together; the love of God, and the love of his
Saints: He that loves not his brother, made to Gods image, whom he sees how
shall he say he loves God, whom he has not seen? Seeing our goodness extends
not to the Lord; if it be showed to his Saints, and excellen^ ones upon earth,
for his sake, it shall be no small argument of our loving affection toward him
self.

Godly David, when Jonathan was dead, made diligent inquisition, Is there none
of Ionathans posterity, to whom I may show kindness for Ionathans sake? and at
length he found a silly lame Mephiboseth: So if we enquire diligently, Is there
none upon earth, to whom I may show kindness for Christ's sake who is in
heaven? we shall ever find some, to whom whatsoever we do, shall be allowed
as done to himself.

Every man's company wherein he delights, Every man's company, declares what
himself is. Ambr. ad virg. deuotam. Ambr. offer. lib. 3. ca. 16.
tells what manner of man he is himself; Qualiscunque quis fuerit cum tali se
coniungit. The fowls of heaven flock together according to their kinds: ye
shall not see Doves assembling with Ravens; Inter dispares mores quae potest
esse amicitia? What fellowship or friendship, can be among men of inequall
manners? Non potest homini amicus esse, qui Deo fuerit infidus: he can never be
friendly to man, who is false unto God.

But there is yet a greater argument; the Lord JESUS has honored us to be his
companions: Christians of an inferior rank to ourselves, should be used as our
companions.
so we are called, Psalm. 44. God has anointed thee above thy fellows. To
work this fellowship, he assumed our nature; he abased himself; he was
baptized, as we are; he died, as we
do; he rose again, as we shall do; he walked in all our ways, that he
might train us up to walk in his ways; and might every way make us like
himself: and shall we think it a derogation to our honor, to humble our selves
for Christ's sake, to men of a rank inferior to us* and even for the fear and
love of God that is in them, to account them our companions?

Yet further, his great modesty is to be marked. An example of great humility.
Non dixit imitantium te, sed timentium: he says not, I am companion to all
that follow thee, but to all that fear thee. The fear of God, is the
beginning of wisdom. Inter rudes se constituit humilitate, cum veteranos
superaret deuotione:
he places himself among nouices in humility, when he excelled ancients in
piety.

That fear thee.] The godly are commonly In the godly, fear is with love, not
so in the wicked.
described by this grace, That they fear God; but so, that they also love and
obey him: therefore David ioynes these two together, That fear thee, and keep
thy precepts. Apostat Angels, says S. James, fear GOD; but there-withall they
hate him, and rebel against him. In the Godly, fear prepares a way to love:
when love is perfected then fear shall cease; but in the wicked, fear prepares
a way to despair, and restless perturbation.

Abraham looked for no good in Gerar, because No good is to be looked for where
the fear of God is not.
he thought the fear of God was not there: on the contrary, Joseph confirmed
the timorous hearts of his brethren, that they should look for none evil at his
hands, because, said he, I fear God. Thereby letting us know, that this is a
sufficient reason to assure us of all good duties from a man, if truly it may
be said of him, He fears God.

VER. 64. The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercies: teach me thy statutes.
Here is a prayer, with a reason: Seeing o Lord, thou art good to all thy
creatures, Gods benignity general, is to all: special, to his own children.
show thy goodness also to me in this, that thou teach me thy statutes. Gods
general benignity, is extended to all his creatures; his special benignity
is for his children: and this is it that David here craves.

And indeed, Gods general goodness unto all his creatures, should serve to
confirm his children in the assurance of his more special favor toward them,
as here David uses it. If he care The goodness of God toward his creatures,
should confirm his children in the assurance of his love.
for sparrowes, if he feed the young Ravens when they cry, if he clothe the
Lilies of the field; are not his own children much more worth? will he not
much more care for them? Seeing of his goodness he sends rain to the wicked,
and makes his sun to shine on the unjust; will he not of his mercy, lift up
the light of his countenance upon his own; and make the dew of his grace to
fall upon them? Yea, if we our selves, when we were enemies, were reconciled;
how much more now, being reconciled, shall we be saved?

And this, as it serves to confirm the godly, Blind are the wicked, who see
not Gods goodness in his creatures.
that the whole earth is full of Gods goodness: so does it also convince the
wicked of a blind stupiditie. Every creature has in it some note of Gods
goodness, and yet they cannot see it: they
look to heaven; they walk upon earth; they breathe in the air; they warm
at the fire: every moment they use Gods creatures, but never see nor feel his
his goodness in them, to lift up their hearts, and praise him for them.

TETH.
VER. 65. O Lord, thou have dealt graciously with thy servant; according to
thy word.
IN the verse following, David seeks Gods mercy showed to a man, is an
undoubted argument, that he will show more mercy.
mercy; in this, he gives thanks for mercy received. Mercies received, as
they should be returned with praise to him who gave the^; so should they
confirm our hearts in an expectation of greater to be received. It is not with
God, as it is with man; a man, the more he gives, the less he has: it is not
so with the Lord. Among men, this is a reason as they allege, why they should
not give, I have given you already, why then do ye trouble me any more? but
it is not so with God; the treasures of his grace can never be emptied: whom he
loves, he loves unto the end; and to him that has, he gives more. Yea, all
that now we get, he wills His present gifts, are but pledges of greater.
us to receive, as an earnest, or a pledge of greater good he has to give us.

So David confirms himself, Psalm 23. that because the Lord had been a
Shepherd to him in time bygone, he gathers this conclusion, Doubtless,
kindness and mercy shall follow me all Psalm. 23.
the days of my life.

But how says David, did God deal graciously with him, seeing he did humble
him from his How God is gracious, even when he afflicts.
youth with many sore afflictions? These agree very well together: for the Lord
is most loving when he chastises. Etia^ in seueritate est bonitas Ambrose.
Dei; vt recurrat vnusquisque castigatus, and pedem referat a peccatis, and ad
tramitem, bonamque conuersationem reuertatur: even in severity, Gods gracious
goodness appears; in that he who is chastised, returns from his sins, to
the right trade of a godly conversation.

Will any man accuse a Physician of cruelty, The same declared by sundry
similitudes.
because he cutteth away the rotten member with iron, or burns with fire a
fretting canker? Or shall the Master be blamed, for correcting his negligent
Disciple, that he may make him more diligent, and attentive to learning? Sic
castigare, amantis est, non execrantis; and ideo bonitatis est,
noncrudelitatis* so to chastise, is the work of one that loves, not that
hates; there is no cruelty in that, but gracious goodness.

And albeit these chastisements seem not sweet for the present, yet afterward
(as the Apostle says) they bring the quiet fruit of righteousness to them
who are thereby exercised. And therefore, David still craves to be taught of
GOD the same manner of way; Sciebat namque Propheta disciplinae vtilitatem:
because Basil.
he had learned by experience, what great good Gods discipline does to the
soul of a man.

Ye may perceive by this, how David kept remembrances Memorials of mercy
should be kept.
of the several proofs of Gods favor showed unto him; in performing to him
the promised kingdom; and in delivering him from many outward, and inward
temptations. Thus the children of GOD, keep with themselves memorials of
mercy received: for albeit the time of the full performance of Gods promises
be not yet come; yet does he perform so much of them, as binds us in all
conscience to remember his praises, who is a most true and merciful God unto
us.

Thy servant.] David frequently delights in The servant of God, an honorable
and comfortable style.
this style. He found that his greatest comfort stood in the serving of GOD in
a good conscience: and if we do not so, with what boldness can we look for
comfort from him in the day of our trouble, or hour of death, who made no
conscience of his service? Yea rather, justly may the Lord give us that
fearful answer, which he gave to the rebellious Jews, when they sought his
help in the day of their distress; Go unto the gods who^ Judge. 16.
ye have served, and let them deliver you.

According to thy word.] Natural men will not believe, that GOD will do
according to his word: they have it in derision. The vision The wicked
dishonor God, when they call in doubt the truth of his word.
say they, is but wind. In so doing, they highly offend the majesty of GOD,
imputing this note of dishonestie unto him, That he is not so good as his
word: but in experience they shall find the contrary.

The godly shall find the truth of his word in mercy; as Ezechias did, so
shall they praise him: Esaias 37.
The Lord has said it, and the Lord has done it; but the wicked shall find it
in judgment, Your Zach. 1. But they shall find it a true word.
Fathers, where are they? and do the Prophets live for ever? But did not my
word, and my Statutes, which I commanded by my servant the Prophets, take
hold on your Fathers? And they returned, and said; As the Lord of hosts has
determined to do unto us, according to our own ways and works, so assuredly
has he dealt with us. So shall all the wicked find at the length, that as God
has a mouth to speak: so has he a hand to execute it; Then shall they
discern between Malac. 3. 18.
the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him that
serves him not.

VER. 66. Teach me good judgment and knowledge: for I have believed thy
commandments.
THis verse contains a prayer with a reason. In the prayer, he beseeches God
to teach him good judgment. The word Tob Tagnam, signifies the goodness of
taste: so The Understanding is the taster of the soul, that discerns between
truth and falsehood.
Vatablus, Bonitatem sensus doce me. The natural sense of tasting, is here by
a Metaphortranslated to signify judgment and understanding: and that because
as taste discernes meat, and makes choice of what is to be sent into the
stomach; ^o the understanding discernes between truth to be embraced, and
falsehood to be rejected. This is the grace for which the Apostle prays, to
the Phil. 1. 9. Many want this Sense.
Philippians. I pray that ye may abound more and more in knowledge, and in all
judgment, that ye may discern things which are excellent.

This is a rare grace. For many by the judgment of light, knows what is good,
and what
is evil, who know it not by the judgment of taste: for if by sense they
felt the bitterness of sin, and sweetness of righteousness, they would not
so love the one, and set light by the other as they do.

And again, this puts a difference between that knowledge which we have in
this life, and that Our knowledge in this ^ife, ^ar infe^ to that we she have
in the (...) ^o come.
which we shall have in the life to come. Now we have but a taste, then shall
we be filled, and satisfied with his image; now we know but in part,
hereafter we shall know fully; now we walk by faith, then we shall walk
by sight; now we 2. Cor. 5. 7.
have but the earnest of the Spirit, but in heaven we shall be filled with his
graces, and receive the principal sum.

Now that David ^o frequentlie and fervently desires the Lord to teach him,
see ver. 34.

For I believe.] Sometime, David brings the Gods promises cannot comfort us, if
we be not of their number to whom they belong.
reason of his petition, from Gods mercy, goodness, righteousness, power, and
so forth: sometime again from himself; as from his love, his fear, his faith
in God, and some such like. It is not sufficient to seek from God, because of
that which he is; we must also consider what we are: otherwise, as Iehu said
unto one demanding, Is it peace; What have thou to do with peace? So may it
be answered to us; Though the Lord be good, and gracious, and merciful, yet
what is that unto us, if we be such as believe not in him, love him not,
and fear him not?

VER. 67. Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now I keep thy word.
IN this verse, David protests that the chastisements Affliction in the godly,
works humiliation.
of God, had made him more godly. Euthymius thinks, David's meaning is, that
his sins had made him more humble. This is true in the godly, that their
sins humble them, and make them more godly, as is evident in S. Paul: but
the former sense is most agreeable to these words: as ye may perceive, ver. 71.

As the Philistims could not understand Samsons riddle, How sweet came out of
the sour, and meat out of the eater: so can not worldlings Worldlings can not
understand how good can come by the Cross.
understand, what comfort is in the Cross, or what profit comes by
afflictions. But certain it is, there is none truly godly, but they will
testify this, that either they first learned Religion, or at least, were
confirmed in it, by some notable cross.

But this is to be understood of sanctified crosses, Only sanctified Crosses
work good.
with the which GOD ioynes grace: such a Cross changes the nature of it,
and is not Poena, sed remedium delinquentis; a punishment Ambrose.
of sin, but a remedy. Otherwise, as of their own nature, afflictions are
evil, being the fruits of sin: so they bring out evil fruits in the
wicked, as impatience, murmuring, blasphemy;
for, if even good things become evil unto them, what marvel that by those
which are evil, they become worse?

But now I keep thy word.] To be afflicted To be afflicted and not purged,
chasti^ed, and not corrected, is an evil token.
and not purged by affliction, to be stricken with the rods of God, and no
correction to follow, is an argument of fearful induration. As silver metal
put in the fire, if nothing come of it but Ierem. 6.
dross, is found to be reprobat silver: so these men who are not fined in the
furnace of affliction, if they so continue, shall be found reprobate men; the
lead is consumed, the bellows are burnt, but their wickedness is not taken
from them.

Alas! how many are there such among us, of who^ the Lord may complain,
Wherefore should ye be smitten any more? for ye fall away more Esaias 1.
and more. God has strooken them with Pestilence, Many now become worse after
deliverance from trouble.
beside many other rods; he has marked their bodies with the Byle: but after
their deliverance, they have become more profane then ever they were before; as
if now they had escaped all wrath of God, and no plague after this could
ouer-take them, since the Pestilence had not devoured them.

But as Esau spoke of his fathers blessings, Have thou but one blessing, my
father? so do we wish These are reserved to sharper scourges.
them consider of Gods plagues: Has the Lord but one plague? The Sodomits
escaped the sword of Chedarlaomer, and the peril of the Lime-pits: but they
perished with fire from heaven. And the Israelites, who drowned not in the Red
sea; because they repented not, many of them were stinged to death by fiery
Serpe^ts. So the wicked, escaping some heavy judgment, and still continuing
in their sins, are but reserved to a worse: Gods last stroke is always heauiest.
as if one flying a Bear, should be devoured of a Lion; for the last plague of
God, is ever heauiest Amos 5. 19.
to the impenitent.

VER. 68. Thou art good and gracious: teach me thy statutes.
HE repeates his former petition; desiring A godly man is covetous of heavenly
instruction.
again that God would teach him. And no marvel he frequently makes this
prayer, Diuinae doctrinae auidus, covetous of heavenly instruction: for he had
not only himself to govern in his private conversation; but being called to
be a governor of others, he prays so much the more earnestly, that God would
teach and govern him.

The reason is taken from Gods goodness in How due unto God is the praise of
goodness.
himself, and his beneficence toward his creature: Bonus es and beneficus.
When we have to do with men, we labor by praising them to conciliate their
favor; and oftentimes we praise them for that which is not in them, but we
would wish to be in them: or else in so praising them, admonishing them what
they should be: Quanto magis Deo laus sua est deferenda, cuius proprium est, vt
Ambros. in Psa. 119.
bonus sit? qui nisi bonus esset super terram stare quis possit? How much more
should Gods own praise be given to himself, whose property it is to be good,
yea, goodness it self? And if he were not good, none upon earth could stand
before him.

And it is this goodness of God, that moves It is his own goodness that
makes him good to his creature.
him to be beneficial, and gracious to his creature: Omne enim bonum est
Communicatiuum sui; for every good thing communicates the self unto another.
And as it excels in goodness, so excels it in this virtue, of communicating
the self unto others: as ye see the Sun, which is a most excellent light,
does above all (...) lights communicate his light to other (...). And if so it
be with the creatures which are good, how much more with the Creator, who is
goodness it self? And this is the reason whereby our Savior confirms us; If
ye who are evil, can give good things Luke 11.
to your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father, who is good, give
good things to them that seek from him? And surely, if we knew with David,
how good the Lord is in himself, A great blessing to be in fellowship with God.
how gracious, and beneficent to them who wait upon him, we would account it a
greater blessing then we do, to be in fellowship with him; and would testify
it, by a more careful seeking of his favor by prayer.

VER. 69. The proud have imagined a lie against me: but I will keep thy precepts
with my whole heart.
HE professes here again his constancy in Constancy in Religion.
religion, amplifying it by this circumstance; that albeit he was hated and
persecuted by wicked men, yet still he followed after godliness. Here we have
three things: First, who were David's enemies; Proud men. Secondly, how they did
war against him; by lies. Thirdly, how they trimmed their lies. Wicked men
are restless enemies to the godly.


To the first, it is manifest by David's example, how the godly are exercised
with the continual inimitie of the wicked. Quanto magis quis Deo Ambr. in
Psalm. 119.
service ^esiderat, tanto magis in se excitat aduersarios: yea, the more a man
sets himself to serve God, the more stirs he up Satan and his instruments,
to be adversaries unto him. No band of No band of nature can conioyne them,
whom grace has not conjoined.
nature can conioyne them, whom grace has not conjoined. Jacob and Esau, both
gotten of one father Isaac, both borne of one mother Rebecca, lying both
together in one womb, yet even there do they fight together. Let us never
look for peace, where God has proclaimed war; the world will hate us because
we are not of the world. Let us never be dismayed when we are crossed by them,
but rather so much the more comforted; being assured, that while as wicked men
are enemies to us for a good cause, we are upon that side whereof Christ is
Captain, his Saints are soldiers, and victory is most certain. Why wicked
me^ are termed proud men.


Neither is it without cause, that wicked men are so commonly called proud men;
for pride is the mother of all rebellion against God and man. By pride, Satan
and his confederat Apostats usurped to be like unto God: and by the same sin,
he drew man into the similitude of his condemnation; so that now, every man by
nature is a proud man: which makes him shake off the yoke of God, P^ide an
horrible evil.
and without regard, transgress the limits of obedience appointed to him by
God. As Phara^
would not let Israel go til the Lord slew his first borne: so our nature now
corrupted, shall never render obedience to God, nor love to man, til the first
borne sin, that is, pride, be subdued by grace.

Forgrace, on the contrary, ever works humility: Grace works humility in the
godly.
so soon as the eyes of Gods children are opened to see their sins, they
abhor themselves; the comb of their natural pride is pulled down, and they
abase themselves before God and man. It was the humble speech of Abraham the
great father of the faithful; I am but dust and ashes: it was the voice of
Jacob; I am not Genesis 18. 27.
worthy of the least of Gods mercies: David has the like; Who am I Lord?
Gedeons voice; My fathers Judge. 6. 15. Examples proving that they who are
greatest in Gods estimation, are least in their own eyes.
house is the least in all Israel: and the Baptist (who received this praise,
That a greater Prophet was not among the children of women) acknowledged in
humility, That he was not worthy to loose the latchet of Christ's shoe: the
Centurion confessed, he was not worthy that Christ should come under his
roof: Saint Peter's voice was; Depart from me, for I am a sinful man: S.
Paul's; I am not worthy to be called an Apostle: yea, he confessed plainly, he
was the least of all the Apostles, and the chief of all sinners. Thus all the
children of God give glory to God, by downe-casting themselves. And if ye will
go thorough all the examples of the book of God, ye shall find, that they who
have been greatest in Gods estimation, have been always smallest in their own
eyes: the heart which has received most from God, (...) thinking least of it
self.

Alye.] The (...) ^cumstance is h^re, showing with what (...) proud did fight
against him, namely, with lies. Satan's two arms Satan's two arms whereby he
wrestles against the godly, are violence and lies.
by which he wrestles against the godly, are violence and lies: where he
cannot, or dare not use violence, there be sure he will not fail to fight with
lies. And herein does the Lord greatly show his careful providence, in fencing
his children against Satan's malice, and the proud bragges of his instruments,
in such sort, that their
proudest hearts are forced to forge lies; their malice being so great, that
they must do evil: and yet their power so bridled, that they cannot do what
they would.

The third circumstance, is in the words, they Lies trimmed up with the garment
of truth.
have imagined. Vatablus translates it, Concinnarunt mendacia. So Tremel. They
have trimmed up lies. As Satan can transform himself to an Angel of light: so
can he trim up his lies under couerings of truth, to make them the more
plausible unto men. And indeed, this is no small temptation, when lies made
against the godly, are trimmed up with the shadows of truth, and wicked men
cover their unrighteous dealings, with appearances of righteousness. Thus, not
only are the godly unjustly persecuted, but simple ones are made to believe,
that they have most justly deserved it. In this case, the godly are to sustain
themselves by the testimony of a good conscience.

But I will keep thy precepts.] David's enemies fought against him by lies. He
takes him to the obedience of Gods word. We should not fight We should not
fight against Satan and his instruments with their armor.
against the wicked with their own armor, rendering one wrong for another, a
lie for a lie, rebuke for rebuke: no more then David could fight against Goliath
with Saul his armor, which was like unto the armor of Goliath. If we encounter
Satan with his own armor, he shall soon overthrow us; for by striking,
lying, evil doing, we are deadly wounded: But to the weapons of flesh, we must
oppose the weapons of the spirit; ouerocmming, after the manner of our Lord,
the fury of men
with our patience; their persecutions with our prayers; their evil with our
good: so shall we either win them unto us, or else heap coals of Romans 12.
20.
fire on their heads.

With my whole heart.] See ver. 2. 10. 34. 58. 69.

VER. 70. Their heart is fat as grease: but my delight is in thy law.
David makes here an oppositio^, between David's disposition, and his enemies,
contrary.
his disposition, and the disposition of his enemies; showing how their heart
was become fat and senseless through their worldly wealth: but he, being
humbled by the rods of the Lord, had his delight in the law of God, and counted
more of it, then thousands of gold and silver.

When the godly look into their own hearts, or up unto GOD, they see in
themselves, such a power of corruption as humbles them, and How different
effects are wrought in godly men, by their different sights.
makes them account themselves the chief of all sinners: but when they look
to the effects of Gods grace in them, working a renouation which is not in the
wicked, then arises to them matter of rejoicing.

That which the Pharisee, in the pride of his heart spoke of the Publican, the
penitent Publican, in humility, and a good conscience, may turn over to the
Pharisee; I thank God, I am Luke 18.
not like this Pharisee. For the Christian, by the light of God, seeing the
miserable estate of the Acts 26. 29.
wicked, they could wish as St. Paul did to Agrippa, that the wicked were like
unto them; but would not change their state of grace, with the most honorable
estate that worldlings can have on earth, without grace.

In this that he says, their heart was fat as A soft and melting heart a
great blessing.
grease; he notes two things. First, that they abounded in worldly wealth.
Next, that their heart was become fat, senseless, and void of feeling. Quaedam
veluti crassities occupat coru^ corda, vt stupidi sint in sua obstinatione,
neque Deum curent, audeantque simul contra seruos eius insurgere: a certain
grossenes possesses their hearts, which makes them senseless in obstinacy. It
is the principal blessing of the new covenant, to have a soft, feeling, and
melting heart, like the heart of good A hard and stony heart, a fearful cu^se.
Josiah: but a hard heart, called a stony heart, an adamantine and stubborn
heart, is a great sign, and a sure forerunner of a further and more fearful
judgment to come, if it be not remedied. It is an enemy to grace; it is the
mother of presumptuous sins; it makes smallest sins irremissible; it makes a
man Gods adversary: for the Lord resists the proud. As two hard things when
they encounter together, the weakest of the^ is broken in pieces:
so is it with man, when with his hard heart he contends with the invincible
God. Let us pray we may be delivered from this plague of a hard heart.

But my delight.] see ver. 14. 16. 35. 76. 77. 174.

VER. 71. It is good for me, that I have been afflicted; that I may learn
thy statutes.
He renewes his former protestation How a sanctied cross may be discerned
from a cursed.
which he madever. 67. declaring how his afflictions made him more godly then
he was before. Hereby may we discern a sanctified cross, from a cursed: the
cross which makes thee better then thou wast, how sharp so ever it be, if it
work a correction of thee, thou may be sure it is a blessing. It is commonly
in the mouths of many, when they are in trouble, We must thank God for his
correction. But alas! how can that be called a correction, which Namely, if the
cross be a correction.
corrects thee not? If thou be not corrected with David, thou have matter of
grief in thy trouble but none of joy; and so can not say with David, It is
good for me, that I have been afflicted.

Affliction, as we said, ver. 67. in it own nature Nature of affliction
changed to the godly.
is evil, being a punishment of sin: but the Lord, who changed the bitter
waters of Marah, and made them sweet unto Israel, has also changed to his
children, the nature of the cross; that not only they find comfort in it, but
most happy effects are wrought in them by it.

In trouble we see three things better then in Three things we see in
trouble, better then in prosperity.
prosperity: First, how provident, merciful, and true the Lord is. Secondly,
how weak and miserable our selves are. Thirdly, how false and changable the
world is. Beside all these, it is an effectual mean, whereby the Lord beats
down the pride of Nature, and humbles us for our sins. Hagar was proud and
blind in Abraham's house: but in the wilderness she is humbled, and begins to
look to the Lord. Israel learned not to mourn until they were sent into
Babel. Jonas sleeps in the ship; but wakes, and prays in the Whales belly.
Blessed is the man whom the Lord corrects, Job. 5.
therefore refuse not the chastisement of the Almighty. For tribulation
brings forth patience; Romans 5.
patience, experience; experience, hope; and hope makes us not ashamed.

That I may learn.] He now condiscends in The cross makes a man learned by
experience.
particular, and shows what good he got by afflictions: he learned Gods
statutes by them. He speaks not of that learning which is gotten by hearing or
reading of Gods word; but of the learning which he had gotten by experience:
that he had felt the truth and comfort of Gods word more effectual and lively
in trouble, then he could do without trouble; which also made him more godly,
wise and religious when the trouble was gone. Wicked men are somewhat good when
they The goodness of wicked men, ends when their trouble ends: it is otherwise
with the godly.
are in affliction: but so soon as they are delivered, they return to their old
sins, as ye see in Pharao. These are like Iron, which is soft and will bow at
the workmans will when it is in the fire; but soon after it is drawn out, it
returns to the old hardness. These men use repentance, as worldlings do an old
garment: which they put about the^ in time of a shower, but cast it away so
soon as the weather becomes fair. It is otherwise with the godly; the fire of
affliction purges their dross, and makes them finer all the days of their
life: so that with good Ezechia, being once rightly humbled, they Esaias 38.
recount their bygone sins, in the bitterness of their heart, all their days.

VER. 72. The law of thy mouth, is better unto me, then thousands of gold and
silver.
David, at this time, being spoiled of his The less worldly comfort we have,
the stronger is the comfort of Gods word.
kingdom by Absalom (as Basile thinks) rejoices that he found more comfort
in Gods word, then all the gold, or silver, or treasures of Canaan could
afford. And indeed, the less worldly comfort we have, the greater find we
the comfort of the word of God.

But here his speech is to be marked; for he The authority of Gods word,
should be distinguished from the ministry thereof.
calls the word, the law of Gods mouth. Which leads us to consider two things
concerning it: the authority of the word; and so it is from Gods mouth: the
ministry of the word; and so it comes from man's mouth.

Sometime men look to the ministry of the word, and not to the authority of
it; and then it is no marvel they disesteeme of it: even as Samuel 1. Sam. 3.
ran to Eli, when he should have run to God; because he thought the voice
that called him, had been but the voice of Eli. So, many regard not the word,
because they take it to be the voice of man, and not of God.

Then thousands.] Worldly riches are gotten Vanity of worldly riches.
with labor, kept with care, lost with grief. They are false friends,
farthest from us, when we have most need of comfort: as all worldlings shall
try to be true in the hour of death. For then, as Jonas gourd was taken from
him in a morning, when he had most need of it against the Sun: so is it with
the comfort of worldlings. It is far otherwise with the word of God: for if
we will lay it up in our hearts, as Mary did, the comfort thereof shall sustain
us, when all other comfort shall fail us.

This is it that makes us rich unto God, when It is not poverty to want gold,
but to want grace.
our souls are Storehouses, filled with the treasures of his word. Shall we
think it poverty to be scant of gold and silver? An ideo Angelus pauper est,
quia non habet iumenta, etc. Shall we Chr^s. in Mat. hom. 9.
esteem the Angels poor, because they have not Otherwise, Angels might be
called poor.
flocks of Cattle? or that S. Peter was poor, because he had not gold nor
silver to give unto the Criple? No, he had store of grace, by infinite degress
more excellent then it.

Let the riches of gold be left unto worldlings: we have to remember, these
are not current in Canaan; not accounted of in our heavenly country. If we
would be in any estimation there, let us enrich our souls with spiritual
graces, which we have abundant in the Mines and treasures of the word of God.

IOD.
VER. 73. Thine hands have made me, and fashioned me: give me understanding,
that I may learn thy commandments.
THis verse has a petition for understanding, and a reason with it; I am tho
workmanship of thine hands, therefore give me understanding. Nemo Man is Gods
workmanship, and even in that respect beloved of God.
est qui operibus and beneficus suis non faueat. There is no man but he favors
the works of his hands. And shall not the Lord much more love his creature,
especially man, his most excellent creature? whom, if ye consider according to
the fashion of his body, Nihil poteris in terra pretiosius Ambr. in Psalm. 119.
iudicare: ye shall find nothing on earth more precious then he: Sed in eo quod
non videtur, multo pulchrior est; but in that which is not seen, namely his
soul, he is much more beautiful. So ye see, David's reasoning is very
effectual; all one as if he should say as he does elsewhere, Opus manuum
tuarum, ne deseras; Te authorem conuenio, te teneo conditorem, aliena praesidia
non quaro. Forsake not, o Lord, the work of thine hands; thou art my author
and maker; thine help I seek, and the help of none other.

No man can rightly seek good things from God, if he consider not what good
the Lord has None ca^ rightly seek from God, who consider not what he has
already done to them.
already done to him. But many are in this point so ignorant, that they know
not how wonderfully God did make them: and therefore, can neither bless him,
nor seek from him, as from their Creator and conseruer.

But this argument, drawn from our first The privileges of our first
creation, are all lost.
creation, no man can righly use it, but he who is through grace partaker of
the second creation: for all the privileges of our first creation, we lost
them by our fall. So that now by nature it is no comfort to us, nor matter of
our hope, that GOD did make us; but rather matter of We have neither hope, nor
comfort in the^.
our fear and distrust, that we have mismade ourselves, have lost his image,
and are not now like unto that which God created us in the beginning.

Give me understanding.] David knew, that A man without understanding, is a
companion of beasts.
a man without understanding, were he of never so noble blood, or comely of
personage, he is but a companion of beasts: and therefore the Spirit of GOD,
commonly gives the style of a man, unto man either made, or restored to the
image of God. But a man destitute of that image, Aut serpentem, aut equum, aut
vulpeculam, aut iumentum vocare consueuit: he calls, either a serpent, or a
horse, or a fox, or a beast.

That I may learn.] He shows here, what True knowledge is that which works
godliness.
is the understanding which he craved; namely, that he might learn to obey
the commandments of God.

It is not wisdom in Gods account, for a man to know all other things, and
be ignorant of himself: neither is this learning, to have knowledge of all
Sciences, and secrets of Nature, and to be without godliness. This is the
beginning Practice of pie^e, is the art of Arts.
of all wisdom, To fear GOD; and the Art of Arts, to practice piety.

To this purpose, said Ambrose, Quid tam obscurum Ambr. o^i. lib. 1. cap. 26.
quam de Astronomia tractare, and profundi aeris spatia metiri, relinquere
causam salutis, error is quaerere? Where, if says he, it be objected, Was not
Moses learned in all the learning Moses learning
of the Egyptians? let it be answered; So he was: but he thought all this
wisdom loss and foolishness, in comparison; and turned to seek GOD with
inward affection. Ideoque vidit, interrogavit, audiuit loquentem Deum: he saw
therefore, he asked, and heard God speaking unto him.

VER. 74. So they that fear thee, seeing me, shall rejoice; because I trusted
in thee.
THe godly, in ordering their life, have a respect first unto God; that he may
have glory. Next, to themselves; that in conformity with The three designs of
a godly man.
God, they may have peace and comfort. And thirdly, unto his neighbor; to give
unto him that is godly, matter of joy and edification, by his godly life:
according to that precept of our Savior, Let your light so shine before men,
that they seeing your godly conversation, may glorify your Father, who is in
heaven.

Beside this, appears the great power and virtue The power of godliness.
of godliness; that even the very sight of a godly man, ministers joy to the
godly, terror to the wicked. Plerisque iusti aspectus admonitio correctionis
Amb. in Psalm. 119.
est, perfectioribus vero laetitia: to many men, the sight of a righteous man
is a warning of correction. For they are admonished, what need they have to
amend their life, that The sight of a godly man, suppose he be silent, teaches
others.
they may be like unto him: but to such as have profited more in godliness, it
is always a matter of joy.

Quam pulchrum ergo si videaris, and prosis? How excellent a thing then is
this, that as often as thou art seen, so often thou do good?

And again, there is such a fellowshippe and The communion which is among
Christians.
communion, among all the lively members of Christ his mystical body, that
they mourn together, they rejoice together; the grace of God communicated to
one, is a cause of joy to all the rest. Bonis enim insitu^ est, vt virtutes su
as in alijs ame^t. It is the property of the godly, to love those virtues in
others, which either they have, or would in themselves: to envy the good of
another, and be grieved thereat, is a devilish thing. Infirm Joshua may
murmr, when Medad and Eldad prophecy in the assembly of the people; but
meek Moses shall rejoice, and wish that all the Lords people did prophecy in
like manner.

Because I trusted in thee.] Gods working The working of God with one of his
servants, teaches all the rest.
with any one of his servants, is a confirmation of all the rest: for what he
is to one that fears him, he is unto all that fear him. So that mercy showed
to any penitent, and promises performed to any believing man, should confirm
us in the assurance of the like favor of God to be found by our selves, if we
also repent and believe in him.

VER. 75. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou have
afflicted me justly.
THis Verse consists of a thanksgiving; To praise God in affliction is a great
grace.
wherein he ascribes to the Lord the praise of truth and righteousness, in
afflicting him. Many use to praise God in prosperity, who in time of trouble,
impatient of his heavy hand, murmr against him: but such as are truly godly,
do then bless the Lord most heartily, when he seems to deal with them most
hardly; giving him the praise of equity, and acknowledging
that his greatest rodds are not so great as their sins; as also the praise of
fidelity, that according to his word, he afflicts his children, for no other
cause but to purge them, and make them more capable of grace and consolation.

I know.] How is this seeing the Apostle says, All Gods ways are righteous,
suppose we see them not.
Romans II. that the judgments of God are unsearchable, and his ways past
finding out? The answer is: David does not so speak, as if he were privy to all the secret ways of God; but that thus much he knew in general: that all his
judgments, whereby he strikes either the godly or the wicked, were all right;
suppose the causes and particular ends of them were secret. And this knowledge
is learned out of the word: The Lord is righteous in all his works, and holy
in all his ways. And again, All the ways of God are mercy and truth to them
that fear him. And again, All things work for the best to them that love him.

And it is the want of this knowledge that Ignorance of this makes men murmr
where they have no cause.
makes us oftentimes to murmr or faint, and be discouraged at the works of
God; apprehending in our ignorance, that to be evil which in Gods working is
good, and directed to a good end. For if we saw the end of Gods work, which
is ever his glory, the good of his Church, and every member thereof; we would
not offend at his works, whereby he works that end; a way that is unpleasant
to us, because it is unknown to us.

That thy judgment.] The judgment of God Judgment put for plagues, and for
corrections.
is taken in two significations: first, for the plagues whereby he punishes
wicked men in his anger, proportional to their sins. And this judgment
David declines, Psalm. 143. Enter not into judgment with thy servant: Secondly,
for the rods and corrections, wherewith he chastises his own children. And
these are called judgments, because iudiciously he measures and Why the
crosses of godly men are called judgments.
moderates them, according as the state of his children requires; not pouring
out the full viol of his wrath, as he does on the wicked, but proffering a
temperate cup to be drunken by his own, as their weakness may bear it. And
in this sense Ambrose speaking of Gods chastisements, says, Omnia Dei iudicio
fiunt. That he sends Amb. in P^s. 119
sickness rather then health; poverty and not wealth; it is because in his
most judicious consideration, he finds it expedient that it should be so.

Thus then we see, how among many other Afflictions of the godly and wicked
differ.
differences between the afflictions of the godly and the wicked, they differ
also these two ways: first, in measure; Has he smitten Jacob as he 1. In
measure. Esa. 27. 7.
smote those that smote him? No, no: he powers a violl on the one, but
pro^ereth a moderate cup to the other: secondly, in the end; 2. In their ends.
for, the one he strikes for punishment, the other for purgation.

And that thou have (...) me justly.

More of this see ver. 7. 20. 30. 39. 43. 52. 62. 75. 67. 107.

VER. 76. I pray thee that thy mercy may comfort me, according to thy promise,
made to thy servant.
IN the former Verse he acknowledged the Lord had afflicted him: now in this
he prays Faith and not nature, teaches a man to run to the hand that
strikes him. Hos. 6. 1.
the Lord to comfort him. This is strange, that a man should seek comfort at
the same hand that strikes him: it is the work of faith; Nature will never
teach us to do it. Come, and let us return to the Lord; for he has spoiled,
and he will heal us: he has wounded and he will bind us up.

Again, we see that the crosses which God Comfort for men under crosses.
lays on his children, are not to confound, nor to consume them; only to
prepare them for greater consolations. With this, David sustained himself
against Shimei his cursing; The Lord will look on my affliction, and do me
good for this evil: with this, our Savior comforts his Disciples; Your
mourning shall be turned into joy. As the last estate of Job was better then
his first; so shall the Lord render more to his children at the last, then now
at the first he takes from them: let us therefore bear his cross, as a
preparatiue to comfort.

According to thy promise.] David had a particular promise of a particular
benefit; to weet, the Promise of mercy, rendered more joy to David, then the
promise of a kingdom.
kingdom of Israel. And this promise God performed unto him; but his comfort
stood not in it. For Saul before him had the kingdom: but the promises of mercy
belonged not to him; and therefore, when God forsook him, his kingdom could not
sustain him. But David here depends upon the general promises of Gods mercy
made to his children: wherein, he acknowledges a particular promise of mercy
made to him. For the general promises of mercy and grace, made in the Gospel,
faith makes them particular to every believer. Of this, see verse 41. 58. 76.
170.

VER. 77. Let thy tender mercy come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is
my delight.
HE prayed before for mercy; now again Mercy received, makes the godly thirst
for more.
he prays for mercy. The children of God have such an earnest and fervent
desire of mercy, that what-euer sense thereof they get, they still cry for more:
and sure it is, in this life they can never be satisfied. Neuertheless, happy
are they who now hunger and thirst, for hereafter they shall be satisfied. And
when I awake, Psalm. 17. 15.
I shall be satisfied with thine image.

But if we mark more narrowly, we shall find, Three ranks of mercy craved by
the godly.
that David here seeks another sort of mercy then he sought before. For
first, he sought mercy, to forgive his sins: then he sought mercy, to
comfort him in his troubles: now he seeks mercy, to live and sin no more.
Alas, many seek the first mercy, of remission; and the second mercy, of
consolation in trouble; who are altogether careless of the third mercy, to
live well. It is a great mercy of GOD to amend thy life: where this is not, let
no man think he has received either of the former. Magna est miseratio Dei,
quae non solemn remissionem tribuit peccatoru^, sed etiam certantibus addit
calcaria, vt in suscepto certamine pergant. It is a great mercy of God,
which not only pardons evil that is done, but strengthens us also to further
good that we have not done: and this is the mercy which here David seeks.

For thy law is my delight.] Of this reason, see verse 70.

VER. 78. Let the proud be ashamed: for they have dealt wickedly, and falsely
with me.
David here prays, not against the person Prayer against enemies, how it
should be framed.
of his enemies; but against their course, their false and wicked dealing
against him: Or rather, as we may think with Basile, Orat pro Basil in Psalm
119.
inimicis. The reason hereof is given by Ambrose, Ambrose in Psalm 119.
Pudor enim plerumque corrector est nostri: and dum incipit nos pudere
commissi, ne diutius pudeat deserere, quaeerubescenda sunt, admonemur. For
shame oftentimes corrects our ways: when we think shame of that which we
have done, we are admonished, not to do that again, which may make us more
ashamed in time to com. For where Shame with contempt, reward of sin.
a gentle shame cannot move men to amend, it is a just recompense of God, to
pour upon them shame, with contempt and confusion.

Still we see, how the Spirit of God styles the The wicked are proud men.
wicked by the name of proud men: for a wicked man shakes off the yoke of God,
and will not be subject to his Maker; and so spares not to exalt himself over
men in such sort, that there is nothing in man so sacred, so worthy reverence,
which he tramples not under his feet.

But here is the just recompense of his pride, A proud man ^is just punishment.
Let the proud be ashamed. He would feign have honor or pre-eminence; which
God will not give unto him: he flies shame and contempt; but God shall pour
them upon him.

For they have dealt.] He complains of the Let us not look for peace from the
wicked.
wicked, and false dealing of his enemies against him: and it is written to
uphold us in the like tentation. For Satan is always like himself, hating them
whom the Lord loves; he may well be Satan may wex worse, but shall never be
better.
worse, he can never be better: and therefore with restless malice stirs he
up all his cursed instruments, in whom he reigns, to persecute them who are
loved and protected of the Lord.

But I meditate.] David's enemies fought against David's armor.
him, with the armor of flesh, wickedness, and falsehood: he withstands them
by the armor of the Spirit; not meeting wickedness with wickedness, and
falsehood with falsehood. For if we fight against Satan, with Satan's armor, he
shall soon overcome us: but if we put upon us the complete armor of God to
resist him, he shall flee from us. See ver. 69.

VER. 79. Let such as fear thee, turn unto me, and they that know thy
testimonies.
AS he was troubled by the wicked, so he Every Christian has need of another
help.
prays that he may find help and comfort in the godly. God has joined his
children into one happy fellowship; for his Church is a communion of Saints:
yet so, that he has distributed his graces to every one of them in so wise a
manner, that there is not one of them, who stands not in need of the help and
comfort of one another: where one doubts, another has light By reason of the
diversity of grace dispensed to the^.
to resolve; where one is grieved, another has the word of consolation to
uphold him; and where one is weak under any temptation, the Lord has
appointed the stronger to bear his infirmities: and this is the benefit which
here David craves.

Basile so expounds these words, as if David for his sin had been separate from
the congregation of Gods people, as Miriam was for her leprosy; Public sin,
is like Miriams leprosy, that separated her from the Congregation.
and therefore, now prays again, that he may be received into the communion of
Gods people. Which more clearly is expressed, by the translation of Symmachus;
Conuersentur mecum timenteste: Let such as fear thee, have conversation with
me; and let me not be abhorred of them.

How-euer it be, we may see that the hearts of Why God suffers the countenance
of good men, to be cast down on other good men.
men, are in the hands of the Lord: and that ma ny times, godly men are made
strange to other godly men. Wherein, the Lord has no other respect, but that
our hearts should not depend upon the testimony of man. God is so jealous over
his children, and will have their hearts so wholly bound unto himself, that he
cannot be content we should put our comfort, or seek our approbation in any
creature. And in this sort did he so humble David, that as he protests, Psalm
69. he found not one to comfort him; and all for this end, that he might
learn to comfort himself in the Lord his God.

In this description of the children of God, we Knowledge and ^are of God
^equired together.
see how fear and knowledge are required to make up a godly man: knowledge of
GOD without fear, breeds presumption; and fear of GOD without knowledge,
breeds superstition: as we see how the Gentiles, fearing a divinity which they
knew not, have fallen into most beastly Idolatry.

CAPH.
VER. 81. My soul faints for thy salvation: yet I wait for thy word.
David being sore troubled by wicked Desertions spiritual, do sore cast
down the godly.
men, and finding that God delaied to comfort and deliver him, was sore
dejected and cast down in his own mind: so that his soul fainted, his eyes
failed, and his body became like a bottle in the smoke. All hatred, and
inimitie of man, is easily comported, where God shows his favorable face: but
when the godly are sore troubled by men, and find not their souls comforted of
God, their strength fails them. Even as the body, wanting natural helps to
refresh it, becomes As a body wanting meat fain^th: so etc.
faint, and falls in a swoune: so the soul, destitute of heavenly comfort,
languisheth. For the godly live by mercy; and can no more endure to want the
sense of mercy, then the body can consist without those natural means, which
increase and conserve the life thereof.

Yet does he never so faint, but that some life The godly never so faint, that
they lose all life.
remains in him; for he subioynes immediately, I wait for thy word. Waiting
for comfort, is an action of faith, and an effect of life. As in the midst of
Winter, there is a substance in the Oak and Elm, even when it seems to be
dead: so is it with the Christian; in his greatest extremities,
some spark of life remains in him. For the life o^ Christ Jesus whereby he
lives, is of that nature that it cannot die: it may be weakened, but can not be
extinguished. Our petitions should all be warranted by the word.


For thy word.] In the first part of the verse, he protested that he waited
for Gods salvation; and now he says, he waited for Gods word. Teaching us
first, not to seek any thing from God, which his word warrants us not to crave.
And next, how we should give such credit to the word of God, as to believe it;
even then, when in our sense there is no likelihood of the performance of it.

VER. 82. Mine eyes fail for thy promise: when will thou comfort me?
IT is a customable manner of Gods working Answer of our prayers delaied many
times, and why.
with his children, to delay the answer of their prayers, and suspend the
performance of his promises: not because he is unwilling to give; but because
he will have them better prepared to receive, Tardius dando quod petimus
instantia^ nobis Chrysostom. in Math.
orationis indicit: he is slow to give that which we seek, that we should not
seek slowly, but may be wakened to instancie and feruencie in prayer, which he
knows to be the service most acceptable unto him, and most profitable unto our
selves. And for this cause, continuance in prayer is commended unto us by the
Apostle.

VER. 83. For I am like a bottle in the smoke: yet do I not forget thy
statutes.
He still insists in his former complaint, The troubles of the mind distemper
the body.
declaring how the greatness of his inward anguish, had extenuated and worn the
natural strength of his body, so that he was become like a bottle dried in the
smoke; his skin contracted, withered and wrinkled with the greatness of his
grief. The like he has Psa. 32. that the moisture of his body, was turned
into the drouth of Summer. The troubles of the mind affect the body, and
distemper it: and the best way, in such cases, to mitigate bodily diseases, is
to pacify the mind.

But again, when we see the great anguish of David's Gods children exercised
with sharp afflictions.
mind, and how his beautiful body was now become but a withered skin; let us
consider how how hardly the Lord deals with his children, whom he loves most
dearly. He judges us in this world, that we should not be condemned in the
world to come. By the fire of affliction, he burns up the superfluities of our
nature, which in prosperity increase upon us, to the great hinderance of the
work of our salvation. And again, that he Reasons hereof given.
may make us capable of heavenly comfort, he takes carnal comforts away from
us: for so long as we are delighted with the one, we can never feel the
consolation of the other. This should learn us, not to be discouraged, when in
the same manner God deals hardly with us. His rods may be sharp: but his way is
mercy. He may do to his children, as Joseph did to his brethren; speak roughly
to them, and make himself strange toward them: but his loving affection cannot
ever be hid from them.

VER. 84. How many are the days of thy servant? when will thou execute
judgment on them that persecute me?
THis verse contains a supplication; wherein The reason of David's supplication.
David craves, that God would judge between him and his enemies. The reason he
uses, lurks in the Interrogation; How many are my days? My time is not long,
my days are but few: then let them not pass comfortless; but let me see that
thou art a God of judgment (who wilt do according to thy word) and men: There
Psalm. ^8. 11.
is fruit for the righteous: Verily, there is a God that judges righteously on
the earth.

To show the brevity of man's life, he reckneth Man's life measured by days,
not years.
it not by years, but by days. And this consideration of the shortness of our
life, David uses it as an argument, sometime to move the Lord to compassion,
and sometime to stir up himself to further piety and godliness: as we may
see Psa. 39. And truly, it were good for us, oftener then we do, to think upon
this question of David's, How A question always to be remembered.
many are my days? For we are deceived with the shadow of this life,
co^ceiting it to be longer, then we shall find it to be: whereof it comes to
pass,
that men are prodigal of their days, as if they would never be done. Their
rents, their money, their garments, or any other thing they have, they spend
sparingly, and with moderation; only they are wasters of their days, as if
they had Methusalems years in a treasure. Let us pray with Moses, for grace
to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. When we look
to the bygone time, and see how we have
misspent it; when we look to the time to come, and see how uncertain we are
of it, let us redeem the time we have, to use it well.

When will thou execute.] David was far from Prayer against our enemies, how it
should be framed.
hatred, cruelty, or private affection: for in all these his petitions he was
the penman of the holy Ghost, and spoke nothing of any private motion. Where,
that we may know how far forth we are to follow him in these, let us
remember, that God executes two sorts of judgments upon Such judgments as are
preparatiues to mercy, may be prayed for.
men: some are preparatiues to mercy; such as were inflicted upon Saul, when
he went to persecute the Saints at Damascus: he was cast from his horse, and
strooken with blindness: and for these we may pray, that God will execute them
upon them, who are sleeping in their sins; that rather they may be wakened by
Gods judgments, and moved to repent, then perish in their impiety. But not
those judgments that are forerunners of wrath.
Others again of his judgments, are but forerunners of that great and last
judgment, which he will execute on all the wicked; such as were the punishments
of Caine and Judas. The first, works conversion; the second, confusion; and for
these we can not pray against our enemies: because, howsoever their works be
evil for the present,
yet we know not what the Lord may do with them hereafter.

Who persecute me.] David was a godly man* Godly men, evil recompensed of the
world.
approved of God, and a profitable instrument to his King and Country. When
Saul was vexed, he did mitigate his trouble with the Harp: he slew Goliath,
and overthrew the Philistims: yet ye see how he is recompensed. Such commonly
is the reward which godly men get in this world, at the hands of them, to
whom they have been instruments of greatest good.

And this persecution, many ways are the wicked Sundry sorts of persecution.
guilty of. The railing of Shimei against David; the mocking of Isaac by
Ismael: these the world esteems no sins, or very small; but the Lord ranks
them in among bloody sins, and calls them persecution: learning all men not
to speak evil, or scorn the godly, least they fall into greater sins then
they are aware of.

VER. 85. The proud have dug pits for me; which is not after thy law.
HE insists still in his complaint against his Enemies of David described.
enemies; and describes them first from the quality of their persons: They were
proud. Next, from their labor and subtilty; They dug pits for him. Thirdly,
from their manifest iniquity; Their courses against him, were not according to
Godslaw.

The proud. See ver. 69. 21. 51. 78. 85.

Have dug pits.] Their labor and subtlety Pridecan humble it self for a
greater vantage.
whereby they oppugned David, is here noted. Whereby this seems strange, that
a proud man should be a digger of pits: but so it is, that pride for a time can
submit it self, for a greater vantage over him whom it would tread under foot.
The wicked is so proud, that he seeks not God: yet he Psalm. 10. 4. 10.
croucheth and boweth, to cause heaps of the poor fall by his might. So proud
Absalom abased himself, to do all men reverence; subiecting himself, to
meanest subjects: that so he might prepare a way to usurpation over his king
and father.

But mark; he says not that he had fallen in the The wicked are taken in their
own s^are.
pits which his enemies had dug. No, no: in Gods righteous judgments, the
wicked are snared in the work of their own hands, while the godly escape free.
He has made a pit and dug it, and Psalm. 7. 15.
is fallen in the pit that he made: his mischief shall return upon his own
head, and his cruelty upon his own pate. Thus Haman hanselled the gallows
Example hereof in Saul and Haman.
which he raised for Mordecai: and Saul, when he thought by subtilty to slay
David with the Philistims sword (when he sent him out to seek two hundredth of
their fore-skinnes in a dowry) was disappointed of his purpose: but he
himself at length was slain by their sword.

Which is not after thy law.] As David by this Comfort when we see wicked men
are our enemies.
aggrauates the gross impiety of his adversaries; so does he also greatly
comfort himself. For why shall we be discouraged, to have these men our
enemies, of whom we clearly see, that neither their persons nor actions are
according to Gods law?

VER. 86. All thy commandments are true: they persecute me falsely; help me.
Here he reasons from the equity of his The Word gives comfort against all
trouble.
cause, and the iniquity of his enemies: and upon these sends he up his prayer,
Lord help me. As for my enemies, they persecute me falsely and without a cause;
as for me, I know thy commandments are all true, and that they cannot be
deceived who depend upon them, nor yet prosper that are against them. He shall
never want comfort in trouble, who cleaues unto the word of God: who ever be
against us, keep it on our side, and it shall be well with us.

Again it is to be marked, that he declines no Profitable for us to be
exercised with afflictions.
persecution, but seeks Gods help in it. He knew, that all they who will line
godly in Christ, must suffer persecution; Deuotionem fidei, praelia
persequuntur, and Cito fides inexercitata languescit; Faith not exercised with
tentation easily languishes: yea, since the Lord chastises every one whom he
loves, he may justly suspect himself, who lives without a cross. Si desint
certamina, vereor ne deesse videatur, quicertare desideret; If Amb. in Ps. 119
there be a man who has no battle, it is to be feared, least he be such a one
as desires not to fight:
and so what can he be but a captive of Satan?

But in all our persecutions let us ever take heed We should take heed to the
cause for which we are troubled. Cyprian.
that our cause be righteous, and we may say, They persecute me falsely: potest
enim quis persecutiones pati and non unjust: and it is ever Causa non poena
facit Martyrem. But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or an
evil doer, or a busy body: if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not 1.
Pet. 4.
be ashamed, but glorify God in this behalf.

Help me.] Profane mockers think that a man is weak when he is driven to
Gods help; but indeed then he is strongest when he is weakest in him self,
and seeks help in his God. So long as we depend on the arm of flesh, whether
it be our own or others, the Lord will do the less for us: but when
distrusting our selves we rely upon him, then is he strongest to work for us.

VER. 87. They had almost consumed me upon earth; but I for sooke not thy
precepts.
IN this verse are two things; a complaint of the malice of his enemies, and a
protestation of Malice of the wicked is insatiable against the godly.
his constant affection toward the word of God. In the first he complains, they
had not only troubled him, but almost consumed him: the malicious cruelty of
the wicked is insatiable, it cannot be quenched: nay, not by death; for even
after death they rent both the name and the bodies of godly men. David was not
thus far delivered They rent both their names and their bodies after they are
dead.
into his enemies hands; but he complains, that their malice almost had undone
him. We mark it for this end, that we may know it is Gods great providence,
that at any time we live among the wicked, and are not consumed by them.

Secondly, we mark here the great weakness and infirmity of Gods children,
who oftentimes It is man's infirmity to be cast down with tentations coming
from men more then those that come from God.
are more discouraged with those tentations which come immediately from men, then
with those others which com immediately from God; in the one they stand strong;
in the other they faint and are overcome. Surely because we are in a great
part carnal, therefore is it, that the want of man's comfort and countenance
commoues us. If we were as we should be, or as Nazianzen Nazian.
compares us, like Rocks in the Sea; what
would we regard the wind of men's mouths, or raging waves of their turbulent
affections? As an arrow shot at a stone, returns to him who sent it, or
otherwise falls down to the ground: so an injury done to a spiritual man, who
is built like a lively stone upon the Rock Christ Jesus, returns to the doer,
but troubles not the receiver. If it be otherwise, that we consume and faint
for the injuries of men, all this weakness proceeds from our unregenerate
nature.

Thirdly, we mark here the Lords dispensation, Why God will have his children
brought very low by affliction.
in his manner of working with his children; who not only suffers them to be
troubled, but brought so low by trouble, that in their own sense they are
almost consumed. Both in outward and inward troubles does the Lord humble them
so far, that they are brought even to the door of death, that so their faith
and his truth may be the more manifested. Thus the Apostle protests, that he
received in himself the sentence of 2. Cor. ^.
death; all for this end, that he might learn not to trust in himself, but
in God, who raises the dead. For so long as in danger there is any hope of
remedy, our infidelity casts her eye a wrong Infidelity ready to go ^
whooring from God.
way: but when we are brought to such extremity, that with Peter we begin to
sink in affliction, then we look to the Lord; we c^aue the help of his hand,
and he releeueth us; and we cannot but acknowledge that our d^iuerance is
come from him only: and so by the greatness of our trouble, our faith is
^roborate, and the praise of Gods truth more (...) manifested.

VER. 88. Quicken me, according to thy loving kindness: so shall I keep the
testimonies of thy mouth.
MAny a time in this Psalm does David Desertion is like death to the godly.
make this petition: and it seems strange, that so often he should acknowledge
himself a dead man, and desire God to quicken him. But so it is unto the child
of God; every desertion, and decay of strength, is a death: so desirous are
they to live unto GOD, that when they fail in it, and find any inabilitie in
their souls to serve GOD* as they would, they account themselves but dead, and
pray the Lord to quicken them.

According to thy loving kindness.] He oppones Gods kindness is our defense
against man's malice.
Gods kindness to his enemies malice; and it is very comfortable: I am
troubled with their malice for thy sake; and therefore I crave to be refreshed
with thy kindness: acknowledging, that in Gods kindness, there is comfort
enough against all the malice of wicked men whatsoever; according to that
opposition which he makes in another place: Why boastest thou thy self
Psalm 52. 1.
in thy malice? the loving kindness of the Lord indureth daily.

David knew a twofold kindness or benignity in God: One general, extended
to all his creatures; A twofold kindness in God.
whereof he speaks, Psalm 145. All living Psalm. 145.
creatures depend upon thee, and thou give them meat in due season. Another,
special; toward his own beloved in Christ: and for this he prays, Psalm
106. Visit me with the salvation Psalm. 106.
of thy people. And again; Look upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou
use to those that fear thy name. And for this now he prays, that God would
be good unto him: not only by that general kindness, by the which as a
Creator he is good unto all his creatures, but according to his special
favor; whereby, as a loving father, he abounds in kindness, toward all his
children in Christ Jesus.

So shall I keep the testimonies of thy mouth.] Man without grace is but dead,
and can do no good.
He protests here* that (...) the Lord quicken him, there is no strength in
him to obey, nor to do any other ac^ ^ing to Gods spiritual worsh^ (...) ^
dead man can do actions (...) natural life. Presumptuous professors reproved.


But the presumptu^ (...)* of his age, find no difficulty in the (...) they
can pray well enough, (...) ^mselues:
but they are saire de^; (...) Lord renew his mercy towar^ (...), and (...)
daily by his spirit of grace, we shall be bu^ (...) senseless stocks in
praising, praying, (...) the Lord our God. Non enim commun^ (...) custodit
coeleste mandatum, sed illa quae (...) fulcitur aeterno per operatione^ gratiae
spiritualis for it is not this common life which keeps the heavenly
commandment; but that life which is sustained by the eternal, and spiritual
operation of the grace of God, which the Lord may increase, and conserve in us
for ever.

LAMED.
VER. 89. O Lord, thy word endures for ever in heaven.
IN the last Section, David complained A comfortable meditation of the
eternity of Gods word.
to God of the malicious doings of his enemies; he comes now to show what
sustained him in his troubles: to weet, the certainty and eternity of the
word of God; by the which he considers, that both heaven and earth were
sustained: and thereof concludes, that so long as he trusted to Gods word, he
could not fail. So that he gives this glory to the Lord, that his word only
kept him, that he perished not in his affliction.

Thy word.] David here makes a secret opposition The word of God, opposed to
the word of man.
between the words of his enemies, and Gods word. Sore was he troubled with the
long tou^gs of the wicked. Hoc enim est opus diaboli, vt seruos Dei mendacio
laceret, and falsis opinionibus gloriosum Cypr. lib. 4. Epist. 2.
nomen infamet; vt qui conscientiae suaeluce clarescunt, alienis rumoribus sor
didentur. It is true which Philo says, Veritas opinione melior est, non tamen
est negligenda fama: truth is better then opinion; Philo.
and it makes not much, what wrong opi The good name of a christian should be
regarded: and why.
nion be conceived of us: yet the same or good name of a man is not to be
neglected (specially if he be in a public office) that by his name he may do
good unto others. But because this cannot be obtained, and Innocence itself
cannot hold off the scourge of the tongue, we must oppone the word of God, to
the words of wicked men; resting Innocence defends us not from the calumnies of
m^n.
with Io^ in this, That our witness is in heaven: and with S. Paul, in the
testimony of a good conscience. Then shall we not be discouraged for the words
of man, having both Gods word, and our own conscience, to warrant us.

And for our farther comfort, let us remember Words of men most effectless,
when they are stoutest.
how the words of men, when they are greatest, are most vain and effectlesse;
and on the contrary, that GOD is as good, as his word; yea, and better, doing
more then can be expressed by word.

It was a proud word of Iezabel, God do so to me, and more also, if I have not
the head of Elijah ere tomorrow at this time: but the dogs got her head, and
she got not the head of Elijah. Such also were the words of Sennacherib,
boasting by Rabsache, that he would make the inhabitants of Jerusalem to drink
their own piss: but these were vain words, and vanished with the wind. Only
the counsel of the Lord stands: what he determines, shall be done; and as he
speaks, it shall assuredly come to pass.

In heaven.] By this, Basile understands Angelorum What is meant here by heaven.
coetus coelum inhabitants, qui diuin^m legem custodiunt: the company of
innumerable Angels, who observe the law of God. But the words following,
declare he means the frame of the same visible works; wherein the constancy
of Gods truth does appear most manifestly.

For two causes then does David so speak. First, The changes of this world,
cumber our faith.
to draw us from looking to the instabilitie of things here upon earth
(wherein are restless changes and vicissitudes) to a consideration of the
stabilitie of Gods decree in heaven. Vtcunque versentur res humanae, and omnia
sint varijs inclinationibus Vatab.
obnoxia, tamen verbum Dei non est subiectum ordini naturali: In earth, the
word of God is not only controuerted, but contradicted Then it is good to
look up unto heaven.
and resisted; and the state of things so mutable, that oftentimes the wicked
prosper and are exalted, the godly cast down, and sore oppressed. To uphold us
against this tentation, let us look up, and cast the anchor of our souls
within the veil: Heb. 6. 19.
there we shall see an unchangeable decree of God, which shall change all these
things again, and bring to the end spoken of in his word.

The other cause why he so speaks, is, that this The visible frame of heaven, a
witness of Gods eternal truth.
visible frame of the heaven, stands as an eternal witness of the verity of
Gods word, that he will not retreat nor call back that which he speaks: for
he once commanded the heavens to be, and incontinent they were, and ever since
continue. Thus we see how the godly profit by looking into the works of God;
ever drawing some spiritual consideration out of them: but of this hereafter.

VER. 90. Thy truth is from generation to generation: thou have laid the
foundation of the earth, and it abides.
AS he collected the certainty of Gods word, by the indurance of heaven; so
now The creatures cannot teach the way of salvation, but confirm us in it.
he confirms it, by considering the foundation of the earth. Since the
foundation of the earth, made by the word of God, abides sure, shall we not
think, that the foundation of our salvation,
laid in Christ Jesus, is much more sure? Though the creatures cannot teach us
the way of salvation (for, that we must learn by the word) yet do they
confirm that which the word says. Thus says the Lord, who gives the Sun
for a Iere. 31. 35.
light to the day, and the courses of the Moon and Stars for a light to the
night; If these ordinances depart out of my sight, then shall the seed of
Israel cease from being a Nation before me for ever. As there Jeremy gathers
the stabilitie The certainty of our salvation
of the Church, from the stabilitie of the creatures: so here David co^firmes
the certainty of our salvation, by the most certain and unchangeable course of
the creatures: and both of them are amplified by Christ Jesus; Heaven and earth
may pass, but one jot of Gods word shall not fall to the ground. Let us
therefore be strengthened in the faith, and give glory to God.

Tho^ have laid.] This work of God is often mentioned in holy Scripture, to
commend the The glory of God shines in the work of creation. Job. 38.
glory of Gods wisdom and power. Yea, the Lord himself glories in it: as ye
see in his speech to Job; Where was^ thou when I laid the foundation of the
earth? declare, if thou can, who laid the measures thereof? who first stretched
the line over it? whereupon are the foundations of it set? or who laid the
corner stone thereof? He has founded it without Earth founded without a
foundation.
a foundation: for the pillars of the earth, mentioned by Anna, are no other
but his word and decree. But alas! how great is our stupiditie? we walk upon
earth, and it bears us up: but we never consider, how God sustaineth it by
his mighty power, that we may give glory to him.

And it abides.] As the Lord by his word made the worlds; so bears he up
all things by Creation as a mother; Providence a nurse conseruing things
created.
his mighty word. Creation is as the mother, and Providence the nurse and
conseruer of all the works of God. God is not like man; for he, when he has
made a work, cannot maintain it: he
builds a ship, and cannot save it from shipwreck; he edifies a house, but
cannot keep it from decay: it is otherwise with God; we daily see his
conseruing power, upholding his creatures: which should confirm us, that he
will not cast us off, nor suffer us to perish (since we are the works of his
hands) if we do depend upon him, and give him the glory of our Creator,
Conseruer, and Redeemer.

VER. 91. They continue to this day by thine ordinance: for all are thy
servant.
THe same argument by which David here Out of the wholesome word profane men
(like wasps) gather poison.
proves the truth of Gods word, is used by profane mockers to improve it. Where
is (say they) the promise of his coming? for since the fathers died, all
things continue alike from the 2. Pet. 3. 4.
beginning of the Creation. There is so great difference between a godly, and a
godless heart, that where the one of every thing learnes to be more godly; the
other learnes to be more profane: like poysonable Waspes, who out of most
wholesome herbs, gather nothing but poison.

For all are thy servants.] From the Angel to All creatures, from the Angel to
the worm, serve the Lord of Hosts.
the worm, all serve him: he is the Lord of Hosts; let us also serve him, and
then shall they serve us. But it is both sin and shame, that where the raging
water, and furious fire serve God at his command, only man, made to his own
image, disobeyes him. And therefore again, fearful is the recompense; that
where it is said, The Lord Psalm.
rejoices in all his works, of man only the Lord said, It repents me that I
made man. Gene. 6.


The Lord grant it may repent us, that ever we offended so good a God: and so
the Lord may be pacified toward us in Christ Jesus.

VER. 92. Except thy law had been my delight, I should now have perished in
mine affliction.
HE now declares unto us what profit he Since other creatures are vpholde^ by
his word, much more the Christian.
made of his former meditation: to weet, that the certainty of Gods word kept
him, that he perished not in his affliction. Since he saw it was a sure and
powerful word, whereby other creatures were sustained, he collects it could
never fail him: and so leaning upon it, he found him self vpholden by it in
his greatest afflictions.

Let us learn of David, to seek our comfort in Comfort which is not from Gods
word, brings two great evils.
time of trouble, out of the word of GOD: for all other comfort, which is
sought with neglect of this comfort, brings two great evils. First, it
increases grief, how-euer for a time it seem to mitigate it. And next, it
leaves a man destitute, when he has most need of comfort. Only the comfort
of Gods word bides with us, when all other comfort for sakes us.

My delight.] The word signifies delights, in The word has comfort for every
estate of life.
the plural number. Many were the sorrows of David's life: but against them
all, he found as many comforts and delectations in Gods word. With such
variety of holy wisdom, has God penned his word, that it has convenient
comfort for every state of life: and therefore the children of God account
nothing so dear as it; they prefer it to their appointed food. Yea, as the
body cannot live out of the own element of air; so cannot the soul of a
godly man, without comfort of the An answer to worldlings, who say they find no
delight in Gods word.
word. Where, if it be objected to us by worldlings, Where are those manifold
delights which ye say are in the word? we hear nothing but one and the self
same thing repeated unto us: The best answer to them is, Come and see. Taste
and consider
how gracious the Lord is: and ye shall find, that every repetitio^ of it
brings new delight. And this they may learn by their natural affection toward
bodily food: which is so great, that the same kind of food, whereupon they
feed this day, they long for it again to morrow; and with a new appetite,
long to have renewed every day. And if they were as well acquainted with the
spiritual life, their affection would be, in the same manner, renewed every
day toward the word of God. For the truth is, that no Monarch in the world can
furnish his table with such variety of delicates, as are offered to us in the
treasures of Gods word.

Perished in mine affliction.] David was a godly Men fruitful in godliness, by
affliction made more fruitful John 15.
man, and dearly beloved of the Lord his GOD; yet is he sore humbled by
affliction: for even those branches which are fruitful, God will purge, to
make them more fruitful.

Our nature is so rebellious, that without sore afflictions, it cannot be tamed
and subdued. Stones cannot be squared for palace-worke, without strokes of the
hammer; gold can not be purged and prepared for work, without fire; neither is
corn separated from the chafe, without wind. We are Gods corn: let us abide
the wind of tentation, to cleanse us from the chafe of our corruption. We must
suffer the fire of affliction, that
we may be fined, and made vessels of honor for the house of God. And we must
be content, that the hammer of God strike upon us, to beat away our proud
lumps, that so we may be squared, and made ready, like lively stones, to be
laid in heavenly Jerusalem. More of this, see ver. 50. 52.

VER. 93. I will never forget thy precepts: for by them thou have quickened me.
THis verse has a protestation of his thankfulness; None contemn Gods word,
but such as have gotten no benefit by it. Basile in Psalm. 119.
he had found life in Gods word, and he resolves never to forget it:
Experientia edoct us iustificationes tu as producere vita^, inextinguibilem
illaru^ memoria^ seruabo. It is no marvel, that they who never got life by the
word of God, have no delight in it: the excuses of men here avail not. Certain
it is, the cause of all contempt of Gods word, is from this, that men never
found life, nor comfort by it. Whereof see Sect. 1.

But it is worthy to be marked, that he says It is not the Word that quickens,
but God by his Word.
not, the Word quickened him; but God by the Word quickened him. The Word was
preached at one time, by one Preacher S. Paul, to many people assembled
together at Philippi: but many heard it who got not life by it; only Lydia by
that Sermon had her heart opened. Paul may plant, Apollo may water; but God
must give the increase. Let us thank God for the word he has given us; and
let us pray to God that grace may be joined with it: so with the Gospel,
having the blessing of the Gospel, it shall become the power of God to our
salvation.

VER. 94. I am thine, save me: for I have sought thy precepts.
MAny reasons has David used hitherto, Since man is careful to keep that which
is his own, shall we think that God loves not those who are his own?
to move the Lord to be merciful to him: but none more forcible then this; I
am thine. A strong reason indeed, where man in a good conscience can use it:
for if we who are evil and weak, have a care of every thing which is ours,
that we will not (if we may) suffer it to perish; even our garments, and our
houses, and our cattle, we have a care to conserve them, because they are our
own: how great may we think is the Lords care toward his own, whom he
tenders with greater compassion the^ any earthly father can do to his children?

But howsoever this seem facilis vox and communis, Every man c^n not say to
the Lord, I am ^hine.
Tuus sum: as easy a voice as it is common, to say, I am thine; yet few are
they, who in a good conscience may say it. Mentitur enim Basil. in Ps. 119
peccator, si se seruum Dei nominet: A man in his sins, lies, if he say that
he is the servant of God; for to what-euer thing a man gives obedience, unto
that same is he a servant. O how Romans 6. 16.
many people, and nations, and wealthy men are there in the world, Qui
paupertatem putant Domino seruire, who think it a poverty Ambrose.
to serve GOD! He who is above all seems nothing to them: and they seek
other things with such insatiable affection, as if the Lord Jesus, in whom are
all things, were not sufficient for them. Can these men say to the Lord, I am
thine?

But these men are not the worst: for ye shall Yea, rather men now are so
profane, that every kind of si^ne may say unto them, Thou art mine.
find now a bastard Christian, so profane, that when all vices are gathered,
every one may say to him, Thou art mine: Quomodo ergo qui hui^smodi est, potest
dicere Christo, Tuus sum? How then may such a man as he say unto Christ, I am
thine? Concupiscence, Avarice, Ambition, and the rest upon just reasons of
service, done by him to them, challenge him to be theirs. Of such a man it may
be spoken that was said of Constantinus Copronymus; Eum nee Christianum esse,
Cent.
nee Iudaeum, nee Paganum, sed colluuiem quandam impietatis, That he was
neither a Christian, nor a Jew, nor a Pagan; but a confused mass of all
impiety. And how then can such a one say to the Lord, I am thine?

But if so they will say, let them receive their How the Lord acknowledges not
profane men to be his.
answer; Away ye workers of iniquity: he is not always mine, that says
Lord, Lord. Wicked men may so say, Sed vo^e non cord; but it is with their
tongue, not with their heart. As Judas even then pretended that he was one of
Christ's, when Satan had entered into him: but the adversary justly might
challenge him by the like of these speeches, which by Ambrose properly are
ascribed to him; Non est How Satan challenged Judas as his ow^.
Tuus, Jesus, sed men's est: quae mea sunt, cogitat, qua mea sunt in pectore
volutat, tecum epulatur, and me^um pascitur: a te panem, a me pecuniam accepit,
tecum bibit, and mihi sanguinem tuum vendit: He is not thine, said Satan to
the Lord Jesus, he is mine; his thoughts and cogitations are mine; he eats
with thee, but is fed by me; he takes bread from thee, but money from me; he
drinks with thee, and sel^es thy blood to me. A fearful conviction of men,
who give their word to Christ, professing his name; but their works to Satan,
doing what he commands them. These men cannot say with David, I am thine, O
Lord.

For I have sought.] See here how David qualifies his protestation: from his
earnest affection to the word of God, he proves that he was Gods How David
proves that he was Gods man.
man and his own servant. It is not words, but affections and actions, which
must prove us to be the Lords. Tuus sum, quia id solum quod tuum est quasiui: I
am thine, because I sought nothing but that which is thine, and how I might
please thee. Mihi in tuis iustificationibus est omne patrimonium: in the
observance of thy precepts is all my patrimony.

VER. 95. The wicked have waited for me, to destroy me: but I will consider thy
Testimonies.
TWo things again he notes in his enemies: A great miracle that the sheep of
Christ are preserved in the midst of ravening Wolves.
diligence, in waiting all occasions whereby to do him evil, and cruelty
without mercy; for their purpose was to destroy him: wherein, still we see how
restless and insatiable is the malice of the wicked against the godly. Daniel
his preservation in the Lions den was a great miracle: but it is no less a
marvelous work of God, that the godly who are the flock of Christ, are daily
preserved, in the midst of the wicked; who are but ravening Wolves, and thirst
for the blood of the Saints of God, having a cruel purpose in their heart if
they might perform it, utterly to destroy them. When we see them disappointed,
let us give thanks with the Jews; If the Lord had not been on our side (may
Israel now say) If the Lord had not been on our side, Psalm. 124.
when men rose up against us, then had they swallowed us quick, when their
wrath was kindled against us: but praised be the Lord, who has not given us a
pray to their teeth.

But I will consider.] The consideration of Gods word, is a strong stay against
all temptations. See verse 9. 15. 59. 95. 159.

VER. 96. I have seen an end of all perfection: but thy commandments are
exceeding large.
IN the conclusion of this Section, he compares The vanity and instabilitie
of all earthly pleasures.
Gods word, with all other most perfect and excellent things that are in the
world; and he shows how they shall fail and vanish, but the word of the
Lord endures. Nihil tam perfectum, vel absolutum est omniex part, quod finem
suum non habeat. Experience lets us see this to be a truth: for there is no day
so pleasant, but
a night puts end to it; no Summer so fruitful, but a barren Winter ouertakes
it; no body so pleasant and lively, but death destroys it; frequent eating and
drinking in the days of N^h, but the flood came and took them all away; great
mirth among the Philistims upon their Patrons holy day, but their banqueting
house became Judge. 16.
their burial.

The Monarch of Babel, that golden head, had Esaias 14. 1^.
feet of clay, and in the end, worms spread under him, and worms covered him.
All the pomp of the world is like the gourd of Jonas, flourishing one day, and
fading another. The wind shall carry Psalm. 1.
away the ungodly like chafe: all their most perfect pleasures, are like a
light thing bound up in the wings of the wind, which is easily carried away.

When we come to be men, we laugh at those A clear declaration of the vanity
of this life.
things we did when we were children: for they, as we see, take great delight
to build houses to themselves in the streets, of shells and stones, and delight
to behold them; which albeit they were Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 24.
able to stand, yet could they not profit them. We
are not yet come to the perfect age of Christian men: but when we shall be,
then shall we understand how foolish now men are, whose care is to increase
their rents, and enlarge their sumptuous buildings, Quae ciuem coeli capere non
possunt: which cannot lodge a Citizen of heaven. Let us therefore so use this
world, as if we used it not; possessing it so this day, as ready to part with
it to morrow.

But thy commandments.] There Is the other The word of God is called large,
because the comfort thereof indures. Euthy. in Psalm. 119.
member of the opposition. He calls the commandments or word of God
exceeding large; Quia cos omnes recreat, and corda little dilatat, qui in
angus^ijs, and afflictionibus versantur: because it refreshes them all, and
inlargeth their hearts who are in distress and affliction. And again, it is so
large, that it has none end, Propter amplitudinem suam fideles nunquam
deseret: and the amplitude thereof is so great, that it never When all world ly
comforts fai'e.
fails the faithful. Worldly riches serve worldly men so long as they live,
and make some service also in conueying their bodies with a pompous funeral to
the grave: but there it leaves them, and goes no further with them. Only the
word of God sustaines the godly against all tentations, so long as they live;
it conuoies them unto death; and the comfort thereof abides with them for ever
when they are dissolved.

MEM.
VER. 97. Oh how love I thy law! It is my mediditation continually.
HE insists here still in the declaration of his earnest affection toward the
word, Many speak that by custom, which in conscience they dare not present
unto God.
and the notable fruits which he reaped thereby. His affection is declared,
ver. 1. Oh how love I thy law! Wherein ye see, he calls God himself to be
judge of his love to the word: Nec speciem, sed plenitudinem charitatis tali
conventione testatur; Witnessing thereby, that it was no counterfeit love, but
complete and sincere love, which he bare unto it. The like protestation was
used by S. Peter, Thou know, O Lord, that I love thee. It were good, that in
things pertaining to godliness, we did declare our upright heart, by speaking
as they spoke. Since at the length we must be presented before him, A great
grace to speak to God from an upright heart.
and made manifest such as we are, let us in time present our selves unto him:
for many by custom speak that of themselves, which in conscience
they durst not speak, being presented unto God.

All that GOD craves of us is love. Therefore God craves nothing of man but
love. 1. Tim. 1. Ambr. in Psalm. 119.
says the Apostle, that the end or perfection of the law, (...), is love: and
again, that love is the fulfilling of the law. Amari exigit, qui omnes amat,
quia charitas est: he desires to be loved of all, who loves all, because he
is love it self. This one commandment We are inexcusable if we give it not.
contains all; and it is most reasonable: for what excuse can a man bring for
this, that he loves not God?

Yet many in word profess that they love him, who love not indeed. The trial
of our love to How love to God may be tried.
God, is our love to his word, and our care to keep his commandments. If any
love me, he will keep my commandments. Qui enim diligit ex voluntate facit,
quae sibi sunt imperata. This one trial conuinceth many to be liars, who say
they love God, and yet delight not in his word, nor are careful to obey him.

It is my meditation continually.] He proves The nature of love, it cannot
lurk, but will tell where it is.
that which he has spoken. The nature of love is, that it is ever thinking of
the thing beloved, and uses all means to obtain it. Strong love is like
fire, that cannot be quenched with much water. So David proves his love to God,
by his love to Gods word; and his love to Gods word, by his continual
meditation in it: no change of other exercises could make him forget it.

Mark again the means, by which (after David's example) we must grow in the
knowledge of the word of God: First, meditation of that which Means to grow in
grace, are meditation, prayer, thanksgiving, and conference.
we have heard or read. Secondly, prayer for grace to believe and practice it.
Thirdly, thanksgiving for grace received. Fourthly, godly conference thereof,
one of us with another. All these
shall a man find carefully practiced by David. And truly, the greatest cause,
why now there being so much preaching, there is so little profiting in
godliness, is, that men before hearing, prepare not; in hearing, pray not;
after hearing, neither meditate thereof in themselves; nor speak thereof unto
others.

VER. 98. By thy commandments thou have made me wiser the^ my enemies: for
they are ever with me.
NOw he prayseth the word for the singular David co^pares himself with three
sorts of men, his enemies, his teachers, and the ancient.
profit and fruit which he reaped by it; to weet, that he learned wisdom by
it. And this he amplifies, by co^paring himself with three sorts of men: his
enemies; his teachers; and the ancients. And this he does, not of vain glory:
for bragging is far from him who is governed by the Spirit of grace; but to
commend the word of the Lord, and to allure others to love it, Not to commend
himself but the word of God.
by declaring to them, what manifold good he found in it.

Wiser then mine enemies.] But how can this be? seeing our Savior says, that
The men of this world, are wiser in their own generation then Worldlings, in
what respect they are called wise.
the children of God. The answer is, Our Savior does not call worldlings wise
men, simply; but wiser in their own generation: that is, wise in things
pertaining to this life. Or as Jeremy calls them, Wise to do evil: and when
they have so done, wise to conceal and cloak it. All which in very deed is but
folly: and therefore, David, who by the light of Gods word saw that it was so,
could not be moved to follow their course. Well; there Time will try whether
they or the godly be more wise.
is a great controversy between the godly, and the wicked* either of them in
their judgment, account the other to be fools; but it is the light of Gods
word which must decide it.

VER. 99. I have had more understanding then my teachers: for thy testimonies
are my meditation.
Here is the second amplification; That Godly men tell what they are, but not
of presumption.
the word of God had made him wiser then his teachers: which might indeed seem
to be Incongrua presumptio. Where note still he is magnifying not himself, but
the grace of God toward him. It is no new thing, to see many teachers often
pretending to learn others, that which they have not learned themselves: and
who can tell how miserable these men are, who will be Doctors, but not
disciples; teaching others, but not taught of God themselves, because they are
not careful to learn from him? To such, says Nazianz. Our Lord was 30. years
Nazian. He is not meet to be a teacher of Christians, who is not a disciple of
Christ.
old, ere he began to be a Preacher: Et tu magister vis fieri, antequam
discipulus: and thou will be a master of Christians, before thou be a scholar
of Christ.

Vnus verus est Magister, qui solus non didicit, Ambr. lib. 1. off. cap. 1.
quod omnes doceret: caeteri omnes discant prius quod doceant, and ab illo
accipiant, quod alijs tradant: There is one true Master, who teaches all, and
learnes of none: as for all others, they must first learn what they should
teach, and receive from him, that which they should deliver unto others.

But alas! Quam multi sunt, qui sermon valent, Macar. h^. 16.
and loquuntur, non tamen sale coelesti conditi sunt, recensent que multa de
mensa regia, quorum nullum adepti sunt gustum! How many are powerful in
speech, who are not seasoned with heavenly salt; rehearsing many delicates
which
are on the table of the heavenly King, whereof they never tasted themselves!

More wise was the holy Apostle, who subdued his body by discipline, least
while as he preached to others, he should have been a reprobat himself. God
grant that we may follow his example.

And yet even where the Preacher is godly, That God gives more grace by an
instrument, then the instrument has,
partaker of that grace himself, whereof he is an Ambassador to others, it
falls out oftentimes, that greater measure of light and grace, is communicated
by his ministry to another, proves that he is the dispenser of graoe.
then is given to himself. As Augustine, first illuminated and converted by
Ambrose, did far excel, both in knowledge and spiritual grace, him that
taught him.

And herein God wonderfully shows his
glory, That whosoever be the instrument, he is the dispenser of light and
glorle; giving more by the instrument, then it has in it self. And this is so
far from being to a godly Teacher a matter of grief, that it is rather a
matter of glory.

The wicked glory, to make others more wicked Since the wicked glory to make
others more wicked, shall we grudge, that others by us are made more learned and
godly then our selves?
then themselves; as our Savior said the Pharisees did with the Proselyts, that
they made them ten times more the children of Satan, then themselves: and
shall the godly grudge, to see that they have made others more godly then
themselves? Nay truly: but rather such, unto them are their crown and joy,
that they may glory in, as in a prey which they bring to him that sent them.
For, as the Dove which Noah sent forth, returned to him again with the branch
of an Olive in her mouth: so all godly Preachers which are come from God, and
remember they must return to him again, are most joyful, when they see they
have some prey-conquest by their ministry, and that they have neither run nor
labored in vain.

VER. 100. I understood more then the Ancients; because I kept thy precepts.
THe third point of his comparison is How youth and old age are to be
considered.
here. Wherein we see, how it is neither learning, nor experience gotten by
length of time, which makes a man wise; but only the word of God, used with
meditation, prayer, and practice: for wisdom is not always with the ancient.
He is not young in Gods estimation, whose wisdom is ripe: and it is not by
number of years, but by solid and settled manners, that the Spirit of God
esteems men to be ancient. Always here, David speaks of men grown in
years, but not in knowledge: whom Philo properly called, Grandaeuos pueros.
And indeed, it is A warning to aged men.
pity to see any man foolish through the ignorance of God; but greatest pity,
to see aged men bring their days to an end, and draw near to the grave,
before they have learned to consider, either the end for which they came into
the world, or to know the state into which they shall be translated, when
they go out of it.

VER. 101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I might keep
thy word.
David's wisdom, which he learned by To resist sin, not to want sin, is our
greatest perfection on earth.
the word, consisted not in naked speculation, but in practice: this is
wisdom, to refrain from evil. Our greatest perfection on earth, stands in
resisting sin. We are never without a tempter to sin; nor yet without some
occasion of sin; and which is worst of all, never without the seed of sin
in our selves: which is fruitful, in sending forth Cupiditates and motus Amb.
in Psalm. 119.
qui irruu^t sicut bestiaein nos, vt teneros fructus and noua ruris nostriculta
depaseant: such lusts and motions, that like unto wild beasts, make incursion
upon us, to destroy the tender fruit of this new husbandry of God within us:
for which we have need continually and carefully to resist them.

From every evil way.] He knows not what it He can resist no sin, who
resists not all sin.
is to resist sin, who resists not every sin. It is true that all sins are not
alike subdued in us; for some affections are stronger then other: but if
against
them all we fight not, seeking to refrain our feet from every evil way, we
cannot walk in the way of GOD. Nequit enim fieri vt duas quisquam vias
simulingrediatur; iustitiae videlicet, et iniustitiae. This is to be marked of
some professors of this age, who will be counted good Christians;
notwithstanding it be manifest, there are some gross evils, from the which
they will not refrain. Though we subdue no sin as we should, yet must we
remember, that every sin, in some measure, must be resisted: otherwise, if
we be captiued of any one, it is sufficient to destroy us.

That I might keep thy word.] The resistance Every sin received within us,
opens the door to another.
of evil, makes us the stronger and more able to keep Gods word: on the
contrary, every transgression diminishes our spiritual light and strength. So
that by sinning, we not only contract a new guiltiness upon our souls, but
weaken our own strength: for so soon as any one sin, be it never so small,
gettes vantage over us, it prepares a way to another and a greater.

VER. 102. I have not declyned from thy judgments; because thou did teach
me.
LEast it should seem that David ascribed the Our natural inabilitie to good.
praise of godliness to himself; or that it came from any goodness in him, that
he did refrain his feet from every evil way: he gives here all the glory to
God; protesting, that because God did teach him, therefore he declined not.
Whereof we learn, that if at any time we stand, or if when we have fallen, we
rise and repent, it is ever to be imputed to God that teaches us; for there is
no evil so abominable, but it would soon become plausible to us, if God
should leave us to ourselfe.

For thou taught'st me.] David was taught by They only learn who are taught
of God.
his ordinary Teachers, and he did reverence them; but that he profited by
them, he ascribes unto God: Paul may plant, and Apollo water; God must give the
increase.

VER. 103. How sweet are thy promises to my mouth! yea, more then honey to my
mouth.
GOds teaching works ever in the heart a God when he teaches speaks to the
heart.
feeling of that which is taught: for he writes his law in the hearts of his
children. And this is it which David here protests, that he found a sweetness in
Gods word, which exceeded the sweetest things in the world. And the cause why
many in this age feel it not, is either because their conscience is evil, and
so intellectualibus Euthym. The causes why many now profit not by hearing of
the word.
animae sensibus non polle^t, they want the intellectual senses of the soul
(for as to a sick man, that which is sweet seems sour and ungracious; so to an
ill conscience, the most comfortable word of God becomes terrible:) or else,
albeit the conscience be not so evil, yet no pains are taken by meditation
and prayer to search out the comfort of the word. For as Minerals are not
gotten on the superfice of the earth, but men must dig
deep into the bosom thereof before they find them; and as the sweetness of
a kirnell cannot be felt where the shell is not broken: so cannot the comforts
of Gods word be felt of them, who look but lightly and superficially into it.

But what is the reason of this kind of speech, A Christian apprehends good
offered in the word, not with one, but all his le^ses.
that Gods word was sweet to his mouth; seeing words are not discerned by the
mouth, but by the ear? The answer is, that a spiritual man apprehends the
good which God offers, with all his senses: he not only hears it, but smells it,
touches it, tastes it, and so eats and digests it, that he feeds upon it.
And again, the reason is, for that David being taught of God, delighted to
speak of Gods word to others; and the more he spoke of it, the sweeter he
found it.

And here is our comfort; that if the promises Since Gods promises are sweet,
how sweet will their performance be?
of God be so sweet, what sweetness shall we find in the performance of them?
When a man of honor promises us any excellent thing, it makes glad our heart;
but when he gives it, it does much more rejoice us. The promises of God are
excellent; but the promised things are such, as by no word can be expressed:
For the eye of man has not seen, his ear has not heard, neither 1. Cor. 2.
9.
can his heart understand (now) those things which God has prepared for them
that love him.

VER. 104. By thy precepts I have gotten understanding; therefore I hate all
ways of falsehood.
IN this last Verse he commends the word, from a twofold excellent benefit
which he reaped by it: for he not only got by it understanding to Two great
benefits David got by the word.
his mind, but sanctification to his affections.

In the beginning of the Section he protested that he loved the word of God:
and now in the Lukewarm professors of this age convinced.
end of it, he protests he hated all the ways of falsehood. Here is a trial
of our true love to God: if we hate every thing that is contrary to it; whether
it be a false Religion, or evil manners. This convinces the lukewarm
professors of this age, who say they love God and his word; when in the mean
time, they are companions to idolators, they take part with adulterers, they
run with thieves, they drink with drunkards, they blaspheme with
blasphemers, and they hate not the works of them that fall away.

NVN.
VER. 105. Thy word is a Lantern unto my feet, and a light to my paths.
THe use of a Lantern, is in the dark The word of God compared to a Lantern.
night; for no man will carry it when the Sun shines clearly. David here
protests, what a Lantern is to men in darkness, the same the word of God was
to him in his pilgrimage. In nocte huius praesentis vitae, Euthym. in Psalm. 119.
in the night of this present life, it showed him the 1 Because it shows
light in darkness.
right way, to lead him forward to his desired and determinate end. And as men
when they come to their lodging, require no more the help of the Lantern; so
shall we, when we shall finish 2 We shall set it by when we come home.
our pilgrimage, and shall come to our heavenly Jerusalem, not the^ any more
stand in need of this ministerial light: there shall be no Sun nor Candle
there; The Lord is the light of that City. Revel. 22. 5.


Basil makes here a comparison between the The light of the Gospel is
clearer then the light of the Law.
Law and the Gospel; and thinks that the Law is called a Lantern, because
it did but illuminate the house of Israel: but Christ Jesus, the Son of
righteousness, by his light of the Gospel, has illuminate all the houses and
families of the earth. It is true indeed, the light of the Gospel is both
cleerer and larger then the light of the law: but that which here David
speaks, does properly belong to the whole word of God; as S. Peter 2. Pet. 1.
19.
says, It is as a light shining in darkness, to the which we shall do well to
take heed.

Always we see the necessity of the word of As the Sun is necessary for the
day, so the light of the word to direct our way.
God; and how impossible it is for men to direct their ways aright without it.
As the Sun is necessary for the day, and the Moon for the night; and as in a
dark house, nothing can be seen without a Lantern or candle: so cannot the
right way, be discerned from the wrong, in this darkness of our life, without
the light of the word. Multae foueae, Ambr. in Psalm. 119.
multi scopuli in istius seculi caligine non videntur; praefer tibilucernam,
quam Prophet a monstrauit: there are many pits in this mistie world, many rocks
in this turbulent sea, which are not scene; carry before thee this Lantern.
Nullicre* Ambrose.
das tuum, nisi praeeunte lucernae istius luce, processum: Credit not thy
steps to any, unless the light of this Lantern go before to direct thee.

David was a man of very good wit, and natural Our ways are in darkness
without the word.
understanding: but he gives to God this glory, that his best light was but
darkness, when he was not lightened and ruled by the word of God. Oh that we
could consider this, that in all our ways wherein the word of God shines not
unto us, to direct us, we do but walk in darkness: and our ways without
it, can lead us to none other end, but utter darkness. If we hearken not to the
word of GOD, if we walk not by the rule thereof, how is it possible we can
come to the face of God?

Israel in the wilderness were governed by a As Isreal's course in the
wilderness was directed by the Lord, so should ours be.
cloud in the day, and by a pillar of fire in the night: their camp was
raised and settled, as God gave them the sign, till at length they came to
Canaan. Happy shall we be, if so our life be governed in all the course
thereof, that our resting and remoouing, our going in, and going out, and all
that we do, may be ordered by the Lords direction: for so shall he bring us at
length to his promised Canaan.

But that this may be done, let us remember, As a man lights one light at
another, so should we light our minds at the word.
that as a man lights one light at another: so we must seek to have the
light of our mind illuminated by the light of the word. Ex hac lucerna accende
et tu lucernam, vt luceat interior oculus tuus,
qui lucerna est tui corporis: At this Lantern of the word, light thou the
Lantern of thy mind; that the interior eye, which is the light of the whole
body, may shine clearly.

VER. 106. I have sworn, and will perform it; that I will keep thy righteous
judgments.
THis verse contains a protestation of David's David's resolution confirmed by
an oath.
resolution, to walk in Gods obedience; and not a naked protestation, but
confirmed by an oath: which in effect is no other thing, but a ratification of
his promise which he made in circumcision; to weet, that he should serve God,
as one of his people. And this kind of A godly oath a necessary help of our
great weakness. Ambr. in Psalm. 119.
oath whereby we confirm our hearts to do that which we have promised,
according to Gods words, as it is et iudicium scientiae, and testimoniu^
conscientiae, both a testimony of our science, and a testimony of our
conscience, that we know we should do so, and therefore resolve we will do
it: so is it a necessary help of our great weakness, who are ready either to
forget and not remember; or if we remember, to fail and not perform. For
remedy whereof, it is good that by an holy oath we should strengthen our
selves to the performance of that duty, which once by the light of God we have
resolved.

O! but here the weak conscience will object The objection of a weak
conscience concerning an oath.
and say, If I swear and afterward fail, do I not increase my guiltiness?
But to such it is answered, Shall we never resolve to do good, yea, and to
confirm ourselves by an oath to do it, because we are infirm, and fail in
many things, and can not bring our good purposes to perfection? Or shall we
think, that every fail in our particular duties, against our resolution, our
promise, yea, and against Why we should not cease to confirm our good purposes
by an oath, albeit we be weak in performing.
our oath, is always a falling away from the covenant, which by our great oath
in Baptism we once ratified. No, no: for the certainty and continuance of
this covenant, is not grounded on us, but upon GOD himself. It falls not by
our falling:
but we rise again, and stand by the stabilitie thereof; Because I am not
changed, ye are not consumed. Thirdly, albeit of infirmity, there be many
fails in performance of our promise and oath, yet is there any renouncing of
it? God forbid: but these same sins where-into we fall, make us the more
ashamed of our selves; the more afraid of our weakness; the more earnest to
renew our former resolution; and the more careful to call upon God, for grace
to perform it.

Thy righteous judgments.] So David styles the Gods word, why called his
judgment.
word of God, because it judges most righteously between right and wrong,
truth and falsehood. And secondly, because according to the judgment given
therein, God will do. Let us take heed unto it: for the word contains a
catalogue of such as shall not inherit the kingdom of God; and another of such
as shall dwell in Gods tabernacle: let us read and see, in which of the two
catalogues our selves are; for according to that word will the judgment go.

VER. 107. I am very sore afflicted, O Lord: quicken me according to thy word.
THe godly, in all their troubles make their How familiar the godly are, in
declaring their griefs to the Lord.
recourse to God; in most homely manner pouring out their griefs in his
bosom: so that I may well say, there are none in earth, nay, not the most
dear unto them, to who^ they can speak so familiarly, as unto the Lord their
God. Their wants, their weakness, their grief, their sins, whereof they
think shame to speak to others, they think not evil homely to communicate to
him. But as Moses in all his troubles, ran ever to the door of the
tabernacle; so they to the throne of grace: and happy are they, who close not
this door upon themselves by their sins.

Again, we are still remembered, that afflictions Afflictions no arguments of
hatred.
are no arguments of Gods hatred, but rather of his love. A father that spares
the rod, hates his Amb. in Psalm. 119.
child; Nunquid non frequentius corripitur filius quam seruus? Is not the son
oftener chastised then the servant? It is the voice of our heavenly father, Quos
diligo, castigo: If ye be without correction, ye are bastards, and not sons.
Where the Physician Heb. 12.
By the contrary, impunitie and liberty to sin, is an argument of Gods anger.
Hosea 2.
refuses to give medicine, it is a token there is no hope of life: and where
the Lord gives a man loose reanes and liberty, to go where he pleases, not
hedging in his ways with thorns, as he promises to his Israel, it is an
argument of his great displeasure. But seeing he protested before, it The
state of the godly in trouble, and after trouble, to be distinguished.
was good for him, that God afflicted him; how does he now complain? The
answer is, that there is a great difference between the sense of the godly in
trouble, and after it: For no chastisement Hebr. 12.
is sweet for the present; but afterward, it brings the quiet fruit of
righteousness, to them who are thereby exercised.

Sore afflicted.] Two things should restrain Two great motives to patience in
trouble.
us from co^playning of the greatness of our trouble. First, if we consider it
is measured by the Lord; who is faithful, and will lay no more upon us, then we
are able to bear. And next, that our stripes are not according to our sins:
for if he should beat us with as many rods, as we have grieved him with
sins, he should add yet ten times more to all our greatest afflictions.

Quicken me.] Defatigatas vires me as restitue, Vatab.
sicut pollicitus es. Restore my decayed strength, as thou have promised. He
confesses, he was almost dead by the greatness of his trouble. But of this, see
ver. 17. 77. 116.

VER. 108. O Lord, I beseech thee, accept the free offerings of my mouth, and
teach me thy judgments.
IT is a great grace, that the Lord should accept It is a great savor that the
Lord accepts any thing from us, and that in three respects.
any thing from us, if we consider these three things: First, who the Lord is.
Next, what we are. Thirdly, what it is we have to give 1. If we consider who
the Lord is.
unto him. As for the Lord, he is All sufficient, and stands in need of nothing
we can give him. Our Psalm 16.
goodness extends not to the Lord. As for us, we are 2. If we consider who our
selves are.
poor creatures, living by his liberality: yea, begging from all the rest of
his creatures; from the sun and moon; from the air, the water, and the
earth; from fowls and fishes; yea, from the worms: some give us light; some
meat; some cloth; and are such beggars as we, meet to give to a King.

And thirdly, if we well consider, What is 3. If we consider what our
oblation (...).
it that we give? Have we any thing to give, but that which we have received
from him? and whereof we may say with David; O Lord, all 1. Chron. 29.
things are of thee: and of thine own hand have we given thee again. Let
this humble us, and restrain us from that vain conceit of meriting at Gods
hand.

Of my mouth.] David at this time, in his great No gift so small, if it come
from a good heart, but God accepts it.
necessity, having no other sacrifice to offer unto the Lord, offers him the
calves of his lips; but no doubt, when he might, he offered more.

There is nothing so small, but if it come from a good heart, God will accept
it: the widows myte; a cup full of cold water; yea and the praise of our
lips, although it have no other external oblation joined with it: but, where
men may do more and will not, it is an argument their heart is not sincerely
affected toward him, and their praises are not welcome to him.

And such as have liberty to come to the holy A reproof of them, who praise
not God with their lips.
assemblies, and offer not there the praises of their mouth to God, but sit as
if they were dumb; as also they that offer naked words, without the willing
heart, are here much more convinced. They were great beasts under the law, that
thought to And of the^ also, who offer service of their words, not of their
hearts unto him.
please God, by offering a beast unto him, keeping back themselves: and they are
greater beasts under the Gospel, that will give their heart to another, and
think to please God, by giving some other gifts unto him.

Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousand
rivers of Oil? Shall I give him my first borne for my transgression? Mich. 6.
7.
or the fruit of my womb, for the sin of my soul? Is it such sacrifices
will please the Lord? No, if thou will not offer thy self unto him, he will
have nothing that is thine.

VER. 109. My soul is continually in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law.
THis verse has a renouation of his former The godly man has his life always
ready in his hand, to offer to the Lord.
protestation; with an amplification, that he would keep it, albeit he was
daily in peril of his life: and was also resolved and ready to lay it down.
For so this phrase imports, when he says he had his soul in his hand, ready
to give when ever God should take it. And this is to be observed, that there is
no trouble so ready to take away the life of Gods children, as they are ready
to give it. As Elijah came out to the mouth
of his cave to meet with the Lord; and Abraham stood in the door of his
tabernacle to speak to the Angel: so the soul of the godly, stands ready in
the door of the tabernacle of this body, to remove when the Lord shall
command it: whereas the soul of the wicked lies back, hiding It is far
otherwise with the wicked.
itself, as Adam among the bushes; and is taken out of the body perforce: as
was the soul of that worldling, This night they will take thy soul from thee:
but they never sacrifice their souls willingly to the Lord.

VER. 110. The wicked have laid a snare for me: but I swarued not from thy
precepts.
David continues his complaint to God Three things concur in wickedness.
against the malice of his enemies; but changes the styles he gave them: and
now he calls them wicked men; which imports three things. First, they work
wickedness. Secondly, they love it. Thirdly, they persevere in it.

The godly want not their own sins; but this wickedness is far from them: for
when they sin, they are rather like men oppressed, and forced against their
will, to do what they will not, then Which are not in the godly.
otherwise, workers with their will. And if at any time they do evil, they
continue not in it, but rise again by repentance: so that their sins, are
rather sins of weakness, then of wickedness.

Yet have I not swarued.] The constancy of Constancy of Christians.
the godly, is tried by trouble; when neither the evil example of the wicked
can infect, nor their cruel persecutions can enforce them, to follow them in
evil: but rather, the more they are troubled, the faster they cleave to the
Lord; and the more they see the impiety of evil men, the more they are
confirmed to be good.

VER. 111. Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they are
the joy of mine heart.
THere is nothing in the earth so excellent, Excellency of Gods word above all
other things.
but if it be compared with Christ Jesus, it is, as the Apostle says, but
dung. Such is the estimation of all the godly: when they compare Phil. 3. 8.
the word of God, with other most precious things, they account them of no
price in comparison of it. The honey, and hony-combe, has no sweetness, when it
is compared with the comfortable word of God: all treasures of gold and silver
are nothing to it; yea, the kingdom of Canaan made him not so joyful as did
the word of GOD; which he esteemed his greatest inheritance. For beside the
present comfort it renders unto us, it is the Charter sealed and confirmed by
It is the sure Charter of our heavenly inheritance.
GOD; by Sacraments sealed; by the oath of God ratified; with the blood of
Christ subscribed: whereby we are made sure of our heavenly inheritance.

But alas! by most part of men it is not regarded; The contempt of Gods word
reproved.
they prefer their trifles before it. Take from them a foot breadth of their
earthly inheritance, they show such a carnal zeal, as stirs
them up to hazard their lives in defense of it: take from them the comfort of
Gods word, they regard not; neither are they any more touched therewith, then
if it did not concern them. And all the cause hereof proceeds from this; that
they never found the joy of this word in their hearts, as David here says: for
according to every man his feeling of the comfort which is in it, so does he
esteem of it.

VER. 112. I have applied mine heart to fulfill thy statutes always, unto the
end.
HE concludes this Section, with a protestation Seeing man's heart is not in his
own hand, how says David, he had applied his heart?
of his constant and sincere affection toward the word of God. Where first, it
comes to be considered, seeing the heart of man is in the hand of GOD, and that
man is not able to change a hair of his head, far less the affections of
his heart; how says he, that he had applied his heart to Gods statutes?

The answer arises from distinguishing these twofold estates. A man before
his conversion How a man after grace received, works his own salvation.
is dead in sin and trespasses, and can do no good, till GOD strengthen him:
but after conversion, he becomes, by grace, a worker with GOD, to stir and
incline the heart toward God.

Animae consilium lanci est simile: the counsel Basil. in Psalm 119.
of the soul is like to a balance: et men's, imperium nacta, lancem adea quae
meliora sunt inclinat: and the mind, which has gotten the commanding power
over the affections, inclines the balance to that which is best.

To fulfill.] He affirms not any time that in The godly fail in performance,
not in purpose.
practice he did fulfill Gods law, but in purpose. In resolution he ever
willed and desired: and albeit he failed many times in performance, yet
never did he change his purpose.

To the end.] David's godly motions were Beginnings of good are nothing without
perseverance.
not taken by starts: he was no Temporizer, whose goodness is like the
morning dew. The seed of Gods word was deeper rooted in his heart: as he
had a care to begin well; so also to continue well. Frustra velociter currit,
Greg. moral.
qui priusquam ad metam veniat, defecit: Our life on earth is a race; in vain
begins he to run swiftly, that faints, and gives over before he come to
the end. And this was signified (says Gregory) when in the Law the tail of
the beast was sacrificed with the rest; Perseverance crowns all. It is good
we have begun to do well; let us also strive to persevere to the end.

SAMECH.
VER. 113. I hate vain inventions; but thy law do I love.
THE comfort of all men in time of In trouble man's comfort consists in one of
these two: 1. A by-gon good life.
trouble, consists in one of these two; either in the by-gon testimony of a
good conversation, which vpheld Job in the time of his affliction: or else, in
the certainty of a present unfeigned repentance. The last is good enough, if it
come in time; but the first is more sure: and it is a great folly for a man to
live 2. Or else a present unfeigned repentance.
uncertain of that wherein stands his comfort. When neither thy conscience
witnesses, that thou have lived as thou should, nor yet that thou have
repented for doing that which thou should not; where can thy comfort be?
Learn both of Job and David, that in one of these two thy comfort must stand in
the time of trouble: and our comfort shall be the greater, if we join them
together; ever sorrowing for sin; ever studying to glorify God, by the
amendment of our ways. Three things in sin to be escliued.


Vain inventions.] A godly man hates not only the execution of evil, but the
invention. In a sin there be three things would be carefully looked unto: the
occasion, the beginning of it, and the perfection or accomplishment thereof.
The occasion 1. The occasion.
would carefully be prevented: for he hates not sin, who fears not and
hates not every occasion of sin. And from time once we feel any strength of
it, that the monster of corrupt 2. The beginning of it.
nature begins to shoot out any of her heads into us, we should resist it in
the beginning: for
he is worthy to be stung to death by a Serpent, who may, and will not slay it
when it is young. So should we never suffer it to come to perfection; 3. The
perfection.
otherwise it will slay us: For sin perfited, Iam. 1. 15.
brings out death.

Since Adams first transgression, his children Men grow more skillful in
sinning then they were before.
have grown more and more learned in the inventions of evil: so that now men be
not content with evil practiced before them; but new sorts of sin, and new
ways of wickedness are found out. Thus shall the world grow in evil, till
the harvest of sin be ripe: and then shall the Lord put in the hook of his
vengeance, and cast all the wicked into the wine-p^esse of his wrath.

It is a dangerous thing to sin any manner of way; but it is devilish to
invent sin: for this is to sin after the similitude of Satan; he saw no
sin before him, himself was the first father and forget of it. Let men
beware of this; lest they also be punished after the similitude of his
condemnation.

VER. 114. Thou art my refuge and shield: and I trust in thy word.
He makes here a secret opposition between In most desperate dangers God
comes with unlooked for deliuerences.
the armor of the wicked, by which they impugned him; and his armor, whereby he
defended himself. As for them, by their worldly wisdom they are subtle in
inventing ways to hurt, and craftily lay many snares wherein to trap me; but
my defense is in thee only. David was in many most desperate dangers, and
still he found the Lord providing unlooked for deliverances: the strong City
of Keilah could not defend him; the Lord warned him to come out of it, and he
was a shield unto him: the solitary Wilderness of Maon could not secure him;
for even there Saul and his soldiers had compassed him: but God had a care of
him, and turned his pursuers another way. These bygone experiences of Gods
loving care and favor toward him, do now confirm him to rest in God: how
many ways soever his enemies pursue him, he will still make the Lord his
refuge and shield, and trust in his word.

VER. 115. Away from me ye wicked: for I will keep the commandments of my
God.
AS before he protested that he would cleave unto God; so now that he will
sunder from the wicked. True fellowship with God binds us Why our hearts
should be diuded from wicked men.
to divide our hearts from all them who will not walk Gods way: and therefore
this is brought in as a sufficient reason of improbation against the Psalm. 50.
wicked, to prove they were not the Lords, because, says the Lord, If thou see
a thiese, thou runnest with him, and art companion with the adulterers: what
then have thou to do, to take my ordinances in thy mouth?

Every man's company wherein he delights, may Every man's company tells what he is.
tell what manner of man he is himself. As Ravens flock together by companies,
and Doves fly together, and beasts of the earth gather themselves to other of
their own kinds: so wicked men love the company of wicked, and godly men
through grace, delight in the fellowship of such as are like them. Which is not
so to be understood, as if in regard of personal conversation, we behooved to
separate from the wicked: for so, as says the Apostle, we should go out of
the world; but even in the midst of their company we must separate from them,
both in fashions and affections, as we see Lot did in Sodom.

And this David did for two causes: First, for Wicked company for borne for two
causes: 1. Because they offend God.
offenses don against God, he withdrew himself from the company of the wicked;
for their sport and pleasure is in those things, which grieve the spirit of the
Lord. Sure it is, he never loved God, who mislikes not men for offending God:
Do Psalm. 1 39.
I not hate them that hate thee? Do I not contend with them who contend with
thee? I hate them as if they were mine utter enemies. The other cause is the
fear of his own infirmities, 2. For fear they hurt us.
lest by the example of the wicked, either he should be allured to evil, or
relented to good.

For every company warnes us to walk in How every company warnes us to walk
circumspectly.
fear and trembling; Quoniam vndique scandala nos obsident, and innumeris
vitijs refertusest mundus, quae extinguunt, vel saltem corrumpunt in nobis
Vatab.
legem Dei, and legis studium: On every hand we are compassed with stumbling
blocks, and the world is replenished with innumerable evils, which either
extinguish or corrupt in us the study of Gods law; and for which we have
need to walk circumspectly: if we be in the company of godly men, we should
watch over our words and ways, lest we offend them: and if we also be in the
company of the wicked, we should likewise fear, lest we be offended or
infected by them.

For I will keep the commandments of my God.] There is the reason of his
protestation. Your Wicked company not meet for godly men, and why.
course and mine are contrary: I have resolved to walk another way, then the
way wherein I see ye are walking; and therefore your company is not for me.

Of my God.] As a man can esteem of any He that knows God to be his God, by no
means can be (...) from him.
thing which he knows is his own; so if once he know that God is his, he
cannot but love him, and carefully obey him: neither is it possible that any
man can give to God hearty and permanent
service, who is not persuaded to say with David, He is my God. All the
pleasures, all the terrors of the world cannot sunder that soul from God, who
can truly say, The Lord is my God.

Again, a true Christian has nothing in the A Christian has nothing wherein
he rejoices as in his own, but the Lord.
world, wherein he can rejoice, as in his own; but only in the Lord his God.
A worldling will speak with Nabal; My flesh and my bread: and with
Nebuchadnezer; Is not this my Palace? and, with Alcibiades, boast of their
Rent. A Christian has none of these of his own, but uses them like
moueables: a man's own flesh, yea, his own heart, his friends, and all that he
has will fail him. To these a Christian will never say, Psalm. 73. 26.
They are mine: but, God is the strength of mine heart, and my portion for ever.

VER. 116. Stablish me according to thy promise, that I may live: and
disappoint me not of my hope.
David after his former resolution turns Prayer strengthens all our good
intentions.
him to prayer: for our intentions and conclusions are nothing, except the Lord
bless them; and therefore now David craves that God would stablish him.

The godly are subject to a two fold instability: A twofold instability
incident to godly men.
the first is, a wavering from a constant believing of Gods promises. And this
is an instability 1. One of faith.
of faith: not that I think the faith of a man regenerate can fail; but
because oft-times it is sore combred, and shaken with the wind of manifold
tentations. Who can tell how many ways Gods children are tempted with
unbelief? It may truly be said, that he nere knew what it is to believe,
who knows not what it is to wrestle with unbelief: great need therefore
have we to pray with David, Lord stablish me; and with that Father interceding
for his son in the Gospel, O Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief.

The other is an instability of love and obedience: 2. The other of love and
obedience.
for the godly find their hearts many times carried away by external
allurements, to a forgetfulness of the Lord their God, and there-thorough also
to an offending him. Alas, how instable a thing is the heart of man by nature!
every object intangles it, and it is ready to go a whooring after every
creature, unless that golden nail of the holy love and fear of God be
driven into it. And in this respect also we have great need to pray with
David, Lord stablish me.

Adam created by God, was endued with many Adam endued with many graces, but
not with perseverance.
excellent graces; but wanted this perseverance and stability in grace, which
now we have in Christ: for by him we have not only the grace of conversion,
but the grace also of confirmation; the one makes us godly, the other continues
us godly. But now, many so lean to the show of their conversion, that they
are careless of the grace of confirmation: whereof it comes to pass, that they
end in the flesh, who made a show of beginning in the Spirit; not considering
these two distinct graces requisite to salvation, Conversion, and Confirmation.
Let us therefore still pray
with David, that God would stablish and confirm us.

According to thy promise.] The prayers of The prayers of godly me^, how they
are framed.
the godly, are poured out in faith; they seek nothing but according to Gods
promise. Many do otherwise; who pray, neither looking to Gods promise, nor
leaning to the Mediator: such prayers, are words poured out into the air, and
carried away with the wind. Yet others are more profane; who pray not only
without a promise, but against the command of God: for either when they go to
do wickedlie, they pray GOD to prosper them; or else, in their perturbations,
they cry for vengeance on their neighbors, where they should cry for mercy.
These prayers are the offering of strange fire to the Lord; which is
abomination.

Yet are we to remember, that if we would Gods promises are made on a
co^ditio^, which we must regard
have our prayers grounded well upon Gods promises, we must also remember the
condition, whereupon he has made the promise. We read, that when Israel was
oppressed by the Philistims, Judge. 10.
and cried unto God; at the first, he gave them a hard answer; Go to the Gods
whom ye have served, and let them deliver you. But being humbled by this
answer, they pray again; and with their prayer, put away the salse Gods from
among them: and then it is subioyned, that the soul of God was grieved for the
miseries of Israel. Whereof we learn, that it is but a vain thing to charge
GOD with his promise, where we make no conscience of the condition he requires
of us.

That I may live.] But what life is this he craves? Had he not already the
life of a King, with Many think they have life, who are but dead.
worldly wealth, and honor enough? He had indeed: but this is not the life,
which David esteems to be life. There is nothing natural men love better
then life; nor fear more then death: yet know they not what is the life they
should love, nor what is the death they should flee. Sunt enim qui viuentes
mortui sunt, and qui Amb. in Psalm. 119.
mortui viuu^t: for there are some living men, who are but dead; and some dead,
who are living.

If this be life, to grow well, and wex strong, from In the life vegetative,
trees excel man.
infancy proceeding to old age; will not, in this, the trees of the field
excel man, who from little plants grow up into most excellent Cedars? Or, if
this be life, to see, to hear, to smell, etc. will not, in this, the beasts of
the earth excel thee? for In the life sensitive, beasts excel man.
there is no sense, wherein some beasts do not far excel men: some see
better; some hear better; some smell better. And generally, all of them have a
greater appetite to their meat, and are more strong to digest it.

But if ye^ ^hou glory in this, that thou art endued In the life rational,
reprobates excel Christians.
with reason; then remember, how many Philosophers and Ethnicks have excelled
thee in the use of reason. So that neither can thy comfort be in the vegetative
life, wherein trees excel
thee; nor in the sensitive, which beasts have better the^ thou; nor in the
reasonable life, which many reprobates have, that shall never see the face of
God. If man have no better life then these, he has but a shadow of life; and
it may truly be said of him, that while he is living, he is dead.

The life of a Christian, stands in this, To have Wherein then stands the life
of a Christian, by which he excells all.
his soul quickened by the spirit of Grace. For as the presence of the soul
quickens the body; and the departure thereof, brings instant death; and the
body without it, is but a dead lump of clay: so it is the presence of Gods
Spirit, which gives life to the soul of man.

And this life is known, by these two notable effects; for first, it brings a
joyful sense of Gods mercy: and next, a spiritual disposition to spiritual
exercises. And without this, pretend a man what he will, he is but the image
of a Christian; looking somewhat like him, but not quickened by his life.

And disappoint me not of my hope.] That is, Wisdom prouides for the time to
come
in the time of need, let me feel the truth of thy promises, to comfort me:
as now I hope to find thy help in the time of trouble; so I pray thee that I
may find it. It is the manner of the godly, to fore-thinke of that whi^ is to
come: and to provide for trouble, ere trouble come. Wherefore, Solomon
describing a wise man, says, that his heart is always at his right hand, and
that his eye is in his forehead. A prudent man sees the plague, and hides
himself in time: he knows, that trouble and heavy tentations are before
him; and that he must fight fore battles, before he enter into his promised
Canaan: and therefore prays fervently before hand, that God would not be
far from him, when trouble comes near him.

It is, on the contrary, the folly of the wicked, But the foolish are so
snared with things present, that they see not what is to com.
They go on, says Solomon, and are snared; they never fore-thinke what is to
come; they rest upon present false comforts, which disappoint them in the time
of their need. Others, that stand by, may bid them be of good comfort: but what
comfort can they have, when outward comforts, where-to they trusted, fail
them; and inward comforts they never knew?

VER. 117. Stay thou me, and I shall be safe: and I will delight continually
in thy statutes. Lamentable that we should want, when we may have grace for
the seeking.

THis verse contains a prayer, in substance and effect one with the former: and
the repetition of the prayer, shows that he was touched with a deep sense of
his own necessity, which made him fervent in prayer; and it does greatly
reprove us, who are cold in prayer. We may have store of grace for seeking; and
alas! we are careless to seek. If thou knew, John 4.
thou would ask; and if thou askedst, I would give.

It is true, our Savior forbids us to make repetitions in praying, like the
heathen, who think Words without affection, a dead sacrifice.
to be heard for their much babbling. For to offer unto the Lord multitude of
words, without spirit, or affection, is to offer a dead sacrifice to a living
GOD: but certain it is, that words doubled from a fervent and intended
affection, are ever gracious, and acceptable to the Lord.

Stay me.] Like a man ready to fall, he prays Three things caused David to
fear least he should fall. 1. Tentation. 2. Corruption.
God to hold him up. Three things made David afraid: First, great tentations
without: for from every air, the wind of tentation blows upon a Christian.
Secondly, great corruption within. Thirdly, examples of other worthy 3. The
falls of others.
men, that have fallen before him; and are written for us: not that we should
learn to fall, but to fear least we fall. These three should always hold us
humble, according to that warning, He that stands, take heed least he fall.

Sure it is, we are most strong, when distrusting our own weakness, we lean
to the Lord, praying him to stay us: otherwise, as Peter, in his carnal
confidence, was overcome with a small tentation; so presumption, and want of
fear in us, will not fail to procure our fall. Of the promise following, see
ver. 16. 35. 47. 70.

VER. 118. Thou have trod down all them that depart from thy statutes: for
their deceit is vain.
David here, by a new meditation, confirms The judgments of God, executed on
wicked men, should be awe-bands unto us.
himself in the course of godliness: for considering the judgments of God,
executed according to his word, in all ages upon the wicked; he resolves so
much the more to fear God, and keep his testimonies. Thus the judgments of
GOD, executed on others, should be awe-bands to keep us from sinning, after
their similitude. But few are like David, who trembled when he saw Vzzah
stricken; and many like Lam^h, who because he saw Cain the murderer spared,
confirmed himself to commit murder also. Because judgment is not speedily
Eccles.
executed on the wicked; therefore the heart of the children of men, is set in
them to do evil. Judgment in this life, is not executed on all the wicked,
because this is the time of his patience; and the day of his judgment is not
yet come: but by the plagues executed upon some of the wicked, all the rest may
learn to fear. For God is no accepter of persons: what he punishes in one,
he will punish in all, if repentance prevent not.

Trod down.] The Lord, in chastising his The Lord strikes not the godly, as
he does the wicked.
own children, takes them in his hand like a father to correct them: but when
his wrath is kindled against the wicked, he tramples them under his feet, as
vile creatures, which are in no account with him.

That depart.] When the wicked are said to depart Sin is a departing from God.
from God, it expresses very properly, both the nature of their sin, and
fearful punishment thereof. Sin is a departing of man from God his Ambr. in
Psalm. 119.
statutes. Non interuallo locoru^ Deus relinquitur, sed prauitate moru^: it is
not by distance of place, but by perverse manners, that men depart from God:
and in so doing, their own deed become a punishment to themselves; For all
that go a whoring from him, shall perish. For he that runs from light, where
can he go but to darkness? and he that departs from the God of life, what is
he but posting to eternal death?

For their deceit is vain.] Mendacium hic non Deceit of sin is twofold.
refertur ad alios: he means not here, of that deceit whereby the wicked
deceive others; but that whereby they deceive themselves. And this is twofold:
first, in that they look for a good in sin; which sin deceitfully promises,
but they shall never find. Next, that they flatter themselves with a vain
conceit, to eschew judgment; which shall assuredly ouer-take them.

VER. 119. Thou have taken away all the wicked of the earth, like dross:
therefore I love thy testimonies.
HE insists still in his former purpose; showing, how Gods hand, punishing the
wicked, made him more godly. Many ways are wicked men taken away; sometime by
the hand of other men, sometime by The fall of the wicked is Gods work,
who-euer be the instrument.
their own hand. The Philistims slew not Saul, but forced him to sley
himself: yet the eye of faith ever looks to the finger of God, and sees that
the fall of the wicked, is the work of God.

The word which he uses, imports, Thou have The wicked are restless in raging
now, but God shall bridle them.
made them to cease. The wicked stir their time, and are restless: they
compass sea and land; they cannot sleep except they have done wickedlie: for
they are inspired of that Dragon and roaring Lion; that Compasser, that goes
about continually, seeking all occasions to do evil. The faculty of moving
and breathing, which God has lent them, they use against himself: but let
them remember, he will shortly take his breath out of their nosethrills, and
then shall they cease; and The fruit of temporal sin, is eternal pain.
the fruit of their temporal sins, shall be eternal pains: for their worm
dies not, and the smoke of their torment shall ascend for ever. Natural man
cannot mount above the earth.


The wicked of the earth.] It is customable to the Spirit of God, to describe
the wicked, by calling them Men of the earth: for their original is earth;
themselves are earthly minded; and they end in earth. They have sometime in
their pride, high imaginations; as if with the builders of Babel, they would
mount up into heaven: but the higher they mount, the lower they fall; they end
in dust, and then their thoughts perish. By his birth, he comes into vanity,
says Solomon: and by his death, he goes into darkness.

Like dross.] The men of this world, esteem Comfort when the godly are
disesteemed of the wicked.
Gods children, as the off-scourings of the earth; so Paul (a chosen vessel of
God) was disesteemed of men: bu^ ye see here, what the wicked are in Gods
account; but dross indeed, which is the refuse of gold, or silver. Let this
confirm the godly, against the contempt of men; Only the Lord has in his
own hand, the balance, which weighs men according as they are.

Thy testimonies.] So, very frequently he calls The testimonies of God, what
they are, and for whom.
Gods word; wherein there are both commands and promises: the commandments of
God, appertain to all; his testimonies belong to his children only: whereby,
more strictly, I understand his promises, containing special declarations of
his love and favor, toward his own in Christ Jesus.

VER. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee: and I am afraid of thy
judgments.
HOw David, by consideration of Gods Euerything that a godly m^n s^es, sends
him back to consider himself.
judgments on others, profited in the love of GOD, he showed in the last
verse: now he declares, how he also profited in the fear of GOD; by looking
to the judgments of God, which he had executed upon others.

It is a grace of the godly, that when they look to many things without them,
they are always drawn home, to edify themselves by that which they see in
others, whether it be good or evil. Electorum corda semper ad se solicit
redeunt: Greg. moral.
Other men so look unto other things, that they forget themselves; only
feeding their senses, and therewith contracting guiltiness: which for the
present they know not. Happy is he, who of all that he sees, learnes to be
more wise and godly himself.

But how do these two consist together? He Our love not without fear.
said before, he loved the testimonies of God: and now he says, he feared the
judgments of God. It is answered, they agree very well in the godly, militant
in this body. If our love were perfect, as theirs is, who are glorified, it
would cast out all fear, as says the Apostle: but in this body of sin, we
cannot so love him for his mercies, but by reason of the great corruption of
our nature, we must also fear him for his judgments. Yea, Love of God,
conserved in our heart by fear.
which is more, the love of God cannot be kept in our hearts, but by the fear
of God: and if the fear of God conserve us not, our hearts should easily be
carried away to the love of other things, not worthy to be loved, and no place
for the love of God should be left in our hearts. Confige Ambr. in Psalm. 119.
ergo clauis spiritualibus, and destrue fomenta peccati; affige carnes patibulo
crucis dominic^, vt libertatem vagandi cupiditas voluptatum cruci affixa non
habeat: nail therefore thy carnal desires to the Cross of Christ, that they
may have no liberty, as they were wont, to go loose, and wander where they
please. Otherwise, if thou will be vain, carried like an instable man, after
the wandering lusts of corrupt nature, fearful is that sentence, My Spirit shall
not always strive with man, Gene. 6.
for he is but flesh.

For fear of thee.] Familiarity with men, Familiarity with God, breeds no
contempt of him, but greater reverence.
breeds contempt; familiarity with God, not so: none reverence the Lord more,
then they who know him best, and are most familiar with him. The Seraphins,
who cover their faces in presence of his Majesty, teach us this by their
example. Such as do not remember God (and far less reverence him) when they
think or speak of his Majesty, declare sufficiently, that they were never
familiar with him.

I am afraid of thy judgments.] It is not to be thought strange, that this
fear of Gods judgments ^ith the godly are not freed from fear,
is in men regenerate: for the guiltiness which by sins of commission and
omission, daily they contract, cannot be without fear. But, as I said, it
cannot continue: for in them, fear prepares away to love; and love, as it
increases, diminishes fear.

Always we learn here, that if the judgments what horrible fear abides the
wicked?
of God executed upon others, make the godly afraid, how fearful, and
importable they will be to the wicked. If Moses trembled at the giving of the
law, how terrible shall the execution thereof be unto the wicked? Let us fear
in time, and we shall not fear in that day, wherein horrible fear shall
confound the wicked.

AIN.
VER. 121. I have executed judgment and justice: leave me not to mine
oppressors.
IN this Section David continues his A good conscience makes boldness in prayer.
prayer, for protection against his enemies; as also for grace to know his way
upon earth, and follow it. He begins with a Petition; Leave me not to mine
oppressors: and he gives the reason; I have executed judgment and justice.
Where we are not to think that he is justifying himself before God; but only
declaring how iniustly he was oppressed Amb. in Ps. 119
by men: Desensio est, non arrogantia. Our lesson is; If we would have our
prayers forcible, let us intertaine the testimony of a good conscience.

Judgment and justice.] These two are distinguished Judgment and justice, how
distinguished.
by Ambrose, in such sort, that he makes the one the effect of the other:
Iudicij finis, iustitia est: in altero veritatis custodia est, in altero
fructus aequitatis; judgment is the keeper of verity, justice the fruit of
equity: the one of these perteyning to the mind, makes it give light for
discerning between right and wrong; the other rectifying the affections and
actions. Happy is the man in whom these two concur together: Quis autem hodie
tanta animi praeditus est puritate, Basil* in Psalm. 119.
vt cum fiducia verbis is it is vti possit? But who this day is endued with such
purity of mind, that with boldness he may use these words; My rejoicing is
the testimony of a good conscience?

Leave me not.] We have often said that David We cannot in (...) life be (...)
o^ trouble by wicked men.
was a man after Gods own heart, who had also the testimony of a good
conscience to sustain him; yet could he not live free from the oppression of
wicked men. So long as this battle lasts, and Satan wants not instruments, let
us ever look to be troubled by them; and not to be discouraged thereat, but
rather comforted, considering the inimity proclaimed in Paradise is without
reconciliation: and since the Prince of our salvation sustained such
contradiction of sinners; why shall it grieve us to bear his cross?

And since David so earnestly prayed, not to be How should we pray against our
souls oppressors?
left into the hands of his bodily oppressors; what shall we do against our
souls oppressors? Satan seeks continually to spoil us of that spark of
spiritual life which God has put into us. It is a searfull judgment, where
God leaves men to his tyranny: let us pray for mercy against it.

VER. 122. Answer for thy servant in that thing which is good: and let not the
proud oppress me.
AMong many crosses wherewith David Calumnies of men heavy crosses.
was exercised, the strise of tongues is not one of the least: they did
persecute Psalm. 35. 16.
him with lies and calumnies: scoffers and bellygods made a byword of him in
their meetings; and flattering Courtiers belied him unto Saul. This was not a
small cross; Molesta enimres calumnia Basil.
etiamsi magnum afferat praemium: against it David makes his refuge to God;
Answer for thy servant. His meaning is, Lord thou kno west how iniustly I am
calumniate and evil spoken of in many parts: where I am not, nor may not
answer for my self, Lord answer thou for me.

And his petition imports not only a craving of help from God; but that God
would take his part, and join himself with his righteous cause. God is a
partaker with his own in their innocent sufferings.
And so it is indeed: the Lord is partaker with his children in their innocent
sufferings, and their cause is his cause; Blessed are ye when ye are 1. Pet. 4.
railed upon for righteousness sake, etc. For the spirit of grace and glory
rests in you, which on their part is evil spoken of, but on your part is
glorified. This might serve for a warning to wicked men: if any wisdom were in
them, they should be loath to meddle with the children of God: for if so they
will, they meddle with a stronger party then they are aware of. Dangerous to
commend a wrong cause to Gods protection.


Again, it is to be considered, that he craves protection only in his good
and honest cause. It is not for us to call for the Lords assistance to all our
wills and works: He is the righteous Judge of the world, and neither will
nor can Genesis 19.
do unrighteously. To commenda wrong cause to his protection, is to provoke him
to hasten our punishment.

And on the other hand, albeit our cause were Or yet were our cause never so
good, we must not think to bear it out by our wisdom.
never so righteous, yet we must not think to bear it out with our own
strength and wisdom. It falls out oft-times, that men fall down and faint
through feebleness, even in a good cause; because they give not to God his
glory. In their lawful affairs they prosper not, because they take counsel,
but not from me (says the Lord). They commit not their way to God, as David
exhorts; Psalm. 37. 34.
neither cast they their burden upon the Lord, as 1. Pet. 5. 7.
Peter commands them: but sacrifice to their own net, and think to compass
their affairs by their own wi^. Sure it is, the Lord is then most careful of
us, when we cast our greatest care upon him.

For thy servant.] Customably King David delights in this style, to call
himself Gods servant; Man's greatest honor is to be Gods servant.
learning us also to count this our greatest honor, to be the servants of the
great and everliving God: for we are not our own (as says the Apostle) We
are bought with a price. But here is our sin; such as are vndervs, whether they
be bought, or hired servants, we think they should serve us, and are offended
if they do not; but are not so careful to do service to him, who is above
us: who has not only bought us with a deer price, and promised to us
excellent things hereafter; but daily rewards us with wages, that far
surmounts our service. The service is not base but honorable wherein God
imployes us.


And this duty, should the more willingly be discharged by us, because the
service is honorable whereunto the Lord imployes us: for it is not to do any
base or servile thing, as to work in brick and clay; which way the Israelites
served Pharao, and common servants serve their Lord and Master. No: Pretiosa
h^c seruitus virtutum Ambrose.
constat expensis: this precious and honorable service, stands in the practice
of virtue, in prayer, and praises of the Lord thy God. These are the principal
points of this service; in this we have the Angels to be our companions: for
in these same things they serve GOD with us, and serve us for Gods sake. And
shame will be unto us, if we be ashamed to serve GOD with them; and one of
us to serve another for Gods sake.

VER. 123. Mine eyes have failed in waiting for thy salvation, and for thy just
promise.
David here renues the protestation of his David's seruent desire of Gods
salvation.
earnest desire he had of Gods salvation: Et vt desider ij veheme^tiam
significet, and Basil.
to express the vehemency of his desire, he protests that his eyes failed in
waiting: meaning Oculos mentis, as Euthymius thinks, of the eyes of his mind.
So also Ambrose expounds it; Oculi animae tota fidei intention in Deum defixi
erant, that the eyes of his soul, and whole intention of his faith, were fixed
upon God.

But what is this salvation for which he waited Salvation is of two sorts:
David seeks the best.
so earnestly? Not that temporal deliverance from his enemies; for which also
many times he prays to the Lord his God: but especially here he prays for
that salvation, mentioned Ps. 106. Visit me with the salvation of thy people,
that I may rejoice with the joy of thine inheritance: and for which also he
prays; Many say, Who will show us any good; but Lord lift thou up the light
of Psalm. 4.
thy countenance upon me. And this is it, whereupon the desires of our soul
should always be intended.

If a man shall separate himself in his cogitation, The restless vanity of
worldlings.
and take a view of men's actions in the world, he shall see them running with
insatiable desires; some after one thing, and some after another: they are all in
a restless business, like ravening birds and beasts of the earth pursuing
their prey. But is not their laboura wandering after vanity? Will the fruit of
their actions remain with them? Are they not fools, to be busy about
many things with Martha; careless about one thing, which is ^eedfull, with
Mary? Let us be wise in time. Happy is he whose heart is well set, to covet the
best things: if, with David, we can wait, and hunger and thirst for Gods
salvation, God will not fail in his own time to satisfy us.

And for thy just promise.] He shows here Gods promise is the warrant of our
hope.
upon what warrant he did wait for Gods salvation; namely, his promise. There
is no people, who know there is a God, but they wait for some good things from
him: nevertheless, all these walk in uncertainties; only we have Gods warrant
for our hope: which is his sure promise he has made and sealed to us in
Christ Jesus.

But in this point also the unthankfulness of Small present gifts more
esteemed by worldlings then promises of greater things to com.
this age is manifest: for who now delight in the promises of God? No, no; as
if they were but vain words, men now account more of one of his temporal
gifts presently given them, then they do of the most excellent promises of
better things to come, which he has made
to *them: and therefore is it they wait not for those which are to come, but
let loose their hearts, to delight in these which are present. An unthankful,
unfruitful, and back-slyding generation is this, wherein we are fallen. God be
merciful unto it.

VER. 124. Deal with thy servant according to thy mercy; and teach me thy
statutes.
HE protests now, as often before, that he was Gods servant; that he did not
live We cannot serve God as we should.
according to his own will, but depended on the will of God. Even as the eyes
of a servant look to the Master, and the eyes of a handmaid to her Mistress:
so did he look unto the Lord his God. But because he was privy to the
conscience of his own sins, and that his service was not such as it should
have been, therefore he appeals to mercy; praying GOD not to deal with him
after his service, but after Gods mercy. Non vno facto seruus Dei absoluitur:
It is not one duty which completes the service we owe unto God. Yea, when we
have done all that we can, we are but unprofitable servants: for who can serve
so great a Master as the Lord is, according as he should be served?*

Yea, to let be himself; who can serve him, Yea, our best service is far^e
inferior to his wages.
worthy of that wage we have received from him? Quis tanta naturae munera,
vitae salutisque seruatae diuina beneficia, digno possit aequare seruitio? Amb.
in Psalm. 119.
Quis potest soluere quod accepit? ideoque misericordiam petit David: Who can
give equal service for so great benefits of nature, life, and salvation, which
we have received from God? who can recompense him that which he has given? or
pay him that which he owes unto him? And therefore David knowing all these, he
cries for mercy.

And yet shall we not be defrauded of the comfortable Two things prove a man to
be Gods servant.
style of Gods servant, if we find these two things: First, that we are
glad to do any thing in his service, that we know is according to his will.
Next, that we are sorrowful for the evil which we do; and for the good
which of weakness we leave undone.

Teach me.] David had Nathan and Gad the Outward and ordinary teachers, are
nothing if God teach not.
Prophets; and beside them, the ordinary Levites to teach him. He read the word
of God diligently, and did meditate in the law night and day; but he
acknowledges all this was nothing, unless God did teach him. Other teachers
speak to the ear; but God speaks to the heart: so Paul preached to Lydia, but
God opened her heart. Let us pray for this grace.

VER. 125. I am thy servant: grant me therefore understanding, that I may know
thy testimonies.
IN this verse, his former petition is renewed, with a reason. The thing he
seeks, is understanding. Intellectus spiritale munus est: and ideo quod They
may lawfully seek all good from God, who can truly say they are his own.
Dei est, a Domino postulatur; understanding is a spiritual gift. David seeks
it from God, because it is at his Donation. The reason he uses; I am thy
servant: Non quasi extraneus poscit. Amb. in Ps. 119
I am not a stranger to thee, but thine own domestique servant; let me want no
grace may enable me to serve thee. Omnes homines natura sunt serui Dei;
adoptione vero illi qui dominationem Basil. in Ps. 119.
Dei cupide sunt amplexi: All men by nature are Gods servants; by adoption
only, they who are glad to come under his Dominion: these serve him, not by
constraint, nor for fear only, but willingly and with joy; as being such
servants as are also his sons.

He acknowledges here his own wants; that The godly can not learn so much,
but they would still understand more.
as a natural man he had no understanding of the ways of God: his Word is
full of mysteries; which we cannot know, till God reveal them. And as a
Regenerate man, he had not so much knowledge as he should have. Habebat
intellectum: Ambrose.
sed vt redundaret, vberiorem inquirit; he had understanding, but he craves he
might more and more abound in all knowledge and judgment. We will not with
Euah aspire to that knowledge which God has forbidden: but that which God has
revealed unto us, we will never think we can learn it so well, but that
still we have need to learn it better.

To know thy Testimonies.] He prayed before for knowledge of Gods Statutes:
now he Statutes and Testimonies of God would be learned together.
prays for the knowledge of Gods Testimonies. The Statutes (more strictly
taken) are that part of Gods Word declaring his Will, which we should obey:
the Testimonies properly are that part of Gods Word, declaring his Promises,
which we should believe. To know the first without the second, will not make us
godly: for it is the sense of Gods love, and faith in his Testimonies, that
works kindly obedience; and therefore David prays for it. See verse. 2. 14.
22. 24. 36. 46. 59. 79. 88. 95. 99. 111. etc.

VER. 126. It is time for thee to work: for they have destroyed thy Law.
He has complained before of the oppression David's complaint against his
enemies.
of his adversaries; and besought the Lord to arm him against them, with
knowledge and understanding: now he complains their iniquity was come to such
a height, that they did give battle even to God himself; and were not only
enemies to David, but such as had done what they could to destroy the law of
God. So the verse contains a prayer, that God would work; and a reason, taken
from the ripeness of the wickedness of his enemies.

According to our sense, there is a time wherein God works not: whereof
proceeds in the God is a continual working virtue, even when we think he is
resting.
godly the like of these complaints; Arise Lord, why sleep thou? How long
will thou forget? It is true, in himself he is a continual working virtue;
but we, being ignorant of the ways whereby he walks to his own end, think
sometime that he is not working, because he is not executing: although even
then, when we so think, he be most busily working a way, to effect his own
determinate conclusion.

But how is this, that he prescribes a time to How David prescribes a time to
the Lord.
the Lord? Is not this to fall into that fault, which is reproved, Psalm 78?
They limited the Holy one of Israel.

For answer of this; GOD has made some promises with a time, declaring to his
children when he would perform them. So he promised Some promises made with
a time when they shall be performed.
to free Abraham's seed, from the Egyptian persecution, after four hundred
years; as he did: for it was no less between the beginning of that
persecution in Ismael mocking Isaac, and the deliverance from it, in Pharao
oppressing Israel with burdens.

Again, he promised to bring Israel out of Babel after seauenty years: and
therefore the godly, who thought very long for expiring of that date, prayed
earnestly, that God would have mercy on Sion, because the appointed time was
come. So also, he promised to send Shiloh, the true deliverer of his people, at
that time when the Scepter should depart from Israel: and therefore at that
time, Simeon waited for the consolation, and his eyes saw the salvation, of God.

Other promises again he makes without a Some without a time.
time; that is, not telling when he will perform them. He put Noah in the Ark;
but told him not when he would bring him out: and he tarried a year and a
day, waiting Gods time with patience. He sent Joseph and Mary into Egypt,
commanding them to tarry there, till he told them: they inquired not how long;
neither did he tell them: Learning us, when God lays a cross on us, not to
capitulate with him, concerning the time of our deliverance; but patiently to
bear it, In these we should have patience waiting till Gods time come.
till his time come. It was Saul's ouer-hastiness; he tarried for Samuel seven
days, but would tarry no longer. And it was the blasphemous speech of Iehoram,
Why should I attend any longer?

Let us not dishonor the Lord, by prescribing a time to him. If he should
always tell us the time of our deliverance, the praise of our patience should be
the less, and our prayer the colder: but when he conceales the time, and we
with patience
wait upon it; we give good proof of our faith and patience, and find our
deliverance the sweeter when it comes.

Yet in public troubles of the Church, when When the godly may use this reason
in their prayer, The time is come.
the pride of the enemy is become great, and the cup of the Amo^ites seems to
be full; when the children of God, are brought low, and their souls humbled to
the dust; it is no limitation of the Lord, when with David they pray, that GOD
would have mercy on them, because the time is come.

For they have destroyed thy law.] It is a great proof of true godliness,
when we are more displeased Offenses done against God, should grieve us more
then our own injuries.
with offenses done against the Lord our GOD, then with such as are done
against our selves. But it is now far otherwise with most part of Professors:
so that they be not prejudiced in their names, and commodities, they care not
what be done against the glory of God. An evident argument, that they never
loved him.

In the second verse of this Section, he complained, Godly me^ have no
enemies, but such as are enemies to God.
that the proud would oppress him: now he complains, that they destroyed the
law of God. Who then are David's enemies, and seek to oppress him? Only such
as are enemies to God, and seek to destroy his law. A great comfort have we in
this, that if we love the Lord, and study in a good conscience to serve him,
we can have no enemies, except such as are enemies to God. And so long as God
wants his due at their hands, that is, love and service; may not we be content
to want their affection toward us? Truly, it should greatly increase our
patience, to remember, that if they were not enemies to God, they would never
be ou^ enemies.

But, how is this h^ (...) They have destroyed Seeing Gods law can not be
destroyed, how are the wicked charged with this crime?
thy law? Is this pos^ble, that Gods law can be destroyed? No indeed: yet
because their malice would, if their power might, they shall be charged with it.

There is a law of God written in holy Scripture, The law written in the Bible
they cannot destroy.
which the wicked in all ages have sought to destroy; but GOD has marueilously
preserved it. There is a law written in the book of every The law written in
the conscience, they can never destroy.
man's conscience, which the most profane in the world, do what he can, is not
abloto scrape out; but still it judges him, conuinceth him, and rebukes him
when he does wrong. And, as for the execution of the law, all the wicked in the
world are not able to stay it, when Gods time comes: yet because (as I said)
the wicked would Yet because their malice would do it if they might, they
shall be charged with it.
do it if they might, they are charged with it, that they have done it. For as
the godly shall have imputed to the^, that good, which feign they would have
done, albeit they did not perform it: so shall the wicked be charged as verily
with that evil, which they would have done, albeit they never did it. O what a
heap of finnes shall be gathered
against them, when with the sins of their actions and words, the sins of
their affections shall be conjoined also!

And here we see, how-euer God for a time tolerate There is a time appointed
for the punishment of evil men.
them, yet he has his own appointed time to punish them, and will not pass
it. Omnia in statera gubernat Deus; God rules all things in a balance. Diu
quidem fert (...) peccata: vbi Basil.
vero patientiae eius intuit^ a^geri malitiam videt, tum p^nas sumit: Long does
the Lord suffer the sins of mortal men; but when they abuse his patience to
increase their wickedness, then he does punish them, he does nothing out of
time. Totum oportunum est quod fecerit; but whatsoever Ambrose.
he does, he does it most seasonably: and therefore whether it be
deliverance to us, or judgment upon our enemies, that God delays; let us
know it is because his hour is not yet come.

VER. 127. Therefore love I thy Commandments above gold: yea, above most fine
gold.
WE may see here that David was not True religion cannot be tried without
trouble.
a temporizer in religion; whose affection toward Gods word depends upon the
state of times, and persons of men: but even when his enemies did disdain it,
yea because they sought to destroy it, therefore he loved it. This is a trial
of true religion, even then to cleave to the word of God and profess it
constantly, when honorable, and great men of the world are against it. This
was Joshua his resolution, Albeit all the world should for sake God, yet I and
my fathers house will worship him. And Peter's in like manner, when many of
Christ's disciples did forsake him, and it was asked at them, Will ye go also
from me? he answered, where away shall we go? thou have the words of eternal
life. To profess religion, when it is warranted by law; when both rulers and
people profess it, is no great matter: but when the powers of the world
forsake it; then to stand to it, is an argument of true religion.

Love I thy commandments.] He professes Love of Gods obedience, an argument
of true godliness.
not that he fulfilled them; but that he loved them: and truly it is a great
progress in godliness, if we be come thus far, as from our heart to love them.
The natural man hates the commandments of God; they are so contrary to his
corruption: but the regenerate man, as he hates his own corruption, so he
loves the word; because according to it he desires to be reformed. And here is
our comfort, That albeit we cannot do what is commanded; yet if we love to do
it, it is an argument of grace received.

Above gold.] It is not unlawful to love those With what conditions Gods
creatures may be loved.
creatures, which God has appointed for our use; with these two conditions:
the one is, that the first seat in our affection of love, be reserved to God;
and any other thing we love, that we love it* in him and for him, and give it
only the second room. Thus David, being a natural man, loved his natural
food: but he protests he loved the law of the Lord, more then his appointed
food; and here he loves the commandments of God, above all gold.

VER. 128. Therefore I esteem all thy precepts most just; and I hate all false
ways.
IN this verse are two protestatio^s. In the first, As the mind esteems of
any thing, the affections go after it
he declares how he esteemed of Gods word in his mind: in the second, how in
his affection he was disposed toward it. As the mind of a man esteems of any
thing, so are his affections moved to fly or follow it. It is shame for many
professors, now to say they esteem of Gods word, when they show their
affections more set upon any thing in the world, then upon it.

Most just.] In two respects is the word of God The word of God called just in
two respects.
just: first, because it commands nothing, but that which is most reasonable;
and next, because it shall not fail one jot, but the event of things shall be
according to the predictions of this word. What cause have we then to rejoice,
That how ever our tribulations be many, yet we hear, out of this most just
word, It cannot be but well with them that fear the Lord? And again* what
cause of fear is there to the wicked? when this same word says, There is no
peace to the wicked, says my God. And a sinner of an hundred years old shall
die accursed. If we behold the wicked in their most flourishing estate, and
look to them in the glass of the word, we shall see their miseraend, long
before it come. (...) of evil ^s a ^val of our (...) to God.


And I hate all false ways.] The best trial of our love to God and his word,
is the contrary; hatred of sin and impiety: Ye that love the Lord hate that
which is evil. He that loves a tree, hates the worm that consumes it: he that
loves a garment, hates the moth that eats it: he that loves life, abhors
death* and he that loves the Lord, hates every thing that offends him. Let men
take heed to this, who are in love of their sins: how can the love of God be
in them?

All false ways.] Religion binds us not only The perfection of the godly is
in parts, not in degrees.
to hate one way of falsehood, but all the ways of it. As there is nothing
good, but in some measure a godly man loves it: so is there nothing evil, but
in some measure he hates it. And this is the perfection of the children of God:
a perfection, not of degrees; for we neither love good, nor hate evil as we
should: but a perfection of parts; because every good we love, and we hate
every evil in some measure.

The worst man in the world loves some good, and hates some evil. Plerumque
enim peccata huiusmodi Ambrose.
sunt, vt si alterum declines, incurras alteru^; It is sufficient to man's
damnation, if he be captiued by any one sin.
ofttimes he that declines one sin, falls into another: It may be thou ha^est
couetousness, and yet art snared with lechery; there is one very temperate of
his mouth, but of a proud and hauty heart; there is another not ambitious of
honor, but a servant to gluttony: Diuerso vsu in eundem indeuotionis errorem
vterque concurrit. And this is very dangerous, when as men because some good
thing is in them, take the greater liberty to commit some evil: for, if Satan
get a gripe of thee by any one sin, is it not enough to carry thee to
damnation? As the butcher carries the beast to the slaughter, sometime bound by
all the four feet, and sometime by one only: so is it with Satan. Though
thou be not a slave to all sin; if thou be a slave to one, the gripe he has of
thee, by that one sinful affection, is sufficient to captive thee.

P E.
VER. 129. Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore does my soul keep them.
THE familiarity of man with God, is If we hear not God when he speaks in
his word* we shall not be welcome when we pray.
increased and continued by the exercises of the word and prayer. For in the
word, God speaks unto men; and in prayer men speak unto God: let not men
disioyne these two. For he that cannot receive the Lord with reverence and
obedience when he speaks (answering him with Abraham and Samuel, Here am I
Lord; Speak for thy servant hears) shall not be welcomed of him, nor
receive a favorable answer when he prays. Yea, as Solomon says, He that
turns away his ear from hearing the law, his prayer shall be abominable.

Such as have received most from God, are If men seek not from God, it is
because they know him not.
more instant by prayer to crave more. No marvel, that the wicked, who never
got grace from him, cannot pray unto him: for who will seek a treasure where
he thinks not to find it? or who will seek refreshing waters, where he
looks not to find them. They know him not to be the father of light, the
fountain of life, the treasure of all good, they believe not his word; and how
then can they call upon him? but the godly, who know what the Lord is worth,
are continually seeking from him, as here ye may see in David.

In David's prayer, mark his variety and breuity: Our manifold necessities
require manifold prayers.
his variety in this, that as his necessities were manifold, so his requests;
he prays for his mind, for his heart and affections, for his tongue, for his
eyes, for his feet. As Job when he prayed, sacrificed for all his children: so
the Christian when he goes to pray, prays for every thing that is in him. And
if we knew how many are our necessities, for the which we have need to pray,
beside that we are bound to pray for others, we would not be so slack, and
remiss in prayer, as we are.

His brevity again is evident; he has many, To continue long in prayer, and
be fervent also is a difficult thing.
but very short petitions: this proceeds not of weariness, but as I have said
of feruency. Finding his necessities so many, he passes speedily from one to
another; for it is a difficult thing to continue our prayers long, and keep
zeal and sincerity: sometime so it will fall out, but very seldom. Yea, the
children of God may observe in their own experience, that it is a difficult
thing to pray the Lords prayer, and not to be interrupted in it. Augustine
records of Christians in August. ad Probam.
Egypt, Habent preces crebras et breues, tanquam eiaculationes animorum; idque
inquit, ne intentio Prayers would be short and frequent.
illa emollescat, They have short and frequent prayers, like eiaculations, or
bolts and arrows shot out of their souls: which they do says he, for this
cause, that their intention should not relent
in prayer through long continuance. And therefore Prayers should be made long
or short according to our disposition.
he teaches us to frame our prayers according to our disposition. When our
affections are not intended, it is not good to make them more dull by
continuance: when again they are spiritually disposed, then it is good to
continue our conference with God; though this same consideration be used by
some Christians in our time to urge continuance in prayer. For if they get no
access, they are more instant, and loath to come away without a favorable
answer: if again they find comfort in prayer, and that God hears them, they
are also loath to break off their conference with him.

And to this purpose notable is it, which there Good to deal with God by
tears more then by talk.
he subioynes. Oration multa esse debet, loquutio pauca, Our prayers should be
many, but our words few; and that lachrymis potius quam verbis agendum sit, et
sletu magis quam affatu: Verba enim non in alium vsum adhiberi, quam vt vel nos
ipsos vel alios incitemus. We should deal with God by tears more then by
talk, by weeping more then by words: for words are used in prayer for none
other end, but either to stir up our selves, or others to pray.

This verse contains in it two things: first, a Two things in this verse.
commendation of Gods word; that the testimonies thereof are wonderful: and
next a protestation of his earnest affection toward it; and therefore says he,
My soul does keep it.

Many ways hitherto has he praised the word of God: as namely, that there is
no good thing whereupon the heart of man can be set by nature, Commendatio^ of
Gods word.
but the word of God offers him better then it; for it renders incomparable
pleasure and profit: beside, true wisdom to such as delight in it, is sweeter
then the honey; it is more to be desired then gold or silver.

But here he praises it from a new quality: Al thy Every article of our faith
is a mystery.
testimonies are wonderful; and so they are: for every article of our faith
is a mystery. Great is the mystery of godliness, said the Apostle. Though 1.
Tim. 3
to natural men the Gospel seem a base and a foolish doctrine, yet is it
indeed wonderful. Whereof we learn, that if we would be good scholars in
the Lords school, to profit by his word, we must not come to it with natural
sense and reason, as customably men do; to judge it*
rather then to be judged and controlled by it: but as it is a wonderful and
supernatural doctrine; so must we not examine it by nature, but embrace it by
says. Otherwise, it shall be but a stumbling block, and rock of offense unto
us.

Of his protestation renewed, see what we have marked, Verse 47. 48. 97. 113.
119. 127. 132. 140. 159. 163. 165. 167.

VER. 130. The entrance into thy word shows light, and gives understanding
to the simple.
AS the life of natural babes, is not conserved The word serves for food and
light to the soul.
without food convenient for them: so is not the life of men regenerate,
preserved without the word. And as the one by natures instinct, desires to be
nourished with milk: so the other by instinct of grace, desires to be sed by
the word. Neither is it to the godly as meat only, but as light also. The sure
word of the prophets, Saint Peter calls it a light shining in darkness, like
as before he called it unmingled milk, and most necessary food for the babes
of Christ. And the spirit of God so frequently comparing Gods word to food and
to light, will tell us, in what miserable estate they are, who live without it.

Here he praises the word from this notable Without the word men walk in
darkness.
quality, that it is an illuminating word, such as gives understanding; letting
us thereby to know, that without it men walk in darkness. What-euer show of
learning Naturalists had* yet being ignorant of Christ, by whom the father is
known and the way of salvation manifested, they did but vanish in their own
cogitations; and while they professed themselves to be wise, they became
fools.

He amplifies this praise of the word of God, Shame it is now to see aged men
children in understanding.
when he says that the entrance thereof, ostium verborum tuorum, the first
opening of the door of thy word gives light* for if the first entrance to
Vatab.
it give light, what will the progress and continuance thereof do? This
accuses the age wherein we live; who now of a long time has been taught by
the word of God so clearly, that in regard of time they might have been
teachers of others, yet are they but children in knowledge and understanding.
But to whom does the word give understanding? Only simple men, and not they
who are high minded, profit by the word.
David says to the simple: not to such as are high minded, or double in heart,
or wise in their own eyes, who will examine the mysteries of godliness by the
quicknes of natural reason. No: to such as deny themselves, as captive their
natural understanding, and like humble disciples submit themselves, not to
ask, but to hear; not to reason, but to believe. And if for this cause,
Naturalists who want this humility, No marvel Papists profit not by it.
cannot profit by the word; what marvel that Papists far less become wise by
it, who have their hearts so full of preiudices concerning it, that they spare
not to utter blasphemies against it; calling it, not only unprofitable, but
pernicious to the simple and to the idiots. Papists calumny of the obscu^ity
of scripture confuted.


And again, where they charge it with difficulty, that simple men and idiots
should not be suffered to read it, because it is obscure; all these frivolous
allegations of men, are annulled by this one testimony of God, that it gives
light to the simple. Eos qui ignorantia tenentur, and infantibus Basil.
similes sunt, intellectu replet lex tua: that is, Even to such ignorants, who
are like infants, says, Basil, non solum viris, sed mente and intellectu
paruulis, it gives not only light to men but Euthym.
to such as in understanding are children. To this purpose notable is that
saying of Irenaeus, Vniuersae Iren. l. 2. c. 46
scripturae et propheticae and euangelicae, in aperto, et sine ambiguitate, et
ab omnibus audiri possunt, The whole scriptures both prophetical, and
evangelical, are open, plain, not doubtful, but such as may be heard of all
men. And to this purpose, says Lactantius, Number igitur deus, and mentis, and
Lactan. l. 6. c. 21
linguae, and vocis artifex diserte loqui non potest? Imo vero summa
prouidentia carere fuco voluit ea quae diuina sunt, vt omnes intelligerent quae
ipse omnibus loquebatur. Shall we think that God, who is the creator of the
mind, the tongue, and voice, cannot speak distinctly himself? No truly: by
great providence he has propounded his word in so plain a manner, that all
sorts of men may understand that which he speaks unto all. Many other
witnesses might be brought to this same purpose: but I cease.

VER. 123. I opened my mouth, and panted, because I loved thy Commandments.
BY this manner of speech, David expresses, How a moved mind affects the body.
as Basile thinks, Animi propensionem; that the inclination of his soul was
after Gods word. For, this opened mouth, Ambrose thinks, is Os interioris
hominis, the mouth of the inward man, which in effect is his heart: and the
speech notes Vehementem animi intensionem, a vehement intension of his spirit,
says Euthymius: yet shall it not be amiss to consider here how the mind of
the godly earnestly affected, moves the body also. The speech may be drawn
from travelers, who being very desirous to attain to their proposed ends,
enforce their strength thereunto: and finding a weakness in their body to
answer their will, they pant and open their mouth, seeking refreshment from
the air to renew their strength: or as Vatablus thinks, from men exceeding
hungry and thirsty, who open their mouth as if they would draw in the whole
air, and then pant and sigh within themselves, when they find no full
refreshment by it. So he expresses it, Tanto desiderio legum tuarum flagrat
cor meu^, vt subinde cogar haurire aerem propter ass^dua suspiria. The fervent
desire of godly men toward the word.


How-euer it be, it lets us see how the hearing, reading, or meditating of Gods
word, wakened in David a most earnest affection, to have the light, joy, grace,
and comfort thereof communicated to his own heart. For in the godly, knowledge
of good increases desires: and it cannot be expressed, how vehemently their
souls long to feel that power and comfort, which they know is in the word;
and how sore they are grieved and troubled, when they find it not.

And happy were we, if we could meet the When God opens his mouth to give,
we should open our hearts to receive.
Lord, with this like affection; that when he opens his mouth, we could also
open our heart to hear as David here does. Christus aperit os, vt daret alijs
spiritum: David aperuit vt acciperet; Opening his heart, to receive the spirit
of grace, when God opens his mouth, in his word to give it. For it is his
promise to us all; Open thy mouth wide, and I shall fill it: let us turn it
into a prayer, that the Lord, who opened the heart of ^dia, would open our
heart to receive grace, when he offers by his word to give it.

VER. 132. Look upon me, and be merciful to me; as thou use to do unto those
that love thy name.
FRom praises, David now turns him to prayer. Psalm.
In our best estate, we are far from that In our best estate we have need to
seek mercy.
which we should be: our perfection in this life, stands in the acknowledging
of our imperfection. Even when the godly speak any thing to God, out of a good
conscience, concerning their upright affection toward him; at that same time,
privy to the conscience of their wants, they take them to prayer, and seek
mercy.

Look upon me.] This prayer is used by the A good conscience presents it self
unto God.
godly in two respects: first, when they are unrighteously judged of men, and
charged with that whereof they are not guilty; in this case, they desire that
God would look upon them. For sure it is, unless the conscience be sleeping,
no man dare present an evil cause to the eye of God: but rather as Adam hid
himself after his transgression; so men, whose consciences are evil, fly the
sight of God, and dare not desire him to look upon them.

And again, when they are under spiritual desertion, Godly exercised with
spiritual desertions.
and in their sense the countenance of God is turned from them, whose favor is
better then life (which after the manner of men, turning their face from such
as they are angry withal, they take up to be an argument of displeasure) in
this case also, they pray that the Lord would look upon them: that is, as he
expounds himself, be favorable and merciful to them.

And be merciful.] This is very well subioyned: To some God looks in mercy, to
others in with.
for God looks to some in his displeasure; so he looked to the Egyptians and
unloosed the pinnes of their chariots, that they could not drive; so he looked
to Sodom, and rained down fire and brimstone upon them. The eyes of the Lord,
said Amos, are upon the sinful kingdom to destroy it. David knew this; and
therefore desires the Lord so to look on him, as to be mercivnto him.

As thou use.] These words contain in effect Examples of Gods mercy o^
others should confirm us.
a reason from Gods constant kindness toward all his children: Lord do to me,
as thou have used to do to others that love thee. Or^ vt aequali cum illis
sententia potiar. The examples of Gods mercy, are not only registered for our
comfort, but for our confirmation. Wherein, we are always to take heed, that if
we would have the argument effectual toward us, we make it sure to our
selves, that we are of the number of them who love him.

VER. 133. Direct my footsteps in thy word: and let none iniquity have
dominion over me.
AS before he sought mercy, so now he seeks Mercy and grace are benefits in
diuisible: foolish are they who seek the first and not the second.
grace. There are many that seek mercy to forgive sin, who seek not grace to
deliver them from the power of sin: this is to abuse Gods mercy, and turn his
grace into wantonness. He that prays for mercy to forgive the guilt of sin
only, seeks not that by sin he should not offend God; but that he may sin and
not hurt himself: but he who craves deliverance also from the commanding power
and deceit of sin, seeks not only a benefit to himself, but grace also to
please and serve the Lord his God. The first is but a lover of himself: the
second is a lover of God, more then of himself. And truly he never knew
what it was to seek mercy for sin past, who with it also earnestly sought not
grace to keep him from sin in time to come. These benefits cannot be divided:
he who has not the second (howsoever he flatter himself) may be assured, he
has not gotten the first.

My steps.] These steps Ambrose restraines The steps of the Soul are motions
of the affections.
ad profectus animae, to the progress of his soul only: but we may very well
think, that David here commends the whole course of his life to be governed by
God; both outward, and inward conversation. The body is carried to good or
evil, by steps of the feet: the soul by the motion of affections, is carried
either to the Lord, or from him; and therefore he prays that God would direct
them: for according to our governor or directour, so goes the course of our
actions.

Thy word.] By the word of the Lord all creatures Al creatures, except man and
apostate Angels, are ruled by Gods word.
are ruled. At his word, fire comes down contrary to the course of nature;
the sun stands or goes back; the moon and stars keep forward their course;
yea, the raging sea abides within his prescribed bounds. Strange is it, that
man makes it not the rule of his life: but let this be an awe-band to him, That
by this word he must be judged at the length.

And let none iniquity have dominion.] Dauaid Satan an unreasonable Tyrant.
takes up very wisely the controversy that is between Satan and us: he
seeks by sin to have dominion over us. Wherein we may consider what an
unreasonable Tyrant Satan is and what just cause we have to wage battle with
him. The Lord our God made us, he redeemed us, he conserues us; none but he
can claim any title vnto-vs: Is it not then most unreasonable, that Satan
should seek superiority over us, or that we should be so beastly as give it
unto him?

Neither is it only against all equity, but also Service to Satan, hurtful to
them who yield it.
most hurtful unto our selves: for what wages can Satan give to his slaves,
but the wages of sin, to make them partakers of his own damnation? Can he
give unto others, better then he has to himself? Besides this also, he exacts
service without rest or intermission. Most cruel oppressors, Turks and Pagans,
give some rest to their captives: Satan gives none: in eating, in sleeping he
abuses them, to serve him.

And which is worst of all; where this Tyrant Satan's officer* can never be
satisfied.
sends out sundry officers and servants, that is, sinful affections, to exact
service from thee: they are all so insatiable, that they may well consume
thee, spend all thy means, and all thy days; but thou shall never be able to
satisfy the least of them. And therefore great need have we to seek the
helping hand of God against them; praying with David, that iniquity may never
have dominion over us.

VER. 134. Deliver me from the oppression of men: and I will keep thy
precepts.
NOt one, but manifold are the troubles of Armor of the godly is patience and
prayer.
the righteous: they have not only to wrestle against their own corruption;
but against Satan's malice, the pride and envy of all his wicked impes and
instruments. Against them, the best armor we can use, is patience and prayer:
they are but like rods in the hand of the Lord; as our Savior said to Pilat,
Thou could have no power over me, if it were not given thee from above. The
rod is not able to move, but The wicked are but rods in the hand of God.
by the hand of him that holds it: let us run to the hand of God: let us
pacify him by prayer, and we shall not need to fear what flesh can do unto
us. But above all things, let us beware we fight never against the wicked with
their own weapons.

From the oppression.] The word is general; They who persecute with their
tongues, will not fail, if they might, to persecute with their hands also.
and imports not only oppression by violence, but by calumnies and any other
injury. And they are well joined together: for such as do evil one way, will
not fail to do it another. They who loose their tongues, to calumniate Gods
servants, will not fail, if they may, to loose their hands also to oppress
them; and such also who oppress them, will not spare to speak evil of them,
that they may justify themselves. None of all the servants of Saul would draw
the sword to slay the servants of the Lord, albeit their Master commanded them:
only Doeg, who before had calumniated David (and so by his tongue had begun
the persecution) spared not to murder with the bloody swords, such servants
of God, as for Gods sake had showed favor to David. Let us not look for
better from them whose tongues are bent to speak evil of the servants of God,
but that their hands also, when they may have the occasion, will be ready to
shed their blood.

Of men.] The word he uses, is Adam: this is Man by sin is become a weak
and silly creature.
the first name that God gave to man after his fall; signifying earth, or red earth: and it shows how weak and silly a creature man has made himself by
his sin. The consideration of it confirms David against his enemies, that
they were but men of earth: if we could remember, we would never be troubled at
their inimity; Who art thou Jacob, that thou should fear a mortal man? and
all flesh is grass. A preservative against pride.


And again, the consideration of this serves to humble the pride of man: Since
they are but men of clay, why wax they proud to oppress others? It was a
very worthy warning, which a certain Ambassador gave
once to Alexander the great, that flies and worms at length would eat the
flesh of Lions. If proud men considered this, That they are but earth, and
that shortly their beautiful bodies will become carcases to be eaten by the
worms; it would abate their natural pride, by which they trample down
others, poorer and weaker then they, under their feet.

And I will keep.] The benefits or deliverances Benefits should bind us to
the love and obedience of God who gave them.
of God, obtained by prayer, should not be abused to licentiousness, to
nourish our selves in our sins, and wonted security: but the more we receive
from him, the more should we acknowledge our selves bound and obliged to him.
Otherwise, if benefits bind us not, if mercies allure us not, if the cords
of his love draw us not, to be thankful servants to our God; how inexcusable
are we?

VER. 135. Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant: and teach me
thy Statutes.
THis verse contains a petitition, which in this Book of the Psalms David
frequently makes to God; as ye may see, Ps. 4. 6. Psalm. 67. 1. Psalm. 80. 3. 7.
and 19. For understanding whereof, we are to see what the light of Gods
countenance is. A common light external.


There is a common light external, whereby the Majesty of Godshines after a
sort unto all his A common light internal.
creatures. There is a common light also internal, whereby he illuminates
every one that comes into the world. This is the light of the mind and
conscience, communicated both to just and unjust: but here he seeks a greater
benefit then any of these; to wit, a declaration of Gods special favor and
love toward him. This A special light internal.
is called a showing of his face, or the light of his countenance. Crassius de
Deo sacra Scriptura Basil. in Ps. 119.
inter dum loquitur, sermones ad Naturam hominis attemperans; The spirit of God
in holy Scripture, attempers his speech to man's nature: and so here he puts the
face of God, for the favor of God.

Solomon says, that the wrath of a King is the Angry face of God most fearful.
messenger of death; but in the light of the Kings countenance is life: and his
favor is as the cloud Prou. 16.
of later rain. The downe-looke of Ahashuer us confounded Haman. It was
Absaloms speech to Ioab, suppose in hypocrisy; That it was better to him to be
banished, then abide in Jerusalem, wanting the Kings countenance. If such
moment be in the countenance of earthly Kings; what is the face of the King of
kings? Surely, such as know him, rejoice to behold his face continually: and
it is death to them to want it. How God forsakes his children.


Certain it is, the Lord looks always favorably upon his own elect, but he does
not always show it; no, not unto themselves. Before their effectual calling, in
themselves they differ nothing from the children of wrath; albeit in Gods
counsel there be a great diffrence: and after their calling, for the trial of
their faith, he many times forsakes them; not according to his truth, which is
Not according to his truth, but our sense.
unchangeable, but according to their sense, which is changeable. He loves them,
but will not let them know that he loves them: but sometime will frown upon
them; as Joseph did on his brethren, even then when his affection was most
strong toward them. And then the want of the light of the Sun in the
firmament, is not so heavy to natural men, as this is to a Christian, To want
the sight of Gods favorable face: and therefore is it, that David here prays
so earnestly, Show the light of thy countenance upon me.

And teach me.] As the sun makes other Gods countenance illuminates the
^inde, and changes the heart of him, upon whom he looks.
things bright, whereupon it shines: so the countenance of GOD works light in
that soul upon which he looks favorably; Cum sapientem videris, cognosce
quia descendit super eum Dei gloria: illuminauit eius mentem scientiae fulgore.
So that this is a special argument of Gods favorable Amb.
face looking upon a man, when his mind is illuminate, and God has taught him
to know his way, and given him grace to follow it; according to that of the
Apostle: God who commanded ^. Cor. 4. 6.
light to shine out of darkness, is he who has shined in our hearts, to give
us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

VER. 136. Mine eyes gush out Rivers of water, because they keep not thy Law.
MAny a time has David protested his No joy in this life without grief, nor
yet grief without joy.
great joy: now here he makes mention of his exceeding great grief. We have no
joy without grief in this life: neither yet, thanks to God, have we grief
without joy. As the wine failed in that banquet, whereat Christ was present: so
oftentimes fails joy, even in the heart where Christ dwells. But as in the one
he turned water into wine: so in the other will he turn all sorrow into joy.
To have joy without
grief, is the condition of them who are glorified in heaven. To have grief
without joy, is the condition of them who are damned in hell; I mean, to be
both without sense and hope of joy: But the godly on earth have their joy mixed
with grief, and grief tempered with joy: and albeit sometime they want the
sense of joy, yet do they never want all hope and expectation of joy.

He prayed before, ver. 37. that the Lord would Of the right government of our
eyes.
turn away his eyes from regarding of vanity: now he shows how he practiced
it. He was so far from delighting to behold vanity, that he mourned when he
saw the vanity and wickedness of other men. God who has made the eyes to be
Organs of sight, has also made them to be Conduits of tears: if we mourn as
we should, when we look to the creatures, we shall not easily be snared by
them. If we look to unreasonable creatures, we may see lying upon them, the
fruits of that curse, which our sin procured: if we look to reasonable
creatures, our selves or others; what a great dis-conformity is between us and
the holy Law of the Lord our God? If these move us to mourning, the power of
sin shall be greatly restrained. Malum innatum, that seeks to break out by
looking and speaking: and Malum seminatum, that seeks to come in by hearing and
looking: both of these evils shall greatly be weakened, if every thing we look
to move us to mourning; as justly it may in the respects aforesaid.

And to move us yet more to this mourning Reasons moving us to mourning.
disposition, let us consider two things: the evil we incur if we mourn
not; and the good shall ensue to us, if we mourn for the sins of others. As
for the first: Among many ways whereby 1. If we mourn not for other men's
sins, they become ours.
the sins of other men become ours, this is also one; If we know their
iniquities, and be not grieved therewith: and therefore are the Corinthians
reproved, that they sorrowed not for the incestuous man that was among them; by
so doing they were defiled by his sin, and became one polluted lump with him.
And Ezech. 9. Not only is judgment determined upon the committers of sin;
but of such also as mourned for sin: they are involued in the same judgment,
as partakers of the same sins, by reason that they mourned not for them.

And as for the great good we get by mourning 2. If we mourn many blessings
follow it.
for the sins of the wicked, whereby they dishonor the Lord our God; it is
also evident. Blessed (says our Savior) are they that mourn, for they shall
be comforted. When the heaven waters the earth in due season, there follows a
fruitful increase: but when the earth waters the heaven, then shall follow a
more plentiful harvest of all spiritual comfort. And this is done, when a
sinner powers the tears of his penitent
heart into the bosom of God: then the heavens are watered by the earth. For
the tears of the godly fall not to the ground: the Lord gathers them like most
precious pearls unto him, and puts them in his bottell, and they bring still
increase of comfort to such as shed them. They are sown like good seed on
earth; the first fruit whereof is reaped on earth, but the fullness thereof in
heaven: according to that of the Psalmist, They that sow in tears shall reap
in joy.

ZADE.
VER. 137. Righteous art thou, O Lord: and just are thy judgments.
Here David, sore troubled with A threefold comfort that sustained David.
grief for the wickedness of his enemies; yea, tempted greatly to impatience,
and distrust, by looking to their prosperous estate, notwithstanding their so
gross impiety; does now show unto us a threefold ground of comfort, which in
this dangerous tentation vpheld him. The first is, a consideration of that
which God is in himself; namely, just and righteous: the second, a
consideration of the equity of his word: thirdly, of his constant truth,
declared in his working and doing according to his word. When we find our
selves tempted to distrust, by looking to the prosperity of the wicked; let us
look up to God, consider his nature, his word, his works, and we shall find
comfort.

Righteous art thou] There is the first; a meditation 1. A meditation of the
righteousness of God.
of the righteousness of Gods nature: he alters not with times, he changes not
with persons, he is always, and unto all, one and the same righteous and holy
God. Righteousness is essential to him; it is himself: and he can no more
defraude the godly of their promised comforts, nor let the wicked go unpunished
in their sins, then he can deny himself to be God, which is impossible.

Just are thy judgments.] The second ground of David's comfort, is here and in
the next verse.

VER. 138. Thou have commanded justice by thy Testimonies, and truth
especially.
AS the tree is, so is the fruit. From so righteous 2. A meditation of the
equity of Gods commands, flowing from his righteous nature.
a God nothing can proceed but righteousness: God forbid, that the Judge of
all the world should do unrighteously. This meditation of the equity of Gods
command, flowing from his most righteous nature, confirms David in this sure
conclusion; It cannot be but well with them who walk after his word: and by
the contrary, such as go a whooring from it cannot but make a miserable end,
how-euer they prosper for a time.

And out of this we may further learn, how the The Law of God represents to us
the image of God.
law of God expresses to us the lively lin^ments of his image: for from his
righteous nature flow his commandments, commanding righteousness. This lets
us s^e (...) fearful an evil sin is: since it is a transgression of that
holy law, How horrible an evil sin is.
which flows from Gods righteous nature, it is a direct impugning and
violating of the divine nature, so far as the creature may. The laws of
Kings may be broken, and their persons not touched, far less their nature
violated; yea, ofttimes their nature likes of that evil which their law
forbids. It is not so with the law of God: it flows from his righteous
nature, and God and his law are so straightly united, that the breaking of his
law is an impugning of his very nature, so far as the creature may; as I
have said already.

By thy Testimonies.] The word of God is called If any man desire to know what
will be his end, let him inquire at Gods word.
his Testimony, both because it testifies his will, which he will have us to
do; as also because it testifies unto men truly what shall become of them,
whether good or evil. Men by nature are curious to know their end, rather then
care full to mend their life; and for this cause seek answers where they never
get good: but if they would know, let them go to the word and testimony; they
need not to seek any other Oracle. If the word of God testify good things
unto them, they have cause to rejoice: if otherwise it witness evil unto
them, let them have to prevent it, or else it shall assuredly overtake them.

VER. 139. My zeal has even consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten
thy word.
THroughout this Psalm, we see that David The love which godly men carry to
the word cannot be satisfied in this l^fe.
cannot satisfy himself, in declaring the love he had to Gods word, for that
comfort which he had felt in it; as likewise his insatiable affection, craving
more comfort by it. What he speaks of himself, he speaks it not like that
Pharise, who boasted of his good, not mourning for his evil, nor yet longing
for better. Such presumption is far from the godly: If at any time they make
mention of any good disposition in them, they do it to the glory of God, from
whom all good comes; and to comfort themselves for the beginnings of Gods grace
in them: but still they know their wants, and mourn for them. Never contented
in this life with the grace received, with earnest affection they cry for more.

Three things have we to consider in this his The nature of zeal.
his protestation: first, the nature; secondly, the sorts; thirdly, the effects
of zeal. As for the nature of zeal; It is a mixed affection of grief and
anger, flowing from love: for what a man loves earnestly, he is careful to see
it honored; and, by the contrary, grieved when it is dishonored.

The sorts of it are many: for according as our Sund^y sorts of zeal.
love and grief are, so is our zeal. If our love be upon the right objects,
moderate, in due measure, it causes a zeal which is holy and spiritual:
otherwise, if our love be inordinate, it begets a carnal or inordinate zeal.
Sometime the zeal is not upon the right object; and then it may be great, but
it cannot be good: such is the zeal of Heretics, who compass Sea and Land
to
make one of their own profession. Sometime again the zeal is on the right
object, not in the due measure: either too cold, which is remission; or too
hot, which is superstition. Of these, says the Apostle, It is a zeal, but
not according to Romans 10. 2.
knowledge. Zelus ad mortem, non ad vitam; a zeal Ambrose.
which tends to death, not unto life.

The effects of David's zeal he touches, when The effects of holy zeal.
he says, it had consumed him. Affections of the soul are very forcible to
move the body. A sorrowful heart, says Solomon, dryes up the bones: But men
should carefully mark what spirit inflames their zeal, and what zeal moves
their bodies. There are some, who under show of zeal, or at least because they
think it zeal, neglect the duty which they owe to their bodies; not
remembering, the service which God craves of the Romans 12.
body is a reasonable service, not unreasonable. Others with their zeal fight
against the Gospel; so did Paul before his conversion. Let us try the Spirits,
and see that our zeal be according to knowledge.

For these two, Knowledge and Zeal, are compared by Bernard to the two wings
of a foul: Knowledge and Zeal two wings of the soul.
the Bird that has but one wing, falls the more that it minds to fly.
These are two excellent gifts, Knowledge and Zeal: but if the one be without
the other, it were better to want it.

And now since zeal must be tried by knowledge How true zeal may be tried from
false.
first; let us consider that to be the zeal of God, which fights with the
armor of God, the Word, Prayer, and patient Suffering. That again is a zeal,
but without knowledge, which fights with carnal armor, hatred, evil
speaking,
and bloody persecution: such a zeal breeds superstition; spares not to deal
cruelly with all such as are contrary minded. By this rule, Papists may try of
what spirit they are.

Because mine enemies.] David had many enemies; Who are enemies to godly men.
but none, except such as had cast the Law of God behind their back. It is a
great comfort to the godly, to see that they have no enemies but such as are
enemies to God.

VER. 140. Thy word is proved most pure: and thy servant loves it.
Here is the third ground of comfort which 3. A meditation of Gods constant and
continual working according to his word.
sustained David; to wit, that Gods word was tried to be true, by his constant
and continual working according to it. To express this, he compares the word
of God, here and Psalm. 12. unto gold tried in the fire; which not only
indures, but becomes fine^, when all refuse or counterfeit matter fails and
vanishes. So will David say, when the fire of affliction was kindled, I have
seen all comforts perish; only thy word proved a word of consolation: for the
more the flames of affliction increase, the more powerfully does the word
express that hidden virtue of consolation, which is in it. And because he had
so felt it, so now he speaks of it.

Where it is to be marked, for our greater comfort, As God has a mouth to
speak, so a hand to do, as continual experience has proved.
that albeit the time be not yet come, of the full accomplishment of Gods word,
in the which the least jot thereof must be fulfilled; yet the Lord gives us as
many present proofs of it by experience, as may confirm us in assurance of
the verity thereof. If we be wise, to mark the working of the Lord, we shall
find witnesses in every age, in every year (yea, in every month and day) to
confirm us, that as God has a mouth to speak, so has he an hand by which he
works according to his word; giving joyful deliverance to his own, out of all
their troubles, and rendering judgment to his enemies, according Love in God
the fountain of all his benefits.
to their pride.

And thy servant loves it.] Love in God is the fountain of all his benefits,
extended to us; and Love in man the fountain of all his service.
love in man is the fountain of all our service and obedience to our God. He
loved us first to do us good: and hereof it comes, that we have grace
to love him next, an^ ^e him service. Love is such a duty, as the want
whereof cannot be excused in any; for the poorest both may, and should love
him: yet without it, all the rest thou can do in his service, is nothing;
nay, not if thou should give al thy goods to the poor, and offer thy body
to be burned. Small sacrifices, flowing from faith and love, are welcome to
him; where greater without these are but abomination unto him. Proofs of both
we have in the Widows myte, and Caines rich oblation: whereof, the one was
rejected, the other received. Happy are we, though we cannot say, We have don
as God commands; yet, if out of a good heart we can say, We love to do what he
commands.

VER. 141. I am small and despised; yet do I not forget thy precepts.
He renues again the protestation of his Temporizers in Religion.
unfeigned affection toward Gods word, with an amplification thereof: that albeit
his estate was mean, and himself despised, and contemned also of his enemies;
yet he did not forget the word of God. There are many who can profess
Religion, as long as they see peace and honor following it; who rather then
they would endure trouble and contempt, will utterly forsake it. The Samaritans
could very well rejoice in their new Temple, built on Mount Garizin; boasting
that they were the posterity of Ephraim, companions to the Jews, no less
worshippers of God then they were; having also a Temple of their own: but when
they saw that Antioehus Epiphanes, King of Syria, did cruelly Carol. Sigon. de
rep. (...). lib. 1. c. 3
persecute the Jews for the worshipping of God; then did they alter their
profession: they called themselves, not Israelites, but Sidonians; and that
their Temple was dedicate, not to Iehoua, but to Jupiter Cretensis: and so
eschued they the fury of the persecutor. Many such Samaritan
professors are in this age, who, to eschew the present wrath of men, spare not
to renounce Religion; and so cast themselves in danger of the fearful wrath
of God, whom they will find a consuming fire. From such temporizing, and
counterfeit dissembling, the Lord preserve us: and bless us with this grace of
a constant affection toward Gods word, in every state of life.

Again, it is no new thing to see them small They are little esteemed of men,
who are great in the account of God.
and despised in men's estimation, who with the Lord are highly esteemed; being
men, as here David was, according to Gods own heart. Honorable in the eyes of
the world was that rich glutton, clothed in purple; despised was Lazarus: but
ye see, the one was an heir of glory; the other but an inheritor of hell. A
godly man is an excellent treasure in an earthen vessel; compared by Macarius,
to a precious pearl in a contemptible Macar. ^om. ^ ^
purse; despised by many, because they know not the jewel that is within it.
The worla 1. Ioh. 3.
knows them not, because it knows not the Lord, whose sons they are:
neither does it yet appear what they shall be. Nazianzen for this compares men
in this world, to those who in a Stage Play represent another thing then they
are: there the beggar is busked like a King; and by the contrary. But when the
Play is done, and their garments Persons should ^e regarded for heir faith.
laid by, then shall every one of them appear such as they are. For this,
Saint James gives us a profitable instruction, That we should not Iam. 2.
have the faith of Christ in respect of persons; to honor a man only for his
riches, or despise an other for his poverty: but where we see the grace of
Christ, be they rich or poor, we ought for Christ's sake to have them in
honorable estimation.

Yet do I not forget thy precepts.] We see by Oblivion of our duty, is the
first step to defection.
experience, that our affection leaves any thing from the time it goes out of
our remembrance: but earnest love, ever renues remembrance of that which is
beloved. The first step of defection is, to forget what God has commanded, and
what we are obliged in duty to do to him: for upon this, easily follows the
offending of God by our transgression. Such beasts as did not chew their cudde,
under the law were accounted unclean, and not meet to be sacrificed to God:
that was but a figure, signifying unto us, That a man who has received good
things from God, and does not think upon them, cannot feel the sweetness of
them; and so cannot be thankful to God.

VER. 142. Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness: and thy Law is
truth.
David considers here two things in the What a sure comfort we have by the word
of God.
word of God: first, the equity of it; next, the eternity of it. And by these
two he sustaines himself against all tentations, wherewith he was compassed;
and namely, the contempt of men. Since the Law of God is truth, and his
righteousness everlasting; they cannot be deceived who depend upon it: and
they who live in a contrary disposition unto it, cannot be but miserable
eternally. Neither is it enough for us to know this generally, as many do; but
with David, we should earnestly pray we may be taught by his word,
stablished by his truth, rectified by his righteousness: Haec conciliant
sempiterna bona; that so we may be partakers of that everlasting good which
comes by them.

VER. 143. Trouble and anguish are com upon me; yet thy commandments are my
delight.
ALbeit David was laden with heavy troubles, yet did he never quit his
affection toward the word of God. Where if it be enquired, why The Cross is
necessary for a Pilgrim; and why?
did the Lord lay such heavy trouble upon a man whom he loved so dearly? and
why suffers he his children to be so hardly handled, in this life; for whom he
has prepared a blessed fellowship, and communion with himself in the life to
come? The reason is, because as says the Apostle; Need so requires.
Necessaria est crux peregrinanti, The cross is necessary for a pilgrim: for
by it sin is subdued, pride weakened, patience and all other graces of the
spirit increased. It works a contempt of this world; and prepares us for the
kingdom of God.

Of this, let such as are under the cross, learn The kindly sons of God
cannot want a Cross.
with patience to bear it; and others, who know not yet what it is, prepare
themselves for it. For, if they be the kindly sons of God, they shall not
eschew it: For he chastises every one whom he receives.

Are my delight.] This is strange, that in the Carnal and spiritual joy
consist not together.
midst of anguish he has delight; yea indeed, the sweetness of Gods word is
best perceived under the bitterness of the cross: the joy of Christ, and the
joy of the world cannot consist together. A heart delighted with worldly joy
cannot feel the consolations of the spirit; the one of these destroys the
other: But in sanctified trouble, the comforts of GODs word are felt and
perceived in most sensible manner.

Many a time has David protested this delight Delight in the word an argument
of true Godline.
of his in the word of GOD: and truly it is a great argument of godliness,
when men come not only to a reverence of it; but to love it and to delight in
it. Let this be considered of those unhappy men, who hear it of custom, and
count it but a weariness.

VER. 144. The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting. Grant me
understanding, and I shall live.
THis verse is one with the 142. save only that he adioynes to it his
accustomed petition The fearful recompense of them who love not Gods word
Vatab.
for understanding, that he may live. Nam proprie homines non viuunt sine
intelligentia diuinae legis: for it is no life which men have, who are
destitute of this knowledge. The word of God is contemned of none, but suchas
know not the excellency thereof. And they are repayed with this fearful
recompense; that because they know not, nor cannot account of it, the light,
the virtue, the grace there of is not dilated toward them; but they abide still
in their natural darkness and death. From which most unhappy condition, the
Lord deliver us.

KOPH.
VER. 145. I have cried with my whole heart: hear me, O Lord, and I will keep
thy statutes.
IN this verse, we have three things: a petition, Hear me; a reason, I have
Three things in this verse.
cried with mine whole heart; a promise, I will keep thy statutes. The reason
is first set down; which in effect is this: O Lord, thou have bound thy
self by thy promise to answer them who call upon thee: and thou have not at
any time, sent them away comfortless, that call upon thee in spirit and truth;
yea, thou have been found of them, who sought thee not. Then Lord, seeing thou
have given me this grace, to cry to thee with my whole heart; show me also this
grace, that thou may hear me.

As the husbandman seeks no increase, of that Prayer is a seed which now we
should sow plentifully, that in harvest we may reap the fruit thereof.
land wherein he has sown no seed: so he that prays not, and seeks not
the Lord while he may be found; what comfort can he expect in the time of his
trouble? Our prayers are seed, sown not in the earth, but in the heaven; we
cast them into the bosom of God: he that sowes sparingly, shall reap
sparingly; if we look for a plentiful harvest, let us sow more abundantly
in the seed time: for every prayer, fervently and in faith sent up to God,
either presently returns
with some good; or then lays good up in store for us, which we shall enjoy
hereafter.

The feruency of his prayer he expresses, when Feruency and zeal of heart
required in prayer.
he says that he cried: it notes Animi propensione^, the earnestnes of his
soul: without this, the earnestnes of the tongue is but Ludibriu^ quodda^, quo
deus non honor, sed contumelia afficitur; a mockery of God, and a dishonouring
of him. Non ^ocis Ambrose.
magnitudine, sed cordis magnanimitate clama^dum Psalm. 119.
est; non sono corporis, sed cogitationum sublimitate, and concentu virtutum.
It is not by lowdnes of the voice, but stoutnes of the heart; not by sound of
the body, but by sublimity of our cogitations, and by consent of virtues, that
we must cry unto God.

When Israel was straighted at the red sea; the Every crying pearces not
heaven.
Army of Egyptians upon their back, and the sea before them; and in their
judgment they saw no outgaite (but looked either to be devoured by the sword,
or drowned by the water) no doubt there was among the people murmuring, and
crying, with doleful lamentation: but what? Clamabat populus et non
audiebatur: tacebat Moses and audiebatur; the people cried and were not The
voice of the wicked in prayer ^uailes not.
heard: Moses is silent, and God hears him; for his heart was fixed upon God;
waiting till God should show the way of deliverance, which they could not see.
What auailes the voice of the wicked, who honor God with their lips, but their
heart is far from him? Iniustianima deo mertua est, The soul of an unrighteous
man is dead unto God: Nihil in illa sublime, nihil magnificum est. There is no
high, nor excellent thing in it, which can go up to the most high, and
excellent God.

With mine whole heart.] He amplisies this yet Great things should be asked
from the great God.
further, when he says, that he cried with his whole heart. Non solum ergo
elamandum est; sed et toto cord clamandum. For, as a man cries most loudly,
when he cries with all his mouth opened: so a man prays most effectually, when
he prays with his whole heart. Neither does this speech declare only the
feruency of his affection; but imports also, that it was a great thing which he
sought from God. Et tu cum oras, magna ora: id est, ora quae aeterna sunt, non
caduca. And thou when thou prayest, pray for great things; for things enduring,
not for things perishing: pray not for silver, it is but rust; nor for gold,
it is but metal; nor for possessions, it is but earth. Ista oration ad deum non
peruenit: such prayer ascends not to God. Non audit deus nisi quod dignum est
eius beneficijs. He is a great God; and esteems himself dishonored, when
great things, with a great affection are not sought from him.

Hear me, and I will keep.] Of this petition and promise, see verse 8. 33. 44.
88. 134. 146.

VER. 146. I called upon thee: save me; and I will keep thy testimonies.
HE insists in his former petition, expounding Prayer, a service due to God
only.
every part of it. He protested before, he cried with his whole heart: now he
declares to whom he cried. Prayer is a point of service due unto God. Only he
craved before that God would hear him: now he shows wherein; Save me: and
thirdly, he renewes his promise; and the repetition thereof tells us, that the
promises of thankfulness in Gods children, are no sudden nor vanishing motions,
but settled conclusions.

And again, it teaches us, that as Gods children, He that seeks from God,
should also offer to him.
are careful to seek from God, that which they need: so are they careful to
give unto him, that which he requires; to wit, praise, and obedience.
Otherway, where men seek benefits from God, the fruit whereof they mind not to
return unto him; either they get not that which they seek: or if they do,
they get in his displeasure, as Israel got quails. If we would so seek, that
we may obtain; let us not seek that we may bestow upon our own lusts: which
S. James reproues; but that we may advance his glory.

VER. 147. I prevented the morning light, and cried: for I waiteden thy word.
HE amplifies, yet further, the first reason Continuance in prayer reco^mended
unto us
for which he desires the Lord to hear him; taken from his earnest feruency in
prayer: and it is written for our instruction, to learn us continuance in
prayer. It is required by precept, Luke 21. Watch and pray continually: and
again, 1. These. 5. Pray continually. For example also, at midnight morning,
and at noone tide, did David pray; yea seven times in the day: all the night
long did our Savior pray; Non precationis Ambrose, in Psalm. 119.
indigens auxilio, sed statuens tibi imitationis exemplum: not standing
himself in need of the help of prayer; but setting down, to thee, an example
of prayer for imitation. Ille pro te rogans pernoctabat, vt tu disceres quomodo
pro te rogares; when he prayed for thee, he prayed all the night long; that
thou also might learn how to pray for thy self. Qui rogat itaque, semper
roget: and sinon
semper precatur, paratum semper habeat precantis affectum. He therefore that
prays, let him pray always: or if he do not always pray, let him always have
ready the affection of prayer.

But the manner of speech is to be marked; he How time posts away and we
should strive with it.
says, he prevented the morning watch: Thereby declaring that he lived, as it
were, in a strife with time; careful that it should not ouerunne him. He knew
that time posts away; and in running-by, wears man to dust, and ashes: But,
David preassed to get before it, by doing some good in it, before that it
should spur away from him. And this care which David had of every day; alas,
how may it make them ashamed, who have no care of their whole life! He was
afraid to lose a day; they take no thought, to lose months and years without
doing good in them: yea, having spent the three ages of their life, in
vanity and licentiousnes; scarce will they consecrate their old and decrepit
age to the Lord.

I waited on thy word.] See verse. 43. 81.

VER. 148. Mine eyes prevent the night watch, to meditate in thy word.
HIS former purpose is yet continued, How a man on earth may imitate the life
of Angels.
declaring his indefatigable perseuera^ce in prayer. Oh, that we could learn
at him to use our time well! At evening he lay down with prayers, and tears; at
midnight he rose to give thanks; he got up before the morning light, to call
on the Lord. This is to imitate the life of Angels: who ever are delighted to
behold the face of God; singing alwaie a new song without wearying. This is to
begin our heaven upon earth: oh, that we could always remember it; An Ambrose.
nescis o homo, quod primitias tui cordis ac vocis quotidie Deo deboas: Know
thou not, O man, The first fruits of our heart and tongue every morning should be
offered to God.
that thou owe every day the first fruits of thy heart and tongue to the Lord
our God? Should thou think of any thing, before that first thou remember him
in the morning? or should thy
tongue speak of any thing, before the first fruits of thy speech be offered
unto him by prayer, and praising of his holy name?

But alas, the coldness of this age in worshipping Gold professors reproved,
who spend all their time on the world.
the Lord, in praising him who is most worthy to be praised; is here greatly
convinced: no time of the night will they spend in prayer; yea, in the day time
they had rather do any thing then be exercised in prayer and praising;
snor^ing and sleeping in the very time of divine service, when others beside
them are intertayning fellowship with God, by the exercise of the word and
prayer. If oftentimes they whose lips are praising him, have their hearts
far from him; how far is thy heart from him, who can not do so much as
with thy lips to praise him when thou should? O man, will thou remember that
no time shall render thee comfort in the hour of death, but that which thou
have spent in the service of thy God? And if thou can not consecrate If they
cannot give all, at least they should give the half of it unto God.
all thy days, and every hour of the day unto the Lord; yet why will thou not
divide thy time rightly? that where thou give one hour to the world, and the
affairs thereof; why will thou not give another to the Lord, and the works of
his worship? In this point the Lord make us more wise, and give us grace to
redeem the time.

To mediate in thy word. See ver. 15. 23. 27. 48. 78. 99. 148.

VER. 149. Hear my voice, according to thy loving kindness: O Lord quicken me
according to thy judgment.
THis is a petition frequently used by all Prayer mitigates trouble.
the children of God; That he would hear them: and not without great cause; for
the heavy heart is eased and disburdened by prayer: and it brings a present
mitigation of their troubles, when they feel in effect that God hears them.
Beside that, it renders unto them unspeakable comfort for the time to come: it
confirms them against the fear of death, and makes them with boldness to go
out of the body, that they may be with the Lord; because by manifold
experience, they did find in the body that God heard them, and gave them
comfortable access to his Throne of grace.

According to thy loving kindness.] This is the The common argument of al Gods
children in Prayer.
great and maine argument, whereby all Gods children move the Lord to
compassion; namely, his own favor and loving kindness. Semper Amb^n Ps. 119
homo, etiam si sanctus, si iustus sit, debet orare vt exaudiat eum Dominus
secundum misericordiam suam, non secundum merita virtutis alicuius; Is from his
mercy, not from their merit.
quia rara virtus, multa peccata: A man, were he never so just or holy, should
evermore pray that God would hear him, according to Gods mercy, not according
to the merit of his virtue whatsoever; because in the best men their virtues
are rare, their sins are many. It is true, they use also secondary arguments,
taken from God his graces in themselves; as, that they love him, or fear him,
or call upon him: but these in effect are but the alleging of the conditions,
whereupon God out of his kindness has made the promises; and so being his
own graces, freely given, may lawfully be used to move the Lord to the
performance of his promises.

Quicken me. See ver. 37. 40. 50. 88. 93. How David desires God should deal
with him in judgment.


According to thy judgment.] Judgment is sometime taken for the execution of
Gods threatenings against transgressors: and this, David declines, Psalm. 143.
Enter not into judgment with me. Sometime it is taken for the performance of
his promises, according to his word: and this, David desires; as in this Verse.
See ver. 7. 13. 20. 30. 39. 43. 52. 62. 66. 75. 84. 102. 106. 108. 120. 137.
149. 156. 160. 164. 175.

VER. 150. They draw near that follow after malice, and are far from thy
Law.
He reiterates again his complaint against The godly are a mark of
contradiction to Satan and al his instruments.
his enemies; whom he describes after this manner: That toward God they were
impious men, far from his Law: toward David they were malicious; yea, such
as followed malice, and hunted after all occasions to do him evil. This is
the condition of the children of God: as their head and Lord Christ Jesus was
set for a sign of contradiction; so is it with his servants, they are set as a
mark and butte, whereat Satan and his instruments shoot all the arrows of
their indignation: but in vain; for God is their buckler.

And truly it should greatly comfort all the Comfort against the contempt of
men.
godly, to remember, that such as are their enemies, are Gods enemies also:
since they are far from the obedience of Gods Law, what marvel they be also
far from that duty of love, which they owe unto us? It may content us, to
want that comfort in men, which otherwise we might and would have; when we
consider that God wants his glory in them. Let this sustain us, when we see
that Godless men are enemies unto us.

VER. 151. Thou art near, O Lord: for all thy commandments are true.
FRom the meditation of his enemies malice, No enemy so near to hurt us, as
God is near to help us.
he returns again to the meditation of Gods mercy: and so it is expedient
for us to do, least the number, and greatness, and malitiousnesse of our
enemies, make us to faint when we look unto them. It is good, that we should
cast our eyes upward to the Lord: then shall we see they are not so near to
hurt us, as the Lord our God is near to help us; and that there is no evil
in them which we have cause to fear, but we shall find in our God a contrary
good, sufficient to preserve us.

Otherwise we could not endure, if when Satan Comfortable examples thereof.
and his instruments come near to pursue us, the Lord were not near to
protect us. Comfortable is it, that when Laban with great fury followed Jacob,
the Lord stepped in between them, and commanded Laban not to hurt him: and
when Satan many a time intended to destroy Job, he found that he could not,
because the Lord was a hedge and defense unto him. This is of GODs marvelous
working, that we being in the midst of the wicked, who like so many ravening
Wolves, thirst for our blood; and before the mouth of that roaring Lion, that
seeks to destroy us, we should still be preserved: for the which we may give
thanks with David; It is so, O Lord, because thou art near unto us.

But let us remember, if we would have this Upon what condition will the Lord
be near unto us.
presence of the Lord rendering us comfort, we must also be moved by it to
render him reverence. Prope est omnibus, qui vbique adest: Amb. in Psalm. 119.
nec refugere eum possumus si offendimus, nec fallere si delinquimus, nec
amittere si colamus: He is near unto all, who is every where present: if we
offend him, we cannot fly from him: if we ^ne, we cannot siele nor cover his
eyes: if we worship him, we cannot want him near to us in all our
necessities. De sole non dubitas quod vbique resplendeat: de Deo dubitas quod
non vbique fulgeat? Thou doubtest not of the Sun, that it shines into every
place; why doubtest thou that the Lord is present in every place?

Be where thou will, he is near unto thee; If we in our heart be also near
unto him.
be thou also in thy affection near unto him, to fear and love him: in all
thy ways walk with him, as Henoch did: set him always in thy sight, as David
did. Unless thou be with him to wait upon him, and serve him; how can he be
near unto thee, to preserve and comfort thee in all thy necessities?

He is near unto all; illum tamen fouet qui appropinquat sibi: but he
comforts and nourishes such as come near unto him. He that hides himself
from the light of the Sun, and closes They that in affection go far from
the Lord hurt themselves.
the door and window of his house, that it shine not unto him; what marvel he
have no comfort by the light thereof? In tenebris ambulat; and in omnium luce
ipse sibi est causa caecitatis: He walks in darkness; and in the midst of
light shining unto all, he becomes a cause of blindness unto himself. If
by iniquity we depart from the Lord, we may find him near as a Judge to
punish us; not as a Father to protect us.

For all thy Commandments are true.] His The word is a ^affe, to sutaine us
in trouble.
meaning is: Albeit, O Lord, the evil will of wicked men follow me, because I
follow thee; yet I know thy commandments are true, and that it is not
possible thou can desert or fail thy servants, who stand to the maintenance
of thy word. Then ye see David's comfort in trouble, was not in any presumptuous
conceit of his own wisdom or strength; but in the truth of Gods promises,
which he was persuaded could not fail him.

And here also he makes a secret opposition Man commands without reason, he
pro^es without performance, (...) without effect not to the L^.
between the word of the Lord, and the word of his enemies. Sometime men
command, but without reason: sometime they promise, but without performance:
sometime they threaten, but without effect. Herod's commanding, Rabsac^e his ray
ling, Iezabel her proud boasting against Elijah, may prove this. But as to the
Lord our God, he is always better then his word; and his servants shall find
more in his performance hereafter then now they can perceive in his promise:
like as his enemies shall find more weight in his judgments, then now they
can apprehend in his threatenings.

VER. 152. I have known long since by thy Testimonies, that thou have
established them for ever.
THat which he has spoken concerning the certain truth of Gods word, he now
Experience of the truth of Gods word does greatly comfort us.
amplifies it, that he had found it by experience. Sure it is, the Word of God
does ever comfort them who believe it: but when by experience in their
particular troubles, and tentations, they find the truth of it, then does it
so much the more confirm them. Let us look to our selves, and mark narrowly
the working of GOD with us; that as we believe Gods word to be a most true word
in itself, so in our own experience we may find it toward us.

This stabilitie and unchangeable truth of Gods The Word an Anchor of the soul.
word, if we once be persuaded of it, shall be an Anchor to our souls, to
hold us fast that we be not carried away with the wind and waves of
greatest temptations. Long before David's trouble came, this was settled as a
truth in the heart of David; and therefore in all trouble it sustained him.
There fall out oftentimes such confusions and perturbations in the world, as
makes the children of God to doubt whether the hand of God, by the stable order
of his providence, rule them, or not: and where The providence of God by stable
order rules all things.
they are moved to doubt; what marvel if Insidels, Epicures, and other
Naturalists do altogether distrust it? After the opinion of that Ethnique;
Rex mundi magna curat, parua fortunae relinquit. Eurip.
But it is far otherwise: his provident and ruling hand extends to smallest
things; Videte Aug. in Matthew.
quia minima non contemnit Deus: nam si contemneret, non crearet: For if he
neglect them; he would not have created them. Neither does any thing fall out
by fortune: but, as says the Apostle, He works all things after the counsel
and Ephesians. 1.
good pleasure of his will. Always to confirm us against this tentation, let us
resolve with David here, That God has established his testimonies for ever.
More of this see ver. 142. 160.

RESH.
VER. 153. Behold mine affliction, and deliver me: for I have not forgotten thy
Law.
THese prayers of David are penned David's prayers proper to every member of the
Church.
with such heavenly wisdom, that they are convenient for the state of the
whole Church, and every member thereof. The Church is the bush that burns
with fire, but cannot be consumed: every member thereof bears a part of the
cross of Christ; never without some affliction, for which they have need here
to pray with David, Behold mine affliction.

We know, that in afflictions it is some comfort How God is a spectator and
partaker with us in all our afflictions.
to us, to have our crosses known to such, as of whom we are assured that they
love us: it mitigates our dolor, when they mourn with us; albeit they be not
able to help us. But the Christian has a more solid comfort; to wit, that in
all his troubles the Lord beholds him: like a King, rejoicing to see his own
servant wrestle with the enemy; he looks with a merciful eye, pitying
the infirmity of his own, when he sees it; and with a powerful hand, ready
to help them. But because many a time the cloud of our corruption comes
between the Lord and us, and lets us not see his helping hand, nor his loving
face looking upon us; we have need to pray at such times with David, Behold
mine affliction.

For I have not forgotten.] This reason is not, A good conscience makes a man
familiar with God.
quod iactare se cuperet, sed vt Dei in se gratiam prouocaret; as if David here
did boast of himself: for he says not, that he had fulfilled Gods law; but,
that he had not forgot it. But this is subioyned, to move the Lord to pity and
compassion toward him; from this reason, That his conscience was good toward
God; if not in that which he had don, yet at least, in that which he would have
done: for he ever protests that it was his joy to do the will of the Lord his
God. And it is only this good conscience that dare make request unto God;
where the evil conscience dare not look to him, more then a wounded eye can
look to the light; yea, it flies and runs away from God: as we see in Adam,
fearing evil from him, because it had done evil against him; and far less
dare it seek good things from him.

VER. 154. Plead my cause and deliver me: quicken me according to thy word.
Here is an appellation made by David An appellation from men to God.
from men unto God. The meaning of it is: O Lord, I find that among men
equity is not regarded: even they, who upon earth are thy Deputies, who should
maintain the right, and punish the wrong; by them the cause of innocent men
many a time is borne down: wherefore Lord, I beseech thee (who art the
righteous ludge of the world) plead my cause against them.

Wherein, first we have a comfort for them To be used of them who are wronged
by men.
who are oppressed by the unrighteousness of men: they are taught here by
David's example, to appeal to God, and call him to be Judge between them and
their oppressors. Many a time good men faint and fall down even in a good cause
for a while, because they trust in their cause, neglecting to seek the Lords
protection.

And again, here is a warning for all men in the world; specially for Judges,
to who^ belongs A warning to Judges.
the cognition of other men's causes: that they take heed what they do; seeing
as Iehosaphat said to his Deputies, The judgment is the Lords: 2. Chron. 19.
for when they have judged, the Lord will judge them over again, and their
judgment also; either
to ratify or disannull the sentence they have given. And therefore it were
good for them, not so much to look unto such as are under them, with whom they
may do (as they think) in the matter of right and wrong at their pleasure,
without controlement; as to look unto him who is above them, and whose
judgment they themselves must undergo, both in their persons and actions.

Quicken me. See ver. 25. 37. 40. 50. 88. 93. 107. 154. 156.

VER. 155. Salvation is far from the wicked, because they seek not thy
Statutes.
THis Verse contains a protestation of the Wicked men are the authors of their
own wrack.
miserable condition of the wicked; expressed in this weighty sentence,
Salvation is far from the wicked. Ipsi sunt authors Amb. in Psalm. 119.
sui periculi, quia Domino non appropinquant; they themselves are the authors
of their own wrack, because they draw not near unto the Lord. Salute quae
abste est, se ipsi qui inique viuunt, priuarunt; Basil. in Ps. 119.
they who live wickedly, deprive themselves of that salvation which is in thee:
Non refugit eos salus; sed ipsi salutem fugiunt, salvation flies not from them,
it is offered unto them; but they fly from it. A fearful estate, not only to
want salvation; but to want it in thy own default, because thou will not
embrace it.

In the verse 150. he said that the wicked were far from Gods law: now he
says that Gods The word of God and his salvation are conjoined together.
salvation is as far from them. The Lord has conjoined these two, his Word
and Salvation: for by his Word he saves such as are to be saved: they who
despise the one, shall never find the other. If wicked men knew this, or could
apprehend it, they would not redeem the pleasures of sin so dearly, as for
them to defraude their ownesoules of salvation; despising against themselves
the counsel of God.

And this Oracle of God should confirm us against External prosperity of
wicked men not to be regarded.
all these tentations, which arise unto us by looking to the prosperity, peace,
and worldly pomp of the wicked. What is the glory of their outward state to be
regarded, so long as this fearful sentence lies upon them, that the salvation
of God is far from them? This sustained the Apostle S. Paul, when he saw the
great pomp of Agrippa; Acts 26.
he would not for all that, exchange estates with him: he wished not to be like
unto Agrippa; but rather that he had been such as he was.

Because they seek not thy Statutes.] Here is The godly guilty of
transgression, but not of contempt.
noted the cause of all their misery; namely, the contempt of Gods word: they
did not so much as seek the Lords Statutes; An argument they esteemed nothing
of it: for who will seek that whereof they account not? or who will despise
that which they esteem precious, and necessary to them? This is much more,
then if he had only said, They transgress thy Statutes. The children of God
may be guilty of the one transgression: for in many things we sin all; And if
any man say he sins not, he is a l^ar, and the truth is not in him: but they
are far from the other, to dis-esteeme of Gods word, and cast off all care to
seek it.

VER. 156. Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord: quicken me according to thy
judgments.
NOw David turns his consideration from It is grace only by which one man
differs from another in godliness.
wicked men, unto himself; acknowledging, that he was no better by nature then
they; but that Gods his mercy had made a difference between him and them, where
there was none by nature. And therefore prays he that the work of Gods mercy
may be continued with him, to quicken him, and give him life; that he defile
not his conscience by dead works, as they do; nor yet have fellowship with
them, in their unfruitful works of darkness; but that being quickened by
God, he may live the life of God, from which he saw them to be strangers. Godly
men edify their hearts by every thing they see in others.


Thus we see, that how-euer the godly exercise sometime their consideration
about other things, yet in the end they return still to themselves: What-euer
they hear, or see, or speak of others; they enter into their own hearts, and
edify themselves by it: if they look to such as are godly, they are confirmed
to follow them if they look to the manners of wicked men, they are afraid of
their own weakness, and run to Gods mercy; praising him who has preserved
them from the like impiety, and praying also for grace to keep them, that their
hearts incline not to walk with them. Thus of every thing they reap some profit
to themselves: but natural men look so to things which are without them, that
they enter not into their own hearts, to edify themselves by that which they
hear or see in others.

Again, the manner of the children of God in In Gods mercy, not in our merit
stands our comfort.
their prayers, is, to fly always to Gods mercy: it is of mercy, that they
begin well; of mercy, that they continue well; of mercy, that they look for
any good at the hands of God: let them lean to merits who will; we will depend
upon mercy. Are we able to give unto God himself? Are we able to requite his
benefits which we have gotten? Quis potest debitum refer naturae, debitum
salutis Ambrose.
and gratiae? Can any man requite him for benefits of nature which we have
received? far less for benefits of grace and salvation: these are debts
which we are never able to pay; Where then are thy merits? Quis nostrum sine
diuina potest miseratione subsistere? Who among us all can subsist without
divine miseration? Quid possumus dignu^ facere praemijs coelestibus? Or what
can we do worthy of a heavenly reward? Let us therefore learnat David, to send
up our requests; Non secundum merita nostra, sed misericordiam Dei: not
according to our merits, but his mercies.

Two Epithets he ascribes to Gods mercies: first The mercies of God, why they
^re called great.
he calls them great, and then he calls them tender mercies. They are great in
many respects: for continuance, they endure sor ever: for largenes, they reach
unto the heavens, and are higher then they; yea, they are above all the works
of God. And this is for the comfort of poor sinners, whose sins are many and
great: let them not despair; his mercies are greater and more: for since they
are greater then all his works; how much more greater then thou and all thy
sinsull works? All the Esa. 40.
Nations of the earth are but like the drop of a Comfort against the
greatness of our sins.
bucket, or as a grain of sand, compared with his Majesty: what art thou
then, that thou should magnify thy deeds above his rich mercy; as if thy
sins were so great, that his mercy could not compass them? Only do not
abuse his mercy; neither turn thou his grace into wantonness: but if thou
unfeignedly repent, then do thou also steadfastly believe, that thy sins, were
they never so great, shall easily be swallowed up
by his infinite mercies. As the Ocean, when it flows, couers sands and
rocks, and all, that they are not seen: so, where the flood of Gods
compassions breaks out, how easily does it ouerflow and cover all thy
transgressions? This is the meditation of the Apostle; that where before he 1.
Tim. 1.
had been many manner of ways sinful and ignorant, a blasphemer, an
oppressor, a persecuter; yet the grace of our Lord had been exceeding abundant
toward him: where sin had abounded, grace had superabounded, to over flow and
cover it. And in this he stands for an example to all that will believe, that
they should never distrust Gods great mercies for the greatness of their
sins.

The other Epithet he gives them, is, That they The mercies of God are called
tender, and why.
are tender mercies; because the Lord is easy to be entreated: for he is slow
unto wrath, but ready to show mercy. S. James says, that the wisdom Iam. 3.
which is from above is gentle, peaceable, easy to be entreated. If his grace
in his children make them gentle, and easy to be entreated; what shall we
think of him self? Since he will have such pity
in us poor creatures, that seauenty times seven times in the day he will
have us to forgive the offenses of our brethren; O what pity and compassion
abounds in himself! Thus we see our comfort is increased: that as his mercies
are great, so are they tender; easily obtained, where they are earnestly craved.

Quicken me.] David found the life of grace Life of grace should be cherished
continually.
in himself continually hindered, impugned, yea, oft-times sore weakened, by
the power of his corrupt nature: and therefore the more frequent is he in this
petition, that God would quicken him.

VER. 157. My persecuters, and my oppressors are many: yet do I not swerue
from thy testimonies.
A New protestation of his constancy under Constancy in Religion.
affliction: that albeit he was persecuted and sore oppressed for his
profession; yet no trouble could make him swerue from the testimonies of God.
Trouble is the best trial of true Religion. Non est magnum si tune a Dei
testimonijs non declines, cum te nullus persequitur; Trouble a trial of true
Religion.
It is no great thing to cleave unto the testimonies of God, when none pursues
thee for it: when authority allows it, when honor and prosperity follows it;
it is no great praise then to profess it. When the Lord gloried of his servant
Job, that Job 1.
he was an upright man, fearing God, etc. Satan replied; And what marvel? Does
Job worship God Such as are not sincere worshippers will not continue.
for nothing? He knew there were many hyrelings, and temporizers in the world,
that worshipped not God sincerely; and therefore would not continue in it. He
thought Job to be one of these: Lay now thine hand upon all that he has, and
he shall blaspheme thee to thy face. But he was deceived: for the more he was
crossed, the nearer did he cleave unto the Lord. Let us remember, as S. Paul has
warned us; We have not yet resisted unto the blood: neither yet that which S.
Peter calls The siery trial have we endured. And yet what a shame is it to see
how many moved by the naked example
of the Apostles are become colder in Religion? An evident argument, that they
were never truly religious: for if they cannot stand against offenses, how
should they stand against oppressions and persecutions?

What persecuters they were, and what was the Manifold were David's troubles.
kind of persecution, David expresses not. Basil thinks, Quod quacunque sibi
acciderant, omnia hoc Psalmo congessit; that what-euer befell him of any
trouble, either by Saul or Absalom, or uncircumcised Nations, among whom he
soiourned; all is gathered together in this Psalm: which contains, either
prayers he made when he was in trouble; or praises he gave when God delivered
him out of trouble; or else spiritual gloriations of that strength and
constancy, which God gave him to endure it.

Properly there is but one persecuter of all the There is one persecuter of the
godly, Satan; but he has many instruments.
godly: this is Satan, the enemy of Gods glory and of our salvation. Vnus
persequutor est: sed multos habet ministros: but he has many servants and
instruments under him; some invisible, some visible: and according as they are,
so is the kind of persecution either bodily or spiritual. There is an evil
spirit of fornication, another of avarice, another of pride; Hi sunt
persequutores graves: Corrupt affections sore persecutors.
these are fearful persecutors. Otherwise, the Apostle would not say, Fly
fornication, if the 1. Cor. 6.
spirit of fornication were not a pursuer. Many
are stout in the outward persecution, qui occulta hac persequutione
ceciderunt, who by this secret persecution have been overcome: Hi tibi hosts
cauendi, hi grauiores tyranni per quos Adam captus; these are the enemies who^
thou must eschew: these are the most grievous tyrannes by whom Adam was
captiued; and thou art to beware of them.

By visible enemies also Satan fights against us: By visible enemies also he
persecutes us.
but these are not so dangerous as the other; yet for the present, more
displeasant: let us not be discouraged with them; Si multae persequutiones,
multae et probationes. If our persecutions be many; so are our trialls and
probations: trials, I mean both of our sincerity, and of the truth of God. If
Daniel had not by wicked men been cast into the den of Lions; and the three
children by Nebuchadnezzars fury, into the fiery furnace: then should not their
constant affection toward God, and his truth and power in preserving them,
have been so clearly manifested. Tibi ergo prodest quod multi persequutores
sunt, vt inter multas persequutiones facilius inuenias quomodo coroneris: The
more ways thou be persecuted, the
more ways have thou to be crowned: for by many tribulations, do we enter
into the kingdom of heaven.

VER. 158. I saw the transgressors; and was grieved, because they did not keep
thy word.
ALbeit his trouble were great, by the restless The godly esteem more of Gods
glory, then their own lives.
malice of his enemies; and his dangers oftentimes desperate: yet he protests
none of these went so near his heart, as the dishonor of God, and contempt of
Gods word. The glory of God, shining in his word, is dearer to the godly then
their lives: and they have no pleasure to live, but melt away for grief, when
they see wickedness and idolatry exalted, piety and true religion trod under
foot. This made good Eliah desire that the Lord would take him out of this
life: this made David pine away for grief. And it may condemn many, who if so
be their own estate be peaceable, they will not disquiet themselves with
grief, for any dishonor that by impiety of wicked men is done unto God. See
ver. 136.

VER. 159. Consider O Lord, how I love thy precepts: quicken me according to
thy loving kindness.
THis verse contains a protestation of his A good thing, that a man can desire
God to look upon him.
great love toward the word of God: for probation whereof he appeals to the
testimony of God; desiring the Lord to consider if it be so or not. It is an
argument of a good conscience, when a man dare present his heart unto God, and
desire him to look into it. Nemo dicit Ambrose, Psalm. 119.
vide, nisi qui iudicat se si videatur esse placiturum: No man says to God,
Look upon me; but he who knows that God will like him, when he looks upon
him: for he that does evil, hates the light; and an evil conscience, dares
not stand before God: but hides the self so far, as it can from him, as we
see in Adam.

But since so it is that the knowledge of our estate Vanity, to hide our way
from the Lord.
cannot be hid from the Lord, but we must be presented naked before him; it is
but vanity now to hide our ways from him. Woe be unto them that seek in
deep, to hide their counsel from the Lord: their ways are in secret, and
they say who sees them. But He that made the eye, shall he not see? Wisdom
rather craves that we should lay open our hearts to the Lord in time; walking
so in a good conscience before him, that we might be bold to say with David,
Look upon me, Lord, and consider me. Love of Gods word in the godly is
invincible.


How I love.] He says not, consider how I perform thy precepts; but how I
love them. The comfort of a Christian militant, in this body of sin, is rather
in sincerity and feruencie of his affections, then in the absolute perfection
of his actions. He fails many times, in his obedience to Gods precepts, in
regard of his action; but love in his affection still remains: so that both
before the temptation to sin, and after it, there is a grief in his soul,
that he should find in himself any corrupt will or desire, contrary to the
holy will of the Lord his God: and this proves an invincible love in him to the
precepts of God.

Thy precepts.] He says not that he loved Gods Not only Gods promises, but his
precepts also are loved of the godly.
promises only: for every man has a liking of these; but his precepts also.
Naturally, men hate the precepts and commandments of Gods law; they are so
contrary to the disposition of his corrupt nature, that as the Apostle
affirms, sin takes occasion by the commandment, to work in man all manner
of concupiscence: for without Romans 7. 8
the law, sin is dead; and man his corrupt nature, is the more bent unto
evil, the more it be for bidde^: but grace coming in to renew nature, it
works a love even of the commandments of God; as being most holy in
themselves, most profitable for us, and that our felicity stands in a
conformity with them.

Quicken me.] Of this petition, See verse 25. Worldly things sought earnestly
by worldly men.
37. 40. And out of David his earnest and frequent repetition of this petition,
let us learn how spiritual things are to be sought with a fervent affection.
It is pity to see that the things of this world are sought so incessantly, as
if they were hardly obtained; or being obtained were able to fulfill all our
necessities, or yet could continue and abide still with us: whereas things
pertaining to the life to come, are sought in so cold a manner, as if it were
nothing to get them; or being gotten, they could do us little good; or at
least were not to continue with us. Oh that we could rectify our May make us
ashamed that cannot seek excellent things with an excellent affection.
desires in this point; and learn to seek most excellent things, with our
best and most excellent affections; and that we could always remember these
three things: first, it is uncertain, if we shall obtain worldly things when
we seek them: next, granting we do, it is most certain that they will not
fulfill our necessities: and thirdly, albeit they were able so to do, yet can
they not continue with us. Let us therefore make choice, as Mary did, of the
best part; and covet, as the Apostle counsels us, those gifts which are most
excellent.

VER. 160. The beginning of thy word is truth: and all the judgments of thy
righteousness endure for ever.
Here is a commendation of Gods word, Persuasion of the truth of Gods word
brings out obedience.
from the truth and righteousness thereof. Some read the words so, as if David
should say; the word of God has been true a principio, from the very
beginning of the world. Some read this way, Ab ipso limine veritas tua
conspicua est in verbo tuo, in the very entry of thy word, thy truth is
manifest: and some, Caput Vatab.
verbi tui veritas, this is the excellency and great prerogative of thy word,
the very head and garland of it is verity. This persuasion is the mother of all
obedience to the word of God; and it begets also such a comfort in our souls,
as no trouble nor* temptation is able to overcome. Saint Peter calls the word
of God, a most sure word. 2. Pet. 1. 19
And the Lord himself, calls the promises thereof, The sure mercies of David's
house: We may say with the Apostle, We know whom we have believed. The Lord
will not fail his people: according to his word so shall it be unto us.

And all the judgments.] Here David shows The judgment by-gon should warn
the wicked of judgments to come.
what sustained him, against the delay of judgment upon wicked men; to weet, a
meditation of the eternal righteousness of Gods judgments: He considered with
himself, that the righteousness of God, was not for one age, but for all;
neither yet for one sin only, but for all: and then looking to bygone
judgments executed upon the wicked; he collects, that albeit for the present
they were spared, yet at length they would be punished, seeing Gods judgments
are everlasting. And this should serve for a warning to wicked men of this age;
that the Lord who has punished the wickedness of other ages before, will not let
the impiety of this age escape unpunished.

When the judgments of God are executed, Every man fears when judgment comes.
then all men acknowledge, Verily, There is a God that judges righteously in
the earth. Yea, faithless men are amazed when he strikes, and forced to
confess that it is his hand: but before the judgment come, to believe that it
will come, Only godly men fear* before it come.
is an argument of true faith. So Noah moved with reverence prepared the Arc.
And Solomon says, A prudent man sees the plague before it come, and hides
himself in time. God give us this wisdom.

SHIN.
VER. 161. Princes have persecuted me without cause: but mine heart stood in
awe of thy words.
IT has pleased the Lord to teach us, Every example of godly men learnes us
some lesson.
not only by his word; but by the examples of others his servants, who lived
before us. For this cause, has he registered the obedience of Noah, the faith
of Abraham, the patience of Job, the meekenes of Moses, the zeal of David;
that we also should be zealous of those graces, for which they received so
honorable a commendation of God.

It is a great patience, to sustain injury from How David says he was
persecuted without cause.
any wicked man: but the greater the person be that persecutes us, the greater
is the temptation; whereof see verse 23. Only now it comes to be enquired; How
can David say that he was persecuted without cause? seeing in all troubles
which can befall us, if we rightly examine our consciences, we shall still
find within our selves causes, which have deserved sharper corrections. He
compares not himself with God, but with men.
1. The answer is, that David here is not comparing himself with God: for he
knew that in Gods sight no man could be justified; and none can say unto him,
thou have stricken me without a fault: but here he compares himself with men,
to whom he had given no just cause of offense. It is true, Saul pretended
great causes against David; that he was an enemy both to his life and crown:
but David not only by his words does purge himself, but by his deeds declare
the contrary. For when he might have slain him, he spared him both in the
cave, and in the camp. Thus we must also distinguish between causes pretended
by evil men, and those which are indeed.

But mine heart stood in awe of thy word.] David Princes, suppose they were
wicked, yet should they be reverenced.
renders not evil for evil; but ouercomes evil with good. Though Princes who
should be fathers and protectors of people, should degenerate into oppressors
and persecuters; Is it lawful
for that, to shake off obedience; to refuse their tribute, or to murder their
persons? Shall we become godless Atheists, because they are become faithless
tyrants? No, no: we see men truly religious, do practice no such
unrighteousness. This Murder of Kings is from the spirit of Sa^au.
may tell us from what spirit proceeds the Romish doctrine, which not only
permits, but commands the deposition of Kings, the loosing of subjects from
their obedience; yea, the murdering of their persons. It cannot be from that
good spirit wherewith David was inspired: Princes persecuted him, and he might
have slain them; as his servants counseled him to murder Saul. 1. Sam. 24
God, said they, have closed thine enemy, into thine hand: but he would not,
for his heart stood in awe of Gods word; which told him, as there he answered
his men, that it was not lawful for him to touch the Lords anointed.

Again, we see here an example of the constancy The fear of Gods wrath
ouercomes the fear of man his displeasure.
of Gods children: no wind of temptation can remove, far less ouer-turne
them; they are like rocks in the sea, enduring every wave; like trees planted
by the river side; Gods own plantation: Psalm. ^
they may be shaken, but not ouerturned; they abide rooted and stablished by
the Lord. The angry countenance of Princes, is very awefull unto men: but David
here shows, what sustained him against them; to weet, the awe of God: so
Moses feared not Pharaoh, because he had seen him who is invisible. A greater
fear ouercomes the less; he who knows the power of Gods wrath, will not
cast himself in danger thereof, for no wrath of man. And hereof proceeds that
invincible courage of Martyrs; who, by no terror of most strange and uncouth
torments that the wit of man could devise, could ever be induced to deny the
Lord Jesus, because they stood in awe of his word.

Besides this, we see that both good and evil The awe-band of wicked men is
without them.
men, have their own awe-bands: but, the aweband of an evil man is without
him; in the countenance of man, that may control and punish him: if this
restrain him not, he stands in no awe of the Lord. This was Abners reason, why
he would not slay Azahel; How shall I hold up my face to my brother Ioab?
where he should rather have said, How shall I hold up my face to the Lord my
God?

But the awe-band of a godly man is within The awe-band of godly men is within
them.
him. Albeit no man were to see him, nor punish him, and he might do wickedly
uncontrolled of man; yet the reverence of God restraines him. For he walks as
the Apostle says, in simplicity and in (...), that is, in such godly
perspicuitie
as might be discerned in the sun. Nec tam pudenda apud eum publicatio,
slagitium quam conscientia est: neither thinks he such shame of the
publication of his crime, as of his evil conscience. Da Gygis annulum
sapienti, vt beneficio cius Ambrose, Psalm. 119.
latere possit cum deliquerit; non minus fugiet peccatorum contagium, qua^ si
non posit latere: Give, says he, to a wise man, the ring of Gyges, by the
benefit whereof he may lurk, when he does evil; yet will he not the less
fly the affection of sin, then if he could not lurk at all. Non enim
lat^bra sapienti spes impunitatis, sed innocentia est: for the defense of a
wise managainst public shame, is not in the hope of impunity, but in
innocence. And herein stands the trial of a man truly religious, from an
hypocrite.

VER. 162. I rejoiced at thy word; as one that finds a great spoil.
THe word of God renders such manifold With what affection Gods word should be
received.
fruit to the godly, that by no comparison can they express it: and therefore
David changes so many similitudes. The Apostle
calls it (...), a word worthy of all acception; because look with what
affection, men receive any thing in the world, that is most pleasant or
profitable for them, with the like affection should men receive the word of
God. A man that is hungry, how blythe is he when meat is offered him? a man
very thirsty deuoureth drink when it is given; a sick man or sore pined,
greedily embraces sovereign medicine that he knows will cure him; a poor man
when he finds a treasure, with a joyful heart receives it. How did that lame
man lcap and exult for joy, when he found that Peter had restored his feet
unto him? After the same manner should poor miserable sinners receive the word
of God: it is meat to feed them, it is drink to refresh them, it is light to
illuminate them, it is life to quicken them. But alas, where men find not Why
natural men esteem not of Gods word.
their wants, no marvel they find not the comfort which the word offers. Let
be they cannot receive it with all reception, they receive it not at their
ears, they delight not to hear it: but good David contents not himself to
declare how it was sweeter to him then honey, more pre^ious to him then
treasures of gold; but now also he tells how his joy by it, exceeds the joy of
men victorious in battle, returning with the spoil: which how great a joy it
is, see Esaias 9. Many great victories had he had he gotten by the sword: but now
finding that by the armor of Gods word, he had gotten patience and strength,
to overcome all the malice of his enemics; he protests here, it rendered to him
a more excellent joy, then any that could be expressed.

And this joy, which Gods children find by The godly find joyful tidings by
the word, and therefore esteem of it.
the word, arises from the glad tidings which it brings unto them. When the
Lord Jesus said to Zacheus, This day salvation is come to thine house; when he
said to the man sick of the palsy, Thy sins are forgiven thee: and again,
to the diseased woman, Thy faith has made thee whole; how could they but exult
for joy to hear it? What then he spoke to them out of his own blessed mouth,
he daily speaks to the like of them (that is, to such as believe and repent,
out of his holy oracle) that their sins are forgiven; that they are the
sons of Abraham: yea, the sons of God, to whom belongs salvation. This
renders to them a joy, which surmounts all that comfort the world is able to
give.

It is far otherwise with the wicked. As Achab But the wicked find it a
message of their damnation.
spoke of Micah, He never prophesies good unto me: So find they that the
word of God, never prophesies any good unto them; but by the contrary when
they hear it, they receive within themselves a sentence of damnation. What
marvel then, they delight not in it; yea, rather count What marvel then
they like it not?
it a wearines, and oftentimes be moved to fury, when they hear it? like
those faithless Jews, who gnashed their teeth, and were like to burst for
anger, at the hearing of the gospel, preached by Jesus Christ. Who can
express their misery, whose evil conscience grieves them to hear the glad
tidings of the gospel; and to whom the word of life is no other but a savor
of death?

VER. 163. I hate falsehood, and abhor it; but thy law do I love.
BY falsehood, here David understands every Every thing contrary to Gods word
is a falsehood; and why.
thing which is not agreeable to the word of God: and so truly it is a
deceitful vanity; which in the end will fail and beguile all them, who are
delighted with it. And to declare it was not any light hatred of sin which he
had, he subioynes that he did abhor it: which imports not a simple
refusal, but a vehement indignation; a hostile hatred, mixed with such a
dolor and horror, as uses to be in the hearts of men, when any horrible or
hurtful thing is offered to them.

Cold hatred of evil, by process of time, Col^ hatred of evil shortly
turns into a liking of evil.
turns to a liking of evil, that we begin in some respects to think it
tolerable; and so at length are entangled in the snare thereof. No man at the
first comes to the worst: if we have not sin at the end of the staff to
count it for our enemy, it will easily creep in acquaintance with our
affection. Of this it comes to pass, as we see in daily experience, that
where men once fall away from their first love, and become luke warm;
professing a truth, but not loving it zealously; misliking
untruth, but not abhorring it: they easily degenerate into Apostates. And
therefore our affections would ever be kept in a right temperature by
continual exercises of the word and prayer.

In the law, God commanded his people to Bodily uncleanness unseemly for Gods
people.
hate all uncleanness, even in their bodies: he that touched a dead body or
any unclean thing, was unclean himself. This had in it not only a truth (for
honesty and comelines become the saints of God) but a signification also,
Immunditia Ambrose.
justice iniquitas est, To holy men all iniquity is uncleanness. Quid autem
immundius, quam mentem, qua nihil homini datum est pretiosius, turpibus
commaculare criminibus? And what greater uncleanness, then to defile the mind,
the Much more spiritual uncleanness.
most precious thing which God has given man, with filthy sins? These are
not only polluted in themselves; but defile others that come near them. Fuge
ergo iniustitiam, quae viuentes adhuc mortuos facit; Fly therefore, with
David, all unrighteousness, which makes living men to be dead; and to become
more hurtful and horrible to others by their life, then they can be by their
death.

But thy law.] No man can serve two masters, He that hates sin must love
Gods law.
of contrary wills, and dispositions: if he love the one, he must hate the
other. Ye that love the Lord, hate that which is evil. Men now boast much of
their love to God: but the best rule to try it, is the contrary hatred of all
evil. See verse 113. 128.

VER. 164. Seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous
judgments.
AFfections of the soul cannot long be Affections, if they be strong cannot
lurk, but will break forth in actions.
kept secret: if they be strong, they will break forth in actions. The love
of God is like a fire in the heart of man; which breaks forth, and manifests
it self, in the obedience of his commandments, and praising him for his
benefits: and this is it which David now protests, that the love of God was not
idle in his heart, but made him fervent and earnest in praising God; so that
seven times a day he did praise God. Numero Ambrose.
studium sanctae deuotionis exprimitur. For by this number, the carefulnes of
holy devotion is expressed, and the feruency of his love; that in praising God
he could not be satisfied, says Basil.

Concerning this duty of the praising of God, and time, which is the greatest
worldly benefit God gives man; see ver. 62.

Only let David's example provoke us to the Such is our coldness, that we
scarce pray so frequently on the Sabbath as David did every day.
imitation of the like devotion and piety: and let us be ashamed of our
negligence in this duty; who scarce can do that on the Sabbath day, which
David did every day.

Under the Law, the Lord commanded that Yet on the sabbath the daily
sacrifice should be doubled.
the daily sacrifice, which every day morning and evening was offered, should
be doubled on the Sabbath. But alas! the profaneness of this
age is such, that not only now is the daily sacrifice neglected; but the
Sabbath contemned of many, who neither praise him for his works of creation,
remembering they are his creatures; nor yet for the works of redemption, as if
they were no Christians redeemed by Christ's blood: and so least praise give
they to the Lord upon that day, wherein they are bound to give him most. A
fearful in gratitude. God grant David's example may learn us, in this point,
to be more dutiful.

VER. 165. They that love thy law shall have great prosperity; and they shall
have no hurt.
HItherto David has declared his great It is not for one, but for all the
godly, what ever comfort is in Gods word.
affection toward the Word of God, and that unspeakable comfort he found in it.
And now lest it might be thought, that this was by any special privilege or
dispensation of God toward him, from which others are excluded; he now declares
that all who love the law of God, may look for the like comfort in it, which
he had found. And this he sets down in this proposition; speaking now, not in
his own person, as before, but in the person of others. Wherein we have first
to consider a description of Gods children; and next, the privilege or
benefits belonging to them.

The description of the godly is here, They Godly men many ways described in
holy Scripture, and why.
that love thy law. Many manner of ways are the children of God described in
holy Scripture; as, from their faith in God, from their love, from their fear,
from their obedience, from their patience: to declare it is not one, but
manifold graces of the spirit, which concur to make up a Christian; and how
they all go together, like the linkes of a chain, that one draws on all the
rest. His faith is not without love: his love is not without obedience: his
obedience is not
without fear: his fear is not without hope: his hope is not without
patience: his patience is not without prayer; which keeps and conserues all
the rest. And hereof it comes that the godly in holy Scripture are so many
ways described.

But among all the graces of the Spirit, the Yet are they most described by
love, for two causes.
godly are most frequently described from their love: and therefore of all
other we should most take heed that the grace of love be in us; for two causes:
first, because it leads us to the surest knowledge of Gods affection toward
our selves; and next, it gives us the surest notice of that estate, and
disposition, wherein we stand our selves.

As to the first, the grace of fervent and vn^eyned 1 Love in us ^des us to a
(...) know^dge of Gods ^ue to us.
love, i^ it be in us, makes us certainly to know that we are beloved of God.
So says the Apostle, Herein is love; not that we loved God first: but 1. Ioh.
4.
that he loved us. If we know him, it is because we have been known of him.
If a man utter not
his voice, the Echo makes him no answer: if he look not into a glass, it
makes no representation of his face: if the Lord had not called us, we should
never have answered him: if he had not sought us, we should never have sought
him; neither loved him, if first he had not loved us. Here then is the first
benefire we reap by this grace of love; that by it we know the mind of A
great comfort, to know that God is well minded toward us.
God toward us to be full of love. So that now we need not go up to Gods
secret counsel, to enquire what is his mind concerning us: let us enter into
the secret of our own hearts, and try there what is our affection toward him:
if we dare say that we love him, then may we be out of all doubt that we are
beloved of him.

The other benefit is, that by love we know we 2. By love in us, we know we are
in the state of grace.
are in the state of grace, translated, as says the Apostle, from death to
life: then we begin to live when we begin to love our God. There may be in man
a shadow of grace; a profession of faith and obedience: but though a man had
all knowledge and eloquence, wanting love, he is but a sounding Cymbal. So that
by this one grace, which the Apostle calls a most excellent grace, all other
graces of the spirit will come to be tried. That faith which works not by
love, is no faith: and that obedience which flows not from faith, is no
obedience. Love is the balance of the Sanctuary, wherein every thing is weighed
which is offered unto God: let us therefore covet this most excellent grace.

That this comfort may be made the more sure Two things to try if we have love
or not.
unto us, let us consider these two infallible tokens of our love: the first
is, the love of Gods law; the next is the love of his Saints.

The law of God has in it a certain pourtraiture 1. He that loves God cannot
but love his law, fith it is a pourtrait of his image.
of his image. What he is in himself, he has declared in his law: and
therefore such as know him and love him, cannot but love his law. If any man
love me, said the Lord Jesus, he will keep my commandments. David ioynes
these two together in the 16. Psalm; he protests that God was the portion of
his inheritance: and again in the III. verse of this Psalm, That he had taken
the Testimonies of God as an heritage for ever. Alas, that foolish man should
think to disioyne these two; pretending to love God, when he shows himself a
plain contemner of his word.

The other mark, whereby Gods love is tried, 2. He that loves God cannot but
love his Saints.
is the love of his Saints: By this shall ye be known to be my Disciples, if
ye love one another. He that loves not his brother whom he has scene; Ioh.
13. 1. Ioh. 4.
how can he love God whom he has not seen? Man was made to the image of
God: Can he be a lover of God, who loves not man made to the image of God?

David many times has protested that he loved God dearly; but he proves it by
this, That he loved the law of God, and the Saints of God: I am companion
(said he) to all them that fear thee, ver. 63. And again, My love extends
not to thee; but for thy sake my delight is in thy Saints, and excellent ones
upon earth.

There are many good Christians, who when And now our affection toward
himself, ^s to be declared in our affection to his Saints.
they hear that Marie washed the feet of our blessed Savior with her tears,
and wiped them with the hair of her head; they do wish they had the like
occasion, that they might show the like affection toward him. These would do
well to remember, What thou cannot do to himself, why will thou not do to
such as he loves, and has recommended to be loved of thee for his sake;
accounting that done to himself, which is don unto them? When Jonathan was
slain in the As David entreated weak Mephiboseth for Ionathans sake.
battle with Saul, and David came to the Kingdom; how diligent was he to
seek any that did belong to Jonathan, to whom he might show kindness for
Ionathans sake? at length he found a ^ame and infirm son of Jonathan; and
for Ionathans sake he entertained him. Very kind was Jonathan to David; but
not so kind as Jesus has been to us: and should not we for Jesus sake be
kind to those who belong unto him? If thou be willing to do it, and careful
to enquire, Is there none to whom I may show favor, for that favor So
should we poor weak Christians for Christ's sake:
Christ showed to me? in every place thou shall still find some Mephiboseth;
some poor, some lame and infirm Christian. Why then
will thou defraude thy self of this comfort, that by extending comfort to
those which are his, thou declare thy loving affection toward himself?
considering also, that the smallest benefit given to any in his Name, though
it were but a cup of cold water, shall not want the reward.

Shall have great prosperity.] This being The great recompense of godliness.
spoken of the description of godly men; now sollowes the privilege and
benefit here promised to them: They shall have great prosperity; for so by
the word of peace, the Hebrews express all manner of good. Godliness, says
the Apostle, has the promises both of this life, and of the life to come: even
in their present troubles the godly are comforted with unspeakable joy; or if
for the present they feel it not, yet are they borne out with a lively hope
thereof: afflicted on every side, but never forsaken; casten down, but they
perish not.

But our greatest comfort is promised now, Our greatest comfort is pro^ised
now, but not exhibited now.
not exhibited now: excellent promises are made unto us; but sure they are
far inferior to that which shall be performed. Worldlings have their heaven
upon earth: they enjoy their portion here; but we look for a better. Serua
futuris Amb.
mercedem tuam; keep thou thy reward for the time to come. When we shall pass
this read Sea of tribulation, and be possessed in our heavenly Canaan; then
shall we know the performance of this promise, They that love thy law shall
have great prosperity.

This he expounds more clearly in the negative The privilege of godly men, No
trouble can hurt them.
part, when he says, They shall have none hurt: he means not, that they are
exempted from all trouble; but endued with this privilege, That no trouble can
hurt them: for all things work for the best to them who love the Lord.

By the contrary, most miserable is the condtion To the wicked prosperity is
pernicious.
of them who hate Gods law: There is no peace to the wicked, says my God. The
prosperity they seem to have is their ruin, and their peace like the calmes
of the Sea, which incontinent is troubled with stormy winds; in such sort,
that the waves thereof are dashed one against another; it rages and foometh
out the dirt and mire, which is in the bowels thereof. So is it Their peace
ends in perturbation.
with the wicked: so soon as trouble comes upon them, they walter from one
perturbation to another, foming out their shame; and at length end in
comfortless desperation. Thus
before they be aware, all their mirth and apparent prosperity is concluded,
as Beltasars banquet was, with a cup of Gods wrath.

For their comfort being only in things external, The miserable estate of
wicked men, when comforts external fail the^.
and not in the Lord their God; so soon as the one fails them, who can tell
the horrible confusion wherein they fall? For want of the other they are
casten, as Esaias says, in a strait bed, Esa. 28.
wherein they can find no ease nor relief: for at one time the earth fails
them, and the heavens also are closed upon them. Such comforts as they had in
creatures upon earth, forsake them: and if they look to heaven, they find
nothing but the angry countenance of God looking down upon them; so was it
with Saul, Achitophel, Judas, and with Aero.

O what a strait bed was he casten into, Example hereof in Nero.
when the Senate discerned him an enemy to Rome? when Galba came against him
to execute the sentence? when he shaken with the plague of the heart, and his
own conscience within him did torment him? when the heavens cast down their
countenance upon him? when the earth, whereupon he was flying, opened, as he
thought her mouth, to swallow him? when such as he had murdered, seemed to
rise and pursue him? Such shall be the miserable end of all those who love not
the Lord: they shall find no comfort, who cannot comfort themselves in him.

VER. 166. Lord I have trusted in thy salvation, and have done thy
commandments.
WHat in the former Verse David Without application we can reap no comfort of
Gods promi^es.
has spoken in general of the happy estate of Gods children, he now applies
to himself; making here the assumption of that proposition, But so it is
Lord, I love thy law; which in this Verse, and the Verse following, he
amplifies: whereupon the conclusion follows; Therefore let me have none hurt,
but great prosperity. Of this we learn, that without application we can reap
no comfort of the promises of Gods word: for suppose they were never so sweet,
unless they belong unto Yea, most comfortable promises are most terrible to
such as (...) not apply them.
us; what comfort can we get by them? yea, certain it is, that unto an evil
conscience, which dare not make the application of them to it self, the most
comfortable promises are most terrible. Let us so live, that they may be ours:
let us so hear them, or read them, that we may apply them to our selves; and
then shall we find comfort in them.

Into thy salvation.] Such is the nature of Faith carries us out of our selves
to lean on the Lord.
faith, that it carries us out of our selves in unto the Lord, and makes us to
lean upon him, rest in him, and live in him, and to him; and so this phrase
imports. They who abide in themselves, resting in any thing that is in them
(either wisdom, strength, or merit) shall be found to Matthew. 7.
have built their house on the Sand; which will not continue: Periculosa
habitatio eorum, qui Bern.
habitant in meritis. But such as go out of themselves, and trust in the
Lord, have built their house on the Rock that shall never fail them.

VER. 167. My soul has kept thy testimonies: for I love them exceedingly.
He insists still in the assumption; proving Love proved by obedience, and
obedience tried by love.
his love to God by his obedience, and commending his obedience from this, That
it flowed from love: otherwise, though a man should give all that he has to
the poor; though he should subdue his body in most severe manner; yea,
though he gave his body to be burnt in the fire; if these actions flow not
from such a love as is the daughter of faith, they are not acceptable unto God.
And the manner of David's speech, being more narrowly considered, will let us
see, that his rejoicing was rather in the sincerity of his affections, then in
the perfection of his actions.

The Apostle says, that faith works by love. We sin against God because we
love him not as we should: if we love him not, we are inexcusable.
What it works our Savior tells us; He that loves me, keeps my
commandments: and David again shows here, how love flowing from such faith,
is the mother of all dutiful obedience. If we sin against God, it is for
want of love toward him: and since his law craves nothing but love, and we are
bound by so many obligations to love him; we are made most inexcusable, if we
love him not. Oh that we could consider
this! we would account our sin more weighty then it is. Why sin we?
Because we want the love of God. And why love we him not? have we any excuse
for this? Let us yet stir up our hearts, and endeavor to cherish this little
sparkle of Gods love that is in us: let us increase it to a great flame, till
it kindle all the powers of our soul upward, toward our God. Oh that it were
so.

VER. 168. I have kept thy testimonies and thy precepts: for all my ways are
before thee.
HIs former purpose is yet further amplified; Hypocrisy and dissimulation
far from men who are truly godly.
that he dealt not with God as a dissembler, or an hypocrite; but truly and
sincerely he laid open his heart to God, and made his ways manifest unto him:
as he protests elsewhere, That he had not at any time spoken to God with his
tongue, that which was not in his heart: there was not in him ( discolor mentis
Ambrose.
intentio, materialibus negotijs occupatu, quae a propositi spiritu, alis
executione deflectat) when he spoke unto God, a divided mind, busied with
worldly matters, that might stay his spiritual intention, or turn it another
way. Beatus qui They lay open their cogitations and affections to God.
dicere possit, Omnes viae meae ante te; Blessed is he that may so say in
sincerity, All my ways are before thee; that will not suppose that he might
hide his cogitations nor affections from the Lord. Adam hid his way from God,
he concealed the iniquity of his bosom. Caine in like manner covered the
slaughter of his brother, and dissembled it: this they did in affectu, non in
effectu; in their affection, not in effect: for what can The wicked cannot hide
from God, yet will ^ be laid to their charge.
be hid from the Lords all-seeing eye? Plena abscondent is perfidia, et si apud
deum nulla sit latebra: their perfidie and falsehood in seeking to hide from
God, is not the less, that they are not able
to hide it: Et si Deus omnia videt cordis occulta, bonum tamen est vt
vnusquisque animam suam ei aperiat, and expandat, and tanquam lumini vel calori
eius occurrat. Albeit the Lord see the secrets of our hearts, and nothing can
be concealed from him; yet it were good for us that we should offer them
willingly to be seen: that we lay open our souls unto him, occurring to his
light and heat, not flying from him; that where we are good he may confirm
us, where we are faulty he may amend us. The Lord work it in us.

TAV.
VER. 169. Let my complaint come before thee: and give me understanding,
according to thy Word.
We are now come to the last Section Godly men interrupt their prayers against
their will.
of this Psalm: wherein we see David more seruent in prayer then he was in the
first; as ye shall easily observe, by comparing them both together. The godly,
the longer they speak to God, are the more seruent and earnest to speak to
him; so that unless necessity compel them, they desire never to intermit
conference with him.

Many prayers has he made to God in this We should pray for our prayers.
Basil.
Psalm: now in the end he prays for his prayers, that the Lord would let them
come before him. Some men send out prayers, but God turns them into sin, and
puts them away back from him: therefore David seeks favor to his prayers. Let
us take heed unto this: since we live only by Gods liberality, and have not
till he give, and he cannot Prayer rejected a sore plagu^.
give till we seek; in what a miserable case are we, if our prayers, whereby
we seek from him, be not received of him? Let us abhor every Ambrose.
thing that may procure this. Peccato grauescit oration, and long fit a Deo: by
sin prayer is made heavy, that it cannot ascend unto God. Volare facit
orationem bonae vita, and dat alas precibus: but a good life gives wings unto
prayer, and makes it fly upward toward God.

Three sorts of complaints are made by the Three sorts of complaint made by
the godly.
godly unto the Lord: sometime they complain upon their invisible enemies,
Satan with his Principalities, Powers, and spiritual wickedness. 1. Against
invisible enemies.
These most properly are termed Souls oppressors. Sometime upon their visible
enemies, 2. Against visible.
wicked men: of whom either they suffer great wrongs, and injuries; or then
they cannot get right and justice at their hands. Against these they run to
the Lord, appeal to his Tribunal, and he receives their clamours, griefs
and wrongs into his bosom. And sometime they 3. Against themselves.
complain upon themselves: either for want of grace, which feign they would
have; or else, for abundance of euiil, which feign they would want: as we see
in the Apostle; Miserable man, Romans 7.
who will deliver me from this body of sin? David here tells not what his
complaint was: but unto one of these three it may be referred.

Give me understanding according to thy Word.] No wisdom in man without the
word.
He seeks understanding, not simply; for the wisdom of the flesh is death:
and the children of this world are wiser in their own generation then the
children of light. But he seeks understanding according to Gods word: without
this the wit of man is foolishnes; and the more subtle he seems to be in his
ways, the more deeply involues he himself in the snare of the Devil. They
have rejected thy word, and what wisdom Ierem.
can be in them?

But since he was an excellent Prophet, and protested Gifts of nature and grace,
wherein different.
before, he had more understanding then the ancient; yea, then his Teachers:
how is it that still he prays for understanding? There is a great difference
between the gifts of nature and grace. Nature oft-times gives to men very
excellent gifts, as rare memory, knowledge, quick wit, strength, external
beauty: but therewithal it teaches not man to consider his wants; whereof it
comes to pass, that he waxes proud of that which he has. This is a common
thing to men in the state of nature, that of small gifts they conceive a great
pride: but grace, as it gives unto man more excellent gifts then nature can
afford; so it teaches him to look unto that which he wants, that he be not
puffed up by considering that which he has: but, forgetting it, is carried in
all humility of his heart, to pray for that which he wants.

VER. 170. Let my supplication come before thee; and deliver me, according to
thy promise.
We should mark the graces, wherewith Prayer should be seasoned with faith.
David seasons all his prayers; that our prayer being like unto his, we may
find favor with God as he did. First, his prayer flowed from faith, and was
grounded upon Gods promises. If any man pray, says Saint James, Let him ask
in faith: otherwise, James 1
his motions and words, are but like the rauing and instable waves of the sea.
Next, he prayed Feruencie.
with feruencie; as his frequent repetition declares. The prayer of a righteous
man auailes much, James 5
if it be fervent. Thirdly, he prayed with humble Humility.
acknowledgement of his own unrighteousness and unworthiness; esteeming it a
great favor, if the Lord let his supplication come before him: and last, he
concludes them with some solemn promise of thankfulness: these make our prayers
sauorie and sweet smelling to the Lord our God.

That we may the more earnestly be stirred Prayer makes man on earth a great
Courtier with God in heaven.
up unto this duty; let us consider how by this grace of prayer, a man upon
earth, is made a great courtier with God in heaven. They are much esteemed upon
earth, who have access to the ears of Kings when they like: but this is a
far greater benefit; That if we will, we may by prayer have access to the
king of Kings, to request both for our selves and for others also.

The contrary evil is a fearful curse; when To pray and not prevail is
Moabs curse.
God turns the prayer of a man into sin: He prays with Moab and preuailes
not. How comfortless and confused, was the estate of miserable Saul, who in
his need prayed to God, and got no answer? We showed before what are the
evils which debar a man from this comfort: only now, let those that seek
mercy from God, beware they deny not mercy to others, when they seek it, and
they may show it. See we not how that rich glutton, who showed no mercy to
Lazarus, got no mercy himself? what then shall become of those who are robbers,
and oppressors of others? If he was rejected, qui non dedit sua, Who gave not
his own; what shall become of them, qui rapiunt aliena, who rob from other
men that which is theirs? With what measure ye mete unto others; with that
same shall it be measured to you again.

VER. 171. My lips shall speak praise, when thou have taught me thy
statutes.
AFter his petitions, he subioynes promises Prayers should be seconded with
promises, and promises with performances.
of thankfulness. There are some who seek from God, but offer no promise; or
if they promise, they perform not: these are lovers of themselves, not of God.
So their necesities be fulfilled, they care not what become of his glory: and
therefore either they seek and get not; or if they get, it is not for their
good: for what good can be to them, who seek that they may have to satisfy
their own lusts, and not how to do service to their God? Let us second our
prayer with promises, and promises with performance, if we would have them
effectual.

David was a man of honor, preferred to the They who go before the p^oin
honor, should go before them also in good example.
Kingdom of Israel: yet he was not only an example to others; but a
ringleader also: for so he protests, that he led the people in great
multitudes to the house of God, with such joyful affection, as if he had been
going to a feast. They who have received most from God, are most bound to
honor him: but now it is far otherwise. For great men, for the most part,
think it not seemly for them to open their mouth and praise God: they give
that service over to common people; and therefore many a time God turns their
honor into shame: for he has said, I will honor them that honor me; and by
the contrary.

There are some give their lips to the Lord, Both soul and body and all that
we have received from God, should be returned to him.
and not their heart. C^rsed be the man, that has a male in his flock, and
vows and sacrifices a corrupt thing to the Lord. Others, notwithstanding they
can read and sing, will not do so much as with the mouth praise the Lord: but
good David sometime stirs up his soul to praise God; sometime encourages his
tongue; yea, calls upon all that is within him to praise the Lord. And is it
not good reason, that all which we have received from the Lord, should be
employed to serve him? Nam et oculos, et os, et auditum propterea posuit in
nobis deus, vt omnia ipsi membra
seruirent; et quae ipsius sunt, audiremus; quae ipsius, loqueremur. For this
cause has the Lord our GOD given us both a mouth, and eyes, and ears, That
all of them should serve him; that with our ears we should hear his word;
and with our mouth we should speak his praises; and with our eyes we should
behold his glorious works.

VER. 172. My tongue shall entreat of thy word: for all thy commandments are
righteous.
THe other duty of thankfulness promised Christians are Prophets and should
edify one another.
by David, is, To entreat of Gods words, for the edification of others. Every
Christian man, as he is a priest to offer sacrifice unto God: so is he a
prophet to teach his brethren; for unto us all stands that commandment, Edify
one another in the most holy faith. But alas, ye shall see many Christians
now, who at their Tables, and in their Companies, can speak liberally of any
subject; only for spiritual matters, which concern the soul, there they are
dumb, and cannot say with David, My tongue shall entreat of thy word.

For all thy commandments are righteous] The The word of God keeps religion and
order among men.
reason why among men, he will entreat of the word of God, Because they are
all righteous; and so most forcible to reform the unrighteousness of men. Non
possunt homines reduci ad vitae reformationem, nisi per verbum tuum: there can
be nothing among men, but confusion in manners corruption in religion, where
the word of God is not reverenced as a rule, to the which the actions of men
should be squared.

VER. 173. Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy precepts.
David, having made promises of thankfulness, No success in temporal things
without Gods helping hand.
seeks now help from God, that he may perform them. Our sufficiency is not of
our selves; but of his furniture: to will and to do, are of him. In temporal
things, men oftentimes take great pains, with small profit: first, because
they seek not to make their conscience good; next, because they crave not the
help of Gods hand: therefore they speed no better then Peter, who fished all
night and got nothing, till he cast in his net in the name of the Lord.

But in spiritual things, we may far less In spiritual exercises much
more labor is lost, if the grace of God help not.
look to prosper, if we call not for the Lord his helping hand: the means
will not profit us, unless Gods blessing accompany them, and his hand-worke
with them. Paul may plant, Apollo may water; but God must give the increase.
The Law was given by Moses: grace comes by Jesus Christ. This is the cause why
in this age few grow in grace, notwithstanding they have the means of grace in
most plentiful manner; because the hand of God is not sought to work with the
means. There is preaching, but for the most part without profit; there is
prayer, but it preuailes not; there is hearing of the word, but without
edifying: Balm (enough) in Gilead, and there is Ier. 8. 22

the Physician also, even the great Physician of our souls among us: yet is
not the health of people recovered; And all because in spiritual exercises,
instant prayer is not made unto God, that his hand may be with us to help us.

VER. 174. I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord: and thy law is my delight.
IN this verse is a twofolde protestation: first, The beginning of salvation we
have now, the perfection we look for.
of the great desire he had of Gods salvation; next, of his delight in the law
of God. But how is this, he longed for salvation? was he not even now partaker
of it? does he not glory, Psalm. 27. that God was his light and salvation? Both
are true; that he had it, and yet he longed for it. We must distinguish
between the beginnings, and the perfection of our salvation: the beginning we
have now by believing Gods promises; whereupon we have received the Earnest of
his spirit: the perfection we shall have, when all his promises shall be fully
accomplished unto us. 1. Peter 1
Therefore S. Peter calls it a salvation, prepared to be showed in the last time.

We see, then, the disposition of Gods children We have comfort by the
beginnings, but no contentme^t
toward this salvation, to be such, that howsoever they have comfort in the
beginnings thereof, yet no contentment. This is expressed in holy scripture, by
the words of seeking, waiting, sighing, panting, braying, hungring, thirsting,
longing: by all which, a vehement desire of promised salvation is noted to them.

This condemns both worldlings, who have Worldlings and cold professors
reproved, who long not for better then they have.
set the desire of their soul, upon the perishing trash of the earth; counting
that their treasure, which the spiritual man accounts to be but doung: as also
cold professors, who pretend an hope of eternal life; but long not for it. Non
desiderat patriam peregrinatio sine lacryma; He that lives in his pilgrimage
without tears, declares that he has no desire of his country. Non satis
futura gaudia nosti, nisi renuat consolari anima tua donec veniant; Thou
know not well the joys to come, if thy soul loath not these that are
present, and long for those that are promised. To such, terrible is that
warning of our Lord; Woe be to you Luke 6
that are full, for ye shall hunger.

And thy law is my delight.] In this other protestation, David shows what it
was that vpheld The word to us in our pilgrimage, is like Manna to Israel in
the wilderness.
him in this time of delay of Gods promised salvation; to weet, the comfort of
Gods word: this is like Manna to Israel in the wilderness; which ceased so
soon as they entered into Canaan, but sustained them in the journey. So shall
the exercises of the word cease, when we shall come to our heavenly Canaan: in
the mean time, so long as we are in the way, let us comfort our selves with
it.

Again, we see how David always conioynes They who despise the word need not
look for salvation.
these two; salvation, and the word of God. This is to be marked, for
contemners of Gods word; who live as if God were to save them by miracles, and
not by his own ordinary means, appointed in his Church. They look to be
saved, and yet will not reverence the word: but they shall be deceived.

VER. 175. Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee; and thy judgments
shall help me.
SOme expound this to be a petition, for If natural life may be loved.
the prolongation of his natural life; that he may live and praise God. This I
know is lawful to seek: and for it he prays, Psalm. 90. Oh spare a little,
that I may recover my strength before I go and be not. But here I think David
stretches his affection toward that spiritual life, How much more should
eternal life be loved?
which now in Gods children is the beginning of life everlasting; when the
soul quickened by spirit of God, is able to walk with God. For as the bodily
life is discerned by actions competent unto it: so the spiritual life is
known by actions compete^t to it. Also where there is grace to pray, and
thanksgiving with joy, delighting in Gods word, and obedience given thereunto,
these are undoubted arguments of a spiritual life.

But it is a pity, to see how many are living, But many live by the one, who
are dead as concerning the other.
concerning their bodies lusty and strong, who are but dead; carrying a dead
soul, in a living body; strangers from the life of GOD, painted sepulchers,
pleasant without, full of rottenness within; having a soul which can no more
pray, nor praise the Lord, then a dead body, which can neither hear nor speak
unto men.

And it shall praise thee.] Much throughout Fruit of all Gods benefits, is
profit to us, praise to himself.
this Psalm, and in all the rest, does David esteem of this exercise of
praising GOD: sometime he prays for it as a grace; sometime he promises it
as a duty; sometime he practices it in himself, and sometime he prouokes
others unto it. The Lord so parts the fruit of all his benefits, that he gives
us the profit, reserving no more but the praise unto himself: and the more
praise we give him, the more profit by new benefits reap we at his hands.

And thy judgments shall help me.] How Gods word is called his judgment, See
verse 7. 13. 20. 30. 39. 43. 52. 62. 66. 84. 102. 106. 108. 120.

VER. 176. I have gone a stray like a lost sheep; seek me: for I do not
forget thy commandments.
IN this conclusion of the Psalm, we have three things: a confession of
sin, a petition of mercy, and a protestation. The confession, I have wandered
like a lost sheep: Euthymius and David persecuted with banishment.
Vatablus, understand this to be a complaint of his persecution he sustained
of Saul; who like a ravening Wolf of Beniamins tribe, chased David like a
poor sheep, from his native soil; hunting him to and fro, like a Partrige,
through the mountains of Israel: and that therefore, leaning to the testimony
of his good conscience, he makes bold with GOD, that he would reduce him, and
bring him home again. And this exposition is also agreeable to the Analogy of
faith.

But we rather take this, with Basil and Ambrose, It is common to all men to
wander from God.
to be a petition for spiritual deliverance from his sins; wherein first, he
premi^s a confession of his misery, that he had wandered from God* Basil in
Psalm. 119.
Hoc et prophet a post peccatum, and omni humanae naturae dicere conuenit: and
this not on^lie the Prophet, but the whole nature of man after the
transgression, is bound to confess. Quod lapsum Ambrose, Psalm. 119.
fateris, in eo tibi cum omnibus commune consortium est; quia nemo sine
peccato: negare hoc sacrilegium est; solus enim deus sine peccato est:
confiteri hoc deo impunitatis remedium est: that
thou confessest thy sin, in this thou have a common fellowship with all
mankind: there is no man without sin; that is Gods prerogative: to deny
this, is sacrilege: to confess it, is the way to impunity. Dic itaque et tu
iniquitates tuas, vt iustificeris: Confess thou therefore thy sins, that thou
may be justified. It is the presumptuous voice of Antichrist, That a man in
this life can be without sin, and fulfill the law in perfection.

If their eyes were opened to see either the Lord, Such as think themselves
without sin are but blind.
or themselves, they would be far from this abominable presumption. When
holy Esaias saw a vision of the Majesty of God, he cried out; Woe is Esaias 6
me, I am vneleane. When patient Job had seen the Lord, it was his voice, Now
I have seen the Lord; therefore I abhor my self. And David here by his
deep meditations of Gods word, is moved to acknowledge his great disconformity
from it, by reason of his sins. As the small motes of the ^yre, Atomi, are
only seen where the sun shines: so the manifold imperfectio^s of our
nature, are best seen, where the light of Gods word shines most clearly. And
therefore to all such presumptuous papists, as boast with the Pharisie An
answer to presumptuous Papists, boasting of perfection.
of their perfection; and fall not down with the penitent Publican, and humble
David, to make confession of their sins; we return that answer of Bernard,
Site videres tibi displiceres, and Bern.
mihi placeres: If thou saw thy self, thou would be displeased with thy
self, and should please me. Sed quia te non vides, tibi places, and mihi
displices:
but because thou see not thy self, thou please thy self, and displeasest
me. Veniet autem dies quand^ nec tibi nec mihi placebis: non mihi quia
peccasti: nec tibi quia in aeternum ardebis. But the day will come, wherein
thou shall neither please thy selfe*nor me: thou shall not please me, because
thou have sinned against me; neither shall thou please thy self, because thou
shall be punished with everlasting fire.

In any spiritual disease, the knowledge of our Confession of sin profitable.
sin and confession of it, is the first token of the return of health.
Soluit criminum nexus verecunda Amb. de p^nit. lib. 2. c. 6
confessio peccatorum: the bands of sin are loosed when they are confessed.
And again, Erroris medicina est confessio, Medicine for error is confession:
But to this purpose, notable is the saying of Gregory, Mirentur qu^cunque
volent Gregor. moral. 22
in quolibet castitatis continentiam; mirentur visc^ra pietatis: eg^ non minus
admiror in ^o confessionem humilimam peccatorum. Let men admire as they please,
in others, either their continency, or commiseration: I will much more admire
in a man to see the humble confession of his sins. Scio enim, per
infirmitatis verecundiam, grauioris esse certaminis praeterita peccata prodere,
quam non admissa vitare. For I know, through the infirmity of shame, that the
godly have a greater battle to confess sin committed, than to repress it
that it be not committed.

Seek me.] The second thing in the verse is, God the great shepherd of his
people.
petition of mercy, after the confession of sin; I have wandered like a lost
sheep: but thou who art the great pastor of thy sheep, who causest joy in
heaven, at the conversion of a sinner; thou that leauest ninety and nine
feeding in the mountains, to seek one of thy sheep that has wandered from
thee; Come thou Lord, and by thy grace, bring me home again. Quaere me, quia
te Ambros.
requiro. Seek me, for by thy grace I seek thee: Potes inuenire quem tu
requiris, Thou may find His (...) toward his wandering sheep.
him whom thou seek. Dignare suscipere quem inueneris, Vouchsafe to receive
him whom thou have found. Impone humeris quem susceperis, And lay him upon thy
shoulders, whom thou have received. Non est tibi piu^ onus fastidio, It is no
wearisom burden to thee, to bear thine own, and bring them home again unto
thy self.

Thus we see, how not only in our first conversion, The praise of the
beginning, progress, and perfection of our salvation is dew to God only.
God did communicate life to us when we were dead; as he followed Apostate
Adam, that ran away from him, and brought him again: but in all the course of
our life, he is the conseruer and restorer of life to our souls. No man can
reckon the errors of his life. We should perish in the least of them, if the
mercy of God did not watch over us; to save us when we have lost our selves; to
reduce us when we wander; to raise us when we fall. So that the whole praise of
the beginning, continuance, and consummation of our salvation, belongs to the
Lord our GOD only.

For I forget not thy commandments.] The The godly never so fall that they
lose all grace.
third and last thing in the verse, is this protestation. Where if it be
demanded, How do these agree with the former? He has even now said that he
wandered like a lost sheep; and now he says, that he forgets not the
commandments of God: The answer is, The godly never so fall, but there
remains in them some grace, quae spem medicinae Ambr.
reseruat, which reserues a hope of medicine to cure them: so David here, Licet
quaedam mandatorum dei transgressus est, omnimodam tamen illorum obliuionem non
admisit. Albeit he transgressed some of Gods commandments, yet he fell not
into any full oblivion of them.

And last, we see here, that as David first got life The manifold uses of Gods
word to the godly.
to his soul by the word; so by it life was conserved unto him: and if at any
time he fell, it was the word that wakened him, to turn again to the Lord by
repentance. When we are tempted unto sin, the word arms us to resist it:
when we are vvounded with sin, the word lets us see how to cure it. And as
the crowing of the Cock wakened Peter, to mourn for the denial of Christ: so
the warning of the word, wakens us to repent when we have sinned.

Happy were we, if such affection were in us What comfort we should find in
it, if our affection toward it were like David's.
toward the word of God, as here was in David. So should we find that
manifold comfort in it, which he found, to the rejoicing of his heart. If we
receive it, when we hear it, with a lively faith, Fiet nobis quodcunque
desideramus, August.
It shall be unto us, what ever we desire: if we be in trouble, it shall be to
us a word of consolation; if we be in joy, it shall augment our joy: Certainly
if we knew it, we would be more delighted with it. It is the seed of our new
birth; it is the food that conserues an immortal life in us; it is a
preservative against all evil; it is the restoratiue of our souls in all
diseases; it is the staff of our infirmityes; it is our armor against our
enemies; it is the light of our eyes; even that day star that shines in
darkness. If we walk in the light thereof, it shall lead us to the
bright-shining sun of righteousness, Christ Jesus. To whom with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be praise, honor, and glory, for ever,

Amen.
FINIS.
A Prayer, commonly used by the Author, before his Evening Doctrine to the
people.
O Lord prepare our hearts to seek thee: and open thou thy merciful ear to
hear us. Let the meditation of our heart, the words of our mouth, and the
lifting up of our hands, be unto thee an acceptable Evening sacrifice: and let
thy blessing descend upon us thy people; that by the ministry of thy word and
holy spirit, light may increase in our minds, by which we may know thee;
life in our hearts, by which we may live unto thee* that so long as we are
here, in this miserable absence from thee, we may continually be guided with
thy grace; and in thy own good time, received up to thy glory, through Jesus
Christ: to whom with thee and thy holy spirit, be praise and glory for ever.

Another.
LOrd quicken us, that we may call upon thy holy name. Lord make us weary of
our sins, that we may come to thee, and thou may refresh us: power thy spirit
upon us, that we may hunger and thirst for thy righteousness and salvation;
that thou according to thy promise may satisfy us. Declare thy presence in
mercy upon us, who here wait for thy loving kindness in the midst of thy
Temple. Water thine inheritance with the deaw of thy grace; that we may fasten
our roots in Christ, and may grow up in him in all holiness, fruitful in every
manner of good work, which may be to thy glory, through Jesus Christ. To whom
with thee and thy holy spirit, be praise, and honor, and glory for ever,

Amen.
A TABLE, DIRECTING the Reader how to find out the Principal points of
Doctrine, contained in this Book.
A
A Brahams infirmity, to teach us strength. P. 143. Gods Acceptance of any
thing at our hands, a great favor; for three respects. 246. Access to God by
Prayer, while we are in the body; will make us not affraide to go out of the
body. 137. Adam had all graces, except Perseverance. 260. Affections to be
fervent in seeking spiritual things. 356. Affections, if strong, will break
forth in Actions. 368. Afflictions are favors, and proved such. 166. 245. They
are profitable. 206. Afflictions and offenses humble the Godly. 170. Affliction
not affecting Purgation, is an argument of fearful induration. 171. In
Affliction we see three things better then in prosperity, viz. What of the
Lord? what of our selves? what of the world. 181. The goodness of the Wicked,
ends with their Affliction: It does not so with the Godly. 182. In Affliction
to* praise God, a great grace. 189. Afflictions of good and bad differ and how*
in the measure and in the end. 191. They make the fruitful more fruitful.
219. Alexanders and Caesar's parting the night. 159. Almuggim trees are such as
rot not. 156. The Anchor of the soul is Gods word. 340. Angels to be imitated.
332. Answer of Prayer delayed, and why? 199. Appeal to God from the wrongful
judgments of men. 62. 344. Application of the word, a special grace. 377.
Armor of the godly, the Word and Prayer. 65 The Art of Arts is the practice of
piety. 187. Assurance of salvation is no Arrogance. 123. 215. Assurance
confirmed by Arguments. 124. The Awe-band of the wicked is without them; of the
godly within them. 362.
B
THe Bands and Combinings of the Wicked avail not. P. 155 Banishment, and
Pilgrimage, brings us nearer to God; the farther from Men. 131. Beginnings,
nothing without perseverance. 252. God is a Beholder of our afflictions and
Wrestlings. 342* Benefits received, well used, beget Boldness to ask more. 38.
Benefits should bind us to Obedience. 308. The fruit of Gods Benefits is our
profit, and Gods praise. 393. Benignity of God general, special. 163.
Blessedness of Man, described four ways. 6. Man's Blessedness is in Gods
Approbation. 9. Desire of the best Blessings, pleases God best. 93. Blindness
of Man by Nature. 51. Our Bodies are houses of Bondage. 132. Christ's Burden
bears the Bearer. 79.
C
CAlumnies, are heavy Crosses. Page 275. To commend a wrong Cause to Gods
protection, is dangerous* 276. Be our Cause never so good, our own wisdom
will not help it. ibid. Christians more honorable then Kings not Christians.
48. Christians maimed, which have an ear to hear, a tongue to speak, but no
hand to practice. 119. Christians, called Christ's Companions. 162. Christians
are Prophets. 388. Commandments all to be kept, not with half obedience. 21.
Solid Comfort and Counsel, comes from the word. 67. Comforts to be sought
from God, for Gods sake. 110. The Comfort of the Cross unknown to Worldlings.
171. Comfort, the less worldly, the greater heavenly. 182. Comfort, not
coming from Gods word, has two evils with it. 218 Comfort consists in two
things. 254. A threefold Comfort. 314. The Comfort of the word, is common to
all the Godly. 370. A man known by his Company. 161. 257. Wicked Company, to
be for born for two causes. 257. A threefolde Complaint against three sorts of
Enemies. 383. Confession of Sins, confounds Satan. 274. 396. Confusion
twofolde: either a Desertion of God, or Oppression of Men. 88 A Good
Conscience, affords continual boldness in Prayer. 273. 302. 343. 354*
Consideration, necessary in all things. 150. David's Constancy in religion. 174.
Constancy of Christians. 250. 351. Conversion to God, not of any freewill in
nature. 85. Nothing can give a man Content, but God. 140. Contentment only in
the end, though comfort before. 391. Conversion requires Confirmation to
crown it. 261. Covetousness a mother-sin. 98. A godly Covetousness. 172 Two
Courses in the life of every man; the one seen, the other secret. 8. A
Courtier of heaven made by prayer. 385. Gods Curse is a secret Consumption. 61.
Our first Creation is without hope or Comfort. 186. Creation is as a Mother,
Conservation is as a Nurse. 216. Goodness of Creatures, but a glimpse of the
Creators, to whom they direct us. 140. The Creatures cannot teach salvation:
but they confirm it. 215. Other Creatures consist by Gods word: how much more
a Christian? 218. All Creatures, except Man and Apostate Angels, are ruled by
the word of God. 304. A cursed Cross, and a sanctified, discerned. 180. The
Cross necessary to a Pilgrim, and why? 325.
D
David's disposition and approbation. Page 3. David's affection to GODs word, and
why. 4 David compares himself with others; not to commend himself, but Gods
word. 230. A double Deceit of sin. 267. Delight in godliness, a great argument
of progress. 40. Delight in the Word, a proof of Godliness. 118. 326. Delights
diverse, always sweet, from the same word. 219. Deliverance unlooked for in
dangers. 256 Desertions final, temporal. 25. 310. Desertions temporal more
grievous to the Godly, then temporal Death. 71. 209. Desertions spiritual do
much daunt and cast down. 198. Good Desires are of GOD. 84. 94. Desires
accepted of GOD for deeds. 106. Desires of the Souls salvation are the chief.
278 Determination helps a Godly life. 145. Detractions of men not to be
feared. 103. Devotion of these days cold. 369. Diligence in keeping GODs
law, required for three reasons. 18. Discipline does good. 167. A man must be
a Disciple, before a Doctor. 232. Division of this 119. Psalm. 5. They only
to expect Donations from God, which are under Gods Domination. 282.
E
THe whole Earth a place of banishment. Page 55. The Earth founded without
foundation. 216. Edification must begin at home in a man's own heart. 33.
Edification may arise from every thing. 347. Our Election of Gods truth issues
from GODs Election of us. 86. Our Election is sealed to us certainly, by our
love to God sincerely. ibid. How to pray against Enemies. 194. 202. The
diligence and the cruelty of the just man's Enemy. 224. The Enemies of God, are
the only Enemies of the Godly. 286. 319. 336. Lightly Esteemed of men,
highly Esteemed of GOD. 322. Examples to teach us godliness. 136. 360. How to
be followed; how not. ibid. Excellency of the Word. 250. Experiences of Gods
truth comfort excedingly. 340. The Eyes, death^ windows to enter into the
heart. 98 The Eye of the mind and body differ, and how. 151. The Eyes right
government. 311.
F
EVery Article of Faith is a wondrous mystery. Page 53. 296. Faith in Gods
promises is the Anchor of the soul. 111. The nature of Faith is in particular
application of the general promises. 122. Faith required in prayer. 148. Faith
carries us out of our selves. 378. Falling, to be feared, and why. 265.
Familiarity of the Godly with God more then with Men. 245. It breeds no
contempt, as with Men. 271. It comes by a good conscience. 343. Gods Favor
illuminateth the mind. 310. Fear and trembling, for repenting of sin, for
preventing of sin. 104. The Godly described by the Fear of God. 162. The
Fear of God in any, assures us of good duties in such an one. 163. Fear, to
the Wicked horrible. 272. The Fear of God ouercometh the Fear of Man's
displeasure. 362. Felicity of Man is conformity with God. 6. Fellowship with
God divides us from wicked men. 257. No Fighting against Satan in his weapons
and armor. 178. 196. First Fruits of our hearts to be offered to God. 333. A
godly man is ever Fruitful, either without or within. 43.
G
GOds Gifts, pledges of greater 165. Small Gifts accepted of God. 247. Great
Gifts are to be asked of God. 329. Gifts of Grace and Natue differ, how. 384.
A Glory to the Godly, to make others more godly then themselves 233. God, the
object of prayer. 730. Gods dishonor more grievous to the Godly then their
own. 354. True Godliness has perseverance with sincerity. 94. Impediments of
Godliness, many both within and without us. 127. Truth of Godliness tried by
private exercises. 133. Godliness is the gain of Godliness, as one talent
begets another. 134. The power of Godliness. 188. The recompense of
Godliness. 188 A Godly man is more afraid of sin that he may do, then a
Godless is for sin that he has don. 104. The Godly pity the Wicked. 128. The
Godly in their life have respect to God, to themselves, to their neighbors.
188. The Godly silent teach others. ibid. A Godly man described. 370. His
privilege. 375. God shows his Goodness in being good to his creature. 173.
Worldly Goods are Gods Moueables. 142. They that have worldly Goods and God,
have a double portion. 143. The more Good a Godly man does, the more he
desires and delights to do. 45. Good things to be sought, for good ends.
77. Graces are linked together: lose one, lose all. 46. Without Gods quickening
Grace, man is dead. 210. Growth in Grace, wrought how. 230.
H
THe Heart the Godlies treasure-house, and why. Page 34 It is kept by three
things. 98 Being well disposed, it dares present it self to God. 105. A soft
melting Heart an happy thing, and an hard stony Heart a grievous curse. 179.
God speaks to the Heart. 237. Hatred of sin is a trial of our love to God.
291. Cold Hatred turns to liking. 367. Hatred of sin is in him that loves
Gods Law. 368. No Hearing of God by us, no Hearing of us by him. 293. 327.
Heaviness of the Godly continual, how outwardly happy soever. 78 Heaviness
according to the tentation. 79. One needs the Help of another, because of
the diversities of Grace dispensed severally. 196. Gods Help the best. 206.
389. God is nearer to help, then any enemy to hurt. 337. The Hiding of
wickedness is proper to the wicked. 380. Humility in the godly. 176. 298.
Hypocrisy, a vile sin. 147. It is far from men who are truly Godly. 380.
I
Jesus is our guide in the narrow way. Page 96. Ignorance of the Word comes
not from the Word, but from our own darkness. 52. Illumination, Gods work
alone. ibid. Illumination of the eyes, and conversion of the heart, go
together. 53. Impunitie an argument of Gods anger. 245. Inabilitie to God is
natural. 236. Instabilitie in the Godly. 260. God gives more grace by an
Instrument, then the Instrument has. 232. Good Intentions strengthened by
prayer. 259. Interruptions of prayers in Godly persons. 382. The Joy that
comes from Gods Word, surpassing all. 40. Joy by the practice of the Word,
not by professing. 41. The Joy of a true Christian is only in God, as in his
own. 259. Joy and Grief go together in this life. 311. 325. Joy in the Word
inexplicable. 364. A warning for Judges. 344. Judgments of God, secret and
revealed. 38. Judgments of God double; Directory, Correctory. 57. 191. Of
Conversion and Confusion. 203. Judgments of God diversely applied by David, and
by Lamech. 59 Judgments, Awe-bands to keep us in. 266. Judgment and Justice
distinguished. 273. How David desired to be dealt with in Judgment; how not.
335. Judgments past should persuade the certainety of Judgments to com: it
does with the Godly. 358.
K
GOds Kindness and man's, much different. Page 110. Gods Kindness a sufficient
defense against Man's malice and ill will. 111. 209 Gods Kindness general,
special. 209. Gods Kindness is the Godlies argument in prayer. 334. Knowledge
which reformeth not is dangerous. 93. Knowledge of this life far inferior to
that of the life to come. 169. Knowledge and Fear of God go together, and so
destroy both superstition and presumption. 197
L
THe Law of God, the rule of man's life. Page 8. Then learned, when writ in the
heart. 83. A Lantern, and why so called. 240. 241. Law written in the
Scripture, and in the conscience, which the wicked would destroy if they could.
287. Gods Law, his image* 315. True Liberty* what, and wherein it is. 116.
Carnal, is thraldom. 114. Natural Life makes a Reprobate worse, because
Life without grace is death. 49. Our Life a race, and restless battle. 90.
Man's Life measured by days, not years. 201. The Life of the Godly excelled
diversely: but he in the Life of grace excels all. 262* 263. Of a Godly Life,
three helps; Determination, Supplication, and Consideration. 145. Of Life
natural, eternal. 39^. Light not only to be had, but grace withal to be
desired to walk after the Light. 95. The Light of the Gospel, clearer then the
Light of the Law. 240. At the Light of the Lantern of the Word, we must light
the Light of the Lantern of our mind. 242. Light external, internal;
special of Creatures, of Conscience, of Gods Countenance. 308 A Look of
mercy; a Look of displeasure. 302. To Love to live to sin is wicked; but to
Love to live to repent of sin, good. 50. Lovers of God love the Godly. 161.
Gods Love to his, exceeding great. 221. David's Love to Gods Law, not
counterfeit, but complete. 228. Love is all God asks: the trial thereof.
229. Love coupled and conserved with fear. 270. Love of obedience, an argument
of Godliness. 255. 289. Love of creatures must be conditional. ibid. Love in
God, the fountain of his benefits: Love in Man, the fountain of his obedience.
320. Love to God in us, assures us of the Love of God tovs. 371. Two trials of
true Love. 372. 278. A Lying way, the way of nature. 81. Lies trimmed up with
the garment of truth. 177.
M
MAn quick to works of sin, dead to works of grace. 100 Man, Gods work
manship; therefore loved by him. 185. Man without understanding, a Beasts
fellow. 186. Man at the best stands in need of mercy. 301. Martyrs of
invincible courage; whence. 362. Meditation necessary. 43. The matter of
Meditation. 44. Members natural, one need another. 39. Mercies begun, move
God to more mercies. 72. 165. Gods Mercy in forgiving, and man's Truth in
confessing, meet together. 73. Desire of Mercy uses the means of Mercy. 106.
Memorials of mercy to be maintained. 167. Mercy received makes men thirst for
more. 193. Mercy for remission, for consolation, for reformation. ibid. Gods
mercies are registered constant, not only for our consolation, but for our
confirmation. 303. Mercy in God, and grace in man meet together. ibid. It is
Gods mercy that differe^ceth the gracious and graceless. 347. 348 Gods
mercies, why called great, why tender. 349. Man's minding God, may be seen by
his godly life. 133. The troubles of the mind distemper the body. 200. 300.
The godly should open their mind when God opens his mouth. 301 Moabs curse.
386. Mockeries of evil men, a part of Christ's cross. 126. Motions of sin
and Grace. 105 Mourning for our selves, for others, commended; why. 312.
N
A Good Name to be regarded* and why. Page 213. Natural men cannot mount above
the earth. 268. Nature cannot conioyn, whom Grace does not. 175. Not Nature,
but Faith, leads us to the hand that smites. 192. Necessities hinder
spiritual duties. 156. As God is Near unto us, so we should be Near unto
him. 338. Nero his miserable end. 376.
O
A Godly Oath necessary to a godly resolution. Page 243. Obedience, qualified
how. 57. Obedience resolved on by the Godly for eternity. 114. The Oblation of
a man's self most pleasing unto God. 248. The Oblation of his heart is ever in
the godly man's hand. ibid. Obl^uion leads to rebellion, and defection. 17.
323. Offenses offered God, should grieve us more then injuries offered us. 286.
He must Offer to God that asks of God. 330. The Opening of sin before God.
780. A spiritual Oppression in David. 68. Oppressors of our souls to be most
prayed against. 274
P
TWo great motives to Patience. Page 246. Our Perfection is rather in desires
then in deeds. 105. 379. 396. Persecutions and Persecutors diverse. 203. 306.
352. True Godliness never wants the crown of Perseverance. 87. Gods last
Plagues the more grievous. 172. Pleasures diverse. 2. Pleasures earthly, all
vain. 225. God is the Portion, wherein a boue all* the Godly do glory. 138.
Motives to make God our Portion. ibid. God a Portion no whit less, though
communicated unto all. 141. Comfort to the Poor, that God is their Portion.
142. Our Practice must prove that God is our Portion. 144 Poverty* not to want
gold, but grace. 184. To Practice what we prescribe. 31 Prayer the life of the
soul. 47. The Godly answer Gods precepts with Prayer. 18 Rules for Prayer. 80.
Argument of Prayer arises out of all our diverse dispositions. 82. Prayer to be
fervent and frequent why. 108. 265 294. 385. When to be long, when short. 295
In David's Prayer 3. things; his Reverence, Sincerity, Faith. 146. For Prayer,
Christ's and David's precepts and practice. 158. Nothing to be Prayed for, but
what warranted by the Word. 199. Prayers to be framed to God* promises. 261.
385. Prayer is seed to be sown. 328. Prayers of the Godly interrupted. 382.
Every crying is no piercing Praying. 328. Prayer must be with Perseverance.
331. Prayers to be prayed for. 382. Prayers rejected, a sore plague. ibid.
Error of pride accursed. 61. Prides policy. 203. A preservative against pride.
307 Religious Princes, a great blessing. 64. Princes, though Persecutors, to be
reverenced. 361. Presumptuous Professors reproved. 210. Gods Promises most sure
in themselves, must be made sure un to us by Prayer. 100 All Gods Promises are
conditional. 102. 262. He that prays unto God, must Promise unto God. 109.
386. The general Promise of mercy, contains every man's particular comfort
that is godly. 120. It stands with Gods honor to perform his Promise. 122.
Gods Promise is our hopes warrant. 279. Gods Promises, some made with a time
set, some without. 284. 285. Not only Gods Promises, but his precepts are
loved of the Godly. 356. Prosperity of the Wicked, not to be regarded. 346. The
Wicked, commonly styled, Proud men. 59. 175. 195. Proud Satan has made
Disciples prouder then himself. 60. A Proud man's punishment, shame, which he
shuns most. 195. Providence against the time of trouble commended. 264 Purposes
and protestations, to be seconded with prayers. 24. Purpose in us perishes, if
God prosper it not. 146 Purpose of prayer must remain, though performance
often fails. 157. 252
R
THE Reason of our Petitions must sometimes be drawn from God, sometimes from
our selves. Page 170. Rebukes of God to be feared; of man not. 104 That is a
Refreshing Recreation to the Godly, which is a tedious weariness to the
Wicked. 130. Regard good, wherein man looks into his own necessities, and
looks up to Gods mercies. 78 Regeneration wrought by degrees. 51. A trial of
true Religion. 63. Truth of Religion not to be measured by the number or
greatness of those that oppose it. 64. One trial of Men truly Religious.
109. Religion is the more loved by the good, the more it is hated by the badde.
288. How God is said to Remember. 120. We that desire God to Remember his
promises made to us, must Remember our promises made to him. ibid. Remission
and Renouation two inseparable graces. 75. Repentance delayed, dangerous and
damnable. 152. A godly Resolution is the beginning of a godly life. 24.
Reverence in prayer. 146. Worldly Riches full of vanity and vexation. 42. 183.
Ignorance of Gods Righteousness makes men murmr. 190.
S
A Man works his Salvation after grace received. Pa. 252. Salvation and Gods
word are joined together. 346. 392. 398. Satan's two arms, violence and lies.
177. Satan an unreasonable, insatitiable, usurping Tyrant. 305. Seeking of God,
shows he was lost. 12. Intention required in Seeking. ibid. Six conditions
in Seeking. 13. The spiritual man apprehends good with all his Senses. 238.
To be Gods Servant is more honor then to be a King. 48. 167. 276. Gods
Servant, proved by two badges. 281. The Service of God must be cheerful. 89.
The great Shepherds favor toward his vvandring sheep. 397* Godly Singing
and tears. 58. Simple men understand Gods word. 298. Sincerity in Prayer.
147. Sins whence they proceed. 17. Sins evil fruits and effects. 20. Sin
aggrauated, in that it is a forsaking of GODs Law. 129. Sin punished here,
shows there is a Judge; and Sin spared, shows there is a Judgment to
come. 160. To resist Sin, is our greatest perfection. 235 Sin unresisted and
received, weakneth our spiritual strength. 236. In Sin three things to be
es^hewed; the occasion, the beginning, the perfection. 255 In Sin men grow
more Skillful every day then other. ibid. Sin is a departing from God. 267.
339 By any one Sin a man may be damnably captiued. 291. Sin makes a man a
silly Creature. 307* Sleep, the dew of Nature. 158. The Soul not satisfied
in this life. 35. The Souls three-folde action about the word. 43. The Soul
lives by mercy, as the Body by meat. 198. To Speak of God, common to all. To
Speak to God, is proper to Gods. 137* Speech why sometimes taken away from the
faithful. 39. Many Speeches used by custom, but not with Conscience. 228.
Gods Statutes and Testimonies must be learned together. 283. Christians
confess themselves to be Strangers here. 54 The Strangers guide must be
God. 56. Two Suitors, whereof the one seeks us for our Weal; the other for
our Wreck. 97.
T
THE subject of our Talking should be GODs Word. Page 117. No Teaching unless
God Teach. 36. 281. Prayer unto God, to be joined to the Teaching of men. 37.
David a Teacher desires Teaching. ibid. and 91. Teachers to learn first. 39.
GOD continuing a Teacher, we shall continue his Servants. 92. God Teaches by
precepts and presidents. 135. Tears with GOD beter then Talk. 295.
Temporizers in Religion are Samaritan Professors. 321. Tentations of the Godly
sometimes cannot, and sometimes are not to be told. 69. Tentations overcome by
remembering time to come. 128. True Godliness endures great Tentations. 155.
Thankefulnes commended for four causes. 22. It must be from the Heart. 25.
Declared in Obedience. 113. In tongue, in affection, in action. 116. Time to be
taken while it is present. 154. It is a precious Jewel. 157. David's st^ife
with the Time. 331. The Royal Tower of Christ, is a soul ascending to heaven.
70 Trouble mitigated by Prayer. 334. Trouble, a Trial of true Religion. 351.
V
Virtues of Gods servants to be marked. Page 3 The Virtuous love those Uertues
in others, which either they have or would have. 188. Understanding is the
Souls Taster. 169.
W
Our service is far inferior to the Wages which God gives. Page 280. All
men Wanderers from God. 394. Wants waken the Godly, and make them wiser. 71
Ways of Learning. 1 Man's life a Way. 7 A Godly man's life, called Gods Way. 16.
19. 45. The Ways of God want a Teacher: The Ways of Sin need none. 76. The
Law of God, is the Way of Truth in three respects. 82. The straight Way has
but one path; the broad Way, many. 96. Our Ways need always redress. 151.
They are darkness, without the word. 249. Sins of Weakness, and of Wickedness,
differ much. 250. The first Weapon of the Wicked against the Godly, is their
tongue. 65 The Wicked are insatiable in Cruelty. 207. Wickedmen why so called.
250. The fall of the Wicked, is Gods work. 268. The Wicked, Gods Rods. 306.
The Wicked, authors of their own Wrack. 345 Their miserable estate. 376. No
Wisdom without the Word. 383. Gods Word why called a Testimony. 10. 97. 269.
316. Why his Judgment. 86. 244. Kept in mind, affection* actio^. 11 Keepers of
Gods Word are kept by it. 15. 35. Gods Word a glass, wherein may be seen Gods
image and ours. 27. As no Word without letters: so no good without this Word.
28. It is needful to all, especially to young, and why? ibid. It is to be used
to our Consolation, and our Edification. 112. God will a*way make good his
Word. 113. 160. 320. Gods Word vnwelcom to Kings, why. 117. It is comfortable.
125. It is the life of our soul. 126. It is the light. 297* Convenient for
every estate of life. 130. The truth thereof shall be found of the wicked, in
judgment; of the righteous and believers, in mercy. 168. The authority thereof
from God, the Ministry from man. 183. The eternity and equity thereof. 212.
324. It is not only controuerted, but contradicted in earth: not so in heaven.
Therefore look up. 214. Thereout the Godly and the Wicked gather Contraries.
217. Contemned only by such as get no benefit by it. 220. It is the trial of
Wisdom. 231. Two great benefits thereof; Understanding in the mind, and
Sanctification of the Affections. 239. It is the sure Charter of our heavenly
inheritance. 251. Gods Word called just for two respects. 290. It is Gods
Oracle to be enquired at. 316. It is a staff to sustain us in trouble. 339.
Commended for the truth and righteousness thereof. 357. Every thing contrary
thereto is falsehood. 366. It is the keeper of religious order. 389. It is like
Manna. 392. Gods Works are wondrous. 77. All his Works serve him. 217.
Worldlings treasure is without them: The Christians is within them. 33. The
Worldlings joy, The Godlies grief. 69
Y
YOuth and Old age both to be godly. 30. To be considered. 234.
Z
THe Zeal of the godly to Gods word, not soon satisfied. 317. The nature of
Zeal. ibid. Sundry sorts of Zeal. 318. The effects of Zeal. ibid. Zeal and
Knowledge, twowings of the Soul. 319. The Trial of Zeal. ibid. Zeal in
Prayer. 328.
What may seem wanting in this Table, the references of certain verses will
supply.

FINIS.

