The Author to the Reader.
I Beseech you to peruse this little Book of my own making: imprinted at my
own cost and charges. Which I humbly entreat you to accept at my hands: not
weighing the worth, but respecting my good will. And deal therein (in your
virtuous disposition, and Christian love and charity) as God shall move your
mind.

I. A. Minister and Preacher of Gods Word.

A CELESTIAL Looking-glass: To behold the beauty of Heaven.

Directed unto all the Elect Children of God, very briefly composed, and
authentically penned, that it may be effectually gained.

PSALM. 87.3. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God.

PSALM. 107.43. Who so is wise, will ponder those things.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, 1621.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, truly Noble, virtuous, and most worthy Lady, the Lady
CATHERNE, Marchioness Buckingham, wife unto the right Honorable GEORGE,
Marquess of uckingham, Vicount VILLERS, Baron of Whaddon, Lord High Admiral
of England, etc. grace and peace from God the Father, through our Lord Jesus
Christ.
RIght honorable and virtuous Lady, so far forth as the holy Scripture
makes mention of the Titles, Magnitude, Joys, and Eternity of heaven, (the
which I have here entreated of) or any other divine matter whatsoever: so far
I may be bold, either to speak, write, or entreat of, and no further; for
the secret things belong unto the Lord, but the revealed belong unto us, and to
our children for ever, Deuteronomy. 29.29. But yet it may be thought great boldness
in me, that am altogether vnacquanted or known unto your Honor, being a
Minister, and Preacher of Gods Word, to presume to shrowde from the prejudice
of contempt, this my small and unlearned Treatise, Entitled, A Celestial
Looking-glass, to be patronized under your Honors protection, being a Lady of
such dignity and virtue; (and so in some sort I do my self acknowledge.)

Yet as the Lord has adorned you among other religious Ladies, with who^ ye
shine as a clear Lamp of light in the world, through your unfeigned love, and
sincere profession of the Gospel, (whereby you are an honor not only to your
house, but unto your whole degree and Sex:) which as it is a sweet testimony
to your own heart, that you are beloved of God, and has made you far and
near honored of all those that love God: so also as your religious zeal
toward Gods Word does exceed your honor or Greatness, it likewise makes me
very confident, that it will excuse my boldness; the rather, because I have
received the ground of my work from the direction of the word of God: but the
method I submit to the correction of man, and am sorry it is no more worthy
your honorable view. But although it be rawly comprised in a few scattered
leaves, and as rudely composed in a sort of scribled and unlettered lines, as
the fruit of whose outward husk being unpolished, may seem unpleasant; yet (no
doubt) the inward kernel once tasted, and well digested, may prove cordial,
and right fruitful.

Right Honorable, and Christian devoted Lady, like as the Moralists shows
me, that where only the quality of the affection, and not the quantity of the
present, is to be attended, Modicum non differt a magno, it is no matter
whether the present be great or small. So was it with Alexander,, who received
a few harsh lines of verse from Choerilus; Artaxerxes a handful of water from
poor Sinaeta, and our Savior Jesus Christ the poor widows mite.

In like manner I am loath to trouble your Honor with a treatise of long
circumstance, lest I should fear you with the loss of time, and so make an
end before I begin. But if the good liking of this Mite of my poor labors,
could win the hope of your favor, to entreat you with patience, to peruse
the same: and withal, vouchsafe to grace me with your honorable acceptance,
to patronize this small work, which I in all dutiful manner, with as tender
affection (as ever mother or nurse gave their breasts to their children, or the
Pelican peckt out her blood to feed and cherish her young) do here as kindly
dedicate and present: then shall I (if God spare me life) be comforted and
encouraged under so worthy a favorer, to proceed in the like studies, and
according to my bounden duty, incessa^tly with all humility pray to Amightie
God, for his glory, not only to preserve your Honor in all happiness, to
continue you honorable upon earth, but also to be far more adorned, to
reign with a Celestial Crown of glory in the Kingdom of heaven.

Your Honors in all Christian duty to be commanded: I. A.

An Apology of the Author to the Reader.
O Wretched man that I am! What am I, that dare undertake (being but dust and
ashes, worms meat) to enter into a description of the sacred and Celestial
Kingdom of heaven? which is in all things inscrutable, and unsearchable, and
in all respects infinite. It exceeds the power of our Eloquence, and the
capacity of our Intelligence, in so much, that no mortal man can comprehend it.

Much less that I, of men one of the meanest, of a defiled heart, and polluted
lips, of weak memory, and of a shallow understanding, should attempt and
presume to define or describe the unspeakable Joys or secrets of heaven.

Yet for as much as the Lords Penmen have, according to our capacity,
described in sundry places, diverse particulars of the heavenly blessedness; I
have briefly, according to the rules of sobriety, collected and considered the
same for our instruction and comfort. And as the authority of the speaker or
writer is lost, when as the voice and life is not affected with the work it
self: I do therefore heartily desire al those (although unknown unto many)
that shall either read, or hear this short and brief Celestial
Looking-glass, and gather comforts unto their souls our of these my labors,
to pray unto our Lord Jesus Christ for me, to give me his grace, and direct
me with his holy Spirit, that what I either preach or write, I may both in
life and doctrine express and perform the same unto my lives end: that whilst
I endeavor to raise others, I may raise my self from all my sins, to the
glory of Gods holy name, and the salvation of my own soul. Amen.

I. A.

Qui cessat esse melior, cessat esse bonus.

He that ceasseth to be better, ceasseth to be good,


A Celestial Looking-glass, to behold the Beauty of Heaven.
OF all the works of God, Heaven is the most ancient; Genesis 1.1. Psalm. 33.6
Psalm. 136.5 Act. 14.15. Reu. 14.7.
it was made at the beginning of the world, and it was the first of all Gods
works: 1 Cor. 2.9 Esaias 64.4. Psalm. 31.20
the felicity thereof cannot be imagined, Mat. 5.12 1. Pet. 4.14
neither the blessings numbered: so incomparable as cannot be equalled; of such
value as none can comprize it, so great ae cannot be measured, Dani. 7.14.
Luke 1.33. Dan. 2.44.
and of such eternity, as never can be ended,

The very name of heaven to all is lovely, because it is a haven Math.
11.28.29. Iere. 6.16.
for rest, Reu. 2.7.
a Paradise for pleasure, Reu. 21.2
a City for beauty, Mat. 16.19. Luke 19.12.
a Kingdom of state, 1. Pet. 5.4 2. Tim. 4.8.
a Crown of glory, Reu. 22 1 Mat. 19.28. Reu. 3.21.
a Throne of Majesty, Mat. 19.29
and life everlasting: it is desired of all, hoped for of many, Ioh. 6.44
but only enjoyed of the best.

All religions aim at it, the wicked do wish for it, the Jews expect it, the
schismatiques seek for it, the Turks would enjoy it, and the Papists think
to merit it: Ioh. 3.3. Mat. 19.28 2 Cor. 5.17 Iam. 1.18. 1. Pet. 1.3.
But the true Protestant, the regenerate Christian, Mat. 9.29 1. Pet. 1.9.
by faith Ezech. 18.21.
and repentance, begges it, Lu. 12.32 Ioh. 3.15.16
and he through the merits of Jesus Christ shall enjoy it.

As Heaven is the 2. Cor. 12.2.
highest place, Reu. 3.21
the Throne of God, the Court of Deuteronomy. 10.17.
the great King, Exo. 6.3.
the mighty Jehovah: So it is the Reu. 21.2.10.
City of safety, Ps. 24.4.
the harbor of the Just, 1 Pet. 2.9 Titus 2.14
the peculiar people, 2. Cor. 5.17.
the regenerate Christians, the John. 12.36. Ephe. 5.8.
Children of Light, Mat. 25.34.
the Elect by Gods Preordination, where al are Kings, Gal. 4.7. Romans 8.17.
and heirs with Christ, Romans 9.23.
invested with glory, 2. Tim. 4.8. 1. Pet. 5.4
crowned with Majesty, Reu. 7.9.
clothed with security, decked with delights, replenished with pleasure,
garnished with all graces, adorned with beauty, furnished with the best
company, and flourishing with the flower of all Nations.

The chiefest reasons that the understanding of mortal man can comprehend to
the describing of Gods Kingdom, are specially these four:

First, by the Titles.

Secondly, by the Magnitude.

Thirdly, by the Joys.

And fourthly, by the Eternity.

Heaven is described by the titles. To set forth heaven more fully to our
understanding, it has diverse glorious Titles, and names in the holy
Scriptures: Mat. 25.14 Tim. 2.18. 2. Pet. 1-11 Luke 24. Reu. 21.11. Reu. 2.3.
Mark 16. Luke 10.
it is called an heavenly Kingdom, a blessed and everlasting Kingdom, a
Celestial and heavenly Jerusalem, a Kingdom of glory, a Throne of Majesty, a
Paradise of pleasure, the glory of God, and life everlasting.

In the Kingdom of heaven are three sacred and most blessed orders or
dignities: The first of them is Supercelestiall, containing Cherubins,
Seraphins, and Thrones: The second Celestial, containing Dominions,
Principalities and Powers: The third Subcelestiall, containing Virtues,
Archangels, and Angels.

Reu. 21.10
John, to show unto us in some measure, the unspeakable glory of heaven,
describes the place under the name of a great City; comparing it with the most
precious things of this world; environed round about with a great wall for the
safeguard of the Citizens.

The wall is made of Jasper, to note the riches thereof: in the wall are twelve
gates, which do open unto every quarter of the world, signifying the
willingness of heaven to accept the Elect in every place, on every side, and
from every Country and Nation.

Reave. 21.2 Esaias 60.11
These gates are made of pearls, and every gate is a pearl undivided, without
blemish: Reu. 21.25
They are ever open, signifying security, to receive with welcome, all that
enter in.

At those gates are twelve Angels, whose names are written upon the gates, Reu.
21.2.
and they are the twelve Tribes of Israel. They are porters to keep out all
strangers, Reu. 21.21 Reu. 22.15
and to admit with welcome all Citizens. Every gate has a porter, to show
vigilance: Every porter is a Tribe, to show the dignity: Reu. 21, 2,
Every porters name is on the gate, to the end that every one should execute
his own charge.

The wall wherein those gates are, Reu. 21, 14
has twelve fou^dations, to betoken a sure and firm established groundworke.
In those foundations are written the names of the Lambs twelve Apostles,
implying, that the foundation of the City is laid upon the Rock of Faith.

Reu. 21.2.
The foundations of the wall of the City are garnished with all manner of
precious stones.

The first is Jasper, to figure prosperity; the second Saphir, in sign of
truth; the third a Chalcedony, to note perfection; the fourth an Emerald, in
to-of victory; the fifth Sardonix, implying security; the sixth Sardius, to
demonstrate fidelity; the seventh Chrysolite, to express purity; the eight
Berill, to mark out content; the ninth a Topaz, alluding unto plenty; the
tenth a Chrysoprasus, to design beatitude; the eleventh a Iacinth, to speak
of Eternity; the twelfth an Amethyst, to manifest love. And thus is the wall
garnished, to show us the treasure and felicity thereof.

The City it self is all of pure gold, Reu. 21.21 Reu. 21, 23 Reu. 22, 1, 2,
both the buildings and streets are gold, shining like clear glass: the light
of this City is Christ: from his seat proceeds a river as clear as
Crystal; on both sides the banks grows the tree of Life, that yields
continual fruit; it bears twelve times every year, twelve manner of
fruits, to represent the quantity, and variety of the pleasures and joys of
heaven: of which river and fruits all the inhabitants may eat and drink their
fill. Reave. 21.6


The river is never drying, nor the fruits failing, for the Lord maintains
the same. There is no winter to nip the fruits, no summer to consume the water;
nor fall of the leaf to disgarnish the tree of his beauty: There is no heat
to vex, nor cold to grieve, no hunger nor thirst, no malice nor strife, no
anger, no pride, no dissimulation nor deceit, no covetousness nor griping, no
whoredom or uncleanness, no swearing or profaning, no disobedience.

There is no cosener to collogue, no parasite to dissemble, no foe to fight, no
inferior to yield obedience, no forrainers but brethren, no strangers but all
of the household of faith, Romans 8.17 Titus 3.7,
Children of one holy Father, coheires with Christ their elder brother.

They shall not need the help of any Doctor for Physic, nor any Lawyer to
plead for their right: Mat. 24.25
the whole Kingdom is their own, and their Letters patents of Donation are
recorded.

This is the principal inheritance of the Saints, and the habitation for all
the Elect children of God, prepared for them from the beginning of the world.

To conclude this point, make us, O Lord, to be of the number of them whom
thou have ordained to reign with thee in thy heavenly Kingdom: write us in the
book of Life, that we may be in the assembly of thy righteous Saints: and
give us grace to be sorrowful for our sins, fearful of thy Judgments,
thankful for thy benefits, lovers of thy mercies, and mindful of thy
presence; that we may be diligent to please thee, have grace to know thee and
hope to embrace thee, through the merits of Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

Secondly, Heaven is described by the Magnitude.
AS Heaven is a most glorious Kingdom, so it is a most spacious and large
place: the Angel measuring the same, Reu. 21, 16, 17,
finds it to be every way 12000. furlongs, every which furlong having in it
twenty five Geometrical paces, eight of them does make a mile, which is five
thousand foot: So that these twelve thousand furlongs, are made fifteen
thousand miles, which being made square by addition, there are thrice so many,
for the other three parts, or three squares of the City.

This is that large Kingdom which contains the innumerable multitude of all
the Elect children of God. Thousand thousands do minister unto him, and ten
thousand times an hundred thousand, do stand about the seat and Throne of
God: Reu. 7, 9,
Of every Tribe of Israel were sealed twelve thousand: and great multituds
which no man could number, of all Nations, and Kindreds and people: and the
Inhabitants of heaven exceed in number the stars in the firmament, or the
sands by the Sea shore.

Baruch 3, 24.
O Israel, how great is the house of God, and how large is the place of his
possession. In domo Patris mei multae sunt mansiones, John. 14, 2.
In my Fathers house there are many mansions, says our Savior Jesus Christ:
Whereof this proportion may be made, that as far as the whole world in
greatness and compass of place does exceed the womb of one private woman, so
much does the place of bliss pass all the whole world in greatness and
quantity. And as much as a man living in this world does pass a child in his
mothers womb, in strength of body, beauty, wit, understanding and knowledge;
so much and so far more does a Saint in heaven pass men of this world in all
heavenly knowledge.

This place is so great and spacious, as if we compare the whole compass of
earthly things with the multitude of heavenly, all that ever God made besides
heaven it self, is but as a prick or small point, or period, being matched
with the workemanshippe of heaven.

This is that large and glorious Kingdom of God, which he has prepared to set
forth his glory, and to express unto us his mighty power.

To conclude this point, though heaven be large and great, which no tongue can
express; yet straight is the way, and narrow is the gate to go into it: Many
seek it, and few find it: for the streitnesse of the way is affliction; ye
narrownes of the gate is true contrition; the Suburbs is the Church; and the
door is Christ, by who^ (if we truly seek) we shall surely enter in. O let us
therefore strive to avoid sin, ye our ways may be verity; our paths piety;
Gods holy spirit our co^ductor; his Word our director; Our Faith hold the
Anchor, while Grace steeres the Helm: Let our tears be the seas, and our
sighs the gales of wind, to arrive at Gods heavenly Kingdom; which God has
prepared us; Christ has merited for us, the holy Spirit does assure us, and
our godly life will witness the same unto us: which the Father of mercy, even
for his Son Jesus Christ his sake, for ever grant unto us. Amen.

Thirdly, Heaven is described by the Joys.
NOw as Heaven is a most glorious place, a Kingdom which has no end or
measure, either in power or glory: 2. Pet. 1.11 1. Cor. 2, 9
So in the same are contained Joys unspeakable. As a learned Father says,
that it is an easier matter to know what God is not, then to know what he is:
It is much easier to tell what is not in heaven, then to tell what is there:
the joys thereof are so great, that all the Arithmeticians in the world cannot
number; the Geometricians measure, nor Rhetoricians with all their eloquence
utter and express the same: it does exceed the power of our eloquence, and
the capacity of all our intelligence.

Saint Paul was rapt into Heaven, 1 Cor. 2.9. Esaias 64.4, Ps. 31.20.
and saw the joys thereof: and they were so exceeding great, that his tongue
was not able to express them: Therefore he says, that neither eye has seen,
nor ear has heard, nor the heart of man conceived the greatness of heavenly
joys. They which are there wish nothing but they have it before them; they
desire nothing but they enjoy it; they dwell in love, they live in peace, and
continue in the fruition of all blessedness.

Mat. 5.8, Reu. 19, 9, Psalm. 64.4. Ioh. 3.33,
Blessed is their estate, blessed their beginning, their present being, and
their never ending: They are crowned with joy and gladness, and remain for
ever in a most blessed estate. As they have been here members militant, there
they are all triumphant, all Kings reigning, and all victoriously triumphing.
There the King is Verity, Romans 3, 4.
and the law Love and Charity, the honor Equity, the peace Felicity, and the
life Eternity. Luke 9, 33,


If Peter said only upon Christ his transfiguration, it is good to be here: O
how much more shall the children of God rejoice in the Kingdom of heaven, when
they enjoy not only Heavens beauty, and the beholding of Christ in his glory,
but shall themselves be glorified, Mat. 13, 43 Dan. 12, 3, Mat. 13, 43,
and shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father?

All the Joys, Pleasures, 1 Cor. 2, 9
Delights, and comforts that this world can yield, are but shadows, if they
be compared unto the true Joys in the Kingdom of Heaven. Esaias 64.4, Phil. 3,
21 Dan. 12.3
The joys of our bodies shall be infinite, the joys of our souls unspeakable:
Our earthly and vile bodies shall be made like unto the most glorious body of
the Son of God, like unto the brightness of the Firmament, like unto the
Angels, like unto the Sun in his strength.

Reu. 22.4. 1 Ioh. 3, 2, Exo, 34, 30
We shall see God face to face; we shall see him as he is; all the parts and
powers both of body and soul, shall be filled with the sight, presence, and
fruition of God. As the Lords glory reflected upon Moses, did make his face to
shine upon the Mount: So will our Savior Jesus Christ refine and beautify
with the perfection of grace, Phil. 3, 21,
that they may be like unto his glorious body. It was one of our Sauiors last
requests in the behalf of his Church, Father, I will that those who^ thou have
given me, Ioh, 17, 24,
be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory. For the glory of Christ
is so delightful to be seen, so sweet to be possessed, and so pleasant to be
inioyed; and his continual presence is so joyful unto all the Saints in
Heaven, that if the least drop thereof should descend into hell, it would
sweeten all the pains of the damned.

The fountain of Happiness is called by Divines, visio Dei beatifica, the
sight of God which makes us happy. Haec sola est summum bonum nostrum, this
only sight of God is our cheifest happiness: which Christ also confirms
when he says to his Father, This is life everlasting, Ioh. 17, 3,
that men know thee the living God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

In seeing him, we shall know the power of the Father, we shall know the
wisdom of the Son, and we shall know the goodness of the holy Ghost; we
shall know the invisible nature of the most sacred and blessed Trinity.

This sight of God is the full beatitude and glorification of man: Psalm. 16, 11
for in seeing him, we shall possess him; in possessing him, we love him; in
loving him we shall praise him; and in praising him we shall live and reign
with him: for he is the Inheritance of his people, the possession of their
Felicity, and the reward of their expectation. He is supereminent above all,
superexcellent beyond all, and most abundant in Love to all.

All persons generally have the participation of joy, and every one in
particular the fruition of glory. But this one thing let us consider, that
there is a twofold equality of proportion, and quantity of glory, which arises
not from the Object, Almighty God, which is ever the same; but from man, the
subject, which is not in every particular alike capable of glory: Yet happy,
and thrice happy shall they be, who shall be partakers of the least of
heavenly glory.

They that have least can desire no more, and they that have most, discern no
wants in others, but have a contented pleasure with profit; safety with solace,
felicity with unity, peace with perfection; and agreement with grace.

Where Christ his righteousness is their holy raiment, and his perfect fulness
their joyful contentment: Their drink is the most sweet water of Life, Reu.
21.6.
Angels food their delicate nourishment: they shall have the blessing of the
holy Trinity, with all the spiritual riches and unspeakable joys of heaven,
to be powered upon them.

O who can tell the greatness of this joy? When and where together shall meet
the Head and the Body, Christ and his Church, the Prince of peace, and his
Spouse: our two old friends our souls and our bodies, shall meet after so
many years of separation, with Angels, Archangels, Cherubins and Seraphins,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs, Apostles, and all the blessed Saints of God:
also fathers and mothers, husbands and wives, masters and servants, brothers
and sisters, parents and children, neighbors and friends, all shall meet
together: what cries and shouts will there be for joy? what clapping of hands
and sweet embracements one of another?

O great shall be our joys when we behold our long-desired purchase, which we
have so often wished for: and most great shall be our joy, more then ever it
was, when we both with body and soul, shall see and behold our Creator as he
is; where we all shall think one thing, and all shall sing one song,
Halleluiah, Salvation comes of our God. O we shall not only behold our most
blessed Savior who so dearly bought us, but we shall also reign with him,
triumph with him, sit in the judgment seat with him, and judge the very Angels
with him. O what more hope could be thought upon, except it were to be Gods
our selves? All the joys, all the riches, all the happiness that heaven
contains, shall be powered upon us. To these joys, to these felicities, and
to this blessed Inheritance, bring us, O Lord, for thy dear Son Christ Jesus
his sake.

Fourthly, Heaven is described by the Eternity.
As this Kingdom is full of joys unspeakable, so the joys thereof are also
eternal: Psalm. 145,
Thy Kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy Dominion indures throughout
all generatio^s.

Dani. 2.3. Mat. 19.29, 2. Cor. 4 17 Ioh. 16.22.
The God of heaven shall set up a Kingdom which shall never be destroyed: this
kingdom is life everlasting, this glory is eternal, these joys are permanent,
1. Pet. 5.4. 1 Pet. 1.4.
the Crown never fades, the Salvation is perdurable, the Inheritance
immortal, and the Habitation perpetual.

The Author to the Hebrews says, Heb. 12.18.
We receive a kingdom which cannot be shaken. Saint John heard in Pathmos
great voices from heaven, saying, Reu. 11.
The Kingdoms of this world are our Lords, and his Christ's, and he shall
reign for evermore.

Thus God will bestow upon his Saints a glorious, ample, joyful, and a
perpetual kingdom, where they shall be joyful in an everlasting joy. The
joys of heaven are exquisite, the felicity permanent, and the glory eternal:
where faith has her perfect work in charity, Hope her desired happiness, and
love a large scope in everlasting Unity.

They that have received here small things for a time, shall receive there great
things for ever: they that have been faithful here over a few things, shall
be made there rulers over many things: they that have suffered sorrow here
for a short time, shall enter into joy there for ever, which is called the joy
of the Lord: They that have believed in God, shall rejoice in his presence for
ever: they yt have lived in his fear, shall live without fear of any enemy
for ever: they that have kept holy the Lords Sabboths here, shall there keep
holy day for ever: they that have honored their Parents, Ministers, Masters and
Magistrates, shall be honored of God and Angels for ever: they that have
chastised their bodies and suffered with Christ Jesus, shall be endued with
the light of everlasting immortality, and reign with him for ever: they that
have loved their neighbors shall be beloved of God for ever: they that have
mourned and sorrowed, and truly lamented for their sin, shall receive Crowns
of glory for ever: they that have watched and prayed in the night, and fasted
in the Bridegroomes absence, shall now rest in the day that has no night, and
be richly feasted in the Kingdom of God for ever: They that have labored in
the Lords Vineyard, shall there receive the penny of eternal bliss for ever:
they that have overcome the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, shall triumph in
eternal glory with Christ, and his holy Angels for ever: and they that have
here wrung their hands for sorrow, shall there clap their hands for joy, for
ever more.

This shall be the blessed estate of all Gods Saints, that shall dwell in the
kingdom of God for ever.

These considerations caused the Patriarchs, Prophets, and the Saints of the
old world to long for, and desire that eternal, sweet, and most joyful
inheritance of Gods heavenly Kingdom. Toby, Job, 2. King. 19.
and Elias, wished themselves in that Kingdom: Paul desired to be dissolved,
Phil. 3.
and be with Christ. Solomon counted all the glory of his Kingdom but vanity,
and the continuance thereof but as a weed. David lamenteth yt he is so long
kept away from this glorious and eternal Kingdom: Woe is me, (says he)
that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to have my habitation among the
tents of Kedar. And again, Like as the Heart desires the water brooks, so
longs my soul after thee, O God, my soul is athirst for God; yea, even for
the living God: O when shall I come to appear before the presence of God? And
again he says that he should utterly have fainted, but that he did rest in
hope of a better Kingdom, and believed verily in short time, to see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the Living.

Why did Abraham forsake his own natural country, and his fathers house, and
to go out he knew not whither? Why did Moses forsake Egypt, Heb. 11.
and refused to be called the son of Pharaohs Daughter? Why did so many
Saints, and holy men and women, leave their ancient houses and riches, and
wander up and down in wildernesses and in mountains, and in dens and caves of
the earth? Surely for this cause: they had respect unto the recompense of the
reward, that was Regnum Dei, the Kingdom of God: they counted their Country
but banishment, and a cursed vale of misery; their worldly glory but vanity;
their dwelling and abode here but a Iayle, a prison, or a dark dungeon; their
pleasures but sorrow, mourning and tears: and all their doings were to this
end, that they might enjoy a better Inheritance, that is, this glorious
kingdom of Almighty God.

This is the Inheritance whereof the Apostle speaks, Heb. 12.
Proposito sibi gaudio sustinuit crucem, He suffered affliction for the joy
that was set before him.

This is that precious pearl and treasure, which the Merchant found in the
field, Mat. 13.
and sold all that he had, and bought it. This is that Inheritance, Phil. 3.
in respect whereof S. Paul esteems all the world as dung. The same
Inheritance for which Ignatius, that godly Martyr, bids this price; Fire,
gallows, Hieron. in catalogo. 3.
beasts, breaking of bones, quartering of my members, crushing of my body, all the torments of the Devil together, let them come upon me, so I may enjoy the
treasure of Heaven.

Thus you see, that our Summum bonum, our chief good thing; our Vltimus finis,
our last farewell; our Terminus ad qu^m, the end whereunto all our actions,
endeauours, hopes and desires do tend, and bend, is that we may live for ever.

And so the end of all our preaching, the scope of all our hearing, the fruit
of all our believing, the effect of all our knowledge, and the maine point of
all our profession, is, to live, that we may enjoy this everlasting Kingdom.

To conclude, and briefly end, (though Gods kingdom of glory, and the glory of
Gods kingdom has no end:) The Lord in his mercy correct our present
sinfulness, erect our further weakness, and direct our future frailty; that
we may earnestly desire, advisedly search, truly know, and perfectly fulfill al
things that may please him, whereby we may walk uprightly in his ways, and
live truly in his Love, to our comfort and his glory; that in the end we may
obtain that long desired and beautiful Diadem, wherewith he crowns his
Elect; and reign with him in his everlasting Kingdom, to behold the
delightful countenance of his most glorious Majesty, and to be filled with the
exceeding sweetness of his most blessed presence, which is life for ever.

The Author to the Reader.
If Logicks Art could heavenly joys define,
or Geometry Celestial ways but measure,
here mortal man might show those works divine
Now in the heavens where Saints do reign with pleasure.
arithmetitians never can number right,
Nor yet the tongues of Rhetoricians rare,
describe that bliss which Saints have in Gods sight,
Rejoicing still with Christ our Savior there.
esteem you this Coelest^all Looking-glass,
Which I have penned, Heavens beauty to behold;
each day and night pray God may bring to pass
Such joys unto our souls for to unfold.
Nonne Deus eras via?

FINIS.

