THE COURT OF good Counsel.

WHEREIN IS SET down the true rules, how a man should choose a good Wife from
a bad, and woman a good Husband from a bad.

WHEREIN IS ALSO EXPRESsed, the great care that Parents should have, for the
bestowing of their Children in Marriages And likewise how Children ought to
behave them selves toward their Parents: And how Masters ought to govern
their Servants, and how Servants ought to be obedient toward their Masters.

Set forth as a pattern, for all people to learn ^ it by: published by one
that has dearly bought it by experience.

At London printed by Raph Blower, and are to be sold by William Barley at his
shop in Gracious Street. 1607. (*)

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir John Ioles Knight, and one of the Worshipful
Aldermen, of the Honorable City of London.
HAVING (Right Worshipful) the industrious labors of a willing practioner, in
the discourses of Moral Philosophy, (the same coming by chance into my hands
to be imprinted) which said matters bear the Title of The Court of good
Counsel, wherein the duty of all sorts of people is most Lively set forth:
Which for th'excelencie of the discourse, deserves a Patron of a Judicial
censure. And now your Worship being one whom my secret thoughts deeply
affect, I have boldly dedicated the same unto you, wishing the same as worthy
of your Worships acceptance, as my desire most humbly requires. Thus leaving
your Worship to the Tuition of the Almighty, whom I pray to bless in this
world with much prosperity, And in the life to come with blessed Eternity.

Your Worships in all duty W. B.

Here begins the table of this book.
CHAP. I. Certain reasons entreating of the great and comfortable joys of
Marriage, if the same be duly and rightly regarded as they ought to be. CHAP.
II. How that oftentimes wise Parents may have foolish Children, and foolish
Parents wise Children, and how that oftentimes rich men's Children (being left
rich) become poor, and poor men's Children become rich. CHAP. III. What great
care a man ought to have in the choice of his Wife, and what circumspection
ought to be had therein: likewise showing, that many mischaunces often happen
to the Children through the manyfolde imperfections of the Parents. CHAP. IIII.
How an untoward young woman, or a wanton Wife, may be easily governed by her
Husband, if she have any good nature or modesty in her at all, especially if
the man himself be of any reasonable government. CHAP. V. When a man or woman
has bin once Married, and afterward becomes a Widdower or a Widow again,
what great inconvenience happens often to the Children by Stepmothers:
especially if that both the parents, do not agree well together. CHAP. VI.
Here follows the manner of life, that ought to be observed and kept, betwixt
Man and wife and how a man were better to choose a young Wife, then one that is
aged. CHAP. VII. How some sort of men by giving of their wives overmuch
liberty, do persuade themselves, that that is the next way to make them
honest. CHAP. VIII. Of the great care that every Husband ought to have for the
keeping and maintayning of his Wife, whereby that through want, she be not
driven to alter her manners and conditions. CHAP. IX. Herein is showed the lone
and obedience of the Wife toward her husband, and how that a woman that
regards her own credit, ought to refuse the company of a woman that has an
ill name, or deserves any cause of suspicion. CHAP. X. An admonition to the
wise and discreet woman, how to govern her self: Showing that chastity
joined with vanity, deserves no commendations at all. And how many women give
occasion to beil thought of, for these four causes following, ( Viz) Deeds,
Looks, Words, and Apparel. CHAP. XI. How a woman ought not (as near as she
can) give any occasion to her Husband to provoke him to anger, neither ought
she to be Jealous of him without great cause of desert, showing also that it is
better to cover his faults, then to disclose them. CHAP. XII. Hereafter
follows certain admonishions how the wife may continue her love and goodwill
toward her Husband. CHAP. XIII. Of the conversation of Parents toward their
Children, and of the disagreements that oftentimes happen betwixt the Father
and the Son. CHAP. XIIII. Of the great discomfort that Children many times
bring to their Parents, through their mis-deameanor toward them: And of the
evil success that oftentimes happens thereby. CHAP. XV. Wherein is showed the
occasions of the great difference, that oftentimes happens between the parents
and the children. CHAP. XVI. Of the great wisdom of men, in getting of
riches, and of the excellency of many good and learned Masters, now in this
age. CHAP. XVII. Of the evil success of many Children, through the
imperfections of their Parents. CHAP. XVIII. Of the lewdnes of many Children,
through the want of their good bringing up whilst they are young: And of the
ouer-fight of the Parents in suffering of them to grow too old or stuborne
before they break them of their obstinacy. CHAP. XIX. If a Child be of
never so good a wit, yet for want of good bringing up, grows to be over
headstrong and base in conditions: and this oftentimes falls out, by the
cockering of the Parents. CHAP. XX. Of the great commendations of such Parents,
as keep their Children in awe, whilst they are young. CHAP XXI. Here
follows the duty of the Child toward the Parents. CHAP. XXII. Of the
diversity of the care that Parents ought to take of their Daughters, in the
bringing up of them, more then they take for the bringing up of their Sons.
CHAP. XXIII. Of the great disagreements and discontentments that oftentimes
does happen between the Master and the servant. CHAP XXIIII. Of the
impatience of some Masters toward their Servants, over other some. CHAP. XXV.
Of the great abuses of some Servants toward their Masters, which is rather
for want of wit, then for any other cause. CHAP. XXVI. How a Servant may live
quietly with his Master, if he be of any reasonable government. CHAP. XXVII.
How the Master with good persuasions may govern his Servant, and in the
obstinacy of his Servant, what will ensue unto him.
CHAP. I.
The Court of good Council: or Certain Reasons, entreating of the great and
Comfortable Joys of Marriage, if the same be duly and rightly regarded as it
ought to be.

THE greatest joy, and sweete^t comfort, that a man may have in this world, is
a loving, kind, and honest wife: Contrariwise, there is no greater plaque, nor
torment to his mind then to be matched with an untoward, wicked, and dishonest
Woman. Therefore let him that intends to marry, and fie himself to that
honorable state of life: (being the first bargain of thrist, and the first
step to good husbandry) take all the best Counsel he can in the world in the
choice of a Wife, yet scarce sufficient enough: for being once done it can
never be recalled, but either lamented too soon or repented too late.

Many be the occastions, that make marriage to have an unhappy success, by
which good houses, and great kindreds are brought to ruin and decay: as the
difference between the married couple, either in years, or in calling: whereof
both arise many quarrels about housekeeping and manners of life: therefore the
way to live quietly, is to marry equally in all respects.

Touching the difference in years, in mine oppinion it is an unseemly thing
to ssee a young woman matched with an old man, that caryeth a countenance
rather to be her Father then her Husband, and I am verily persuaded that young
and dainty Damsels, got as willingly to such husbands, as to their graves: For
they are sick to become widows in their husbands life time, and to spend
their days in a most miserable case, for how modest or honest so ever they be,
yet some will not stick to say that they are lewd and wanton, only by reason
of their husbands white beards: Consider I pray you on the other side, what a
name, old wrinkled, and toothles women get, in taking husbands that be young
and beardles boys: and tell me whether the rage of these old women be not
greater, then the young and of good nature, and have these outward marks, that
do betoken a good horse.

I deny not but by the looks of a woman, a man may gather somewhat of her
disposition: but seeing God has commanded us not to judge altogether by the
face of the woman, we must yet use a more certain and commodious way, as in
the next Chapter following you shall read.

CHAP. II.
How that many times, Wise Parents may have foolish Children, and foolish
Parents wise Children and how that oftentimes, Rich men's Children (being left
rich) become poor, and poor men's Children become rich.

I have always liked exceeding well of those Marriages which are treated of
tr^ely, without hiding of any thing, which after coming to light, brings
grief and repentance to one of the parties, but neither men nor women now
adays use that orderly endeavoring so much as they may, to cover the faults as
well of the body as the mind. But yet the surest way to deal in the choice of
a Wife: I will now report by the example of Olimpia the mother of Alexander.
whose saying was, that women are to be married with the ears, before they are
with the eyes, which is, that out of the mouths of diverse people, a constant
report may come of the parentage, life, and behavior of them: But the
greedines of the world is so great at this day, that a man will seek
diligently for Oxen and Horse, of a good raze, but cares not though his wife
be ill brought by, and worse borne, so that she be rich enough: But be that is
wise, will above all things have a special regard of the conditions and
qualities of his wife, and will note what the life and conversation of her
parents are, remembering the saying, that the Eagle breeds not the Pidgion,
but that always the Cat will after kind: Yet I will not deny, but that many
good and virtuous men have gotten had and wicked children, and contrariwise,
many wise children have been begotten by foolish fathers, and we daily see and
know many very honest women have dishonest Mariots to their daughters,
therefore to conclude, let all men, ^ine with discretion.

But now to pass further in our discourses, those men whom Nature causes
their Children to be fools, in my Judgment happens not by the birth, but by
the bringing up, the which is the cause that many great heads by long practice,
become ready witted. And other who ever in their cradles are sound to have a
quick wit, in process of time, either through idleness, or gluttony, or some
such mis-gouerment, become slow and dull headed: Now from that consideration, I
would come to this, that the father, who through much travel and trouble, both
of body and mind, has gotten wealth and honor, though be gets children of
great wit, yet he is so ouer-gone in latherly affection toward them, that
knowing he has provided for them sufficiently to live by at their case, he
cannot abide to see them travel and labor as he has done, so that vanquished
with a certain tender effectien, he suffers them to be brought up
dillicately, and wantonly, and is the cause, that by this idleness their
natural force decays, and by Custom is quite changed into an other nature.

Consider this also besides, how that many Children peceiuing and knowing very
well, them selves to be thus pampred up by their Parents, keep themselves so
much as they way out of the Dust a Sun: neither care they for applying their
thindes, to any commendable thing, nor for to seek to get any more Riches or
substance, then that which their Parents have with great diligence formerly
provided for them: but here it may be truly said of them, that they are not
vn-like the Crow who lives only by such Fond as other Beasts a Cattle do
usually lean: and surely there is no doubt of it, but if that they were
meanly left by their parents (as many poor men's Children often are) then
would they grow to be exceeding prudent and wise, and then would they be rich
and sufficiently able to live in a Common wealth.

We may daily see by experience that for the most part, poor man's children
become rich by their own labor and industry and rich men's children war poor
by their necligence and idleness: which is signified unto us by this proverb or
wh^^le, saying, Riches breeds pride, pride breeds poverty, poverty breeds
humility, humility breeds riches, and riches again brings pride. Therefore
the good father must be admonished that he trust not too much in the goodness of
his nature, that he thinks that not only sufficient to keep his children
good: But beholding them with an eye, rather advised then pitiful and
fatherly, he must seek to better their good nature, in stirring them up to
virtuous deeds, for it is not enough to be well borne, but also to be well
brought up.

CHAP. III.
What great Care a man ought to have in the choice of his Wife, and what
circumspection ought to be had therein, likewise showing, that many mischavnces
often happen to the Children through the manyfolde imperfections of the Parents.

HEAR will we now returns again to our former matter, in the choice of a
good Wife, We must therefore first of al, be well and thoroughly informed of the
modest behavior and of the honest caryage of the Mother all her lifetime
before, in hepe that if the Mother has always govern her life well, the
daughter will follow her honest steps and good Nature, and Conditions: Yet it
is not enough for to know the qualities of the mother, but we must like wise be
partly in-sigted into the Conditions of the Father, for it oftentimes falls
out for, that the Children do (most continually) draw some imperfections from
one of them, which the other (doubtless) is clearly void of.

We must also consider, that if it be true, that Edu^^tion will change nature,
it is requisite not only know whether ones wise be borne of good parents, but
also whether she have been orderly and well brought up: which always comes
not to pass: for there are some who having but one Daughter, are so blinded
with the extreme love they bear her, that they will not have her hindered of
her will in any thing, but suffer her to live in all wanton pleasure and
dillicasie, which afterward is the cause of many inconveniences, yet for all
that the husband must not be discouraged for the too much tenderness of the
parents over her: For she being yet but young with the help of her good
Nature, he may casely, like a tender twigg, make her straight, if she begin to
grow crooked, and with grave admonitions reform her wanton mind: thereby we
may gather, that it is better to marry a young girl, then a maid of ripe
years who is hardly brought to leave her old qualities, and evil tricks, if
she have but once taken any taste of them in her youth or Childe-hoode.

Yet there are some that are of a clean contrary oppinion to mine, who hold
it better for a man to take a wife which is well in years, and of good
discretion (knowing how to order a house in good sort) then to take one of
these Infants, newly come from their Mothers pays, whom a man must either teach
himself, or else appoint an other to be a Governor in his house.

Surely some would think that that man who having such a wife, should die for
very shame, especially when any strangers should come to his house, to whom he
would willingly give good entertainment, and then his young wife being a
sottish, simple Creature, knows neither how to ask a question, nor how to
make an answer, nor how in talk to show her self a wise and gallant wench:
therefore I think (if she be not able to perform that) it were best for her
husband to lock her up, and say that she is sick in her bed because that
strangers may not perceive her qualities and conditions: which if they should
see, it would be a great reproach to her.

CHAP. IIII.
How an untoward young woman, or a wanton wife may be easily governed by her
husband, if she have any good nature or modesty in her at all, especially if
the man himself be of any reasonable Government.

IN mine opinion, I do fully persuade my self, that a man shall never find a
young Woman so vn-toward and wanton, but that lining well and orderly with him,
he will in a short time chaundge her manners, and frame her to his fancy: But
touching this point, if we do well consider how di^ere^t the opinion of many
Husbands are, and how diverse the Customs of diverse Countries are, were shall
stay to long about this matter: For certainly, some Husbands are so
kinde-harted, that they wish their wives in any sort for to give their Friends
Entertainment when they come to their houses, they thinking them-Ielus most
happy to have wives that know how to behave themselves well in that point, and
they are glad that the World may know, that there shines in their house so
rare and precious a pearl and Jewel and one that can perform all things
(without teaching) to her own Comfort, and her Husbands great content.

Now on the other side, there are some Husbands that are of this humor, that
they think it a great dishonor unto them, that their wives should be
Skillfull in any thing else, but in sowing, spinning, knitting or other such
work as they have ever bin trained up unto. And if any stranger happen to
come to their houses, they either run quickly themselves or else send some of
their Servants, to give their wives warning to withdraw themselves out of
sight, which immediately they do, and ^oe they are feign to bide themselves in
a corner until such time as their Guests be gone away: Even no otherwise, but
as the Chicken does when he perceives the Byte coming, be flies amongst the
words, or else into some bush or hedge to hide himsealfe in, for fear of
further danger that might ensue.

I would not wish any one to dispute, which of these Husbands do best. (I
mean) Either they which show their wives, or they that shut them up when their
Friends come to their houses.

Mary I say (in my foolish oppinion) that all the Honnour, or all the Blame,
that may arise either way, falls not upon the Wives head, but upon the
Husbands: But to return again to our purpose, a very young wife is easy to
be framed to the pleasure of her Husband: And although at some times her
husband must be feign to be her master to direct her: Yet it both him much good
to see his precepts readily followed, and be is praud that he has framed her
with his own hand, to his own hand, and I think it be for nothing else, that
it is counted a double pains to marry a Widow, but that she must be first made
to forget the qualities of her first Husband, and then made to dance after the
pipe of the second, which is a thing hard to be done.

Me thinks also, that these second marriages, have the taste of Cole-worts
twice sodden, being so much the more hurtful, if both the parties have been
twice married, and there upon I am put in minds of a merry tale, that happened
betwixt two parties being twice married.

There was a husband, that on a time fell out with his wife, as they sat at
dinner together: the wise in despite of the husband gave half the meat that
was upon the table, to a poor man that came to the door, saying, I give it
th^^ for my first husbands sake.

Now the husband seeing this, took the other half, and gave it him also:
saying, I give thee this for my first wives sake, and so they were feign to
dine both with dry bread.

CHAP. V.
When a Man or a Woman has bin once Ma^^d, and afterward becomes a
Widdower, or a Widow again, what great inconvenience happens often to the
Children by Step-mothers: especially if that both the Parents, do not agree
well together.

THERE is as yeat, a far greater inconvenience then all this that has bin
heretofore spoken of, that is, for that y^ second marring is oftentimes very
prejudicial a hurtful to the Children of the first marriag, which (as God
knows) are too often put to tri^ their Stepmothers Crueine, who receiving the
least coffeehouse (that may be) at their Husbands hands, so soon as
their Backs are turned away, reuendge themselves upon their Children, and
beat them mest pittcously that cannot do with-all.

Therefore, I think, that as it is better for a man to those a young Wife,
then one that is years, so ought be likewise, to marry while he himself is
young and not to stay till his Hayres war gray: for being both young, they are
the like-lier to have children, and the like-lyer to live to see the bringing
up of them, and in their old age, to enjoy their service and comfort: At which
time the Children may do as mu^d for their Parents, as their Parents die for
them before in their youth.

But now I must needs confess, that all this talk is besides the matter: for
I have hitherto spent the time, in a discourse, which tends to no other end,
but to teach a man to choose a wise that is young, well borne, well brought up,
reasonable rich, indifferent beautiful, of a sound and good judgment, and of
a good wit and capacity: But we have not p^^spoken a word, of the manner of
life betwixt the husband and the wise, as our purpose was to do.

CHAP. VI.
Here follows the manner of life, that ought to be observed and kept,
betwixt Man and Wife: and how a man were better to choose a young Wife, then to
take one that is aged.

I THINK that to live kindly with ones wife, it is necessary, that he be well
framed to love her: therefore it is needful first to learn, to know her good
qualities and conditions, and which are the good parts of a woman, whereby men
are induced to love them.

Likewise it is requisite for the Father that loves his Daughter, before he
marry her, to sift thoroughly the qualities, behavior, and life of his son in
law: For it is a true saying, that he which lights upon a good Son in
Law, gets a good son, and be that mateth with an ill one, casts away his
daughter.

Now the hussband knowing the goodness of his wife, being to live with her, he
must above all things, love her most heartily and unfeignedly, for so the Law of
God commands him For that is the strong foundation, which surely vpholdeth
Marriage, and that being neclected by the husband, breeds him great shame and
Infamy: For not in loving that, which be has with care and diligence gotten,
and once judged worthy his love: He manifestly shows himself to be
unconstant and fantastical, and that he were better to be matched with same
fury of Hell, them with a loving wife, if he be of that condition himself.

Therefore the Husband ought to accompany his love with and continual fear,
to loose by his own fault, the goodwill of his wife, for he cannot give her a
more assured sign of her bonest love, then in behauing himself toward her,
in such sort as he would have her use her self toward him, which doing, he
shall be sure to find her both kind and loving unto him.

For let all men be assured, that the greatest part of ^he faults committed by
wives in this age, take the beginning from the faults of their husbands, who
for the most part require of their wives, such an eract observing of the Laws
of Marriage, but they themselves make no account of them.

You shall see some husbands, that both in word and deed^ will use such rigor
toward their wives, and usurp such superiority over them, as is commonly used
toward ^^auts, and if abroad they by chance receive any injury, then their
wives are sure to go to wrack for it when they come home: she wing themselves
cowards toward others, and goodly men, toward their poor wives.

By reason whereof, it is no ^ar^aile, it being overcome with grief and rage,
they call to the devils to help them: and that at that instant, some lascivious
mates take occasion to tempt her, and hope to attain her, for that she is.
then ready to follow whatsoever envy, wrath and desperation, shall put into her
head.

But on the other side, when the wife knows that all the beams of her
husbands love, says, and loyalty, shine only upon her, holding her more
dear then all other earthly things, you shall see her consume clean away in
burning flames of love and cast al her care in thinking and doing, that which
she knows will please him: And make sure account, that a friend loves not so
well his friend, a brother his brother, or a child his father, as a wife does
her husband: whereof there arises on both sides such assurance of trust, and
security of mind, as makes them live in most contented happynes together.

But again, the assurance of trust, and tranquillity of mind, possesses not
the hearts of all husbands, for I am fully persuaded, that there are a number in
the World (though they set a good face on the matter) which do in heart
mistrust their wives behavior: this common distrust that men have of their
wives does truly proceed from the weakness of love, which is usual with most
men.

For certainly make this account, that at the gate where suspicion comes in,
love goes out.

But if perchance the Husband have some occasion given him to mistrust, let
him examine his own life well, and he shall find how the occasion came from
himself, and that he has not used her, as be ought to have done: but if he
begin to repent himself, and begin once to regard her as the one half of
himself, he will also begin to banish suspicion, and to think that he which
loves, is beloved, and that in mutual love, reigns inviolable says.

But yet there is a certain inward spirit tells me, that this rule before
spoken of, is rather praised then practiced.

For he that would observe it, must let the Reyne lie too l^^se on the woman's
neck, and must referr the care of both their good names, only to her small
discretion: which is not the custom of out country of England, where women are
looked too with honest diligence: This reason brings an old saying into my
mind, which is this.

A dishonest woman cannot be kept in, and an honest woman ought not: But those
men that take upon them the keeping of their wives honesty, do think the
world will judge the better of them for it: for they think that men laugh at
those husbands, which give their wives the head too much, and they persuade
themselves, that if they do not keep their wives short, they keep them not as
they ought to do: Besides, they think this with themselves, that the wife
seeing the husband take no care of her, will imagine he does not care for her
making (belike) this reckening, that no man else will desire her.

CHAP. VII.
How some sort of men by giving of their Wives over much liberty, do persuade
themselves that that is the next way to make them honest.

THE other sort of men, which willingly give their wives their free liberty,
persuade themselves that that is the next way to keep them honest, alleging
this reason: that the wife seeing the husband make himself master of her
honor, is displeased with it, and takes no more care to keep it.

But when her honor is committed to her own keeping, she is careful of it,
as of that which is her own: besides that we naturelly are destrous of the
things forbidden, and we know that she ^^neth less, who has free power to
^na^. and in troth she is only to be counted houest indeed, who having liberty
to do amiss, does it not.

But now to rid us out of these diverse opinions, I am purposed to go an
another way to work: For as we see oftentimes two porters bear up together
one burden: so the Husband and Wife being two bodies, ought to uphold one
only mind and honor: And to bear it up uprightly: there must be kept such an
indifferent measure, that the one have no greater charge then the other, but
that they is an^ to each other of them a just part: taking especial heed that
neither of them draw this way or that way: For if one shrink back anything,
it is enough to lay the carriage in the mire: I say then once again, that there
is nothing that makes a more equal conjunction in good liking, then to
exercise themselves in faithful and fervent love, which once beginning to
fail either, on the one side, or the other, their honor forth with falls to
the ground.

There is not any man of understanding, but be may soon consider with himself,
that there is nothing does more in venom and inrage the wife, then the
dishonest life of her husband, for keeping no faith with her, he must not look
that she should keep promise with him: For as the saying is, he that does not
as he ought, must not look to be done to as he would.

And I will say unto you, that in the judgment of the wife, the adulterer
deserves so much the more grieuious punishment: by how much more he ought to
surmount his wife in virtue, and direct her by his example.

Moreover the husband must consider what his authority is, and how far it
reaches over his Wife: For some men keep their wives in such awe, that they
obey them not as their Lord and Master, but as a Tyrant: so that converting
Love into Feary, they make the poor women weary of their lives, and destrous
of death.

After which ill usage, not without just cause they verefie the proverb: When
their husband goes about to make earth of them they go about to make flesh
without him: For the husband must not persuade himself that he is above his
wife as the Prince over his subjects, or the Shepherd over his sheep, but as
the mind over the body, which are linked together by a certain natural
amity: But rather we must consider, that man was not made of the woman, but
the woman of the man, and was taken, not out of the head, that she should bear
rule over man, nor out of the feet, that she should be trodden down by him,
but out of the side, where is the seat of the heart, to the end he should love
her heartily, and as his own self.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the great care that every Husband ought to have, for the keeping and
maintayning of his Wife, whereby that through want. she be not driven to alter
her manners and conditions.

THE Husband likewise must provide to satisfy, the honest destres of his Wife,
so that neither by necessuse, nor super fluitie, she be provoked to dishonesty:
and he must remember that ease, and disease, make women oftentimes unchaste: And
for as much as many learned writers have set down, the behavior of the
husband toward the Wife, it shall suffice to say, that he must account of his
Wife as his only treasure on earth: and the most precious Jewel he has in
the world.

Therefore he must take heed; that by his fault the price of her, fall not, be
must also remember, that there is nothing more due to the wife, then the
faithful, honest, and loving company of her husband.

He must also vouchsafe, in figne of love to deliver unto her his thoughts and
secret councels for many have found much profit in following their wives
council: yea a man is happy that has a loving wife to impart his good fortune
unto, whose hearty rejoicing at it, re-doublesh his joy: And if he disclose any
ill hap unto her, she lighteneth his grief, either by comforting him lovingly,
or by helping to bear a part of it patiently.

Now if the husband, chance to espy any fault in his wife, either in words,
gesture, or doings, he must reprehend her, not reproachfully nor angerly, but
as one that is careful of her honesty, and what opinion others carry of her,
and this must always be done secretly between themselves, remembering the
saying, that a man must neither chide, nor play with his wife, in the presence
of others: for the one bewrapeth her imperfections, and the other his folly.

For as dallying in open Assemblies, is to be misliked: So is not a sour
frowning countenance to be liked: For it makes others to pity her hard life,
that she leads with him.

Therefore, I would always have them show themselves to their wives, both in
speech and countenance, gentle and a miable not making a jest at that reason
which is alleged by her, although sometimes, it be clean contrary to his
mind.

Thus much have I spoken touching the husband, now will I speak of the charge
of the wife: To begin where as Bods Law commands the wife, not only to
love her husband, but besides to be subject and obedient to him: And therefore
they must be put in mind that the sage matron Sara, called her husband Lord
and Master.

CHAP. IX.
Herein is showed the love and obedience of the Wife toward her Husband, and
how that a woman that regards her own credit, ought to refuse the company of
a woman that has an ill name, or deserves any cause of suspicion.

BUT now me thinks I hear some say, that those wives have good hap, whose
husbands are obedient to them, submitting themselves to their wives
commandment.

I term that rather mishapp then ill luck, for that such husbands for the
most part, are fools, doults, asses, beasts, and are commonly termed
wittoles, that they believe so well, that they make it an ill conscience to
mistrust any ill though they see an other and their wife in bed together,
whereof it comes often to pass, that their silly wives are like a body
without a head, and suffer themselves to go astray.

And though they be of good discretion and understanding yet the world makes
no account of them: whereas contrary wise, the wise dome, valor and authority
of the husband, scrueth as a buckler, to defend the good name of his wife, who
thereby is bad in more reputation.

Yet we see that women are glad to meat with husbands that are gentle natured,
and a little foolish, that they may keep them under.

But in my opinion, those which had rather command over fools, then obey the
wise, the like to those that had rather lead a blind man in the way, then
follow another having his perfect sight, and knows the direct way they must
take.

But such wives need not make boast of their sufficientis: For at this day the
rate of the certain women are worn out: and therefore it is best for them to
be content to let their husbands wear the brecches.

A man may well give women this good Counsel, but there be few of them that
will be so good as follow it: and which seek not still to bear rule over
their husbands.

It is a thing reasonable and agreeable to nature, that the stronger should
command over the weaker: yet some women have the right quality to order things
so well that their husbands should be thought to wrong them greatly, if they
should find fault with them.

Where upon Cato was wont to say to the Romans: we command over all the world,
and wives command over us: and surely there is no doubt, but that many rulers
and governors of Cities and Countries, are ouer-ruled by their wives: But as
those women know how in time and place to be obedient to their husbands: So
there are some such shameless women, that they will not at any time be
commanded, but by their exclamations, scolding and brawling, continually:
always with-standing their husbands wills, and make a mock at them, playing
with them a thousand shrewd prankes, which caused a certain King to say that
they were very fools, that would follow their wives running away.

This saying puts me in mind of a merry Jest of a husband, who, his wife having
drowned herself in a River, went crying along the River side, seeking her
against the stream: and being told that there was no question, but that she
was gone down with the stream. Alas says he. I cannot think it, for as in
her life time she used to do every thing against the hair, so now in her death
she is surely mounted against the stream.

But to return again to our purpose, I will say that the wife as the weaker
vessel, must obey the husband, and as men ought to keep the Laws of the
country: So women ought to fulfill the commandments of their husbands, by
which deed they become Mistresses of the house.

I could here bring in diverse virtuous women, who clothing themselus with
humility, have caused their husbands to cast of pride, cruelty, and other
wicked vices: whereby some have pardoned their enemies, and drawn back their
hands from doing vengeance.

Other some have undone unlawful bargains, lest swearing, and other vanities:
and given themselves to devotion, and the health of their souls, they being
brought thereunto by the honest and earnest persuasions and entreaty of their
wives.

But in an other sort, now if the woman see her husband fail in the love,
which he owes her, yet she must not do as he does, but supply virtuously his
default: showing to the world, that for her part, she bears the cross her
self, which doing she shall have double rewad of God, and double praise of the
world: whereby you may gather that the breach of honor is committed more to the
diligence and trust of the wife, then of the husband, and though the husband
offend God as muth as the wife, in violating the sacred band of Matrimony: Yet
the wife ought firmly to print this in her heart, and to remember always, that
where the husband by his fault does but a little blemish his credit, the wife
altogether loses her good name, and remains spotted with such infamy, that
she can never recover her honor again: neither by any repentance, nor by
amendment of her life.

Therefore let a wife woman siop her ears against the alurements of those
which lie in weight for her chastity: and to keept more safely her honesty
both in deed and in word.

Likewise let her avoid so much as she may, the company of women that have an
ill name: who indeauor by their naughty fashions, and dishonest speeches, to
bring others to do as they do: and wish with all their hearts that all women
were like themselves.

But the wife must also know, that it is not sufficient to be bonest, and
innocent in deed: but like wise to au^^de all suspicion of dishonesty, and if
she look well into the matter, she shall find small difference (in respect
of the world) between being naught, and being thought naught.

Therefore a wise woman will shun all lightness and vanity, and keep her self
from giving her husband, or any other, the least suspicion in the world,
knowing that a woman of a suspected Chastity, lives but in a miserable case,
and when she hears other women ill spoken of, let her think in her mind,
what may be spoken of her, imagining with her self; that when a woman is once
in an ill name, whether it be deservedly, or without cause, she has much ado
to recover again her honor: she must not bear her self, so boldy upon her
honest meaning, to think that God will always hold his hand over her head:
For he oftentimes suffers a woman to be reproved wrongfully, for a punishment
of her lightness and vanity: For it is as common a matter for women to show
themselves vain and light, as for peacocks to spread their tails.

Wherefore I may boldly say this, when we have once taken all vanity from a
woman, a man shall be able to take nothing else from her.

CHAP. X.
An admonition to the wise and discreet woman, how te govern her self:
showing, that chastity joined with vanity, deserves no commendations at all.
And how many women give occasion to be ill thought of, for these four causes
following. (Viz) Deeds, Looks, Words and Apparel.

WE will briefly comprehend the sum of that we have said and admonish the
wife, that Chastity joined with vanity, deserves no commendations at all, but
rather yeth open to the saying of King Demetrius: who hearing a man find fault
with one of bis Concubines. said unto him: My Concubine is far more modest,
then thy Wise: Therefore a woman must take beede, that she give not men
occasion to think hardly of her, ryther by her Deeds, Words, Looks or
Apparel.

The mention of this Apparel, now so imboldens me, that I cannot choose, but
speak of the abuse which is committed now a days in our country in the
ornaments and trimming up of women, who bestow upon garments all their husbands
substance: and in garding and trimming of them, all the Dowry which they brough
with them, which makes me amazed at it: and that which greaueth me most is to
see how Husbands not only consent to such excess charge, but also are
pleased well with the vanity which their wives show in the Strumpet-like
dressing of their heads, whereby they make men rather laugh at them, then like
of them: and I see not how it is posible for men, to maintain their Wives in
such costly manner, as they do now a days in England: But that they must let
out their money to Usury, and use other deceiptfull words and means.

I will not say they keep their wives so brane by secret cousening and
cut-throate bargains: And that otherwise they live poorly, and fare hardly,
purging the sin of pride, with the abstinencie of the mouth making their
servants dye with Hunger: though women be very curious in their attire: Yet it
is the hair that they make most ado about, and there are no sorts of
Ointments which they will not prove, to make their hair of the brauest
color, in so much that many in going about to alter the the color of their
hair, by naughty medicines, have wrought their own deaths: But their folly
this day is so great, that by means of such trumpery, when they feel their
heads little ache, and their brains to be a little distempered: yet as
murderers of themselves, they will not give over this shameful and deadly
practice.

But if they knew wherein consisted the commendation of women, they would sit
up most part of the night, and rise betime in the morning, to bestow all the
fore-noone in dressing of their heads and if they would consider with
themselves, that those which trim up themselves least are trimmed up best.

I have b^ne always of this mind, that those women whose minds are not
decked with virtue, are these which labor above others in decking up their
Bodies, thinking belike to have as good luck as the Lapwing, who though he be
but a vile Bird, and lives most in durty lakes, and desert places: yet at the
marriage of the Eagle, she was honorable above all other birds, because of the
crown or cap upon her head, and of her pyed feathers.

But it happens to women oftentimes clean contrary: For the multitude of
ornaments conereth that little good which is in them by Nature: and the
glistering of their Jewels, dimmeth the shining of their virtues: and it is
commonly seen, that women, though never so honest, are insatiable of such
triffles: whereupon it is said that mills and women, ever want something.

But it honest women would advisedly think of the matter, they should perceive
that it is not the gilt bridle, that makes the horse the better, and that by
reason of those affected follyes, they live with suspected honesty.

Let women therefore be careful, to apparel themselves so modestly, that they
may thereby rather please their Husbands, then make them Jealous over them, by
attyring themselves lightly: For men will always suppose that a light mind is
lodged in a gorgeous body.

I have often noted those dames, which are so curious in their attire, to be
very sluts in their houses, and those which neglect such folly, to be very good
huswiues: For it is a common saying, that one cannot drink and whistle
altogether: and therefore it is no mar^aile, if those which spend all the day
in tricking their bodies, have no leisure to see their house well ordered: But
let us make an end of this matter, concluding that it may rightly be said of
these costly clad carcasses, that the feathers are more worth then the Bird.

CHAP. XI.
How a woman ought not (as near as she can) give any occasion to her husband,
to provoke him to anger, neither ought she to be Jealous of him without great
cause of desert, showing also that it is better for her to cover his faults
then to disclose them.

I Will make short and give charge to the wife, not only to avoyde that which
may anger her husband, but also to frame her self to do that which may please
him, for as the glass is nothing worth which makes a sad countenance seem
joyful, or a joyful countenance seem sad: So that woman in my conceit is a
fool, who seeing her husband merry, frowneth or lowreth upon him, or seeing him
pensive, shows her self pleasant, and therefore let her be resolved to frame
her self to the thoughts of her husband, and to judge things sweet, or sower
according to his taste.

For the diversity of minds and manners, is nothing fit to maintain love and
good will.

Let her also by sweet words, and loving deeds, show unto him all the signs of
affection she can: Considering that some husbands having been accustomed to
the Amorous courtesies of other women, will think that their wives set no great
store by them, if they show them not the like or greater.

And in any wise let her continue her kindness toward him, least by failing of
her wont, she seem to war cold in love, or by exceeding her custom she
seem to color some crime, whereby she may drive some foolish toy into his
head, which Jealousy, if by chance he be once possessed withal, she must
labor, by all means possible to rid him of it. Not doing as some foolish
women do, who very vn-wisely, and to their own great hurt, seek to continue
that suspicion in their husbands, that others lay stedge to their own
chastity.

But now me thinks I bear some ask me this question, whether those women do
well who make their husbands priny to it when they are importuned with any
unlawful request.

But those women in my oppinion are commonly blamed, for that there comes
much harm by it, and I think it ill done: for thereby she does not breed
quiet, but trouble to her husband, making them doubt, least revealing one love,
she conceal an other: and which is worse it breeds a quarrel between the
husband and lover, whereof much mischief may ensue.

But a wise woman will always like better that her husband should hear by the
report of others: of the repuise which she shall give her lover, then to make
boast of her honesty her self

And a wise husband will hold himself there with the better content, and be
the more assured in his mind of his wives honest dealing: but to prevent all
mistrust, it behooves an honest woman, to she in her self so sober and chaste
in countenance, that no man may be so hardy to assail her.

For indeed Castles that come to Parley, are commonly at the point to render,
but it she chance to be set upon, let her make this answer, which once a
virtuous damsel made unto her lover, that was this.

While I was a maid, I was at the disposition of my parents, but now I am a
woman married I stand at the pleasure of my husband: wherefore I were best to
speak to him, and know his mind what I shall do.

And if her husband be out of the way, let her behave her self as if he were
present, and to show him at his return, in what profitable work of the house
she has spent her time in his absence, whereby she shall be both the better
liked of, and more commended of him.

A wise husband in deed will take great pleasure in such things, but yet there
are some men that are so testy and froward, that they will never be content
with any thing their wives can do: but do most commonly so take on with them,
that they make them wish themselves out of the world, therefore I will teach
those poor souls some remedy against that mischief.

If her husband be rough and terrible unto her, she must overcome him by
humility.

If he chide and brawle with her, she must hold her peace for the answer of
a wise woman is silence, and she must stay to utter her mind, till be be
appeased; if he be obstinate, let not her be over t^wart, nor do as the woman
did, to whom her husband brought for their supper two Thrushes: but she would
needed say that they were Black-byrds, he replying apaine that they were
thrushes: and the holding that they were Black-byrds, he in his anger gave her
a bor on the oar, and yet for all that, when the Thrushes were served to the
table, she termed them Black-byrds, whereupon her husband fell to beating her
again: A week after she put him in mind again of the Black-birds continuing
in her obstinacy, till he fell to his old remedy: But this matter ended not
thus, for at the years end, she hit him in the teeth, how he had beat her for
two Black-byrdes, and he said it was for two Thrushes, but she said he was
deceived, and so was well beaten for it again: But to return again to our
purpose, I will set down a few more admonitions for the wife, how she may
continue in love and goodwill with her husband.

CHAP. XII.
Hereafter follows certain Admonishions how the wife may continue, her love
and good will toward her husband.

A Woman cannot possible do any thing that may make her Husband more in love
with her, then to play the good Huswife in her house: For it not only does him
good to see his wife so thriftily given; but besides he conceaueth a good
oppinion of her honesty, seeing her take such great pains, and exercise her
body in works belonging to her house, whereby she gets a natural coullour,
and that virtuous vermillion, which falls of neither with sweating, neither
with weeping, nor with blowing, nor with wiseing: which makes him deny her no
necessary thing belonging to the house.

Also when he sees her so careful to keep them in good order which is not
the fashion of those light ^uswiuen, that live without doing any thing, without
caring for husband, children, or any other household business: she wing
manifestly that though her body be in the house, yet her mind is abroad, which
foundeth to her own shame, and the husbands great disprofit.

For it is well known, when the Mistress is buisied in vanities, the servants
take little care of her profit, but look to their own matter, as the common
saying is, while the mistress plays, the maid strayeth, and as the Wife
ought busily to look about her house, so it is unseemly for the husband to
meddle with matters within doors.

But if his hap be so ill to have a foolish wife, then it stands him upon to
supply her imperfections.

But those men are to be laughed at, who having wise and sufficient wives, will
(as they say) set their Hens to brood, season the pot, dress their own meat,
teach the Chamber-maides, and take their wives office from her: such husbands
offend their wives much, showing thereby that either they mistrust them, or
despise them.

Besides that they do much wrong to themselves, and show thereby their want of
humanity for if they were imploid abroad in matters of importance, belonging
to men of discretion, they would (being at home) be now desirous rather to take
their ease, then trouble their wife and servants in meddling with their matters.

Furthermore, they would consider with themselves, that the rule of the house
belongs to the wife, and that God has mate women more fearful then men, to
the end they should be more fit for the wary matching and keeping of the house,
whereunto a careful fear oftentimes is requisite: I deny not but the husband
ought to know how matters go in his house, to provide abroad for things
accordingly, and now and then to correct some faults which his wife perchance
either will not, or cannot.

But it is great reason that she being as it were, the stern of the house)
the husband should commit unto her the whole government of it, as a thing
belonging unto her.

For the rest you must know, that as in adversity and trouble true friends are
known: so the wife cannot by any means more surely bind the goodwill of her
husband to her for ever: Then by sticking to him faithfully in his need and
adversity, which some women do not, who will gladly be partakers of the
prosperity of their husbands, but will not willingly take part of their
troubles: Forgetting the example of the fair and wise wife of Methridates, who
for her husbands sake, caused her head to be paled, and framed her self to
ride, and wear armor like a man, and so accompanied him valiantly,
faithfully, and patiently, in all his troubles and perils, which gave her
husband wonderful comfort in his adversity, and let the world to understand,
that there is nothing so troublesome and greeuious, but that the two hearts of
the husband and wife fast linked together, are able to support it, and to pass
all grief and annoy away.

Therefore when the husbands are afflicted with any infirmity, either of body
or mind, let the wives be ready both in word and deed to comfort them,
whereby they shall see their love will grow more fervent and faithful: But now
for conclusion, the husband and wife must count all things common between
them, having nothing of their own in particular, no not so much as the body it
self, and laying aside pride, they most ch^refully set their hands to those
things that are to be done about the house, belonging to their calling, and to
strive in well doing, one to overcome an other: whereof will grow such
contented quietness as happily prolong their lives to old age: And by the bond
of love and concord, they shall give their children an example, to live in
unity one with an other, and their servants to agree together in their
business, and discharge of their duties.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the conversation of Parents toward their Children. And of the
disagreements that oftentimes happen betwixt the Father and the Son.

FOR AS MVCH now as I have made mention of Children and youth, I think it fit
that from dence forth, according to my determination, to speak of the
conversation that ought to be between the Parents and the Children: For I
think it a matter very expedient to be set down, the ordere which they ought
to observe together, for that even amongst them, there is not for the most part
I found that good agreement, and that discreet dealing which ought to be.

For the world is now come to this pass, that the child is no sooner come to
any understanding, but that he begins to cast in his head of his fathers
death: as a little child riding on a time behind his father, said simply unto
him: Father when you are dead, I shall ride in the saddle, Yea there are many
great and knauish children, which wish and work the death of their fathers.

The sault whereof I know not to whom I should impute it, whether to the
fathers, which keep not their children in such awe, neither bring them up in
such sort as they ought to do, or to the children who know not how much they
are beholding to their fathers: But in my mind I conclude that the child
rather is to be in the fault, who cannot bring any action against his father,
though he do him never so great wrong.

First of all therefore will I begin to excuse the father whom some will think
to be in fault, who ought to have informed him in his duty, when he was young
and tender.

If the father give his son good lessons, and he will not hearken unto them,
what can he do more.

If the father offers Instructions to his child with his right hand, and the
child receives them with the left, what fault is the father in? None but this
in my opinion) but that he deferreth till evening, to give him those
Instructions which he should have given him early in the morning, at the
sun rising, I mean whilst he is young even as it were with the milk of the
nurse, not considering that in tender minds, as it were in war, a man may make
what impression he lift.

But I know not how to excuse the children, who after their father has
nourished and brought them up carefully under the learned men, and instructed
them in the faith of Christ: in the end run astray, living lewdly, bring forth
fruit unworthy their bringing up.

I matualle not so much, that a child virtuously brought up sometime falls
out naught, but I count it strange and as it were against nature, that both
the father and the son, being both honest men, and for their good dealing
well spoken of by all men, it should often fall out that they cannot agree
together in one house, but live in continual strict and variance, and agreeing
well in public aff^yres, still disagree about household matters, whereof I
could bring forth many examples.

But this I must say, that the son in duty ought to suffer his father to
command over him, and that he ought to obey him, without any resistance: And
that their conversation may frame the better: I think it necessary to
counsel the father, how he ought to proceed in his fatherly jurisdiction,
that he exceed not the bonds of reason, and give not his son cause to find
fault with him, in his heart, and to think himself ill dealt withal by him:
by means whereof, he waxes cold in the love and reverence, he ought to bear
to his father.

I cannot forget the old saying, that few children are like the father, and
that many of them are worse, and those that are better, are very rare and thin
sown: therefore I would willingly search out the cause, why so few Children
resemble the Father, and answer to the hope he conceaueth of them.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the great discomfort that Children many times bring to their Parents,
through their mis-deameanor toward their parents: And of the evil success
that oftentimes happens thereby.

FIRST it is to be considered that Children bring small or no comfort to their
Parents, if Nature and Fortune be not well temperd in them: For as a fruitful
grain sown in a soil unfit for it, brings forth no increase: So a child
that is naturally given to learning, will never do well, if be be fet to
husbandry: so much it behooves the father to find out in his Childe-hood,
whereunto he is most inclined.

Therefore it behooves fathers to use discretion in this point, that is to
find out the natural inclination of their children, the which is best done in
their Infancy, as the proverb is, that by the morning it may be gathered, how
all the day will prove after, whether it will be either fair or foul.

I think this counsel most necessary to be respected by the fathers, who
force their Children to enter into trade of life, which is altogether contrary
to their minds, and therefore no marvel though they receive small comfort of
them: For thereof many times insueth the dishonor of their house, and which is
worse great offense toward God, as when poor boys are put to study
divinity, who even from their mothers womb desire the wars.

Those fathers that set their children to things contrary to their disposition,
are rather to be pitied then blamed: for that happens commonly for lack of
taking hade, but those which thrust their children into Colleges before they
are of years, to choose or refuse that life: Are no doubt greatly to be blamed
for that they bring their children too it, either through fear, or through
false persuasions: which is nothing else, but to withstand the will of God, and
so take from their children that free choice which God of his divine goodness,
has promised them.

Therefore if the father be careful of the love and quiet of his house, let
him be also careful to know whether his sons minds, be given either to
learning, or to armies, or to husbandry, or to merchandise, and when he shall
perceive he has drawn him out of the right, let him make him return into it
forthwith, and set him again where he should be, otherwise let him assure
himself, that a thing ill begun will come to a worse end.

Seeing we are to search why children oftentimes fall not out according to the
good hope of their parents, we^ have need to begin at the milk they suck in
their cradles, for that the nurses milk is of such force, that the use thereof
makes the child take after her, then after the mother which brought him into
the world: and when I remember the custom of diverse women in France, who
bring up their Infants only with the milk of beasts: I thinks thereof it
comes that diverse of them are so sterce and cruel, that by their ill life,
many of them show themselves scarce to be endued with that reason proper to men.

I am of mind without doubt, that the effects of the milk is marvelous, and it
is a thing certain, that if a lamb be nourished with the milk of a Goat, or
a Kidd with the milk of a yeaw, the Kidd will have a very soft hair, and the
Lamb a very rough and barry wool.

And therefore it is thought that as the child by reason of the milk, takes
after the complerion of the Nurse.

So the disposition of the mind, fol owes the complerion of the body: and
thereof also it comes, that the daughters of honest women, oftentimes prove
altogether vn-like them both in body and mind: so that to deliver Children
from their mothere to nurses, cannot be said so be other then a corrupting of
nature.

But if we should make mention of this first nourishment, we should have
spoken of it, when we discoursed of unfortunate marriages, but I neither spoke
of it there, neither will do here.

The reason I forbear to speak of it, is, for that women at this day, are so
curious of their comlines, or rather of their vanity, that they had rather to
pervert the nature of their children, then change the form of their hard and
round papps.

Whereof it comes often to pass, that the children fashioning themselves to
the humors of their nurses, swerve from the love and duty they owe to their
mothers, and have not in them the blood which moves then: to obey: which is
manifest by the example of a bastard in Italy, who returning from the wars
laden with the spoils of the enemy, had his mother and his nurse coming
before him, be gave to his mother a silver ring, and to his nurse a chain of
gold, which his mother misliking with, he talde her, she was to blame to do
so, saying: You hoar me but nine months in your womb, but my nurse kept me
with her seats the space of two years, that which I hold of you is my body,
which you gave me scarre donestly, but that which I have of her proceeded of a
pure affection.

And moreover as soon as I was borne, you deprived me of your company, and
vanished me your presence: but she most graciously received me (banished as I
was) between her arms, and used me so well, that she has brought me to this
you see: these reasons with others, stopped his mothers mouth, being ashamed,
and made his nurss further in love with him: but resurne we again to our
matter.

Seeing that diverse women will not be the whole mother of their children they
ought at least to be careful, to choose good nurses and of a good complexion.

For as the first abuse began in setting out their children to nurse: so
consequently followed the second, not to respect the nature of the nurse.

CHAP. XV.
Herein is showed the occasions of the great difference, that oftentimes
happens between the Parents and their Children.

BUT now let us go forward, to show the occasions of the difference between
the fathers and their children, holding for certain, that the difference
proceeds from the trade of life the child is set too, and therefore I say,
that it is not enough for the father to know whereunto his child is not
naturally given: if afterward he endeavor not to assist him, and carefully to
provide to place him in that Art or Science that he most desires.

Another cause of this difference between the father and the child, is when
the father loves himself better then his child keeping him with him to play
withal, without taking any care to set him to masters which may instruct him
in Learning, or to the Court, or to those professions, whereunto his mind is
most inclined.

In this many wealthy fathers greatly offend, who bear themselves bold upon
their goods, and never take care for the bringing up of their children, in
learning and virtue, but suffer their wits to be dulled with idleness, and
gluttony, that (as the proverb is) they know not chafe from corn, but grow
to have as good judgment as the Ass, which judged the Cuckoes singing, to be
more sweets then the Nightingales: but now some will say, that the more the
father keeps his children about him the more he makes their manners like to
his.

But such men are deceived, for the life of the old father is no pattern for
the young son to shape his doings by: and besides in time he will accuse his
father, for that having oppertunitie to send him abroad to get wealth and
estimation, he kept him at home, and thereby hinders his preferment: Therefore
those fathers that love their children will not by keeping them under their
wings, hinder their preferment, for in my judgment the father shows his child
the greater figne of good will, in letting them go from him, then in keeping
him at home, for thereby he prefers his child's profit before his own, and if
he love him as he ought by nature: he must also love his preferment, and seek
to better his estate, liking better that be should dye like a horse in a
battle, then live like a bogge in the mire.

I have yet made no mention of fathers, which are endued with learning,
sufficient to make his child partaker of his knowledge, for indeed they be
very rare, and if there be any such, yet they will not or they cannot take such
pains, nor tie themselves to such a charge, having other business.

Marry if they would undertake it, there is no doubt but great good would come
of it, for that the father would instruct the child more carefully, and the
child would receive it more haedefully of his father, then of his master.

For Cato of Rome, himself taught his son, and brought him to great
perfection, without the help of any governor or master.

Likewise Octauian Augustus being Emperor took no scorn to teach his two
adoptine sons: but the iniquity of this our time is sach, that men would
count it a monsterous thing to see a father being a gentleman to teach his
son, but the shame of those fathers is greater, who being neither sufficient
nor willing to teach their children themselves take no care to put them out to
be instructed by others, such men in my judgment are very simple, and know not
the difference between the learned and the ignorant.

Yet for all that, the abuse of this age is such, that the men of our time,
will not have their sons break their heads with study and in a manner
mislike that they should read, forgetting quite, that the ignorant in
comparison of the learned, are worse then dead, and that rich men without
learning, are budies without minds, and termed by Diogines, sheep with golden
fleects: and therefore they ought to be more careful to instruct their
children in learning, for as the poor are driven to study by necessity, so the
rich are hindered from it by superfluity: and they consider not until it be
too late, that learning is more necessary for rich men, then for poor: for the
rich have more dealings in the world, and have ^^ore need of wit then the
poorer sort, for riches are brettle and frail, and can hardly last, without
they be kept with great wit and wisdom.

And it is certain that a man siueth better with a little gotten by labor,
then a great deal given him by fortune, and those which waxproud through
abundance of riches, show themselves not to know what happened to the snaile
that made his braggs how he had gotten to the top of the pine tree, a little
before a tempest blew it down.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the great wisdom of men, in getting of riches and of the excellency of
many good and learned Masters, now in this age.

LET us now go a little further, and consider that those which are wise, the
richer they are, the better they will consider with themselves how riches are
gotten with travel, kept with fear, and lost with grief: and that he which
puts his trust in them shall be deceived: for the true riches are those,
which cannot be lost being once gotten, and therefore wise fathers will be
careful to bring up their children in learning, persuading them that they are
never rich, until they be learned.

There are in this age many masters excellent in learning, and yet lewd in
life: therefore it is the fathers wisdom to be very wary in the choice of
them, least what his son gets one way, he loses an other way, for he
must have as great care to make him virtuous, as learned, and he must have more
care to make him good, then to leave him riches.

For as one said, if thy son be wise and honest, thou shall leave him good
enough: but if he be a fool, thou shall leave him too much: for fools are not
fit to possess riches.

Now, if the child be not given to learning, the Father must not fail to
employ him some other way: for there is nothing more dangerous then an idle
young man: and as the tree that blossometh not in the spring time, brings
forth no fruit in harvest, so he shall never come to live honestly when he is a
man, who is not virtuously exercised while he us a child.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the evil success of many children, through the imperfections of their
Parents.

VT amongst the other occasions of the ill success of children, this is one,
when the father is careless, to make them in time to raise themselves from the
ground, my meaning is, that the father being careful of his sons
advancement, is many times so curious to see him instructed in worldly
matters, that forgetting how the beginning of Wisdom, is the fear of God, be
takes no care at all to instruct him in the Christian Faith: whereof it
comes to pass that many unhappy children trained up altogether in worldly
astayres, and deprived of the true light, cannot see the right way, but runs
into perdition.

For the wisdom of the world, is folly with God, and it is a thing impossible
for him to live well that knows not God.

Therefore I would have parents to take care both for the mind and body of
their Children: but because the mind being the more excellent, it is reason
to cast out cheifest care upon it.

And for that the mind in Infants is like a table book wherein nothing is
written, and like a tender twig which may be bowed every way, it is clear,
that virtue or vice may be easily planted in it, and for that it is known by
proof, that these things are kept best in memory, which are learned in youth:
Fathers ought to instruct their Children in the best thing they can, especially
in the fear and love of God, holding it for a general rule, that he which
knows every thing, and knows not God, knows nothing, but if the father be
diligent to instruct his children in the Law of God, he shall get his joy by
it, that his children thereby will do him the more honor and reverence,
knowing that it is gods will they should do so.

But now let us return again to the former occasion of the ill success of
children, to which may be added this, when the father sets before them a
stained and spotted glass to look in, that is, when he gives them ill
example, which the Romans were very circumspect in, whose modesty was so
great, that the father would never bathe himself in the company of his son,
for it is counted a great fault in the father, to suffer himself to be seen
naked by his son.

It is no marvel though Cato put Manlius out of the Senate of Rome, only for
kissing his wife in the presence of his daughter.

Therefore the father ought above all things to show him self such before
them, as he witheth they should be: for the master does not them so much good
by his instruction, as the father does them harm by his evil example, for
they are by nature lead rather to follow his steps, then their masters precepts

For it is so natural a thing, for the son to resemble the father in wicked
qualities, as swearing cursing, and such other vices, that if by chance some
child do not follow his father in them but lives virtuously: yet the world
will scarce believe that be does so, by reason of the evil opinion they have
of the father, but rather will think that the child is ^e^re to his vices as
well as to his lands: and when they can find no fault with him any way, some
one or other will not stick to hi^ him in the teeth, that he was the son of a
wicked man.

Likewise it the father be honest and the son lewd, the fathers good name is
called in question through the sons folly.

And many men think it impossible that the son should tread awry, unless he
were by his father led thereto.

And thereupon it is thought, that those men which use too extreme severity
toward their children is not done so much upon displeasure that take against
them, as for the care then have to maintain their own credit.

I would therefore have all fathers to frame themselves to line well and
orderly, as well for their own sakes, as for the venefit of their children,
who seeing virtue shining in their fathers deeds, will have a desire in all
goodness to follow their steps.

For when children see their fathers servants of the house stand renerently
waiting upon him, and ready at the holding up of his finger, to do his
commandments, they will thereby take example to do their duile likewise, and
not be less obedient then leruants and strangers, and besides endeavor to be
like to their father in deeds, that they may in time to come receive the like
reverence of their servants, as they see their father do of his: For the
father that gives an ill example to the child, in time shall be had in
contempt by the child, so that be shall neither receive succor of him in his
latter days, nor at his death, that last duty to close up his eyes: besides
the father living disorderly many times make hand of those goods which his
Children should live by.

I will now pass further to more occasions of the unfortunate course of life,
betworne the father and the child, whereof there are two that come into my
mind: the one is when the father is more then a mother, the other when he is
more then a father.

My meaning how he should be more then a mother, is, when he is to blinded that
he sees not the imperfections of his child, or if he see them, yet is ready
to commend them, or to excuse them in such sort, that if his son be haughty
or hare-brain'd, be terms him courageous: if he be base-minded, he connteth
him modest: if a pra^ing boy, he will have him all Orator and in flattering
thus himself, he thinks him the best Child in the world: with which
blindness, the fathers of one only child, are for the most part stricken.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the lewdnes of many children, through the want of their good bringing up
whilst they are young: And of the ouer-sight of the Parents in suffering of
them to grow too old or stuborne before they break them of their obstinacy.

I Must needer in this place mention unto you a youth of fifterne or sixteen
years of age, of a ready wit, but otherwise vicious and lewd of life which
happened through the fault of the father and mother, who were so far from
correcting him, that they durst not so much as threaten him, nor say any word
to him that might displease him: and I remember when he was five or fire years
old, if any told them that they must rebuke him for some fault he had done,
they would excuse him by and by, saying, he was not yet of age to know his
fault: And being seven or eight years old they would nouer beat him, nor
threaten him, least through some great fear his blood should be chase or
inflamed, whereby he might be cast into an ague.

No, at ten years old, they thought not good to trouble nor molest him,
alleging that stripes and threats would too much pull down his courage, and
take from him his stout and proud stomach, and though now for his haughty
conditions he be hated of all the whole City yet they leave not to excuse him
still, saying, he must first grow, and then after be wise, and that within few
days they will send him to school, where he shall learn wit.

But now many a one looks when he shall be of age to he hanged o^^ the
gallows, to hear him before the people to lay the fault upon his father and
mother, and justly curse their foolish lone, and shameful cockering,
attempting as one did once, to tear their nose and their ears of with his
teeth.

CHAP. XIX.
If a child be of never so good a wit, yet for want of good bringing up,
grows to be ouer-bad, and base in conditions: and this oftentimes falls
out, by the cockering of their Parents.

BY this example in the former Chapter reci^^d, it is verified that a child
though of nouer so good a wit, yet being ill brought up proves too bad, but
this great tockering and compassion is proper to the mother, who commonly
brings up her children with more tender affection and discretion: and
according to the old saying, it is an hard matter for a mother to be fond of
her children, and wise both together: but yet the right love, is to beat and
correct them when they shall deserve it, for certainly the rod does not tessen
the mothers love, but rather increase it, for if the excess of love be to be
blamed in the mother, much more is it to be reproved in the father: whese part
it is ito examine and correct his childrens faults, assuring himself the only
way to spoil them, is to be too much fond and tender over them.

But now I must tell you, which be these fathers, that I call more then
fathers, in my oppinion they be those, which are too cruel to their children,
and beat them continually like slaves for the least fault in the world.

Truly those fathers are to be misliked of all men, for that without any
discretion they measure their children by themselves, and require at their
hands a matter impossible, whch is to have them be old in their youth, not
suffering them to enjoy that liberty which is allowed to their age and in my
mind, they descrue no other name then of Schoole-maisters, for that they
cannot manner their children well, unless they have a rod in their hand: for
if they were right fathers they would be content that their children should
learn of them nothing else but to refrain from doing ill, and to use to do
that which is good and honest, which a child is brought too, rather by love
then by force: but the authority which some vn-wise fathers take upon them is
so great, that without respecting age, time, or place they will heepe their
children under by force, and make them do enery thing contrary to nature, yea
even to wear their apparel after the fashion of the good men of the time past.

In this they do amiss, and hereby they make their children not to love them
harsely, and to obey them rather for fear then affection: And besides, they
consider not that the beating without measure, and the keeping them in
continual fear, is the cause that a man cannot judge to what manner of life
they are by nature inclined Moreover it dulleth their wits, and represseth
their natural strength, in such sort that their is no lively spirit left in
them: and coming in any company, they know neither which way to look, nor
what to do but stand like simple Idiots.

There I give this counsel unto all parents, to leave their butchery beating,
and consider rather that for lark of years, their children cannot have
perfect understanding and experience in things, whereby they are to be borne
withal when they do amiss.

CHAP. XX.
Of the great commendations of such parents, as keep their children in awe,
whilst they are young.

I Like those fathers well, that can keep their children in awe only with
shakeing their head at them, or using some such like sign and can only with a
word correct them, and make them ashamed of their fault: yet I am persuaded
that there are few fathers, that know how to keep the mean, but they will
orther be too rough or too gentle to their children, whereof as the one drives
them to desperatenes, so the other brings them to wantonness.

We must think that a child has given unto him a father and a mother, to the
end that of the wisdom of the one and the love of the other, that mean I
speak of might be made, and that the severity of the father may be somewhat
mittigated by the leuity of the mother.

Now this calls to mind an other disagreement between the father and the
child, which is the partial love of the father toward his children: for in
my mind it is a great fault that he should love one more then an other, and
that all being of his flesh and blood, he should cast a merry countenance upon
some of them, and an angry look upon other some.

Yet this is the nature of man, that a father loneth not all his children
alike, and yet he whom he loves least, cannot justly complain of him: for the
in-equality of love is permitted to the fathers affection.

A father that is a husbandman, having one son a scholar, an other a
Merchant, and an other a husbandman, of those three it is a great chance but
he will love the husbandman best, for he sees him like himself in life and
manners, wherein his other sons in duty must be content: for by nature we are
led to like those things which resemble us most: Oh how hard a thing it is for
the father, after partial love is once entered into his heart, to give justice
indifferently.

The greater is the wisdom of the father, who preferring the deserts of his
children, before his own partial love makes his senses yield to reason, and
shows himself in deeds a like toward all.

I will not deny, but the father by his authority may distribute his favors
as he sees good, to one more, to an other less, according to the state and
doings of his children, for as by gentle usage he incourageth a child that is
well, given to do well so by hard handling, he may bring one that is untoward
to goodness: Yea if he have any child that is past grace, without any hope of
recovery, he may lawfully not only love him less then the rest, but quite
cast him out of his favor.

But those fathers are greatly to be blamed, who with unjust partiality, and
without any reasonable consideration on will use one child as ligetimate, the
other unlawful: whereof it follows, that he which is so meanly accounted
of, does not only fail in affection to his kindred, but begins to fall to
secret war, with his own brothers: whereby the father that might establish
peace and concord amongst his children, shall by his partiality plant amongst
them a root of continaull discord: Therefore the father ought to be well
advised how he prefers in good will one child before an other, and not to
do it upon every light occasion

I likewise think it a great folly insome fathers, that make some of their
children their darling and minion with out seeing any towardnes in them in the
world, and let every man to have knowledge of their fond and causles affection:
yet it often falls out that those children by reason of their wanton and
dilicate bringing up, prove doults and simple sotts: whereas contratiwise those
which are banished from their fathers love, and driven to shift for themselves,
do oftentimes by their own pain and travel, so advance their estates that
they are in better case, then their father or their lawful brothers, to whom
oft-times they afford aid and succor in their distresses: we may boldly then
say, that the in-iustice of the father, breeds disagreement between his
children and himself.

But now again to our purpose: It is commonly seen, and that for the most
part those children which are most made of, fall out the worst, and have many
misfortunes: which makes me remember a pretty Jest of an Ape that had two young
ones at a litter, whereof she loved the one, and cared nothing for the other:
which Ape upon occasion was driven from her den, and having taken that which
she loved in her arms, and tied the other at her back, in running she
stumbled and fell howne against the hard ground, and so killed her young one,
she had in her arms, and loved so well, but the other which was at her back
had no harm at all whereby we may see that the Father oftimes does penance
for his fondnes.

But to return to our matter, there is yet remaining one occasion of the
disagreement between the Father and the Child, which is when the Father will
not suffer his Children to come forth of their Infancy, meaning that when
either thorough the authority of old age, or couetou^nes, the father (though
his Children be grown to man's estate) will allow them neither more living nor
more liberty even they had when they were Children: therefore let al men learn
and know that Children now adays are borne wise, and have gray hairs in
youth: and as men live not so long in these days, as they did in times past,
so they grow sooner to ripenes of wit now, the^ they did here to fore,
therefore I am to advise the Father (if he tender the well doing of his
Child,) to allow him with discretion, some liberty in matters of the House,
suffering him sometime to inuit to welcome and make his companions good cheer,
to give entertainment to strangers, and as occasion shall serve to use the goods
of the house to serve his turn, but above all things he must still counsel
the Son to play the good husband, and to see to things about home whereby he
may be able to keep and augment his estate, and keep himself from falling
into decay.

Hereof will rise three good effects: the first is the love of the son, who
seeing his father withdraw himself by little and little, from the government of
the house, to the intent to put him in his room receives thereby wonderful
countentment, and thinks himself in mind much bound unto him, and not only
honoreth him, but witheth him long to live on earth.

The second is the commodity of the son, who by this means, after his
fathers death, shall have no need to seek counsel at his friends and
kinsfolks hands nor to put the ordering of his house to the discretion of his
servants, having by the foresight of his father, at things long before in his
own hands, so that ye government of his house shall not be strange nor
troublesome unto him, as it is to many, when they have lost their Father.

The third, is the sweet rest, and content of mind, which the Father inioyeth
in his old days, both for that he feels himself rid from all worldly
troubles; and besides sees his Son by his example, govern his house
orderly: and for my part, I count it the chiefest felicity in this world, for
a man to have about him a number of goodly Children, which are grown to
perfection; whom he may term the light of his eyes, and the staff of his
age: and me thikes it must needs be a greater comfort to the Father to see a
proof of his Child, and how discreetly he can dispose of his living, and
order his household, then to do it himslefe: now when the Father shall be
arrived to the haven of such happiness, me thinks he may joyfully look for
the last hour of his life, and die most contentedly.

Yet in the holy Scriptures in it written: Give no authority over thee;
neither to thy Son, neither to thy Wife, neither to thy Brother, nor to thy
Friend: and give not away thy living to another, while thou art alive, least
thou afterward repent it: Yet there have been in time past, and are at this
day, many wise Fathers, which depart with their Liuinges to their Children, and
yet incur no inconvenience by it; mary they do it in such sort, that they
neither bring themselves in subjection to their Children, nor into such case,
that they are not able to live without them.

But now in brief, I give the Father to understand, that there is nothing in
this world, wherein there ought more care and diligence to be bestowed, then in
the bringing up of Children, for thereof proceeds for the most part, either
the mayntenance, or the decay of Houses: therefore he must begin in time, to
furnish their tender minds with the fear and knowledge of God, and such good
conditions, that they may learn to live, as if they were still at the point to
die: that he endeavor to keep them in obeydience, rather by love then fear;
and cause them to do well, rather of their owue accord, then by inforcement:
yet how forward so ever they be, he must not cease to encourage and prick
them forward; knowing that there is no Horse, but needs the spur; that he
suffer them not to be idle, but set in tune to labor, the better to endure it
afterward.

That he enter not into rage and impatience with his Children; tor a good
Father uses Wisdom in stead of Anger, and awardeth a small punishment for a
great fauit; and yet is not so foolish pitiful altogether to pardon it,
knowing that as by sparing the Rod he may spill his Child; so by wearing it
too much, he make him either dull, or desperate.

That he provide them of good Masters to teach them; for young Children must
be propped up like young Trees, least the tempest of Uices either break them,
or bow them crooked.

That he suffer them not in any wise to haunt the company of such people as
will corrupt with wanton speeches, and naughty conditions.

That he be careful to mark in their childhoode, to what kind of life they
are naturally inclyned, that he may disigently set them unto it: for an
untoward beginning, has ever an unlucky ending.

That without just occasion, he use no partiallitie amongst his Children,
unless he be willing to set them together by the ears.

That in all his doings, he show himself grave and modest: and by doing well
him self, give his Children an example to do the like: that in his old age
when his Sons are grown men, thorough covetousness, he witholde not from
them reasonable stipendes to live by: otherwise in stead in honoring him, they
will wish him buried.

Finally, that he be so careful over his Children, that at his death, he
feel not his conscience charged in having to make account for his necligence
in their behalf: persuading himself, that amongst all the abuses of the
world, there is none worse, then a necligent Father: therefore he is moved by
Nature, pricked in Conscience, and bound in Houestie, to have a great care of
his Children.

CHAP. XXI.
Here follows the duty of the Child toward the Parents.

BUT now to fall from the care of the Father, I will briefly speak of the
duty of the Child: For all Children ought to know, that by Nature they are
bound to honor their Father and Mother: in doing so, God gives his blessing,
and pramiseth the reward of long life; for, next unto God, there is none more
to be honored then the Parents. If the Father be churlish and cursed unto them,
let the manifould benefits received of him, counteruaile that cruelty, and
continue them in their duty.

Let Children take heed of molesting their Parents any way; but to overcome
them with patience: for they shall never stude a surer friend, then their
Father: and they must always carry in their minds, that he which stubbernly
strives with his Fahter, provoke the wrath of God against him, so that he
shall neither pass away his life quietly, nor yet make his end honestly: Then
let them so behave themselves, that their Father have no cause to curse them,
and wish ill of them: for God still hears the prayers of the Father against
his Children.

Let them not think any service sufficient to requite their Fathers goodness
toward them: for when they have done their duty, to the uttermost they can,
yet shall they not have done all which they should.

Lastly, let the stick to their Parents, in all troubles and adversity,
assuring themselves, that they which forsake their Parents, shall be forsaken
of God: and that is the greatest offense that may be committed.

Let all men be assured of this, that he shall have the same measure made him
by his Children, as he shall mete to his Father: like as there was a Father,
who was driven out of his own hause by his Soune, and was feign to take up his
lodging in the Spitie-house; and seeuig his unkind Son upon a day going by
the door, prayed him for charity sake, to send him a pair of Sheets to lie
in: The Son moved with his Fathers request, was no sooner come home, but he
commanded one of his sons to carry a pair of Sheets to the Hospital to his
Graundfather; but the Child delivered but one of them, which his father blaming
him for, at his return: he answered, I will keep the other for you Father,
when in your old age you shall go to the Spitle-house, as my Graund-father now
does. Hereby we may learn, that our Children will deal with us, as we deal
with our Parents. And this shall serve to close up our Discourse, touching
this matter.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the diversity of the care that Parents ought to take of their Daughters,
in the bringing up of them, more then they take for the bringing up of their
Sons.

NOw will I make some particular mention of Daughters; for that the Father is
to use himself otherwise toward them, then toward his Sons; yet diverse be
the manners of bringing up of Daughters in England at this day: for, same
fathers will not suffer their Daughters to set their foot forth of doors,
not past once or twice in a year. Some will allow them, not only to keep
company with their friends and kinsfolk at home in the house, but also to
visit their friends abroad, and to be present at Banquets and meeting of
friends. Some will have them taught to write and read, and to have skill in
Music: others will have them learn nothing but to sow and spinne, and
govern the House: All these diversities, I will a little touch in this manner.

First, not to suffer a Maid to go abroad but once or twice in a year, is the
way to make her become foolish, fearful, and out of countenance in compante.

Now the other, which goes abroad every day with her Mother, and haunteth
Feasts and Banquets, melts away like Ware in the fire; and driving by little
and little the maydenly modesty, out of her looks and gestures, there
appears in her a licencious and wanton behavior; so that she is rather taken
for a Mother, then a Maid: and if there come no worse of it, the Mother may
assure her self, that in bringing her Daughter so often abroad in public
places, makes her thereby less prized, and worse bestowed, then otherwise
she might be.

I say nothing of these that are taught in their Chambers to write, to read,
and sing, and never come down into the Kitchen; but I will leave that charge
to the poor Hushands, whose Hause goes to decay, and all for having so
learned a wife.

Then if you cast your eyes upon one of those which can do nothing but sow, and
spinne; you shall see in attire, in talk, and in behavior, the very figure of
a country Milkemayde, who will have as good a grace amongst other women, as a
Kitchenstuff-wench amongst courtly Ladies.

It behooves then all discreet Fathers, who are to bestow their Daughters in
Marriage, to consider of what calling his Son in law is like to be, and so to
frame his Daughter accordingly: as, if he purpose to marry her into the
Country, to bring her up in Country huswiterie. If the Fahter mean to marry
his Daughter to a Courtier, he must set her to the Court to the service of some
great Lady, and must be learned to read to write, to discourse, to sing, to
play on Instruments, to dance, and to be able to perform all that, which
belongs to a Courtier to do: by this means many are married to great
Gentlemen, without one penny dowry given by their Father.

Some (I know) will allege, that the Father has not always his Sanne in law
in his sleeue; for indeed Marriages are made in Heaven, and are guided by
Destenie; so that the Father may be ten years in brewing a matter, which in
a moment he may be driven to change: therefore to conclude this matter touching
Daughters, I can give no fitter advertisement then this; that the Fathers
bestow all their study and diligence, to bring them up chaste, as well in body
as in mind: for a man waigheth it not much to have the flesh unspotted, if the
mind be defiled; and therefore it is needful to put into their hearts godly
imaginations, that from their inward purity, there may shine outward modesty;
and for that Beauty is a frail and dangerous thing, those which are
beautiful, have so much the more need of that virtue, to keep their Beauty
unblemished, for Beauty in an unchaste Woman, ferueth to no more purpose, then
a gold Ring in a Swines snowte.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the great disagreements and discontentments, that oftentimes does happen
between the Master and the Servant.

OUR Discourses (I perceive) now braw near to an end, and we have nothing left
to speak of, but the Disagreements that daily happens between Masters and
Servants; of the which I will delate as follows.

He that will be a Master and Commander of Families, must as well know how to
serve and obey, as to control and command; for it is not so easy a matter
to know how to command, as to be a Master: and although there be few that
take upon them the right course of a Master, and can do that, which belongs
unto them to do; yet almost in every House, Masters are so indiscreet,
proud, fantastical, and insolent, that they use their Servants no otherwise,
then if they were slaves, speakeing imperiously to them; being not content,
unless they see them tremble in their presence; using no speech unto them, but
full of terrifying, threatening, and reuiling.

By such manner of dealing, it comes to pass, that Servants, though good and
sufficient, begin to grow naught, and to wax cool in good will, and necligent
in duty totowardes their Masters: But those Masters are more indiscreet,
which brawle and chide with their Servants before strangers, whereby in mind
they make the strangers think they are scarce welcome to their house; and
besides, thereby spite their Servants the most of any thing in the world: for
proof whereof, when a Servant seeks a passter, he never inquireth whether he
be of an evil life; but whether he be hard to please or no:

But in my mind yet, those are worse, which speak to their Servants with
their hands; who belike, have been beaten by their Masters, whom they served
before time, and therefore they will revenge it upon their Servants then
being. Other Masters are of this fond humor, that they will have their
Servants understand their mind, in making only a sign, as if themselves
were dumb, and their Servants diuiners. Some will have their Servants do
three or four things at once, ot having the judgment to consider, that (as a
Sexton said) a man can not carry the Cross, and ring the Belles together. Some
are so curious, that if they had a thousand Servants, they would trouble them
all, and never be content; for that none of them all can please them: whose
fashion it is every month to change a Servant.

We have in London here, a Gentleman whom I well know, who about six months
since, bestowed upon a Servant of his, a Liuerie cloak: which since that time,
he has bestowed upon four others, and taken it still from them again. In
this humor be many Masters now adays: But to return to our Philosophical
Discourse again.

The Master that often changes his Servants, receives great dishonor
thereby; and withal, shows himself an impatient man, and hard to please;
and besides, spreads his secrets and doings the farther abroad: for when a
Servant departs from his Master, in what sort soever it be, whether
contented or discontented, he cannot refrain from reporting where so ever he
go, the life and behavior of his former Master: and though with one troth,
he mingle a hundred lies, yet there be enough that will believe him: and
besides, the Master is troubled to tune his new Servants to his fancy.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of the impatience of some Masters toward their Servants over other some are.

AMONGST other ill masters may be comprehended leine so impatient, and so
unreasonable that they will insoven their ^^rnants to impossibilities, and to
do such thing, as they are not able to do, but the worst of all are those who
will burden their servants wro^g^ully with naughty dealing, and thereupon
turn them away.

But I s^^ it would be to^ long to rehearse all the imperfections which be in
such masters: Therefore I will pass to the occasion of the di^^a^r^ment
between the Mastre and the Servant. which comes by those Servants that know
not bow to serve and obey, I mean by the unfit to serve. no^ only sooles not
ignorant asses, but also ^ishonest and h^a^^sh companions who though they are
sufficient to perform any thing comm^^^ted to their charge, yet they have some
notable fault, whereby their master has ^^st cause to put them away, but it is
as hard a matter to s^^de Se^uants without faults, as drop st^ pattents without
thirst, and though then faults he innumerable yet their chiefest ornaments, are
the three properties of a Dog, to wit the gullet, for that they are Gluttone,
barking: For that the master can do nothing, but they will presently report it
abroad: Fiting, which is so natural unto them, that let their master do never
so well by them, yet they will not stick to call him ungrateful, and to
speak the worst word in their belly by him, this vice is accompanied with
lying (a thing of all others most bace) but this is to be understood of the
bace and ras^all fort, for it is not to be said, but as there are good masters,
so likewise there are good servants.

But now to take away all disorder, it is requisite, that the good Master and
the good Servant be matched together: For if they be not both good, it is hard
for the wisdom of the one, to supply the want of discretion in the other:
Here we must needs call to mind, that the golden world being gone, the Master
and servant must both think, that some faults must be borne withal on both
sides: Which consideration the Servant not only ought to have, remembering that
it is his duty, to submit himself to the will and pleasure of his Master: But
the master much more: knowing that Servants being for the most part of bace
condition and naturally inclined to do ill, will not have that fidelity,
diligence and affection toward him, as he would have toward any prince that
he should serve, and considering that it were better for him to wink at some
faults in his Servants, then to disquiet himself in going about to reform
them.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the great abuses of some Servants toward their Masters, which is rather
for want of wit, then for any other cause.

THERE are some Servants, I know who in their Masters presence, look as though
butter would no: melt in their mouth, but out of their sight they will play
their parts kindly: Yea and will not stick to make moes at their master
behind his back: ^nt the master must not in any wise, suffer his servants to
commit either in word or deed, any fault, whereby God himself, or his
neighbor may be dishonored: giving them to understand, that he will
entertain no naughtynesse in his House, but that he hatet^ it mostally:
whereby though he be not able to root out, their wickedness, yet at least be
will do his best endeau^our to make thee honest, and to fear God.

Touching some other natural imperfections of small importance, as to be rude,
soolish, indiscreet, crasty forgetful, quarelons, spightfull, negligent, and
such like, they ought to be borne withal, if they cannot be reclaymed from
them: Though for my part I think such Servants better lost then found, and the
house it^ worse, that they are in, yet I know some honest Gentlemen, who so
long as their seruauants are trusty and faithful, care not though they be
soolts or ^esters to make them merry.

There are likewise some Masters who when their Servants take their pleasure of
them with mockes and scoffs, rather take pleasure in it, then seem angry with
them: ^ike as he, who called his Servant King of fools, who answered, I would
to Bed I were King of sooles, I would net doubt then, but I should bear Rule
ever him, which is better then my self: This Servant was without doubt
profitable unto him, or else be would not have taken this scoff at his bands:
but for all that all Masters are not so make minded, to be served with such
men, nor all Seruante so happy to meet with such masters: Therefore I will set
down some such order, that the Master and the Servant may live and continue
long time quietly together.

CHAP. XXVI.
How a Servant may live quietly with his Master, if he be of any reasonable
government.

FIRST of all I think it necessary, that be which does desire to be well
served require in his servant three special things, that is to say, love,
loyalty, and sufficiency, and such a one that a master shall eastly come by,
which will show himself, to be a good and looing Master, following the
commandment of the wise man, love him whom thou noutishest, and he shall be
forced to love thee again, if Masters will but think that Servants are men,
and their humble friends, they shall win their good wills and encourage them to
do diligent service, but withal I hold well that the master keep his state
and degree, to love them well, but not to embrace them, for being haile-fellow
well met with his Servant, he should show himself too low mindrd, and not fit
to command, and to be as it were a servant with servants, which would redound
to his reproach, besides, he should soon perceius that too much familyarity
would breed contempt and therefore men of Judgment will behane themselves with
their servants in such fort, that they will nerther make them too sawey, by
overmuch familiarity nor to fearful by overmuch severity: For in no wise let
a master be terrible to his servant, least in forwning still upon him, he make
him think that neither he loves him, nor likes of his service, which is the
way quiterd disco^^rage him: And yet in giving good countenance to his Servant,
be must be wary to observe fit time and place, for as it beformeth the master
abroad in the presence of strangers, to cast a grave and sad look upon vis
servants, so it is his part being at home in his own house, to look more
pleasantly upon them, and to speak more familiarly vnte them which is thing
they love of life, and are thereby encouraged to do him good service.

CHAP. XXVII.
How the Master with good persuasions may govern his Servant, and in the
obstinacy of his Servant, what will ensue unto him.

YOU see here then that a master may with his honor show courtesy to his
servants, and thereby get their gadwil and love, pet must be not persuade
himself that his servants ought to discharge him of al his business, but that
he must take part with them and consider that it is no east matter to govern
servants, and that the greater number be shall have, the greater will be his
trouble to guide them, for there falls out many household quarrels and
contentions where there are many servants: he must also think, that there is
no servant so well framed to the service of other Masters, but that he must be
feign to receive new laws of his new lord: and therefore he must not think
that at the first bash, his servant is made to his bow, but he must leasurely
and patiently, let him understand his mind and to speak fraely unto him, as
well to make him leave his old fashions which perchance be likes not, as to
frame him to his own fancy. And if I were to take a seru^at, I would rather
choose a fresh water sowler, which never had served, the^ one accustomed of
long time to service.

For those which have served in many houses, have for the most part gotten the
use of some ill quality, which they will barely be brought to leave, but one
that is but raw in service, shows himself more tractable more gentle, and
more fit for all manner of service, and the master commonly will be the better
pleased with his goodwill then with the others skill for it is a thing too hard
to change the manners of an old servant, and yet a master for a time must be
feign to use great patience, and take great pain with a young servant, but yet
to avoid the more trouble, let him be su^e to chase one of a good wit, and fit
for service.

This brings into my mind a pleasant story of a Spanish Gentleman that had one
day good trial of the good wit of a new come servant, which Gentleman hanging
sent his other servants about other business, after be had mate ^un dress up
the house be willed him to cover the table, which be did, and though that day
he dyned alone in his chan^^er, yet his servant set two trenchers on the the
table, and two stools, the one against the other, the Gentleman said nothing
to it, but suspecting the meaning of his new come man, attended the end of the
play: meat being brought in, so soon as his man bad given him water, he washed
and sat him down, which he bad no sooner done, but his man having likewise
washed, sat him down right over against him: the Gentleman being naturally eluen
to be merry kept his countenance, and let his man alone having eaten a while
friendly together, the man began to think him, how his master might perchannce
be a thirst: whereupon be sait, master, when you will orinke, I pray you make
courtesy to command me, whereat the Gentleman lought so heartily, that the
poor fool knowing his fault, rose to fetch him drink, but would fit down no
more.

But now to return again to our matter, that Master who will be well served,
must not be sparing of his speech, as well to command what he will have done,
as gently to instruct his Servant in that wherein he is ignorant, by telling
him of his fault.

Therefore if he will have his servant careful and diligent in his service he
must likewise himself be careful about his business for there is nothing that
more awaketh the servants then the diligence of the master, as one the other
side it is impossible, the Servant should be diligent if the Master be
negligent: And thereupon it is said, that the eye of the master fatteth the
horse to which purpose a Philosopher being asked which was ye way, to make land
bring good store of corn, answered, for the master to walk often about, which
is to sae it himself without trusting to his servants: Moreover he must use
his authority in such sort, that he may be better served with the turning of
his eye, then others are with threatening words.

But now when the master knows he has gotten the love and fidelity of his
servant, he must be careful in any wise to keep it, where unto there is
nothing of more force, then to use him courteously: ayding him in his troubles,
visiting him in his sickness, and bestowing on him when occasion shall serve,
that which shall cost the master little, and pleasure the servant much:
Therefore let him not forget to reward the good servant, and keep him always
about him as a precious thing, remembering that there is nothing in this life,
more necessary then a good Servant: Let him be to thee as thine own soul,
take not scorn sometime to bear his reasons, and govern thy self according
to his faithful adutie, for that there have been found servants, which have
more profitted their masters house, then his Brothers or Children have.

Likewise give charge to the Servant, this lesson to conclude, that be take
beede of failing into the common error of Servants, who like a new broom which
sweepeth the house clean serve diligently at the first, but after grow
slothful, that is not the way to get favor, for not be which begins well
is worthy of recompense, but he that continues in well doing: for the master
will look that his servant should rather heat, then cool himself in service.

Let the Servant also take beede, that ^e go not about to creep in credit
with his Master, by fla^terie and hypocrisy, but to serve and obey him with
an unfayned ha^t, for by feigned words, men gather an argument of saithles
deeds: whereby his Master be^^^msh to sos^en him, and to think that he had
more need to be over looked, then instructed: But in any wise let not the
Servant forget to do his faithful and true fatent, not for f^ are, but for
duties sake: But that service is above all other ill bestowed, which is not
well accepted: and there is no greater grefe to a man's mind, then to serve and
not to please, therefore when after certain proof, he sees that be cannot
frame himself to his Masters fancy, let him sake to depart rather from him
with his goodwill, then with his ill.

And when he sees that he is in his Masters books, let him there hold him,
saying in his bart, happy is be, who serves the happy, and not seek to
channge, remembering that the rolling stone gathers no moss.

Then let there be no want found in him, of love, of reverence, of faithfulness,
of diligence, of readynes, and of secretnes: let him not account of his own
life, being in his Masters service.

But to conclude, there is one service which exceeds all the other, which is
the service of the King of glory: and those servants which enter into that
kind, of service, do (no doubt) love well both the master and the service: In
which blessed Service, the Lord of all Lords make us all diligent servants.
Amen.

FINIS.

