THE INTERIOVR OCCVPATION OF THE SOVLE.

Treating of the important business of our salvation with GOD, and his SAINTS,
by way of Prayer.

Composed in French for the exercise of that Court, by the R. Father, Pater
Cotton of the Societi^ of JESUS, and translated into English by C. A. for the
benefit of all our Nation.

Whereunto Is prefixed a Preface by the Translator, in defense of the Prayers
of this Book, to the Saints in Heaven.

But our Conversation is in Heaven, whence also we expect the Savior our Lord
Jesus Christ. PHIL: 3* 20.

Printed at Doway. 1618.

The Table of the Titles of this Book.
A Doration. Title. 1. Thankesgiving. Title 2. Petition. Title 3. Protestation.
Title 4. To the Soul of our Savior Jesus Christ. Title 5. To the B. Virgin
Mary. Title 6. To St. Michaell. Title 7. To St. Gabriel. Title 8. To the Angel
Guardian. Title 9. To the Angels. Title 10. To the holy Patriacks. Title. 11. To
the holy Prophets. Title 12. To St. John Baptist. Title 13. To S. Joseph. Title
14. To S. Peter. Title 15. To S. Paul. Title 16. To S. John the Evangelist.
Tit. 17 To the Apostles. Title 18. To the holy Evangelists. Title 19. To the
holy Martyrs. Title 20. To the holy Doctors Title 21. To the holy Confessors
Title 22. To the holy Anchorites, Hermits, and Religious. Title 23. To St.
Anthony. Title 24. To the holy Virgins, Men and Women. Title 25. A
Communication had with God, upon the Life, Death, and passion of our Savior.
Title 26. A Prayer agreeing with the former Communication, and Conference, had
with God. Tit. 27. When a man is tempted. Title 28 When any thing falls out,
that pleases us. Title 29. When any thing displeases us. Title 30. In obeying
our Superiors. Tit. 31 In seeing the magnificency of the Court. Title 32. At
our going out of our Lodging. Title 33. In beholding any Garden, or Meadow.
Title 34. In seeing a Field covered with flowers. Title 35. When one smells
to a Nosegay. Title 36. When we admire the beauty of any building. Title 37.
When you behold your self in a Glass. Title 38. In putting on your Apparel.
Title 39. In putting off your Apparel. Title 40. In putting on Jewels, and
other ornaments. Title 41. Washing our hands and our face. Title 42. When you
use your Fan. Title 43 When the Clock strikes. Tit. 44. Touching the care
we are to have of our Children. Title 45. Concerning our Domesticals. Title
46. In going to Mass. Title 47. When one is Melancholy or displeased at any
thing. Title 48. When we feel our selves in any passion. Title 49. After the
happy success of any affair. Title 50. Having received any grace. Title. 51.
When we receive any consolation in Prayer. Title 52. In time of Desolation.
Title 53. When we feel our selves dry at Prayer. Title 54. When one is
despised. Title 55. Eleuations of spirit, which may be done upon every
occasion. Title. 56.
THE TRANSLATORS PREFACE, IN Defense of the Prayers of this Book, to the
Saints of God in Heaven.
GEntle Reader, whatsoever thou be; This Book is so fit for thee, that I
doubt not thou will con me thank for having taught it to speak English. For
if thou frequent the use and practice of it, it will teach thee the language of
Heaven. Wherein whenever thou speak to GOD and his Saints, they will
answer thee: and whatsoever thou demaundest of them, they cannot deny thee. And
though fearfully reading here and there a little, thou should only take it
in thy hands to sipp thereof, as men are wont to do of Physic, when they
intend no more but to taste it: yet it is impossible but that the lips and
the hands of thy soul, which are thy will and thy understanding, should not
receive some Tyncture, and retain some taste of the sweetness of it.

B^t because, it may so fall out with thee, that having been brought up as it
were in some defiance with the Saints in heaven, and thereby thinking all honor
too much which is done them, and every request to be no less then Idolat^y
which is made unto them: thou should in this respect be scandalized with
those excellent inuocations of them, wherein is spent a principal part of this
treatise, and so be provoked either to detest, or contemn the Book it self;
I have thought good, to set thee down two ways; how thou may both read, and
use the foresaid prayers: not only without scruple and offense of conscience,
according to the opinion of thine own Masters, which is the first way: but
also according to the profession of Ours, with great delight, and true
spiritual comfort; which is the other.

The first is (supposing thou can not think better) to Imagine, all the
Prayers of this Book to the Saints of heaven to be but a figure of Rethorick,
called Apostrophe; or which is all one, a feigned speech, whereby to excite
affection made unto those things with cannot hear us; as to a Rock, to a
River; to Birds or Beasts. For in such figurative senses, the most learned
Doctors of thine own religion, do understand those innumerable prayers to
Saints, which every where they read in the holy Fathers; and whereof, I will
here yield thee some few examples in their speeches alone to our Blessed Lady.

St. Athanasius, the great co^poser of that Creed, which he learned in the
Nizen Council (whereof he was a principal part, and which is read every
Athanasi(...) Fua^: De sanctissim^ no^tra D^i^pera.
Sunday in your Churches) makes first this preface; For as much (says this
glorious Saint) as he who was borne of a Virgin is our King, and the same
likewise our Lord and our God; therefore also, the Mother, which brought him
forth, is truly and properly reputed a Queen, and a Lady, and the Mother of
God. And then among other things, he speaks unto her in this manner. Unto
thee therefore we Cry, be mindful of us most B. Virgin, who also after thy
Childbirth, did remain a Virgin. Hayle full of Grace, our Lord is with
thee; Blessed do all the holy Quires of men and Angels call thee; Blessed art
thou among women, and Blessed is the fruit of thy womb. Mistress, and Lady, and
Queen, and Mother of God, make intercession for us.

St. Ephraim, who lived in the same age, and was of such fame, Ephraim
that in some Churches after the Scripture, his writings were publicly read,
and whose prayers most patheticall to our B. Lady, in his Sermon of the praises
of the most holy Mother of God, and in diverse other places are too long to be
recited; in a proper Prayer to our B. Lady. among other things he says as
follows. Be present with me merciful, Clement, and Benign Virgin,
especially in this present life; fervently protecting me, repelling the
assaults of mine enemies: Conducting me to salvation, and at the point of ^y
death, preserving my miserable soul: driving away the darkesome visions of
wicked Spirits; delivering me in the terrible day of Judgment, from eternal
Damnation: and lastly making me heir of the inaccessible glory of God thy Son.
Which I beseech thee again, and again, most holy Lady and Mother of God, that
I may obtain by thy intercession and favor, through the grace and mercy, and
humanity of thy only begotten Soon our Lord and God, and Savior Jesus
Christ.

Likewise, the most renowned, and uncontrolled Doctor of the Church St.
Augustine, in his 2. Sermon of the Annunciation, after many other words in
praise and prayer to her, concludes as follows O Blessed S. Augus^ S^^m. 1 8
de sanct^
Mary, who is able to rep^r thee, the right of praise and thanksgiving, which
is due unto thee? who by thy singular assent, did relieve the world when it
was lost? what praises can the fragil^tie of mankind give the, which only by
thy means found the beginning of recovery? Receive therefore our
thanksgiving, though small as it is; though unequal to thy great merits; and
when thou have received our desires, by thy prayer excuse our faults. Receive
our prayers into thy sanctuary of thy excudition, and return unto us the
Antidote of reconciliation By thee, let that be excusable, which we
importune; and let that be impitrable, which we ask with a fatihfull mind.
Receive that we offer, render that we ask, excuse that we fear; for thou
art the Hope of all sinners. By thee, we ^pes vni^a silicet ^ne qua ^on.
confide to have pardon for our demerites; and in thee most Blessed, is the
expectation of our rewards. Holy Mary, succor the miserable, help those that
are weak minded cherish those that weep, pray for the people, Mediate for the
Clergy, make intercession for the devout sex of Women; let all feel thy
assistance, whosoever do celebrate thy remembrance. Thus these holy Fathers,
who as our last Author says: That which they learned they taught: and that
Aug. lib ^. cont. Iulianum ^um.
which they received from their fathers, the same they delivered to their
children.

Now therefore my friend, if these speeches of ye holy Fathers to our blessed
Lady be lawful, certainly there is no prayer of this book as made to Saints
unlawful, for if they be not lawful as prayers, they be lawful as
Apostrophes. And if thy stomach rise not against these words of the Fathers,
no reason it should detest the like speeches of ours. And if these may faynedly
be used to exite affection, the others also may be likewise practiced to
inflame our devotion.

Wherefore, if thou can frame thy conscience to believe, that all these
prayers and the like, are nothing else but feigned speches; this will be one
way, according to the doctrine of thine own masters, not only to serve thy
self, but also to satisfy others, that shall obiecte the reading of this
Book, or the practice thereof unto thee. But if according to truth and reason,
thou be so persuaded, that neither we, nor the holy Fathers, either do, or
may use such figmatiue or feigned prayers; it will import thee, to follow the
other way, and to believe with us, that they are really spoken unto the Saints;
not as unto walls and woods, but as unto those, that verily hear us, and are
able to help us.

And therefore, because I do not think thou will easily condemn the holy
Fathers of Idolatry, wherein no ignorance can excuse their damnation: but
rather will desire some further satisfaction in this point according to the
Scripture, with thy Masters would seem to make the only ground of their
Religion: That I may the better content thee, I will set thee down here in this
Preface, such evident proofs out of Scripture for prayer to Saints, ^^ may be
sufficient, not only to quiet thy own mind: but also to convince the most
learned Protestant, that hereafter shall attempt to speak against it.

But before I begin, I desire to inform thee of 4. short perticulers; whereof
the two first are such, as may suffice of themselves alone to resolve this
question.

The first is, that many principal Protestants, have agreed with us in this
point. For the opinion of Luther in his own words was this that follows.
Luther in purgatione quoru^dam articulorum.
Of intercession of Saints, I think and judge with the whole Christian Church,
that the Saints are to be honored by us, and also to be inuocated. With whom
do agree acts and mon: page 462.
Bilnay, and acts and mon page 1312.
Latimer, canonized Martyrs of the Protestant Calender. Wherefore this being
the belief, not only of their first Apostle; but also of their latter Martyrs;
I cannot imagine, how it may stand with the reputation of a zealous Protestant,
either to condemn us, or to mislike us for it.

The second particular which I would have thee well to consider, is this; That
the principal ground whereon the Protestants do especially build their
denial, or rather their detestation of this Doctrine, is most vain and
frivolous; contending, Invocation of Saints to be altogether unlawful, because
it is no where expressly commanded or approved in holy Scripture. For, I would
but ask a Protestant, where he reads Hunting, or Hawking to be expressly
commanded, or commended in the Word of God? which, unless he love Hawks and
Dogs, better then Saints or Angels, were enough to make him see, the
impertinencie of this position. In a word, I will demand, where he finds
either this Assertion it self, which they make the ground of their belief; to
be expressly delivered: or (to give instance in some other particulers) where
he can show me, The eating of Blood and strangled meat: the celebration of
Christmas, and of the Feasts of the Apostles: the use of Surplisse, Cappe, and
Typpet in the service of Christ: Or in fine, The abrogation of the Jews
Saboth, which is Saturday, to be expressly either enjoined or approved in holy
writ? Which, not being able to perform, he not only condemns himself in
the continual practice of all these particulers, if he stand to his own
ground: but also makes the Ground it self, to overthrow it self, as being no
where expressly taught in holy Scripture. Wherefore, though no laudable example
of prayer to Saints departed, could be found in the written Word: yet this is
no sufficient cause to condemn it. From whence also it follows; That unless
y^ Protestants can show (which they will never be able to do) that prayer to
Saints is evidently forbidden, either by the word of God, or light of nature,
or law of the Church; They can never be defended or excused, from great
impiety and damnable scisme, in dividing them selves, not only from the
Catholic brethren: but also from the Saints themselves by this occasion.

Thirdly therefore, to come nerer the question in hand, that we dispute not of
words, but of the matter it self, now in controversy between thee and me;
Thou must understand, that the word Prayer, is sometimes taken for a request
made unto him, whom we honor as the first omnipotent cause, and infinite
Author of all things. Secondly, for a petition made unto those, whom we
acknowledge to be endued with that excellency, which is only found in the
friends of God that are in heaven: and lastly, for a request made unto any
other, with that respect, which we acknowledge to be due unto those, that have
the means to help us. In the first and second sense, this word is used, when
we are said to pray, or to make our prayer unto another: in the last sense,
when we pray our friends or our betters to do this, or y^ for us; For
although we pray them; yet we are not properly said to pray, or to make our
prayer unto them. By Prayer to Saints therefore, we understand a request made
unto them, not with that worship which is due unto God, as the Author of all
things: but with that honor and reverence with is due to the Saints of God above
all other Creatures. And in this sense the Protestants themselves will grant,
That if it be lawful to make any request unto them, it ought to be done with
that reverence which is convenient; and by consequence, that in this sense, it
is not only lawful to pray them (if it be lawful at all) but also to pray
unto them.

Lastly, to the end that no exception be taken against the proofs that follow,
as not sufficiently delivered according to my promise out of Scripture, thou
must consider that two manner of ways a thing may be proved out of Scripture.
First, by the express words thereof in which manner we prove many things
against the Protestants. As for example, That man is justified by works and
not Iam. 2. 24 John 20* 22. 23. Math. 26^ 27.
by Faith alone; That Priests receive the Holy Ghost to forgive sins; That
the Blessed Sacrament, is the body and blood of Christ 1 Cor. 11^ 14.
and the like. But in this manner the Protestants cannot directly prove, any
one point of their Religion against us. Therefore no reason that in all points,
they should exact this kind of proof at our hands. Secondly a thing may be
proved by Scripture, as following by necessary consequence out of scripture,
which kind of proof and no other the Protestants (though failing therein no
less then in the former) pretend to be the very ground of their Faith, in
those points wherein they differ from us; And after this manner, I intend to
make it evident that prayer to Saints may be lawfully used according to the
Scriptures.

THE FIRST ARGUMENT
Therefore; may be taken out of those Scriptures, which recommend unto us the
Authority of the Church. For in them we learn. That our Savior himself has
sent his holy spirit, to John 16. 13.
teach her all truth, and to remain with her for ever. In Io. 14. 16
which respect, she is not only termed by Saint Paul, The Pillar Tim. 3. 17*
and foundation of truth: but also our Savior himself says expressly of her,
That he who will Math. 18^ 17.
not hear her^ (or which is all one) he that will not believe her, ought to
be esteemed no^ better then a^ Eathnick. From whence therefore I conclude
Augustine Lib. cont. Crescon. cap. 33.
and affirm with Saint Augustine, That we do nothing but according to
Scripture, in doing that which the whole Church approoueth, whom the
Scriptures Augustine. Epist. 118 cap. 2.
themselves commend unto us. To which purpose also, he spared not to write,
That to dispute whether any thing be lawful, which the whole Church
frequenteth throughout the world, is most insolent madness. In fine, there are
many points of Faith, with though they be not expressly written, the Protestants
believe and practice with us; and among other things which I have noted
before; The lawful neglect of the Jews Sabbath no where abrogated; and the
necessary observation of Sunday, no where commanded in holy writ; which
therefore can no otherwise be proved out of Scripture, but only by the
authority of the Church, which the Scripture commands to be believed.

This being supposed; to make it appear that ye Church of Christ, and the
Pastors thereof, not only allowed this Doctrine of prayer to Saints, but also
practiced the same: I allege the Epistle of the Bishops of Europe to Leo the
Emperor in the fourth age after Christ; which Epistle is joined to the
Council of Chalcedon, where they say thus, We put the most holy Proterius in
the rank and Quyre of the holy Martyrs, and we demand by his intercession,
That God would be pleased to be merciful and propitious unto us. And in the
Council it self, which is one of the four Councils that the Protestants
pretend to reverence with Saint Gregory, no less then the four Gospels; the
Fathers assembled speak thus. Flauianus lives Chalcedo^ Acts 11.
after death, as being a Master let him pray for us. Likewise in the sixth
general Council, the Fathers say, God alone the Creator being Adored, let the
Christian Synod. 6. ^ap. 7
man call upon his Saints, that they would be pleased to make intercession for
him unto his divine Majesty. Whereunto, I will only add another like
authority of the seventh general Council speaking as follows; Let us do
all things with Synod. 7. ^ct. 6
fear, demanding the intercession of the incontaminate Mother of God, as also
of the Angels and of all the Saints.

Thus these general Councels in the person of the whole Catholic Church. Let
us hear now some other express testimonies of the ancient Fathers in the
first ages after Christ. St. Bazill in his Oration upon the Bazill orat in. 40
Martyrs.
40 Martyrs: He that is pressed with any difficulty, let him fly unto them:
He again that rejoices, let him call upon them; the one that he may be
delivered from evil; the other that he may persevere in good. St. Cyrill, when
we Cyril catechesi. ^ Mistago^gica.
offer this sacrifice, we make mention of them that have slept before us;
especially of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs; That God by
their orisons would receive our prayers. St. Ambrose, we must pray unto
Angels, who Ambr. 1 de vidui^
are given us for our guard; we must pray unto Martyrs, whose patronage we
seem to challenge by the pawn of their Bodies; they are our Governors, they
are the Overseers of our lives and actions. We are not ashamed to make them
the intercessors of our infirmity, because themselves have known
th'infirmitie of their Bodies, even in their victories.

Thus these holy Fathers. Of the practice of this Doctrine, and of the
particular prayers made by the Fathers themselves, in all ages to the Saints of
Heaven, that shall suffice which I have cyted already, out of their speeches to
our B. Lady; both because, to show this exactly were sufficient to make a large
volume, as also because no Protestant that is not altogether ignorant, or
extremely impudent can deny it. In fine therefore, the Doctrine of the Fathers in
this point, is evidently testified, even by Protestant Authors. For Fulke Fulk
^n his re^oinder to Bristow.
confesses, that Ambrose, Augustine, and Hierome, held invocation of Saints to
be lawful. That Against ye Re^ish Te^tament.
Nazianzen, Basil, and Chrysostom, make mention of invocation to Saints.
That, Theoderet speaks of prayers unto Martyrs. That, Leo ascribes much to
the prayers of Saint Peter. All 2 Pet. 1
these ancient Fathers. And more in particular, That Answer to Counte^feit Ca^
page 46 Sara^ in defe^ tract. diuersi^ etc. pa^ 349. 346. More Apol: f^ part,
p^ 227. 2 Orm^ Pist. p page 2
Vigillantius the heretic wrote against the invocation of Saints, him (says
he) Hierome reproves. For the which likewise Sarauia a great Caluinist, and
Beza himself do acknowledge, that Vigillantius was charged, and condemned by
the Fathers. Morton, likewise acknowledges in express terms, That all
antiquity taught the invocation of Saints. Add unto these Ormerod, who
therefore says, That the Fathers, did not ponderously consider of this
question. And Perkins, who speaking of the Primitive Church, sets down
these words that follow; Perkins. Prob. page ^3.
There was in the Church, intercession to Saints in particular, for men or
things in particular. And afterward he presumes to say, That the ancient
^bid. page
Fathers, especially after 400. years of Christ, did sin in the invocation
of Saints; yea, were guilty of sacrilege. And so damneth to Hell the greatest
Saints of Heaven, now crowned with glory, to justify the Dreams and fantasies
of his own devices.

Now then my good friend, to conclude this my first argument out of Scripture;
let any well minded Protestant consider, whither not believing these Councels
and Fathers, but co^demning them of sacrilege, he do not incur the censure
of our Savior, that he is no better then a Heathen, for not believing the
Church it self: and whither it be not only the heresy of Vigillantius
reproved by St. H^^rome, to disallow the inuo^ation of Saints: but also as St.
Augustine speaks, most insolent madness to dispute against it.

THE SECOND ARGUMENT.
Supposing the Creed of the Apostles, to be the infallible word of GOD, and
if not Scripture, yet certainly contained in Scripture; I prove the
lawfulness or rather necessity of prayer to Saints, out of our Belief of the
Communion of Saints. Which doubtless for this cause among other reasons it
has pleased God, to make an Article of our Creed, to excite us so much the
more thereby to this kind of pyous worship and invocation of them. For if
sinful men on earth, are truly understood, to be here comprehended under the
name of Saints: much less may the Blessed souls of Heaven, be here excluded
from that title. And who can imagine that the Souls of the just, are separated
by death, from the communion of the Church wherein they lived? For as Saint
Augustine says, why do they run so fast to the Sacrament of Baptism in
extreme danger of death, that were never in the Church before? Or why do they
make such have to be reconciled thereunto before they dye, that are divided from
it? unless it be to enjoy after death, the communion of it? Wherefore, I do
not see, how we can believe, that there is one Communion of the Saints in
heaven, and the Saints on earth according to our Creed: except we believe a
Communion, or which is all one, a Communication of Mutual offices between
them; we praying to them, and they praying for us: the greater helping the
less, and the less in all their necessities, having recourse unto the greater.

THE THIRD ARGUMENT,
Is also in explication and confirmation of the former. And supposing that if
it be lawful to pray the Saints of Heaven, it is no less lawful to pray unto
them, as I have showed before in the third consideration; It may be framed in
this manner. It is lawful to recommend our wants by way of prayer or
entreaty, unto all the friends of God, that are desirous to hear us and are
able to help us in particular. But such are all the Saints of Heaven;
Therefore it is lawful in such manner to commend our selves, and our wants
unto them.

The Mayor is so evident, even by the light of Nature, that there needs no
Scripture to confirm it. For as now at this day, so no doubt before the
Scripture was written, it was lawful for the child to reco^mend himself,
unto the prayers of his Father, or of any other holy man, because it was
believed, that such kind of men, were able and willing to help them by their
prayers. And the only reason of any weight, which the Protestants allege for
their not praying to Saints, is especially this; because they think the Saints
of heaven do not hear them; Wherefore if they hear and can and will help
us, there is no further doubt, but that we may pray and beseech them to
relieve us.

The Minor therefore, that the Saints in Heaven are most desirous, and likewise
most able both to hear and help us, is proved first, a Posteriore, or from
the effect: and secondly a Priore, or from the cause: a Posteriore, thus; They
do actually present or reco^mend our prayers unto God; The four Apoc. 5. ^
Beasts, and the 24. Elders, having golden vialls full of Odours, which are the
Prayers of Saints. Therefore they not only know our prayers in particular
(unless thou will imagine, that they Offer them sealed up in a Bag, as
ignorant of that which is contained in them) but also are a mean to God for
us, and help us to obtain them.

The same is also proved a Priore three manner of ways.

And first, by the perfect love and charity, which is between the Saints in
heaven, and their brethren here on earth. For as Saint Paul says, Charitas
nunquam excidit, Charity (which is the love of God and our brethren) never
falls away, but remains with his Saints for ever. And the reason thereof is
manifest. For, loving God so perfitly as they do, they must needs love all
those, whom they know to be so much beloved of him, as that he gave his only
Son to redeem them. This therefore being supposed out of Scripture, and the
Minor consisting of two parts; The first, that the Saints of heaven, desire to
hear and help us, And the second, that they are able to do both the one and
the other. The first part I prove by the latter, in this manner: The Saints of
God desire it; therefore they cannot want ye means to perform it.

That they desire it, is proved first out of the Nature of all true love in
general. For the which you must understand, That Love being the first act of
the Will: and the formal object of both the act, and power of the will, being
that which is good; to love another, is nothing else, but to will him that
which is good, especially for this reason, because it is good unto him. So
that, the final and formal cause of true love, being the good of another; To
love one truly, is to wish him all the good that may be; and to love very much,
is to will, or to wish the same very much unto him.

And because it is the Nature of the will, and by consequence of love, to do
that which it wills, unless it be hindered, Therefore it produces in us,
not only a desire to hear and understand, the good and evil of the party
beloved: but moves us likewise by all the means we can, to prosecute the
one, and to avoid the other. For the which cause, love is said to be more
effectual then affectuall; Plus enim facit quam ^fficat, and according to
Saint Gregory, Probatio amonis est exhibitio operis. And therefore Love
without these acts and fruits of love, is worse then the Fig Tree which our
Savior cursed, and is indeed no love at all.

From whence also it follows, that albeit we may love those whom we know not
in particular, as belonging to such an One, or as the parts of such a
Community which is principally beloved of us, and may content our selves with
that general good which we are able to do them: yet if our love be perfect it
is impossible we should not desire to know them, and to do for them also in
particular if we be able, or if our attendance to the particular knowledge and
service of them, do not hinder some greater good, which otherwise we might
perform in general toward them. By which it is manifest, that either the
Saints in heaven desire to hear us, and to releive us, not only in general;
but also in particular when we call upon them, because the one in them can be
no hinderance to the other: Or else it must needs be granted, that they do not
love us. For that without this desire, it is very plain they care not for us.

I know some Protestants do here object against this particular care, the same
which many Atheists have also objected against the providence of God; Affirming
that ye Saints of heaven Calvin. instit: lib. 3. cap: 20 per. 24
cannot give ear to our Prayers, or attend to our affairs, without some
trouble and impeachment to their felicity. But the Protestants granting as
they do, that this is no trouble at all, neither to the person of God, nor to
the soul of Christ, nor to the Angels themselves ( Psalm. 90. 11. Dan. 10. 13.
Zac. 1. 12. Math. 18. 10 Lue. 15. 10. Acts. 12. 15. Apoc. 8. 3.) make this
Objection against the Saints of God, with less reason and more malice, then it
was made by their Masters before them against God himself.

Secondly therefore, this desire of theirs will yet better appear by the
consideration of the Nature of Charity in particular.

For according to that, which has been said, as to love another is to will the
good, and by consequence the will of another; which is also the reason that a
wicked man, because he wills not his own good, as he is wicked, can never be
truly beloved: so to love God, is nothing else, but to will, the will of God;
and therefore in effect to desire that it may be perfitly fulfilled, both in
our selves, and in all other Creatures.

And because, as the Apostle speaks This is the will of God, These: 4. 3
o^r sanct^fication, or which is all one, the salvation of our selves and
others. Therefore to love God about all things, wherein consists the nature
of all charity, includes a will to attend above all other things unto the
sanctification and salvation, first of our selves, and secondly of all our
Brethren. Now then to go forward, as nothing is desired, but that which is
good: so the greater the good is, if it be well known and considered, the more
it is desired; And therefore, as there is nothing so good as the will of God: so
nothing by many degrees can be so much desired, of those that truly love God,
as that his will be most perfitly fulfilled, in the sanctification and
salvation of all men.

Again, as the will of God himself is the end of all things: so the love of
his will, and the desire of doing thereof, is the end of all other loves, and
all other desires. And therefore, as God himself has ordained, so it must
needs be, that our love of his will, and desire to fulfill the same, if our
love be right, do exceed with like proportion all other worldly loves or
desires whatsoever.

Wherefore to conclude this point; if true love in the lowest degree, not only
of grace, but also of Nature, produces in us a perpetual and constant desire,
not only to hear and understand, the good and evil of the parties beloved:
but also to endeavor by all good means and courses to relieve them; how great
must the flood and Torrent be of that desire, which flows continually in the
highest degree, from the Fountain and sowrse of all love, which is God
himself, into the Souls of the Saints of heaven, to complie, and cooperate
with his eternal will, by all the means they can, in the sanctification and
salvation of others.

And if the zeal of men on earth, not only in the time of grace: but also
under the dead letter of the Law, extend it self with such desire, not only to
hear and understand, but also to succor and redress by their daily prayers,
infinite dangers and continual labors and miseries of their brethren;
co^passing both Sea and Land (as our Savior says) to make one Math, 23 15,
Proselite, or to convert one soul unto Christ; how much more does the
inflamed charity of the Saints in heaven, transform their souls into the
like desire?

And admiring so much as we do, the vehement love of Moses, and zeal of
Saint Paul while they lived amongst men, to their Natural brethren the Exodus
32 32.
Jews; not refusing to be stricken out of the Book of life, and to be made
an Athema, if need Romans 9. 3
should be for their salvation; How wonderful and unmeasurable think you, is
the desire of the Saints of heaven, to procure the salvation of their brethren
here on earth? and how effectual to recommend their particular prayers, which
here even in this world, is the least, and most easy office, that one friend
can do for an other? certainly, this desire in these golden vials, must needs
so far exceed the former in those earthe^ vessels, as the easines of the one
exceeds the difficulty of the other; And as their knowledge and love of God
whom now they see, exceeds the obscure knowledge which they had of him, and
their imperfect love toward him when they could not behold him.

Add unto all this, that the felictie of the Saints of heaven, is much
increased and perfited, by the salvation of their brethren on earth. And
therefore, as much as they desire ye perfection of their own felicity, they
can no less desire to receive, and to recommend our prayers unto God; with they
know to be ye chiefest means both on our parts and theirs whereby to obtain it.

Thus, as I take it-hauing plainly showed how exceedingly the Saints desire
both to hear and help us in our necessities, according to that superabundance
of their love and charity toward us, which passes all humane understanding;
let us now consider whether it follow hereof, that they are able to do those
good Offices for us, with they so much desire. Which is easily proved as
follows.

Whenever Almighty God gives a Love, an Inclination, or Desire to any thing,
he gives also some power and ability to obtain the same. As we see in the
desires and inclinations of all Natural things. As for example, in the
inclination of the Elements to their proper places: in the Appetite of Birds
and Beasts, to those things that are necessary for the preservation of their
Nature: and finally, in all the Natural propentions and desires of Man. And
the reason thereof is evident. For Almighty God having ordained the one to
obtain the other; and desire of it self being not sufficient to procure the
thing desired, he should come short of his purpose, working in vain, and
leaving his work imperfect, like unto him in the Gospel, Qui cepit aedifi^are
and non potuit consumare, unless having given the desire, he have given
therewithal some other more sufficient power and ability to attain unto that
which is desired. Wherefore, this being true, and a general rule in all his
works upon earth; how much more is it also true, and a certain rule in Heaven,
where all appetites are satisfied, and all desires fulfilled? And having given
the very possession and fruition of himself, and of his Son Christ Jesus, to
reward his Saints; how, as St. Paul says together with himself, Will he not
give them all things, which their hearts can desire? And if Ro^. 8. 3^
it be true which himself has promised, that he will hea^^ths Psa. 10. 1^
desire of a poor man, being yet in his trial: how can it stand, either with
his own goodness, or with the felicity of those, that enjoy y^ riches of his
Kingdom, to withold that from them, which so reasonably, and so exceedingly
they desire, according to his own ordinance, and out of the infinite love they
bear him? And as the Scripture says, If he were not able to Genesis 28, 27.
conceal from Abraham the evil which he intended, against the wicked City of
Sodom, to the end, that by Abraham's prayers he might pardon them if it were
possible, according to the ordinary Law of his Divine providence: and whereby
also as it is probable, his cosen Lot was saved from that dreadful fire; how
can he conceal from his friends in Heaven the good, or evil which he
intends to their brethren? to the end that by their prayers, according to his
Divine providence, bringing all things to pass by Ordinary means, he may
confer the one, and pardon the other?

Whereby it appears how vain it is, which the Protestants do here object,
that because the Saints have no ears they cannot hear us. For albeit they
have no corporal Organ of hearing; yet Almighty God is not so poor of power,
but that he may easily provide them of other means, For neither the Angels,
nor the Devils have ears; and yet notwithstanding the Protestants will not
deny; that they have power to hear our words when we speak; or which in them
is all one, to understand our meaning. Neither does the want of an ear, make
this kind of hearing the worse, but rather much the better. For being thereby
freed from all those conditions and circumstances, which limit and contract the
corporal passion and immutation of the Sense of hearing, to place and
distance, etc: no reason can be given, but that they may hear as well a far
off, as nere at hand; yea, our thoghts as well as our words, when we are
willing to have the^ known unto them. For in this manner and no otherwise are
we able to conceive, how one Angel or Devil should naturally hear or
understand another. Why then will the Protestants deny that power to any Saint
in Heaven, which they know to be no more then is given to the Devil?

And truly though they had no means at all to hear our prayers immediately
and directly, as they come from our selves; yet they might easily know them,
because as St. Augustine says, they have the means to see them. And if
Elizeus, while 4 Reg. 5^ 26.
he did as a Child, and thought as a child, and knew as a child, 1 Cor. 13
11.
which is the state of all men in this world, or could see, and know without
eyes what his servant did, and said in his absence; How much more, the Saints
of God, being come to that mature knowledge, and greatness of perfect men which
they enjoy in Heaven, are able without eyes or ears, to behold those things,
which are done or said, where they are Greg: li^ 2. Dial 35. lib, c. 33. li^
12. Mo^ cap, 14
not present? For according to St Gregory; Unto the eye of him, who beholds
never so little of the light of the Creator, all that is Created seems little
more the^ nothing; And therefore in heaven (says he) Where all with one
Common light behold the face of God; what is it that there they know not, where
they know him, that knows all things?

Notably therefore St. Barnard proves, that our B. Lady, Bernard ^erm. in
Assum. B. Mary.
being ascended on high, gives gifts unto men; because nothing does more
Commend the greatness, either of her power or of her pity; Which we must
needs grant, unless (says he) we will either believe, that the Son of
God does not honor his Mother, in granting her this power: or doubt that the
Bowels of Mary, may be without Charity, in which, the Charity it self,
which is of God, remained corporally 9. Months together. To which purpose
also, Saint Augustine speaking of St. Peter, does argue in this manner; If then
the shadow of his Body was able to help; how much more now the Augu. ser. 19.
de Sa^ctis.
fullness of his virtue? If he were so powerful, to help those that be sought
him before his Martyrdom: how much more efficatious is he after his Tryumphs?
And St. Hierome, disputing with Vigillantius the heretic expressly of this
matter, egregiously co^foundeth his adversary with these words that follow;
Thou Hierom^ con. vigil. cap. 3.
say in thy Book, that while we line, we may pray for each other; but
after we are dead, no man's prayer can be heard for another: especially when
the Martyrs praying to have their blood revenged, were not able to obtain it.
Which reason of the Heretic was most false; for their request was not denied,
but only a little delayed for the good of their Brethren. But hear what St.
Hierome answers; If the Apostles and Martyrs while they were in their Bodies
could pray for others, when it imported them to be careful of themselves; how
much more after their victorious Crowns and Tryumphs? Moses being but one,
obtained pardon of God for six hundred thousand Armed men; And shall he be
of less force, being now with Christ in Heaven? Paul the Apostle says, That
270. souls in the Ship with him, were given unto him: And after his
resolution, when he began to be with Christ, must he shut up his mouth and
not be able, to speak so much as one half word, for those, who through the
world have believed his Gospel? Shall Vigillantius, this living Dog, be
better then he that dead Lion? For to this purpose, I might well use the words
of the Preacher; If I believed Saint Paul to be dead in spirit, the Saints are
not said to be dead, but (to wit according to the body) sleeping or reposing.
Thus Saint Hierome.

Secondly therefore (to proceed) The willingness and ability of the Saints in
Heaven to hear and assist us, is proved out of those Scriptures, which teach
us, that the Saints in heaven, and the Saints on earth, are all Brethren of the
same family, and Domesticals of God; having all received the adoption Ephesians:
19. Gal: 4 Ephe, 4 Gal. 4. Heb. 1 23.
of the Sons of God, and being all fellow members of the same Body, and
Citizens of the same City, which is the heavenly Jerusalem our Mother, the
Church of the first borne, including the society of many thousand Angels.

Which being supposed, we may argue in this manner. In every Mystical body or
society, the principal and more perfect members, have power and ability more
or less to help and assist the rest that are more imperfit, according to
their particular necessities. For this is the end of all Community, and
therefore so true, that no city or kingdom, or civil Body can stand without
it. But the Saints in Heaven, are the principal parts of this Mystical body;
Therefore it must needs follow, that they have some kind of means to hear
and to help us in particular, when we call upon them. For otherwise, they
could neither make one Family, nor one city nor one Body with us, which is
directly against the Scriptures here before alleged.

Again, in every Society, those members that are out of danger and in
prosperity, are bound in duty to succor those that are in any great danger or
necessity, especially when it greatly concerns the good of the whole Body.
But such are the Saints of heaven, and such is the case between us and them,
especially when we find our selves assaulted with some grievous affliction, or
vehement Temptation in particular; Therefore according to their power, when
such occasions happen, they are bound as may be said in duty to relieve us. He
(says St. John) that shall have the Substance of this world, and shall see his
Brother have need, and shall shut his Bowels from him; how does the Charity
of God abide in him? Wherefore, the Saints of God, having the substance of ye
other world: and possessing the Treasures of all Graces, we must either fowly
condemn them, for want of Charity; or else, we must needs grant, that they
open their Bowels to relieve the necessities of their distressed brethren. And
truly Almighty God, seeing the want of this power in his Saints to help us
(if it were so as the Protestants would have it) and the Saints again seeing
our miseries, or if they do not, it is because they will not; how may it be
thought, that either God himself can shut the Bowels of his Charity from
them, when they ask the one: or they from us, when we call upon them to be
relieved in the other? Wherefore to conclude this second reason, for the proof
of their Power to help us; consider gentle Reader, whether it can stand,
either with the unity of this mystical body, that the Saints in Heaven should
not have it: or with their Obligation not to demand it: or with their
felicity not to enjoy it: or with Gods goodness not to grant it.

Thirdly and lastly then, this willingness and power of theirs is yet further
proved, by their special Patronage and protection of us; for the one does
evidently include the other, and no man can imagine, how they can be truly
said to guide and defend us, who like the Idols of the Gentiles, are neither
able to hear us nor to help us. Wherefore, their Pastoral care and
protection over us is showed, first, by reason grounded upon Scripture, and
secondly, by the Scripture it self. And the first reason thereof, may be
framed in this manner. In every well ordered Body or Common wealth, the members
which are the most potent prudent, and perfect, are appointed to govern and
protect the rest. But the Saints of heaven make one body with us, as has been
proved by the express word of God; Therefore, as being the most sufficient
Members thereof, they must be Ordained by God to govern and direct us.
According whereu^to St. C^prian co^clud^^h most excellently, of the holy
Innocents: That being made privy to the secrets Cyprian
of God, with most familiar approaches, they beseech his clemency to bless
our labors. And Lib de Stella. Magis and Innoc: etc.
that being translated from the Cradle to Heaven, they are made Senators and
Judges of the supernall Cappitoll, obta^ning pardon for many. And although they
assist Almighty God, not only in his Divine mercyes, but also in his
punishments: yet they serve themselves more of the mildness, then of the fury
of the Lamb, whom they follow wheresoever he goes. Thus St. Cyprian.

Whereunto may be added another reason, For he that will contemplate a
little, shall easily find, that Almighty God, seldom or never does any thing
by himself alone, which may be brought to pass by means of those his
Creatures that are apt to be made the instruments of his Divine power. Not that
he has any need of them, but because it belongs to his glory and their
perfection, as much as may be, to be served of them. Which is not only seen
in the visible preservation of this world, all things depending therein of
more inferior causes: but also confessed in the invisible mouers, and
Governors thereof, his holy Angels. Who are therefore, in general
acknowledged by Saint Paul, to be administering Spirits, and are perticularly
Heb. 2. 14
testified among other Number. 20 16.
things, to have had the conduction of the Isralites, out of Exodus 23 20.
Egypt, and in the person of God, to have given the Law it Act. 7. 30 35. 53.
self unto them.

Wherefore the Saints of heaven, being so much more fit to govern and protect
us, then the Angels: by how much they are nearer unto us both by Grace and
Nature, and through their own experience of our fragilitie, have better
learned to take compassion of our infirmity: It cannot stand with the
sweetness of Gods prouldence, to exclude them from the Patronage and
protection of us. For the which he has made them ^o fit, and which many of
them have so well deserved, not only by their charity toward us, but also by
their good government of us, while yet they lived here amongst us.

For further proof whereof, it is not hard to allege many good passages, and
pregnant places of holy Scripture. For so our Savior promised, That the
faithful servant, should be Math. 24 47.
appointed over all the goods of his Master. According whereunto he also told
his Disciples; That he disposed unto them, as Luc. 22. 29.
his Father disposed unto him a Kingdom. And therefore likewise the same power
which the Father promised to the Son, where he said; That he would give him
the Gentiles for his inheritance: Psalm. 2, 5, 9.
and that he should rule them in a Rod of Iron, and like a Potters vessel they
shall be Broken: The same power again the Son does promise unto him, who
shall keep his works unto the end, saying; I will give Apoc: 2, 27.
him Power over Nations, and he shall rule them with a Rod of Iron, and like
the Vessel of a Potter they shall be Broken. For which cause also, they are
said To hold in their hands two edged Psalm 149 7, 8, 9.
Swords, to punish the Nations, and Correct the people: to bind their Kings
in Fetters, and their Noblemen in Ma^nicles of Iron; And that it is the glory
of Gods Saints to execute the Judgment which he prescribes. And finally, to
the same purpose our Savior affirms, That he Apoc. 3, 12.
who overcame, should be made a Pillar in the Temple of God: And that he
should sit in his Apoc. 3, 24.
own Throne with him, as I (says he) have overcome, and sit with my Father
in his Throne. So that, as the Father governs the world by his Son: so
again, the Son governs the Church by the Ministry of his Saints. In
which respect they are said to be placed with him in the same Throne of
Government, or in the same Tribunal of Authority; wherein we must also
believe, that they shall sit to Judge both men and Angels at the Day of Done.

Which testimonies of Scripture, albeit clear in themselves: yet to exclude
those voluntary and self pleasing expositions, which the Protestants are wont
to frame upon them; it will not be amiss to confirm by some few authorities
of the Ancient Fathers.

For unto the testimony of Saint Cyprian, who acknowledges S. Cypria^ Orat. in
40. Mart.
them as you have heard, to be the Senators, and ^^dges of the Supernall
C(...)ti, etc. May be added these that follow.

Saint Bazill therefore, calls the Martyrs, the Common keepers of Mankind,
and excellent Companions of our cares. Saint Nazianzen, prays unto Saint
Nazianz^ Orat. in Cyprianu^
Cyprian, to look from above, to direct his words and his life: To feed, or
rather to govern with him the holy Sheepfolde, committed to his charge. St.
Hillarie S. Hillarie sermon. 124*
says, That the Custody of the Saints is never wanting to those that desire
to stand. As the Angels govern, so also they that Ambr. lib* 8. in Luc.
have deserved the life of Angels, says S. Ambrose. And you heard before, how
he calls the Saints our Governors and the overseers of our lives and
actions. Saint Maximus proves, That Max. Ser. de mart. Tauricis.
we have great familiarity with the Martyrs, because they are with us; and
stay with us, keeping us while we live in our Bodies: and receiving us when we
depart Theodor. Lib. 8. ad^ Graecos,
out of our Bodies. Theodoret records, That they who are to go far from
home, beseech the Martyrs to be their companions in the way, or rather to be
the guides of their Journey: and they that are safely returned give thanks,
and acknowledge the benefit received. Now says S. Leo, The good Shepherd S.
Peter does exceute the Commandment of Leo Ser. 3. de anniuer. suae Assump.
his Lord, confirming us with his exhortations, and not ceasing to pray for us,
that no temptation ouercomme us. By all which, it is more then manifest, that
the Saints of heaven have their part in y^ government of this world under God,
offering up our prayers unto him, assisting the good and punishing the wicked,
as it pleases God to appoint them.

Wherefore to conclude this my Third Argument: all truth may very well be
called the word of God, being eternally expressed, and represented unto him by
the fertility of his divine understanding, which can neither deceive us, nor be
deceived, And therefore, whither it be revealed unto us by his external word,
or intimated by the light of nature, whereby he writes the same in our hearts;
or made known unto us, partly by the one, and partly by the other: it is
always a most certain and a most secure direction for us in all our actions.

It is so natural for men in affliction to call upon all those that are able
to help them, though merely strangers unto them, and the lawfulnes thereof is
so evident, even by the light of reason, that it would seem a point of Madness,
not to ask their relief in case of necessity, though no Scripture at all
could be produced, wherein the same were expressly warranted.

Wherefore, having abundantly showed out of the written word, that ye Saints
in respect of their wonderful love to us; and their unspeakable fervor with
Almighty God, are not only willing and able to help us: but also that they
actually recommend our prayers unto GOD, and are obliged thereunto; First, as
being fellow members, and Secondly, as the principal superintendants, supreme
Senators and Judges, of that mystical Body, which is the Church of God under
Christ our head; The lawfulnes of prayer unto them, entreating their more
gracious prayers, and blessed assistance, does so evidently and so necessarily
follow thereof, that certainly if it be nor madness; I do not say with some
Puritanes, to condemn it of Sacrilege or Idolatry in the holy Fathers
themselves; but so as to suspect it of superstition, error or timeritie,
wherewith other Protestanes are wont to charge all those, who address
themselves, either to the inu^cation or intercession of them; But the hurt is
to them selves, of whom we may well say, as the Prophet said, of every wicked
man in particular, Noluit be^e^^ctionem ^ elo^gabitur ab co. They would not
benediction, and therefore it shall be removed far from them. For, if they
deserve not to be heard of God, but do rather offend him, who being in some
temporal misery, will be delivered by him alone, and obstinately refuse to
beg the help or charity of those, unto whom he has given both will, power,
and direction to relieve them; what favor can the Protestants expect at the
hands of God in their necessities, if knowing and considering as they ought,
that y^ Saints of Heaven are appointed by his Divine Majesty to be so many
Fathers, and Masters, and Superiors unto them; Out of Pride, or stomach, or
presumption they will not once open their mouths to call upon them, but rather
utterly refuse to receive any benefit, or consolation by them?

THE FOVRTH ARGUMENT.
Is Double, or two fold, being framed upon two Paralels, or parities, clearly
drawn out of the Scripture; Whereby if thou mark it well, thou shall also
find that all those objections are plainly refuted, which ye Protestants are
wont to make against Prayer to Saints.

The first Paritie; It is lawful to pray unto Angels, Therefore it cannot be
unlawful to pray unto Saints; because no reason can be given, why the one
should be more allowed then the other. Invocation of Angels, is proved
expressly by the example of I^cob, who Blessing the Sons of Joseph (...); The
Angel that Gen 48, 16.
del^uer^^h me from all evil, Bless these Children. Which to be spoken to a
true Angel is witnessed by Saint Bazill li^. ^. (...) Chri^ost hom. ^, ^n la^d
St. Paul. Job, 5, 1.
Bazill, and St. Chrysostom.

This is also confirmed by the practice of the Church in the time of Job, unto
whom one of his three friends spoke as follows: Call, if there be any that
will answer thee, and turn thee to some one of the Saints. Where by name of
Saints, Saint Augustine, in his Annotations understands S. August
Angels: And no sufficient reason can be given, why Jobs friend, a man of
singular wisdom, should advise him to call upon any of the Angels, if it had
not been a laudable custom in those days, for men in misery to do the
like. And the same may well be said of the Jews, who not understanding our
Savior when he hung upon the Cross, affirmed that he called upon Elias;
which is a probable Argument, that it was no strange thing amongst them at that
time to call upon Elias.

The second paritie, It is lawful to pray to Saints that are living;
Therefore, it is lawful to pray unto the Saints that are departed. The
consequence is proved, because Almighty GOD, is no more dishonored by the
one, then by the other: our Savior CHRIST, no more forsaken, nor sacrilege
any more committed, in the one of these more then in the other: neither can any
reason be alleged out of Scripture, why it should be better to desire, the
prayers of men on earth, who have enough to ask for themselves; then to
recommend our prayers to the Saints of Heaven* who being s^cure of their own,
may the better be solicitous of the salvation of others; especially
considering, they not only hear us: but also sit with Christ in his own
Throne, to govern and protect us as has been proved.

Which Argument has the more force, because we use, and that very
commendably, to request the prayers of those, of whom we are most uncertain,
whether they be friends or enemies of God Almighty. Whereof it follows;
That albeit, it were no less uncertain, whether the Saints of Heaven do
hear us or not; or whether their intercession may avail us or not: yet
unless we were sure of the contrary, which no Protestant can be, this last
reason alone, might be sufficient to induce any reasonable man to recommend
himself unto their prayers.

And truly the Protestants enlarging their consciences so far in this
particular, as to think it no s^^n^ at all, but rather an act of P(...)e to
request the prayers, not only o^ v^ whom they persecute, as most contrary to
themselves in many essential points of Faith: but also of others, who show
themselves most opposite to God himself, in their Life and conversation,
Fornicators, Aculterers, Usurers, Blasphemers, Drunkards, and the like; It is a
wonderful thing, how contemning the Authorititie of the Primitive Church in
the first Ages after Christ: ^luding an Article of their ^reece: Reno^n(...)
part of those pre(...) ^s O lours which are the pr^^er (...) S(...)ts:
Inf^ing^^g a titles of Love and fellowship with the Saints of Heaven: And
b(...) king all bonds of ^u^iection, and Subordination unto them, so contrary
to those Scriptures before alleged; they should condemn even the holy
Fathers themselves of Sacrilege and Idolatry, for craving their intercession,
and think it as bad, or little better in us, to recommend our selves unto the
prayer of any Saint in Heaven, then to the help or protection of the Devil in
Hell.

But far more wonderful it is, that the Protestants here withal, especially
during the first fruits of their spirit, and in their very beginning (whereof
I think some of their Scholars are now ashamed) did not only abridge and
spoil the Saints of Heaven of that little honor, which men on earth were able
to give them as to the friends of God: but did also dishonor and abuse their
holy Relics, in such foul and hateful manner; as worse could not have been
done to the bodies and bones of Devils incarnate. And if it be monstrous
impiety in the Son, to tread under feet the dead Body of his Father, or to
mangle or destroy it, or to cast it dispitefully on the Dunghill what crime
soever he had committed; what Barbarous inhumanitie and Heathenish impiety
(which God forgive) did the Protestants perform, upon the Sacred Bodies of
those glorious Saints, that ought to have been a thousand times more dear
unto them, then the flesh and blood of their own Fathers? certainly the doers
of these things, could not be sent from God Almighty, who vouchsafes to
honor his Saints so exceedingly as has been showed; but from him who by the
hands of Protestants having furiously torn the bodies of their Saints out of
their graves, would also have plucked their souls out of Heaven, if he had
been able.

THE FIFTH ARGUMENT
is taken from the exceeding many Mirracles, and supernatural effects,
wherewith it pleased God in all ages to make most honorable demonstration of
the glory of his Saints, and of their infallible power through his virtue, to
help all those that call upon them. For a Miracle, Exodus 11 10. Deuteronomy. 4, 34.
Math, 12 3^. Mark, 16 17. Deuteronomy. 18, 22. Ioh. 5, ^6 10, 38. 14, 12. 15. 24.
may well be called a Testimony, or Certificate of the truth which it
confirms, published as it were to the worlae under the proper hand, and great
broad Seal of GOD him self, which therefore is also called a Sign; And which,
as above all other proofs, the Jews were commanded to receive in the old
Law: so were they cast out of Gods favor, for disobeying the same in the new.

It were too long to descend to perticulers, for the which, I refer me with
Bellarmine, to the Epistle of Nilus, recited in the seventh Nilus. Theodor.
general Council to Theodoret, in his History, lib. 5. cap. 24. and lib. 8.
ad Graecas: To Saint Ambrose* sermon. 19 Ambrose
which is of Saint Agn^s: To S(...) Augustine, lib. 22: Augustine
de C^^tate Dei, cap 8. Io. Gregori^ the great, Lib. 3. Gregory
D^al. Cap. 22. 24. 25. 37. T(...) Bon^uenture in the Bonaue^t.
life of Saint Francis. And finally to the life of Saint Barnar^: Life of S.
Bernard
wherein there is received a most wonderful Miracle wrought by Saint Barnard
him self, who in confirmacion of this very point of prayer to Saints, which
he preached against the heretics of his time that spoke against it; Blessed
certain bread which the people offered with the Sign of the Cross, and said;
In this you shall know, that those things are true which we have Preached If
all your sick, having tasted of this Bread, shall be restored to their former
health, And when the Bishop there had said, If they re^^iue it with a good
faith they shall be healed; Saint Barnard added, I do not say so, but assuredly
whosoever they be tha^ taste it, shall be healed, to the end they may know
that we are true Messengers sent from God. Whereupon, a huge multitude of sick
folks having tasted that Bread recovered, that this word was diuulged over
all the Province.

To conclude, in all the places likewise before alleged, those venerable and
renowned Authors have related so many Miracles in this point of prayers to
Saints, as if any Protestant would take the pains, either to read them, or to
hear them recited, they would be more then sufficient to convince him, For he
that should deride or contemn the judgments of those famous Saints, were
very profane; And how can he think himself a good Christian, that will give
no credit or belief to the chief Pastors and Doctors of the Church of Christ?
whom shall we believe; if we believe not them? Were not this to take away all
faith, and together therewith all Moral belief out of the word?

And this shall suffice me (Courteous Reader) to have collected for the most
part out of other Catholic Authors for thy satisfaction in this point of
prayer to Saints drawn by good consequence out of the Text it self of holy
scripture, which the Protestants on the other side have neither heretofore nor
ever will be able to answer hereafter; and much less to produce any solid
Argument out of Scripture, for the proof of the contrary: without the which
notwithstanding, though we alleged no proof at all, it were more then absurd
to condemn any general custom or practice of Church or Common wealth; as
has been noted in the beginning.

Wherefore gentle friend now at the length to conclude this whole discourse; if
thou rest satisfied therewith I shall think my labor well bestowed: but neither
will I think it lost, if I may gain so much of thee, as not fearing to venture
thy Soul, with the ancient Fathers, upon a truth so testified, not only by
the word of God in Scripture: but also with the very hand of God in Signs and
Miracles, as well at this present time, as in all former ages; thou will be
content to make some trial of the power and ability, of the Saints to help
thee, by recommending thy self seriously to their intercession for thee;
desiring them to beseech Almighty God, that thou may obtain sufficient
light to discern his every saving truth, and effectual grace to embrace it,
And in particular, to recommend thy poor Soul to the prayers of the Mother of
God, our Blessed Lady; who, as Saint Barnard says, is the neck under Christ
our head, whereby all Grace descends unto every member of his mystcall Body.
For I doubt not thou shall find that true comfort, and Real satisfaction in
the excercises thereof, with such a touch of Gods finger, as well better
persuade thy heart, then any other Pen can master thy understanding, until it
please his divine Majesty to subject it fully to the rule of faith; and to
place it firmly on the Rock which is the pillar and foundation of truth.

And so remitting thee to the Prayers them selves of this Book, I desire to be
pertaker of their good effects: etc. rest.

Thine in Jesus Christ: C. A.

THE Interior occupation of the SOVLE. Treating, of the important business of
our salvation with God and his saints, by way of Prayer.
Title 1. Adoration.
1. I Adore thee, O great GOD, with all the creatures which are in Heaven and
on earth, prostrated and cast down even to the center of my nothing, and
before the T^rone of thy sovereign Majesty.

2. My affection is far too little to acknowledge thy high Deity, and
therefore I present unto thee the hearts of Angels and men, the natural
property of the elements, the growth of plants, the sense of beasts, the motion
of whatsoever is in nature, and the very being of all things. Adoring with the
dependence, which they have of thy divinity, that which thou art in them, and
honoring that, which they are in thee.

3. If I had the affection of all those men and women, which have presented
unto thee sacrifices of divine worship, and sovereign adoration, as well in
the law of nature, as in the written and Evangelical law, I should melt in thy
presence: but seeing that all things subsist before thee, I beseech thee that
thou will accept my most humble and profound adoration, as comprising them all,
and being comprised in them.

4. Above all I offer, and present the interior actions of the humanity of
Jesus Christ thy son, even from the first instant of the creation thereof, to
the very last period of his life: and those also, which he continually
exercises in heaven.

5. I present also unto thee, the internal acts of that most happy Virgin his
mother, of the Cherubins, Seraphins, and of all those holy spirits, which
opposed themselves against the revolt of the Apostate Angels: and whatsoever
else has proceeded at any time from those souls, which have been most
pleasing unto thee from the beginning of the world. Beseeching thee to number
me amongst them, to join my holocaust with theirs, and to receive it as a
sweet smelling sacrifice.

6. The most part of corporal creatures, do not acknowledge the being, they
have received from thee, nor the Obligation, which they have to thee for the
same: many abuse that being, which thou have bestowed upon them, as Infidels,
heretics, reprobates, and all the accursed devils: I offer thee them, O my
God, and prostrate them, as much as is in my power, at the feet of thy
Majesty, adoring thee as often as they offend and blaspheme thee, and I do
homage unto thee with the actions, and the very natural being, with the which
they sin, and which they abuse.

7. Great is the honor, that hitherto has been ^oone to the great personages
of the earth, and is still continued every day, Incense has bin offered up to
Idols, Idolatry is committed to corporal beauty, O the God of my soul, I
lay hold of all those thoughts, words, profane actions and passions, and as
far as my mind can stretch, I separate from them all deformity, to make a
present, and sacrifice of that being, they have, of which thou art the Author.

8. I ask thee also, most humble pardon, for all the honor, which since I
came first to the use of reason, I have given to creaturs without referring it
actually, or habitually to thee, who art the fountain of all greatness, and
excellency it self: of which excellency, honor is but a testimony, and
mark.

9. To conclude, I acknowledge and adore thee, O sovereign Deity, Father,
Son and holy Ghost, as often as I breath, or as there are minutes in an
hour, stars in the Sky, leaves upon the trees, sands in the sea, thoughts
in the hearts of men and Angels.

10. Dispose of the world, as it shall please thee, do with me, and with all
creatures, as seems best to thy Majesty, raise up, pluck down, chastise,
cherish; be thou such to Angels and men in Heaven, in earth, in time, and in
aeternitie, as stands best with thy liking, In all, and by all, and always, I
will adore thy providence, I will conform my self to thy will, as the only
paradise of my soul. And I will make good to all, and against all, this most
certain truth, that thou can not do, but that which I will, for I will
whatsoever thou do.

Title 2. Thanksgiving.
1. I Thank thee, O my GOD, that thou art as thou art, the greatest good, that
can befall me.

2. I thank thee O mighty Father, that knowing thy self, thou ingendrest a
word, which is thy Son, and another thy self.

3. I present most humbly thanksgiving (O incomparable Father) that thou love
thy Son, and thy Son loves thee with such a love, and so admirably
perfect, that it carries with it the common essence, nature, and substance of
you both.

4. I thank thee, O my God, for the extraordinary graces which thou have
bestowed upon the soul of our Savior Jesus Christ thy Son: and I thank thee
my sweet Jesus, for those which thou have imparted to thy worthy Mother: and I
thank thee, O merciful holy Ghost for those, which the Angels, the
Patriarchs, the Prophets Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and all the
Court of Heaven, have received from thee, not only during their abode here in
earth, but also since their happy abode in Heaven.

5. And in particular I give thee thanks for the grace, and glory, thou have
bestowed upon mine Angel guardian, and upon the Saint my patron, of whom by
thy especial providence, I have my name.

6. What thanksgiving shall I render unto thee for the goods of my soul and
body, which I have received from thee? I do give thee thanks for them, in him
for whom, and by whom thou have bestowed them upon me, who is Jesus Christ thy
Son. And I give thee thanks, that in his name, and by his merits, I have
received them, not willing to have any thing, but by him, and for him. I
present unto thee the same thanksgiving, which the soul of my Lord thy Son,
did offer unto thee at that instant, when it knew it self created of nothing,
and personally united to the word.

7. I give thee thanks for thy gifts, not because they are mine, but because
they are thine, not because they are agreeable to my will, but because they are
conformable to thine: being most ready and willing to be deprived of them, when
it shall please thee, to take them to thee again: beseeching thee, that thou will so do, when thou shall judge it more for thy glory.

8. Thou have bestowed graces upon me, which through thy grace I know, and
acknowledge, and thou have bestowed upon me others, of which through mine own
blindness, I am ignorant, Thou have bestowed, and would yet bestow more, if
it were not long of my self. Thou will bestow also others, which I shall not
acknowledge, and which through my frailty, and accustomed ingratitude I shall
abuse. For all which, my God, God of infinite goodness, and mercy, I give thee
thanks with all the force, that it has pleased thee to bestow upon me, and
not knowing, nor being able to do it, as I should, I do it in Jesus Christ
thy Son, with the same affection, acknowledgement, and thanksgiving, which
his holy humanity has given, and does give incessantly to thy Divinity, for
whatsoever favors, or graces, it received of thee.

9. I am also to give thee thanks for those graces, and favors, which I never
received, and which out of thy infinite goodness and providence, thou have
forborne to bestow upon me, as knowing that I would have abused them, and
thereby have become more accomptable, to thy most exact and most perfect
justice.

10. Over and above all this, as I stand greatly obliged unto thee for thy
favors, and graces themselves; So it is true, that I am much more obliged for
that love, and charity, out of which thou have bestowed them upon me. For the
which, because it is infinite, I give thee infinite thanks in him, who is the
efficient, instrumental, meretorious, and final cause of all thankfulness
Jesus Christ thy Son; for whom and by whom thou have done all; praise, love,
and glory be unto thee, in him, and by him world without end, Amen.

Title. 3. Petition.
1 IF I were mine own, O my God, I would demand many things according to my
own sense and will: but seeing it has pleased thy merciful Charity, that I
should not be mine own but thine, what can I desire for my self, which is not
for thee and according to thee. Do th^^ for me, as for thy self, and dispose
of me, as of a thing that is thine.

2. O Lord, I am thine by creation, by conservation, by redemption and by
especial vocation, by condition of nature, and election of my own will, why
then do thou permit, that a stronger take from thee thine inheritance? that I
or any other, should enter into possession of that, of which the peaceable
propriety appertains to thee? why do thou endure, that any other will then
thine, should be accomplished in me, of whom thou art only and wholly possessed.

3. He, that does that which is more, does easily that which is less; thou
give thy self to me, take me then unto thee. To create me, it cost thee only
thy word, but to regenerate me, it cost thee thy life. To form me, an act only
of thy will was sufficient; but to reform me, th'effusion of thy blood was
judged necessary. Both the one and the other being effected by thee, nothing
remains but that thou do, and say what thou will, so as thou dispose of me
according, as thou have deserved.

4. So often as I ask of thee any thing, do the contrary, if the contrary
shall be more agreeable to thy will, and to thy greater glory. For such is the
intention of my Petition.

5. My wills, are no wills; my petition, refusals; my desires, so many
detestations; when thou will otherwise, then I desire.

6. If I knew in every thing, what is thy will, O God, the center of my soul,
I would make known both in Heaven, and earth, that I have no other intention,
then to accomplish thy holy will.

7. Can one be importune to him, of whom he seeks the honor, love, and
service according to the measure of his will? If I will any thing else, hear
me not, grant it me not, O my God.

8. Content thou thy self in me, and I shall be content, dispose of me, as of
a thing that is thine, and I shall be too happy.

9. Why do I (wretch that I am) mine own will, contrary to thy will? or why
preuailes my will which is not mine, against the will which is both thine and
mine.

10. Have I any secret corner of a stolen will, to which I am not able to
resist? If it be so (O searcher of hearts) pluck up by the roots from out of
thy field this naughty herb, with all the dependants thereof. But if there
be no such thing, lay hold on me wholly for thy self: seeing nothing can
hinder me from being thine but an evil will, the which I renounce, as often as
it is possible for me to will or nill any thing.

11. Herein thou have particulerly formed me to thine own Image and likeness,
that I can will what thou can will, and as thy power is infinitely extended,
the capacity of our will is of like extent: with all the dimensions then of
this will, I beg of thee instantly the accomplishment of thy will and the
annihilating of mine, if any be to be found in me, which is not thine.

12. I could perticularly tie my will to some certain object, but I do it no
further then it ioynes with thy will, this by thy grace I will, this I intend,
this I protest.

13. Why am I not then henceforth such an one as thou desire I should be?
shall it be said, that my misery has prevailed against thy mercy; my malice,
against thy goodness; my nothing against thy omnipotency; my frailty against
thy invincible strength; my poverty against thy riches; my baseness against
thy greatness; my indignity against thy dignation; my inconstant will against
thy will, which is eternal and immutable? to be short, that which I am,
against that which thou art? Endure it not, suffer it not, permit it not O my
God, for this would redound much to thy dishonor.

14. When I present unto thee my desires, either I present nothing, or I intend
to present unto thee those very desires of Jesus Christ thy Son. Give place
then O merciful Father, to the desires of thy Son in the person of thy
servant.

15. He has promised, that thou would grant unto us, whatsoever we should
desire in his name; for his merits then accomplish his desires. This is it,
which he, I, and thou will.

16. My Redeemer, thy Son, has two wills, the one divine, the other human:
His divine will demands, and commands, that I be humble, pacient, charitable,
meek, alive to thee, and dead to my self. His human will demands the same,
and has deserved it. Grant then, O Father, grant unto thy Son, the
accomplishment of both wills, both divine and human, So thou thy self shall
be served, thy son honored, the holy Ghost, true God of love, be, as he well
deserves, loved. Thy eternal Wisdom, and infinite godnesse, did bestow upon
me in my creation a free will: I perceive that it will not be unlike unto it
self in forcing my will: Neither shall it be needful for thee so to do, if
it shall please thee to bestow a grace upon me so agreeable to my will, that
without any violence I shall incline it to that which thou will. This effectual
grace I do desire and ask of thee my God, by the desires and merits of Jesus
Christ thy Son, my sole and solid hope.

17. If I be troublesome, importune, and over bold in asking, I shall content
my self (O my God) to have obtained one grace, which is, that I may ever be
correspondent and answerable to thy graces.

18. My Lord! if I know not what to do, grant that I may give thee leave to
do, and that my doing at the least may be to permit thee to do.

19. Take from thy self then that offense to see one so miserable, and give
unto thy self that contentment, that I may be such a one, as thou would I
should be.

20. Do it not for me, but for thy self: not because I will so, but because
so is thy will; not because I deserve it, but for the merits of my Lord thy
Son.

21. There is not a wound in his sacred humanity, there is not a thorn in his
crown, which makes not intercession for me, and beggeth not of thee
incessantly that, which thou command.

22. Thou comaundest, they demand, but I amend not my self, who shall
prevail at the last in this fight?

23. O Father, get thee another Son of less merit then he, and of another
nature then thine, or do his will, and restore unto him his merit.

24. His infinite merit was not for himself, the glory of his body and the
exaltation of his name only excepted. These are my inheritance, these are my
riches, this is my portion. Deny me not that, which it has pleased thee to
bestow upon me, and in doing justice to thy Son, exercise mercy toward thy
servant.

25. If I were honored with his prayers, thou would hear him, and hear me:
So is it then that I can ask thee nothing, I can desire nothing of thee, that
he does not ask and desire, and that with groans which cannot be expressed.
Permit me then to argue thus for thee, against thee, O my God.

26. It is the will of God the holy Ghost, that I be perfect, God the Son
deserves it, God the Father then being one, and the same God with them, ought
to effect it.

27 Most honorable Father, in the consideration of that blessedness thou have
in thy Son: Word most amiable in contemplation of that being, which thou
had of thy Father: Holy Ghost God of Charity, in remembrance of that
Divinity which was communicated unto thee by the Father and Son; grant that
I be such as thou would I should be, and that there be nothing in me that
may displease thee. And having obtained this, I will importune you no more.

28. I am not worthy to pray for any whosoever, no not so much as to appear in
thy presence, or once to think of thee, O God of sovereign Majesty: which
makes me first most humbly to ask thee pardon, that I dare lift up my thoughts
so high as to thee. And after this to crave, that thou will be pleased to
receive my prayers, not as proceeding from me, but as inspired by thee. And
(that the effects of them may answer thy desire, and thy greater glory) to
join them with these of Jesus Christ thy son, of his holy Mother, of the
Apostles, Martyrs, Doctors, Virgins, and confessors, and those of either Church
triumphant and militant* It being so, that the prayers, sacrifices, and good
works, which we call past, are always existent, subsistent, and present
before thee, The time past, present, and to come, being one, and the same thing
in thy immutable aeternitie.

29. I will not then make supplication to thee to call to mind, but to regard
these prayers, as present: and in particular for the spiritual and corporal
health of the King, and Queen, his royal house, and all the Kingdom; Even
those that the good Patriarch Joseph did present unto thee for all Egypt:
Samuel for Saul; Daniel for Darius the three Children for Nahuchodonozer; Elias
for the Kings of Israel; Nathan for David; Esaias for Ezechias; Toby for
Salmanaz; Hester for Assuerus; St. John Baptist for Herod; St. Siluester for
Constantine St Chrysostom for Eudoxia; St. Ambrose for Theodosius; St. Gregory
for Maurice the Empeior; St. Stanislaus for Boleslaus; St. Thomas of Canterbury
for the then King and Realm of England; and those of all the Saints, for ye
Kings and Princes, with lived in their time.

30. Who is able to pray for the necessities of the Church, with that seruour
and efficacy, as did St. Gregory, for the Reformation of religious Orders, as
did Saint Francis, St. Dominicke, St. Thomas and St. Bonauenture? For States,
Realms, and Empires, as did St. Sigismund King of Burgundy; St. Carnut, King
of Denmark; St. Oswald and St. Edmund, Kings of England; St. Lewis King of
France; Henry the Emperor; St. Caenigand his wife, St. Clothe, and St. Radigand
Queens of France; St. Edwin Duchess of Poland; St. Elizabeth in Hungary? and
others, who by thy grace knew how to join Piety with the Scepter; greatness
temporal with aeternall; perishing honors with honors immortal? If (I my God
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords) I could speak unto thee with the same
accent and aequal devotion: how many graces and blessings, should I obtain of
thy most liberal clemency for this Monarchy? for the Monarch that commands
us, and represents thee? Accept then, for him and all that appertain to him,
the same vows, sacrifices, and prayers, which have been presented unto thee
by all the Saints, whose honorable names are written in the Book of life:
and look not at me, but look upon them, of whom I present unto thee, the
merits, and prayers, by thy Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Title. 4. Protestation.
1. I Know to my cost, and to my great damage, how prejudicial I am to my
self, and how great my fra^ltie is: and therefore have occasion to fear,
least that so soon as I shall be departed hence, I break my purposes, and do
clean contrary to that, which I promised. O omnipotent and immutable God, have
pity upon me thy frail creature. Stretch forth thy strong hand and
invincible arm, to give s(...)ur to the work of thy han^* permit not that a
creature which has cost thee so dear, be so easily and so dishonorably taken
from thee. If my will be requisite hereunto: behold it is in thy hands, I give
it thee, nay I restore thee it, never to be revoked. And since there is no
better title, then the title of donation, (O God of my heart) command that the
gift which thou have pleased to make unto me of thy self, may authorize the
gift which Iowe, and which I give of my self. And that this donation made by
me living, and confirmed by thy death, may be so emoled in the Records of thy
eternity, that albeit I would it may not be revoked, such being the
disposition of thy grace, and my last will.

2. And in truth were it reasonable that an evil will, which passes, should
disanull a determined resolution, made before so resolutely?

3. I protest, out of all the corners of my will, and with all the strength of
my freedom and liberty, and with a consent as full as is possible, that I
will not offend thee in any thing. I will be thine wholly without exception, I
will that which thou will, and detest that which thou detestest. And if it fall
out otherwise, if it so happen, that I seek my self, that I commit theft in
this holocaust, that I do or omit any thing, contrary to thy will and
p^easure: it shall be nothing else, but a surprise and a stolen will,
altogether contrary to that, which now by thy grace, whilst I am in my perfect
sense and judgment, and by thy assistance mistress of my consent I so
resolutely will and desire.

4. And if it should so fall out, that by exceeding frailty (at the shadow
whereof I tremble for fear) I should give my consent to any thing, that is
repugnant to thy will: permit not, O God of truth, and of infinite goodness;
that such a fault be for ever imputed unto me, since I renounce it both now and
then. And that consent which is authorized by thine, and of which thou art the
author, ought to prevail against that which is not mine, but by unhappiness,
and of which the instigator and first mouer, is the enemy of thy glory, and my
salvation.

5. Every one they say may renounce his right: I renounce then ye right of my
free will, when it shall be tempted, and in danger to offend thee. And
therefore spare not to force it to that which is good, at what time soever,
without having any regard to my freewill, the which otherwise, thou would
leave to her own liberty, as thy holy word does teach us.

6. And if yet not to contradict thy self, thou have regard to leave my will
to her freedom, Consider (O most wise Architect of Man) that my will is not to
have any will to do that which is naught; and herein thou shall co^descend to
my free will, though thou should not respect it at all: seeing it renounceth
absolutely herself in any thing, which has relation to that, which is evil.

7. What perfection is it, to have power to consent to that which is evil?
thou have it not O my God, for it is an imperfection. Make me then thus far
more according to thine Image: that as thou my prototype, can not sin by
nature, so I may be impeccable by grace.

8. And if to have the power to fail in my duty, be a thing appertaining to
my condition, as being the servant and slave of sin, is it not enough that I
have, wretch that I am, finned so often? but that I must make further proof
thereof, to the prejudice of thy honor and glory? better it were for me not
to be at all, then to continue still to offend thee.

9. The love of my self, makes me enemy to my self; and that in seeking my
self I loose my self, and not finding my self, I am still lost. I renounce
this enmity, and I detest it with as much hatred, and as often as I have
hitherto so loved my self, or shall hereafter by my evil custom.

10. Allow, O good God, this declaration of my will. And receive in thy
judgment, and in the account that thou hold of my actions, words, and
thoughts, all such affections, as if they were so many afflictions; all such
inclinations, as so many auersions; all such pursuites, as so many flights; and
all such tacit consents, as so many express resistances.

11. But seeing O sovereign truth, thou can not judge of things, or take
them otherwise then they are; and that if I do seek my self; thou can not
but know, that I do so, I am content if it be so But with this condition O my
God, and not otherwise, that thou look upon me from henceforth as a thing y^
is thine, and that thou impute the love of my s^lf^ as an affection, bestowed
upon a thing that is wholly thine; As the son, whatsoever he gets, he gets
to the b^nefit of his father so long as he is under the power of his father;
and as a bond slave whatsoever he gets, is to his masters profit.

12. From henceforth all the solicitude I shall have, either for apparel, or
meat, or drink, or any such like things; all my affections, reflections,
goings forth, returnings back, that I shall have either in my self, of my
self, or about my self: all my joy, all my fear, all my sorrows, all my
pleasures, all whatsoever appertaining to my vanity past, and the inordinate
care y^ I have had of my self; all this, my God, shall from henceforth be
wholly addicted to thy service, unto the preservation of a thing which is
thine, neither more nor less, then if all this were done by me, to any poor
creature in an Hospital, or any other, toward whom all this exercise of
diligence and charity should be pleasing to thee. Allow this O my God, receive
this O my Father, accept of this O my gracious Lord, by the merits of him whose
works, words, and thoughts never strayed from thy will. He has lived for me,
he dyed for me, even so I will dye to my self, and live to him, and so my
life, shall be hidden in his, and shall appear before thee, as if it were his,
and all the care I shall have, shall not be of a thing that is mine: but it
shall be O the only beloved of my soul, as of a thing that is thine. And what
other means, O God of my soul, can be found t^ cut off the head, and kill
this most horrible Hydra of selfeloue, considering the great malice thereof.

Title 5. To the soul of our Savior Jesus Christ.
1. MOst holy, and most happy soul, Empress of Heaven and earth, I beseech
thee by thy incomparable grace which thou receiuedst, when at the instant of
thy creation, thou wa(...) ^ited to thy divinity, and supported by the person
of the word, that thou will be pleased to obtain for me, those virtues, of
which thou have left us both a Commandment, and an example above all others,
Chartitie, humility and purity.

2. By the blessedness thou did enjoy, even then beholding the Essence of
the Son of God, to whom thou are personally united, deliver me from the
love of my self, and the great misery of my imperfections.

3. Thy holy Mother was impeccable by grace, thou wast so by nature; as well
for that thy divine Will did govern thy humane: as also because by thy
understanding thou did possess, and by thy will created thou had fruition
of the Divine essence. I dare not ask impeccabilitie, but only the grace
never to sin; and if the power to sin be left me, yet that the effect of
that power be taken from me.

4. Soul, seat of wisdom, which containest in thee the treasures of thy
Fathers science, thou have been endued with knowledge divine, blessed, and
insused, over and above the knowledge experimental and acquisite, which was
every day increased in thee. Obtain for me by these so rare privileges and
prerogatives, that I may have knowledge both of divine, and human things; so
as I may never stray from the right path of faith and charity.

5. Soul, the splendour of the glory of the Father, and the Image of his
goodness, be my guide and conductor, in the midst of the perils and
temptations of the dangerous life of this world. Dissipate the clouds of my
passions, drive away the night of my ignorance, making me ever, and in all
things, to acknowledge his will, to who^ thou art personally united.

6. Over and above the grace of union hipostaticall and blessed, thou ba^st
also the grace of Capital union, as being the head of men and Angels. Make me
then to draw abundantly out of this plentiful well, and to partake to the
greater glory of thy Father, of those influences which flow upon thy mystical
body, the Church militant and Triumphant.

7. Who is able to express the thanksgiving when of nothing, and out of that
bottomless depth of not being any thing, common to all creatures; thou
perceiuedst thy self to be transported, to a personal union with God? who is
able to recount that holocaust, and sacrifice, that thou made of thy self,
for the accomplishing of that excellent work of our redemption? with what
excess of Charity, did thou consecrate thy self to God the Father? with
what an eye of compassion, did thou behold human Nature, of which thou wast
a noble sprig and branch? In remembrance of all those thy internal eminent
actions, for the love of thy Hypostasie, by the merits of thy abode in this
world, and by all whatsoever appertains to thy incarnation, I beseech thee to
thank him for me, to whom thou art united: to give and sacrifice me to his
glory: to present unto him my actions, vows, intentions, and thoughts: to make
my miserable abode in this world pleasing unto him: to make unto him an
holocaust of my life, and a sacrifice of my death.

8. Thou wast no sooner united to that body, framed in the womb of the Virgin,
drawn and taken out of the most pure substance of thy virgin Mo^^er, but that
thou wast received, and supported by the word. O so(...), Queen of men,
Princess of Angels, obtain for me by this grace, the grace that I may be
delivered from the cogitation of the body, and infection of the flesh, from
which thou wast preserved, being by an extraordinary manner without Adam joined
to the flesh, which descended from Adam.

9. Ignorance, frailty, and malice, are the furniture of this corrupt Mass,
from which we are drowned: and of that first fault, from which thou wast the
deliverer, and the delivered. I beseech thee to guard me from the falls, to
which I am subject by my natural corruption, and that by the merits of thy
incomparable integrity, purity, and holiness.

10. Thy heart was always attentive to God, of whom thou never did loose
the sight; obtain that I may live in his presence in him ever, and ever before
him.

11. In virtue of the deiformitie of thy soul, my sweet Jesus, I beg of thee
the gift of conformity, and uniformity with thee.

12. By reason of thy Hypostaticall union, thy actions were of infinite merit,
and the only act of thy incarnation sufficient to redeem a thousand worlds.
What shall I not then obtain of God thy Father, if thou shall please once to
present unto him that, which thou have offered, and shed for me, which is thy
precious blood, and thy immaculate and unspotted life, the spring of all merit?

13. Because thou appertainest to God, obtain pardon for me of whatsoever I
have voluntarily done, said, or thought contrary to God. How often did thou
rejoice in the greatness and glory of God, our common creator and Father? and
that much more for it, then for that thou thy self were by his grace? Bring to
pass that all my joy may be in him, my only desire to please him, my only
fear to offend him.

14. All thy actions were of infinite merit; I beg O sanctuary of the
Divinity, the participation of only one, by special application to me.

15. Thou, the only storehouse of Love, and furnace of perfect Charity, do
more love human nature, and much more desire our souls perfections, then all
Angels and men together. We cannot also, nay we ought not to have after God any
better Lord, and friend then thou. I leave then to thee the care of my
salvation, and of that perfection which thy Father requires in me: I leave to
thee the profit of thine own merits, to thee that which thou thy self
desire: to thee that, for which thou have done, said, and endured so much:
to thee that, which cannot subsist, but by thee: to conclude to thee that,
which is as oftentimes thine, as it has pleased thee to be ours.

Title. 6. To the blessed Virgin Mary.
1. BLessed of God amongst Women, and the happiest of all pure creatures, Mary
the Mother of God; I prostrate my self in the profoundnesse of my thoughts
before thee: honoring with all my affection the eminent graces, which it has
pleased the most high and puissant to place in thee, as in the principal and
chief workmanship of his hands, after the humanity of Jesus Christ thy
Son; whose desires concerning me I present unto thee, that by his merits,
and thy prayers, they may be as the abject of his mercyes, fully and perfectly
accomplished in me.

2. Pray then for me, merciful Mother, and in so doing thou shall pray also
for thine own Son: see^ng that he desires in me, that, which I ask of
thee, a thousand times more, then I my self.

3. I am also never resolved to ask any thing of thee for my self, but for
him. I will speak unto thee in his name, I will press the^ by his mer^t^s. I
will adjure thee by the languis^^^g desires of his soul, and as it were
conjure thee by the great and inestimable obligation, that thou have to him, to
deal so effectually with God the Father, that all his desires may be
accomplished in all creatures, and especially in this poor soul of mine, to
which he has given thee grace to desire that, which he desires. If thou put
not to thy hand O puissant Princess, all will pass into vapor, and smoke of
only desires, and I shall remain a fable of the world, and a scorn of hell.

4. By these titles of incomparable honor, with which thy head is crowned, O
Mother of thy Son, O Daughter of the Father, O Spouse of the holy Ghost,
bring to pass, that I may one day with thee, be heir to the Father, coheyre
with the Son, and partake of the inheritance, reserved to the holy Ghost.

5. Tower of David, City of refuge, will thou refuse thy prayers to them, to
whom the fruit of the Virgins womb has not refused his blood?

6. Thou have too great interest in thy Sons inheritance, to neglect, or
disdain to succor with the assistance of thy tongue, those souls, which thy
Redeemer and ours, did recover with the loss of his life.

7. He would, that thou should be his Mother: but it was to the end, that we
might also become his brethren. What hinders us then, from having the spirit
of adoption, toward his Father, and our Father, thy Son and our brother? we
shall have it when it shall please thee to be our Mother by grace, as thou art
his by nature.

8. Thou wast established Queen of Angels, and of men, even from then, when
thou had a Son common to thee with God the Father: and that thou could
say unto God, thou art my Son. O incomparable Mother, o marvel of the
world, O the honor of human lineage; will thou not in acknowledgment of
these benefits and honors, intended toward thee, before thou could merit
them; will thou not procure, in regard of the Almighty which has done so
great things for thee, this little thing which I ask of thee? which is
nothing else, but that I never offend him, especially by deadly sin? and that
in the whole course of my miserable life, I may know and put in execution his
divine will?

9. I am not wor^hy of his love, but he is worthy to be loved of me. I deserve
not to serve him, but he well deserves to be served of me. It is not due to me
to live in him alone, and to dye for him: but I owe it him, and so do thou
thy self. Pay then, O most rich Empress, my debts and thy debts. Acquit them
both for me and thy self, and in doing that which is but duty and justice
toward him, thou shall do a work of compassion and mercy toward a creature
of his, and thy poor servant.

10. As amongst all pure creatures, none ever approached to equal thee, in
regard of the incomparable excellency of him, that was borne of thee: So no
creature whatsoever, shall be ever able to equal thee in mercy. Shall it not
be then, to imitate thy Son and satisfy thy self, if thou afford thy aid
to the miserable. thy succor to such poor sinners as I am? For whom thy
Son has spent all he had, even to the effusion of his most precious blood?
If it be true that the sin of Adam, was the occasion that the Divine word
took flesh, and was borne of thee: it must needs also be, that my misery has
served for a cause, or an occasion of thy greatness, my disgrace of thy grace,
my malediction of thy benediction, and that which I am, of that which thou art:
why then by exchange, shall not thy mercy (if I may so say) serve to my misery;
thy felicity to my infelicitie; thy greatness to my baseness; that which
thou art to that which I am? Be not thou that thou art: or procure that I may
be other then I am. I should here beg of thee to have in recommendation the
Church, and her necessities, if i^ were possible, that a Mother had not care of
her Sons spouse.

Title 7. To Saint Michaell.
1. PRince of the heavenly camp, and inflamed Seraphin; by thy most happy
victory, which thou obtaynedst against those Apostata Angels, of which now the
infernal legions are composed, assist us in our combats: so much the more
dangerous, in that we have not only to fight against flesh and blood, but
against the spirits of darkness, which come marching against us like Giants,
with all the advantage, that the nature of Angels has above (...)

Title. 8. To Saint Gabriell.
1. PAranymph of Heaven, that did bring to the world, the most happy news
that ever was, or shall be by the love of him, who sent thee to the honor of
him, who was by thee Named and Announced, and for the regard to her, to whom
thou broughtest the'mbassage; obtain for me the grace, that I may be obedient
to the Father, pleasing to the Son, and singularly devoted to the Mother.

2. O if I so willingly conceived, and so readily consented to the voice of my
God, as did the blessed Virgin to thine, I should march apace to perfection. I
beseech thee by the joy that the spirit felt, when the Divine word effected thy
word, putting on the rags of our mortality; that thou will be pleased to
obtain for me, this favor of God, that I never resist his inspirations, that
I be attentive to his voice, that for lack of execution I make not sad the
holy Ghost. Obtain I say, for me this grace, thou special ambassador of the
Divinity.

3. Ambassador of God, Legate of Paradise, Nuncies of the celestial Empire;
if any thing be cause of our ruins, for repayring of which the Son of God
espoused himself, to a nature inferior to thine, it was frailty and
ignorance. This appertains to the soul, that to the body. From both the one
and the other thou art free, being a spirit, and full of knowledge. I dare then
adjure thee, by that which thou art, to remedy that, which I am, and to obtain
of him, who did according to thy word, more for me, then thou shall ever be
able to do, that I may know from henceforth, his holy will in all things, and
that in the execution I may be strong, and puissant: Thy most holy Name
signifies divine force, and valor; obtain for me this force against our
common aduersaties, and against the most dangerous enemy, that I know, which
is the love of my self.

4. I salute thee, and thank thee with all my heart, messenger of happy news;
and I be^eech thee to increase my obligacion, by increasing the service, which
by me thou may render then, when thou shall obtain for me the grace not to
be as thou art, but together with thee a fit Instrument, and Organe, to set
forth the glory of God.

Title 9. To the Angel Guerdian.
1. Governor of my life, guide of my pilgrimage, Torchbearer of my
understanding, master of my soul, what thanksgiving shall I render unto thee
for the infinite obli^ations, ^a poor sinner have unto thee? whom thou have
served and assisted, though unworthy and ungrateful from the instant of my
birth; preserving me from so many evils of sin, as I might have incurred;
from so many dangers, as my body has passed and had fallen into, had thou
not favored me. If I should thank thee as often as I breath, I could not
satisfy my obligation; neither will I, nor can I do it, but in him by whom
and for whose love, thou have been so faithful to me. Ask then thy
recompense of him for so many benefits, and permit not that I dye ungrateful
toward thee, least I dye miserable in the fight of God.

2. Vnfatigable friend; the infamous odor of my sins, might have caused thee
to have withdrawn thy self from me, as stink chaseth away Doves, and smoke
Bees. And yet notwithstanding, thou have had patience to stay near to this
dunghill, with charity greater then tongue can utter, and with longanimitie
altogether Angelical. Thanks be given unto thee, by all the courts of Heaven,
and by all those creatures which have interest in my salvation; all whom thou
have together with me obliged unto thee. If ever I come, as by thy mediation I
hope I shall, to the haven of beatitude, I will render unto thee, O my loving
and beloved Patro^, the principal, and arrerages of so many, so special, and
so particular obligations, in the presence of him, whom thou incessantly
look in the face. How often had I fallen into rivers, into flames, into
dungeons, into the hands of my visible and invisible enemies? How often had
Satan styfled me whilst I was drinking, eating, sleeping, walking?
especially at those times, when he perceived me to be out of the grace of God;
if thou O my guide, and singular benefactor, had not broken his strength, and
dissipated his designs?

3. So many times thou have saved my life, as thou have preserved me from
deadly sin, so many times thou have rendered unto me my life, as thou have
raised me out of deadly sin. A life a thousand times more precious then that
of the body, and consequently a benefit as much greater, as aeternitie
exceeds time; grace, nature; the glorious state of the Saints, the miserable
condition of the damned. Thanks therefore be unto thee as many times, as there
are moments in time o^ imaginable minutes in aeternitie.

4. What shall I say of thy going from God to us, and returning from us to God?
exciting the one, appeasing the other? carrying up our prayers, and bringing
down his presents? what of so many inspirations? secret motions? benign
influences? so many interior and exterior ends? so many Angelical
inventions, devises, stratagems of Charity, as thou have used to retire me
from vice, and the inclinations of a corrupt nature, to draw me to the love of
him, whom love made to dye for me? There is no means, how in this valley of
tears, and in the midst of this Egyptian darkness, I may know ye thousand
part of these oblgations: and how shall I then be able to acknowledge them?
Finish then, O sage Pilot, this my perilous Navigations, end this chief work,
which hitherto has put thee to so great pain. For if thou shall have fully
accomplished this; I shall have means to recompense that which is past, to
repair that which is lost, and to make even my debts. Look well then into it,
as is thy custom, O my guide it concerns thee exceeding much, seeing
thereupon depends the glory of God, and the salvation of a soul, committed to
thy charge.

5. And if it be possible, that thou should not be interessed in my
salvation, I am content that thou neglect both the one and the other. He, which
was made man for me, that lived here for me, that dyed for me, that has
given me his body for meat, and his blood for drink; he, that has honored
me with the title of son, and brother; he, that calls and names himself
my spouse; he, who bowing down the Heavens of his greatness, vouchsafed to
serve me; he, that would dye again, if it were needful, and for me endure
again all that he has suffered; he, I say, persuades, yea nothing else. Do
then that, which thou shall judge to be according to his will. Sweet friend,
and charitable tutor, I will put no other rule, no, no other, then thou thy
self do put, which is, the very great glory of him, to whom we all
appertain, by condition, obligation, and election, to whom be all praise,
honor and glory, world without end.

Title 10. To the Angels.
1. MOst happy Spirits, which incessantly stand before the Throne of God, and
who, as the elder brethren of his house, have care of his inheritance; look
down upon us with a merciful eye, upon us I say who are your younger
brethren, out of the respect and regard you b^^re to him, who is the head both
of the one and the other nature, that is, both of Angels and men. And whom you
serve in helping us, and please in assisting us.

2. You purchased your blessedness good cheap: with one only act of your
will and consent, you were confirmed in grace, and received that glory, which
you shall for ever enjoy without all fear to loose it. But we contrariwise
after many good deeds, and many torments suffered and endured, are always
exposed to danger of shipwreck; which many like to us have made near to the
haven. After many battles, we are still in danger to be overcome: but you
after one victory triumph assuredly. Many days pass before we can ariue
there, whether you are come in an instant. Have then compassion upon the
imperfection of our being, ye whose being is so perfect; pity our
feebleness and weakness, ye that are strong; our ignorance, ye that are so
wise; our malice ye to whom goodness and Charity is continual in the
highest degree.

3. You take and borrow nothing from natural abiects, as helps to comprehend
created verities. For from the first instant of your creation, you have ever
had imprinted in your understanding, the express image of every natural
thing; and beholding your selves, you come to know all things, that are
without you. And that by an action of simple intelligence, running as it were
without the help of any discourse, from the principles to the conclusions, and
from the Antecedents to the consequents.

4. We contrariwise, can conceive nothing with our understandings, which has
not first passed through the siffe of our senses. And our senses depend of the
objects, which often deceive them, and make our judgments erroneous, if they be
not corrected in their deceitful operations by reason and grace.

5. Moreover our discourses depend of our propositions: and they of the terms
of simple apprehension. And the apprehension is made out of the imagination,
and sensitive faculties. And in all this Flux and reflux of thoughts and
Ideas; (O ye thrice and four times happy intelligences) who is able to
express? how many times we perticipate our selves into error? Taking then
notice of the great advantage* you have over us, and not only you, but the
wicked Devils, who have lost nothing else but their grace and glory, retaining
still their nature, in which they are equal to you; fortify and strengthen us
against the giants, of which the Scripture makes mention, Leuiathan, Beelzebub,
Baalmorith, Asmode, Astaroth, and other princes of that army of darkness.

6. We crave but the crumbs, that fall from your table, and the poor scrappes
and remainders of your banquet. Our petition to you is very reasonable; which
is no more, then that ye the good Angels, be pleased to do so much for our
salvation, as the wicked Devils do for our ruin and destruction. That ye be
as ready to succor us, as they are to annoy us; to heal and preserve us, as
they are to hurt us; as diligent in conducting us to God, as they are in
withdrawing us from him, and to do us all the mischief, to which their
knowledge and power can extend.

Title 11. To the holy Patriarckes.
1. HOly souls, who during your abode here in this vale of tears, were the
salt of the earth, and light of the world; how great have your virtues been?
how great your perfection, had you lived under the Gospel, as you lived under
the Law of nature, and Moses? we are in the fullness of time, to which you so
much aspired, and for which you so often suspired; obtain for us the grace to
acknowledge and correspond to so great a benefit, and that we may live as
holily after the incarnation of the Son of God, as you did before his coming;
and that we may now do as much for his glory, as you would have done, if ye
had lived in this happy time.

2. By that joy, not to be uttered by any tongue, wherewith you were then
replenished, when the most holy soul of our and your Redeemer descended to
those places under earth, in which you were detained, expecting the Ladder of
Jacob, and the Key of David to come forth; I beseech you to obtain of your
deliverer, for all poor sinners, such as I am, that we may get out of the
dark dungeon of ignorance, and the filthy quagmire of our bad and lewd
customs. And that as the gates of Hell could not prevail against the King of
glory: so sin may from henceforth no more prevail against such, as believe
in him, in whom you placed your hope, and with whom upon the day of his
tryumphant Ascension you ascended to glory, crowned with immortal Laurels;
carrying in your hands, and sweetly tasting the fruits of your lively Faith,
longanimity, hope, and inflamed Charity.

3. Ye hold the rank of Patriarckes amongst those, which believe in the name
of the Son of God; be ye then unto us good Fathers, for the love of him, upon
whom depends all Father-hood, both in Heaven and Earth; and obtain for us
the spirit of the children of God, a contrary spirit to that of mercinarie
fear; to the end that we may one day, come to be partakers of that
inheritance, of which ye now are peaceable possessors.

Title. 12. To the holy Prophets.
1. PRotonotaries of Heaven, Registers of truth, and mirrours of the Divinity;
your holy souls have been the organs, and your mouths the harmonious
instruments of him, who is the fountain of wisdom, and oracle of all truth.
Obtain for us, that we may see by Faith, what you did foresee by the spirit
of Prophecy, and possess that by charity, which you hoped for.

2. The light of Prophecy is a personal and free gift, bestowed upon you for
the instruction of Israel, and consolation of Christians. Herein we content
our selves only to admire you, but in another thing we desire to imitate you.
And that is, in that interior Attention you had to the presence of God, the
better to understand his voice; and having understood it, to follow and put in
execution his inspirations. O when shall I see that desired hour, in which I
may say with one of you, I will hear what our Lord says in me.

3. His words are words of peace, his voice a voice of benediction. Why then,
O you holy censurers of our manners, do I so often lend him a deaf ear!
Awake by your prayers my spirit, pacify my affections; illuminate my
darkness, address mine intentions to the center of every just desire, which
is the accomplishment of his divine Will, only to be loved and desired.

Title. 13. To Saint John Baptist.
1. PRaecursor of the Son of God, voice of the word, and paranymph of the
heavenly Spouse; by that wonderful similitude of thy conception, nativity,
life, and death, to that of him whose baptist thou were, by the graces,
privileges, and prerogatives extraordinarily bestowed upon thee, loose my
tongue, that I may praise God, as thou did loose the tongue of thy Father
Zachary. Obtain for me that I may fly the occasion of sin, according to
that example thou have left me, who from thy tender years did retire thy
self into the desert. Obtain I say, that the dew of thy grace may fall
abundantly upon me, that I may be washed and cleansed in the flood of penance,
by the merits of that precious blood, the sacred vessels whereof were washed
by thee in the flood of Jordan.

2. And if I must be great, let my ambition be to aspire to that greatness,
which was in thee (that is) to be great before God; If I must be covetous,
that it may be after the imitation of thee, a covetousness of the riches which
are Eternal; If voluptuous, let it be of these pleasures, which thou did
seek with thy hair and sackcloath.

3. I have I confess, a ^ee very contrary to that virtue wherewith thou were
endued; and this vice is the too great love and care of this body, which is
nothing else but a sack of worms, a dunghill of corruption, and sincke of
miseries. Obtain for me, O great Anchorite, great Prophet, and great Martyr;
that I may from henceforth become an enemy to the sensual and brutish part of
my soul, and adversary to this stinking dunghill, and a rigorous iusticer
toward this living carcass. It being a thing most certain, that no man can
hurt him who hurts not himself.

4. Thou have maintained truth, and justice with danger, yea with loss of thy
own life: procure for me, that the one may be immouably seated in my heart,
and the other inuariably placed in my mouth.

5. Inconstancy, mother of perfidiousnesse, accompanies me; and I am the
reed, continually exposed to the winds, from which thou wast shadowed.
Obtain for me by the merits of this thy virtue, and by the abundant heavenly
succor which thou never wantedst; that from henceforth I may be more firm and
constant in such resolutions, as proceed from the holy Ghost. I ask this of
thee, O Champion of the living God, and unconquerable Soldiour; by all the
victories, which thou have gotten to the honor of him, who by a special grace
did with his own mouth canonize thee.

6. Heaven has powered upon thee so many benedictions, that thou have been a
wonder of the world, and an astonishment of all ages; by these graces, I ask
of thee as of the Angel of great Council, wisdom; as of a Patriarcke, says;
as of a Prophet, hope; as of an Apostle of God the Father, charity; as of a
Martyr, constancy; as of a Doctor, understanding; as of a Confessor, devotion;
as of an Anchorite, v^ion with God, and the gift ^f tears; as of a Virgin,
puri^ie; as of one who was kin to jesus Christ, and his holy Mother, that
holiness and alliance which the Son of God has promised to contract with
them, who shall do his holy will. To whom he has promised that he will take
them, and treat them as his brethren, Mother, and sister; O inestimable honor!

Title. 14. To Saint Joseph.
1. TReasure-house of the incomparable treasures of Heaven and earth,
Fosterfather of him, who nourishes all creatures, true, and faithful spouse
of the Mother of God, what comparison between the command given by Pharaoh ^o
Joseph, the Patriarch over all Aegipt, and this command given by God to thee.
Moses conducted the people of God: thou had the conduction of God him self.
Abraham was Father to the children of adoption, but the true Son of God called
thee Father, David governed the people of Israel according to Gods hearts
desire^ but thou were the governor, and as it were the master of God him
self. The Queen of Saba judged the servants of Solomon happy, because they
were eye witnesses of his maiesticall carriage, and great wisdom: but thou have
been an eye witness of him, in whom are all the treasures of knowledge and
wisdom of the father; and who was the very original source or spring, from
which Solomon did draw the wisdom, that was in him. Many Kings and Prophets,
desired to see but one of the days of him, whom thou did bring up and
nourish, both in his childhood, and in his youth. Simeon thought himself happy
to have receued him but once into his arms: and thou have an hundred and an
hundred times had him in thine and placed him in the arms of his Mother,
sweetly kissing his feet, as the feet of thy God; his hands, as the hands of
thy Lord; his cheek, as the cheek of the Infant of thy Spouse. God conducted
his people going out of Egypt: thou conducted'st God going into Egypt. He by
Joshua brought them into the Land of promise: and thou broughtest back Jesus
into Palestine: and broughtest him into Nazareth. God was in the midst of his
people by the mediation of Angels, by day in the form of a cloud, and by night
in the figure of a pillar of fire: God himself in person has been days,
nights, weeks, months, and years, one of thy family and thy foster child.
The Ark of God gave victory in time of war, and plentiful benediction to
Obedience in time of peace: the humanity of the Son of God, which he took
of thy holy Spouse, was the true Ark of God, in which was kept the Manna of
divinity, the Rod of discipline, the Tables of exact obedience to the law
of his Father.

2. What graces, what virtues, what blessings did the Father, then power upon
thee by the merittes of his Son? the Son by the prayers of his Mother? O
thrice and four times happy Patriarch, by these so great privileges, obtain
I beseech thee for me this grace, that I never abuse the graces of my God. And
seeing that in the heavenly Sacrament of the Eucharist we have the same Child,
Lord, and God of which thy Spouse was delivered at Bethelem in Judah, and which
was carried by thee into Egypt and Nazareth, and there nourished by thee and
called there thy Son; by the credit thou have with him, and by thy instant
prayer bring to pass, that I may be most devout to this holy Sacrament, and
that my soul may melt in the presence thereof: and that I may live as it is
fit he live, who so often partaketh of that ineffable mystery.

3. By that extaticall affection, which thou feltst toward the Son of God,
when he called thee Father: and toward his holy Mother, of whom thou were
the Spouse, beg of God by thy intercession for me the gift of an intrinsceall
union and familiarity with God, accompanied with three qualities, which were
very eminent in thee, Tender love, Humble reverence, Loyal fidelity.

Title 15. To Saint Peter.
1. Loving Apostle, Porter of Paradise, and supreme Leiftenant of the crown
of Heaven; by the special prerogatives, and favors bestowed upon thee by the
Son of God, obtain for me, that I may love him, and that his love come from
my heatt, from my whole soul, from all my forces and thoughts, as did thy love.

2. By the authority, which thou heldest from him, and by that Crosier, which
he put in thy hand, procure, that his flock, and thine, may be extended over
all Countries on the earth: and the souls committed to thy charge and the
charge of thy Successors, may be defended from the teeth, and wyles of the
i^fernall Woulfe, who as a roaring Lion, seeks whom he may devour.

3. By all the testimonies of the extraordinary benevolence that thou
receiuedst from thy Master and ours, by all the documents, and instruments,
which thou heardest from his own mouth, by all the admirable and miraculous
works he wrought in thy presence; we in all humility, and earnest affection
beseech thee, that our holy Father, who at this day is governor of the Church,
and all they which shall succeed him in that thy charge, may succeed thee
also in thy virtues, and in the fatherly care thou had of the sheepfolde,
pertaining to the Son of God; So as hereafter, no one of the sheep which
recognize their Sovereign pastor, and are called Christians, may be lost or
become a prey to hell.

4. And so much as concerns my particular, I beseech thee, O Coriphe of the
Apostles, Prince and Pastor of my soul, that as Jesus Christ changed thy name
in sign of the superiority and prerogative, which he gave to thee above the
rest of the Apostles: so he will be pleased to change my manners, and to
reform me to his greater glory. Thou were ever placed and mentioned first, let
my ambition be to give place to no man in the love of my God.

5. Thou walkedst upon the waters to come to thy master: procure that I may
tread under feet my imperfections to come unto him.

6. By special revelation thou had notice that he was the Son of God;
obtain for me by thy mediation, the gift of a singular and lively faith.

7. The gates of Hell according to the Divine promise have not prevailed, nor
shall ever prevail against the Church, which the sovereign Architect built
upon thee: guard me so by thy protection, that temptations may not prevail
against my soul.

8. Jesus Christ paid tribute for thee and himself, showing thereby, that
thou should be the head of his family: obtain for me by thy prayers, that
he be pleased to pay to God for me, the debt I owe to his divine Justice; and
to make me master, Lord, and superior over my passions.

9. It was thou, who at two several times did draw to the shore, the Nets
full of Fish: we swim and tumble, as fishes, in the tempestuous sea of this
world; draw us to the haven of blessedness, by faith, accompanied and quickened
by charity.

10. Thou were commanded to lauch into the depth, and from ye hinder part of
thy ship Christ Jesus did Catechize the multitudes of the people: lift me up by
the force of thy prayers, examples, and merittes, to the highest topp of
perfection; and procure, that I never give ear to any Teacher but to him,
whose instruction is conformable to the doctrine of the Church.

11. The Devil desired to sift thee, but the prayer of the Son of GOD, gave an
invincible force to thy Faith: will thou not then obtain for me a vigor and
strength, not to be overcome by any snares, or forces of the infernal legions?

12. Thou wast one of the first, to whom Jesus Christ appeared after his
resurrection; obtain for me, that I be not one of the last, to whom he will
vouchsafe to give his hand when I shall be in danger of temptation, or detained
in the pains of purgatory.

13. The divine word prostrated himself at thy feet, with so great
humility, as at last thou were content he should wash them; be he pleased by
thy prayers, to wash away the filth of my iniquities, to purify mine
intentions, and that I put no obstacle to any thing which he desires to effect
in me.

14. It was said to thee alone, follow me, Oh when shall the hour come, and
that desired time, in with I may follow, in all and ever, the blessed motion of
the holy Ghost, living no more to my self, but to him, who afforded thee the
grace to dye, for him, and after his example, upon the Cross.

15. Thou did work the first miracle upon the person of Anamas: thou made
the first Sermon to the Gentiles, and to the Sinagogue, after the coming down
of the holy Ghost; thou did hold the first Counsel; thou did first visit
such, as were new baptized; for thee, as for her head, the Church was
solicitous, and prayed when thou wast in prison. St. Paul did not hold his
Revelations for assured, that is, he did not think they would have been
accepted for such, until he had conferred with thee; the Churches in which
thou were resident as Bishop, are all accounted Patriarchals; the Chair of
Rome by thy means is the Mother, and Mistress of the rest: I beseech thee, O
Father and Pastor of all ages, by this primacie, to obtain for me the
Princedome and absolute Monarchy over my self, having so often experience,
that by subiecting my self to my affections and passions, I become a miserable
and deplorable slave.

16. Who is he, that would not deliver out of the gallyes ^ a slave, if it
should cost him but his word? Speak then O thou so much favored of God, for
with a word, that thou shall speak in my favor, I a miserable wretch shall be
delivered out of captivity, and set at liberty; that liberty of spirit,
which Jesus Christ has purchased for us with the effusion of his blood. Do it
then, O blessed spirit, moved thereunto by remembrance of the sin, which was
forgiven thee, and for which thou did weep so bitterly, and of those keys
of knowledge, Jurisdiction, and order, which were committed to thy charge.

17. When the Sun in the Spring, does cast the beams upon the mountain,
covered with snow, the snow melts, and of the water distilling from the
snow, arise great floudes. Such were the watrie tears which flowed from thine
eyes, when the Sun of our souls cast the eyes of his compassion upon thy
Apostacy; why then wilt not thou by thy intercession, and mediation procure,
that the Ice of my sin, may melt in the beams of that beautiful eye of the
world, Jesus Christ, the Son of God.

18. Pray unto him, that he be merciful unto me, and I will thank him for
the mercy that he showed unto thee: be a suppliant for me, and I will praise
him for thee; make me such an one as he commands, and in so doing thou shall
do according to his will.

19. Thou art able to do as much as the Angel that delivered thee out of
Prison, and made the Chains fall from thee, wherewith thou were tied: Deliver
me then out of the prison of sin, break in pieces the chains of my bad
customs, that they may fall from me before the face of my God.

Title 16. To Saint Paul.
1. Vessel of Election, Apostle of the holy Ghost, Interpretor of the
Divinity, Doctor of the Gentiles; it is to thee, that I have my recourse, and
in whom I have particular confidence: Considering the Charity, that made thee
desire to be an Anathema for thy brethren: thy Humility, which made thee name
thy self a Child untimely borne, acknowledging that thou had persecuted
the Church: thy inflamed Love toward Jesus Christ, which made thee live more
in him, then in thy self.

2. Thou calledst them thrice yea four times accursed, which love not our Lord
Jesus Christ; deliver us then from this malediction, and make us such by thy
prayers, as in thy writings thou desire we should be.

3. Thou would, whilst thou wast here upon earth, if it had been in thy
power, have set the whole world on fire in the love of God.

4. Thou now art able to do what thou will; inflame then my heart with the
fire of Charity, so as I may truly say with thee: I live, but I live not in
my self for Jesus Christ is my life.

5. O when will the time come, that my life may be hidden with God in Jesus
Christ? when will the hour come, that I shall live to him, who dyed for me.

6. When shall I put off the old Adaem to put on the new, formed, and reformed
according to God?

7. When is it, that thy judgment shall make little or no estimation of the
world? when shall I neglect the figure of this world, which passes?

8. When shall I aspire to that permanent City? to the free Jerusalem, to the
habitation of the Saints?

9. Thou, great Master and Chatechist of our souls, did make so little
reckoning of Faith, if it were not accompanied with Charity: that albeit by it
thou had transported mountains, distributed all thy goods to the poor,
spoke with the tongues of Angels, and of all Nations, had had perfect
intelligence of all the wonders of nature, and of all the mysteries of Faith,
yea though thou had exposed thy body to flames; all this had served to no
purpose, but to make as it were a sound, and noise in the world, but before God
had been (thou said) of no value at all. Obtain then for me this faith
quickened by Charity, from which the just draw the spring of life, and by
which as Saint James says, Abraham and all the Saints were justified.

10. Thou will that we owe nothing to each other but mutual love, assuring us
that Charity is the bond of perfection; love us then, and in loving us procure
that we may love each other.

11. Thou did carry incessantly the mortification of Jesus Christ in thy
body; procure that I may have an internal sense and feeling of his wounds, and
that I may willingly be nailed with him to the Cross.

12. Thou prayedst thrice to be deliured from a troublesome tentation, and it
was answered unto thee, that the grace of God should suffice thee, for that
virtue is perfected in infirmity. Thrice, yea four times I make supplication
to thee, not to be delivered from my temptations but that thou will obtain for
me grace, and force to overcome them, to the glory of him, who has placed us
here in this world, as in a field of war in the sight of Angels, and men, to
crown such as shall fight valiantly. Thou art he, who did sight a good
combat, run a good race, happily end thy course, kept thy faith and promise
made, and for whom the crown was reserved in the hands of the just Judge;
obtain for us this great grace, and these tryumphant Laurels which shall never
wither.

13. More then two hundred souls by thy intercession were not drowned in
shipwreck near to the I Will of Malta; obtain by thy prayers, that we may
escape the shipwreck of sin, and safely ariue at the happy port of
blessedness.

14. Thou desiredst, with an inflamed desire, to be delivered from thy mortal
body, to be the more nearly united to Jesus Christ; assist me that my desire
be always transported to things Celestial, and Eternal.

15. Thou did afflict, and tame thy body, and not withstanding thou had
no reprehension of conscience: yet did not think thy self in assurance.
Keep me from vain presumption, and obtain for me a filial fear.

16. We think our selves often to have charity toward God, and toward our
neighbor, when we have it not: if we had the former, who could separate us
from the fidelity, we have sworn to him? could tribulation, affliction,
hunger, nakedness, danger, persecution, the sword? No, no, we should be
assured that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor any creature should be able to
separate us, from the charity founded in Jesus Christ.

17. And if we had the latter, our charity would be sweet; being without
emulation, without ambition, without precipitation. It would not be puffed up
by pride; it would not be stirred by choler: it would never rejoice in
another infirmity: but contrariwise rejoice in his perfections: think well
of him: endure with patience what he should do unto us: conceive good hope of
him. Charity never fails; she is ever like to her self; as well whether it
be toward the learned or the ignorant, toward the poor or the rich, toward
friend or foe; toward him that is of a different humor from ours, and him,
who is conformable to us in our humors.

18. When shall it be, O great Champion of God, Pillar of the Church, wonder of
the world, that I shall have these qualities? Till then I will not cease to
knock at thy gates, and I will not give truce to my lips, or repose to my
heart, until I be heard in this suite. Grant it then, grant it, O holy
Apostle amiable in Heaven, imitable upon earth, redoubtable to the Spirits of
Hell.

19. By all the ropes, with which thou wast tied, by all the prisons, which
thou sanctifiedst, by the shipwrackes, stonings, whippings, false accusations,
treasons, and persecutions, in which, and by which thou did honor the Son
of God; I beseech thee, that my life may be to him a sacrifice, and my death an
holocaust.

Title 17. To St. John the Evangelist.
1. AS St. Peter was the most loving Apostle: so thou wast the most beloved, a
quality which is singular, for which thou were to be envied with an holy
aemulation, and for the attaining whereunto three remarkable virtues should be
necessary, which all three shined admirable in thee; Charity, Humility, and
Purity; what will it cost the^ to obtain them for me?

2. One never loves God truly, but he is beloved of him: and one is not
beloved of God, but forthwith he loves God: obtain then for me O Secretary
of God, that I may love, if not so much as I ought, yet so much as by his grace
my forces are able to stretch unto.

3. Thou did drink and draw from the fountain it self, when thou leanedst
upon the breast of the Son of God; a special sign of his favor, and love
to thee. I do as much, as often as I present my self at his holy table: but
alas it is not with equal devotion, but with too much coldness, distraction,
dryness and misery. Obtain for me thou favorite of the word, an oblivion of
my self, and an ecstasy of perfect dilection; that receiving him into me, I
may enter into him; and having him near to my heart, I may be according to his
heart. And that albeit I receive not from him an Apocalips, or revelation of
his secret judgment: yet that I may receive at least a clear and manifest
knowledge of his holy will. And howsoever I be not worthy, presenting my self
to his holy table, to receive into my self him, between whose arms thou
did repose, yet at least I may not be so unworthy as I am.

4. Thou were a domestical witness of his most secret actions; in the
acknowledgment of which favors, obtain for me the gift of a most straight
union, and internal conversation with his divine Majesty.

5. Thou had by virtue of his last will and testament, the most noble part of
the inheritance of the Son of God, which was his blessed Mother; In regard of
this favor, I beg of thee, an inflamed devotion toward her, to the end that
being under her protection, I may be so much the more in favor with her Son,
by how much the more I shall by thee be recommended to the Mother.

6. Amongst all the rest at the last Supper thou tookest particular notice of
the traitor, that betrayed his Lord and master; let no man then surpass me in
discovering temptations the enemies of his glory, and ouercomming of them. And
as the poisoned cup did thee no hurt; So pray you, that no naughty suggestion
may hurt me.

7. Thou came out of the boiling Tun of oil without hurt; I desire that I
may so go out of the occasions of sin, clean, and void of offense. And
that as thy banishment in the I Will of Pathmos, served thee for a nearer approach
to God, coming thereby to understand the more high mysteries of our Faith: So
the adversities of this present life, may be to me as a spur and motive, to
draw nearer and nearer to God, and to purge and purify me from the dross of
the world.

8. Charity to our neighbor was perchance never so rare in the world, as it
is now; and yet nevertheless it was the lesson read unto us, by that heavenly
Master first, and afterward by thee. Exercise yet one act of charity
toward me, in obtaining for me the gift of a virtue, which was so familiar
unto thee, and without which we are unworthy so much, as of the name of
Christians; seeing it is the mark and liuerie, by which his disciples are
known, which is Charity it self.

9. Eagle of the holy Ghost, Virginal integrity, and inflamed Charity, were
the two wings which lifted thee up to so pure and high contemplation of the
Divinity. Obtain for us the grace, that our reason may be lifted up to the
love of God, with as great heat of affection, as our sense is drawn down to
the love of things corporal, by the heat of concupiscense, that I may be as
much inclined to desire things celestial, as the common sort of the world
are inclined to desire things terrestrial. And that the love and affection, I
bear to my Creator, may devour and consume all love and affection to his
creatures; saving only that, by which I shall love them in him, by him, and for
him.

10. This is it, O Secretary of God, which thou have practiced thy self, and
wished unto others: join to the documents thou have given us, and to the
examples thou have left us, thy prayer and intercession to God for us: and we
shall be fervent imitators of the first pattern of all holiness, of whom
thou have been and shall be for ever the best beloved Disciple.

Title 18. To the Apostles.
1. FIrst, and chiefest, Peers of Christianity; Princes of the Church; you
are the noble pearls of the mystical body of our Redeemer: the 12.
Patriarchs, from whom descended the true Isralites: the 12. Princes, generals
and conductors of the Army of God, camped about the humanity of his Son,
the tabernacle of the Divinity. You are the 12. sent to take a view of the
Land of promise, who have brought us news of the wonders, which are in that
true land of the living, flowing with milk and honey of aeternall comfort and
consolation. The 12. ouer-seers of Salomons house, who furnish the Church with
all necessary provision. The 12. Fountains, which the people found in the
desert. The 12. loaves of proposition, who with the heat of perfect charity
always appear before the face of the highest: The 12. precious stones, set in
order in the Rational of the high Priest Jesus Christ: The 12. young Lions,
which support the Throne of the great King: The 12. Oxen, that carried the Sea
of his mercies: The 12. Stars of which the crown of the Church his spouse
were made. O Fathers of our souls, obtain for us the effects of your fatherly
charity, pray for the whole Church, that all errors, heresies, and
superstitions may be abolished. Pray for the Sea Apostolic, that it may be
acknowledged for such of all the Nations of the earth. Make the sound of your
words so to be heard every where, as Christians dishonor not the excellency
of their Faith by the corruption of their manners; that they may live in peace
and brotherly amity: and that we altogether both in this life, and in the
next, may be Heirs of your Faith, Legataries of your Charity, fellows and
partakers of your glory.

Title. 19. To the holy Evangelists.
1. TRumpets of Israel, cornets of the living GOD, Notaries of Heaven,
Secretaries of the Church, I have now my recourse to you for the obtaining from
him, who is the mouth of wisdom, and the Oracle of all truth, a firm faith,
with true understanding, and virtue and strength to put in execution, the
words, documents, miracles, and mysteries, which you have set down in writing.
Give force to my voice, cleerenes to my conceit, by which I may be able to
oppose my self against the contrary opinions, and by virtue of that, which you
have written, bring back again to the bosom of the Chuoch such souls, as are
led out. It shall be more easy for you to pray, then to write; to demand,
then to persuade; to intercede, then to convert: do then the one, seeing you
desire the other. Banish out of our souls all error, abuse, superstition,
haeresie, self judgment. To be short, all whatsoever is any way repugnant to
the truth of your words, to the perfctions of your instructions, to the
example of your lives.

Title 20. To the holy Martyrs.
VIctimes of Paradise, holocausts of heaven, pacifiing hosts of the Church
triumphant: Hecatombs of the Church militant; you are the Lambs, sacrificed
without number in the Temple of Solomon, whose death has been an odor of
sweetness, most precious before God. You are the troops of the spouse, and
the shorn sheep, which assend going out of the Lauar, and there is not one
barraine amongst you. You are the Birds which the good Noe (second spring of
human nature) presented to God his father, after the deluge of his passion,
and the inundation of your pains. You make that goodly army of witnesses,
clothed in garments as white as snow, for the purity and holiness of your
life: carrying upon your heads Crowns of pure gold, that is to say, of
perfect charity, beset with Pearls and precious Stones; apparelled with a
garment of the same, richly embroadered and beset all over with Pearls of
great price. The Diamonds, are the invincible force, with which you overcome
the tyrants: The Pearls, the sweat of your brows, and the tears, which sell
from your eyes in great abundance: The Carbuncles represent the wounds, which
you received, and the blood running from your veins, shed for his love, who is
the true king of Martyrs. The daughter of Sion, and the blessed Citizens of
Jerusalem come forth to meet you, partly to honor you, as the most
substantial parts of their body, and partly to admire the rich ornaments,
with which you were adorned by the King of glory, upon the most happy day of
your second nativity.

2. Invincible Champions, and most renowned for your Tryumphes, who have had
the honor to drink of the Cup of the son of God, and to strengthen with your
blood the foundations of his Church, who (as the Scripture says) are come from
great tribulation, and have washed and made white your garments in the blood
of the Lamb, which assist before his Throne to do him service day and night.
He possesses you as his temples, and dwells in you continually; leading you
to the fountain of life, wyping away the tears from your eyes and freeing you
from all the laws of mortality. We have our recourse to you, as soldiers to
their Captains; that we may receive by your mediation, force and courage,
without which we are not able to resist the assaults, with which we are set
upon by enemies, which are within us, round about us, and above us. The flesh,
the world, and the devil. These are the Tyrants with whom we are now to
encounter, the swords, the prisons, y^ flames, the scourges, the racke^, the
fire plats, the brazen bulls, ye gridyrons, which we are to overcome; and that
not once only, but many times; not one day only, but many days during our
lamentable abode in this mortal life.

3. You proposed before your eyes, your Captain and Genetall Jesus Christ,
having a more tender feeling of his pains, then of what your selves suffered,
and endured for his love. O most happy souls, seeing that neither
tribulations, nor anguishes, nor stripes, nor travails, nor any thing else,
whether it were sweet or bitter unto you, were sufficient to separate you from
the charity of Jesus Christ. Ask for me this grace, that living in body here
in this world, in heart soul and spirit I may be crucified with Jesus Christ.

4. Four remarkable virtues shine in your passions: Faith, Charity, Wisdom,
and Humility. For which, as an aeternall reward, you have the fruition of God
in your will: the possession of him in your understanding; the glory in your
bodies after the resurrection; and certain particular special garlands over
you correspondent to your torments, and the particular manner of your
sufferings. We may partake with you herein after seven ma^ners. First, when
we dye for the Faith as the most part of you (O victorious souls) have done.
Secondly, when we are killed for JESUS, as it happened for you, O you blessed
Innocents, first fruits of the Christian Church. Thirdly, when we expose our
lives for the good and salvation of our neighbors, as did the Son of God,
your Lord and ours. Fourthly, when we choose rather to dye, then to transgress
the Law of God, as did the holy Machabees. Fifthly, when we expose our blood
for the maintaining of the immunities, and liberties of the Church, as did
thou O holy martyr St. Thomas Bishop of Canterbury. Sixthly, when, as Abell, we
are persecuted for Justice, out of the envy of the wicked. And lastly, when
we loose our life for defense of the truth, zeal of the honor of God,
salvation of our neighbor, as thou did, O most holy precursor of our Lord,
our redeemer, under Herod: and thou Evangelical Prophet under Manasses: and
you Jeremy and Zhacharie persecuted by popular fury. Obtain for us, O you
witnesses of the living God, the grace, that we may testify the fidelity
which we owe to our Redeemer, after some one of these manners: and that at
least we may honor him, when we dye, whom we honor so little, whilst we
live.

Title 21. To the holy Doctors.
1. THe high Priest in the law of Moses, during the time of his charge, did
wear by Gods ordinance and appointment a garment of color like Hyacinth,
which was fringed and bordered about below, with Pomgranets, mingled with
belles of pure gold. Ye are O masters of our souls, the little belles, which
ring to make us know, the approaching of the high Priest, and the coming of the
holy Ghost then, when bowing down the heavens of his greatness, he is
pleased to draw near unto us in the Sacrifice of the alter. Ye are the salt
of the earth, the light of the world, the City builded upon a mountain, the
Candlestick with seven lamps, the seven Candlestickes in the midst of which,
not without great mystery, appeared the Son of Man. Ye are the Startes of
Daniell, which shine aeternally. I beseech you then, O inflamed souls,
Cherubins for your wisdom, and Seraphins for your charity, that ye obtain
for us, but specially for the Pastors, Preachers, and Doctors of the Church,
the gift of knowledge, wisdom and understanding, together with a sound
foundation of the building of the soul, which is a lively and true Faith. This
I. ask by him, who has made your breasts the storehouse of armor, offensive
and defensive, against his enemies and ours: your memory a Iewellhouse of
understanding: your understanding an Academie of knowledge and wisdom: your
wills a furnace of Charity: your Pens the instruments of his holy will: and
your tongues Organs to sound forth his Glory.

Title. 22. To the holy Confessors.
1. CEdars of Libanus who with your sweet Odoriferous smell, embalm the whole
world: Palms of the terrestrial Paradise of the Church, very high and eminent
in highness: Pomegranets, sowed amidst the Bells and skycoloured fringes, of
the garment of the high Priest, which join Charity, with Humility and good
example: Scarres called Hyades, whose benign influence, cause the rain of
repentance, and the dew of devotion, which never appear, but when the days of
mercy begins, to grow longer, and the Sun of our souls to send forth
more hot beams then ordinary of his grace; the herbs of good thoughts begin
to come on, plants of good desires to bud forth, the garden of our spirit to
flourish throghout with diuer^ flowers, promising to us an happy harvest of
good and holy works. O stars of happy and favorable aspect, work all these
wonders, upon the dry and barraine ground of my soul, to the end that by work
and word I may glorify him, whom ye have confessed and professed with
danger of your lives.

2. Men with loins girded, hands with burning Lamps; great numbers of you
have excelled in confessing the Faith, there is have been singular for Learning,
others admirable for austeritie of life, others for heroical works,
appertaining to Christian perfection. Obtain then by your prayers, in
remembrance and acknowledgement of these graces, that I hold fidelity, and
make known both to Heaven and earth, that which I am to my God in every
occasion of temptation; Seeing that to confess by deed is nothing else, but
to lead a life worthy the name of a Christian.

3. Our sweet Redeemer, being Wisdom it self, Justice it self, Truth it
self, Holiness it self, is it not so then? that men by their sottishnes and
stupiditie, following the trace of their appetites, like beasts without reason
deny his wisdom? following iniquity, deny his Justice? giving themselves to
lying, deny his Truth? and wallowing in the mire of their filthy pleasures,
renounce his holiness? Permit not, O ye governors of our souls, that I
become one of those ungrateful wretches, infringers and forsakers of their
Faith; but that upon all occasions, I may be that which I am, to God most
humble, most obedient, and most faithful; as well in effect, as in affection;
as well in execution, as in obligation; though I should thereby loose my life,
as many millions of times, as I speak, or breath.

Title. 23. To the holy Anchorits, Hermits and Religious.
1. Mountains of eminent perfection, Sina upon which God familiarlie speaks
to men: Thabor, where the Word incarnate manifested his glory; most noble
portion, only chosen of the heritage of Jesus Christ; you are they, to whom
(according to the sayings of the Prophet) the waters are open in the desert,
and the brooks in the wilderness. You are they which have transplanted the
Cedar, the white Thorn, the Mirrhe, the Olive in the wilderness. You are
they, who set a fire, with a burning desire of heavenly things, have with a
noble courage frankly and freely renounced the goods, and pleasures of this
world You are they, who being retired into the deserts of secret solitariness,
and straight Monastaries, have given your selves to a most austere life, and
most earnest study of solid virtues. You are they, who environed with bodies,
have surmounted the condition of bodies, and amongst the beasts have lead the
life of Angels. You are they, who have made the places, before hideous and full
of horror, by your presence the sanctuary of God, and tabernacle of the holy
Ghost. O when shall I, following your example crucify in my flesh all vices,
concupiscences, and pleasures? when shall I with you and after you, embrace an
heavenly conversation in this terrene habitation? when shall I have the earth
under my affections, as I have it under my feet? Bring to pass by your
merits, and prayers, O most happy souls tried a thousand and a thousand times,
bring to pass (I say) by all possible means, and whatsoever power you have in
that aeternall City, especially you, ye holy founders, reformers, and
obseruers of regular discipline, which have consecrated by obedience your
souls: by poverty your goods: and by the vow of Chastity your bodies;
Obtain for me, that in those three things I may honor the author of all
things? that I may renounce my own self, dye to my own will, and live to
the will of God.

2. We that live in the world, are esteemed Saints, when we do, or suffer the
thousand part of that you have done, and suffered. O what difference will there
be between you, and us upon the day, when we shall come to receive our hyer?
But yet we wish that you may increase to thousands, and millions; for you are
our brethren, and it is great consolation to us, and a great remedy of our
miseries, that our common God and Father is honored in you, seeing he is so
little honored in us: and that we have elder brethren which make amends for
our faults. Bring to pass also, that as we rejoice that you are, what you
are, and make you sad, by being what we our selves are, our joy from henceforth
may be accomplished and alike in all; we becoming by your prayers that, which
you have been, and by your charitable mediation that, which you desire.

Title. 24. To Saint Anthony.
1. CHampion of God, ouercommer of Devils, fearful to Hell, the honor and
wonder of the desert, I address particularly to thee my sighs: and to thee I
lift up the voice of my desires; knowing how much thou have done for God, and
how much thou art able to do with God. Be thou then pleased to obtain for
me, three graces of him, who bestowed them upon thee with many more? the one is
the gift of Prayer, and an inward conversation with God; the other a perfect
victory of my temptations; and the third an inflamed Love of him, which is the
lone of Heaven and earth, JESUS the Son of God. Thou have so excelled in the
first, that during the time thou were before God in prayer, years were to thee
but months; months but weeks; weeks but days; days but hours; and hours
but minutes. The Sun going down left thee praying: and rising again he
found thee praying, and whilst he cast forth his beams sometimes upon thy
back, and sometimes upon thy face, the holy Ghost was working interiourly and
effected wonderful things in the most fruitful soil of thy soul. As for
temptations, Hell trembled at thee, and the Devil remained as vanquished and
taken captive in thy presence. For thou wentst not out of the skirmish, as we
do, who ordinarily are either beaten or discouraged. Thy victories were
entire, thy laurel boughs, answerable to the strong and courageous resistance
thou made to the enemies of God. Wherefore not being able to lay any hold
upon thy soul, they exercised their rage upon thy body; bellowing like Bulls,
roaring like Lions, hissing like Serpents; And when they had all done, they
could not take the forte of thy interior resolution, nor so much as shake the
Rock of thy inexpugnable will. As for the love of God, thou said often to
thy Disciples, that the Devils are affeard of humility, temporance, taming of
the body, prayer, and the exercise of other virtues; But above all the rest
they fear most, an inflamed charity toward the Son of God. What shall
hinder me then henceforth, from shining in those three graces? shall the let
or hinderance be on thy part, or on mine? It shall proceed from us both, if
thou neglect to pray for me, and I neglect to cooperate with the grace which by
thy prayers thou can obtain for me.

2. Thy famous name by interpretation, signifies flourishing; bring to pass
then, O great Anthony, by the exceeding credit with thou have with God, that I
may flourish always in all kind of virtues: and that never by any temptation,
the sweet and beautiful flower of the grace of God, fade, wither, or dry up
in my soul.

3. Saint Athanasius writes of thee, that as a Be in the beginning of thy
conversion, thou wentest gathering together the virtues, which thou obseruedst
to be most eminent in the servants of God, whether they were men or women;
gathering Humility from one, from another Prudence, Charity, Patience,
Abstinence, and so of other excellent qualities, which afterward so adorned
and enriched thy soul. Obtain for me the same grace, that from henceforth all
the stay I shall make upon earth, may be a continual amassing together of
virtues, and that all my actions may give good example to those, with whom I
converse.

Title 25. To the holy Virgins, Men and Women.
1. VEssels of honor, Fountains sealed up, Parkes walled round about, Lillies
of the territory of Eden, Angels with bodies, the white Troop of the Son of
God; albeit you cannot but grant, that all the inhabitants, and citizens of
Heaven, enjoy the blessed presence of him, who is blessedness it self, and of
whom they are infinitely beloved, tenderly cherished, exceedingly honored,
immortally comforted and refreshed: So is it notwithstanding, that the holy
Scripture and the Revelations, recorded by the beloved Disciple; teach us, that
souls clothed with the nuptial Robe of the Lamb, with is no other then most
pure and most odoriferous Virginity, receive from him greater demonstration of
love, and are honored by him with a more Imperial, and noble crown then
other saints. You are they then, O holy troop, who leaping for joy, which can
not be expressed, look upon attentively and pray most effectually y^ holy
Lamb, being beheld by him after a particular and special manner, and
receiving from him particular joy, not to be expressed with tongue. Ye are
they, who play continually upon the Harpes, upon which none can play but you.
Ye are they, who sing a new song before the throne of God, following
undefiled, every where the Lamb without spot or stain.

2. O thrice and four times happy Virgins; ye are the Eunuchs, which out of
your own free will, have made your selves such for the kingdom of heaven, and
for the love of him, who is the brightness of aeternall light, and
looking-glass without stain.

3. Ye are those green Cedars, who by the Aromaticall odors of your virtues
have chased away and killed the serpent of sensuality; ye are vallyes for
your humility, Parkes for your integrity. I beseech you obtain for me of
your heavenly Spouse six virtues represented by the six flowers, growing
forth of the tops of the Lilly, and having all six but one stalk.

4. The first is sobriety and abstinence, from superfluous meats: seeing that
gluttony is the Cosengerman to impudicitie, as sobriety is to constancy.

5. The second is honesty and plainness in apparel of the body, appertaining
to the ornament of my person, according to the state and condition, to the
which it has pleased God to call me, taking from me all delicatnesse,
curiosity, and superfluity.

6. The third is mortification, and exact custody of my interior and
exterior senses, principally of my sight and hearing, the two gates, by which
ordinarily sin enters into my soul.

7. The fourth, great circumspection in my speech and conversation, that
neither by word or gestures, I operate or cooperate to any wickedness.

8. The fifth, a fear, and horror of sin, so as I tremble at the very shadow
thereof: and that I resist to suggestions, and temptations, with great courage
and magnanimity upon the first sense, and feeling of them.

9 The sixth, some honest and profitable occupatio^, by which I may avoid and
fly Idleness, the mother and nurse of vice, which may keep me always busy
in some interior occupation for God. O had I the gift of union, and the grace
to live always in the presence of God! what temptation could take hold of
me, I never loosing the sight of him?

10. It is painful I grant, to resist the motions of sensuality, know that it
is also a Martyrdom without blood, and that only Virgins, and such as are
continent after your example in the Church of God, make a continual holocaust
and sacrifice of themselves (as Origin notes) who was a great lover of
Chastity, but his zeal thereof was too great.

11. And if so be, there be any pain and toil in fighting against
temptations: the toil and pain is greater which must be undergone, when we
have basely and cowardly yielded unto them.

12. Bring to pass then by your prayers and suffrages, O companions of the
Lamb; grant that of these two pains I choose the lesser; and that albeit the
pain were far greater, I refuse no labor to get and maintain a treasure of
so great value, as in comparison thereof, gold, silver, and precious stones
have neither weight nor price. O Purity, O Chastity, O Integrity, reverenced
of the Angels, feared by the Devils, admired by the wise, favored and cherished
by God himself.

13. O, if I could worthily conceive, the beauty of the ways, the
pleasantness of the little hilles^ the delight of the odoriferous Mountains,
the good pasture of the heavenly meadows! the Cloth of Arras of immortality,
wrought with an hundred thousand colors! the delicious Garden of ye great
Assuerus, as it were enamaled with variety of all flowers! the Ornaments and
rich furniniture of his royal Palace, the lively Spring^^ and delightful
Fountains, at the which the Lamb takes his recreation with his blessed Mother
the Queen of Virgins! y^ perpetual spring time, that April without end, that
incessant Iubilation that Brook of pure and undefiled delights, at which you
drink! not after the manner of the world, which drinks not but at the durtie
puddle of Aegipt, and at the slimie ponds of Assiria, No nor as other Saints,
who have not the honor to carry your garlands upon their heads: but after a
special manner, and with a singular dilectation exceedingly eminent above
that, which is common to the rest of the Saints. If I could, O choice souls,
penerrate into the least part of the happy recompense, that crowns your
labors, be partaker but only of one of the crummes which fall from your table,
taste but one drop of that great Ocean of your imcomparable delights; O how
much should I loath the vanities, abhor the pleasures, contemn whatsoever
ornaments or beauty of this world; then the honey of this life and sugar of
this world, would be as insupportable to me, as most bitter gall and wormwood.
I deserve it not, neither do I ask of you this sight: but in all humility I
beg, and with all the force of my soul, that for the love of your heavenly
Spouse, I live no more but to him, I take no life, but from him; I bring forth
no fruit but his. And that finally, I may come to die for him.

14. O good Jesus, O meek Lamb, O Chaste Spouse, and rich Crown of
Virgin-soules; let me obtain this mercy, by the love thou have borne to them,
who have loved none but thee: that I be permitted here in this world, to love
thee with my heart, and to serve thee with other fidelity, then hitherto I
have done.

15. Purify the filth of my conscience, restore to my soul her first purity;
so as if I cannot follow thee so near as thy more beloved, in ye street of the
heavenly Jerusalem, and in the most pure and clean paths paued all with f^^e
gold, of which thy Apostle, Disciple, and Virgin Evangelist makes mention:
yet at least, I may carry in my hand, the Lamp of good works, and one day be
admitted to thy marriage banquet, and there be placed, if not at the higher end
of the holy table; yet among those who sit at the lower end thereof.

Title 26. A Communication bad with God, upon the Life, Death, and Passion, of
our Savior.
1. PErmit me my GOD, Father, and Savior of my soul; that prostrate before
the Throne of thy Majesty, I put thee in mind, and represent unto thee, the
wonders which thou have wrought for my love; and as much for all others as for
me, and no less for me then for all. I will speak unto you in the
simplicity of my heart, taking my assurance from your mercyes, and placing my
confidence altogether in imme^sitie of your goodness, without having any
regard at this time to my own exceeding great unworthiness, which otherways
would shut up my mouth, and not permit me to appear before the eyes of your
Majesty.

2. I was as thou truly call me, thy hartlesse Dove, thy lost Sunamite, thy
strayed sheep, when to make demonstration of the excess of thy benevolence,
thou resoluedst to make thy self like to me, to the end that I might become
like to thee. Out of this motion thou descended'st from Heaven to Earth, that
so thou might lift me up from Earth to Heaven, thou humbledst thy self to
extol me, thou becommest passible, to make me impassible, mortal, that I
might be made immortal, and thou becam'st Man, after a sort to deifie me,
and make me God.

3. Thou did take (I say) my human substance to communicate unto me thy
divine; thou tookest for spouse my humanity, to give me for a dowry thy
divinity; as if thou had said; (O thou extaticall lover of my salvation)
when thou shall see me conceived, be bold to say, that it is for no other end,
but to make thee conceive in thy soul the spirit of God my Father, when thou
shall see me carried in the womb of my Mother, that it is to make thee to be
transported with an holy desire; when borne and brought into the world by a
Virgin, that it is to make thee bring forth by works the fruits, worthy of
aeternall life.

4. I will take my repose in the womb of my holy Mother, that thou may come
one day to take thy repose in my arms. I will be content to be shut up in
that dark prison, to bring thee out of darkness into light: I will make my
self little, to make thee great, feeble and weak, to make thee strong; poor,
to make thee rich; an imperfect child, to make thee a perfect man; I will be
naked to cloth thee; trembling in thy Maunger for cold, that thou may be
warm; tied up in swadling-bands, to set thee as liberty; laid upon the hay
and straw, to place thee above the heanens; between the Ox and the Ass, to
procure thee the company of the Angels; in a ^table, and amidst the dung, to
make thee know that I will not disdain to be borne amidst the filth of thy
imperfections, so as they be displeasing unto thee.

5. Thou would that the Shepherds of Idumaea, and the Kings of the East
should take notice of thee, to show that thou did think long, when thou were
newborn, to make a present to God the Father, of the first fruits both of
Jew and Gentile. Thou wast circumcised the Eight day, to give me betimes the
earnest penny of my redemption, and to bestow upon me the first fruits of thy
labor some life.

6. Thou wast carried upon the fourteenth day to the Temple, thy holy Mother
was there purif(...), and thou thy self presented to God thy Father, and after
Redeemed for five pieces of Coin. To what other end was all this? but by the
mediation of thy worthy Mother, to present me to thy heavenly Father; to
obtain for me internal purification, and by the means of thy five wounds,
the only price of my redemption, to redeem me from my vain conversation.

7. The flight into Egypt was to encourage me, not to fly, but to stand
before the face of God, whom I had provoked to wrath; and when thou were found
in the Temple it was to teach me, that thou will be found in the midst of my
heart, and erect there a divine Academie. If so be, I make it a holy Temple
dedicated to thy Majesty, and not a profane house open to all vanity, which
it shall not be hard for me to do, after the three days of contrition,
confession, and satisfaction: by means whereof thou have promised, to hold me
in the rank and quality of a Mother, a Brother, and a Sister.

8. Thou wast subject to Joseph as a tutor, and to his spouse thy Mother, to
put me under the tuition and protection of God thy Father; Thou wast obedient
to them, to make easy to me the law of obedience: and which is admirable, thou
were unknown in the world for the space of 18. years, to teach me humility,
and to make me known in ages to come, with titles of honor due to divine
adoption.

9. When thou wast pleased to manifest thy self unto the world, was it for any
other end but to give me knowledge of my felicity, and of the means by which
I might attain unto it? And when thou did change water into wine at the
Marriage of Cana, was it not to instruct me? that thou would change the water
of my imperfections into the wine of perfection, flowing from the precious vine
of thy grace? especially being aided herein by the intercession of thy most
honorable Mother? And further to instruct me, that it should not be hard or
difficult for thee, to change the material wine into thine own blood,
whenever thou sholdst be pleased to make thy self as admirable and amiable
in the nouriture of my soul, as thou art in the refection, and conservation of
my body.

10. Did thou not leave unto me a rare example of humility (the strong
foundation of the stately building of all virtues) at the River of Jordan? when
after the manner of penetents, which at the river received the baptism of
penance thou wast content to be baptized of thy baptist? and (together with
this abasing of thy self) by touching the water with thy precious flesh,
giving regeneratiue virtue to the waters, which afterward have served for a
bath to wash away and cleanse original sin?

11. Thou wast called an immaculate Lamb and why so? if not because thou wast
to be a victime for our sin; a pacifiing host in thasksgiuing for benefits; a
true holocaust in testimony of love?

12. Thou enduredst hunger to feed and fill me; thirst to quench my thirsty
appetites; cold and heat, to remedy my passions.

13. Thou did persevere in prayer, that I might learn to surmount the
difficulties and tediousness, which I find in that exercise.

14. Thou were tempted permitting the Common enemy to assault thee: was it not
to drive him away from me? and to give me force to resist, and overcome him?

15. The Angels come to serve thee after the victory, to assure me of the
like, and as it were to promise me, that thou would in person serve them,
which shall be victorious over the enemies of thy glory.

16. Thou did call unto thee, Apostles, and made choice of Disciples, and
it was to leave me so many Masters and Teachers: Thou reproouedst them for
their faults, for the correction of mine: Thou did bear with them in their
infirmities, to make me know, how patiently thou would bear with mine.

17. Thou did restore to the lame their limbs, to the blind their sight,
hearing to the deaf, speech to the dumb: Thou did Catechize the ignorant,
cure the Paralitiques, raise the dead, and all this to illuminate the eyes of
my understanding, to open the ear of my heart, to rectify the gate of my
affections, to cureithe Palsy of my soul, to unloose my tongue that it might
utter thy praises, to set me at liberty from death of sin, to draw me out of
the grave of my iniquity, to make me borne a new by grace, drawn out from
under the marble of my naughty habites and customs.

18. Thou were sold by one of thy Apostles, to the end that I might not be
sold to mine enemies; thou wast forsaken of thy Disciples, never to forsake
and abandon me; thou wast seized with fear going to thy so often desired
temporal death, to give me assurance and courage against the fears and
frightes of aeternall death.

19. Thou wast tied, that I might be untied; contemptuously treated, to make me
respected; clothed with an ignominious garment of purple, that I might be
vested with the robe of honor; thou carriedst a reed in thy hand, to put in my
hand the S^epter of heaven and earth; upon thy head a crown of Thorne^, that I
might come to wear a crown of Glory! Thou were conuented before profane
Tribunalls, that I might be justified at the Tribunal of my Judge. It was
said of thee in mockery Behold the man, thereby to recover for me the most
noble title of the child of God, which I had lost.

20. Thou wast charged with the heavy burden of the Cross and wherefore? If
not to discharge me of the insupportable burden of my iniquities.

21. Why were thou lead up to the Mount Caluarie, but to lift me up to the
mount of heavenly faelicitie; why nailed in the midst between two thieves but
to place me amidst the Angels; why were thy arms stretched out upon the
Cross, but only with tender love and affection to embrace me?

22. Me think I hear thee say: (O the God of love) that if in dying, thou
bow down thy head: it is to give me the kiss of peace. If one open thy side
with a Spear, it is that I may have a place whether to retjre my self, and to
make me know, that the affection of thy heart with which thou love me,
surpasses the passion of thy body in which thou dyedst for me. To conclude if
thou dyedst, it is to give me life.

Title. 27. A Prayer, agreeing with the former Communication, and Conference,
had with God.
1. O My God, my Savior, bestow upon me then that grace, that I may conceive
thee by affection; carry thee in the womb of my soul by desire; be delivered
of thee by such works, as are pleasing to thy divine Majesty, to this end I
implore the breasts of thy mercy, by the breasts of thy holy Mother with thou did
suck.

2. Disdain not the hay and straw of my vanity, the Maunger of my naughty
habites, the filth of my indeuotions, the brute beasts of my irascible and
concupissible affections.

3. I offer up with the Shepherds the little I am in body and soul, with the
three Kings the Gold, the Mirrhe, and Frankensence of my memory, of my
understanding, and of my will.

4. Circumcise, and cut away all whatsoever is in me, that is displeasing unto
thee: and by the merit of thy first pain pluck up by the roots in me the
first young springings of all evil pleasures.

5. Present me in the temple of grace to God thy Father, and with thy five
wounds, as with the five pieces of money, redeem me from the servitude of
sin.

6. By the merit of thy flight into Egypt, obtain for me that I may fly and
avoid all occasions of sin; and that as at thy entry into Egypt all the
oracles of Idolatry were silent, so there may be in me a beginning laid of
never sinning.

7. Speak in me my God, make me hear thy voice, and for thy love obedient to
my superior.

8. What care I for being known in the world, seeing thou were so long
unknown, and mistaken? I ask of thee so much honor or dishonor, as is
necessary for me for thy glory, and no more.

9. I present unto thee not only the reasonable actions of my life, but also
those which appertain unto sense, and drinking, eating, sleeping and such
others, which I desire thee to look upon, as united with those of my redeemer
thy Son. Grant that with him I may overcome my temptations, that I may be
washed in the Iordain of thy graces, and that it may be said of me: This is
the beloved servant of God, in whom he takes great pleasure.

10. I languish with desire to follow thee, not as that miserable wretch, that
betrayed thee and sold thee to the Jews: but as thy faithful Apostles, who
have signed with their blood, and sealed with their death, the faith and
fidelity, they had promised thee.

11. Thou will change the dirtie and stinking water of my imperfections, into
the most precious wine of thy love, when by thy grace I shall no more loose the
sight of thee: and that near unto thee, I shall make three tabernacles of my
understanding, memory, and will, in which thou shall dwell, and make thy abode
with contentment.

12. The filth of my imperfections hinders me from presenting my self, as I
ought, to thy holy Table; wash then the feet of my affection, that from
hence-foorth it touch not the earth; and seeing that thou have bestowed such
virtue upon the plants, the stones, the herbs: seeing the Sun by the aspect
and influence of the Beams, does work such wonders in nature, even to the
making and forming of mettalls in the very bowels of the earth; seeing also the
Adamant draws unto it the iron, Amber the straw, the Star the steel, by
reason of a kind of simpathie and natural impression, which thou, the author
of nature, have given unto them; Is it convenient, that thy most holy body and
incomparable treasure, honor my body with his presence, that thy most precious
blood be in me, and that thy divine humanity should really touch mine, and not
lift up my soul to thy divinity? Permit not this monster in Grace, and this
prodigious wonder in nature.

13. Bestow upon me the charity, which thou did so straightly recommend unto
thy Apostles; and grant unto me the gift of prayer, and tears, as well to
accompany thee in thy prayers, as that I may be able to resist my temptations
according to thy instruction.

14. By the fear which ceazed upon the inferior part of thy soul, and by the
streams of blood, which did wonderfully run down, caused by thy sorrow, and
vehement apprehension; I beseech thee (my benign Redeemer) to assist me at the
hour of my death, and to do me the favor, that albeit my life has been so
unprofitable unto thee, yet at last I may honor and serve thee by my death,
which I desire may be no other, then that which thou shall Judge to be for thy
greater glory.

15. Grant that by the stroke of thy word, I may lay a long thy enemies and
mine. That I may be tied, and manacled in ropes and chains of thy love. That
with thee, and no otherwise, I may appear before the Tribunal of God thy
Father. That the Spirit of sweetness, and meekness, which thou did hold
toward that accursed fellow, which did blindfold thee, may accompany me in all
occasions. That I may be clothed with a white robe of Innocence, and with the
purple garment of charity, that by the merit of thy whipping, my body may be
a sanctified vessel and instrument of thy glory. That in virtue of the Crown
of Thorns, wc pierced thine head, I never consent to any evil thoughts, but
especially to such, as tend to any pride.

16. When will the hour be, when one seeing me, may say, not in derision, as
it was said of thee, but in sincerity and truth, Behold the man of God? bring
this to pass, my sweet Jesus, by the merrits of thy most profound humility.

17. Then I shall be content, and with quietness of mind, hear the sentence and
judgment, which the wicked shall give of me, and little regard, what the world
esteems of me at this time, which passes, though it should be a definitive
sentence of death, as unjust and detestable, as was that, which was pronounced
against thee.

18. I shall carry the Cross with thee, such a Cross I say, as it shall
please thy divine providence to lay upon my shoulder. I shall edify by my
example, the predestinate souls, the true daughters of the heavenly Sion.

19. But when shall I have spoiled my self of self love? when shall I be, as
it were naked, in respect of things of this world, to be nailed with thee to
the Cross? It shall be then, when the nails of thy feet shall nail my
affections, the nails of thy hands my actions, and the Spear that pierced thy
side, shall pierce all my intentions.

20 Wash me o my God, God living, and dying for my love, wash me in the blood,
which flowed from thy sacred person; so as from hence-foorth I may appear
before thee, as a new washed sheep comne out of the pond, as a Lamb without
spot, ready to be sacrificed.

21. Pardon, and forgive all those, which wish, or do me evil, help all
those, which are in deadly sin, and near to their end, that they dye not in
that pitiful estate, as thou did help the good Thief in his extreamitie.
Commend me with the beloved disciple to the protection of thy unspotted Mother,
acomplish in me the thirst of thy desires. Consume whatsoever is displeasing
unto thee, and consummate all thy mercies toward me. Abando^ me not, and leave
me never alone. Receive my soul into thy hands, as God thy father received
thine at thy giving up thy Ghost. Deliver from Purgatory, the souls, which
are in pain, as thou deliueredst the holy Fathers out of Lymbus, where they
were detayned. Give us such a resurrection to life by grace, as that we never
more die by sin. And seeing that our heart ought to be where our treasure is:
seeing that thou the Lord of the world, art placed at the right hand of thy
Father, lift us up to thee, and transport our affections above the heavens.

Finally, impart unto us some part of those graces, bestowed upon thy Apostles
and Disciples upon the day of Penthecost: that from hence forth we may become
the Temple of thy glory, thy heretage, the chosen people, with which thou
take pleasure to make thy abode.

Prayers, and considerations as it were in passing, according to the
occurrences that fall out every day. Title 28. When a man is tempted.
1. I Protest my GOD, that I give no consent in any sort to this temptation;
and that my will desires the contrary of that, which is proposed with as great
affection, proceeding from reason, as I feel inclinations arising from
sensuality.

2 I thank thee, O my gracious Creator, that sense or feeling, and consent or
yielding, are two different things. For if every feeling, were a yiedling
joined with offense of thy divine Majesty, I were utterly undone. Temptation
has the one in his hold, but none shall have possession of the other, but thy
divine Majesty. The world, the flesh, and the Devil, have a power to make me
feel; but my consent or yielding shall be ever in thy power.

3. My God, leave me not alone, and deliver me from my self.

4. I cannot live without thee, make me then I pray thee, live to thee.

Title 29. When any thing falls out that pleases us.
1. IT is thou, my sweet Jesus, who art the author of all reasonable
contentment, from thee proceeds all pure consolation. I desire it not then,
but from thee, in thee, by thee, and for thee. Dispose thou otherways, when
thou shall be pleased to deprive me of it, and I shall accommodate me
thereunto, with all resignation and indifferency.

Title. 30. When any thing displeases us.
1. I Accept of this displeasure, as a present sent unto me, from my beloved
Jesus Christ, accou^ting my self too happy y^ I may be worthy to participate,
to carry and to kiss his Cross.

2. The beloved of my soul shall be placed in my bosom, as a bundle of Mirrhe.

3. Look with how great affection I desire to be delivered of this affliction;
with no less I ask and ask again the continuance thereof, if, O my God, it
shall be for thy greater glory.

Title. 31. In obeying our Superiors.
1. I Honor thee, O my God, in them, as in thy Image: and protest that all the
service I do them, I do it for thee.

2. I will love them in thee, and thee in them: and will do them no reverence
neither interior, nor exterior, but with intention that all redound unto thee.

Title. 32. In seeing the magnificencie of the Court.
1. Far greater things are recounted of thee, O heavenly Sion.

2. All that I see here, are no better, then the sweepings of Heaven.

3. When shall I see thee in thy own brightness, O King of glory?

4. All this greatness passes with the figure of the world, but the
greatness of Heaven continues eternally.

Title. 33. At our going out of our Lodging.
1. SEt my feet in thy paths, O my God, my way, my truth, and my life.

2. Make me avoid and shun all bad company, and turn away from me all
occasion of sin.

3. The Rivers run to the Sea, the Stars hold always their course, the
Elements tend to their Sphere, all heavy things naturally descend to the
Center: Even so I go to thee, Center of my affections, Sphere of my soul,
Heaven full of benign influence, great Ocean of Charity and Mercy.

Title. 34. In beholding any Garden or Meddow.
1. O Architect of ye world, which have powered forth upon this immouable and
insensible world so great beauty, and such variety of odours and colors, why
do thou not the same to the territory of my soul?

2. If the earth of the dying be so beautiful, how beautiful is the land of
the living?

3. The dew, the rain, the influences of Heaven are not so necessary for
these flowers, as the grace of God, and favorable aspect of the holy Ghost are
necessary for my soul.

Title. 35. In seeing a Field Covered with Flowers.
1. THe odor of the Son of God, and the blessed Virgin Mary, is like to the
odor of a field, upon which our Lord has powered out his blessings.

2. If heaven were locally to be divided to all the blessed Saints, as was the
Land of promise to the Israelites; every one should have more for his part,
then the whole world; what do I then here? and what stays me here, O my God?

Title 36. When one smells to a Nosgay.
1, O how much sweeter art thou, my sweet and beloved Jesus!

2. When thou shall be pleased, O the love of my soul, thou shall smell in me
the Rose of Charity, the Lilly of Purity, the Violet of humility, the
Gilliflower of hope.

3. I would and desire many things according to sense, many things which I
cannot get, I make of them all a Nosegay, as being your spouse, to present
unto thee, O the Spouse of my soul.

Title 37. When we admire the beauty of any building.
1. EVen so the Birds highly prize, and esteem the Rocks, where they build
their nests: and the Ants their little holes, where they lodge.

2. All this is common both to the friends, and enemies of God.

3. What an habitation is that which thou reseruedst for thy Children, O God of
Israel? what, and how delightful shall be the Tabernacles of Jacob? seeing
thou art so liberal to the tabernacles of Moab.

4. One day in the house of God is more worth, the^ a thousand years in this
base lodging, in which the Beasts lodge with me.

5. If such be the habitation of the body, exposed to sin, and subject to
death, what shall be the habitation of the soul, when it shall be by grace
impeccable, as it is by nature immortal.

Title. 38. When you behold your self in a Glass.
1. Sweet JESUS, the looking glass of my life, when shall I see my self in
thee and thee in me?

2. My only desire be to please thee, and my only fear be to displease thee.

3. I shall be beautiful in thy eyes, when I shall be displeasing in my own.

4. The beauty of the body withers and rotteth, if it be not accompanied
with ye beauty of the soul.

5. I will look upon the life of Saints: to behold in it as in a glass my
own deformities.

6. There are certain persons which are always running to their
Looking-glasses: I will have no other looking-glass but thee, O Son of God,
in whom the Father, as in a glass, sees his own essence, and beholds his
perfections.

7. O what a looking glass is that, in which God the Father takes a view of
himself? wherein consists his blessedness. Thou art the lookingglasse, O
eternal word, which represents the essence and substance thou take from
him.

Title. 39. In putting on our Apparel.
1. I Stand in more need of virtues, with which to adorn my soul, then of
this apparel wherewith I set forth my body; Cloth me O my God with thy grace,
and cover my spiritual nakedness with the rich robe of perfect Charity.

2. Jesus, my love, when shall I put on thee? pardon me the too great
solicitude, and the over long time I spend in apparelling and decking my body,
a sack of worms, a tomb of death, and a mass of flesh, which is never
satisfied.

3. How long shall I serve with such attention this my slave, and pamper this my
domestical enemy?

4. I deserve not the name of a Christian, nor so much as to appear in thy
presence, if I have not at least as great care of the beauty of my soul, as I
am sollicitous about the beauty of my body.

5. Should I not now be a Saint; if I had done and endured, thought, and cast
about, as much for the one, as I have done for the other? pardon me this
vanity, O my God, by the merits of Jesus Christ thy Son, who is the true and
amiable beauty.

6. What were the cogitations, and thoughts of the Mother of God, of St.
Edowing Duchess of Poland, of St. Elizabeth Queen of Hungary, when they did
put on their apparel?

7. Our natural and borrowed dresses, put the crown of Thorns upon thy head;
our cherry-red and vermilion adorn thy face with blood, and spittle. I protest
to thy divine Majesty, in the presence of the Angels and Saints, that all the
solicitude, care, and pain, that I will henceforth, take about this my
miserable body, shall be purely and simply to discharge the vocation to which
it has pleased thee to call me; beseeching thee not to permit, that any thing
be in me that may offend thee, or be an occasion of offense to any.

8. I had rather be the foulest creature in the world, then that my body should
be but once the occasion of any ones falling but into only one deadly sin.
Make then of it O my God, an Organ of Purity, and an instrument of thy Glory.

Title. 40. Inputting off our Apparel.
1. THis body of mine is nothing else but the garment of my soul, which I must
put off, when the night of death approaches.

2. I will treat my body from henceforth, as I would wish to have treated at
the hour of death: Give me grace to do it O my God.

3. My apparel is the ornament of my body; O that my body might serve for an
ornament to my soul? conuersing holily during the time of my abode in this
world, until thou, O monarch of our lives, command me to put off this mortal
skin.

Title. 41. In putting on Jewels, and other ornaments.
1. HOw much more precious are thy ornaments, O blessed holy Ghost? O my
heavenly spouse, the only beloved of my soul, give me the abillament of good
example, the Diamond of patience, the Rubie of charity, the Emrauld of hope,
the Topaze of humility, the Sardonix of purity.

2. As our serges and clothes are the fleece of Sheep, our shoes the Skins of
Beasts, our Silks and Veluetts the excrements of Worms* our Amber and
perfumes the Mushrums of the Ocean, and sweat of beasts, our Feathers and
Fannes, the spoil of the Birds, our gold and silver, white and yellow earth;
even so our precious stone; are as it were the warts of the Orient mountains,
our Pearls the excrements of the Sea.

Such then is, O God of truth, the Attire of our vanity: Open then my eyes and
the eyes of all Christians, that acknowledging our selves to be aparelled from
the Brokers shop, as kings upon the Stage* and as such miserable beggars as
live upon the rich men's alms begged from the beasts. We must seek and take
from thy liberal hand, the ornaments of the soul, which need cost us nothing
but the asking, and the will to serve our selves of them.

Title 42. Washing our hands and our face.
1. MY hands, and my face were never soul by either speaking or looking; but
the face of my soul has been often defiled both by the one, and the other.

2. Wash me then and cleanse me O my God, by all the tears of Jesus Christ thy
Son, by the bloody sweat, which issued out of his divine person in the Garden
of Gethsemanie, by the miraculous water, which together with blud, issued out
of his side. It is the imperial and heavenly water, distilled by the fire of
his charity, which alone can take away the spots of my soul and make the same
pleasing unto thy eyes; power it upon me, O God of purity.

Title. 43. When you use your Fan.
1. Divine wind, which proceedest from the mouth of the Father and the Son, as
from one Origin, cool and refresh the heat of my passions, and the distemper
of my affections.

2. Amiable Spirit, and desired wind, dissipate the noughtie Air of our
temptations, the fiery exhalations raised by the irassible part of my soul,
and the misty vapors exhaled from my concupiscence.

Title 44. When the Clock strikes.
1. SO much the less of my life is to run.

2. The Yard y^ measures our mortal Life, is the hour out of which it
follows, that neither midnight nor midday ever strike, but death has taken
away twelve yardes of my piece of cloth, that is, so much time of life, or
rather so many hours of my life.

3. Sovereign steward of our lives, and disposer of our days, make me so
pass this hour to come; as I would have wished to have employed all the
hours of my life.

4. I make an offer unto thee O my God, of all that ever I shall say, do, or
think, until the next hour, uniting them to the deeds, words and thoughts
of Jesus Christ thy Son.

5. The Periods of all time are comprised in the moment of thy aeternitie,
nothing is past, nothing is to come before thee, and all is there present. And
yet nevertheless we are free to do, or not to do that, which thou desire.
And consequently it is in our power to give thee either contentment, or
coffeehouse aeternall. Permit not O my God, that I ever charge thee with any
such coffeehouse: but make me such an one temporally, as thou desire to
see me aeternally. That so I may rather give thee eternal contentment, then
one minute of coffeehouse.

6. I make an offer unto thee of all the time, that I have lost, and evil
employed; and in supply thereof I make a present of that time, which has
measured the life and actions of my Lord thy Son, being sorry from my
heart, that I cannot recall those years, that I have so ill employed. I make
then, O my God, an offer and sacrifice no less of that, which I cannot, then
of that, which I can.

7. O how late have I known thee, thou infinite goodness, how late have I
loved thee, ancient beauty, that never fadest, but always co^tinuest the same.

8. Look how many minutes there are in the hours or how many hours according
in time eternal which are without number; So often do I bless thee, O thou
ancient of days, and I give thee thanks more for that which thou art, then
for that which I am.

Title. 45. Touching the care we are to have of our Children.
1. THese are the beams of thy grace, O Father of light, these are thy gifts,
the workmanship of thy hands, I offer them unto thee as thine, and I bes^ech
thee to take care of them, as of things without comparison more oppertaining
to thee, then to me.

2. Accept of all that I have done, do or shall do for them, as being alive
wholly for thee: for I have no interest in them but from thee, from whom they
have, and of whom they hold body, soul and life.

3. Abraham made but once only, a sacrifice of his only son: I make it not
only of mine, but of my self and of all that I have, and that so often, as I
breath forth, or take in my breath.

4. When I feel in my self certain effects of tender love toward them, I
begin to conceive a new confidence, and a wonderful hope, O my God, knowing,
how much more tenderly thou affectest them, then I do or can. Being assured,
that thy love far surmounteth mine, and that without all comparison. O thrice
happy condition of souls, which call themselves, and are called by thee, thy
daughters!

5. Have I any right to these Children, or any intrest comparable to that which
thou have? I am ashamed to recommend them unto thee, For it were as much, as to
pray thee to have care of that which is thine.

6. No man builds a house to pluck it down; no man planteth a vinyard to
root it up; nor sows a field to burn the harvest; How then can thou
neglect these young plants, planted by thy grace in the Orchard of thy Church,
watered with thy blood, and designed by thee to be transported one day into the
Garden of thy aeternitie.

7. I sin blind buzzard that I am, as too covetous and loving to much that,
which they have: take away this overplus, O Father of mercy: Or if the force
of nature must so far prevail, that it must needs remain, impure the same
to the excess of that affection, which I owe to all that, with appertains to
thee.

8. I fall sometimes into certain secret diffidencies and distrusts, I dare not
say they are altogether against my will, though they displease me: doubting
somewhat, lest thou think not upon my children, nor vouchsafest to have that
care of them, that I feel in my self. O God of infinite goodness, pardon me my
offense, and deal not with me and the^, according to our demerits.

Title. 46. Concerning our Domesticals.
1. What did I, before I was, by which I might deserve to have this honorable
condition that I have? might not I have been borne in Barbary of some slave, or
have been borne here in these parts of as base condition, as these that serve
me? why then do I expecte so much service? why am I so hard to please? so
imperious, and rough toward such, as serve me? Permit not this any more, O my
God, but give me abenigne ha^t, full of compassion, and rather of a Father,
then Master, toward those of my family.

2. Grant me the grace, y^ I may become their servant, serving them in things
appertaining to their souls, as they serve me in things apertaining to my body.

3. Our souls are made all of one substance, and if there be any difference,
it is in the use we make of them; if they make better use then I, they are
better then I: so as peradventure I am before thee as much their inferior, as I
am according to y^ world their superior and better.

4. I should blush for shame, tremble for fear, and be exceedingly confounded,
to see that such, as serve me, have more care to please me, and more fear to
offend me, then I have to please or displease the eyes of thy divine Majesty.

5. My God, my true Lord and Master, reform this disorder, and make that at
least I may be such an one toward thee, as they are, or as I desire they
should be to me. I am too sensible of every fault or defect, or negligence
committed in my service; I observe it too exactly, I censure it too rigorously.
O my God King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, proceed not with me, as I proceed
with ^he^, weigh me not in that balance, and with those weights, with with I
wright them, measure not unto me according to that measure.

6. True, there is no comparison between thee and me: or between the faults
committed against me, with the faults I commit against thee, and for which I
am a^ountable to thee. But no less true is it, that there is no proportion
between thy goodness, and my naughtines, thy mercy and my misery; thy
fortitude and my frugalitie thy prudence and my imprudencie; thy divinity and
my humanity.

7. Will thou leave to be that which thou art because I am not that, which I
should be?

Title 47. In going to Mass.
1. I Accompany thee, my sweet JESUS, to the Mount Caluarie, make me partaker
of that Charity which conducted thee thither.

2. Make me have that feeling which the Daughters of Sion had, when they met
thee with the Cross upon thy shoulders, with the rope about thy neck, with
thy Crown of thorns upon thy head.

3. Grant me that resignation of my will to thine, which was in thy blessed
Mother, standing at the foot of the Cross: and by the merits of her
sorrows, and constancy in them, grant unto me the guist of constancy and
perseverance in thy love, and service.

Title. 48. When one is Melancholy or displeased at any thing.
Melancholy is the seat of Sachan, he endeavors to make me that seat; now
succor me O my God, I protest that I consent not to any thought, that now I
have, I renounce all suspicions, judgments, indignation, wayward^es, auersion,
unquietness, and all such other passions which assault me, and will trouble and
toss my spirit; if thou command not the fury of the sea enraged, if thou
allay not ye winds, which cause this tempest in my soul. Speak the^ my
assured Pilot, and my heart shall feel a calm. Say the word and it will
straight be fair weather.

Title. 49. When we feel our selves in any passion.
PAssion is a colored glass, which gives its color to our eyes, and the
objects we look upon through it. Wherefore O my God, I deny, I resist, I
reject, and that with all the force I can, all that which then I had the will,
and was resolved to do. And I put my heart, my will, and my consent into thy
hands.

Title 50. After the happy success of any affair.
IT is thou my beloved, which had the care to prosper with happy success
this affair, and to bring the same to so good an end. I accept of it, as from
thy hand, and I give ^hee thanks for it, beseeching thee O my blessedness,
never to permit, that I be withdrawn from thee by any thing, which I have not
but of thee. I desire that, which thou desire, and no more.

Title. 51. Having received any grace.
IT is by thy means, sweet Jesus, by thy merits, and by thy mediation, that I
have received this grace, thank thou God the Father for me; For in so doing
thou shall thank him for thy self. The grace which is done unto me, is done
as much if not more, unto thee: because it was granted unto me, as desired of
thee, and merited by thee.

Title. 52. When we receive any consolation in Prayer.
DEfend me O my GOD, from all vain glory and self liking; a man may think
himself gracious in thy eyes, with whom thou art offended. And another, that
is near and dear unto thee, may fear himself to be far off, and
altogether out of thy favor. I will not therefore hold any certain iugdement
of my self, out of any deceitful opinion, I may have of my self, but my
confidence shall be in thy mercyes, and I will rejoice in thee, my God, and my
Lord, who art good with inuariable goodness, from whence shall proceed all true
firmness, and strength of my heart, and all solid repose, and quietness of my
soul. I renounce then all vain motions, whether of Joy, or sadness, which
take their Origin, and spring from self-love.

Title 53. In time of Desolation.
I Will carry this Cross cheerfully, and not drag and draw it after me
discontentedly: there being no reason, that under a head of thorns any member
should be at case. Many will have the Crucifix, but without ye Cross. That is,
they would be saved, but they would not be crucified; others carry the Cross,
but without the Crucifix; that is, are crucified, but shall not be saved. They
presume, and these despair: I will and desire both the one and the other, and
consecrate my self unto them both. Come then, O the spouse of my soul, though
never so much dyed in thine own blood, come I say, when thou please, and come
with thy Cross. It is the bed, upon with thou and I must sleep, and upon which
we will die together. It is my Paradise to be with thee whersoeuer thou art. I
love thee as much amidst the Lances, the Nails, the Thorns; as amongst the
Olives, the boughs, and the adorned streets, through which thou did pass
with triumph: as much upon the mount Caluarie, as upon the mount Thabor: as
much dying, as living: as much buried, as risen again: as much in Lymbus, as in
Heaven. Only grant yt I may be thine, and that I never depart from thee,
whether I be in consolation, or desolation, poor, or rich; in plenty or in
want; all shall be one to me, so I may be wholly and only thine.

Title. 54. When we feel our selves dry at Prayer.
I will continue with perseverance before thee, and not give over, O my God. I
will honor thee with my body, seeing I cannot do it with my soul. It is good
foe me, that thou have humbled me: Now I begin to know and feel what I I am.
Now I touch with my hands my own misery, and well perceive that I am able to
do nothing with out thee. This is as it were a returning to the nothing, from
which I took my origin, and out of which I was drawn by thy omnipotency.
Blessing, praise, and thanks, be to thee, my God, for ever. I merit not so
much as once to enter into thy thought, or that thou shoudst once think of me;
And should be to happy, it that I might serve thee but in the condition of a
stone, or thing without sense and life. Receive the homage, don by my miserabie
condition to thy blessed self, who art independent of any, and have all
contentment in thy self.

Title 55. When one is despised.
O My God, I have lost nothing so long, as I loose not thee, have I any thing
that appertains unto me, whether it be goods, honors, body or soul? Can
any thing fall out in the world without thy providence? Is any thing done,
sin only excepted, which is not done by thy will? If then thou be pleased,
that I be despised, why should any opposition be made? who is he so insolent,
and so bold a Theife, that dare entermeddle with things appertaining to thee,
contrary to thy will? may not thou do with that which is thine, according to
thy pleasure? when I am honored should I rejoice there at for my self? Is it
a thing appertayning to me or to thee? It is enough for me, O great God, that I
be thine, whether I be an Ant or an Elephant, an Egle or a Gnat, dirt or gold.

Title. 56. Eleuations of spirit, which may be done upon every occasion.
1. MY God, my all JESUS, the delight of Heaven and earth, when shall I be all
thine, as thou art wholly mine?

2. Father of mercy, make me such an one, as thy Son has deserved, and thy
holy spirit desires I should be.

3. God of my life, when shall I die to my self, that I may live to thee?

4. Take me, my God, whether I will or no, seeing I am not so wise, as to give
my self unto thee, as to have the will to give my self unto thee.

5. If it should fall out, my beloved, that I should desire any thing but thee,
which I desired not for thee; I renounce it even from now, as if it were then,
and protest that I have nothing to loose or gain besides thee.

6. O God, God of my soul, permit me not to be at all; or procure by thy
grace, that I may be to serve thee, as I am, and have my being from thee.

7. I will have ^o eye, but to look upon thee; no ear, but to hear thee; no
tongue, but to speak of thee; no heart, but to think upon thee; no hands, but
to work for thee; no feet, but to walk and seek after thee; no body, but for
to offer up unto thee; no life, but to make a sacrifice thereof to thy honor
and glory.

8. God which art Love, give me Charity.

9. God, which were made Man, grant me Humility.

10. God, which art a pure Spirit, bestow upon me Purity.

11. Omnipotent power, strenghthen my weakness.

12. Eternal wisdom, illuminate my darkness.

13. Incomparable mercy, pardon my haughtiness.

14 Incomparable beauty, to late I have loved thee.

15. Infinite goodness, too late have I known thee.

16. He that loves not thee, what does he love?

17 He that admireth not thee, what does he admire?

I will love my self, not because I am mine, but because I am thine: I will
have care of my self, not for any other reason, but because thou so willest
and commaundest.

I esteem my self more happy in thy happiness, th^n I count my self wretched
for my own misery. And the contentment I take that thou art that, which thou
art, far exceeds the coffeehouse I feel by being that which I am. Be
thou then, my God, for ever that, which thou art, and make me other then I am,
That is, whereas I am my self miserable, I shall be in thee blessed and happy.

To thee in thee, by thee, and for thee, O my God, be all things.

Amen.

