A SHORT DISCOVERY OF THE VNOBSERVED DANGERS OF several sorts of ignorant and
inconsiderate Practisers of Physic in England: Profitable not only for the
deceived multitude, and easy for their mean capacities, but raising reformed
and more advised thoughts in the best understandings: With Direction for the
safest election of a Physician in necessity: BY JOHN COTTA of Northampton
Doctor in Physic.

LONDON, Imprinted for WILLIAM JONES, and RICHARD BOIL dwelling in the
Blacke-Friers. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND WORTHY Gentlemen, my desired
friends and deserving Patients of Northamptonshire, honor, health and
happiness of life.
RIght noble and renowned Gentlemen, it is now the tenth years since the
singular favors, love, merit and tried worth of my thrice Sir William Tate.
honored friend has first here detained me in the eye of your use. In this
short space of quick time, as my public office has been truly devoted unto
you all the common right, so many your noble peculiar deserts have worthily
challenged their special claim. In pledge therefore of my love and duty unto
you all, and in memory of my travels amongst you* (when former vows shall
happily hence re^all me) what my time here passed has brought forth, most rare
or worthy unto choice observation, I freely publish, and reciprocally here
present unto the countries good, and together with general caution and rule
for safe and wholesome medication, repay and dedicate. The matter and subject
it self, unto common reading, is of a virgin fresh and as yet vndiuulged
view, and no less of necessary and serious use. The style can neither be so
far in love with it self as to forget the matter, nor altogether sauoureth
of his often interrupted and unsettled leisure; and breuity does not suffer the
reading to be any burden. The pains and loss of secured safety Namque
tacere Tutum semper erit. Scalig. Constare gratis quin silentium possit.
Martial.
in silence are mine own, and the opportunity every man's that lusts to
censure, or to satisfy any other more honest end: I have thus freely exposed
my self in a proposed hope, that the hence derived good of many may make good
my good desire unto all. Since the^ this small sacrifise of my self to all
your happy healths (a mite answerable to my might) does therewith include a
needful use unto a common good, that after succeeding participation may enlarge
the benefit unto all, or at least my poor pains awake more ample merit in
some others worth, vouchsafe my free and honest labor in your friendly
acceptance, shrouded by the true splendour of your generose and noble worthes,
may dazzle the narrow sight of base obtrectation. Thus shall your ever deserving
loves and now desired patronages, make both so much more deserved love your
desirous servant, and religiously ever oblige my self in all true rights unto
your daigned favors, perpetual solicitor of humble, officious and thankful
memory.

JOHN COTTA.

TO THE READER.
THe Sun does rise and fall, and returns every day: but when the short day
of man's life once goes down, it never Soles occidere and redire possunt:
Nobis cum semel occidit breuis lux, Nox est perpetua vna dormienda. Catull.
dawneth. Life is dear, and too dear (being lost) for all inestimable valewes
to redeem: and health is the sweetness of life, and the very life of Non est
viuere sed valere vita. Martial.
living, without which, men while they live are already dead. Thou therefore
that love thy life, and for thy life thy health, take counsel of a Physician
without a fee. So many and so infinitely do the numbers of barbarous and
unlearned counselors of health at this time ouerspread all corners of this
kingdom, that their confused swarms do not only every where cover and
eclipse the Sunshine of all true learning and understanding but generally
darken and extinguish the very light of common sense and reason. It is every
man's office to do good for goodness sake, and both my general duty unto a
common good, and my special bond unto my friends, do earnestly solicit me
hereto, since no man (that as yet I hear) has hitherto undertaken this task.
For their sakes therefore, for whose harms by unskillful hands I have often
heretofore sorrowed, and for their loves, whose life and health I wish
heareafter preserved, and for their good who will take pains to know it, I
here commend (leaving the common mischief to the common care) unto every
particular for himself this needful detection of harmefull Cui malus est
nemo, quis bonus esse potest.
succors, and necessary counsel for safe supply (necessity being never
more distractedly miserable in hard choice of good) in so common and confused
multitudes of ill. For the meanest readers sake (whom in this whole work I
labor equally to observe) I have suited the plainnes and simplicity of a
familiar style: and for facility of common reading have also smoothed and
cleared the stream and current of this little volume, from the stops and
interruptions of unusual sounds and language (as far as the subject will
permit) refreshing only the learned in the margin. Neither have I esteemed it
any indecorum for the meanest understanding sake, together with general
cautions and rules to insert particular cases and reports, which may be both an
inducement to read, and an enticement to continue, example being neither least
pleasing nor least profitable unto the vulgar. There shall appear in this
following treatise described, first, such insufficient workmen and
practitioners, as this time does generally set forth, with their several
manners, defects and dangers: and after shall succeed a plain pattern of that
sufficient Artist, unto whom with judgment and better satisfaction unto thy
own understanding, thou may commend thy health, and whom the Ancients, right
reason, and experience have ever allowed. I labor not in this plain
discovery with words to feast prodigality, nor hope altogether for want of
correspondence unto satisfaction to macerate frugall satietie. Few words do
best hold Cito dicta Percipiunt dociles animi, retinentque fideles. Horat.
memory, and a short taste does breed more eager appetite. I will therefore
only briefly point the common forgetfulness by bare advertisement to better
memory, which after may better thence guide it self to more large and
accurate consideration. This plain endeavor begotten of succisiue hours by
good desire, thy proposed benefit (deserving Reader) has here brought forth
into this common light. Enjoy therefore therein what seems liking, or of use:
the rest thy wiser thoughts may either in reading, abstract, or thy ingenuous
mind compare with that is better, or by it self censure as a cipher. Farewell.

Thy weale-aduising friend, JOHN COTTA.

THE SEVERAL TRACTATES of the Treatise following.
In the first Book.
Chap. 1. The Introduction. 2. The Empericke his defects and danger. 3. Women
their custom and practice about the sick, commonuisiting counselors, and
commenders of medicines. 4. Fugitives, workers of iugling wonders,
Quacksaluers. 5. Surgeons. 6. Apothecaries. 7. Practisers by spells. 8. The
explication of the true discovery of witchcraft in the sick, together with
many and wondered instances in that kind. 9. Wisards. 10. Servants of
Physicians, ministering helpers.
In the second book.
Chap. 1. The methodian learned deceiuer or heretic Physician. 2. Benificed
Practisers. 3. Astrologers, Ephemerides-maisters. 4. Coniectors by urine. 5.
Travelers.
In the third Book.
The true Artist his right description and election.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction.
THE dignity and worth of Physics skill consists not (as is imagined
commonly) in the excellence and pre-eminence of remedies, but in their wise and
prudent use. It is an ancient true saying, that wholesome medicines by the
hands of the judicious dispenser, are as Remedia si ab indoctis Medicis
vsurpentur sunt venena, si vero a doctis and exercitatis, Deorum sunt
auxiliares manus. Herophil.
Angels of God sent for the good of men; but in the hands of the unlearned, are
messengers of death unto their farther evil. Good medicines are in themselves
excellent instruments of health and life, but require a learned workman
iudiciously to guide them unto their destined end. It is order and not
confusion, that is ever safe and happy; and knowledge (which works by
election, and (...). Aristot:
true reason, and not rash boldness, which does good by chance Homo
inconsultus and temerarius futura non videt. Cicero.
and uncertain event) that is the light and safe guide of understanding
minds. Who knows not how much Id solum been fit quod fit opportune. Plato.
opportunity aduanceth in all performances? how descreete observation of
smallest in alijs (...) in alijs (...).
circumstances aduantageth? how wise and learned Omnes intellectus mentisque
habitus ad vnius prude^tiae complementum desiderantur, (...), etc. Aristot.
cunctation, and sometimes anticipation, make fortunate an action? Who sees
not in every days experience, how necessary it is by a mature and judicious
eye to foresee in all attemps the after unavoidable Front capillata, post est
occasio calua.
hindrances? Who discerns not that without prudent circumspection and
provident forecast, blind rashness and ignorance do always hazard, and often
unrecoverably overthrow all good success. Through want of knowledge to mistake
(...). Aristot.
time, is loss of labor and of time. Ignorant slownesse does come too late,
and rash haste does stumble: he that knows not the danger, does easily run
upon the rock. Thus is it easy for the unlearned to err, and those that want
understanding to fall into the snare. If then all enterprises prosper by wise
advice, and it is wisdom in matters of meanest moment to consult with a wise
and judicious friend, in cases of health and life certainly every man is not a
sufficient counselor. He that considers the multitude of causes in diseases,
their infinite kinds, manners, and natures, the variety of accidents, their
sudden and variable mutations, the soon lost occasions, and hardly gained
(...). etc. Hippoc. Aph 1.
opportunities, the wisdom which circumstances require, the care and
vigilance which the subject exacteth, the doubts which repugnances bring, the
resolutions which necessities urge; shall find the most exquisite powers of
understanding, judgment, wit, discretion, and learning herein exactly sifted.
From the variety of Principium medendi cognitio morbi, minimusque error in
illius ignoratione commissus est maximus in fine. Galen. de Meth. med.
causes of diseases, what varying differences arise in the manner, quantity,
quality, and times of remedies: every one requiring a separate and distinct
respect and dispensation, even in the same disease and person? The immediate
cause from the mediate, the antecedent from the continent, the necessary from
the casual and contingent, require both a diverse handling, and also a
distinction in order of handling: neither is there a like consideration of the
external and internal, the positive, the privative, the material, the
immateriall, those that are single and alone, and those that are jointly and
with others. Sometimes many causes are coincident in one effect, sometimes many
diseases from one cause. Sometimes the same cause receives a difference from
it self, and exacteth an exact difference in his own remedies. Sometime the
same cause is so far unlike it self that it seems not it self, being
either more then it self in quantity, or a monster to Accessu qualitatis
pestiferae and deleteriae.
it self in malignant quality. As causes and diseases (according to their
causes:) so no less material are accidents to be distinctly known and
considered. Some of them bring Hinc alia (...) in quibus (...), alia (...). etc.
certain knowledge, some artificial conjecture, some matter of presumption
and probability. Some are manifest, some anxious and ambiguous, some
significant by themselves, some consignificant with others. Some are of virtue
in singularity, some in multitude: some are considered as signs and causes,
some as neither, some as both. Some accidents go before the disease, some
accompany, some follow after. Ordinarily the disease does draw all attendance
unto it self, sometimes the Symptoma crudeliter saeuiens a morbo auocat. Hinc
curatio duplex habetur, haec regularis, illa coacta.
accident does obscure the disease. Some accidents alone are ciphers, but added
unto other make up a just account; some prognosticate, some iudicate, some are
idle: some iudicate the constitution of the sick, some the humor, some the
diseased part, some the disease it self, and some the issue. Sometimes
diseases are discovered by no signs at all, but by an exact and exquisite Haec
est illa (...) acerrime coniectans, (...) intue^s summa ingenij sagacia.
disquisition of a sound and AEgritudines aliae manifestae, aliae occultae,
aliae difficiles cognitu, aliae faciles, aliae inco^prehensae nisi exquisita
and subtili aestimatione. Auicenna tract. de horis AEgrit.
solert judgment. So that according to the kinds, places, courses, changes
and courses of accidents, vary significations, iudications and
prognostications, and follow safe administration and application of apt
remedies, unto the more speedy Sum haec spectanda in Medico vt tute, iucunde,
celeriter salutem expediat.
benefit of the sick, facility of cure, and security of after health.
Diseases, their causes and circumstances wisely distinguished and known, do
point a discreet knowing workman to a more certain issue; without which as
the beginning of cure must necessarily be rash, so must the end be doubtlesly
uncertain. Hence it must needs be apparent, that by the common neglect and
ignorance herein, the monopolizing of cures unto the prerogative of this or
that secret, and thereby the contempt of the due permutation of medicines,
according to requisite circumstances and necessities, and the omission and
reiection of the wholesome administration of the general Quemadmodum duae sunt
primae and communissimae morborum causae, Plethora and Cacochymia, sic totidem
oportet esse communissima remedia purgationem debitam, and idoneam
opportunamque sanguinis missionem, etc.
remedies (without which the particular are vain and preposterous) do commonly
turn to the common perdition of most valetudinary men. From hence also it does
come to pass, that many disea^es, beyond their own nature, and besides the
constitution of the sick, grow so commonly, so easily rooted, and vnobseruedly
confirmed in men's bodies, that often they can never have end, which by due
ordering should never have had beginning. Hence grow so frequent the multitude
of strange and unnatural changes, and new fashions of fits, even through the
too common use of wholesome remedies in vulgar and profane hands. For through
this presumption, either by idle trifling and vain flattery of ease, dangerous
diseases quickly and in short time grow too proud for any medication: or else
in the other Aegritudines in alias aliae facile mutantur. Auicen. de dispos.
Aegrit,
extreme, by too much haste and violence are hunted out of their own course,
(...). Hippoc. Aphor. l. 2.
and so metamorphize themselves into wild and unaccustomed shapes. Hence
likewise it comes to pass, that diseases in their own kind easy and of
small continuance, by the wrong and injury of remedies (without advice admitted
and celebrated) are not only extended, to a lingering age of many days: but
from days to weeks, from weeks to years, yea often unto a longer life then
the sick himself, after him inheriting his children and posterity. It is a
verified and true saying, Worse are the bad after-consequences of ill applied
medicines, then diseases themselves. Although this be often apparent, even unto
the common sense of vulgar sight, yet much more infinite are the impeachments
and ruins of health by the learned seen and discovered daily, whereof a
common eye is not (...). Non est cuiusuis malum in initio exo^iens dignoscere.
A^stot. in Polit.
capable; while unperceived mischiefs stealingly (...). Latet corruption quia
non tota simul fit, decipiturque men's ab illa. Aristot. in Polit.
and insensibly enter with vnpriuiledged remedies, and by some present benefit
or ease for a time, gayning credit and entertainment, by little and little
secretly undermine the very frame and foundation of life. We may instance in
Tobacco: with what high fame and great renown was it at his first arrival
here in England entertained as an incomparable jewel of health, and an
universal antidote and supersedeas against the force, and capias of all
diseases, every man with the smoke thereof in his nosthrils, breathing the
prayles and excellencies thereof in his mouth? But now has not time and many a
man's woeful experience given testimony to right reason and judgment, from the
first suspecting, and until this proving time suspending the too great name
thereof? Is not now this high blased remedy manifestly discovered* through
intemperance and custom, to be a monster of many diseases? Since the riotous
use of this strange Indian, let it be noted how many strange and before
unknown diseases have crept in unnaturally, besides the former custom and
nature of the nation, proving now natural and customary to the follies of the
nation. Is it not apparent that the air of this vapor and smoke by the
subtility thereof, does suddenly search all parts with a general distress often
times to nature? And is it not thence probable, that by advantage in the
weakest, it may often leave behind it (especially where it is any time used)
such impression and print, besides painful distention through his enclosed
vapor, that no time of life, no remedies, often times, are ever after able to
blot A vaporosae and aereae substa^tiae occulto subtilique seminario
imperceptibiliter nouos and inauditos ob^epe^e humano generi affectus ignotum
no^ est. Hinc Galenus lib. 1. praedictionum interpretatur illud (...)
Hippocratis, ambientis aeris efficacia^* quod insensibili ratione, ideoque
miris modis corpora immutare soleat. Hoc non modo in aere pestilenti
conspicuum, sed and in pluribus exhalationum generibus per aerem diffusis clam,
and celeriter quasi syderantibus.
out? And from this Nicotian fume grow now adays, doubtlesly, many our
frequent complaints, and every day new descriptions of Hinc febres
catarrhosae, and ab his latentes (...), cachexiae etiam occult^ obrepentes,
tota ^aepe sanguinis massa a catarrho contaminata dum in venas delabitur, saepe
diuersis corporis partibus imperceptibiliter lacessitis, saepe manifesto
maleficio oppressis, prout per arterias, musculos, neruos, aut occultos and
latentes meatus praecipitata a capite fertur pituita.
pains, according happily to the diversity and difference of the parts it
chiefly affects, or the more or less extreme use thereof. And men happily led
by some present bewitching feeling of ease, or momentarie imagined release from
pain at some time, hereby unadvisedly with such means of their ease, drink
into some weak parts, such seed of future poison, as having given them for a
time supposed pleasing ease, does for time to come secretly and unfelt settle
in their bones and solid parts, a never dying disease (while they live.) How
many famous patrons and admirers of this simple, have senselesly died in the
very time of the idle use thereof, while it yet smoked in their teeth? and
others living in the immoderate I condemn not a plentiful and liberal use
thereof when any necessity or need with reason and judgment conduct thereto,
but the ordinary, fond and needelesse custom thereof, led by no persuasion of
any foreseen good or benefit, must needs fall into the common errors and
harms of vseles and needelesse actions.
burning love therein, have with the fiery zealous gluttony thereof (as the
badge of his mastership in the^) sensibly stupefied and dried up their ever
after, foolish and besotted brains? I might give other instance in these well
known and vulgar remedies of the named French disease, which by a present
benumming of the sense, cousining, and easing of pain, do withal, for after
time, inure and leave behind them such a rottennes, and weakness ofttimes of
the bones and sinews, as suffers few of our Mercurials to live, to know Rato
antecedentem scelestu^ Deseruit pede poena claudo. Horat.
their age in health, especially who thoroughly knew the siluer-salue in their
youth. Hence toward declining age (if not before) some fall into consumptions
and marasmes, some lose their teeth, some have the palate of the mouth rotted,
some the very bones of their head eaten, some by conuulsions their mouths and
faces set awry. And it is ordinary with most of this sort, long before harvest
to leave no grass grow upon their paued tops. I do not altogether condemn
these smoakes, but fear their fire, and with the Ancients sparingly commend
their kind of remedies, knowing their pernicious danger in their ignorant and
rash ouervse, with their singular service in some rare exigents, God and nature
happily leaving a sting and poison in them, for their too common vicious need
and custom. I might here yet farther insist in all other diseases, how the use
of the most excellent, proper, and apt remedies being unaptly applied, either
too little or too Quot sunt qui solo victu competenti citra vllum discrimen ab
affectibus liberari possint, qui praeter rem pharmacis contunduntur? Brudus de
vict. febricit.
much, too soon or too late, before their season or after, in some cases at
any time, or in any manner, bring in corrigible and helpeles harms, being in
their own nature Vidi quos in pemiciem traxerit solum simplex apozema ex
numaria cum senae folijs temere exhibitis: nam corpus totum in colliquantem
fluxum traxit. Heurnius in Aphor. Hippocr.
harmeles, but in their unskillful use pernicious and mortal. It is apparent
in all mysteries and faculties whatsoever, that the excellency of the tool
without the excellency of the workman, does not bring forth excellency in
the workmanship. Hence it must needs come to pass, that medicines though
wholesome in themselves, and of a saving and sovereign power, without any
touch of harmefull quality at all, yet being ignorantly or indiscreetly out of
time or place disposed or dispensed, must likewise bring forth mischief, in
stead of expected good. And although many hardened by custom unto a boldness
of tra^sgressing in this kind, provoke often revenge of their folly, (for a time
without harm or punishment) yet do they not always escape: for though hap
often pass by, it lights at Quem saepe transit casus, aliquando inuenit, Senec.
last, and not seldom heavily. Cassia is esteemed for a delicate, wholesome
and harmless lenitiue unto old men, children, babes, women with child, and
the weakest amongst the sick; yet the learned know it in some Graves affert
mutationes and perniciosas saepe Cassia, perturbat, distendit, distorquet cum
molestis deliquijs in naturis and temperame^tis biliosis. Quercit. de tot.
capit. Affectib.
cases not only unprofitable, but of maine mischief. Rhabarb is said to be
the life of the liver, yet in some conditions thereof it is an In lienteria, in
ventriculi imbecillitate in flatibus, in renum vlceribus and vesicae notissima
sunt mala.
enemy; And for the general remedies, phlebotomy, purging, vomit, sweating,
bathing and the like, reason and experience daily give demonstration, that often
in the same body, and the same disease, they are variablie, sometime necessary,
sometimes profitable not necessary, sometimes neither profitable nor necessary,
but accursed. Sometimes bleeding does ventilate and refresh the spirits above,
and beyond all other remedies, and is the only key unto health; sometimes
again it does exhaust and spend their vigor, sometime being both profitable
and necessary, yet used out of time or quantity does no good, or used
unseasonably does much hurt. Purgatio^s in some estates with Siccis corporibus
non parum nocet.
preparatiues, and in some without In humoris turgescentia, nimia tenuitate*
ichore susque deque fluido.
preparatiues are harmefull: in some either (...). Hippoc. Aphoris.
with preparatiues, or without Haec sunt (...). Communem materiem educentia.
preparatiues they are necessary and never to be omitted. And as there is
infinite danger in error and ignorant dispensation, so is there unspeakable
good in the prudent prescription according to the nature, quality and seat of
each humor; according to which it is wisdom sometimes to quicken, sometimes to
alay, sometimes to hasten, sometimes to moderate their effects, discreet
stays often making more speedy iourneys. Aph. 18. lib. 4. Aph. 17. lib. 4.
Vomits in some diseases are altogether banished and not admitted, and in some
contrariwise they have only privilege. The like may be said of outward
remedies, plasters, unguents, cereclothes, fomentations, and baths, which also
according to wise and discreet administration, or a rash and heedlesse abuse,
are good or evil. And this is the reason, that so many famous and renowned
remedies now adays bring forth effects unworthy themselves; for (being with
such dissolute licenciousnesse every where and in all places permitted to
break forth, out of the prudent awe of understandings guidance) how shall they
choose but become wild and irregular in the hands of unskillful raines that
want true art, and the method of their right dispensation? There is no place
nor person ignorant with what confusion of good order (either by abuse of
immunities, or impunitie, ill provision, or ill execution of good laws)
through all parts of this kingdom, all sorts of vile people and unskillful
persons without restraint, make gainefull traffic by botching in physic;
and hereby (besides many wicked practices, iuglings, cousinages and impostures,
which mask unespied under the color and pretense of medicining) numbers of
vnwotting innocents daily in thrall, and betray themselves, their lives and
safety, to sustain the riot, lusts and lawless living of their enemies and
common homicides. It is a world to see what swarms abound in this kind, not
only of Tailors, Shoemakers, Weauers, Midwiues, Cooks, and Priests, but
Witches, Coniurers, Iuglers, and Fortune Tellers. It were a wrong to exempt any
that want wit or honesty in a whole country, yea and many that have too much
of either, must be privileged by an old proverb, to be Physicians, because it
is no manners to call them fools. And hereby not only the simple and
unlettered, but often times men of better sort and quality, casting their eyes
upon some attempts of these barbarous medicine-mongers, (good often in their
event) and not considering the dangerousnesse of such habit and custom,
desirously often times entertain the messengers and ministers of unrecoverable
Perdere quos vult Jupiter, hos dementat. Senec.
misery unto their after life. For as in military designs, often times a bold
and foole-hardy enterprise above and besides reason, and beyond expectation,
produces an excellent and admired good in the happy issue, yet is it not
commended, or in any case permitted (as being very dangerous) in ordinary
practice or custom of warfare: so likewise diverse events of medicines prove
good, whose bold use and rash prescription is dangerous and unskillful. I do
not only herein pity the mean capacity, but wonder also at the madness of
men in their wits, who in other kinds of knowledge reverend, yet herein, with
desire of life, seem often to have so little care of their lives. It is strange
to observe how few in these days know, and how none almost labor to know with
election and according to reason, or reasonable likelihood, to bestow in cases
of their lives the trust and care of their crased healths, but for the most
part wanting a right notice of a judicious choice, take counsel either of
common report which is a common lier, or of private commendations, which are
ever partial. The vnmindfulnesse hereof, and the more mind of mindlesse
things, do steal from men the minds of men. Hence every where preposterous
intrusion does disorder the right and propriety of every thing, and the
general forgetfulness of that which to every one is most pertinent, does beget
an itching business in that which to every one is most impertinent; and self
conceited and presuming ignorance does prick forward rash spirits to become
more bold and busy, then modesty does permit discreet minds, soberly
limited within their own bounds. This is the cause, that vnwottingly to the
poor patient, unwittingly to the unskillful workman, and generally for the
most part unobserved of all, is the thread of many a man's life ordinarily, by
unskillful hands entangled in such inextricable knots of sickness, pains and
death, as no time nor art are ever able to unfold. Improper remedies are for
the most part worse then diseases, and unlearned Physicians of all bad causes
of diseases themselves the worst. That therefore men continue not in this
general confusion (through voluntary ignorance, ever ignorantly unfortunate)
it is not a needless learning, more studiously to know and discern (...),
Euripid.
good from ill, and ill from good, beginning with the last first.

CHAP. II.
Of the Empericke.
RIght Quae sub sensum non cadunt mentis vis and ratio percipit. Gal.
reason and true Mente perspecta and ratione generatim comprehensa, sensuum
fide cognoscimus magis and stabilimus. Gal^^. de sect.
experience are two the sole inseparable instruments of all humane knowledge:
the Empericke trusting unto experience alone without reason, and the Methodian
unto the abuse of right reason; the Ancients have divided all sorts of
erroneous Physicians into these two Duplex ignorantium medicorum genus. Alterum
eorum qui sola experientia nituntur, aiuntque nullius rei naturam posse ratione
inueniri. Alterum eorum qui sibi nomen sapientiae vindicant, and licet parem
habeant cum prioribus ignorantiam, opinionem tamen scientiae sunt aucupati. Sed
eorum inscitia inde habet initium quod in rationalibus scientijs nequaquam sunt
exercitati, quae nos rite distinguere and secernere docent ^as propositiones
quae demonstrandi vim habent, ab ijs quae probabilitatem quidem continent,
nihil aute^ very possunt aut demonstrare aut inuenire. Gal. lib. 1. de
different. febr.
. For ignorant experience and without reason, is a false Ideo impositum est
iudicium tanquam praetor quidam ad inuentorum and obiectorum perpensionem.
Sensus enim apprehensio est simplex, non iungit aut disiungit, neque iudicat,
sed aliavis interna per sensum intellectum promouet. Scalig. de Sbutil.
sense, and mistaking reason is denial of reason. As therefore unto these two,
other ages before, so we now may reduce all the faulty practitioners of our
time, beginning with the Empericke. The Empericke is he who rejects Empiricir
ati^nem negant, sensum recipient. Galen libr. de Sectis.
the disquisition of diseases and remedies, their causes, natures and qualities
according to judgment and understanding, and the careful perpension and
ballancing of his action and practice unto a just proportion with reason; but
only informs himself by such things as often appear evident and manifest
unto sense and experimental proof, carrying his heart and understanding (for
the most part) in his hands and eyes, taking nothing sure but what he sees or
handles; and from the differing manners of experience, are numbered several and
diverse kinds Hinc (...). etc.
of experience. The defect in the Empericke hence appears to be want of true
method and the habit of right operation and practice according to reason,
(which is art) through which defect his actions must needs often be reasonlesse,
Ars vsus reru^ incertos certis legibus coercet, Scalig. de Subt.
and by consequent as blind in their intention, so likely to be foolish in
their issue and execution. For there must needs be in all actions want of much
more necessary knowledge then sense and experience can advance unto: and
experience must needs witness against it self, that the longest age of
experience does nothing so fully furnish and instruct in many things, as much
more speedily does prudent invention; which though occasioned and helped by
books and reading, which are both keys unto all knowledge, and also rich
storehouses of experiences, not only of one age and country, but of all times
and nations; yet do they only glut the sense with stories of experiences past,
but reason and judgment truly enrich the mind, and give daily new increase and
light in before untried and unexperienced truths. Indeed particular
experience, if it be accompanied with understanding Omnibus in rebus prudenter
agendis ratio pro suasore habenda, vsus pro duce. Scalig.
and right reason (which is the touchstone of truth and right in nature)
establishes and confirms knowledge; but if experience be no more but
experience, it must needs prove in many cases a slow guide to lame
instruction. For as it is with the soldier in the field, let his own special
experience in arms be never so ancient, so true, so sound, yet without a more
general Prudentia est habitus qui deducit omnia sua facta e rationibus ad
fines suos sine offensione. Dicimus enim prudenter factu^ ab Imperatore vbi
recte parts exercitus disposuerit, tametsi similes ordines acierum nunquam
antea notos habuerit. Scalig. in Poet.
understanding or theorie, and a more enlarged knowledge then his particular
and limited experience can bring forth, he must be lamely fitted unto many
sudden and often before unseen occurrents, which the perpetual mutabilitie
and change of circumstances in warfare must needs produce. The field, the
enemy, the time (not always the same) require a diverse and often a contrary
consultation, design and manner, wherein one particular experience by it self
cannot but be much wanting, because the same thing or actio^ seldom or never
happens again the same in all circumstances; and one circumstance Ad eundem
modu^ non potest quidqua^ saepe videri. As^lepiad.
alone commonly alters the whole condition. As it is in military affairs, so
is it in the assaults of diseases, where the fight and wrestling of nature is
not always in the same part, nor in the same form or manner, nor with the same
disease, nor of the same period: all which circumstances in the same subject
cannot happen always to any sight or sense the same, (which makes
experience) yet are ever present in the general notions of the understanding,
whereby the prudent and wise man does make supply though experience fail.
Besides the differences which circumstances make, many diseases in themselves
and their own kind are such as are scarce seen in a man's Galenus morborum
saepe meminit quos a se nunquam visos profitetur, alios quos semel autbis.
life, some in many years, some in an age, some in many generations; and
therein how can experience give prescription for those things whereof it has
not had experience? for experience is of things (...). Arist. in Eth.
often seen. If then the same things be in all circumstances seldom or never
seen, and some at sometime seen which a life or age shall not see again, and
there can be no true experience where there is not sight and sense, how blind
an help must often experience be? Does not every day bring forth somewhat new
or strange unto the day, and worthy denomination of the day? The French,
Spanish, Neapolitane, Italian disease was a stranger sometime in old Albion,
which now is an English denison. The Scorbut not maine years since was unnamed
of writers; now commonly known unto a common eye. The English sweating Sudor
Anglicus tam laethalis vt vix ce^tisimus quisque correptus euaderet. Qui
euadebant in morbum bis terque relabeba^tur, and tandem concidebant. Correpti
intra 24. horas animo deficiebant and moriebantur. Hollerius ex Polydoro
Virgilio.
sickness very seldom (if more then once) here seen, nor at all, or at least
not often elsewhere. To wander yet farther into some more wonder, Ruland with
other reports a tooth of gold naturally Rulandus de Dente aureo.
growing with the common rank in the mouth of a child: Hollerius Hollerius in
ratis obseruationibus.
witnesses a child in the womb to thrust forth the hand at the nauill of the
mother, and so continuing the space of fifteen days, in the end the child
borne living, and the mother saved. Brasauolus Brasauol. in Aph. Hipp. 18. s. 6.
me^tioneth his cure of a soludier who lived after 3 years, having almost
half his head cut away with a portion of his brains, only thereby losing his
sense and memory, never eating nor having memory to require at any time to
eat, but as it was put into him; nor redeliuerage at the posternes, but
insensibly. Albucasis knew in his time a woman carrying one dead child in her
womb, notwithstanding to conceive and quicken of another, the dead child in
the mean season rotting and falling away by parcels at several times. But to
pass these and many the like infinite received upon credit and report, my
self have met some accidents in my own practice, and for the most part within
the space of these eight last years, worth their memory. In the year 1608.
an ancient gentleman Of Thingede^ in Northamptonshire.
being neither sick nor much pained, and only molested with a cough and
shortness of wind (from which his health was never free) requested my advice
for the prevention of the increase of the former accidents (in which also he
found, unto the general seeming unto his own sense and some other learned
counsel, very cheerful and comfortable amendment) my self only suspecting
and signifying unto his friends my despair. Between his pulses on the right
side and the left in general manifestly appeared a wondered ods, so continuing
the space of 12. or 14. days together. On the left side no position Pulsibus
manum applicand^ tres modos tradit Galenus lib. de Pulsib. palpationem,
compression^^, modum medium.
of touch, no search could find any pulse at all. On the right side the pulses
were constantly and continually, as in his best health, manifest, strong,
equal, in good order, with full distentio^ unto all the dime^sions. In the
same parts where the pulses on the other side seemed dead, all other faculties
perfectly lived in natural heat, color, vigor, sense and motion. This was
the^ witnessed by certain honorable gentle women present, who^ well
understanding and more then sufficient for such a task, I thereto entreated,
and it cold by no sense be denied. It was imagined by some learned dissenting
from my first hours dislike, that it was no other but an imperceptibilitie
Tale quiddam narrat Struthius in art Sphygmica, propter vulnus acceptu^, in
brachij arteria pulsationem fieri posse imperceptibilem.
of his pulse, and without danger, as supposed usual unto him in his health by
reason of diverse deep wounds ten years before received upon that side. My
experience of the contrary often in his former health, and also in diverse other
his sicknesses, confirmed by own doubt, and death which determines all
things, suddenly and vnexspectedly determined this, in so fair a visard so
many days deceiving many. In the year 1604. my pains was solicited unto a
virtuous Lady honorably both in her Knight, and her self allied, and no less
eminent in their own worth, then lying near Grafton in Northampton shire. I
found her left by a former A Parson-Physition.
Physician to verify his prediction by her death. She was miserably perplexed
with the doubtful delivery of a dangerously begun abortion, her own
strength failing, and the ordinary assistance of women in those cases
shrinking from her, and a deep die of a mixed and diverse colored iaundies,
with extreme pains of her stomach (giving no rest nor intermission) adding
fear and sorrow; the substance also of her urine continually troubled,
confusedly thick, the color altogether resembling the strained juice of the
grenest herb. In the terror of her abortion my endeavor proved unto her
speedily happy and succesfull. Afterward according unto the second indication
from the iaundies (necessity urging, and her strength then favoring the work)
I commanded her to bleed in the arm; which done with good ease and felicity,
nature, in spite of all endeavor to the contrary, kept the orifice after still
open, running daily and continually the space of three weeks together, and
then healing and closing Hollerius inter raras obseruationes virum memorat cui
e regione Hepatis vena per interualla dehiscebat, quae sanguinem fundebat,
postea sanguine sponte restitante vestigium nullum apparebat.
it self with her perfect amendment. At the same time (a sudden sharp pain
giving a special distinct sense thereof) she disburthened of a round white
hard stone full of little holes, that part which gives the name and seat unto
the Colike. In the year 1607. a young Of Hac^leton in Northampton shire.
woman of 30 years age, with another grave gentlewoman accompanying her, came
unto me requiring advice in her wondered estate and condition. The skin or
membrane of her belly (from the nauill downward withered, dead, and gathered
together, in likeness of a rotten bladder or a wet leather bag, and in that
form falling flagge from the former close setting unto the guts and belly)
lay continually loose unto the one side. In the year 1601. a barbers
Apprentis^ unto one John Friend.
boy of Northhampto^ avoided worms, besides other ordinary passages, by Simile
quiddam inter raras obseruationes ^arrat Hollerius, and Medicus Argentoratensis
Didymus Obrechtus de se ipso idem refert.
urine. In the year 1600. a shoemaker of Northampton sometime a bayliffe of
the town, falling dangerously sick, called my counsel together with an
Empericke. The other accused the hypochondriaca passio, my self made known my
suspicion of an abscession in the bulk: vain hope gave credit to that it
rather desired, and the patient trusted himself with the other. Shortly after
he was surprised with sudden frequent swoundings and fear of imminent
suffocation, but by cough and spitting escaped, and with wonder in short space
filled diverse large Simile quiddam narrat Reolanus de aegro qui simili materia
plures pelues impleuerit, and expurgatus perfect, liberatus est. Addit
praeterea huiusmodi abscessus primarios no^ esse sed epigenematicos, nec verum
aut legitimum pus, sed potius (...), dum pituita in thoraeis capacitatem
destillatione lapsa mora coquitur, and fit puri simile.
basins with foul purulent stuff (one paroxysme at once, sometime before
intermission, making up the said measure.) In this fear and terror unto
himself and the beholders, he earnestly sued, and again obtained my advice.
He perfectly recovered (the purulent collection after the A Principio saniei
expurgetionis numerando, non generationis.
40 day exhaust) and he yet lives free Non praeclse necessarium est intra 40
dies vel expurgari, velin pthisin transire, nam and post 40 diem and expurgari
and liberari quis potest proculdubio, modo 40 diem non multum excedat.
Brasauol. in Aph. Hipp.
from the sequeles of any other manifest disease or danger. In the year 1607.
a woman Wife unto Master Langham of Thornby in Northamptonshire.
vexed with a palpitation of her heart, together with an often intermission of
her pulse, by an inward presention moving from a so daine troubled agitation of
her mind, would usually unto my self (with others present) foretell when her
pulse should stand and intermit, sometimes two, sometimes three or four
pulsations, before the intermission. The pulse in theiust known number and
time did ever keep time with her prediction, herself nor then nor ever
wotting how to feel a pulse by her hand or touching. She in this manner
continued by uncertain fits and times the space of 2 mon^ths or thereabouts,
while sometime myself resorted unto her, being for that and other accidents by
her husband called and consulted. It is reported unto me by diverse well knowing
gentlewomen, and others of good worth, that a Wife unto one Tiplar of Harding
stone in Northamptonshire.
woman dwelling within a mile of Northampto^ was brought to bed first of one
child, and within twenty weeks after of another, quickening of the latter the
same day she was churched of the first. It is testified by many now
inhabitants of Northampton, that from within the womb of a woman with child
(then dwelling in the town) her child was audibly heard to cry, unto her own
amazement, and the wonder of diverse hearers of credit and understanding. Anno
1610 a woman of Northampton Of Woolaston in Northamptonshire.
shire being with child and growing near the time of her delivery, was
extraordinarily diverse days pained in the belly an inch distant from the
nauill, until at length diverse worms, each equalling in length a quarter of
an ell, suddenly at two distant places did eat themselves a passage through
the skin of her belly; and so came forth and gave her ease. A gentlewoman my
late patient, and now dwelling in Northampton, reports unto me from her own
sight with many other eye witnesses; that among her own children a male child,
being then five weeks of age, a fortnight together had the breasts full of
milk, as readily and plentifully flowing and spouting out milk as the breasts
of a suck-giuing nurse. These few instances are sufficient to prove the like
contingence of other the like, which other times in other manner, may and do
often bring forth. Neither is ever nature so great a niggard (though not to every
eye alike bountiful) but every day almost may pose bare and naked experience.
He therefore that sees not but with his eyes of his own experience; where he
has no experience, has no eyes Per artis exercitationem co^peri eam
remediorum inuentionem quae ex vera demonstratione procedit in his quae raro
accidunt long praestare: vnde multos curaui morbos medicamentis ab experientia
alienis.
, and therefore there is blind and cannot see. Since then many things fall out
beyond the compass of experience, which by experience make experince blind,
how then where are no eyes shall an Empericke borrow eyes? Galen^de Locis
affect.
It is again answered, Though the Empericke happily have not seen the same with
that which seldom, or once only does hap, yet very seldom has he, not
often, or at least sometime seen the Hinc ille En^piricorum transitus ad simile
(...).
like, and thence unto the like he fits the like disposing. But with the wise
the like is much unlike the Similitudo no^ affert identitate^.
same. Their confusion is only proper unto the fool, and the dangerous issue
his deserved punishment. It is a chief point in all learnings truly to discene
Vnum est ex Principijs humanae sapientiae rerum differentium similitudines and
similium differentias rite dignoscere. Aristot in Top.
between differing similitudes and like differences. Many accidents commonly
fall out seeming like, yet have no affinity; and again in show the same, yet
indeed contrary. Contraries have often in many things likeness, and likeness
contrarieties easily deceiving the vnwotting and vnleamed. It is therefore of
no small moment or consequence for a Physician truly by a discerning eye to put
just difference. This he that cannot do, must either through the
deceiuablenesse of likenesses confound repugnant remedies, (which cannot be
without great harm and hazard of life and health) or by mistaking parities for
imparities disioyne helps better united, which cannot be without both
hinderance and hurt unto the sick, their safety and security. Many diseases
ofttimes so lively mock one the other, that a good eye may easily deceive it
self. The ulcers of the baldder and the reins, a mole and a true conception,
a ruptu^e and a relaxation, plurisies and some kinds of inflammations of the
liver; the Colike and some other kind of the same inflammations, diverse kinds
of Hinc Hectici pulmonarij and hectici a iecore retorrido. etc.
consumptions according to diverse Pauci febrem spuriam duplicem a quotidiana
distinguunt; nam licet facile sit febrem cognoscere, difficile est hanc ab illa
distinguere Synochus putris and non putris facile decipiu^t ab eadem materia
antecedente natae, cum materiae similitudo similia producat accidentia vt and
partium vicinitas, continuitas, situs.
feauers with infinite more in their intricate ambiguities, dissemble
themselves and deceitfully resemble one the other, much thereby often times
perplexing the best understanding. Sometimes the most unlike will put on
likeness, and the most like wear contrariety. What more unlike then death
and life, death to life, and life to death? Yet sometimes life appears in the
shape of death, terrifying the beholders with frightfull shows of inquietude
and anxietie, deliquation, sudden and violent euacuations and exagitations
Aegri febriunt, vehementius vigilant, grauiter se habent quando sunt propinqui
crisi. Galen.
of the whole body, Semper grauia symptomata crisim antecedunt. Hippo. doctr.
Aphor.
when the healthful crisis is at hand, and the victory of nature in the
masterie of her enemy the disease. And sometimes death comes smiling in a
visar of life with cheerfulness and ouer-pleasing lightsomenesse, when the
last hour is now already run, Vigor morbi est vehementissimum totius
aegritudiois te^pus, quod sequitur crisis.
and the Sun for ever setting. Hence the inconsiderate and unlearned to
distinguish, are easily induced, sometimes by vain hope deceived to physic
death, sometime too fearfully despairing with exequious offices to comber life
and the recovery of death. Gal. de Cris. lib. 1.
Hence are often sound parts vexed with needelesse remedies, and the comforts of
life Cogimur a gratis animum suspendere rebus, atque vt viuamus, viuere
desinimus. Maximian. Historia.
imprisoned for an untimely death. It is now the sixth year since I was
solicited for a woman by the opinion of the dysenterie or abrasion of her guts,
miserably held for the space almost of a quarter of an year unto the
continual use of eueryday-glysters and other astringent medicines, until it
was my fortune coming unto her, by good reason to discover the supposed
membranous deiections to be nothing else but skins of worms, which first
dead, after putrified and dissolved into small parcels descended with some
torment in the similitude of little skins. The skins being found it was an
easy matter by a new warrant to fetch the skinners, whose thereto appearance
confessed the evidence, and gave the suspicion of the dysentery for ever after
free discharge and perfect delivery. In this one instance he that is wise may
conceive many more without number, which therefore as unnecessary and
troublesome I will not farther here trouble or awake now sleeping with time
past. In these like cases, sometimes the best perfection Similitudines non modo
vulgares sed etiam M^dicos eruditosa iquando decipiunt. Galen. in Apho. 2. lib.
4. Hippo.
, the ripest understanding does and may mistake. And therefore the ignorant
Empericke who professes confusion and uses no light, or help of judgment or
reason at all, but the only (...). Sensuum nullum existimamus sapientiam.
Aristot. Metaph. 1.
sense of his own experience, how shall he do otherwise, but often and
continually mistake manifoldly much more? And thus we have briefly discovered
the Empericke in matters requiring extraordinary counsel, ignorant, in cases
of his best experienced knowledge yet unto some circumstances unfurnished, in
many matters of substance altogether inexpert, in rare accidents and before
unseen at a maze, in true and right discerning wanting the eye of right
reason, in confounding things differing, and in separating things in their own
nature inseparable, dangerous. Now as we have pointed out the Empericke
himself, so it remains that with him and in him, we note all that by
institution, educatio^, tradition, instruction, or stolen observation derive
their rule, example and custom from him. In this number are all that usually
profess themselves in confidence of their choice secrets and excellent
medicines, commanders and masters of all diseases. Such also are they who in
all places proclaim open defiance against all maladies, and with vehement
remedies upon every light occasision needelesly, and unprovoked (if diseases
presently cannot away) either fire them out or pull their hold about their
ears, with the fall of the disease needelesly hazarding the diseased. Often
times a good event may authoritse it for skill, and their friendly offer call
it good will; but their kind care is too often seen and proved a keen weapon
to wound their friend, and the sick are nor seldom oppressed with being so
loved. I would it were a slander in these days, that good will and excellent
medicines put to death more lives then open murder. For as the most complete
armor, engines, and forts of war, the excellent munition and rich provision
unto a man without knowledge to manage them, are but instruments without life,
until some better skill put life into them: so good medicines being the
Physicians instruments and weapons, either defensive for nature, or offensive
against the forces of diseases, in other hands then his must needs prove as
but dead in themselves, so ofttimes deadly unto others. To square and leuill
their right use requires more understanding then is to be found in reasonlesse
medicines, or yet their senseless masters. For as in all other affairs,
where knowledge, prudence, and discretion Sapientis consilium vnum multorum
manus superat. Gal. in Suasor. ad Arts.
have prerogative, the attempt is commendable, and the issue likely to be
happy; so also in cases of health, wherein wise and judicious dispensation, or
in rash and erroneous, the virtue and efficacy of medicines does live, or die
in use and power. It is strange notwithstanding in these days to behold, with
what senseless madness, men are become worshippers of medicines: and so great
ofttimes is their idolatrous folly herein, that (as if they had gotten some
rare good in a box, I mean some rare secret) they presently inflamed with the
fury and opinion thereof, dare upon the consused notice of a disease commend
with as sacred secrecy and intolerable usurped titles of infallible, absolute,
and irresistible virtue and force, as if any particular excellency were able
to conjure the general casualty whereunto all earthly things must needs Casus
and tempus omnibus rebus accidunt. Ecclesias^e^ 9. 11.
be subject. For God has set down a law of mutability and changeableness to
all things; Galen. lib. 1. de Aliment. facult.
created according to diversity of circumstances, by which all things under
heaven are continually altered, changed, and governed Consi^ium docto resque
locus^ue dabunt. Ovid.
. There is no creature, medicine or (...) etc. Affectuu^ cog nitio est materia
remediorum, non ipsorum remediorum cognitio.
herb that has any such boundles or infinite power as to keep the same
inchangeable or infallibe, but there shall be a diverse and manifold
consideration and Occasio est Domina rerum agendar.
coaptation of the same thing. There can be no endeavor, means, way, or
instrument of never so complete perfection or tried proof directed to what
effect, issue or end soever, that receives not ordinarily Neque doctorum
hominum sed Empiricorum sunt singulares illae quae circumferuntur ^egulae.
Fetrerius de lue Vener.
impediment, opposition, and contradiction, whereby those things which in
themselves might happily seem certain and good by accident and circumstance,
are again very uncertain Exhibenda remedia pro re nata and semper pro
circunstantijs variare aliquid oportet. Galen de puero epilept.
and evil. All ignorants therefore whatsoever (such are whosoever are not
Artists) had they for all diseases the most choice and excellent medicines
known even unto God and nature, above and beyond all knowledge of men, yet
except therewith they know their due dispensation, they cannot but pervert
their right use, be they never so sovereign. The general Generalia remedia
semper praemittonda particularibus. Galen. de Loc. affect. 4.
remedies against the common causes of diseases ordained, except first rightly
administered, shall continually and necessarily forestall and hinder the good
and benefit from any particular. There are no material diseases wherein the
common remedies are not requisite. Such are phlebotomy, purgation, vomit, and
the like. And wheresoever these are requisite, if they be not rightly
administered, all other medicines be they never so excellent and incomparable,
must needs lose their excellent and incomparable use. And none can rightly
dispense the general remedies, but those that are more generally learned then
the best acquaintance and familiarity which particular medicines can afforde.
From hence it cannot but be manifest, how infinitely blind good will and zeal
do herein daily err to the destruction of many. It were happy if at length the
common inconvenience and public scandal might beget a law, and law bring
forth restraint. For illustration of that which has bin said, it were
indifferent to instance in any disease, but I will make choice of some few
only, to satisfy for all. It is an ordinary custom in those days with
women to give medicines for the green sickness; and other stoppages in young
women. In which practice if it so happen that no inward impediment frustrate
the endeavor, they casually ofttimes do seeming present good, and blaze the
excellency of their medicine: but if ofttimes (which they cannot distinguish
or observe) the general cause of the obstruction be not first by the general
remedy removed or diminished, or the immediate cause settled within the stopped
parts, be not first fitted and prepared to yield, all their medicines of never
so great force, yea though commonly as strong as steel or iron, do not only
no good or small good, but ofttimes incorrigible hurt and mischiefs never
after able to be reformed, or by the most learned counsel to be redressed;
while from the plenty or ill disposition of humors in the body these searching
and piercing medicines carry with them into the stopped parts either more or
worse matter then was before, and thereby there leave a disease which shall
never after die except by exchange for a more pernicious. In the common known
disease of the stone likewise many and famous medicines are at this day in many
common hands, and perhaps truly celebrated; yet if sometimes bleeding Si metus
sit inflammationis, sanguis mittitur tum e basilica partis affectae ad
minuendam plenitudinem, tum de vena poplitis ratione partis and materie
coniunctae.
have not a first place, (namely where is present or imminent danger of
inflammation of the reins) sometimes if vomit be omitted (namely where the
stomach is stopped and full, and unto every thing impenitrable,) sometimes if
glysters or lenitiues be not premised, (namely where the fullness of the belly
does press the passages, the bladder and the vreters) all other excellent
medicines whatsoever for the stone do not only in vain exasperate the
disease, but hazard the party much more then the omission of means. Likewise
in a continual fever, if sometimes present and immediate opening of the Vbi
in synocho ob ebullientis sanguinis copiam, ex leui occasion irritatam adest
suffocationis periculum.
vein without delay or intermission have not precedence, all other means are
not only preposterous but pernicious. Likewise in the small pocks, a disease
so well known and common to children and other: whatsoever other fit and good
medicines and Cordinals be administered, sometimes if bloodletting go not
before Perpetuum no^ est abstinere phlebotomia cu^ iam papulae in superficie
corporis extitere. Etenim fit aliquando prae copia vitij vt plurimum reliquum
sit in corpore, vrgeat veheme^ter difficultas spirandi, grauis sit febris, quo
tempore vena secanda est. Hollerius de Morbillis.
their breaking out, sometimes if not used Vbi iam malu^ in habitum corporis
euasetit, periculosa est plebotomia. Hollerius.
after, all other good means are frustrate. And at another time if there be
any bleeding at all, it is hazard, danger, and death it self. There are no
medicines so commonly well known as such as are every where in use, and at
every man's hand provided for the pains and diseases of the stomach, and for
that use happily special good; yet ofttimes we see how long and vainly those
means without benefit are applied, until the true cause by a general remedy
be happily removed, and that remedy perhaps the most unlikely in a common
judgment, and seldom in common practice, prescript or custom used for that
purpose. When all other trials are waste and lost in this case, and pain does
nothing stoop, sometime the opening only of a vein Mulier in vehementissimo
dolor stomachi nullis ^^luta remedijs ducto tandem sanguine ex vtraque
basilica seruata est. Hippocrat. Epidemion 5.
in the arm, In magno dolor ventris, secanda interna vtriusque brachij, and
hoc magis si dolor grauis, si repentinus, si difficilis ructus and spiritus, si
febris est, si dolor in dorsum and scapulas extenditur. Hollerius de compos.
Medic. tractat. de stomachicis.
being reckoned amonst the most unusual and commonly harmefull for that use,
does prove the sole helpful refuge and author of case. And as in this case is
sometime said of bleeding, so at another time may be said of purging and
vomit. In the apoplexy sometime bleeding In Apoplexia pituitosa cerebrum
magis magis^ue sangunis priuatione refrigescit.
is present death, sometime the only In Apoplexia sanguinea vincu^ and
singular remedium a phlebotomia expectandum.
hope of life. In pestilent feauers and in the plague it self, all the most
choice Cordials and Antidotes are made frustrate, sometime by Si pestis cum
ephemera aut hectica analogiam habeat.
bleeding, sometime for Si pestis sit synocho putri similis, and corpus
plethoricum.
want of bleeding. And from hence grow our so great disputes and differences
amongst Physicians themselves, some chiefly and above all magnifying it, some
with execrations detesting it: which grows in them for want of right
distinction of the several causes, and differences of the pestilence. In the
same disease the like may be said of vomit, if at sometime Vbi magnae
cacoethiae ratione si conturbaueris naturam, praecipitas.
used at all, at another time if Vbi humor qui venenum aut contagium conceperit
in primis venis substiterit aut in ventriculo.
omitted. The common general remedies used against the dropsy are purging,
vomiting, sweating, and the like; yet sometime the most Si hydropis origo a
mensium suppressione aut sanguinis multitudine calidum innatum suffocante
manifesto ducatur, a sanguine detracto curandi ratio necessario est auspicanda.
unusual and seldomest safe, is only necessary and helpful unto it. Sometime
if a woman with child be let blood she suffers (...). Hippocrat. Aph. lib. 5.
abortion, says Hippocrates. Sometime if she omit Noui quam plurimas quarum
aliae abortiunt, aliae foetus edunt parum firmos aut vitales nisi intermedijs
mensibus phlebotomia plenitudo minuatur Reolanus.
letting blood she cannot escape abortion, Multae nisi* 4. mense releretur vena
abortiunt. Foetus enim copia obtuitur. Ferne^ius de Meth. Med.
says Fernelius. Mulieri grauidae si menses fluxerint liberius sanguinem
mittas. Hollerius.
Many and innumerable more might instances by, but these may suffice for light
and illustration to all the rest, as also for sufficient caveat for putting any
trust or confidence in the excellency of any particular remedies without
advice, for right dispensation of the general. And here by may be judged and
discovered the indiscreete thoughts of light brains and understandings in
these days, of men, that so preposterously diuulge in all places so many
books and paper-Apothecary-shoppes of secrets and medicines, better judgment
and learned soath teaching the wise and discreet, that things without reason
in themselves are by reason and wisdom to be guided and ordered; lest in
ignorant handling and vnwotting abuse their fair promising seemings prove
gilded poisons. If any man want wit to see or know this or knowing will not
consider, let the danger prove it self unto him, and let such experience be
ever the mother of fools. And for those that herein make mercy and
commiseration apology for their rash violating the rules of wisdom,
sobriety and safe discretion in ignorant intermedling, I wish them consider
how dangerous are the harms and consequences of good intentions, and
charitable indeauors, where they run before knowledge and propriety in the
agent. Every honest function is not every honest man's, but unto every man is
distributed and allorted the action of his own calling: which also must be
made his and appropriate, not only by approved sufficiency in himself, but
authorized approbation in others: whereby the action being good in it self,
lawful in the doer, fitting and accommodate unto the circumstance, it is
blessed of God, commended of men, seasonable in it self, harmelesly
profitable, and every way without reproach.

CHAP. III.
Women their custom and practice about the sick, common-uisiting counselors,
and commenders of Medicines.
OUR common offenders in the former kinds are generally all such, Women
counselors. Commonuisiting counsellour's and commenders of medicines.
as are known to want institution in arts and sciences; are not educated in
pertinent precepts, not studied nor brought up in places of good liberty:
without which good (...). Aristot.
means ordinarily there ca^ accrue to me^ no perfection in any faculty. Bona
institutio triu^ opus habet, naturae, doctrinae, exercitatio^ is.
For although it be possible that there may grow in some few an allowable
mediocrity in some sort sufficient to inform themselves, and profit others by
a fitness in nature joined with industry, (though the ordinary course of
instruction by readers, teachers and schools, be not so plentifully supplied)
yet is it no safe discretion ordinarily to trust a sufficiency so very rarely
found, so hardly, so seldom, and in so few truly gained. Here therefore are
men warned of aduising with women counselors. We cannot but acknowledge and
with honor mention the graces of womanhood, wherein by their destined property,
they are right and true sovereigns of affection; but yet, seeing their
authority in learned knowledge cannot be authentical, neither has God and
nature made them commissioners in the sessions of learned reason and
understanding (without which in cases of life and death, there ought to be no
daring or attempt at all,) it is rash cruelty in them even there to do well,
where, unto the not iudiciously foreseeing, that well might have proved ill,
and that ill is often no less then death, or else at least the way to death,
which is the hazard of health. Their counsels for this cause in matters of so
great and dangerous consequent, modesty, nature, law, and their own sex
Mulieribus nemo nunquam Lycaeum aedificauerit, aut Senaculum statuerit.
has ever exempted. We may justly here tax their dangerous whisperings about
the sick, wherein their preualence often being too great, they abuse the weak
sense of the diseased, while they are not themselves; and make just and wise
proceedings suspected, and with danger suspended. Scalig. de Subtle.
For it is not sufficient for the Physician to do his office, except both the
sick (...), etc. Sed and aegrotum, and astantes.
himself, and also all that are about him, be prudently and advisedly careful
and obedient unto good reason: without which, love it self may be dangerously
officious, the error of friendship a deed unto death, Hippoc. Aph. 1.
and a kind work in intention the wound of an enemy in issue and execution.
Among those that are wise, a good conscience does stay all rash commission: and
confirmation of all necessary offices by such as are learned, does prevent the
accusation of careless omission: and in this mean for the unlearned to
consist, is only harmless piety. Between the inconsiderate have of abundant
affection, and the lame and careless pace of want of love and duty: between
too busy meddling, and too curious forbearance, are conspicuous the excellent
virtues of prudence, discretion and knowledge, upon which are safely founded
wise moderation and temperate use of means, unto which ever and only God has
blessed all actions, their ends and issues. In whom therefore these are not,
how unwarranted are their actions unto their own hearts, and how dangerous
also must they be to others harms? If women then profess no arts, nor as
masters of sciences can prove their rules, let them with sobriety govern the
great rule of themselves, and so shall they be most harmelesly happy in being
freed from the unhappiness of having their hands so commonly in others
mishaps, unto the dishonor of womanhood, Historiae.
A gentlewoman lately falling grievously sick, through the frights of
bloodletting (wherewith women's counsel by many ill reports thereof had
confounded her) refused the only safe rescue of her life thereby. Whereupon
very shortly after, her blood grew so furious, that breaking the wonted bounds
and limits of her veins, with violence it gushed out not only at her mouth
and nose with diverse other passages of her body besides, but also made a
diruption in the veins of one of her legs, from whence issuing in great
abundance it speedily dispatched her, even unto the end and last breath still
making her choice, that rather her blood should thus kill her then she consent
to part with any part thereof otherwise. Thus she miserably died. Contrariwise
another gentlewoman Wife unto one Master Mercer of Northampton an ancient
Alderman.
in the year 1602. and of her age the 74. (as she her self numbered) vexed
many years with a continual issue of blood, after she had been long left in
hopeles care and despair, required and expected of me her last doom. I found
(often observing her pulse) a manifest, equal and constant magnitude, altitude,
and vehemence, the habit of her body well liking; and by these assured my
self as of the cause of her disease, so also of the strength of nature. Many
other remedies before in vain iterated and varied, and none prevailing or
profiting, contrary to the judgment of some former Physicians, as also her
own liking in regard of her age and supposed weakness, and contrary to the
general disclaim and wonderment of her friends, her Distinguendae vires
grauatae and oppressae a languidis and attritis. Hae maiora remedia postulant,
illae nullo modo ferunt.
strength in the former indication favoring it, necessity urging, and
therefore her age dispensing, I commanded her to be sparingly let blood Firmus
puer, robustus senex tuto sanguinis missionem ferunt. Fernel.
in the arm; whereupon without any farther other help she immediately
recovered her strength, and was freed the space of eight years together from
the issue, which had continually vexed her many years before. I deliver these
familiar examples of mine own for better satisfaction, whereby unto the
meanest eye and simple understanding it is apparent, that bloodletting or not
bloodletting (as all other remedies) are either good or evil, or neither good
nor evil, in several seasons and circumstances; whereby the persuasion or
disswasion thereof by such as want judgment, In decrepita aetate sanguine^
mittit Rhazes vrgente valde necessitate.
is ever casually also good or evil in it self, but ever unjustifiable in the
ignorant counselor. The just will not herein offend, but the fool will be
babbling, whereof to beware unto many had been saving physic, that now are
dead. Many times have many by persuading without reason or judgment drawn
their friend unto death, contrary to their better meaning, troubling them with
fear of death in the remedy, while they run themselves to death for want of
remedy. Ill counsel for the most part produces ill event. Ignorant counsel
is never good counsel. And therefore it is honest for it self, and safe for
the sick, that ignorance be ever silent, or never presumptuous. It is often
occasion of mirth to see, how even after sick men are sometime perfectly
recovered, the very ill opinion of remedies past (labored into the conceit by
the wauing of idle tongues) holds them still needlessly sick, until their
wiser thoughts draw their minds to forget their imagination, or to remember
themselves: and thus unawares they sometime ease themselves of their own
imposition, which was first the vain supposition of a friend. Such friendship
is often simplicity, and happily sometimes knavery; but let the patient that
desires his own good, be impatient of such folly, and not enlarge his kind
heart unto so unkind hurt unto himself, remembering (though it be humanity to
hear a friendly voice) that the attendant of wisdom is slow belief. Often and
much babbling inculcation in the weak brains of the sick may easily prevail
with them, to forget both that which their own good has taught them, and also
by a borrowed opinion from others indiscreete words, to corrupt their own
sense. It is the common custom of most common people thus ordinarily to molest
and trouble the sick. Their presence therefore is dangerous, and carefully to
be either prohibited, or better governed. Common and vulgar mouths easily
incline scandalously to prejudice the things they know not. Hence it is in
these days a customary work to dissuade physic, while me^ not making right
choice of their Physician, or perue^ting good counsel by their own peevish
frowardnes, and thereby multiplying unto themselves continual occasion of
complaint, unjustly therefore accuse art, which they never duly sought, nor
found, nor used, and therefore never knew. The offenses that men justly take,
are the faults, the blots, the stains of imperfect workmen, not of art;
whereof art is as guiltless as they are void of art. Many because they may
happily observe some others by the too much and immoderate use of physic,
sometime too hardly to keep under their own strength, sometime happily to tire
nature, or too continually to interrupt and perturbe her quiet fruition of
herself, and the true sense of her own power and stre^ght in her self;
therefore in the other extreme they also with a nice and foolish morosity
altogether contemn and reject the temperate and moderate In vitium ducit
culpae fuga si caret art. Horat.
use thereof, denying unto God and nature their care, and duty to themselves,
restraining nature from the privilege of remedies which God has given unto
her, and injuriously suffering her to live within them imprisoned, oppressed,
and often needlessly ruined. Physic it self is honored by the mouth and mention
of God himself, and in it self has demonstration of it self, unto them
whose understanding does give them eyes; but the ignorant and the excessive
use, the abuse thereof, and no less the perverse contempt and neglect thereof,
are the curse of God, and the sin of men. They therefore that persuade the
sick that they have no need of the Physician, call God a liar, who expressly
says Non est opus valentibus Medico, sed male habentibus. Mathaei cap. 9.
otherwise; and make themselves wiser then their Creator, who has ordained Est
enim a Supremo medicus, and a Rege stipendium accipiet.
the Physician for the good of man. Let men therefore fly and take heed of
such foolish calumny, and in their necessities let them remember their Maker,
and thankfully embrace his blessing and benefit of ease and health, which
thereby he has commended and given unto them; lest unthankful to him, and
accessarie to their own hurt, Ecclesiast. 38. 2.
they perish in a double sin. Beside the ordinary and mean sort of visiting
people, Dominus e terra condidit medicamenta, and prudens homo non conte^nit ea.
doing in the former kinds very scandalously and continually much hurt, it is
too ordinary use and manner generally with all orders of men: for since most
men are not capable, worthy, nor understandingly able to discern a true good;
it is no wonder that the fewest speak truly good of good. Ecclesiast. 38. 4.
Some of these sorts do not simply or absolutely dissuade physic, but (as an
inducement unto their own practice and admittance) such physic only as
comes unknown unto them, out of Apothecaries shops, or from Physicians hands
and directions: thereby preferring their own private ointments, plasters,
ceareclothes, drinks, potions, glysters, and diets, because by time and
custom they are become familiarly known unto them, and now are of their own
domestical preparation, and therefore are by their knowledge, acquaintance,
and auouching of them, grown into some credit and reputation with them. With
this insinuation and officious promise of their known, gentle and pleasant
medicines, and of undoubted good from this their own protested proof and
experience, many allure Spes laqueo volucres, spes captat arundine pisces, Cum
tenues hamos abdidit ante cibus.
the sick miserably to beguile themselves; to exchange reasonable likelihood,
for personal confidence; the knowledge of the right and safe use of medicines,
for the knowledge of the composition of their medicines; Tibull.
the preciousnesse of time and opportunity of health. For the partial
expectation of uncertain trial, these known defects as the perpetual
consequences of this ignorance and want of knowledge, as they are ordinarily
admitted, so are they continually manifestly observed and noted by others
harms, and ofttimes too late repentance: for since want of knowledge does ever
lamely give supply to any want, what safe expectation or probable hope can the
diseased have of ignorant persons in their distressed wants? Old Eve will never
be worn out of Adams children. Alas an apple can do no great hurt. It is fair
and beautiful unto the eye, pleasant to taste, and but a trifle, a small
matter, a little quantity, and of excellent quality; Adam must needs taste. It
is good for his eyes, it will clear his sight, an excellent medicine to make
him see. What is more fair, more easy, more gentle, more harmless, more
cordial, more dainty then an apple? Eve in good will offered it, and so Adam
took it. It made him also see; but Adam had been better still blind. A
dangerous and incurable leprosy and infection thence seized upon him, which
after none but the great Physician of heaven and earth could cure. Many
medicines are small, harmless, gentle, pleasant, and in themselves do not
hurt. But by accident, by consequent, by circumstance, death often follows them
at the heels. Milk, broth, butter, and many other wholesome meats, juices
and fruits in themselves, are of common harmless use, mild, nourishing and
comfortable, some of them sometimes sovereign antidotes against many poisons,
mitigators of diverse pains; yet because sometimes against some circumstances
In horadoloris vehementis clou^ quicunq^ pe^oulo non caret. Gal. de victu
Febricit.
against art or reason used, they prove a destruction unto the vser: and as
sometime a smaller damage, sometime a greater, so therefore sometime more and
sometime less, observed. Who almost suspecteth a mess of milk or a cup of
beer, Data tempora prosunt: Et data non apto tempore vina nocent. Ovid.
things so familiar and customary in daily use and diet? yet permitted in some
Ijs qui in morbi acumine euacuatione indigent, si quis cibum dederit, magnum
operatur malum. Galen. de vict. Febricit.
conditions, in some manner with some error, Si quis dolorem alui subductione
vel insecta vena soluerit, pro humoris exigentia, and vel pauxillum ita
affectis ptisanam dederit, praecipites aget in mortem. Galen. de vict. Febricit.
Si Phlegmone vel redundantia adsit, cauenda ante accessione^ cibatio seu res
maxim noxia. Gal. de vict. Febricit.
the messengers Lenissimum saepe erratum in victus ratione irreparabilis damni
causa. Galen de vict. Feb.
of death attend them, often faintings, swoundings, sudden extinction of the
natural heat, anxietie and vexation, with other accidents of easy corruption
and putrefaction in the one, as of stupefaction and mortification in the other.
This did witness a late Summers sudden heates, wherein the unadvised hasty
satisfying of thirst with cold drink, by heaps in diverse places in
Northamptonshire sent laborers and harvest people into their graves. With
these for farther illustration, I might number without number many more; but
unto the wise and worthy, a word is sufficient intimation. And thought many
ignorants may speak fair and pleasing, and commend things that look smooth,
and smiling upon the liking of the sick; yet provident necessity will hence
be warned to be wise for it self, not rashly admiting so dangerous Impia sub
dulci melle venena latent. Ovid.
flattery, nor too swiftly trusting Sirens for their songs, nor Crocodiles for
their tears: but in matters so nearly concerning life and death, duly and
carefully inquiring, and according to the verdict of understanding and reason,
trying and examining, and not forgeting beside the hazard in unsafe error by
insufficient Counselors, the loss of time and opportunity for better help,
which ofttimes is never Sero medicia^ (...), Cum mala per longas inualuere
moras. Ovid.
regained. And for entertayning so mean counsel in the use of such means as
carry a manifest danger and malignity in their nature and use, I could think
no man so void of counsel, as to need therein counsel: yet because
experience of some errors herein past is argument of other remaining possible
to come, I will only by one example advertise, and from that example it will
be easy for every one to raise a rule and caution Foelix quicunque dolor
Alterius disces posse carere. tuo. Tibull.
to himself. It is ordinary with many unskillful busybodies under color and
pretext of gentle and safe dealing, to make familiar and ordinary the use of
perilous medicines, which happily also they do not so distinguish or repute, and
therefore cannot be said to lie, (because they speak their thought,) yet tell
not truth, because they think not right. Historia.
I was sometime solicited by a careful mother for her child, whom I found by a
sharp and acute conuulsion violently distorted, and before time allowed
leisure for preparation of remedies, swiftly strangled. In any propension
thereto in the constitution or other disposition of the child, was nothing
which might apparently be accused; and therefore making diligent inquiry after
some outward cause, I found that the suspicion of worms had occasioned the
commendations and use of of the herb Bearefoote, which though ordinary and
much accustomed for that end among women, and often by good hap without hurt; yet
we could not but with good reason hereof convince, conferring the present harm
(which no presumption could unto other thing impute) with the danger and
malign nature of that herb in production of such like effects: (although many
for the like use have in like manner given it unto their children without
blame.) Thus sometimes some men have devoured mortal poisons, not only
without harm, but with good and commodious effect. By these conueyances and
through the like presumption, many vnwotting bodies often bury in themselves
vnbewailed (because unknown) Ellebor, Quicksiluer. Precipitate, and the like,
colored with better names, and at the present unperceived. Desperate trials
sometime bring forth strange deliverances, yet neither is the boldness
warrant, nor the escape encouragement. There happen often in these days many
sudden, maruailed and strange accidents, posing the best Physicians
themselves, without doubt often raised from causes by these errors unknown,
secret, concealed, or happily by time before the effect appear, forgotten: (for
secret mischiefs long time insensibly undermine before the sensible event
appear.) For proof of dangerous customs in ignorant hands, Historia.
I will make one example a light unto many. A woman sometime came to advise
concerning an extraordinary accident in her ordinary use of spurge-comfits. She
gave (at the same time her self, and some others in the same house taking
thereof with answerable effect and euacuation) unto a very aged man eight in
number (being her usual dose.) The first day they had no effect with the old
man, and in all the rest performed their wont: she therefore gave him as many
the next day with the like effect, and as many every day unto the 10 day, with
the like proof. It was then her fear he had tasted his own funeral feast
before his death, but he suruiued the fear without sense of change or danger.
Is it safe from this good hap, for other in hope still to hazard themselves in
such unsafe handling? Is it not rather manifest how ignorantly and commonly
these creatures ouerlooke the danger which justly wisdom and reason suspend
and fear? Discreet fear awaketh vigilance and circumspection, but ignorance
of danger is void of fear, and therefore of care. Careless attempts draw
harmfull and repented issues: and though good haps sometimes flatter vain
security, yet if seldom harms be not wisely extended as a caution and example
unto many, the custom of neglect will make the rare confusion quickly common.
So large a feast of spurgecomfits has seldom kept so many holy days in one
belly, or a banketting likeness so harmelesly privileged idleness in a
working quality. The consequent happened much fairer then could be foreseen or
hoped. If for that cause any man will again adventure the like, who will not
imagine that in the thought he has already lost his wits, and in the proof
may lose himself? If notwithstanding he escape, any man will wonder, but no
man, I suppose, imitate. It may be happily deemed incredible, that so common and
mean sort of people can attain acquaintance with so dangerous instruments, as
some before mentioned and other the like; but due exploration often by the harms
occasioned does testify it, and the means of their acquaintance discovered
does prove it easy. Quacksaluers, banckruptapothecaries, and fugitive Surgeons
every where ouertrauelling the face of this kingdom, hunted by want of riot
from place to place, are often compelled to insinuate and creep into the favor
of many mean people; and in their necessity do sell for gain and
entertainment, and in their prodigality for lust and love, these generose and
noble secrets carrying on the outside the titles of famous medicines, and being
within infamous poisons. And by this means quick and desperate experiments,
with such as thus like to gain them, grow vulgar medicaments.

CHAP. IIII.
Fugitives, workers of iugling wonders, Quacksaluers.
NOW seeing we are cast upon the mention of the former sort of men, Fugitives,
Quacksaluers.
we will here for giving better knowledge of them, protract their short stay.
Empirici, Chymistae,
Of this order are they who in towns and villages hang up their banners and
triumphant flags in fields, of broken arms, rotted legs, and half faces, and
happily also timber for new, displaying at large before the simple amazed
multitude, their provision of shot and wildfire in quintessenses and spirits:
scouring up before them goodly store of harness wherewith men of all sorts may
arm themselves against all diseases; discoursing Quod si dolosi spes
refulsetit nummi, Coruos poetas, and poetridas picas cantare credas Pega^cium
melos. Persius.
with what agility they can soudre new gris^es for old noses, and newly again
infranchise French limbs, and finally making themselves admirable tinkers of
all infirmities. Amongst these men credulous minds may see things invisible;
beggars are enabled to sell gold to drink, that want silver to make them eat.
Aurum potabile, the natuturall Balsamum, the Philosophers stone, dissolved
Pearl, and the like inestimable glories and pride of Art and nature, are their
professed ordinary creatures and the workmanship of their hands, in whose hands
are nothing but idleness, Clinicus Herodes trullam subduxerat aegro, Deprensus
dixit, stulte quid ergo bibis? Martial.
theeft, and beggerie. To engage wonder above wonder with admiration unto the
beholders, some of this sort will not seem nice to cut their own flesh, that
it may be glory within few hours to heal it up again, the pain being
pleasure which is invited by consent, and recompensed by gain. It is strange
to see how these men leaving their old occupations and mechanical mysteries
wherein they were educate, suddenly find themselves inspired with a spirit of
revelation of rare secrets, and thereby promise unto themselves and others
miraculous wonders. And it is indeed true wonder to see with what agility they
are able so grossly to deceive, and in the end like noble Chemists, having
extracted silver out of the baser metal of idle words, in smoke they vanish,
leaving behind them the shadow of death, with those who leaving the day light
of clearer understanding neglected, rashly run themselves into the mist of
imposture and ignorance. Thus preualent is fair pollicitation and vain
wonderment. If men would consult with reason and iudiciously consider; though
their wonders were truly to be wondered, and worthy to exercise the wise and
learned in their extrication (as they are the vanities and inanities of argute
and subtle cousinages,) yet must it never be forgotten, that wonders yea and
miracles themselves are solie never arguments of truth or sufficiency, but for
the most part fruits of unprofitable curiosity, deceiving the simple, amazing
the multitude, and giving way and credit to untruth, cousinage and iugling.
Therefore in this kind the devil himself is excellent, and for the most part
it is one chief part, a true mark and prerogative of his followers,
Coniuerers, Sorcerers, Witches, and Iuglers; who wanting true worthiness in
themselves, make unto themselves these glorious couers. God has given nothing
unto man, but for his trauail and pain. And according to his studious
industry, care, prudence, providence, assiduity and diligence, he dispenses
unto him every good thing. He has not ordained wonders and miracles to give
supply unto our common needs, nor to answer the ordinary occasions or uses of
our life: but our own needful discreet indeauors ever depending upon his
providence. Truth and sufficiency receive not their just trial by rare works
or casual events, but by an Scientia, intellectus, prude^tia, sunt habitus,
qui vigili studio, labor, diligentia and assuescendo acquiruntur.
habitual and continual proof and exercise in their daily, ordinary, and
proper subjects and occurrents: whereunto truly and pertinently they apt and
fit every design and action: whereunto their own upright judgment is a
trusty guide, and others eyes vndeceiued witnesses. And thus if men will
learn to guide themselves, they shall not so commonly and easily lose their
eyes in the gaze of wonders, nor their reason in the maze of such inexplicable
and intricate folly.

CHAP. V.
Surgeons.
THAT which has been formerly said suffiseth to point out the deceivers last
mentioned. Their affinity gives occasion to mention in the next place, their
next neighbors, diverse our common unlearned Surgeons, having neither letters
nor humanity, nor ever acquainted with the dialect and language of the learned.
These men for the most part esteeming themselves deserving well for the operary
Ac si interiores affectus sensu cognosca^tur, aut manus opera curentur.
Riolanus.
uses of a skillful and well exercised hand in wounds, incisions, amputations
of sphacelate parts and the like, hence take unto themselves an emerited
privilege in physic practice. Some also venture farther, and for some rare
exeperiences arrogate unto themselves ability, a power and authority to
educate and institute Physicians, as an vnder-growth unto themselves, by lying
promises, persuading many honest simple parents to commit their children,
otherwise perhaps more fortunate and ingenuous, to be their apprentices. Hence
it comes to pass that many in these days thus traded up by their example
unto a nimblenesse of deceit, and of aduenturing in all occurrents, so
ordinarily promise like gods, dare above men, and act like devils crucifying
the lives of poor men: while by the grace of one good Quo fieri possit modo
Severe, vt vir omnium pessimus Charinus, vnam rem been fecerit, requiris?
Dicam, sed cito: Quid Nerone peius? quid thermis melius Neronianis? Maritial.
deed of good hap, the opportunity of committing many tragedies unspoken is
gained. And thus is the world furnished with factors for the grave and the
perdition of mankind. An example of double impudence let here witness.
Historia.
A gentleman of Northamptonshire vexed with an ulcer of the bladder required my
advice. Understanding by the daily abundance of purulent matter in his urine
(for the space almost of half an year before continually observed) together
with some store of blood ofttimes withal, (neither of which the bladder it
self and the exility of the veins thereof could so plentifully with so easy
A pure long putidiore quod a vesica separatim exit, grauiora solent inter
meiendum asturgere accidentia. Pus quod e renibus defluit, substantiae est
magis subtilis and elaboratae, ideoque cum minore difficultate permeat,
doloremque minorem creat Renes praeterea sunt parts indolentes magis qua^
vesica, and partium aliarum consensum minus ducunt vbi magis computrueint.
accidents afford) as also by the more perfect permistion thereof with the
substance of the urine, that it was not only an affection of the bladder, but
a greater and more dangerous in the reins, (about the region whereof was ever
much pain and weakness) and coniecturing them past possibility of cure (their
substance already so far spent) I refused to promise or meddle farther then by
palliatiue cure, wherein accordingly I insisted a long time with good ease and
satisfaction unto the patient. At length by some friends there was commended
highly for a farther and better performance, a Barber Surgeon, who thereupon
being required and conducted thither, came unto the gentleman, and according to
the commendatio^s premised promised to cure him in six Aut facere ingenui est,
aut non promise pudici. Catull.
weeks space. Shortly after the patient complaining of want of sleep, he gave
unto him a Ladanum pill of Paracelsus, and after Mercuriall pills for another
supposed end; by the use whereof in his body, then by the length of his disease
exceedingly before weakened and extenuate, he presently fell into an amazed
staring sleepiness, or an astonishment between Coma vigila^s dictum Galeno,
lib. 4. de loc. affect.
waking and sleeping, wherein after he had continued a natural day, in the
morning following he was suddenly surptised with acute and epilepticall fits
and a general conuulsion, with foming, gnashing his teeth, loud stertors and
the like, whereof after in one day he had passed 8 or 9 fits in my sight (being
then upon that new occasion newly required, the Surgeon Qui nondum stygias
desce^dere quaerit ad vndas, Tonsorem fugiat, si sapit, Antiochum* Martial.
fled) he was after my coming and means used partly by Theriacall glysters,
suppositars, and antidotes fitting the present cause and accidents, through the
grace of God unexpectedly delivered, after he had by stool thus procured,
avoided one whole pill undissolved (seen by diverse well understanding
witnesses present,) as also diverse small fractions of Quicksiluer fluctuating
and floating like white pinnes heads, as the women that saw reported unto us.
To make the cause of these accidents yet more manifest; it happened that two
maid-seruants there attending upon the gentleman, by their continual
conuersing near him and the infected sweat of his body, fell strangely and
suddenly into the same fits one after another by course, and each having
suffered six or seven apart, were carried forth, and after that time never
since (as I yet hear) nor ever before had the like, as they both then said.
One of these now lives married in Towcester in Northamptonshire, the other was
lately servant unto an honorable Lady. This history is known unto many of note
and worth beside. To conclude, the gentleman thus escaped, and grew by little
and little unto his former senses and strength as his first disease would
permit. Within a quarter of an year after, or thereabout, another Surgeon
again put the gentleman into a new hope of recovery: and although the report
of my judgment did somewhat (as I heard) shake his confidence, yet not
conceiving my reason nor seeing the cause, and supposing no other but the ulcer
in the bladder, he took him in hand; and in his hand within few days he left
his life, according to my prediction unto diverse his friends concerning this
second attempt likewise solicited. By these examples it is manifest, both how
bold and confident ignorance will be, as also how powerfully and bewitchingly
it deceives the distressed mind, easily prone Quod nimis miseri volunt hoc
facile credunt. Senec.
to believe that which it desirously would. From hence also may be coniectured
how commonly such errors by these ignorant persons in likelihood befall, yet
for the most part either for want of knowledge unespied, or by the priuacy
smothered. For if they kill, a dead (...)
man tells no tales: or if by chance they save one life, that shall be a
perpetual Lepide illud: Sol successus intuetur; errores tellus operit.
flag to call more fools to the same adventure. This is commonly seen in the
vulgar custom of curing the French disease by Barbers and Surgeons, who
precipitate commonly every one alike, and confusedly without respect or order
thrust all through the purgatory of their sweatings; bleeding, vomiting,
unctions, plasters, and the like. Hereby many needlessly entangle themselves
upon mere supposall and fear, and many take more then necessity vigeth; and
others for satisfying that necessity, neglect a more material, and flying too
timorously and rashly a known inconvenience, run headlong unknowing into an
after too well known unrecoverable Fumum fugientes in ignem incidunt.
mischief. For if they that fall into such rough handling be strong in
themselves, and no way liable to the harms of such desperate remedies, and be
free from the implication of all other diseases besides, (which entering by
their breaches may interrupt their smooth passage, and make pernicious their
French medication) they may happily escaping the danger, for the hazard attain
their desired delivery, as is in some seen. But if nature happily be weak, or
the disposition of the sick subject to the perils of that cure (which these
men seldom do or can consider) or any other disease lie in weight too prompt
to trust with any advantage, (which these men want knowledge to foresee) the
acquaintance with such remedies may easily prove a greater plague unto the
greatest pox. How can he that considers the disease and not the (...), etc.
Non co^munis homo curatur, sed singulorum quisque. Galen de Meth. Med.
person (as is usual with these men) because the contrary is not possible with
ignorance) how can they I say in curing the one but endanger the other? We see
ordinarily, the same medicine in the same force unto one man is scarce
sensible, unto another is a sting; unto one favorable, unto another cruel; in
one wanting edge, in another exceeding. It therefore requires learned ability
to discern the hidden ods and differences, thereby justly to distribute unto
every several his proper and fit Habenda enim ratio non manifestae modo
qualitatis, sed and occultae, tum vniuscuiusque (...).
proportion of the same thing. Neither is it safe to accommodate so harmefull
helps as belong to so cautelous a cure without a judicious view, not only of
this strange disease it self, but also of the mixture or Morbi e duorum
humoru^ putredine in eadem sede nonnunquam fiunt confusi, nonnunquam in diuersa
impliciti, nonnunquam ab eadem materia in diuersis partibus, diuersimode
dispositi. In omnibus secundum varias, diuersas aut contrarias indicationes, ab
vrgentiore auspicatur prudens Medicus, singulos perlustrat, leuissimos versat.
conjunction of any other maladies and respects therewith, whose necessities
may and do often forbid and prohibit his remedies (that being a medicine to one
disease which is a mischief to another, and an ease to one which is a sorrow
unto another.) It is therefore no marvel, that while these men contemn order
and method, and the learned examination of these and such like circumstances,
and blindly prosecute issues unknown to foreseeing reason, they therefore
(though sometime they remove a mischief) yet either equal it again with the
like, or exceed it with a greater, or else ofttimes not profiting nor
satisfying the utmost patience and painful expectation with the smallest
good, effectually double the greatest evil. This for that all men see not, few
consider, many forget, and some ioyously escaping defend. The hurt is often
unespied the harms vnheeded, the shameful wrongers and homicides with the
dead buried, and the good haps by many foolish living idly admired, unto the
increase and continuance of multiplied mischief. Hereof solie for the most
part woeful experience is capable, neither reason, nor example, nor any advice
warning or moderating, Morbus coniunctus exigit curam coniunctam vt simplex
simplicem, in coniunctis vero quae potior potiorem exigit non neglecta altera.
Galen in Aph. Hippoc.
though the ordinary batteries from hence every where almost leave rotten and
mangled monuments of remediless cures, if not present with the cause, yet
never far of, and though sometime long, yet ever certain. For though where
the body is strong, ofttimes many gross errors may be by the ignorant
committed, and yet not espied, (because where is strength there is less sense
and esteem of harms, (weakness being only unable to bear or endure without
complaint) yet the insensible sting does often breed the most festered poison,
in the latest sensible smart. The errors of the unskillful Pilote though great
and many, in the calm are not Plurimi medici similes vi dentur nauium
rectoribus. In tranquillo mari regendo si quid errent peccentve, error non
patet. In aduersa tempestate errore aut ignorantia facile nauem perditam in
omnibus liquido constat. Brud. de vict. Feb.
considered, but in the dangerous sea the least error offers the ougly shape
of his own foulness. In bodies not easily harmed many rash harms are hardly
discovered, but in dangerous conditions the least lapses are heavy loades.
Ignorance therefore is only good when it does no hurt, whereunto it is never
wanting in her property, but only sometimes in power. It is objected, that
wise and learned men do often mistake. It is true: where is the greatest wisdom
the most incomparable, yet there is, and ever must be sometimes mistaking and
infirmities. The reason is, for that absolute perfection is above the nature of
mortality. He therefore that in his art or faculty does never err, is (...).
more then a man. He that most seldom Ideo theore. ma describit Galen. lib. de
Finit. Med. cuius contrarium raro euenit.
, nor grossly, nor easily erreth, and for the most Vbi plura nitent non ego
paucis offendar maculis. Horat.
part and commonly frames all his judgments and actions unto right reason, he
is only a right and Ars est eoru^ quae ordinario and plerunque non aliter
fiunt, (...).
complete Artist. He that grossly or easily or commonly erreth and mistaketh,
justly meriteth the name of an ignorant and idiot. This is the plain and
uncontrolled difference between the learned and unlearned. It is yet farther
objected, that often as good hap smileth upon these ignorants as upon more
learned. It is sometime true, but it is wisdom to distinguish how. Al things
that happen unto the understanding and notion of the mind (which is the guide
of all actions) are either Rerum quae cognoscuntur species sunt 4. Aut enim
apparent sensui vel statim per se vt colores, vel ex alijs seu signis, vt
igni^s ex fumo. Aut sensui quidem occultae sunt, rationi vero manifestae,
eae^ue vel statim euidentes vt bis duo 4. vel per demonstrationem discendae.
Incipit autem demonstratio ex aliqua praecedentium, id est, ex apparentibus,
vel euidentibus aut certe ex demonstratis antea; primam speciem sensus indicat,
secundam (...), tertiam (...): quartam consensus ad confesta sieve ea apparentia
sint, sieve euidentia, sieve antea demonstrata. Galen. lib. de Opt. Sect.
in themselves certain and demonstrate, or necessary by consequent, or
probable and of likelihood, or of contingence and good hap. In the first the
truly learned cannot err; in the second not often nor easily. But, in both the
unlearned is ever subject to error, as unable to distinguish plain truth from
seeming appearance. In the third the learned may be Neque idem vnquam aeque est
beatus. Neque est quisquam quem non aliquando videre Suffenum possis, Catull.
deceived, but not so commonly and easily as the unlearned. In the fourth good
hap and blind fortune is indifferent unto both, and therein the fool has often
as good hap as the wise man. But he that has common sense may discern great
ods. The learned has a prerogative in three parts unto himself, and an equal
part with the unlearned, in the fourth. The learned has for his light and
guide either knowledge, whereof is Scientia est habitus demo^stratiuus,
habet^ue principia nota and aeterna.
demonstration, and thereby are his actions more certain; or reason and
judgment, and thereby are they more tried unto right and truth; or right
probability and artificial Artificialis co^iectura quam prope accedit ad
veritatem. Galen passim.
conjecture, and thereby are they more seldom found erring. The unlearned
wants all these helps, Insipiens mouetur falsa finis specie, non fine.
and is led only by bold adventure in hope of good hap, which after long
expectation is but seldom Quod casu fit, inexpectato fit, and taro and
incer^ta mora fit; vt quod natura sit, expectato fit, fere semper fit, vel vt
plurimum sit.
seen, and then soon gone. For the bounty of good hap is not every day, and
when it suddenly like a wanton shows it self, her smiles are obuious to any
one, and therein has the learned with the unlearned Quippe deest finis cuius
gratia agatur, vbi casu aliquid fit. Negatio finis ponit ca^um. Positio finis
negat casum. Sapiens vero sine proposito fine nihil agit.
equal interest. It breeds yet farther doubt, that is sometime seen. The
Empericke and unlearned Surgeon do sometimes cure where the learned has long
trauailled, and at length has given place unto the disease. It cannot be
denied, in many desperate cases these men are the only fit instruments. Where
the learned foreseeing the slippery hope of means, and the notation and
staggering of nature, does make wary Tutus and intra spem veniae cautus. Horat.
proceeding (unwilling where the caution is so nice that the action cannot be
safe, to undertake so hard Semper metuit quem saeua pudebunt. Lucan. Historia.
an office) there these men (who think nothing hard though impossible) being
ever ready to give bold adventure, may hap luckily to ouersute the danger, and
thereby the cure must needs be a mighty Hinc illa Empiricorum miranda gesta and
vulgata miracula, Riolanus.
deliverance. An ancient gentleman of Northamptonshire, being then my patient,
related unto me among our merriments his medicine for a continual headache and
giddiness, which in time past had long vexed him, and solicited diverse good
Physicians in vain. By chance he met with an angry Surgeon, who being by him
in some words provoked, and finding the gentleman alone and far from company
or rescue, with a staff unto the utmost peril of life soundly brake his head,
and plentifully let him blood in diverse places; but life escaping, he thereby
delivered Ab istiusir odi errore nascitur expe^^ent^a (...). Galen. de Sect.
him of his diseases, whereof more wise and deliberate counsel could never
with much labor and long time free him. It was a great oversight in his
learned Physicians, that they could not foresee, nor would not prescribe so
fortunate a remedy. Thus malice was as happy as an Empericks bold attempt, yet
herein was somewhat better, that it was freely bestowed. Historia.
In like manner, unto another so far engaged in the Neapolitan disease, that
discreet counsel durst not oppose equipollent remedies, a woman (purposing to
poison him) gave an unknown dose of rats-bane; and thereby nature driven unto
her utmost and last shift, setting open all the passages of his body, at once
with the poison wholly expelled the former disease. Thus issues wondered good
out of devilish and dangerous acts. I condemn not sharp and extreme
remedies, when as extreme Saepe misera auxilia tolerabiliora faciunt mala
miseriora. Leuin. Lemn.
need requires them; neither do I commend a trembling and timorous judgment
in prescription and accommodation there of where is Dabitur^ue licentia sumpta
pudenter.
needful. But I admit not hard or sudden (...), Plurimum atq^ repent quouis
modo corpus mouere periculosum. Hippocrat. lib 2. Aph.
attempts, but only in extreme necessities, where also the In extremis morbis
extrema exquisite remedia optima sunt, vt Hippocrates. Sed agendi iudicatio
semper sumenda a viribus, nec deploratos attingat Medicus. (...), in ascite
vtilis, sed plerunque lethalis. Ideo frustra tentatur fractis viribus aut vbi
hydrops succedit s^hirrho aut febribus ardentibus. In extractione calculi
vesicae cauendum etiam a longo dolor fractis viribus. In partim etiam
principum vehementiore affectu diacrydiatis atendum caute, etc.
strength of nature has by the judicious and learned been carefully
foreballanced between hope and hazard: without these respects the use of hard
and vehement remedies by the hands of unlearned Practitioners are grown too
common. It is therefore good for men to take heed, how they too boldly walk
in the common tract of Empericks and unlearned, whose ways often trodden grow
slippery, and therefore not varied proo^e dangerous. It is sometime nearest way
to go out of the common way, many times the fairest way, and not seldom the
safest way. For though diseases may be of easy note and well known, and the
vulgar medication no less otherwise apt unto the necessity; yet may one small
circumstance only by it self making the disease different, once escaping an
unskillful and blind eye, for ever after ouerrun the hopeful use of any other
means, and frustrate the happiness of after-health by better counsel. This
is the reason that so many suddenly and unexpectedly perish not without wonder
in the unskillful practitioners hand, who casting his eye upon nothing but that
which is common, takes for a great stranger what is otherwise, and therefore
not foreseeing, his coming is not prepared to entertain or intercept him with
best advantage; nor gives nor takes warning of him, and therefore is so
suddenly often surprised by him. Historiae.
I may hereof give a rare instance in an esteemed friend sometimes a learned
Divine, who by some rash advice, his estate at that time not duly considered,
required of an Apothecary a strong medicine against the stone (wherewith from
his childhood he had been ever hereditarily Qui calculi non diu concreeriut ij
medicamentis aptis dissolui possunt; qui vero diutius exiccati and indurati
difficillim^ aut nunquam enra^ tur, ideo^ue periculose irritantur. Rondeletius
de vrin.
molested. The one prepared it, the other took it, both expecting no other use
or consequent, then that which was usual to such a medicine. But the same
night that potion violently descending brake through his Lapillis in ve sica
subsistentibus crabrones irritant quicunque saxitragis deturbant temere. Reolan.
bladder, making therein two issues, where by the urine came from him
immediately then, and continually after by those two breaches, before it could
attain the usual passage or conduit. Hereof was then witness a grave and
learned gentleman an ancient Doctor of Physike unto whom this patient did sly
for his judicious advice in this sudden mischief, and with whom my self had
serious conference about that accident, both of us lamenting his so unhappy
distress and misery.

CHAP. VI.
Apothecaries.
HERE so fair occasion offering their memory, we may not forget our
Apothecaries. Among them also some to do a friend an vnlicenced friendship, or
to keep their wares in motion for fear of corruption, will happily sometimes
offer a casual good turn, to any that like the venture. I must needs say for
the privilege of Apothecaries, that if any may have prerogative to be
Physicians, by the excellence and rare choice of medicines, it is most proper
unto them; who have with them registered and enrolled the privy choice, trust
and command of all the best remedies, and have the best light to guess at their
best use. Nay I may commend them farther; that for the excellent preparation
and knowledge of medicines they sometimes may excel some Physicians
themselves: but above and beyond the preparation, the right and judicious
dispensation is truly worthy, commanding and directing their safe and prudent
use. This skill requires an understanding able to raise itself above both the
medicine and the Quam enim proportionem Architectu^ erga coementarios
lignariosque fabros and alios quibus imperat gerit, eandem Medicus erga
ministros suos, herbarios, venam scindentes, cucurbitulas admouentes and
Clysteres immitentes. Galen in lib 6. Hipp. de Morb. vulgar.
maker, unto the great Maker of them both, and from his general Naturae
legibus Medicinae leges semper consentaneae. Fernel.
decree and counsel in the administration of all things in nature, to levy
and limite circumstances, Vt medici cuiusque auxilij quantitatem, occasionem
and vtendi modum cognoscimus, vt ministri vero venam secamus and reliqua
manibus operamur. Galen. in lib. 6. Hipp. de Morb. vulgar.
proportion, time, place, quantity and quality, according to the manifold
several purposes and infinite uses for the preservation, conservation, and
continuance of health and life unto mankind. And herein how far it behooves the
erected mind of higher contemplation, to exalt it self in consultation above
the elementary consideration and composition of a medicine and the vulgar and
common sense, the continual exquisite use and exercise of the most
incomparable prudence and learning in the ordinary and daily difficulties that
befall the health, do plainly prove and demonstrate. It is not the medicine it
self, but the judgment and knowledge of the learned, and right accommodation
annexed unto the wholesome medicine, that adds unto it a worth above it
self; whereby it does far exceed it self in excellency, in variety of
greater good, in distinction of more proper use, according to art and reason
thereto conducting it, which is the life of every application and accommodation
in all things. Hence even the greatest clerks with this sufficiency provided,
have not blushed to borrow or learn a good medicine at a simple and vulgar
Neque enim turpe est per vulgus and aniculas profecisse. Non enim puduit
maiores nostros in multis remedijs brutorum discipulos se profiteri. Quin and
acceptis a vulgo remedijs adhibenda ratio and rectus vsus, in quo summa artis
posita est. Holler. Instit. Chirurg.
hand, yea from fools and brute beasts, in their own more excellent
adaptation as the soul unto the body, conferring the full and true perfection.
The Ancients themselves have not shamed so to do, as Galen in diverse places
professes of himself. Unto Apothecaries therefore that faithfully and truly
apply themselves and their whole indeauor, that have tried and experienced
skill, and use faithful industry in fitting wholesome and incorrupt remedies
to attend each honest need and necessity without fucation, adulteration or
deceit, and contain themselves within themselves, no man can deny a worthy
esteem both in private thoughts and public estimate; but if the pride and
maister-ship of the medicine stir once in them the ambition of medication, as
in the former men comme^d them, so in the second they shall justly condemn
them: and as in the one safely use them, so in the other with safe discretion
refuse them, fearing lest with Salomons fly being taken in the Apothecaries
box, they also in like manner make a stink of the medicine, Historia.
and an end of themselves. Valleriola mentions an Apothecary who with the
imprudent use of quicksiluer poisoned himself. I knew sometime an honest and
approved good Apothecary in Warwickshire, who imitating a prescription of
precipitate against an inueterate disease which he supposed in himself,
exulcerated his guts, and therefore died. These experiments in other then
themselves had been bloody and dishonest, and in themselves rather then in other
argue their strong confidence, (which therefore might easily seduce them to be
in time bold with others.) Example and imitation (which are the rules of an
Apothecaries practice) are but patterns of another sufficiency. Sufficience
therefore being not their own, it is sufficient to put them in mind of their
own. It is good for every one to be contented and contained within his own
lists, and of his own store with liberality to lend, and of another with love
and license to borrow. This vpholdeth societies and good orders in commonweals, maintains mutual neighborhood and humanity, friendly and just
commerce with love and loyal reciprocation, and distribution of every right to
every owner, with good to the general and common, and without hurt to every
private and particular. I say nothing of banckrupt Apothecaries, who having
left their own standing become walking merchants, and with a few pedlarie
wares remaining keep shop in their own hose, or else in their guts, who
(wanting other use) imagine them sufficient to make clean the kitchen. Let
the^ that desire their meat in the stomach should long find good cookerie,
take heed who put herbs into the pot. It has been required and by some
imposed, that a Physician should be both Surgeon and Apothecary himself. It is
easily decided. In judgment, skill, knowledge, and ability of direction, it is
very requisite and necessary, and the contrary is not tolerable in a true
architect: but every particular execution Ei qui praesidet, scire operari
necessarium non est, sed potius aliorum ministerio vti. Aristot. polit. 3.
or manual pains and travel is never unjustly, sometime necessarily, and often
more conveniently distributed and divided unto others, whose vicissitude,
assistance, and often more ready handling thereof, is as sufficient, nothing
inferior, yea for operary proof and cunning handworke far without envy (...).
Nonnulli nescientes quam aliqui scientes ad opera sunt magis ido nei. Aristot.
eth. 6.
superior, because the maine and continual exercise therein, does therein also
make the meaner judgment better apted and more prompt. Galen indeed himself
in necessity, and want of other (whose better and more special practice and
exercise therein might make it their more proper performance) put his own hand
unto Primi medicinae parents and veteres Graeci Medici fere omnes humanit^te
ducti (vbi ita res postulauerit) suis manibus operaba^tur in ciuitatibus nondum
populosis. At vbi hominum multitudo increuerit, alio res delegata est. Hinc
etiam Principum edictis distincta extant Medicoru^ and Chirurgoru^ ministeria
and officia.
chirurgie: but when he found it another distinct office, as an ease unto
himself and a commodious liberty and enlarged help to his other imploiments,
studies and care, he thereunto referred hand-operation, though ever happily
conferred his mind and judgment. In like manner Hippocrates refuses by Nec
vero calculo laborantes secabo, sed viris Chirurgiae operarijs eius rei
faciendi locum dabo. Hippoc. iurc iurando.
oath to meddle in Chirurgerie, and expressly in the extraction of the stone of
the bladder, and leaves it unto those that are therein exercised: The fewer
offices the less distraction, and where less distraction, there is the better
bent unto the more maine and proper scope. Where therefore with as sufficient
supply by others, the suffection or deputation may ease of a burden (as
indifferently else were imposed) there (the business less, and the diligence
and incumbence equal) the remaining task must needs be completely and
absolutely attended and perfected. Concerning the Apothecarie included in the
Physician: indeed the first Ancients were Apothecaries unto themselves, because
in themselves only was then newly sprouting in the infancy, the inchoation of
that skill, and therefore as yet they could not Omnes arts rudiores primu^,
tractu deinde temporis absoluuntur. Scal. Poet 3.
communicate perfection unto others. But now time and age have accomplished it,
the Physicians eye and skill has used another hand both as a needful and
requisite Medico mulrae arts aptam materiam praeparant, ipse naturae per
ministros suppeditat Galen. in lib. 6. Hippo. de morb vulgar.
help in the mechanical ministry, and also as an advantage and ease to the
more necessary, laborious, and studious travels of his mind. In ordinary
dispatches therefore it is unavoidably necessary an Apothecarie be ever at hand,
as faithful as his own right hand, and in extraordinary the Physicians own
heart must only trust his own hand, and his own eye witness their consent.
This equity may satisfy curiosity.

CHAP. VII.
Of Practisers by Spells.
NOw to leave both Surgeon and Apothecarie, the opposition against the use or
need of either, does put in mind in the next place not to forget those, who
profess the performances, uses, and end both of Surgeon and Apothecary, yea
and Physician himself without their help or need: such are such as cure by
spells and words. If men believe as reason would and as reasonable men should
(for men are no Nec credere possis Hunc hominem, humana qui ratione caret
Maximia^. vel vt alij, Cornel Gall.
men if unreasonable) of any effects from spells, among the wise is no true
reason or cause, and without reason can be no right persuasion. Between a true
cause and his Causa immediata protinus per se cohaeret cum effectu. Sca^ig. de
subt.
proper effect, there is an immediate necessity; between a cause by accident
and his effect, there is a Causam per accidens sequitur per accidens effectum.
mediate consequution: but this cause being only ni opinion, can be no more
then opinion, and in opinion is no truth. Some finding spells to do no good,
object as a good, they do no hurt. This hurt I am assured they do; while men
have gaped after such shadows, they often in the mean season have lost the
substance, their life and health: which while due season offered unto them that
had learned to know opportunity, bad scholars were still at spelling school.
To speak more seriously of such a toy: If the faithful and devout prayer of
holy men (unto which the promise of God, and the blessings of men are annexed)
has no such assurance or success of necessary consequent, without laborious
industry and the use of good means, how can religion Quod neque religio
praecipit nec oritur ex causis naturalibus est superstitio. Melanth.
or reason suffer men that are not void of both, to give such impious credit
unto an vnsignificant and senseless. Scripta, verba annuli, characteres, signa,
nihil valent ad profligandos morbos, si nulla superior potestas diuina vel
magica accesserit. Inania itaque sunt vereque anilia crede^tium animos
superstitione occupante. Fernel. de Abd. rer. causis.
mumbling of idle words, contrary to reason, without president of any truly
wise Vide Galenu^ lib. 6. and 10. de simpl. Med. facultat. Theophrast. in hist.
plant. l. 9. Aug. tract. 7. in Euan. Ioa^nis.
or learned, and justly suspected of all sensible men? It shall be no error to
insert a merry history of an approved famous spell for sore eyes. By many
honest testimonies, it was a long time worn as a jewel about many necks,
written in paper, and enclosed in silk, never failing to do sovereign good
when all other helps were helpless. No sight might dare to read or open. At
length a curious mind while the patient slept, by stealth ripped open the
mystical cover, and found the powerful characters Latin, which Englished were
these: The Diabolus effodiat tibi oculos, impleat foramina stercoribus. Wierus
de praestig. cap. 4.
devil dig out thine eyes, and fill up their holes with his dung. Words
without meaning are nothing, and yet so here are best. Of nothing can come
nothing (much less good:) yet so In thought.
it was, and yet it was In deed.
not so) oaths and testimonies auouching the one religion, and truth Neque
enim verum est hominem ab homine noceri posse verbis. Sed demon credulitate
decipit hominem vt socium habeat, tum impietatis, tum aeterni exitij. Scal. de
subt.
denying the oaths. Thus ofttimes things happily begun in sport and jest, with
light minds, by vain opinion grow to sooth and earnest. It is strange in these
days to behold how this folly does laugh even wise men to scorn, while their
unreasonable parts of imagination and fancy, so iuggle with their judgments
and understanding, that they can scarce contain themselves from believing and
consulting with such ridiculous folly. Thus able is fancy, not only to
deceive sense, but to obscure our reason. If there be any good or use unto the
health by spells, they have that prerogative by accident, and by the power and
virtue of Phantasia imperium habet in spi^itus and humores, qui sunt morborum
parents.
fancy; wherein is neither certainty nor continuance. Fancy, according unto
the nature thereof, can seldom be long fixed upon any thing; because naturally
being ever full of fiction, it must needs easily and continually be Sensus
interioris motus perpetuus. Aristot. de insomn.
transported. Fancy therefore can be no ordinary or common remedy, being but
rarely fixedly detained; and where it is most earnestly bent, yet hardly of
long continuance. If fancy then be the foundation whereupon builds the good
of spells, spells must needs be as fancies are, uncertain and Galen. lib. 6 and
10. de simp. med facultat. Confidere doctos and bonos Midicos medicamentorum
substantiae praecipit, non verbis aut carminibus.
vain: so must also by consequent be their use and help, and no less all
they that trust unto them. I speak not of enchanted spells, but of that
superstitious babbling, by tradition of idle words and sentences, which all that
have sense, know to be void of sense, as the other devilish. The one (if
there be no remedy) we must permit unto fools, in the other we cannot deny
the devil.

CHAP. VIII.
The explication of the true discovery of Witchcraft in the sick, together
with many and wondered instances in that kind.
MAny things of great power and wonder, Witcheraft.
above reason and beyond the power of nature, have been effected through the
imprecation, stimulation and ministry of wicked men the associates of devils,
whose commerce with spirits has been often plain and manifest. But it is good
before we enter into the consideration thereof, that we be wary and
cautelously wise, how we make a true difference between a true work of the
devil, and the strange likeness which phantasmes (often countenanced by
casualties and events) strongly work in the opinion and conceit. For as the
machinations of spirits are certainly often inserted into the actions of men;
Historia.
so by the iuglings of the imaginary, are so lively framed resemblances and
counterfets of them often times, that they can hardly be distinguished. That it
may therefore the better first appear what fancy and imagination are able to
do, I will not here omit an history worth good ear: Anno 1607. a Parsons wife
of Northhamptonshire, dwelling within three miles of the town, came unto a
Physician, complaining of a tumor in one of her breasts. He demanded her among
many other things concerning the Sciatica, which he Narrata ab aegrotante
praeter totius plethora^ lassitudo partium omniu^ inferiorum cu^ mensium
retentione, coxarum grauitate in motu, torpore dum quiesceret, paratum affectu^
monstrabant. Ideo neque praedixisse difficile, neque re ipsa affectum subsequi
miraculi loco haberi debet.
coniectured to vex her. She denied any acquaintance or notion thereof in all
her former life. The same night (being returned home) suddenly about midnight
the Sciatica seized painfully and grievously upon her. Some few days after, it
happened another of her neighbors came also unto the same Physician, whom
(beside the disease which she her self made known) he guessed to be troubled
with the Praeter plethoram tum infra tum supra diaphragma conspicuam, tumor
venarum molestus circa crura and in poplitibus, de quo conquesta est aegra, de
spasmo and distentione illarum partium facilem inde dant coniecturam. Vbi
igitur aegrae imprudentia praesatur causam, facilis est prudentia probabilem
post fari effectum.
crampe, and cursorily questioned her thereof. She never before sensibly
knowing any such pain, after her return also that night suffered thereby
exceeding torment. These two accidents compared together by the first party,
(the one in her self, and the other in her neighbor) and the apprehension
being whet by her exceeding pain continued, caused in her a strong and
resolute opinion of bewitching, which she presently vnremoueably imputed unto
the Physician. Her outcries and impatience through her pain, made such
forcible impression in her husband, that to satisfy his wives unreasonable
importunacie, he was contented to come unto the Physician from her to
expostulate. He, before he could utter his message, blushing at the folly, and
yet desirous to satisfy his wives iniunction, because she would not otherwise
give him rest, at length related unto him the cause of his coming, desiring him
for his sake (being much ashamed thereof) to conceal the folly of his wife.
This done, he returned home, and found his wife nothing better, but assuring
her self and him, that if he would but once more come unto the Physician, and
(as I conjecture) gain him to forgive her, she should presently be well.
Accordingly the next day he came unto him, and (then concealing the reason and
cause of his coming) desired him to forgive and pardon his wife. This easily
granted (as such a toy) he presently demanded the hour of the day, which
instantly the clock gave two, being afternoon. He hastened homeward, and
before he could speak unto his wife, she ioyously entertained him, and with
prevention told him that she was perfectly well, and that just at She was
assured late the night before of the Physicians being at home that same day;
she knew the length of the way, her husbands vsuali pace, and n^w direct sp^ed.
She might easily compare the time of his going forth, with a competent time for
his attaining the Physician, and with all these might well hope of the
Physicians facility by his friendly entertainment the day before. From hence
her imagination satisfying itself with the confidence thereof, she might
thereby, settling and quieting her spirits, mind and humors, for a time thus
appease and mitigate her pains. As for her so true and just conjecture at the
time which was two of the clock, the circumstances before mentioned, and
likelihood it self did guide her to suppose it. If this reason satisfy not,
religion and reasons give leave farther to suspect, that the devil to advance
error and illusion, might convey into her imagination an inward and secret
sense of the time. The power that the devil does exercise in this kind, might
be made clear by many examples.
two of the clock her pain left her, which she (it seemed) imagined (as it
also happened) to have been the same time and moment that the Physician had given
her desired pardon. The next morning her husband did write unto him,
discovering with this news the reason of his last coming unto him the day
before, together with this strange event following it. Within half a year
after, she fell sick again, and After the penning of this history, the cause
and manner of her death by her neighbors of worth and credit, was thus
reported. Her husband, at her earnest suit, consulted with a wandering Surgeon,
whom fame, it seems, had magnified for charmed and potent cures of such as
were bewitched. The Surgeon delivered a medicine unto the husband, promising a
miraculous cure thereby, and charged him withal, by no means to be feared,
though happily there might fall out some strange and fearful operations unto the
seeming. The medicine with this style coming unto the patient, was gladly
received; and after she had received it into her body, she died. The glorious
name of the medicine, together with a confidence that this was only the
strange operation of the medicine foretold by the Surgeon, caused the friends
about her still to expect some admirable event of recovery, and therefore they
still gaped after her rprising: but in the end necessity called for a grave:
and thus their hope with her was buried.
died. This strong imagination, with this strange event, might have entangled
many a poor spinster in a thicker string then her cunning could untwist, to
save the cracking of her neck. But if me^ would more duly often examine and weigh
these cases, they shall many times find the Witch in a foolish sconce; and
greater and more dangerous are the bewitchings of a man's own folly, and more
effectual often times unto his own hurt and others, then any witch, yea or
devil whatsoever. Without doubt chance may flatter and countenance the
imagination with unwonted, yea and justly wondered events, and yet is that no
demonstration of ought about nature or reason. Casualtie does so apt often times
consequences unto dreams, as if there were some secret power or influence in
them proceeding unto such effects, yet is it no proof of truth or trust in
them. Women often times out of their Aelianus lib. 4. scribit Aspasiam concubinam
Cyri posterioris admonitam fuisse in somno de medicamento quo sanauit vitium
oris, quod venustatem prius valde deformauerat.
sleeps have foreseen and foretold many things, which according to time and
place have justly come to pass, but this does make their dreams no oracles.
Many vain me^ out of the presage of their own minds, have confidently made
prediction of such things as have assuredly happened, yet is this no inducement
to take them for prophets. In like manner some that have possessed themselves
with witchcraft, and the opinion thereof, have seemed to know things above
their knowledge, and that knowledge above and beyond all reason has been true:
yet neither is this any dispossession of themselves of this spirit of folly,
nor no just proof or accusation of any one to be a witch. I cannot therefore
take it for an ingenuous course, upon such grounds to draw simple people unto
confusion. It is an easy matter for any impression to work it self into the
imagination of a vain mind. And why may it not seem as easy for the devil
who is the author of lying Hinc illa (...) diabolica.
wonders, to credit it with wonderful events above the weak eye of our
reason? Therefore ineptly and injuriously may the illusion of fancy, and the
practice of the devil therewith joined, be made snares for the innocent, whose
destruction is his intention who rejoices in the perdition of mankind. Neither
can I believe (I speak it with reverence unto grauer judgments) that the
forced Non absimilis vis compellendi motus tum animi tum corporis etiam
philtris and carmini bus attribuitur. Philtra nocent animis vimque furoris
habent. Ovid. Carmina de coelo possunt deducere lunam Virgil.
coming of men or women to the burning of bewitched cattle, or to the burning
of the dung or urine of such as are bewitched, or floating of bodies above the
water, or the like, are any trial of a witch. I see no reason why I may not
think, that the devil by the permission of God, has power indifferently to
work these effects upon any man, whether a witch or no. For if he had power
for his own malicious purpose upon the body of our blessed Savior, to
transport it through the air, and to set it upon a pinnacle of the temple; and
upon the body of righteous Job, with hope and desire of his overthrow: by what
prerogative dare any other man whatsoever presume to free himself from his
power, but by a special grace and mercy of God? Or why is it any imputation
unto any man to be known to be subject thereto, since God does permit it in
diverse his dear Data est Diabolo potestas non modo vt fallat malos, sed vt
exerceat bonos. Augussin.
servants? If men shall grant the devils exercising his power upon any man a
sufficient evidence to convince him a witch, Diabolus imperium exercet in
impios. In pios etia^ in multis casibus particularibus potestatem habet, qua
and vulnerantur and concidunt. Calvin. lib. instit.
there shall thereby be allowed unto the devil a large Quid Angeli mali
possunt, quid no^ possunt facere per naturae suae conditionem, homini explorare
difficile immo impossible, Augustine. de Trinit.
commission, which his malice will easily extend beyond the latitude: as by
right observation of many learned in their own experiences has ben^ and may be
often truly noted. I do not deny nor patronage witches or witchcraft, but wish
that the proofs and trial thereof may be more carefully and with better
circumspection viewed and considered: that rash determination beguile not the
wise, nor condemn the innocent, upon whom the devil can with more nimblenesse
and agilitie transfer his own evil works, then either they can avoid it,
or others easily epsy it. Every thing whereof every man cannot give a
reason, is not therefore a miracle. There are many things whereof few Soli viri
ingeniosi and subtilis mentis acici difficilia cognitu facile comprehendere
valent. Aristot.
men, many whereof no man can attain the reason, yet every Multa sunt quorum
cum veritas certa sit, tame^ causae nos latent. Plutarch. de Sympol.
man knows to have a reason in nature. Behold a toy for an example. There is
seen in the hand of a iugler a thing as it is indeed; suddenly in a moment
without perceptible motion, it is again seen Inter praestigiatoris manus quod
est video. Mutatur species vel propter celeritatem vel propter aliud. Quare
vero mutetur latet me. Scalig. de Subt.
as it is not. That there is a cause of the change who knows not? what it is,
who knows except to whom it has been made known? With great wonder and In
natura plurima fiunt miranda and singularia, inquit Aristoles, ideoque naturam
ipsam appellat (...).
admiration have diverse in this age showed mercenarie spectacles, incredible
(...). Camerarius de diuinat.
even unto the beholding eye, and yet in the actors by mean understandings
deprehended to be nothing but agilitie and nimble cunning, by continual
practice and custom working desperateness into facility. Thus with common
wonder have some walked and danced voon cords. Some are written to have leaped
and danced upon the edges of sharp swords without hurt unto themselves, and
with pleasure unto the beholders. Some have credibly been supposed to devour
daggers and other sharp and dangerous weapons. That naturally the loadstone
draws iron the meanest know: the reason or cause the wisest never knew. There
are wonders in nature, and wonders above nature; these are subtilties, the
other miracles. That fire and air, contrary to their own A forma universally
mouentur sponte ignis and aer deorsum, ne eueniret vacuum. Forma particularis
obedit universally ad conseruationem totius entitatis and vnitatis. Scalig. de
Subt.
particular nature of the own accord descend, and waters ascend: that the
heavy metals of iron and lead, contrary to their own natural motion, should
with such admirable swiftness, in so short a Quia nequit tam cito ratefieri ad
implendum vacuum, quod reliquum potest facere facit, atque tam cito abit.
Scalig. de subt.
moment pass so large a distance through the air, from a small flash of a
little flame: these and such like are subtilties, because the cause and reason
thereof does unfold it self to few, or not to all, yet unto the learned. That
the Sun should stand still in the firmament, the Moon be ecclipsed in no
interposition, the bodies of men should fly in the air, or walk upon the
face of the water; these and the like are miracles, because hereof is neither
power nor reason in nature. And as in the former to be easily drawn to
admiration, and to ascribe natural effects to supernatural causes, is gross
ignorance, so in the latter to enquire natural causes in Frustra de
metaphysicis quaeruntur physicae rations.
supernatural effects, is profane curiosity. In both these extremes men too
commonly err, the learned for the most part in the latter, the unlearned in
the first; the one too Sapientia vera, Nolle nimis sapere.
wise, the other stark fools. None truly learned, or that truly know the face
of nature (whose scholars the learned ever profess themselves) can be upon the
vain flashes of seeming wonders lightly moved to deny or call into question
Hoc nomine Cardanum taxat Scaliger lib. de subtilit. Quae consulto natura in
orb molita est suo, is praestigiae nomine denotandum putat.
the power and force of nature. With therefore the common amazed thoughts of
vulgar people, to be blasted by the stupiditie of every idle fear, to gape
after witchcraft, or to make nature a devil or a bugbeare, must needs be base
procliuitie and unlearned lightness. To admit also nothing above or beside
nature, no witchcraft, no association with devils at all, is no less madness
of the opposite and extreme. But those whom true learning and wisdom has
well instructed, know how to stay themselves, and to consist in a temperate
mediocritie between both these. The actions of the devil are discovered by
the proper notes and difference. First they are ever Hoc a diuinitatis
excellentia separat. omnis enim potestas supra naturam est vel diuina vel
diabolica, haec voique and semper bona, illa nusquam non mala.
evil, either in themselves or in their end. Secondly, they are above Quorum
daemones authors sunt eorum ratio est trans naturam. Fernel. de abd. rer. cause.
the power and course of nature and reason. This appears manifestly in his
violent carriage of so many herds of swine headlong into the sea, mentioned in
the Gospel: in his bringing fire from above so suddenly to devour so many
thousands of Jobs sheep. These, with other such like, carry in their mischief
and hurt the stamp of such an author, and in the transcendent Daemoniaci
nonnulli obloquuntur sum ardua, arcana reserant and occulta renunciant. Edunt
verba and sententias graecas and latinas, cum ipsi vtriusque linguae omnina
ignari sunt. Fernel. de Abd. rer. cause.
and supernatural power thereof, the testimony of a spirit. This is plain,
and by these notes men may learn to distinguish between an imaginary and a
real devilish practice. Now the doubt remains, how we may in these works
and practices of the devil, detect the conversation and commerce of men. I do
not conceive how any marks in the flesh or body of any one, may be any trial
or manifest proof: for besides the grant, that Many and strange have been the
forms of diverse excrescencies, or growings in the flesh through all parts
almost of the body, whose nature, form and cause are well known unto the
Physician, though to his eye often times strange and wondered. Scaliger in his
book of Subtilties, mentions a Waterman, known unto himself, who had a
horn growing upon his back. The like have others since and before known and
written. Some men have been borne with parts proper unto the other sex, and
women with parts or resemblances of parts naturally given to the malekind
alone. The errors of nature in monstrous births, are not obscure, and feed
variety of wonder; nor are nor can be tied from the counterfeit of any shape,
likeness, mark or figure, sometimes superfluously cast upon one part,
sometimes upon another.
likeness may deceive, who can assure me that the devil may not as easily,
secretly and insensibly mark the flesh of men as their souls unto
destruction? If the devil may mark them without their knowledge and consent,
shall his malice be their offense? or how shall I be assured he cannot so do?
He that can do the greater, can do the less. He that could give unto the Son
of God a view of all the kingdoms of the world in one instant (which was no
doubt a special strain of his utmost spiritual cunning, considering he was
then to deal with wisdom it self) can that cunning find no means to make
a small scarre, impresse or tumor in flesh? Who dare presume to say, God will
not suffer him? Who ever so far entered into the counsel of God, or measured
what therein he does permit? If no holy writ, no reason manifest it, proud and
blasphemously daring is observation in so infinite and unmeasurable a subject.
I deny not that the devil by covenant may suck the bodies and blood of
witches, in witness of their homage unto him; but I deny any mark (of never
so true likeness or perfect similitude) sufficient condemnation unto any man;
and beside and above all other notes or marks whatsoever, judge it chiefly and
principally and first to be required, that both the devils The devils property
is known by actions, deeds or works first found sustained by a supernatural
power, and next bent unto an evil end. Thus for devilish ends have Witches
and sorcerers been known to ride upon the seas in vessels incapable of such
carriage, or of any defense. Thus have some haunted men and other creatures, in
manners, means and circumstances more then any way reasonable or possible unto
humanity or the nature of man alone. Thus have some also declared the secret
words and actions of men, then absent in far distant places, and foretold
particular things to come. These with their devilish affection, end, and
intention are certain proofs of diabolical power and witchraft.
property therein, and also the parties Consent and cooperation may be
manifested first by proof of any incantation, invocation, spells, and other
performances of other diabolical rites and ceremonies: secondly by their use
of such instruments as are usual or proper unto such devilish works Of this
kind are pictures of wax or other matter, by which they secretly work wasting
and consuming pains unto the living persons of those dead resemblances. Of
this kind are also charmed kno^s, characters and figures. Of this kind also
are diverse sorts of poisonsome matters, by them known to be solemnly sought,
and carefully hidden or kept. These found or detected, are certain conuictions
of witches and witchcraft, joined with other due presumptions and
circumstances, and a manifest detection of the assistance of any tra^ scendent
force.
consent thereto may be justly and truly euicted, which is often too lightly
weighed. It may be with good reason judged, that the devil does not blush to
be both bold and cunning, there to set his mark, yea and make his claim where
he has no interest. But when the devil does appear in works and signs
proper to himself, and therewith shall be evident either directly or by good
consequent the act of any man consenting or cooperating, there law may justly
take hold to censure; and there also the former presumptions and marks (denied
sufficiency while alone and single) may now concurring be admitted and
allowed. I speak not this in contradiction of other learned judgments, but
retaining the liberty of mine own, and leaving the like equanimitie to every
one. Nor do I deny or defend devilish practices of men or women, but desire
only to moderate the general madness of this age, which ascribes unto
witchcraft whatsoever falls out unknown or strange unto a vulgar sense.
Concerning diseases therefore, it will not here also be impertinent or
unprofitable to deliver many their strange seeming forms from the too
ordinary injurious imputation in this kind. It is manifest and apparent, that
the mixture and implication of diverse and differing diseases in the same
subject, may and do often bring forth a wild and confused concourse of accidents
seeming therefore of monstrous and wondered shapes, and therefore in their
deceiving appearance coming very near unto the similitude of bewitching. But
because every eye is not able in so various a chaos to Quippe vbi nec causas
nec apertos cernimus ictus, Vnde ergo veniant tot mala, caeca via est. Propert.
analyze and reduce them unto their several heads, and proper diseases, (so
intricately confounded one within another) it is not therefore sufficient for
reputing them as things without causes in nature. Many diseases single, alone
and apart by themselves, seem strange and wondered, which therefore in their
strange forms united, and in their mixture one with another, must needs arise
much more monstrous and Hydralike. For example, in one kind In (...) vel (...).
Gal. de loc aff.
of disease, the whole body as it were in a minute is suddenly taken in the
midst In this manner Ann. 1598. my self being present, a child of one M.
Barker of Couentry was afflicted, and in the end these fits changing into
conuulsions of his face, mouth, and eyes, he therein died.
of some ordinary gesture or action, and therein is continued some space
together as if frozen generally, stark and stiff in all parts, without sense
or motion, yet with eyes wide open, and (...). Gal. de loc. aff.
breathing freely, as if it were a moving image or a living carcass. In
another, the sick are also suddenly taken or surprised with a senseless In
Apoplexia vel morbo attonito. Gal. de loc. affect.
trance and general astonishment or sideration, void of all sense or moving
many hours together, only the breath sometimes strives and labors
`against the danger of suffocation, and the pulse continues. In another, the
sick are swiftly surprised with so profound and deadly a sleep, An. Dom. 1602
In this manner a former wife of one M. Roson of Northampton continued the space
of two days and nights, being then my patient.
that no call, no cry, no noise, no In Caro. Carum vero distinguit a
Catalepsi. Galen. lib. de loc. affect. quod in hac oculi aegrotorum clausi
permanent, in illa aperti.
stimulation can in many hours awake and raise them. In another, the sick are
doubtfully held, in some part Hoc genus coma vigilans Galeno dicitur tract. de
comate, quod and insomne vocat, and Phreneticis attribuit. Iuxta hoc coma
pigrum and somnolentum statuit quod e contra Lethargicis ascribit.
waking, and in other part sleeping, in some respects, manners and parts
expressing wakefull motions, sense, speech, right apprehension, memory and
imagination; in other respects, parts and manners (as men sleeping) void of the
liberty or use of sense, motion, or any the other faculties. The form of this
disease, Hippocrates has very fitly assimilated to the shape Hippocrates in
Prorheticis, and Epidemior. 5.
and fashion of drunkenness, whose ordinarily known effects are in some
things busy wakefulnesse, in other some at the same time dull sleepiness; in
some imaginations, apprehensions, senses and motions quick and ready, in some
with as apparent vrgence, yet senseless and dead. Contrary to these forms, in
some other diseases there arise continual stirrings and depraved motions
through all the parts Deprauati motus sunt plurimi tremuli, conuulsiui,
palpitantes, vibrantes, qui prout in toto corpore vagantur, diuersam appellatio
nem sortiuntur. Galen. de sympt differ.
of the body, contrary to the will, and beside the sense and power of the
sick. This is seen commonly in (...) etc. Epi epsia vel morbus caducus
vniuerso corpori motus affert deprauatos. Gal. de diff. sympt.
falling sicknesses, diverse kinds of conuulsions, and the like. In these
diseases, Conuulsio simulat omnem motus voluntarij speciem, and hac sola
ratione a motu naturali differt quod praetor voluntatem fit. Galen. de loc.
affect.
some bite their tongues and flesh, some make fearful and frightfull
shrinkings and outcries, some are violently tossed and tumbled from one place
unto another, some spit, some froth, some guash their teeth, some have their
faces continually deformed and drawn awrie, some have all parts wrested and
writhed into Motiua actio laesa pro particularium instrumentorum ratione ita
variantur, vt varias habere species videantur, cum illius motionis ratio fit
vna. Galen de sympt. diff.
infinite ugly shapes. Some have their heads violently wrested forward, and
their faces behind. Some have their eyes with inordinate twincklings, rauings,
and rollings Conuulsis musculis, oculos mouentibus.
disfigured. Some have their mouths distorted into diverse forms, grinning,
mowing, Musculorum masticatoriorum and eorum qui peculiariter lati appellantur
conuulsione, contractione, resolutione, fit spasmus cynicus, tortura oris,
risus Sardonius etc.
laughing, sometimes gaping wide Conuulsis musculis temporalibus contrahuntur
dentes, and strident, resolutis fit hiatus oris.
open, sometimes close shutting. Some have their limbs and diverse members
suddenly with violence snatched up and carried aloft, and after suffered by
their own weight to fall again. Some have an inordinate leaping Generalis
haec palpitatio dicitur ab Auicenna, ab alijs membrorum subsultus and iactatio.
and hopping of the flesh, through every part of the body. In some diseases the
mind is as strangely transported into admirable visions and miraculous
apparitions, as the body is metamorphosed into the former strange shapes. In
many ordinary diseases, in the oppressions of the brain, in feauers, the sick
usually think themselves to see things Historia Theophili, Medici aegrotantis
lectu dignissima est, libr. Galeni de diff. sympt. sect. 3.
that are not, but in their own abused imaginary and false conceit. Sometimes
with their fingers they hunt for flocks and flies, and with narrow eyes pry
for puppets and toys, working in the consistory of their own brains.
Sometimes they complain of their friends and others to lie upon them, to
creep or sit upon them, to stop their winds, to endeavor to cut their
throats, and the like. Sometimes they complain of Vide Hollerij historiam de
Pharmacopoeo incubo correpto, scholijs in tractat. de incubo. Auicen^am in
Cant. de signis Melancholiae.
devils or witches, lively describing their seeming shapes and gestures toward
them. Some in sicknesses so far forget themselves, that they have not so much
memory as of their own Thucydides de in peste seruatis scribit, inde factos
esse fatuis similes tantaque ignorantia and fatuitate imbutos vt se ipsos and
familiares plane ignorarent. Galen. in 1 Porrhet. Hippocrat.
names, or their most familiar friends. Some above all persuasion or reason to
the contrary, strongly imagine themselves unreasonable In (...) Actuar. lib. 1.
(...).
creatures. Some cry out and fly from In (...). Galen. in Pror^et. Hipp.
Historia pulcherrima.
waters when none are near: some from fire, and likewise from many other
supposed fears, in their vanity infinite, as in their present and sudden
appearance unto the beholder full of amazement. How can these like accidents,
or any of them even single and alone in their several peculiar shapes apart,
but seem wondered? Much more when diverse of them, most or many of them, as it
sometimes falls out, are confusedly together so compounded, that at once in
the sick, a man may see a part of one and a part of another, a show of many,
and a perfect shape of none; must they needs not only affright a common
beholder, but sometimes also exercise the better judgments. I saw hereof in
the year 1608. a rare example, which both for illustration of that which has
been said, and the instruction of other that may hereafter hap to behold the
like, and especially for the contentment of many eye witnesses (both worthy and
desirous therein to be satisfied) I may not omit. A gentleman of ancient name
and sear in Warwickshire, in the time of the late memorable long frost, called
me unto his daughter afflicted in an unknown and strange sudden manner, both
unto her parents, friends, and neighbors, and also some Beneficed Physicians.
Physicians therein consulted. A vehement shaking and violent casting forward
of her head, every day in a much marvelled fashion surprised her about three or
four of the clock each afternoon, and so usually continued until the
twelfth hour of the night: every such shaking or casting of her head, ending
with a loud and shrill inarticulate sound of these two sillables, ipha, ipha.
After my first sight, I discovered these before wondered motives to be nothing
else but sneesings and sternutations, which in all men have their different and
(...), Sonat sternutatio quia per angustum illi est ex itus. Hippocrat. Aph. 7.
l b.
diverse noyses, and in her were more then ordinarily violent. To confirm and
settle this judgment, I gave both by writing and speech prediction of a
sequel, either of the falling sickness Ingens sternutatio affinitatem habet
cum epilepsia, tu^ quod ab eadem causa nasci potest, tum quod in eadem sede
sita est. Ideo Hippocrates sternu tationem cum rheumate malu^ nuntiat; quin and
indesinens sternutatio animalem facultatem valide saepe fatigat, nec non and
sternutantes saepe mortui conciderunt.
or some other spice or species of conuulsion, so grounding upon the continual
violence and vehemence of the sternutation, and the great oppression of the
brain, together with some obscure contractions of some parts already begun,
though happily of others unobserved. In the mean season before my departure at
that time in few days the grieuousnesse, length, and frequence of the former
fits was much mitigated and grew more easy, and so continued the space of a
fortnight after my return from thence. This time last mentioned expired,
suddenly the parents again sent for me: from them I learned that their
daughter after diverse tortures of her mouth and face, with staring and rolling
of her eyes, scrawling and tumbling upon the ground, grating and gnashing her
teeth, was now newly fallen into Epilepsiam sequitur plerunque grauis sopor.
Andernac. de med. ^et. and noua.
a deadly trance, wherein she had continued a whole day, representing the very
shape and image of death, without all sense or motion: her pulse or breathing
only witnessing a remainder of life. With these fits (often in the mean season
first frequenting) at length she again Compositus enim morbus videtur, ex
comate, caro, Apoplexia, Epilepsia. In nonnullis enim accessionibus sopitis
motu and sensu libera erat respiratio, in alijs graui cum difficultate spirandi
and stertore periclitabatur, quae duo Apoplecticos a veternosis and
catalepticis distinguunt authore Galerio lib. de loc. affect. Epileptici vero
motus vix vnquam desiere.
interchanged new, and then awaking out of her astonished sleep, wistly
casting her eyes as looking sometime behind her, sometime to the one Deprauato
omni genere motus voluntarij tum capitis tum oculotum.
side, sometime to the other; sometime over her head (as if she had fearfully
or frightfully espied somewhat hagging about her) with her eyes staring open,
her mouth wide gaping, and her hands and arms strongly distent and carried
aloft above her head, together with a general starknesse and stiffness of al
these parts, she spent many days in this manner, both day and night iterating
these fits, and each several fit continuing the space sometimes of half an
hour, sometimes a quarter of an hour. While these fits at any time
discontinued, she either slept, or (at least all her outward senses slumbring)
her imagination still led her hands unto many and diverse continual actions and
motives, which argued in their folly great fatuitie and Epilensia est totius
corporis conuulsio cum rectricis partis actionum cohibitione. Galen. de Symp.
differentijs.
defect of reason and understanding, yet manifested the business and depraved
motion of her oppressed imagination, which therefore continually Singularium
praeter sensum exteriorem est sensus internus. Aristot. eth. 6.
employed her fingers to imitate many usual exercises of her health (as
dressing and attiring the heads of such women as came near unto her. In all
these actions and motions she neither had nor used the help of any other sense
but only the feeling Saepe morbo laeditur ratio salua imaginatione, saepe
deprauata imaginatio ne integra perstat ratio saepe deficit vtraque, saepe
deficiunt sensus exteriores seruatis internis, and e contra. Gal. de Loc.
Affect.
with her hand, whereof she seemed also altogether deprived in Coma est motus
imaginatricis deficiens and imbecillus. Galen. de Sympt. differ*
all other things, except only those whereto her imagination (which is
mistress and great commander of all the senses) lead Communis facultas and
potentia a cerebro per neruos in singula sensoria penetrans alterationes omnes
ipsorum persentit. Gal. lib. 7. de Plat and Hippoc. dogmat.
her feeling. Hereof was often made trial by pinching and the like, whereof she
took no care, nor was thereby moved, except only when thereby happily they
intercepted or interposed her feeling and the imagined object, whereof she was
ever for the most part very sensible. After I had with much assiduitie and
diligence by some quick medicines solicited nature to a better remembrance of
her self, at length upon a sharp provocation she immediately answered our
desired hope, and we then first gained her sense of her self with some
comfortable words, and with a perfect return In Caro and intelligere and
excitari aegrotus potest. Auicennna de sign. spec. Subeth.
of her understanding the distinct utterance of diverse short, but devout
inuocations of God, unto the singular comfort of her parents, having before
beheld her three weeks together both Laesa septima neruorum a cerebro ortorum
coniugatione loquela imminuitur, deprauatur aut ad tempus tollitur necessario.
Galen. de loc. Affect.
speechless and senseless. Her speech shortly again (after the operation of
the medicine had taken the usual effect) departed, but her better sense and
understanding still remained, which by her The words which by writing she
expressed, were these: God is a wonderful God, The Lord can do marvelous
things; and when the skill of man has done what it can, God will show himself
a wonderful God.
pen she signified, and therewithal an holy mind and thoughts rare in such an
impe (being then under the thirteenth year of her age) with an inward feeling
of her agony and affliction, often blessing God, and therein honoring her
virtuous and careful education. Thus after much labor by the grace of God,
and good means (for so they proved themselves ever by the immediate sequel of
good unto them) we at length obtained the continuance of all her senses. Her
tongue Quomodo lingua, nunc motum nunc sensum amittat separatim aut coniunctim,
magis vel minus, perque vicissitudines ratione cerebri laesi aut processus
neruorum. vide Galen. de loc. aff.
remained still Refert Guintherius Andernacus aliquos sibi natos, qui ex
ingenti refrigeratione, and inde nata destillatione muti per aliquot dies
perstitere, liquore vero absumpto vocem recepere. Andernac. lib. de Med. vet.
and noua.
imperfect, yet continually moved it self to force a certain imitation of
speech, with a mumbling, which (though no plain articulate sound of words) yet
unto those that were thereto accustomed, often intelligible and well perceived.
Sometimes perfect speech The very same accident, about the same time, in the
same manner, befell a gentlewoman then lying at Cotesbrooke in Northamptonshire,
and sometimes daughter unto M. Read, while he lived there dwelling. She often
diverse days together lost her speech, and again by fits suddenly recovered
it, being besides vexed with diverse manners of conuulsions.
suddenly and unexpectedly would come unto her, but stayed not constant nor
long. In this mean season I imparted unto her parents my doubt of a hard
condition, namely a palsy or maime in some part likely to be annexed unto her
recovery, if she suruiued her conuulsiue fits which still remained as before
mentioned. Between hope and this fear we continued endeavor, and in the end
by the infinite goodness of God, her fits before mentioned (namely of gaping and
carrying her arms distent above her head) with the rest decreased, now
discontinuing all day, only four or five short fits every night when she
first lay down in bed continued, and with the decrease of the former vehemence
and fearful continual frequence of the said fits, succeeded (as was before
feared) a palsy, which possessed both her legs with a senseless deadness, and
a general stupiditie of one side of her body, being the ordinary
terminations of an Apoplexy, and therefore foredoubted. After she had continued
in this hopeful forwardness the space of two months or thereabout, she was
then commended unto the Bath, with my report and description of her former
passed accidents unto her Physician there, where after much and long fear and
doubt, she began at length to yield better hope, finding by little and little
the use of her legs, only the former small fits did still hand fast, and her
speech as yet remained Ex faciei partibus sola lingua saepenumero afficitur.
Gal. de loc. affect.
unperfected. Her legs being at Bath, began there to recover; her speech
shortly after Saepe medicamentoru^ commoda non sunt cum vsu praesentia sed post
emergentia.
her return home from thence also followed, and all her former fits and
complaints vanished before that Compensante procul dubio aestate ad tempus
insigniter feruida incommoda praecedentis hyemis insigniter gelidae. Ab insigni
vero refrigeratione ortum and originem mali factum esse, apud me satis constat.
Frigus vero cum humiditate intensum soporem, stuporem, omne conuulsionis genus,
Epilepsiam, Apoplexiam constituere, author est Galenus lib. de loc. affect. 4.
summer passed. It has been and is still a great doubt and question, not only
among the common and vulgar sort, but diverse also learned, whether this
gentlewoman (in manner aforesaid afflicted) shall justly be ranked among those
upon whom (by the permission of God) devils and witches have had a power, or
whom nature and the course of natural diseases have thus in manner aforesaid
afflicted. My own judgment must needs incline unto the latter, for that I
could behold in the gentlewoman nothing (most continually conuersing with her)
which either my eyes had not before showed me in others, or perfect notion from
reading both ancient writings and later neotericall descriptions, had not
before made the same Qui universal cognoscit quoquo pacto cognoscit and
particulare. Aristor.
unto my understanding, which they then presented themselves unto my sight. The
first is in part testified in the margin of the page 59. 60. and 64. The
second, any man may witness true who can compare the report of all the fits
and accidents which befell this gentlewoman (which as truly and nearly as I
could, and I suppose fully, by the testimony of any that saw her, I have
related) with the several shapes of some diseases before mentioned, pages 59.
60. 61. 62. which are truly set down according to the common consent of most
writers. The mixture of diverse of them one with another, must needs make some
difference in them from themselves, where they are each alone and several: but
he that with that just allowance of that odds only, can consider the
particular accidents in the special example, with the true notion of the
diseases before it generally described, must needs grant them to be the same in
kind and nature. It may farther persuade, that my self with reason from the
known custom and nature of such diseases, gave both by speech and writing,
prediction of the conuulsion which after followed, and also of the termination
of her Saepius enim deprehendebatur repentino lapsu aut depriuatione omnis
sensus and motus, comitante difficultate spiritus and stertote nec non
rectricis facultatis functionibus omnino cohibitis. Hanc Apoplexiam veram
distinguit Galenus praedictis notis, lib. de loc. affect. quam etiam generalem
paralysim alias appellat. Apoplexiam vero vel generalem paralysim terminari
particulari, nemo non norit, grauem scilicet (...) plerunque, leuem (...) vel
vnius tantum membri.
Apoplecticke accessions in the lamenesse and palsy of some parts, which also
came to pass, and cannot now be denied testimony of many. It makes yet
farther against the opinion of witchcraft, that such medicines as were
ministered unto her, in reason good for her, according to that reason and
expectation for the most part ever profited, sometimes immediately with their
use reducing her understanding before lost, sometime recovering her speech when
she had diverse weeks together before continued speechless, and by little and
little evermore repairing continually some decays, notwithstanding many and
diverse relapses; which both her parents themselves, and the servants, and all
that ministered unto her, must needs unto God and truth with thanks
acknowledge. It farther confirms the negative of witchcraft, and is not the
least, that while the opinion thereof most hotly possessed most hearers and
beholders, the parents of the gentlewoman at no time in the height of their
daughters affliction, or a good space after, could resolve upon whom with any
just show of reason to cast the suspicion of bewitching, as they often avouched
unto me both then and since. The most certain and chief proofs Vide Wierum
de praestigijs daemonum. Consule Langium in epist. Medicin. tract. de
Daemoniac. Ioann. Hucheru^ Bellouacum de Maleficijs. Joan. Baptistam
Codronchium de morbis veneficiatis.
of witchcraft and devilish practices upon the sick, among the learned
esteemed are generally reputed three: First, a true and judicious manifestation
in the sick of some real power, act or deed, in, above and beyond reason and
natural cause. Secondly, annihilation and frustration of wholesome and proper
remedies, with discretion and art administered, without any just reason or cause
thereof. Thirdly, ought either in the knowledge or speech of the diseased,
discovering a rauishment, possession or obsession of their minds or spirits by
any infernal inspiration. Hence the sick often speak strange languages
Fernelius de Abditis rerum causis, lib. 2.
unto themselves unknown, and prophecy things to come, above humane
capacity. To the first does satisfy the former manifest reference of all
accidents befalling the gentlewoman mentioned, unto the preualence and power of
diseases before related. The second is negatiuely answered by plain
testimonies. Of the third and last was never mention, nor question, nor reason
of either. There can nothing be required more unto ample satisfaction: and as I
therein rest and stay my self, so I doubt not the consent and content of all
that affect truth and embrace reason. I will notwithstanding for the better
exercising and stirring up of diligence, circumspection and vigilance,
generally in this so hard and deceiuable point of witchcraft, and also for
their sakes, whose weakness may as yet be incapable of satisfaction in the
former particular, answer some objections therein made. The forenamed
conuulsiue fits, of lifting up her hands above her head, Object.
which were the last remaining fits, toward their decay and latter end, never
came unto her but only when prepared at the night for bed, and unclothed into
her night-weeds, she began to yield and decline her body to lie down. In that
instant, each night without failing, ever and never before began her fits. When
she at any time lay her self down to rest upon her bed in her clothes
(whether by day or night) her fits notwithstanding appeared not. Some have
imagined some coniuration or witchcraft upon or in her nightcloths or sheets;
but to them that seek reason, I suppose it found. The power of voluntary
motion, which is the animal faculty, and the disease it self both possessing
the same parts, namely the sinews and muscles, while the disease was in his
vigor and strength in the beginning, it therefore mastered the faculty and
moving power, and continually ruled, so that the fits then never almost ceased
by day or night. Now in the declination and weakness of the dissease, and
toward the end, the faculty grew strong, restrained and commanded over the
disease, whereby all the day there appeared no fits at all. But when the moving
power or faculty composed it self to a true and general cessation and rest,
then in that instant the disease took his advantage and liberty to stir.
Object.
But why was it not thus also when she slept in her clothes? The sense and
encumbrance of the day-habite is ever an hinderance of perfect sleeps.
Therefore to them that sleep in their clothes, or upon their beds, commonly
there is not so true a ligation of their senses, neither are their sleeps so
sound, nor of the like continuance. While therefore she lay or composed her
self to rest in her clothes, the sense thereof both interrupted the faculty
from the true and sound disposing it self to rest, and also thereby put it in
mind of the disease which had so lately sharply visited it, with tart
remembrance; and the disease being now too weak to resist or to provoke the
faculty, could not upon that imperfect advantage stir, until by a more
sound and true dispose to rest and sleep, the spirits and natural heat more
truly retiring inward, had more perfectly left the outward parts, and thereby
the disease there still remaining might have more liberty and power to stir,
which notwithstanding also soon after of the own accord desisted, because it
wanted the former strength to maintain continuance. Object.
That which breeds other doubts, is that at such time when she wanted all her
senses, and altogether seemed senseless of any object offered unto her, or of
it self occurring, yet had she a curious feeling of such things as her mind
and liking sought or seemed to hunt after. This is no wonder to them that know
where the imagination intently and earnestly works, it there gives sense to
those Primum sensorium omniu^ sensuum commune est. Galen de sympt. differ.
parts it exercises, though all other parts be stupefied or asleep. This is
often seen in many who in their dreams walk, talk, and do seriously many
works, distinguishing and feeling those things whereabout the fancy occupies
them, of other objects, though happily more near hand and of quicker
remembrance, taking no notice at all. The disease or accident which most often
and frequently possessed this gentlewoman, was a kind of Apoplexiam, caru^,
catalepsin altos sopores nominat omnes. Galen lib 13 de Meth. Med vt and aliis,
Lethargum etia^ inter sopores recenset sed cum febre incidente^ propter humoris
putredinem. Object.
heave sleep, in degree only exceeding the ordinary resolution and ligation
of the senses by sleep, and therefore the same reason may indifferently serve
both. It is farther objected, that the gentlewoman often pointed, sometime this
way, sometime that, as seeing the appearance of a woman of such and such form
and colors, which also according unto her manner of imperfect speech, she after
described, as some say. It is not unusual with the sick often to imagine
indifferently, as well things inconsiderate and Sicut in somnis decipimur
insomnijs, ita vigilantes in aegritudinibus, (...), etc. Arist. de insomnijs.
incomposed as truths, and therefore are their imaginations of no Egregie hac
in re satisfacit Theophili Medici aegrotantis historia, memorata a Galeno lib.
de sympt. different.
validity without better proof or reason, which I think before sufficiently
satisfied. And in this gentlewoman (having her head, where her disease had so
manifestly deeply seated it self, therefore so mightily oppressed) it was more
easy for any faculitie therein to mistake and err, then to conceive aright.
And therefore though it might happily manifestly appear (which may be and is
ordinarily rather the abusiue impression of some indiscreete The mention of her
supposed sight of the witch, came after the return of all her senses, and when
only the conuulsions of her arms and face were remaining accide^ts Object.
whispering about the sick) that she of her self primarily and without
suggestion conceived the form or shape of a witch, yet is that no sound proof
or clearing of the question of witchcraft in general, nor any reasonable
evidence against one particular, since the trials of truth are not sterred by
imaginations. It is lastly objected, that certain witches lately dying for
sorcerie, have confessed themselves to have bewitched this gentlewoman. I grant
the voluntary and uncompelled, or duly and truly euicted confession of a witch,
to be sufficient condemnation of her self, and therefore justly has the law
laid their blood upon their own heads, but their confession I cannot conceive
sufficient euiction of the witchcraft it self. It is known evidently unto men
learned, that the subtle serpent and deceiuer the devil does usually beguile,
delude and deceive those that trust in him by his iugling collusions,
persuading often times those actions and events to be his gratification of their
malicious affections, which are indeed the very works of nature, and often times
the rare effects only of hidden causes in nature. A witches confession
therefore being only grounded upon his credit, information and suggestion,
whose nature, custom and property is and ever has been to lie and deceive,
is a mean, poor and uncertain proof of witchcraft, though a just
condemnation unto the witch, her self being proved an associate with the
devil in any sort. Her death therefore does satisfy the law for her offense,
but is no sound information of the judgment of the witchcraft. Thus according
to that whereof my self could take notice in this gentlewoman (if more full
information of others observations in those things that by my self were not
seen or noted, fail me not) I have truly and fully described every material
accident and circumstance; and to all the known or conceived likely doubts and
difficulties therein have carefully and directly answered, and therein also
have (I suppose) satisfied the ingenuous and reasonable with brevity at full.
Now to conclude the former explication of the question of witchcraft in
general, I entreat the Reader to call unto mind the formerly mentioned fears
and doubts of witchcraft, which unknown accidents and diseases easily impose
upon minds herein unacquainted and not discerning their cause and reason, and
in them farther for future good to consider the possible contingence of many
more of like nature and sort in other the like cases elsewhere happening, and
here unmentioned. In both and with both let also be recalculate and cast the
strange and sly suggestions of the fancy and imagination, sometimes
countenanced by admired casual events and chances, sometimes applauded by
ignorant credulity, and sometimes advanced by superstition in all and every of
these still with the vulgar sort, aduantaging the same error and opinion of
witchcraft. I have so much the rather thus far labored, for that ordinarily
herein I see truth and judgment too much perverted, the diseased their health
and life thereby neglected, and many times simple idiots and fools oppressed,
whose weakness does often seem guilty, because ever unable to defend it self.
Every one in these cases is not fit or competent arbiter: it requires the
learned, and not learned in word and superficial seeming, but indeed truly
judicious and wise, whom ever to preconsult in these occasions is only safe,
is right, expedient, and ever necessary.

CHAP. IX.
Wisards.
THe mentione of witchcraft does now occasion the remembrance in the next place
of a sort of practitioners, Wisards.
whom our custom and country does call wisemen and wisewomen, reputed a kind
of good and honest harmles witches or wisards, who by good words, by hallowed
herbs and salues, and other superstitious ceremonies promise to allay and
calm devils, practices of other witches, and the forces of many diseases. But
these being of the same nature with those before mentioned to use spells, and as
they before, so these now sometimes only superstitiously vain, sometimes
diuellishly assisted, I will refer these unto them, and only dismiss them
both with a short history. Anno 1602. a poor boy of Pychley in
Northamptonshire, was suddenly surprised with a vehement conuulsion, drawing
his head and heels violently Nam in auersam partem aegrotantis reclinationem
opisthotonon vocamus, neruis qui eo loci sunt male affectis. Emprosthotonon
autem si in priorem partem homo deflectitur, neruis anterius positis
laborantibus. Aret. lib. 1. (...).
backward, and in that sort carrying his whole body into a roundnesse, tumbling
up and down with much pain and inward groaning. The parents of the child posed
with the strangeness, presently accused Hic hominum ineptorum mos est, in
malis sua ignorantia vel acquisitis vel co^morantibus cum anu Aesopica semper
daemonem accusare.
witchcraft, sent for a wisewoman, and her wisdom came unto them. At the same
time it fortuned my self to be in the town with a patient of mine, a worthy
and virtuous Lady there inhabiting, who moved me to see the bewitched child,
and upon the motion together with her Preacher then living in her house, I went
unto the place where the child lay. There among other standing silent and
unknown, I beheld the fits, and heard also the wisewoman wisely discoursing,
and among other things of the like nature, declaring unto the company, that the
lungs of the child were as white as An possit oculos tantum contendere Lynceus?
her kercher. With this and some other such like kercher learning, I Doleba^
mehercule quod pugillares and stilum non haberem qui tam bellas fabellas
pernotarem.
silenty departed. When I was returned unto my patient, I there professed my
opinion concerning the manner and nature of conuulsions with their several
causes, amongst the rest not omitting the strange accidents which did often fall
out in such diseases by worms. Not long after, when the cunning of the wisard
was now grown without profit, stale and forsaken, the child avoided a great
and long worm, and immediately after recovered without other help or means,
and so has continued ever since. Thus the serpent beguiled the woman, and the
woman beguiled (though not Adam) many foolish sons of Adam. At length a poor
worm gave them demonstration of their ridiculous folly. Such teachers are
fittest for such scholars, whose gross ignorance is ever so far in love
with it own preiudicate conceit, that though they were brayed in a mortar,
yet cannot this love be beaten out of them for any love of truth or reason. I
did not therefore trouble them with my patience to instruct them, nor they
molest me with their impatience to hear.

CHAP. X.
Servants of Physicians. Ministering helpers.
NoW to fulfill our just computation of Emperickes, and therewith to conclude
their mention and number: the last (but not the least) that offer themselves
ordinarily in this kind and name, are suchas either by often serving Physicians,
Servants of Physicians. Ministering helpers.
or by continual conuersing with them and viewing their custom and practice,
or by their own employment Ideo olim Clinici and lecticularij dicti and
Diaetarij.
from their directions in applications and administrations unto the sick, or
by some special trust and attendance about the necessities of the diseased,
ingrosse unto themselves supposed special observations, and choice and select
remedies, and with such small wares thus taken up upon credit, set Hac ab
origin Experientia nata est (...) and imitatoria.
up for themselves, presuming it good rhetoric (because an old figure) to
take a part for the whole. Thus seeing too much honesty would not suffer them
to rob their teachers of a more sufficient portion of general method and art,
they think it sufficient to be able to supply the same particular means with
the like desire and goodwill. But apish imitation and resembling show can never
express the life of reason in her native use. Although therefore sometimes
some of this sort, by subtlety, a good wit, officious diligence, and thereby
pleasing fortunatenesse, do angle a good report and estimation, and thereby
catch many simple Parua leaves capiunt animos
people (who hoodwinkt with good opinion discern not the bait) yet does their
commonly observed daring those things which they know they know not, and their
ordinary raising themselves by the ladder of boasting, manifestly detect, both
their cloaked defect, and their choked guilt. For what expectation can be of
them who for the most part build their whole worth upon the meanest proof of
another sufficiency, and all the skill which they are able to expend, is but
that little which another without envy or jealousy could spare? Timely and well
grown perfection is never to be attained either by service or bare
observation. It is necessary that man be in himself a master of knowledge and
of sincere judgment, that shall be able truly to make right use of another
experience. Experience therefore alone, and the benefit of a Physicians service
or admission unto the view of practice, without the benefit of sufficient
general theorie and learning going before, can in it self be no true
benefit. It is reason and knowledge that does guide men wise unto Quoniam ars
circa particularia versatur quae insinita sunt, qui non redigit ad vniuersalem
methodum, caeco and incerto modo agit and opera fortunae committit. Gal. de
puero Epilept.
all their particular actions and experiences, and those actions succeeding in
trial and proof according to that reason commend and confirm that reason,
and made good that experience. For that which experience has once or ofttimes
known and found to do good, must not therefore in necessity still do Medicina
sexies vel septies probata non facit vniuersalem propositionem. Galen.
the same good, except the same reason of the good do in each circumstance
again commend and command it, which only they can judge and examine that are
wise and learned. That experience therefore is only certainly and truly
allowed trust, which proving it self good does therein also justify (...).
Aeque mutila ratio sine experientia, and experientia sine ratione Nazianz.
the knoweldge and reason which directed it unto that good. They therefore that
without method, art, reason and Qui se artem acquisiuisse sine Methodo
arbitratur sciat se vmbram habere non artem. Plato in Phileb.
knowledge, take care to spend their time in gaping after others experiences,
do set the cart to draw the horses, and every one that goes unto plough,
knows they either never went to school, or begin their lesson at the wrong
end. By this preposterous defect therefore, and therein want of knowledge to
foresce the likely issues of their actions, since these Emperickes themselves
know not, not truly forsee what they endeavor or do, how shall others that
trust them know what thereby they shall suffer? Provident foresight is far
from blind ignorance, and wise prevention from imprudent temeritie, and the
experiment made without ait or reason does Per se naturaque sua fallax est
experientia and periculosa. (...). Hipp. Aph. 1.
more commonly reprove and chastise, then instruct and establish. Neither can
any man make a true rule or use of his experience, that truly knows not the
particular nature and estate of those things whereof he has experience,
together with all circumstances that may alter the considerations. They
therefore that will learn more safely to inform themselves, let them know
assuredly, that sufficiency is never found in the utmost observation or
Empericall tradition, but in a settled and itself confirming knowledge and
understanding. Neither can this true knowledge be duly or competently attained,
but by early begun, and late continuing education thereto, instituted in
places fit and free for true grounds, for the grows and seed of pure and good
knowledge, instilled into the mind by little Habitus omnis intellectiuus,
actiuus, factiuus sensim acquiruntur nec sine assiduitate, tempore, diligentia
stabiliuntur vnquam.
and little, by daily reading, contemplation, meditation, and assiduitie in
both, watered with the dew and sweat of painful study, hastened to maturitie
by careful and continual good culture Doctrina nam vim promouet insitam.
Horat.
of ancient counsel and direction, and lastly confirmed and strengthened in the
good and perfect grows unto a firm age and time there in by choice example
and experience, withal these possessing an Naturae sequitur semina quisque su^
Propert.
aptness in nature as the ground of all.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I.
The Methodian learned deceiuer or heretic Physician.
THus far have been remembered the ignorant practitiones that infost this age.
Now it follows we come unto another erronions kind of such as have a name and
portion among the learned: such are they that have a taste of good arts and
science, but are not truly earned, nor have sincerely drawn the natural and
lively sap of true science and understanding. Of this kind among the Ancients,
were reputed those they termed Quales Proclus, Antipater, Dionysius, Thessalus,
Themison, de quo nomine Iuuenalis sic habet: Quot Themison aegros autumno
occidederit vno.
Methodians, either by an Ironie or Antiphrasis, as having no true (...) and
omnium maxim (...) appellat Galenus.
method, but a compe^dium or a method of their own making; or else because they
arrogated this name unto themselves in the best sense, as only in their own
supposall meriting the title of true Art and Method. These had their peculiar
and proper errors in those times in which they lived, then especially noted;
but we will make bold more generally under this name to comprehend all who
carry a name and visar of learning, but are not able to express the power
thereof, either by their distinct and truly digested understanding, or by right
performance in action and practice according thereunto. These men, any man may
note to be of three sorts: First, such as may commonly be observed to bear
natural defects and impediments within themselves: secondly, such as want time
in nature or their studies: thirdly, such as have spent most part of their life
otherwise distracted, and have not had entire emploiment in their callings. The
first rank nature her self does note unto every one by their imperfect parts
stamped and expressed in their daily conversation. Such are they who argue in
themselves want of wit, of common capacity, of ordinary government: or are
disposed to lunacies, to inordinate affections and customs in the continual
course and practice of their life. The second are youths, young men, and all
wanting discreet years in their faces or Inconsideratio cognatum and perpetuum
iuuentutis vitium. Scalig. de subt.
manners, with all such as derive their knowledge no further then grammar
schools, or in Universities have made short stay and too sudden departure.
Both these are easily diseouered, and therefore cannot so usually deceive, or
else can but deceive such as deserve no better. The third, are all such aside
fraud their callings of their whose endeavor, and divide themselves between two
professions. Their neutralitie in both does prove their nullitie in either.
Perfection in any faculty requires more then a Qui si quid homo sit seias
facile te nihil esse intelligas. Ego vero nequaquam nos homines esse dicere
consueui sed parts hominis. Ex omnibus enim aliquid fieri posse, idque non
maginum, ex singulis pene minus quam nihil. Schilg. de subtle.
man, Nemo nostrum satis esse potest ad attem vel constituenda vel absolunda:
sed sat superque videri debet si quae multorum annorum spacio priores
inuenerint posteri accipiamus, atque his addentes aliquid illa aliquando
compleamus and perficiamus. Galen. in Aph. Hipp.
and Competit quod par est, par est quod sufficit, sufficit quod nullius
indiget (...). Arist. Eth. 1.
competence a whole man nor ever was any in an excellent whom one calling could
not (...) deserve and employ. Within this compass also stand such, as having
spent a good part, or most part of their time in one art or science, toward
the end (...) in them iddel course exchange. These from the (...) flowing and
wanting of their minds in a former stream, (...) arriving in a new (...)
cannot suddenly lauch unto any depth or profoundnesse of judgment (which only
time by stealing steps by little and little does mature and ripeth as a timely
fruit Nam mora dat vires, teneras mora percoquit vuas. Et validas segetes quae
fuit herba facit. Ovid.
) and therefore they may in have and greatily swallow upon hole sentences, yea
and volumes vnche wed, yet can they never truly digest them but with (...).
Tempus inuentor and adiutor bonus, vnde and artium sunt facta incrementa.
Arist. Eth. 1.
many days and much leisure. Every Art is an habit: an habit is by small
degrees and length of time and custom acquired, and thence rises by little
and little to perfection and full growth. There is to every faculty belonging,
first an habit of right judging therein, and distinct knowing: secondly an
habit according to judgment and knowledge of right action and (...). etc.
Omnes mentis habitus sunt extremorum, etc.
disposing. A double habit in every faculty, requires a double time in every
faculty, which therefore cannot but with long patience and careful assiduitie
therein be invited. The too common want hereof in these days, is the cause
that many reputed great clearks and scholars, have in their mouths and
discourse, the phrase, the language and sentences of wisdom, but want the
(...). Alia est enim dicacitas, alia doctorum elegans and erudita ratio: haec
consistit in verboru^ virtute, illa in idearum quae rerum sunt species.
soul, the substance and the sense. Hence it comes to pass, that tongues
ouerflow with aphorisms, maxims, and rules of ancient truth, but for the most
part confusedly, not rightly distinguished, mistaken or supposed. Neither cau
excellence in one faculty give prerogative in another. Therefore those that
are perfect and absolved artists in their own faculty, and will impair their
dignity by engaging it in another, (where neither their time nor proof can
equal it) let wise men cuatelously and with suspicion admit their counsel or
trust their practice. I sometime knew a learned Divine, batchelar in that
faculty, Historiae.
a great clearke, of much reading and study therein, whose busy and ambitious
brain not contenting it self within so infinite an ocean of sufficient sacred
and sweet imploiment, would needs break out into other bounds, and from some
borrowed hours and time for study in physic, grew to affect therein more
then a common name and understanding. In the end his pride and conceit of his
knowledge transported him so far, that among other ridiculous paradoxes, he
both in schools and common profession defended an indifferency in the
natures, qualities and use of Stibium and Ratsbane: to conclude, his confidence
herein so far bewitched him that he made trial thereof in himself, and as a
just execution upon himself, was the same day poisoned. Another of my
knowledge and acquaintance, a man in the Greek, Latin, Hebrew, Chaldey, and
other languages much studied, and in the judgment and theory of Divinity of
approved worthiness and understanding, having therein bestowed the best part
of his time, suddenly interchanged with an unadvised course of practice in
Physic; he spent some time in travel beyond the sea, and returned again
thence dignified; but his former studies were so well and soundly foresetled,
that they admitted not so true and right after-setling of the second. Hence as
his brain ouerflowed with unconstant propositions, and his tongue with
paradoxes, his actions also thereto suited. In the end he made upon himself an
experiment of the force of Opium in a more then ordinary dose, and so composing
himself unto a desired sleep, never returned to view the issue of his
experiment, but descending into the grave, left this memory behind him. If any
man wonder at these grand lapses in men learned, let him stay and satisfy his
doubt with admiration of the multitude of sects in all ages, swarming with
gross errors and opinions, even amongst the learned of all faculties and
professions. This undoubtedly grows from no other ground but want of entire
understanding of those things men study and read, through imperfect and
distracted imploiment of their minds, seriously and wholly required unto any
measure of perfection. Therefore Galen in his learned treatise of the method of
right cure (as also in other places) does often times witness, that where sects
and sectaries abound, there is infallibly mistaking and unsound apprehension of
truth, and therefore lamely, defectiuely, and in part attained, because Prim^
and praecipua delictoru^ and errotu^ causa in aegrotantium curatione,
Diuisionum prauitas, vt and in alijs haeresibus. Quidam in primis and supremis
diuisionum generibus consistunt contenti illis indicationibus quae ab illis
sumuntur. Quida^ vero vsque ad aliquid diuidu^t non tame^ vsque ad finem
perueniunt. Nonnulli vero vitiosis vtuntur diuisionibus. Qui vero omnia quae
sunt secundum naturam and praeter naturam recto diuisionis artificio
complectitur, atque ab omnibus sumit sufficientes indicationes, hic solum
medendo non errabit, quantum humanis conceditur viribus. Galen. de ratione
Meden. ad Glaucon.
so only sought. If any man require a more special proof or trial hereof,
let him with me here cull and examine any few Aphorisms of Hippocrates, and in
them (though commonly and orderly read and avouched by every mouth) ye shall he
find how easy and ordinary it is for any man in any one to be inconsiderately
deceived and mistaken, if he do not with all possible diligence, indistracted
vigilance and circumspection, continually, wholly and indefatigably Puta
apprehensio simplex saepe caret ratione, nondum excitata ratione, aut suae
cognitionis non inita ratione. Scalig. de subt.
exercise all his powers in seeking out their hidden truth, which does never
freely reveal it self to those that carelessly or in part, or for sinister and
trifling Hinc paucissimi sapientissima^ Hippocratis (...) rite sapiunt.
ends labor after it. For example, in his sixth book of aphorisms and 52.
aphorism, Hippocrates does nominate a mortal sign in the diseased, the
appearance of the white of the eye in sleep, and sleeping with unclosed eyes.
In many diseased, this often is found untrue, but with Hippocrates understanding
it is never Vide Galenu^ in praedictum Aphoris. and Brasauolum in vtrosque.
false. He that simply and verbally only understands, and without meditated
differences and exceptions, or makes not more narrow search, shall hardly
truly find the certain and true limitation of this truth. For if this manner of
sleeping fall out from any outward cause, or besides reason or cause thereof in
the inward disposition, it is not simply or altogether bad, much less mortal.
For where the sick are thus accustomed to sleep in health, or so sleep by
reason of fumes and vapors ascending unto the head, and thence distilling into
the eyelids, and so hindering their right closure, (as it is often seen in
great drinkers) or where it proceeds only from worms in children, and the
like, the incautelous and superficial understanding is readily deceived. In
like manner the 51. aphorism of the same book does promise by the coming of a
fever thereto, the profligation of the apoplexy. But this is not true,
confusedly interpreted, and therefore beyond the first view requires further
studious inquisition to find out the quantity Oportet febrem neque leuiorem
esse qua^ quae morbi materiam discutiat, neque grauiorem quam aegri virtus
ferat. Holler. tract. de Apoplex. Galen. in dictu^ Aphoris.
of the fever, with the degree of the apoplexy. Great wounds and cuts of the
head (says the 50. aphorism of the same book) procure and incur feauers:
but he that does no further search to know the Necesse est febrem superuenire
sed non simul. Nam putredo cum vulnere accelerat febrem, vulnus sine putredine
tardigradam producit febre^. Brasauol. in praedict. aph.
times that feauers may differently in swiftness or slownesse of their coming
take, nor understands the causes slackning or quickening the feauers speed,
may easily too hastily before just time accuse the truth hereof. The 3.
aphorism of the fifth book threatens danger in conuulsions upon great issues
and losses of blood; but in what quantity thou shall esteem them Magnus ille
est fluxus quicunque repent indesinenter and celeriter profluit. Gal. in
dictum aph.
great, or with what conditions, thou must use diligence, and elsewhere
enquire. Many have lost great measures of blood at once, and yet have escaped
both with and without conuulsions, if 8. 9. 10. or 12. Ponderauit Brasauolus
libras 18. ex sinistra nare foeminae nobilis fusas simul and semel, praeter 4.
libras aut plures per lintea and mappas sparsas, nec aderat interea aliquod
vitae discrimen, sed conualuit. Brasauol. in aph.
pounds at once from the nose may be called much or great. The first aphorism
of the fifth book, does pronounce the conuulsion procured in assumption of
Hellebore mortal. It is notwithstanding seen, that conuulsions so raised,
cease again without death or other danger. To understand therefore aright, we
must know to distinguish the diverse ways and Conuulsio quam affert Hellebori
assumptio ex oris ventriculi vellicatione plerunque sine discrimine, quam vero
ex immodica euacuatione, illa maxim lethalis. Galen. in aph dictum.
manners whereby Hellebore does produce conuulsions. The 31. aphorism of the
fifth book, menaceth unto a woman with child being let blood, abortion. But
whether we shall understand it simply necessary, or only as an hazard or
periclitation, or with what conditions, more certain information does ask
further search. The 40. aphorism of the second book, threatens unto old men
surprised with mur^hes and distillations, the end of their disease with the end
of their days. But unto perfect conceiving, is further requisite the
consideration of the degrees of old men, in whom is apparent either age alone
(which is only the number of years) or oldnesse Hinc senectus and senium,
senectus prima and vltima, viridis and decrepita.
with age, which is a decay and wearing of nature together with years.
Infinite might we be in these and the like, every triuiall and vulgarly
received rule requiring a more circumspect and considerate understanding, then
the first view or light reading does offer or present. It is a common well
known and commendable caution, to suspect phlebotomy in children unto the
foureteenth year, and in old men after fifty or sixty years. But with what
restraints and limitations these rules are to be bounded, fully and truly to
conceive, besides their hearing or reading is required a view and reuiew of
differing reason and exposition, diligent and careful scrutiny, often comparing
and conferring odds and differences of circumstances. None truly learned will
or can be so inconsiderate or rash to take blood from age, whose veins are
exhaust or spent, blood dried up, or from infancy crop the first hopeful
sprouting or spring thereof; yet with deserved fame and honor to themselves,
and incomparable benefit unto the sick, have right learned worthy and
excellent Physicians used and prescribed phlebotomy both under five Auenzoar
filio suo trimo venam secuit.
, and after sixty Rhases aetati decrepitae in pleuritide venam secuit.
years. Diligence will not rest until it have found Interest enim non quae
aetas sit, neque quid in corpore geratur intus, sed quae vires sint. Firmus
puer, robustus senex, and grauida mulier valentes sanguinis missione tuto
curantur. ^ernel. de sang. miss
out reconciliation to these doubts, and confirmation to more perfect
knowledge, which serious labor must buy, study continually attend, and thence
time gain, free from other impertinent implication. The common want hereof
suffers so many unprofitable questions amongst the the learned, maintains
contentions and pride of words, multitude of sects and schisms from truth: and
while men at other leisure, for other shifts, ends, and supplies, and not for
the own worthiness, or for it self seek knowledge, they commonly lose the
true end, and therefore true perfection. The innumerable dissentions amongst the
learned concerning the Arabicke and Chymicke remedies at this day infinitely,
with opposite and contradictorie writings, and inuectiues, burden the whole
world. Some learned Physicians and writers extol and magnify them as of
incomparable use and divine efficacy. Some with execration accuse and curse
them as damned and hellish poisons. Some because they find not these remedies
in the common and vulgar readings of the Ancients (the famous and learned
Grecians) with fear and horror endure their very mention, far therein unlike
and differing from that ingenuous spirit of the thrice worthy and renowned
Pergamene Claudius Galen, who in brightness of understanding, sharpness of
apprehension, and invention ouershining all the precedent wits that were before
him, yet did he with humble and daigning desire search and entertain from any
sort of Versatus su^ and i^notui celeberrimis in vna quaque secta
praeceptionibus and pa^i studio omnibus dedi operam. Galen. de Loc. Affectis.
people, yea from the most unlearned Empericke himself, any their particular
remedies or medicines, which after by his purer and more eminent judgment, and
clearer light of understanding, refining, he reduced to more proper worth, and
thereby gave admired presidents of their wondered ods in his learned
prescription and accommodation. Some contrarily contemning the learning and
knowledge of the Grecian, and with horrid superstition, deifying an absolute
sufficiency in Chymicke remedies, reject the care or respect of discreet and
prudent dispensation. A third and more commendable sort differs from both
these, and leaving in the one his learned morositie and disdainful impatience
of different hearing, and in the other his ignorant and perverse Hermeticall
monopoly, with impartial and ingenuous desire free from sectarie affectation,
does from both draw whatsoever may in either seem good or profitable unto
health or physic use: from the Grecian deriuing the sound and ancient truth,
and from both Greek, Chymicke, or Arabian, borrowing with thankful diligence
any helpful good to needful use. Antiquity has given us our first Maiores
nostri ad veritatis indagationem and conuentione^ cum magno animo atque excel^o
per sa^ebras atque tenebras iter suum contulerint, vt quo possint modo
praelucerent nobis, quare no^ erunt illorum manes (prope dixerim) Deorum cultu
celebrandi? Scal. de Subt.
lights in all knowledges, succeeding times have added their several lustres,
and our latest Atque iniquu^ decreti genus est quod omne^ laudis fructum and
gloriae vni Graeciae detulit, vt Arabum and posterita^is studia perpetuis
tenebris obruantur. Quaedam posteritas addidit non irauda^da laud. Vixerunt
Graeci in media luce literaru^, ex^iterunt Arabes, and inde ductae familiae iam
desertis and scpultis melioribus disciplinis digna tamen luce aeterna^ue
memoria nobis reliquerunt. Hollerius instit. Chirurg.
posterity has yielded also many things not unworthy their worthy praise.
Chiefly to honor the ancient worthies, yet to Etiam hispidis, etiam qui
errarunt habendam esse gratiam censeo. Scalig. de Subt.
contemn none, and to view all, is the rarest growth, but truest perfection.
And thus by the examples before for many innumerable more, it is manifest that
men learned, knowing and reading much, may notwithstanding either through
distraction or negligence be esteemed and found in complete perfect and
distinct knowing, ignorant and vnwotting. And as their understandings are hence
corrupted and depraved, so necessarily by consequent must their actions be
answerable thereto, since thence derived, bad principles ever producing bad
practice. This is not obscure nor dainty in many common practisers of imperfect
knowledge, to be daily instanced almost every where, whereby that man whose
own judgment cannot give him dispensation to swerve and differ sometimes from
the common understanding, use, and custom of vulgar practice, shall often times
dangerously err. In above 40. years being, I have now twenty years been an
understanding obseruer and partaker of diverse and different medicinal
practice, and therein have often noted how that which sometime has opposed common
received rule, in the peculiar proof of some other learned, has given good
occasion of new disquisition of before unconsidered reason or distinction in
the rule. For a brief taste of many, I will particularize some few. I have
observed in some kind of Palsies blood taken from the paralytike side, when all
other means have proved vain, to have been the sole present succesful
remedy, yea beyond all hope has often rescued the latest hope out of the jaws
of death. This much experience does testify, yet is it contrary unto received
ancient edict. In like manner in some diseased plethoricall bodies, I have
observed and seen, that their general numnesse, Torpor leuis quaedam
Paralysis. Galen. de Sympt. causis.
torpor and stupidity raised in them from the distention, compression and
obstruction of their full vessels, has immediately on the same side that was
let blood, found present and sensible delivery from those accidents with great
lightsomnesse and alleuiation, the opposite side still continuing in the former
manner oppressed and grieved, until the same remedy of phlebotomy has been
thereto likewise applied. In common stoppages of the womb I have often seen
when the usual bleeding in the foot has nothing at all profited, but in
vain wearied the parts thereby fruitlesly vexed, that the incision of a vein
in the arm has immediately opened the stoppage, and the former current has
freely streamed. In some kind of dropsies, cachexiaes, or green sicknesses. I
have observed that letting blood by excellent fruit and benefit, has proved
the succesfull remedy, above, beyond, and after all remedies. These things are
witnessed by many worthy testimonies, and yet are generally esteemed violations
of rule. I will not here dispute the causes and reasons of these things, nor
disquire how judgment did guide unto these trials, nor how necessarily or
probably the effects and consequent followed, or cohered with the judgment. I
will leave it indifferent unto every one learned, and unto right perpension in
just occasion of due consideration hereof. I give not these instances (as rash
supposall may imagine) to encourage Empericall boldness, unto common imitation
hereof, nor do hereby allow (as some not distinguishing may imagine)
bloud-thirstie phlebotomy to suck men's lives in rash trial hereof* but to prove
and manifest how necessary it is for a judicious and orthodox Physician,
diligently and prudently in his faculty exercised according to art, to retain
and enjoy a reserved power and warranted sufficiency within himself, to vary
and differ sometimes from too strict and superstitious imitation of a common
rule and received custom. And from this worth and virtue has it come to
pass, that many learned and famous men, in their several ages have left so
many worthy additame^ts unto knowledge and the common good, by their own
special proofs and trials of rules, in their peculiar practice often different
from vulgar conceit, use and custom; unto whom may not be denied beyond the
ordinary bounds, a liberty and dispensation contained within the latitude of
safe discretion and art. And thus briefly both by the use of common distracted
reading, and thence indigested understanding, and also by the former particular
proofs of easy deception in acception of common rules, and lastly by examples
of practice, it is manifested that men otherwise, and in other respects,
esteemed justly learned, may inconsiderately and easily err, when distractedly
and deuidedly they employ their thoughts and cogitations, or want that sole or
solid possession of their whole minds and meditations by their own proper
faculties and functions. This is the reason, that though comparably to these
times no age has ever affoorded writings more prodigally obuious, nor show of
knowledge with greater affluence, yet in Authors never has been either less
true meaning, or less right understanding. Hence as seeming understanding did
never more abound, so never was it of worse report, the goose Capit insanabile
cunctos scribendi cacoethes. Scalig.
so liberally giving wings and feathers unto fantastic thoughts, but the
eagle-eye of clear and Prepauci aliquid been sciu^t Ad apicem plura aspirant
magis ingenia quam perueni^^t. Scalig.
sincere judgment, seldom vndazedly, or without winking, fixed upon the
perfect brightness and purity of serene and clearly distinguished truth. And
thus much touching those that are of best proficience and most learned note in
divided studies and callings, distraction necessarily leaving a remissness and
neglect in many things both of mind and action. As for those that are of mean
literature in their own professions, their intrusion in others, and desperate
esteem and quality in their own, must needs preach their insufficiency in
the latter by their mediocritie in the first.

CHAP. II.
Of beneficed Practisers.
THE grand and most common offenders in those kinds before remembered, and in
these days, are diverse Astrologers, but especially Ecclesiastical persons,
Vicars and Parsons, who now ouerflow this kingdom with this alienation of
their own proper offices and duties, and usurpation of others, making their
holy calling a linsey wolsey, too narrow for their minds, and therefore making
themselves room in others affairs, under pretense of love and mercy.
Besides, their profane intrusion into inhibited lists, their unlimited breach
of law, and want of reverence and respect of order and distinction of callings,
(which true Divinity does teach holy men) reason and experience do daily
witness, that by the necessary coincidence often times of both callings
requiring them at the same moment in distant places, without conscience they
impose upon themselves a necessary neglect of both by an unnecessary Elige quid
velis, qu^ enim pudor omnia velle? Martial.
assumption of the one. This the poor patients necessity and need must often
complain, though happily more seldom observed: and therefore of few is that
which herein is lamentable, at all lamented. Many times many poor people (and
sometimes men of better worth) in their necessities, and often last extremities,
through this voluntary ouermeasure of emploiment in these enlarged spirits,
are not only deferred, procrastinated and neglected, but often times even to
death illuded. For from report and information by others unto the Physician,
and from the indication by urine (which are borrowed, and therefore slipperie
grounds) many diseases conceal themselves: often for want of the presence of the
Physicians own view, the chiefest opportunity and hopeful hour steal away
unespied, and death makes many blind, because they had not their Physicians
eyes. In these difficulties therefore (wherein consist the greatest uses and
benefits of a Physician) these men by their double and both-hand emploiment,
compel themselves commonly to a double cruelty, either for the most part to
deny their presence, or else not to perform the promise of their presence,
being ever subject to a countermaund, by their voluntary subjection to a
double command. If therefore they would consider the shortness of their lives,
with the immensitie of their own task, they would not allow so large a
vacancie to succisiue hours and works, which now for the most part are most
part of their time unto the great hurt and injury of others, and the increase
of scandal unto their Persona namque venustat studium dum suo insistit
officio, nec praeripit alienum.
own vocations. I know the learned and reverend Divine is herein for the most
part free, or if some few be justly taxed, their modest minds will easily
moderate and reduce them; and for the rest, whose dispositions are shameless
and incorrigible, that may happily still become the fool, which is a reproach
unto the wise, and Nam quod turpe bonis Seio Titioque decebit, Crispinum.
befit the dishonest that defames the just. I do not dislike the devout and
charitable deeds of their holy minds, nor real compassion and contribution
unto the sick and needy, nor yet their medicinal advice with incorrupt hands
free from implication of private gain, and unobserved and concealed
merchandising in charitable deeds; but I abhor and wish repented (which in
many of them is abominable and sacrilegious) their pecuniarie traffic and
trading by usurped erecting in their houses Apothecarie shops by manumission of
base wares that are not allowed, nor have obtained freedom elsewhere, whereby
unlawfully they exenterate and eat out the bowels of poor men's purses.
Neither is it any way to be justified, that they ordinarily travel up and down
to spoil the more worthy of his fee, and the proper laborer of his hire: nor
yet is it less shame, that without shame or blushing their bills in many places
inhabit ordinarily Apothecaries files and shoppes, as if their own undoubted
right. Their master Saint Paul teaches every man to walk within his 1. Cor.
7. verse. 20. 24.
own calling, and not to be busily Vnicu^ ab vno optime perficitur opus.
Arist. Polit. 2.
straggling in others: so shall they honor their calling, and their callings
honor them, and both honor God that sent them. I know the gift of healing in
the Apostles was the gift of God his grace and special favor and allowance
unto them for those times; but it was in them a miraculous and diuin^ power
conse^rated unto an holy end: but in these times it is an acquired faculty,
and in these men unto a mercenarie use. It is indeed a deed of mercy to save
and help the sick, and a work of charity to advise them for their health
and ease: but the common good and public weal, and the law for both does
inhibite the doing of every good by every man, and does limit and restrain it
unto some special and select sort of men, for necessary causes, and respects
unto good government and policy, and for avoiding confusion, which is the
ruin of public weals. Shall then Divinity teach and allow for private
deeds, ends and respects of charity and mercy, to break Fuit haec sapientia
quonda^, Publica priuatis praeponere, sacra prophanis. Sic honor and nomen
diuinis vatibus, atque Carminibus venit. Horat.
public edicts, to transgress laws, to contemn magistracy, to confound
and disturb good order? Good order forbids, that for pretense of any
necessity whatsoever, cause or reason, one man presume to break into another
bounds, yea and Divinity teaches the same. God himself tieth men in all
things, in all necessities, unto certain and appointed ends. He ordained a
select number of Apostles and Disciples, and unto them only annexed the divine
work and calling of nations and people unto salvation, commanding all men upon
pain of damnation to seek out and follow that means wheresoever or howsoever
distant, and did not ordain the means confusedly in every person to wait
upon every private necessity. In like manner in a commonweal, laws and
policy ordain (preferring the common good before every Omne publicum co^modum
habet aliquid ex iniquo: quod in singulos peccatur, vtilitate publica
rependitur. Tacitus.
private ease and benefit) that every man have his distinct calling, unto
which all other men's necessity therein may and ought to repair. For if every
man might be of every calling, confusion of callings would in the end leave no
calling. Therefore every man's need or necessity is not sufficient to make every
one capable of giving supply needful thereto, but God, and nature, and law
have tied and allotted men to seek means, and those means confirmed to
certain set bounds and limits, that men may still in all things according to
the law of mortality, be ever in this life subject unto casualties, often for
their trial, sometime for their punishment, or else for a further decree and
secret purpose of the Divine providence, so and to such ends thus ordering.
Thus by clear truth ouershining the mists and clouds of false pretexts to the
contrary, it is manifest, that this fluctuation of these men between two
callings is offensive to God, scandalous unto religion and good men, and
injurious unto commonweales, and but presumption borrowing the face of
Divinity. What encouragement their example has given unto drones and idle
persons, abounding by their example infinitely in the same wrong, he has no
eyes that does not consider. Their many, ordinary, rash, ignorant and
unskillful errors and commissions against the health and life of many, besides
their forenamed omissions, intrusions, procrastinations, and neglects of one
calling by another, I could by many too true instances confirm, but for
reverence of the callings I spare the men. I will only give two known
instances, wherein (as in a glass) men may view the diverse faces of many more
of the like sort. Historia.
A gentleman in Bedfordshire not long since was suddenly surprised by a
continual fever, accompanied with a general lassitude and weariness of the
whole body, and together with heat and burning, delirations and lightness of
brain. The habit of his body and his flesh were musculous and well liking,
the season warm, his age firm, and constitution sanguin^, his pulse high,
full, large, and in the vehemence and strength of motion manifest even unto the
beholders eye. A Parson or Vicar coming unto him, makes many fears and
seeming-graue discourses of the danger and imminence of a In principio morbi,
firmis viribus, habitu pulchro, exinanitione nulla, plenitudinis and
suffocationis pericula non sine ratione saepe obuia fiunt, quo tempore and modo
si marasmus coutingeret, prodigiosum plane foret. Spectatum admissi risum
teneatis?
Marasme, and from this supposed grand peril stoutly withstandeth the needful
use of due phlebotomie. The allies and friends of the patient observing the
daily decrease of hope and health, diligently enquire after another Physician,
and by hap found me where then employed. When I came unto the patient, the
Parson entertaineth us with confident discourses and disputes concerning a
Marasme, whom when I found after long patience and calm conference in the
presence and hearing of diverse worthy knights and gentlemen still endlesly and
reasonalesly Marasmum Trallianus li. 12 describit, in quo humiditas
substantialis in totu^ consumpta fuerit aut torrefacta, vel (...)* Quod in
corpore (...) and succulento nunquam quisquam praeterea inuenerit. (...).
inquit Galenus de Bon^habit.
vain, and yet possessed with an in^incible spirit of open and obstinate
contradiction, I in the end with their common consents contemned and rejected
him. The patient I found free from any particular which might inhibite Vires,
habitus, aetas intrepid^ ferunt, morbus, calor sitis, deliria, plethora
exigunt, anni tempus, constitutio aegri annunt.
phlebotomie, and manifestly saw the danger of the delay thereof, (both which
may appear by the description of his estate) and therefore seeing the
indication so plain, and the necessity so urgent, contrary to the babbling
opposition and caus^esse predication of needless danger, I caused him to
bleed; whereupon within few hours after, besides immediate alleuiation, nature
Natura vel vis quae i^ potentijs naturalibus aliena excernit, vehementius
operans magnum and violentum arteriarum efficit motum, appetens illa quae
molesta sunt expellere, atque ita profluuium sanguinis facit. Galen. in aph.
21. lib. 7. Hipp.
seconding the work, expelled at his nose diverse quantities of blood at
several times; and thus was Leuata quae corpus nostrum regit natura
exonerata^ue eo quo velut sarcina premitur, haud aegre quod reliquu^ est vincet
and expellet. Galen. de Meth. Med lib. 11.
enabled to perform her Crisis, being before detained by the oppression of the
former quantity of blood, whereunto her strength was not equal. The life of
man unto God and men is dear and precious, yet behold how presumptuously
glorious ignorance, and the lawless breach of the due lists of distinct and
proper callings, does licentiously hazard the utmost price and date thereof.
And how likely may it seem, that the memory of this wrong had been in the
same grave buried, if it had not been prevented, and by the prevention solely
observed. I will now annexe another example of secret betwitching flattery by
close whispering of the sick, ordinarily practiced by these kind of men, unto
the unobserved and stolen perdition of many. Anno 1611. a gentleman in this
manner falls sick. He was suddenly surprised by a continual fever, with
burning, thirst, troublesome heat in the soles of the feet, and palms of the
hands, frequent delirations and perturbations of the mind, fullness of the
stomach, loathing, painful distentions and ructuations, dryness and
yeallownesse of the tongue, bitterness and heat of the mouth, pains about
the short ribs, loins, back and shoulders, ill sleeps and confused dreams.
There entertained these accidents the usual fullness of his body unto the
common outward view, and accompanied a pulse swift, vehement and large, an
urine high colored, red, and thick: al which many witnesses of understanding
confirm. According unto the former indication, the patient was twice let
Maxima remedia continuarum febrium haec duo sunt Detractio sanguinis and potio
frigida, Gal. lib. 9. de Meth. Med h Saluberrimu^ autem est febribus venam
incidere, non continentibus modo sed etiam alijs omnibus quas purtrelcens humor
concitanerit. Gal. lib. 11. de Meth. Med. Ideo missus est sanguis ex hepatica
ad sanguinis hepatis^ue refrigerium and ventilationem, e mediana etia^ ad
minuendam plenitudinem.
blood, the quantity lost the first time, coming short the second time, not
exceeding ten ounces, as the Surgeon does witness. He was once Si ad os
ventriculi materia febrilis quae putruerit sua sponte impetum faciat, per
vomitum expellatur. Galen. de Meth. Med. lib 11.
vomited, by due respites twice Bilis abundantia and turgescentia manifesta hoc
exigebat, secundum intentionem Hippocrat. Aphoris. 22. lib. 1. and aph. 10.
lib. 4. Curandae autem non sunt omnes febres eodem tenore, nec eae quae sunt
sine accidentibus ac illae quae cum accidentibus tractandae sunt, vt testatur
Gal. de Art curat. ad Gla^conem lib. 1. In alijs igitur eadem remedia
iteranda, in alijs non omnino vsurpanda.
purged with good effect and alleuiation, often by glisters In febribus Galenus
saepe injicit mulsam per clysterem fi aliuus sponte non ducitur* vide de
Method. Med. lib. 11. and lib. 9. de art curat. ad Glaucon.
gently moved, his diet prescribed, cooling, opening, and altering the evil
quality of humors. After these things done, within few days the urine in
color, substance and residence manifests Quippe misso in febribus in initio
sanguine non solum pauperibus sed diuitumetia seruis, plurimis quidem quinto
post, aliquibus septimo Crisis contigit. Galen. de Meth. Med. lib. 11.
concoction, and therewith follow some disquiets and anxieties, not Vigilant
aegri magna ex part grauiter se habent and febriunt vehementius, quanto
propius crisim accedu^t. Gal. in aph. 71. lib. 4. Hippoc. b (...), etc. Circa
initia and ^ines omnia imbecilliora, circa statum omnia fortiora. Hipp. aph.
30. and 29. lib. 2.
vnhopeful forerunners of the approach of the expected Crisis of the disease, by
the urine so Si velociter morbus moueatur, etiam coloris and substantiae vrinae
mutatio s^nt sufficientia signa futurae Crisis. Gal. in Aph. 71. lib 4. Hipp.
fairly promised. In this fair hope (though by unbelief of sense denied) a
Parson-Physition led by a secret ambition of stealing the praise of such a
cure, (if fortune might happily favor the patient with ease, and himself
therein with the opinion of the merit (as was very likely) in this hope taking
opportunity of the patients impatience, he whispereth unto him the
excellencies of Aurum potabile, far beyond all other remedies. After the
patient had from him received it, within short time good hap gave ease. Ease
being gained, begets in the patient an ever after incorrigible consultation
with his own sense, and now measuring his good by his ease, and settling in his
thoughts an assurance of his recourie, he studiously and continually defameth
his Physician, and with evil clamours fills all corners of the country, as
far as his agents, his own tongue or credit could extend. In this interim
likewise he reiects the former begun method of discreet euacuations and
alterations of the offensive humors of his body, and in steed thereof he
cherishes and cheareth up himself with daily magnifying and worshipping Aurum
potabile as the God and sole author of his supposed recovery. In this mean
season and intermission of former courses, the forward signs of fair
concoction, so hopefully before appearing diverse days together, now retire and
vanish, and painful swellings fall into Sic lib. 11. Galen. de Meth* Medendi,
Diuites qui propter delicias debita praetermisere remedia, phlegmonas
contrahunt vel in iecinore, vel in ventriculo, vel in aliquo alio viscere.
his legs and nether parts: and then compelled he sends for other learned
Physicians, but uses them by uncertain fits, as his own conceit induced, and
with a reservation of his sole happiness and best security in Aurum potabile.
To conclude, he escaped the present perils of the former sharp accidents, but
Qu^cunque morbi imperfecte iudicati sunt, deinde seruantur in seque^tium
iudicatoriorum dierum aliquem vsque ad 40. diem, no^ simpliciteracuti sed acuti
ex transmutatione vel decidentia nominantur. Gal. in aph 23. lib. 2. Hipp.
continued lingringly and languishingly sick from about the middle of March,
unto the the latter end of Quadragesimus diesprimus est morborum diutinoru^,
quicunque hunc transcendunt ad septenarij rationem habent Crisim, non
septenarij quoad dies, sed quoad menses, deinde annos. Gal. aph. 28. l* 3. Hip.
August next following. About that time he first began to find some
reasonable satisfaction in ease, and the recovery of some better strength, but
a secret remainder or impression of the former delirations continued, and some
suspicious signs of a Scorbut seemed to increase, which before likewise did
obscurely show. Beside the shameful wrong unto Physicians and patients, and
the injury of Arts and truth it self, in men that are professors of divine
and holy callings, behold the usual insidiation of Death and Danger, by the
spirit of flattering intrusion and secret lenocination of false hopes and ease
possessing the distraction of the distressed sick. What man learned and
judicious cannot determine, whether this dangerous long continuance of this
Gentleman's disease may not justly and in good reason be ascribed unto the
sudden Si integre, si plene, si perfect Natura iudicat, nihil noui moliatur
Medicus: si vero in quopiam deficia^ Natura, quod deficit debet Medicus
adiungere. Gal. in Aph. 20. lib. 1. Hippoc.
discontinuance of his first means, and to the neglect thereby of perfecting
the hopeful Crisis so fairly Signum concoctionis nullum vnquam prauum fuit,
^ed omnia optima semper, and tanto citius aegrum conualiturum o^tendunt quanto
citius apparu^^int. Gal. in aph. 12. lib. 1. Hippoc.
promised and intended? Or unto who^ does it not appear palpably gross, that
Aurum potabile can contain in it self any such golden sufficiency, as soly to
remove or prevent all the former accidents in this gentleman described, which
God, and nature, and reason have ever denied unto any one particular or
special medicine whatsoever? Let al men then unto whom God has given ears or
eyes, advisedly behold and consider how dangerous and injurious these ordinary
and ignorant intrusions in reason prove unto poor patients, who thus beguiled
with opinion, and blinded with deceitful hope, or ^ase, or sense, ioyously often
give thanks for their own hurt, magnify the authors, and not seldom perish
in the praise of their own harms. The unlimited expatiation of so foul wrongs,
do challenge all men, not only the learned, but all honest or ingenuous, unto
the vendication of art and truth from oppression by so gross and harmfull
ignorance. These examples are sufficient to admonish the offenders of their
impieti^, and others of their own peril in trusting unto them.

CHAP. III.
Of Astrologers, Ephemerides-masters.
NOw concerning Astrologers-practisers: Astrologi, (...).
There is a sort of men, who beside and beyond that is sufficient and
profitable unto Physic, use in Astronomicall science, (having unadvisedly,
prodigally or unrecoverably spent too much pains and time in the too curious
or superstitious, or supposed excellence in the vanities of Astrology, or else
finding by their other defects in themselves the want and insufficiency of
knowledge more proper and essential unto a Physician) do therefore (which now
is all the hopeful remainder of their time so far spent) fish for a name and
fame amongst the common and easy deceived vulgars, with the glorious baits of
prodigious precepts. Thus they hook simple credulity to worship and admire
their lying revelations, prescribe fortunes and fates, and limit the days and
dates of men's lives and deaths unto the dark points of their Kale^dars.
Neither do they blush to promise and profess that they take counsel of heaven
(when heaven Vide Isai. cap. 47. verse. 13. Stent and saluent te Augures coeli
qui contemplabantur sydera and supputabant menses, vt ex ijs annuntiarent
ventura tibi. Ecce facti sunt quasi stipula and ignis combussit eos, Deutero^.
cap. 18 Nec inueniatur in te qui ariolos sciscitetur, aut obseruet somnia, aut
auguria, aut pythones co^sulat. Omnia enim haec abominatur Dom. and propter
istiusmodi scelera deleuit eos in introitu tuo.
denies them) thereby gaining to themselves glory in the slander of heaven
and the scandal of truth. Thus usually they pervert the right use of
Astronomicall science unto deceit, imposture, and iugling merchandising for
unjust and injurious gain, and persuade the voluntary motions and arbitrary
actions of men, their consequences and issues to be driven by the heavens unto
ends and destinies there enrolled, and themselves (as if the only true sons of
heaven forsooth) there only admitted to read and view. Indeed the will of man
has not power in it self to will or move it self to any good pleasing unto
God, or saving to it self, but by the special grace of God, drawing, guiding,
or moving his will thereto, yet does the general concordant consent of most
Divines grant as vncontrouersed, a liberty and freedom of man's will unto any
Deus nos docet, irradiat, assistit, etiam suo modo trahit vt Saulem. Quod autem
in nobis sit nullum internum principium potestatis, eorum est vociferari qui
nihil intelligunt. Scalig. de subt.
moral, natural, civil or politic good. And in these kinds all Divines
both ancient and neotericke, have both acknowledged and admired the worthy
examples of virtue in Philosophers and heathen men, whose infinite studious
pains and voluntary laborious industry in atchieuing so many incomparable
excellencies, no ingratitude can deny, or without honor mention. Virtue is
not (...). Virtus morali^ est habitus electiuus. Aristot. Eth. 6.
forced, but free in whom it is, and therefore not to be ascribed unto the
heavens or any other outward (...). Arist. Eth. 3.
cause, but unto the free and voluntary agent of it self, and by the own
inward power in it self, moving it self thereto, from his own (...), etc. Ea
quae secundum virtutem aguntur, non just aguntur si sint iusta, sed si agens,
sci^ns, eligens^ue propter virtutem ipsam agat, animo^ue stabili and firmo
agat. Aristot. Eth. 2.
purpose therein. This all men, Divinity, Philosophy, reason, experience,
with an unity of consent confirm. If then a man's action be his own, if the
end his own, the effectual prosecution thereof unto the end his own; if God
himself have granted this privilege unto all men, as indifferent and common
unto all whom he has created under the condition of men, what creature shall
intercept the Post Adamae lapsum (inquit Caluinus) supernaturalia dona in
homine extincta sunt nisi quatenus per regenerationem recuperentur* at
intelligentia, iudicium, cum voluntate, quia inseparabilia ab hominis natura,
omnino perire non potu^re, Calvin. instit. lib. 2.
endowment of the Creator? what shall take the honor of this gift from him
that gave it, or the right thereof from him that thence receives it? The
heavens cannot so blaspheme their Maker, though men thus dare belie the heuens
to justify their own impiety. All things depend upon the providence of God,
and from him and by him are ordained second causes, which indeed in nature have
their necessity, but in the will of man have a power only to move or incline,
and not to force. This is the reason, that though man by his stars be borne
to infinite miseries, diversely moving and affecting him continually, from the
earth, from the sea, from the land, from the air, from the fire, from his own
affections, infirmities, diseases, from diverse haps and casualties; yet unto
him that knows the free gift of his Maker, and the good that he has done for
him, none of all these things by any necessity in themselves thereto, can touch
him or once Astrologoru^ decreta non sunt praetoria. Ptolomaeus.
come near him. For whether calamity approach from above or below, from
malign constellation, or other inferior or terrestrial encumbrances, man by
his spirit of understanding, by prudence and circumspect providence, has a
large immunitie, whereby he may and often does avoid these violences, and delude
their forces. The wise man (says Solomon) foreseeth the plague, and hides
himself, neither can any evil befall the wise, which he may not and does not,
either being to come by provident foresight prevent, or present by careful
industry allay, or past by diligence redeem, no influence or destiny being
able to bring man's will and endeavor to an higher point then wisdom and
goodness. This is the reason that common calamities befall not all men alike,
yea rather to every one unlike. This is also the reason that many borne under
the same constellation, have different fortunes from each other, and far
unlike their like constellation: nay it is often seen, and cannot be denied,
that many men by their own industry have contradicted their stars, whereby
unfortunately marked in their natiuities, they have triumphed over the heavens
in the felicity of their own wisdom and virtue. Of this sort have been not
only one Socrates and the great Philosophers, but many common men Socratically
Sapiens assuescit futuris malis and quae alij diupatiendo leuia faciunt, hic
leuia facit diu cogitando.
disposed and endeavoring. Contrariwise also diverse borne under good stars
unto good destinies, in their growth have either ouerunne, or Si ingenia
primitius vtiliter salubriter^ue ficta sint, omne^ illam vim quae de facto
extrinsecus ingruit inoffensius tractabilius^ue transmittunt. Sin co^tra, licet
paruo aut nullo fatalis inco^modi conflictu vrgeantur, sua tamen leuitate and
voluntario impetu in assidua delicta and errores facile ruunt. Gellius.
come short of their destiny. For although the heavens do work by their
hidden power and influence, secret impressions, procliuities and inclinations,
as in all things under heaven, so in the constitutions and tempers of men in
their generation, conception and birth: yet are their effectual productions
thereof in men Secundae causae in natura quidem necessariae, in voluntate
inclinantes, non cogentes. Scal. de Subt.
themselves variously alterable according to education, inclination, occasion,
and circumstance, and therefore as touching the absolute power of the heavens
ever varying. There is no man that can so far Si homines nil sponte, nil motu
arbitra^io faciunt, non erunt (...) sed ludicra and ridenda (...). Gellius.
Noct. At.
deny himself a man, as to make doubt of free arbitrarie choice in himself to
do or not to do, to like or dislike, to do that he will, to refuse that he
nill. For if heavenly influences compel or force men's actions, and their wills
be led and not free, unjustly any man shall be unjust, neither can the laws of
God or men be just ordained against wilful (...) Non contingit quempiam ea
velle quae impossibilia sunt aliter fieri. Arist Eth. 6.
offenders: but God is just, and laws are righteous, and therefore men's actions
are their own, moved from an inward power and essence peculiar unto
themselves, and from an end and intention which is their own. Touching those
therefore that from the heavens promise to tell fortunes, to cast figures, to
turn Ephemerides for natiuities, for good haps, for ill haps, successes,
losses, fortunate, unfortunate events, he that has but common sense and
reason, and can think but worthily of himself, may Calliditas neque comprensa
neque percepta loquitur sed ambagiosa, inter falsa atque vera pedetentim quasi
per tenebras ingrediens and multa tenta^do incidit aliquando repent^ in
veritatem. Gellius.
easily discover their falsehood, imposture, deceit and cousenage, howsoever
sometimes events may countenance; for hoodwinked hap may sometimes light upon
truth, and craft working upon credulity, may make any truth of any falsehood.
Thus far briefly concerning the powers of the heavens over the minds and
wills of men, their voluntary actions, their consequences and issues. Now
concerning their virtue over the bodies and humors of the sick and diseased:
No man can deny the heavens as general Sunt enim superiora formae
conseruatrices inferiorum, quia causa causarum tuetur ea quae fecit. Scalig. de
Subtle.
and superior causes to have power over all things created under heaven, by
whose influence and radiation all things increase, grow, live, and are
conserved, and by whose recesse all things mourn, wither, fall and droupe.
This does witness the summer and the winter, and all other seasons, which the
heavens by their motion varying, bring unto all things vicissitudes, changes,
and alterations, and by their secret influence imperceptibly distill different
and contrary inclinations, tempers, and affections. Hence winter, summer,
spring, and autumn, breed their peculiar diseases. Evil and malign
constellations beget plagues, pestilences, and other epidemiall contagions,
which the air as the great mother of all things breathing does fruitfully
conceive, and plentifully bring forth. Unto what sight or sense has ever been
unknown, either the pride or splendour of the Sun, mounting in his glorious
altitude, or his eclipsed force and light somnesse opposed and abased? Who is
ignorant of the monthly metamorphosis of the Moon? What thing is or can be
insensible of the Cynosure, and the nipping frosts? Is not the glory of the
heavens over all, and are not his forces in all? Notwithstanding general
causes produce not particular effects, and the heavens are but general Pendent
nostratia haec a superioribus propter aequiuocam connexionem, non propter
vniuocam effection^m communionem. Scalig. de Subt.
causes, second causes, outward causes, remote causes, mediate causes, unto
those things which immediately fall out in the bodies of men from inward causes
contained within themselves, and therefore soly having by their inseparate
nearenesse an inevitable and vnauoided necessity in themselves. The inward
causes of diseases are the humors of the body, which can never be separated
from the body, because in them consists the life and being of the body.
Therefore when either they corrupted from their kind, or offending in quality
or quantity, raise diseases in the body, how or by what means can the body
choose but be therewith affected, except it could leave it self? From any
outward cause which is without, and of another divided and separate nature,
separation does free from immediate necessity or consecution. Since then the
heavens are outward causes, and removed causes, and therefore never necessarily
or simply of themselves affect, and the inward causes of diseases stick
nearer, and so closely touch in their effects, that they suffer no
interposition, it is manifest, that the heavens have no certain or absolute h
power in the diseased, Communes causae communes habent effectus, nec vires aut
actiones particularium flectunt simpliciter aut primario. Causas vero
immediatas necessario sequuntur effectus.
nor can match or equal the immediate force appropriate only unto the
disease. The heavens indeed do often and much also prevail in raising, allaying,
increasing, diminishing, enraging and calming the inward causes, but ever by a
proportion, either with the temper and constitution of the sick, or the
humors of their bodies, whether originally bred, or after by time acquired.
Saturn is therefore said a great Lord over melancholy bodies, in like manner
the Moon over phlegmatic, Jupiter and the Sun in sanguine, Mars in
choleric, (whether in their several reuolutions apart, or their conjunctions
and combinations) and according to the greater or less proportion of their
peculiar humors in the body, and the dispositions of the particular parts of
the body, they more or less exercise their rule. Therefore also according as
means more or less accrue to lessen or increase their proportion: so more or
less manifestly are their effects and operations weakened or quickened. If the
wise Physician foreseeing the evil approach of a malign and Saturnine aspect,
by discreet prevention abate and withdraw the melancholy humor from the body,
Saturn shall thereby want a part of his Causae efficientis opus augetur eius
aucta substantia. Gal. in aph. 5. lib. 6. Hipp.
proportion, and as the greater abundance thereof does necessarily more advance
and promote his efficacy, so the exiguitie there of must needs abridge and
obscure it. The like may be said of all other aspects in their several
destined and appropriate humors. For the constellation of it self simply
Astra vim non necessitatem inferunt. Ptolomaeus.
cannot effect anything, nor can build or ruin any being, which first has not
the seminary and prime foundation thereof in it self, both as his subject and
his means. And this is the true cause, that the body either by Physic reduced
to just temper in it self, or to an equal contemper of all the humors, or of
it self strong and healthful, in the most different constellations does
commonly find indifference of alteration. And this is the reason that many in
the most Saturnine and deadly constellations live, as the contrary also cause
that many in the most fair and Iouiall die. From this vncontrouersed ground,
Astronomers generally themselves advise and prescribe means, both to prevent
the harms of influences to come, and also to redress them present, and give
unto the Physicians hand powers and remedies to command, countermand, delay,
allay, and abolish. And from this reason P^olomy himself, the Prince and
father of Astrology, in unfortunate aspects does advise to consult the prudent
Physician, and by his counsel and help to decline the malign constellation.
For right remedies rightly administered unto the diseases and their inward
causes, by the decree of God and Nature necessarily oppugn, allay, prevent and
expel diseases, and therefore are not prescribed unto outward Externis causis
nihil praescribitur, summa tamen diligentia perquirendae praecognoscendae^ue
sunt vt deducant in interiorum cognitionem Gal. de Meth. Med.
causes, but only unto the inward. And although the outward cause happily first
raised or impo^ed the disease, yet in the cure is not that cause so much
respected, but his effect (which is the disease it self) or the inward causes
by which, and through which, the outward had admission to their effects. If the
inward causes (the antecedent and the immediate) be removed, it is a miracle,
and a thing supernatural, that there should remain his Cum efficientibus
causis necesse est accidentia tolli Gal. in aph. 22. lib. 2.
effect, the disease; but the outward cause may be removed, and yet his Si in
vna requalibet leui causae ratio claudicet, simul in reliquis vbi videtur
abundare merito titubabit, vbique ^nim sibi constare debet causa si quide^ vera
est. Gal. de dign. Pulsib.
effect therein not follow him. Thus corrupt and hot constitutions of the
air, and constellations from the heaven, breed pestilent and hot diseases in
the body, and the diseases still remain* when the constitutions or
constellations are changed; but when the pestilent and hot humors, and
dispositions within the body, which are inward causes, are thoroughly removed,
there can no such effects continue, be farther fed, or maintained. The outward
cause may also be continually present, yet particular subjects or bodies, feel
or Qui quidem ex Solis incendio feb^^citat ab agentis causae caliditate affici
Natura aptus est. Gal de dis^. febr.
participate no effect: but if the inward cause grow in quantity or quality
unto the excess, it is impossible it should not in the same moment produce the
like sensible effect. For example, in some heavenly conjunctions or
combinations there may arise an hydropicall constellation, though many
particulars be nothing therewith affected, or thereto thereby inclined; but if
hydropical humors or causes abound within the body, it is impossible they
should there be without not only the imminence, but present co^secutio^ of the
dropsy. By these examples it is not obscure, that the heavens are a foreign
invasion, and therefore more easily admit Causa nulla sieve aetherea, sieve
syderalis, ^^ne patientis aptitudine agete potest. Galen de di^^. Febr. 1.
interception, and that diseases are ever to be suspected, because ever
present. Where there is an vnproportioned congruitie or susceptibilitie in the
body and humors with the heavenly inclination, there the heavens have no edge.
Where the disease has once taken possession in the body, the necessity of his
effect is absolute and Causas immediatas necessario sequuntur effectus. Ideoque
effectus immediatus est signum (...) suae causae.
unavoidable, Quoties vehementiores morbi premunt aut instabunt, vt in
suffocante pleuritide, angina, sanguinis immoderato fluore, extrema vasorum
plenitudine, in alijs denique morbis qui nimiu^ praecipites sunt, nullus
astrorum delectus haben^dus aut cura. Fernel. de hora Phlebot.
howsoever the heavens or any outward causes are disposed. He therefore that
finding the inward disposition, shall for the superstitious fear of stars
delay with speed to seek present remedy, or in hope of foreign supply from
constellations, neglect certain rescue more near hand, is a fool, a mad man,
or worse then either. The first is continually acted by common simple deluded
people, the other patronaged by obstinate defendants of vain paradoxes; and
the third by our impudent Astrologers prostitute for gain. I commend not
senseless morositie in the perverse reiection of true Astronomy, so far as
is commodious for Physic use (which reason it self, experience and all the
Ancients worthily extol) but with reason and authority, I dislike
superstitious and needless Optimi quique astronomi iudiciaria^ astronomiam
tanquam vnam and futile^ and nullo fundamento subnixa^ postqua^ multu^. diu^ue
versaru^t, repudiarunt. Mornae. de verit. relig.
curositie in the ouer-religious esteem thereof. He that observes the wind,
shall not sow: and he that regards the clouds, shall not reap, says
Solomon, Ecclesiastes 114. And I cannot but detest the shameless daily
cousenage and imposture, heathenishly practiced by many, under the color,
pretext and false In praeclarissima art Astronomica curiosa vanitate in
obseruationes veras se implica^te, superstitiosa and aliena inculcata
reperiu^tur. Camer. de divine.
shadows of true Astronomy. An example here of may not impertinently for
better illustration be here proposed. A gentleman of Northampotonshire diseased
by an immedicable ulcer of the reins, was moved by his friends (after my
despair of his recovery signified privately unto them) to call the advice of a
famous Ephemerides-master, who coming unto him, and not knowing (and therefore
not considering his disease) from the counsel table of his Ephemerides
pronounced, that if the patient suruiued 3. or 4. days (which we must suppose
were of an il aspect) until the next ensuing Tuesday (which was, it seems, a
fairer influence) he made no doubt of his recovery and life. But he suruiued
three months or thereabout, and in the interim neither did the aforesaid ill
disposed stars any apparent hurt, nor the well disposed any eminent good: but
after the forenamed three months, the stars brake promise, the disease kept
touch, the gentleman Astrologi dum coeli scrutantur plagas, quod ante pedes
est, nemo eorum spectat. Cicero.
died. The reason in the disease was manifest: without a new creation or
generation, a part in it self radically, and in the whole substance perished,
can never be restored. The disease therefore could not lie, nor all the heavens
could perform either a new generation (because the patient could not again
enter into his mothers womb) nor a new creation (because the world could not
again return into the old chaos.) How vainly then did here the Astrologer
gape and gaze after uncertain stars, when the true knowledge of the disease,
the cause and nature thereof (wherein consists an infallible ground)
manifested the certain issue? How foolishly and ignorantly (or shamelesly and
impudently) did Astrologicall simple folly or intolerable imposture, either
cunningly and wittingly seem to look aloft for that which lay near hand
below, or simply stumble over so plain truth, and tumble into so ridiculous
and gross error? And thus it is apparent, both how vncertaintly Astrologers
(...). Leonid. Transtulit sic quidam: Vatum sidereos quisquis scrutare meatus
Dispereas, mendax non nisi vana sonas. Obstetrix tibi stultitia est, audacia
matter. O miser and proprij non benegnare probri.
fable, and how certainly diseases do not lie: and who comparing the one with
the other, cannot see, in which truth has more evidence, and trust security?
There is a sober and Syderum occasus and ortus cognoscendi a Medico artis
perito, ratione morboru^ vulgariu^ and epidemiorum, quia hi temporum
mutationae, tempestatum^ue vi suscitantur. Hippocr. lib de Loc. aere, aqu. lib.
Epid. lib. aph. 3.
modest use of Astronomy, In vnaquaque regione vbi obire artem Medicam
instituimus, cuiusque syderis emersus occasus^ue perspexisse necessarium est,
quia tempora ab his anni circunscribuntur. Galen. in lib. 1. Hippocr. de Morb.
vulg.
either for general prediction, or particular accommodation unto particular
ends: both these (thereby putting a difference between the honest use and
false abuse thereof) Ptolomey himself has bounded within that which is either
manifestly natural and according to (...).
nature, or in reason (...).
possible or contingent. Wha^ with these conditions Astronomy does afford
unto the benefit of the sick, is to be esteemed and guided by the prudent
Physician, according to particular necessities, circumstances and
considerations, as either the heavenly inclinations shall seem (...), etc.
Hippoc.
proportioned unto them, or they liable to those general and common causes.
Whatsoever does wander further, or is extended unto other uses then these, is
not ingenuous nor proper unto a Physician, but is abuse of time, himself and
others, trifling vain idleness, foul and unlearned falsehood.

CHAP. IIII.
Of Coniectors by urine.
AS the heavens themselves are not free from the insinuation of imposture and
deceit (thus cunningly does evil wind it self into the likeness and shape
of goodness: (...):
) so is nothing almost under the heaven created, which is not made an
instrument, a visar and ba^d unto adulterate seeming, lying and cousenage. The
air, the fire, the waters, the foul, the fish, and infinite other Hinc (...),
etc.
creatures, yea their definite and single Hinc Extispicia (...), Magia (...),
etc.
parts apart, are all made prodigious enchantments* and snares of ignorant
minds, begetting faith unto falsehood, and trust and credit unto untruth. As Art
upon true and proved grounds does promise according to good reason fair
likelihood, so imposture upon wondered and unknown conclusions professes
assurance in falsehood, and certainty in impossibility; which while wise men
contemn, credulous fools admire and follow. Amongst many other, the
inspection of the urine is in this kind too commonly most palpably abused by
many that carry the name and badge of learning. It is a common practice in
these days, by a colorable deriuation of supposed cunning from the urine, to
foretell casualties, and the ordinary events of life, conceptions of women
with child, and definite distinctions of the male and female in the womb;
which while impudence does gloriously set forth, the common simplicity does
worship and reuere. It is unknown to none learned, that the urine is truly of
it self and properly Vrina primo and per se vere and proprie antecedentes
morbo rum causas, affectus partium naturalium secundaque regionis indicat, tum
venarum, renum and vesicae. Galen. in Prorrhet. Hipp. comment. 2.
indication of no other immediate dispositions, but such as are of the veins
and liver, the blood and humors; the antecedent causes of diseases, and the
natural faculty giving only Coniunctas morborum causas extra venas, affectus
tertiae regionis, pulmonis, cerebri ex accidente and incerto vrina monstat:
affectus hepatis, venarum, renum manifest and sine dubio demonstrat. Galen. in
Prorrh. Hipp.
conjecture at the diseases of other parts by consequent, by the knowledge of
the Plethorae scilicet and Cacochymiae a quibus omnes morbi primum fiunt,
deinde fouentur.
common and antecedent causes of all diseases. Erroneously therefore the common
sort imagine, that in the urine is contained the ample understanding of all
things necessary to inform a Physician, and from thence common expectation
does generally deceive it self in the proof of a Physician by his judgment
of the urine. Unto the satisfaction of a Physicians knowledge, are many ways
and helps besides the urine, as material, and in many cases of more special
moment, necessity and use. In the pulse are properly and soly apparent
manifold medications, which in the urine Lynceus himself could never see. This
is the cause that many even unto the last moment of a languishing life,
continue in their urine not only no shadow of danger, but fair and flattering
forms of lying safely, the pulse Prognostica quibus praeuidemus fitne
moriturus aeger, aut conualiturus, certa sumuntur a pulsu, qui vitalium and
spiritualium partium affectus arteriae pulsatione monstrat euidenter. Galen.
lib. de decret. Hipp. and Plat.
only by it selfe-forewarning the mischief. The animal faculty, the
affections of the third region, and habit of the body, and many other
particular parts have their peculiar Omnes quae nutriuntur particulae
excrementum aliquod creant, vtique non negamus. Galen lib. 1. de not. facult.
excretions, which only keep the property of their indication unto
themselves, communicating no part Sic sudor succorum qui in toto corpore
abundant nota est: vrina vero succorum qui in vasis. Gal. de sanit. tuend. lib.
4.
unto the urine: neither is the judgment by the urine ever infallible, or Nos
autem ingenu^ fatemur fere totam partem semeioticen in vrinis esse
coniecturalem, sed coniecturae in multis sunt artificiales, quae proxime
accedunt ad veritatem. Rondelet. de vrin.
not deceiuable, even there where it is properly and soly allowed chief
esteem, diverse impediments both positiuely and priuatiuely forestalling his
right estimate: positiuely either by assumption of diverse meats, Alteratur
saepissime vrina nouissime sumptis Rhabarbaro, Terebinthina, Violis, etc.
drinks or Vrina immoderato potu facile diluitur, and aliena permistione
conspergitur. Fernel. de vrin.
medicines, or when diverse diseases In eodem corpore saepe plutes occurrunt
morbi, compositi, impliciti, connexi, congeneres, degeneres, contrarij, varij.
concurring in the body, together send down their several or contrary
recrements into the urine, and thereby confound the true judgment of any of
them therein; or thereby priuatiuely, when either by stoppages (which diversely
happen in the tortuous windings and turnings between the liver and the veins,
and conduits thence descending unto the reins and bladder) the substance,
color and contents of the urine are Hoc indicatur in (...), in valida renum
obstructione a grumo, calculo, lenta and viscida pituita, in generali etiam
obstructione a crapula, ebrietate, plethora.
intercepted, and the thin aquositie often only issues by so straight a
percolation, as can carry no sign, no sight or show of the natural estate of
the urine in it self; or else when the natural heat withdraws it self
unto some interior Hinc in apostematibus internis vrinae apparent saepe tenues
and vix coloratae.
intention of nature within. When therefore the urine descends in his own
substance, quantity, quality and contents, without impediment or hinderance,
it is a certain, proper and true demonstration of the true affects of the
liver, veins, the second concoction, and of the diseases of those parts which
in his descent it washes, and gives unto the wise Physician an uninterrupted
certain judgment of it self, as when it descends in borrowed In aegris
saepe transmittitur aliena materia ad vrinas tum critice tum symptomatice, in
sanis per proportionem correspondet bibitis and assumptis vrina. Actuar. lib.
1. de iud. vrin.
liquor and colors, it reports rather his rubs and interception by the way.
Hence the learned Physician, either by the first immediately instructs
himself to a direct opposition unto the discovered disease; or by the other,
finding the impediment that hindered the right understanding and discovery, he
thereby informs himself to remove that impediment, or else finding it
thereby vndiscouerable, searches it by another disquisition or inuestigation,
by another way or method, until he have attained the right end of a true
Physician, which is the prudent rescue of the distressed life and health, and
not the false trumpe of his own undeserved praise, promoting unworthiness to
gain and lucre. Thus he neither deceives himself with vain expectation, nor
others with lying profession, but diversely in both makes a prudent and good
use of both, according to the indication, whether certain and vndeceiuing, or
doubting and ambiguous. And as the ends are diverse, of those that view the
urine to conjure up wonders, and those that esteem the urine to detect the
disease for the good of the diseased: so are their understandings differing,
the one truly Art^s improbae apparens bonum, verae verum bonum comparant. Galen.
directed by reason and judgment, the other by nimblenesse of cousenage and
circumuention of simplicity and ignorance; whereof the chief use is not the
benefit of the sick, but the color of fraud and comodity by deceit. Touching
the oracles of Fortune pretended in the urine, and their floating favors in so
low an ebb, those that too commonly in their own experience find good drink
to steal their wit out of their brain, may happily imagine it thence descended
into the urine. I leave them there to seek it, that want it so much, and
deserve it so little. The mention is unworthy mention. Concerning the looking
of unborn babes in an vrinarie glass, and the making of old fools in love
with their own reflection: to unmask the common illusion in this kind, I will
briefly point unto the discovery of the folly, whereinto entering their serious
cogitation and due recognition, they may more amply after exercise and satisfy
themselves, whom their own fatal stupidity does not detain, or resolute
obstinacy preoccupate. The conceptions of women, together with the accidents
accompanying the same, do necessarily bring forth general alterations unto the
whole body, partly by the consequent stoppages of the body, and partly by
distracting the natural heat and spirits from other parts unto that new
intention, whereby is added either quantity or quality, or both unto the
blood and humors, and from thence the urine receiving different tincture and
substance does manifestly report the ods. Yet for that this sudden productio^
of change in the body issues from conceptio^ only by accident, thereof being
truly and immediately no cause it self, but an occasion only moving other
causes, as commonly or more commonly moved, both by diverse kind of other
obstructio^s beside, and also by other distractions of the natural heat and
spirits, by critical intentions, concoctions, and maturations of diseases;
therefore is the confused alteration of the urine found upon conceptio^
indefinite, and can be no special note of co^ception. This is also further
manifested by the alterations and effects themselves following conception,
which not only in differing bodies, but in the very same, are seldom the
same, but commonly far unlike, yea and often contrary at one time from
themselves at another. This women themselves in their own experience must
needs witness, seldom observing the changes of bodies after co^ception in all
alike, and often each in themselves finding the particular manners of their own
alteration far discrepant. This their often deceit in themselves, mistaking,
and uncertainty in themselves commonly does testify, sometimes suspecting
themselves with child when they prove diseased, sometimes doubting diseases
being only with child. Since then conception is neither in it self a sole, nor
a separate cause, nor any true immediate cause of the alterations of the body
following thereupon, but only the occasion moving other causes, and those
causes are as indifferently also moved by many other occasions besides unto the
same effects, their generality does discharge their propriety in this
particular, and the common indication in the urine any special signification
proper unto conception alone. This demonstratiuely proves the uncertainty of
the signs of conception that are common with other in the urine. Now concerning
the small certainty of the signs that are thereto supposed peculiar: the
inward dispositions and affections of inward parts, which by the outward sense
cannot be deprehended, are by three Partem intetiorem aff^cta^ ^^dicant Actio
^ae^a, Dolor vel ametria in ex^^etis aut retenris.
ways or means soly to be detected. The first is the action or function
proper Ea pars per se aut per consenlum laborat cu^us functio est laesa.
and ininherent in the party. The second is the proper Exc^eta naturalis
oeconomiae fideles nuntij.
excretions proceeding fromht he party. The third is a distinct feeling or Vbi
dolor ibi morbus.
pain in the part. The proper functions of any part can never be disioyned
from the part, and therefore appear not in the urine. Pain or other sense and
feeling are ever inseperable companions with their patient parts, whereof the
urine having no sense, can have no part, and therefore therein also is
vnsignificant. It only then remains, that the affection and conception of
the womb soly does discover it self by the determinate excretions thereto
peculiar. The peculiar excretio^s of any part do bring testimony unto the truth
of their indicatio^, either by the Quicquid e corpore excernitur vel est toto
genere praeter naturam, vel de substantia partis affectae, vel parti adnatum,
vel coctionis excrementum.
co^comitance of part of the substance of the part, or of part of some
substance either naturally, orby some il disposition adherent to the part, or
of the ordinary recrements of concoctions, or other preparatio^s, or operations
of nature in the part. Whether excretions in all these kinds proceed from the
womb, and how and with what differences and distinction, it is not here
necessary to determine. It is sufficient that the proper indicatio^ of the
dispositio^s of that part must necessarily be derived from the excretions
thereto appropriate: which therefore proves the urine no right prognosticator of
any affection thereof issuing from other and different vessels. It may be
objected, that by the contiguity of the womb and bladder, and the near
termination of their extremities, the expulsive faculty of the seminary
vessels, moving sometimes with the vrinarie, may thereby mixing their
recrements connexe their indications. This is true, yet not always, but rarely
and seldom true, and therefore uncertainly happening does doubtfully promise or
signify. The expulsive motions and offices of the seminary parts are not so
ordinary, so frequent, so common, as the vrinarie, neither does their raritie
in their motion always then meet or consent with the urine, and sometimes
also meeting therewith, it gives notwithstanding impertinent indication unto
the inquisition of conception, other common Indican^ me^ses albi grauidarum qui
saepe in bonis habentur, rubri etiam qui saepissime per anastomosin venarum
exteriorum ceruicis vteri and crurales dicuntur fluidi sunt.
recrements after conception, no less or rather more descending then those
which are only consequents of conception. And thus is made apparent the
falsehood and deceit of the ordinary profession of the prediction of conception
by the inspection of urine, which also the most Veteres Graeci omnes omnino
praetermiserunt mentionem signorum conceptus in vrina. Mongius and Costaeus in
annot in tract. Auicen de vrinis.
ingenuous and judicious writers and authors from their own long proof and
experience have ever generally exploded as impious imposture. The true Artist
does promise nothing beyond that which reason does demo^strate, and art
habitually perform: the deceiuer by fair pollicitations bewitcheth simple
credulity, ridiculously to delight in his own wrong and gross collusion. It
is very worthy note and memory, that a great and learned clearke Cornelius
Agrippa, retracting his former wont therein, does ingenuously confess of his
affectation and circumuention of common admiration by his supposed magic and
Astrologicall skill, Vrinarum inspectione abuti ad praesentiendum an mulier
conceperit vel non, impostoru^ est, non medicorum, licet permulti nugas inid
genus cognitionis and cautiones scripserint. Ioannes ^ebon. de therap. puerp.
and it does well fit and settle instruction and satisfaction in this our
particular also, though of another kind I have been ( Ego quoque hanc ar^em a
parentibus puer imbibi, deinde non modicum temporis and laboris in ea amisi,
etc. Vide reliqua ex authore tractatu de Astrologia. Vide in marg. c. 3. p. 101.
says he) from my childhood by my parents carefully iustituted in Astrology,
and in riper age and understanding afterward spent therein no small time. At
length by long and certain proof I found it wholly compound and founded of
mere fictions, and toys of vain imaginations: wearied therefore and grieved
with my time and study so long and so idly spent, I labored to cast away the
irksome and unpleasing memory thereof out of my mind, and never in my
thoughts to entertain it. Vrinam de impraegnatione nil certi significare omnes
antiqui crediderunt, ideo de hac re nullas notas reliquerunt. Nam cum foetus
sit extra venas and de venoso genere tantum indicet vrina, non potest aliquid
certo indicare, nisi adiunctis alijs. Rondeletius de vrinis.
But the violent and forcible importunacie of great and mighty Potentates,
(who usually prevail to abuse great and worthy wits unto base arts and
offices) again compelled me upon the fame rock, and my own private profit
again enticed me to think it duty and honesty to make profitable use of
wilful folly, and with toys to please these that so much desired toys. The
same Apology for the exercise of vrinarie Praestigiaturae opinionem merito
referu^t, qui non ex speculatione medica, sed ex diuinandi quapiam art in
morbis praedicunt. Gal. lib. 10. de simp. Med. facultat. Historia.
divination, their own consciences unto themselves do make that use it, but
they loath the example, and truth is hateful because incommodious. It was
sometimes my hap to witness the free profession of a dying Physician unto
this point. He inhabited Northampton many years, was in nation Irish, in
manners homely, in learning of me diocrity, but in the auguration by urine of
conceptio^ was generally reputed excelling, and in a fortunatenesse therein often
posing some better learned. Three or four days before his death (expected and
known unto himself) while by his own earnest request then (as often before) I
was present, motion was made unto him that he would commend unto posterity
that skill by which he lived with many so much esteemed and admired. His
answer was free and ingenuous, to this effect: It is unworthy posterity,
unworthy the name of Art. I have long with the felicity of a good opinion
exercised it, and with tried certainty know it uncertainty, and certain
deceit. Simplicity is ever ready unwittingly to betray it self, and it is
easy to him (that is therein much and continually exercised) in common people
palpably to see their simple hearts, in their eyes, in their gesture, in their
countenances, and other circumstances, of themselves unobserved and
unconsidered. I have sometime by good hap been fortunate in my predictions by
urine, of conceptions, which because when it sometime happened, it seemed a
wonder; it therefore was ever largely transported many ways, and much busied
and employed common talk. I have proved therein an hundredth fold more often
and more commonly in mine own knowledge Temere, callide, and astute dicta
aliquando incidunt in veritatem. sed quae vera dicunt prae caeteris quae
me^tiuntur non est pa^s millesima. Gellij dictum de Astrologis.
false, yet because to err was no wonder, (and therefore not so much worth
either relating or observing) as also for that it was for the most part but
privately to some sew known, and often times also the shame of illusion in the
most put the report thereof unto silence, the contradictorie instances still
died unremembered, but fame and opinion suruiued and prospered. It ever excused
my deceitful custom unto my self, that I deceived none but such as either
desired or deserved it, who by their insidiation of the proof of my skill
either provoked it, or by their unreasonable earnestness extorted it. In this
and other the like, some few days before his death, he thus Vixit qua voluit
viuere part magis.
died unto his former life, and lived unto his soul and saving health. And
thus it is manifested, both by reason and also by the last testimony of dying
experience, how the vrinary divining for prediction of conception, forsaking
the brighter streams and clearer fountains of detecting truth, does hide it
self in the puddle water, there laying shining baits for dazeled fish. The
more silence, the better fishing; lest therefore I may happily too much prejudice
the pleasing spoil of willing fools, I will think that which has been
already said unto any other, sufficient intimation, aduising honest minds from
the judicious Physician, by the plainest information to draw the Incertam and
plerunque dubiam mercede^ referet qui periclitatione Medicos tanquam vates
augurari coget. Consultor vero prude^s and fidelis sani consilij fructu^
percipiet. Fern. de vrin.
directest counsel, lest by the vain proof of a deceiving worth, seeking
that is not, they lose that might be more proper and pertinent unto their
health.

CHAP. V.
Of Travelers.
AS from all parts of the world true knowledge does fetch home his substantial
grounds to enrich it self; so falsehood and lying imitation does likewise
derive deceiuable colors to beguile the imprudent. Hence under the name of
Travelers supposed much knowing, by much seeing of things worthy to be known
(the common expectation of wonder giving glad entertainment, and desire of
novelty joyous welcome) insufficiency clothed with this outward figure of
sufficiency, does often enter into the rights of better desert, and by casual
pofiting some few, deceives most, and ruineth many. Travel is required in a
Physician, not as any part of his essence, but as an ornament, receiving the
essence and perfecting of it self from the essence and perfection of a
foresetled and continuing understanding. The general theory and speculation of
any knowledge or science whatsoever, is in no soil or country a stranger to
them that duly and truly seek it, nor does understanding meet, or is taken up
in high ways; but to the most secret retired thoughts reflecteth the
brightness of his true worth, and from the perfect fullness of time, and
thence accomplished brightness of his beams does seasonably break forth, and
soly give the rectified perspectiue of particular objects. In the occurrents of
travel, it is indeed the sense that conducteth the object to the
understanding, but it is a pre-existing power and ability in the (...).
Scientia est, intellectus instrumentum. Aristot.
understanding it self that rightly judges and disposes the Res ipsae saepe
aut praeposterae, aut confusae, aut falsa specie sole^t sese offerre.
object. If therefore the understanding be either in it self originally
defective, or by want of time unsettled, or by precept and doctrine not
habitually formed; the sense may truly, rightly and continually present, but
the understanding shall either falsely or not fully apprehend, distinguish,
digest or dispose, whereby disorder in want of right method, does rather
multiply confusion then increase right use. Hence many things worthy notice
escape ignorance, unjust reductions are commonly miscarried to improper
subjects, good uses are unseasonably or unreasonably wrested, mistaking
obuious, right estimates either for the most part vnobseruedly ouerpassed, or
casually well happening. For where wisdom does not lead travel forth,
knowledge guide it on, prudence accompany it, good desire uphold it, the true
end persuade and call it forth; folly easily seduceth, and depraved ends
pervert the right fruition. Hence we see commonly many travel far, and bring
home little. Some make swift adventure, and slow return, with late repentance.
Some bring home more then they would, some more then they should; and all that
begin travel with raw judgment, for the most part come home perpetually after
drunken with opinion. Different countries, aires, people, customs, manners,
zones and climates, do fruitfully expose commodious consideration unto those
whose judicious view and exchange does know rightly to entertain them in the
way, and in many examples of many worthy Physicians, the benefits thereby have
ever been conspicuous. Amongst the rest, Galens industrious commutation of
distant regions, by his own writings are not obscure. But he that enters into
Galens travels without Galens Coelum non animu^ mutant qui trans mare currunt.
Horat.
mind, may exceed him in the pains, but shall never come near unto him in the
fruit and worth. This is the reason that our common traveling Physicians for
the most part (the learned only in all places and countries worthily
purchasing unto themselves due reverence) do often from beyond the sea bring home
strange preparations and medicines, but little wit and discretion safely to use
them; by the great opinion of far fetched wondes distracting and cousening
the needful inquisition of a more inward worth in themselves to warrant their
accommodation, without which, both heedlesse proof and needless use, do often
find in the best excellence a harmfull goodness: and howsoever happily commending
it self in his own property and virtue, yet often stinging unto the heart
busy, unnecessary and unadvised meddling. It is grown so common in these
days to entertain Quia inopes sunt and indocti in patrijs suis viuere non
possunt been noti. Galen. de sui temporis pseudomedicis, lib. praedict.
fugitives under the former pretexts, that it shall ease my pains to report
the mischiefs, being grown too common to need any other notice then their
own ugliness, each post proclaiming their wooden worth, and their painted
clouts every where hanging up their ragged Cyclopum crudele genus, Visceribus
miscrorum and sanguine vescitur atro.
executions. It is usual with these men, moving their wandering and uncertain
steps from place to place and from town to town, by fair deluding promises
and pollicitations to draw the Hoc solo a latronibus differentes quod in vrbe
non montibus scelera perpetrant. Gal. lib. praedict.
lives of simple credulous men, for their own gain, into their own hands;
and after they have by their common desperate courses provoked and drawn
forth unwilling death (when they see him coming) to run away, and to leave
the miserable beguiled innocent in his angry jaws, to answer their rash and
needless challenge. The wiser sort have better learned to know them, but the
simple are still Quod non cognoscantur ab omnibus, hoc ipsum malitiam naturae
ipsorum auget, and vsque ijs insidiantur qui ea quae versute semper perpetrant
non norunt. Galen. lib. praedict.
their prey. It necessarily now follows unto the general conclusion of all
that has been before said, that both the travels of the mind, and
contemplation in the former tractates mentioned, and also the change of places
and countries here specified, with all other sense-informing means and
inquisitions of knowledge and science, without precedent right institution, and
settled incorrupt seeds of select understanding, shall all ever doubtfully, and
for the most part lamely succeed unto timely growth or ripe perfection. For
knowledge must ever go before industry as a guide, and particular practice
follow general rule, which he that has not first in mind fully and truly
conceived, must needs want the idea that forms an understanding action. And
thus has it hitherto appeared negatiuely, now it follows affirmatively,
where true election may make right choice of a good Physician.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I.
The true Artist his right description and election.
THe corruptible condition of all things in Haec (...) illa (...).
substance, and perpetual mutabilitie and alteration in a accidents, does
every moment beget such diverse odds and differences in the same things, that
their former considerations and respects, can never constantly, truly, and
indeed long continue them to be the same. Hence by vicissitude it ordinarily
comes to pass, that of those things whereof lately seeemed certainty,
thereof by continual access of different accidents and circumstances, is
again begotten Quin res, aetas vsus, semper aliquid apporret noui, vt quae te
scire credas nescias, and quae putaris prima in experiundo repudies. Terent.
uncertainties. That which late seemed necessary, in an instant becomes
casual; that which was true, now false; that which was good, now evil, and
that which was possible, often impossible. Necessity and this uncertainty of all
things, does drive men that desire with more likely certainty, through
prudence to guide their actions unto the school of contemplation of the world,
and of the general revolution of all things therein, (which is true
Philosophy) that thence by long study and diligence observing to know and
distinguish what is in nature, and the ordinary vicissitude of all things,
according to several seasons, circumstances and subjects, means, measures,
and manners variously, now true, then false; now necessary, then casual, now
absolute in it self, now conditional, with supposition, and by accident, now
possible, now impossible; they may inform themselves from tried and approved
knowledge, where with certainty is safe to Bona consultatio e summa ^atione
eruit consilia, and haec est rectitudo consilij. Aristot. Eth. 6.
resolve, how in uncertainty neither to (...). Qui consultat quaerit and
rationem subducit. Aristot, eth. 6.
neglect the least hope, nor to ouer-weene the best good hap: how to
endeavor in that is possible, how to observe necessity in that is impossible,
prouidently how in cases of vrgence and serious counsel, to forecast and
husband occasion and opportunity, that ill hapsharme not, vain hope deceive
not, time beguile not, advantage escape not, uncertainty prejudice not,
occurrents prevent not that good which according to reason and the destined
issue in nature, diligent endeauout may otherwise effect. This is the sum of
art and prudence. This is the use and perfection of reason in man, without
which man must needs be as the brute beast, void of understanding, dwelling in
perpetual blindness, darkness and confusion, without distinction of good and
evil, true and false, without consultation or election of the one or other.
Without the knowledge of nature our life is death, our sight blind, our light
darkness, and all our ways uncertain. He that knows not the quality of
the fire, can neither seek comfort by the warmth, nor fear the scorching. He
that has not observed nature in the water cold and moist, shall neither
needing their contemper think of their use, nor subject to their danger
decline their hurt. Who has ever been so blind, that has not claymed reason
Ideo Plutarch. (...) consundit (...), Rationem and Disciplinam. (...), etc.
for every action, both as natures common light and rule in all things, as
also his own eye and Ratio manus intellectus. Scal.
hand to guide him unto the understanding thereof? For there is Quae vi^tus
mouet ^or, quae mutat succum in cibos, quae distribuit, quis dicat id sine
ratione agere? Sine ratiocinatione quidem non sine ratione. Scalig. de Subtle.
reason in nature, and reason of understanding. Reason in nature is the
constant course and Natura est ratio Vniuersi. Scalig.
order of nature according to which she governs and orders all things.
Reason of understanding is that Ratio est vis animae quae mouet se ab
effectibus ad causas inuestigandas and vicissim a causis ad ea quorum illae
causae sunt. Scal. de Subtle.
light and eye of the mind, whereby is discovered what is according to reason
in nature, good and evil, true and false. Thus the reason of man has his
excellence and perfection, consisting in finding out and understanding the
excellence and perfection of Quid est Ratio nisi Naturae imitatio? Senec.
reason in nature. This is the top and height of all humane wisdom, knowledge
and learning. Hereby is distinguished the subtle Solertia est acerrima
coniectatio ex iudicij summi adytis penitius eruta. Aristot. eth. 6.
and wise from the mean understanding, from the fool and idiote; the counsel
of the prudent, from the rash and unadvised; the sharpness of wit and
discerning understanding, from sottish amazement and stupiditie. Hence are
only settled and cleared all doubts, difficulties, and ambiguities, by which
otherwise for ever men remain void of counsel and of truth. Hence it comes
to pass, that as men more or less earnestly seek the wisdom, order, and
reason of nature in her dispensation of the whole world, and therein more or
less dispend their studious pains, so they diversely obtain answerable
measures and proportions therein, growing in wisdom more or less according
as they are more or less of generose desire and ingenuous (...), etc. Qui
rerum causas and Naturas maxim dijudicat and docet maxim sapientem iudicamus
Aristot. metaph. 1.
exercise therein. The order of nature in all her works is (...). Nihil eorum
quae Natura fiunt aliter assuescit. Aristot. eth. 2.
constant, full of wonder, and unchanged truth in the continual Est enim
naturalis ordo (...) omnium rerum, ex aeterno alijs ad alia consequentibus
incommutabili manente eiusmodi complicatione. Gellius. Noct. Attic.
cohesion, sequence and fatal necessity of all things, their causes and
effects: wherein therefore how the Almighty Deity has commanded all things
by an unchangeable law to be ordered, is both true and necessary wisdom to
understand, and the true Natura dux optima. Naturam ducem si sequamur, nunquam
aberrabimus. Cicero.
pattern, rule, and square of every discreet, sober, and wise design and
consultation. Hence upon the principles of nature stand everlastingly founded
all arts and sciences. For science is the faithful and truly studied
apprehension of the mind, of the never Scientia est conueniens, firma, and
nunquam a ratione declinans cognitio. Galen. in Medico. opt.
deceiving general grounds in the general dispensation in the nature of all
things: and art is the learned and skillful habit Ars est habitus cum ratione
factiuus. Eth. 4.
of imitation thereof in humane action. And all true arts thus founded upon the
vndeceiuing grounds of nature, in themselves are euercertaine Ars medica quoad
naturam propriam theoremata and praecepta Artis indubitatae est fi dei vera,
firma, stabilis, Naturae principijs semper co^sentanea, solum quoad subiecta
varia, medentium operas, and inde euentus instabiles coniecturalis. Galen de
Sect. opt.
and infallible, whose rules although discretion according to circumstance may
continually diversely vary, yet can no In medicina perpetuum est quod sequi
debeat, non semper perpetuum quod sequi conuenit. Celsus.
time nor circumstance ever or at any time abrogate. Hence above all other arts
and sciences the art of Physic must needs be most excellent and true, because
it most continually conuerseth with nature, as her prime and proper subject,
and beyond all other most immediately depends upon the perpetual study, view,
and observation of nature, and the continual consultatio^ with nature in every
actio^. For it is requisite in a co^petent Physician, that he be truly able and
fully furnished to be unto nature a governor and moderator to preserve her, to
conserve her, behoofefully to dispose and Haec est (...) sanitatis tuendae
consilum, and (...)
guide her in her best and rightest way, not only of being, but of being well,
and well continuing. It is also requisite he be able as a prudent minister with
knowledge to provide and reach unto her Medicina est adiectio necessariorum,
detractio inutilium. Hippocrat.
all needful helps, and to remove from her all harmefull impediments. Lastly,
he must be a faithful friend in her necessity, needfully assisting, helping,
and comforting her. And how can he duly perform these things unto nature, that
truly and perfectly knows Physiologiae necessitas perpetua medico non ad
discendam modo sed ad exercendam quoque artem. Galen. de Med. opt.
not nature? Above therefore and beyond all other Artists the Physician
immediately has need and use of exquisite knowledge of nature. For since he is
deputed to be helper and restorer of particular nature, how can he for that end
but become scholar and imitator of the general? For as all particulars do
ever participate the nature and kind of the general, and are therein
comprehended, so besides that which unto every individual nature is specially
proper, there is an essential Species generis, indiuiduum vtriusque naturam
participat, vtrunque and indiuiduum and speciem genus and facit and
comprehendit.
property in it belonging unto the general: without which as the particular
cannot be at all, so therefore is ever an eye, a respect and reference to be
had, that those things which for the good of the particular are considered or
consulted, may never be disproportioned from the general: which he that
knows not, cannot consider. He therefore that shall rightly and prudently
dispose for the good of any man, ought as well to know and advise what and how
he participateth with the general condition, as not to be ignorant what is
peculiar Huc spectat (...) specificae differentiae, and proprietates rerum
occultae.
unto himself. For if he know not the Sed and Medicus and exercendorum
corporum magister optime singulorum curam rationemque habuerit, si genus
vniuersum cognouerit. Na^ qui bonus artifex and ad res percipiendas and
co^templandas idoneus effici velit, ad genus vniuersum illi progrediendu^ est,
atque in illo cognoscendo elaborandum. In hoc enim scientias positas esse
scimus. Aristot. Eth. 10.
general kinds and natures of things, what powers, faculties, privileges,
prerogatives, properties, indowments, belong indifferently to all, as well as
differently to the special, he shall often omit and ouerslip a larger portion
offered in the common good, then any specialtie shall after recompense or
counteruaile in it self. Contrariwise also, if he only know the general, and
understand not to compare, consider, apt and fitly suit it unto the Universe
enim ei qui febre afflictatur inedia and quies vtilis est, alicui autem
fortassis inutilis. Aristot. Eth 10. (...), etc.
particular, he shall never from the common derive thereto ought pertinent or
truly accommodate. It is necessary therefore a Physician understand both what
nature has allowed man in universal, with all other things, and also no less
what proper to himself, and enclosed in his own. For if he know not nature in
her special kind, Qui ignorant corporis affectum secundum naturam a quo actio
producitur, prorsus cognoscere non potest affectum praeter naturam a quo actio
laeditur. Galen. de meth. med.
when her self is separate and free from other implications, how shall he judge
or know her just reduction thereto, when he finds her oppression requiring
his assistance to bring her home unto her self? Neither must he here only
consist, but must farther view and consider, what God either in heaven or in
earth, in the whole world, or the wide occan, from all the elements or
elementary things has ordained for any good or use of man. For as God has
created all things for the good of man, so has he appointed the Physician to
fit and accommodate all things unto the necessity and need of man, and has
farther also deputed him to supply unto man even those things which Natura non
potest aratro boues iungere, nec illorum opera terram scindere, art vtrunque
fit. Scalig.
nature her self often times cannot. Nature cannot either open the necessary
vein, or ventilate or euacuate the corrupt blood from the bruised part, or in
the right and behouefull quantity. Nature cannot with election or regularly
purge the right and proper humor, fitting the cause and necessity. Nature
cannot fetch home from the fields and mountains her medicinal herbs, fruit,
wood and plants unto her own necessity; but Art transporteth them unto her at
several seasons, and for several needs. Nature cannot decoct, infuse,
compound, mix or prepare her roots, metals, or other drugs and simples, in
number and nature infinite; but Art is unto her benefit and service therein
accurate. As therefore the Physician must ever have Nature for his chief Quo
natura vergit tendendu^ medico naturae ministro. (...), etc. Hippocrat.
counselor, so must he ever again be sufficient and able substitute and Vt
natura recte operans imi tanda, ita aberrans reducenda and adiuuanda. Natura
enim alias agit satis, alias parum, alias nihil. Galen. de venae sect. contra
Erasistrat.
helper unto her. Not to speak of his excellent subject (which is the life and
health of mankind) his divine direction in his calling (led by the unchanged
order and wisdom of God himself, manifested and set forth unto him in the
structure and great frame of heaven and earth) does exact and require in him
all possible perfection to sound and fadome the depth and height thereof. For
as it is manifoldly and vnmeasurably infolded and wrapped up in the intricate
wisdom of his universal workmanship, so must long days and time carefully
spent, indefatigable study, pains and meditation, restless vigilance, a
clear eye of understanding, and sincere affection work and labor it out, and
thence must his prudent and wise action derive the ground of all his counsels
and consultations. And thus must the true Physician ever behold God as his
guide, and be governed and directed by his hand. For God is nature (...). Est
enim Deus omnium causarum causa and principium. Arist. metaph. 1.
above nature, and nature is his hand Natura est ordinaria Dei potestas. Scalig
de subtle.
and subordinate power: Natura quid aliud quam Deus and diuina ratio toti mundo
and partibus eius inserta? Senec. lib. de benef.
God being therefore the cause of causes in nature, he is the giver of health
and life in nature, and the Physician is his Sanitas opus Dei, opera vero
nostra. Scalig.
servant and minister therein. To learn of such a teacher, to imitate so
absolute a pattern, what wisdom is sufficient, what sufficiency worthy? If
any man think it a light labor to find out the order and reason of so
infinite a workman in the immense work of all things, or but an easy
difficulty to imitate his example in infinite actions, he knows not what is
the height of humane wisdom, which being to know most (...). Qui maxim
homini dissicilia cognitu potis est cognoscendo assequi, ille sapiens. Aristot.
metaph. 1.
among men, (although what in that knowledge is nearest unto God, is the least
shadow of himself) yet is it so much as is able to make men justly admired,
and happy that obtain it; as all other that want it, worthily as unhappy and
unfortunate as ignorance can make man. Ignorance is ever blind, blindness
continually stumbleth and often Animus lumine mentis and intelligentiae orbatus,
ignorantiaeque tenebris and caligine demersus, sibi ipsi mentitur, se ipsum
perpetuo fallit, and in capitales frauds facile impellit vndique. Osor. de
reg. instit.
infortunately falls; but knowledge gives eyes, and the happiness of sight
declineth the unhappiness of our lives perpetual groping error, and the
miserable confusion of the darkness of mind. Since then knowledge is the eye and
sight of the mind, and all knowledge comes either by the ordinary light of
nature, or the extraordinary illumination of the Creator of nature, whence
shall the ordinary dispensation of men's ways and actions borrow counsel and
light, but from nature? And then how necessary is the knowledge, learning and
study of nature, not only unto the accomplishment and ornament of our better
being, but unto the establishment of prudence and discretion, and the happy
consequences thereof in all our lives and actions? If prudence and wisdom
flow from hence, and the miserable condition of man perpetually crave their
supply, and the neuerceasing mutable uncertainty of circumstances continually
multiply occasion of consultation from thence, how can any action or purpose of
man be rightly tried, approved and assured unto him, but by the complement and
perfection of this knowledge? And if knowledge only rectify and make happy
men's works, endeavors and actions in all things, how is it much more chiefly
and absolutely requisite and necessary in a Physician? His subject, which is
the safeguard of life Morbus cum sit vitae humanae capitalis hostis, Medicus
vnice natura duce est morbicida. Pulchre Riolanus.
and succor of nature, exacteth the most exquisite wise and wary working. His
rule in working (which is the prudent observation and imitation of his Creator
in the created order and reason of all things) challenges the help and
assistance of all possible worthiness and excellence, the highest perfection
of counsel, and most incomparable sagacitie of understanding. For what
wisdom, learning and knowledge, can be more then needful unto his use and
help, whose continual emploiment and exercise consists in executing the
perpetual decrees and counsels of (...). Morborum medici naturae ^unt, naturae
vero minister medicus. Hippocrat.
creation, in restoring the ruins and decays of generation, in rectifying,
reforming and moderating the errors of continual mutation and alteration, in
opposing death, and enlarging life; lastly, in arming the several true trials
and just estimates of the native uses and properties of all things, substances,
quantities, qualities, forms, seasons, and circumstances, according to the
command of the general commander of heaven and earth, and the edicts of
nature, for the good of man? What humane science can afford more ample matter
and occasion of divine cogitation? what emploiments are more continual works
of charity? what virtue comes nearer unto God in goodness and mercy? God
creates man, the healthful and helpful hand of the Physician restores and
repaireth his daily lapses. What wisdom more inwardly conuerseth with the
hidden and secret works of God and nature? And though his better and more
erected thoughts often humble themselves unto the necessities of miserable men,
(which proud and foolish minds contemn) yet has the example of the saving
Deity herein most exalted him whom virtue instructs, wisdom forms,
prudence counsels, and Art firmly guides; without the competent concurrence
of all which, the necessity of their hourly use does altogether deny
sufficience in a Physician. How worthy reverence in themselves, and how happy
for others were it, if more wontedly and usually our Physicians would first
labor for this settled perfection and Operatio est finis syllogismi practici.
Arist. Eth. 6.
general idea of prudent deliberation, before they so readily rush unto
particular practice and action? For although it be experience that indeed
gives unto reason the true reflection of it self, yet is it the rule of reason
that first Prudentia rei futurae consultum curat ex disciplina non ex
antegressis actionibus. Quare hic habitus omnibus artibus communis sit necesse
est. Scalig. Poet. 3.
guides experience forth unto likely proof. But now in these days this
excellent knowledge, so worthy in it self, how unworthily is it esteemed by
others, because so slightly sought and found in Physicians themselves, every
man hastening to run before his knowledge either of Huiusmodi turbam vulgo
videmus a primis literarum rudimentis continuo se ipsam Medici nomine
iactitantem, and venditantem, inuidam, maledicam, obtrectatricem, nouam speciem
Cynicorum, auaram, supinam ignauam, simul atque ignaram. Scal. Poet. 3.
himself or his action, unto particular trials of confused conceit and
confidence in opinionate grounds? Hence as mechanical offices and
administrations are rather more commonly conspicuous in our ordinary
practitioners, then any weight of prudent perpension or lively stamp of
judicious disposition or ordering; so does the general slightness and
lightness herein of most, sprinkle a common disgrace and ignomie upon all,
casting the excellent faculty it self inestimate almost behind the most
inferior science. To leave therefore the proud and disdainful contemners
herein unto the just contempt of God and nature in his greatest need, that
others deserve not so ill, and all may learn rather to choose the good from the
ill, then to despise the better for the worse, I will here point the
inquisition of the best, who though happily rarely found, yet may the pattern
commend the nearest thereto, and draw the well deserving unto his safest
choice. In all cases and subjects of election, it is wisdom chiefly first to
seek that is most excellent; next, where excellence is not, prudently to
accept mediocritie, but ever knowingly to avoid evil. The pattern of
perfection does show the more and less perfect, and manifests the more or
less imperfect, from which the farthest distance is the greatest defect, and
the nearest affinity the best excellence. Of mediocritie are many degrees.
There is mediocritie ascending b from it self toward perfection or excellence,
and mediocritie descending Mediocritas in confinio boni malique posita est.
Col. lib. 4.
from it self unto the lowest step of means. All that are contained within
the latitude of mediocritie, participate the same true rules and grounds with
those that consist in the highest top of excellence, only herein differing,
that the latter with a more piercing eye searches the marrow of the same
truth, the other more shallowly sounds the same prosunditie. This difference
of mediocrities distinguishes only the several measures of the same
perfection, whereby they differ, not in kind but in degrees of comparison. Thus
are men termed Alius alio sapientior, alius alio (...);
good, better, and best of all; all considered in the same quality, every one
an Artist, every one rightly understanding, but some more clearly, readily and
fully, other less, and all truly. Unto whom therefore either excellence does
give true splendour and eminence, or mediocritie maintains within different
bounds of true Art and science, he is either in the one worthy, or in the other
intolerable. He whom farther unworthiness has exempted out of both these, is
in himself unprofitable, and in others use (...). Eurip. Malus nihil aliud
praeterquam malus.
harmfull. The first and second, and the second by the first thou may here
view in the following description of this latter book, and the third and last
in the first and second going before.

CHAP. II.
AS all ages have derived and acknowledged the foundation of Arts from the
principles of nature, Arts omnes ratione and methodo acquituntur. Aristot.
metaph. 7.
reason, prudence, and knowledge or science; and experience has ever confirmed
their profit and necessary use unto constitution Sine generali methodo nulla
ars discitur, neque disci potest. Galen. de meth. Med.
of Arts by daily proof: so unto the complement and atchieuing first of
knowledge, and after of the right composing of Art, from Arts instituuntur and
accipiunt principia ex scientijs. Scalig. de Subt.
thence all times and men have with one general decree and consent determined
a necessity of seven ever presupposed conductiue helps thereto, without which
neither knowledge nor science can preexist, nor art from thence Intellectus
speculatiuus, actiuus, factiuus, habent principia vniuersalia commun^^. Scalig.
de Subt.
exist or have firm being. These seven Hippocrates with consent of his own
time, and assent of since succeeding times, has in this order numbered. Naturam.
Nature, Praeceptione^.
precept, fit Locum studijs aptum.
place for study, Studium.
study, Institutionem a puero.
institution, Industriam.
industry, Tempus.
time. Aristotle with some others have named only three, nature, precept,
industry; but in these three by consequent has included all the rest. For
study and contemplation must necessarily attend precept and industry both.
Study without fit place and some certain seat, can never deeply settle,
uncertain motion distracting and interrupting serious cogitation and
assiduitie; and time is necessary to be supposed in all. By nature we must not
generally understand the first moving and being power which is in all Omnis
substantia Natura dicitur. (...). Aristot. in Metaph.
things in universal, but more specially for this subject, procliuity,
natural aptnes or fitness, peculiar Natura etiam pro peculiari indole,
ingenio, more accipitur. Sic apud Virgilium. Nunc age, naturas apibus quas
Iuppiter ipse Addidit, expediam.
disposition in the helps and gifts of nature, ripeness of wit, capacity,
reason and docilitie. By precept are understood the maxims, axioms, and
Axio^. propositiones sunt per se fidem facientes, omnibus doctis in confesso
and perpetuae. Gal de Meth. Med.
ancient golden rules of truth, which many ages and aged observation from time
to time for common good and case have commended, compiled and summed
methodically into general orders heads and numbers. By place fit for study,
are not only understood the narrow enclosures of retired silence, and
abdication unto private contemplation, but also the places of the societies and
common assemblies of the learned, where both by private Grata colloquia and
iucundi dialogi opulentiora quam perpetui libri. Scal.
conference, and also by public (...). Conuersatio arts peperit. Eurip
hearing the daily readings, teachings, and exercises of logical Etenim ficuti
lapidum collisione ignis: ita ex disceptationibus elicitur veritas. Scalig. de
Subt.
disceptations of schools allotted every faculty by it self, Optima illa
est docendi ratio quae viua voce traditur. Neque enim quenquam ex libro
nauclerum vel alterius artis artificem euadere licet. Libri enim sunt ijs qui
antea eruditi fuerunt monimenta, non rudium and indoctorum doctrina perfecta.
Galen. de Alim. fac* lib. 1.
the mind may usually receive redoubled memory of the maxims, axioms and
rules of every art and science, whereby continual Qui sapiens and doctus
euadere cupit, (...) oportet, Plato. de Rep.
inculcation may both more firmly settle them, and occasion their more
frequent and better labored examination and rumination. That in whose
admission two senses bear testimony, and by two ways does enter, has firmer
possession. The weakness or weariness of the sight or eye in private reading
sometimes mistaketh, often omitteth, and not seldom ouerslippeth; but the
understanding stands ready at the Animus habitat in auribus. Herod.
gates of the ears, ever giving easy entrance, and with ready attention more
due Vox scriptura ad audiendum long praestantior and disertior, auriumque
sensus potior magister. Plato.
perpension, the most faithful remembrance by the ear conducted unto the
inward seats and selles of the soul and contemplation. By study is generally
conceived the continual occupation and employment of all Studium est vehemens
animi applicatio ad aliquid. Perot. in Epigr. Martial.
the faculties of the mind in serious disquisition, prompt apprehension and
reception of general rules and precept, and frequent often after reuiew of their
former several notions, reflecting the understanding upon it self in the
recognition of his passed intellection, and in due rumination unto right
digestion; from whence by long exercise and use therein gaining an habit and
true method thereof, the firm knowledge and science of assured infallible
rule and principle, does beget art, and art bring forth the end and perfection
of art, which is the honor of the Artificer, the euer-reasonable satisfaction
of needful use and necessity, and for the (...). Infirmos omnes sanos facere
est impossible. Hippocrat.
most part desired issue. By institution is conceived education, early
beginning, and inchoation from Educatio est nutritio and prouectio a
tenerioribus annis. Sic Terent. Eduxi e paruulo, etc. Et Virgil. Nascentes
educat vuas. Nonius Marcellus de proprietat. Sermon. sic habet: Alere est vitam
victu temporali sustentare, educare autem ad satietatem perpetuam educere.
young and tender years, whereby the grounds and rules of knowledge growing up
with age, become in shorter time more natural, permanent, familiar, easy,
more clear and free of difficulties, which unto sudden apprehension bring
confusion and impediment. By industry is understood Industrij homines ijdem
qui laboriosi, amantes laboris, agendi pulchra studiosi. Cicer. Tusc. Quaest. 2.
continual care, exercise, and pains to make every benefit and utmost use
of natures bounty, of precepts worthy of place and every other behoofefull
circumstance, to perfect institution, to save, prevent, and redeem time and
opportunity, with serious affection and desire to whet, uphold, and maintain
alacrity, constancy, and perseverance through labor and diligence unto
perfection. By time is understood the several competence of years to every
single use, and due in all. The necessity of the helpefull concurrence of all
these unto any one perfection is easily manifest. The want of natural helps of
wit and other reasonable parts of man, must needs be Quod natura negat reddere
nemo potest.
incapable of precept. Without precept (being the rich compiled treasure of the
excellent knowledges of many ages and generations) how shall any single lives
sufficiency otherwise truly attain the precious worth and benefit of due
perfection in any art? Without study also precept is never daigned, because
not deserved, God and nature perpetually blessing and proportioning several
measures of knowledge and understanding, to some equality of thoughtfull
(...). Dij labor vendunt bona mortalibus.
search and assiduitie. Where is not place fitting study, and allowing the
prompt concourse Scholae (...). Basil
of learned conference, study must needs want those ready helps which
mutual speech, Tantam enim vim habet puerilis institutio, vt sine ill^ nemo ad
vllum decus eniti possit. Osorius.
special example, and many common reciprocal auxiliarie assistances in
learned society, do manifestly, profitably, and continually supply. Where
wants (...). Non parum igitur sed plurimum quin potius totum refert, sic vel
non sic homines ab adolescentia assuefactos esse. Aristot. Eth. 2.
timely institution, either later springs bring slower growth, or too sudden
sproutes soon wasted springs. Where industrious affection and exercise either
fainting waneth, or is not ever in the full, eclipsed care must needs prove
dull, and pains slow, and without pains shall ever succeed but mean profit.
Lastly, where full time is scant, Veritas filia temporis: (...).
defect is large, and where season Emuntur arts tempore and diligentia. Lac^t.
short, no good Non potest in eo succus esse diuturnus, quod nimis celeriter
est maturitatem assequutum Cicer.
proof long. And thus it is apparent, that none, and no one of these may be
wanting, where is desired any reasonable perfection; and this is the same
infallible truth in all faculties and professions. For many instances, behold
but one, and see by common consent of all learned, by testimony of reason and
experience, how progress of knowledge does in every part answer the nature and
custom of husbanding seed. Compare (...). Analogiam habet natura cum tellure,
agricola cum eo qui praeceptis instituit and instruit, semen cum salubribus
praeceptis* Plutarchus. (...).
the fecilitie of soil with capacity in nature, the seed with wholesome
precept, the country neighborhood of readiness and plenty (whereby need
with common benefit may mutually both lend and borrow) unto the like helps of
learning in learned society. Compare careful gathering together and storing
of good seed, unto daily study; industry and pains to toil and labor;
usual early bringing up, and prudent timely country education, to necessity
of institution, and the yearly seasons to studious times. Are not all in both,
and both in all alike? The seeds of virtue and knowledge are ever fitly sowed
in childhood Pueritia ad 14 annum numeratur.
the age of institution Venaticus ex quo Tempore ce^^inam pellem latrauit in
aula, Militat in syluis catulus. Nunc adbibe puro Pectore verba puer, nunc te
melioribus offer. Horat.
, in whose vniudging youth their hidden virtue steals root, in years
Adolescentia haec est, ab annis pueritiae durans ad 20. and 25. annum, huic
succedit iuuentus and progreditur ad 35.
of discretion growth, in Iuuenilis haec est aetas.
confirmed age gathers ripeness, and in consisting Consistit aetas a 35. ad
50. aut circiter, and vel paulo magis vel minus pro temperaturaru^ differentijs.
age brings forth ripe Studia in Adolescentia sunt tanquam in herbis, quae
annis post maturioribus pulchrae fruges sunt futurae, nam quae seminauerit in
iuuentute metet cum senuerit. Plutarch. (...).
frui^e in practice and proof, therein continuing ever until declining
autumn, the fall of age, and the winter of this mortal life. And this is that
span of man's life, and ought be his reckoning of his days well dispent in any
virtuous or noble faculty. These things are manifest unto all, and need not so
much proof as better consideration. And thus the necessary concurrence of the
knowledge of nature unto perfection in any worthy faculty, has briefly and
sufficiently appeared, and more specially the use thereof unto a Physician has
been plainly instanced and manifest, and his primacie in the counsel and
consultation of nature, the necessities of life have amply proved. It has been
likewise farther considered, that as in all other arts and sciences, so
especially in Physic, no man ever attained the meanest satisfying worth,
without the assistance of a seuenfold furtherance, without nature either Tu
nihil inuita dices faciesue Minerua.
disposing or favoring, has been declared the vanity of utmost endeavor.
Without (...). Innatam virtutem ignauia and desidia destruit, and corrumpit,
naturalem ineptitudinem rusticitatemuc corrigit and emendat doctrina. Plutarch^
(...).
precept where has ever been any right subject, rule, or measure unto wandering
confused thought and contemplation? Without study and (...), etc. Quae facilia
sunt cognitu fugiunt incuriam, quae vero difficilima elegantia concinna
capiuntur. Plutarc.
industry was never gained worth, nor without institution ever purchased
assurance of any perpetuity. In want of fit and settled place, the most
desirous endeavor does find wearisome loss of so fair and helpefull
opportunity, and there is no goodness by Annus in apricis maturat collibus
vuas. Ovid.
time unsettled has ever been after well Illud ingeniorum velut praecox genus,
non temere vnquam peruenit ad frugem. Quintil.
confirmed. From hence it must necessarily follow as a certain conclusion,
that according as me^ are more or less wanting in any of these, so do the
number of the wants truly measure the quantity of their defects. And since
these are seven so inseparable companions and guides unto sufficiency in those
by whom it is truly acquired, they must needs therefore by necessary
consequent be therein fair likelihoods and proofs of that sufficiency unto
others also whom it shall concern to know and enquire it for their own
direction and satisfaction. And as these are thus necessary to be enquired, so
is it as easy for the meanest to trace and discover them in any particular
knowledge. Festinata maturitas occidit celerius. Idem.
Nature does express her self in her own indowments open to every eye in
common conversation. The hope and opinion of good precept, does unto the most
ignorant give prudent guess, either by the particular knowledge, or at least
inquisition of precedent timely institution and likely institutors. Good and
pertinent institution, deriueth probability of it self, from the testimony
of convenient time and fit place of institution. Industry cannot be hid, and
study by his In omni literarum profectu stylo, libello (...) perpetuo est
opus. Isocrat.
assiduitie does ever prove it self, and by continual exercise of it self,
as it first gives, so it after perpetually Literae marsupium non sequuntur:
sudoris comites sunt and laboris, sociae ieiuniorum, non satietatis,
continentiae, non luxuriae. Hieronym.
holds sufficiency, and manifests it self thereby, both past and present,
unto any one. And as education it self is of all learned esteemed and judged
absolutely beyond Recta institutio caput omnis virtutis. Plat. de Leg.
exception or dispensation necessary, so are his places common, and therefore
not obscure. Lastly time well dispent does point his proof unto examination of
his several degrees of grows, both how in Eradenda cupidinis praui ^unt
elementa, and tene^ae nimis mentes asperio ribus formandae studijs. Horat.
childhood and youth, unto the years of discretion, disposed, and how also
after that time in manhood and confirmed age unto consistence, disposing
himself. These are those easy notes, whereby from the necessity, partly of
their continual presence, and partly precedence in every faculty, the
meanest capacity together with the best may confirm and better satisfy their
prudent hope or fear in choice. These marks though common and indifferent
unto all, yet do they bring more or less different behooffull use, according
to different iudgings and Foelices essent arts si de ijs sol^^udicarent
artifices. Aristot.
understandings. Such as are learned in the same faculty, beside these outward
and common informations are farther enabled to assure this inquisition by the
presence and knowledge of the same sufficience in themselves, when they find it
represented unto them in another, Such as are learned in different faculties,
or are general readers or scholars only, by the signs common unto all kinds
of learning may better judge of a common faculty in general knowledge, but
improperly determine of a Artis cuiustibet iudicationes primae omnibus
hominibus sunt notae, sequentes soli arti^ici. Gal. lib. 6. de Meth. Med.
special worth. The first have therefore more certain understanding, the
second somewhat more aduantaged conjecture. He only that is altogether
unlettered and unlearned, for that he cannot help his judgment from any of
these two former inward lights, or intelligence of his own understanding, must
therefore chiefly derive his information from without, and from these outward
signs, from whence it is also better to raise (...) Eurip. Been qui conjiciet
vatem hunc perhibebo optimum. Cicero de Divine.
probable reason and conjecture to resolve himself, then altogether to trust
report and others faith. For that which is probable comes Artificialis
coniectura e probabili eruitur ratione and proxime ^e^per accedit ad veritatem.
Galen.
near unto truth, and he that industriously exercises himself in discerning
rightly true probability, shall always more wisely walk, and most seldom err
or be deceived.

CHAP. III.
ANd thus with a plain sensiblenesse unto vulgar capacity, I have delivered
the sententious sum of those things which the learned in the largeness of
many volumes have widely scattered and confounded: which as according to the
first promise and purpose, it gives unto the meanest a light unto a larger
field of prudent consideration, so does it also unto the younger student yield a
profitable taste of that true way and method which prosperously guides unto
perfection. And although sharp witted folly in the ambition of proud conceit
has often times devised and imagined easier and shorter ways and Huiusmodi
^uere illi Thessalij asini and ipse ipsorum parens Thessalus, qui in sex
mensium spacio totam medicinae artem non modo vorabant ipsi, sed and alios
docere profitebantur.
cuts unto an higher pitch, yet after-time has still otherwise proved it unto
erroneous men, when for the most part their eyes and time are almost out, and
folly has already too sufficiently fatted it self to glut repentance. I will
not spend time in blaming this our time herein, daily experience is just
reproof. From that which has formerly been discoursed, there seems yet
remaining a doubt demanding answer: whether non but men, as before, known
learned, may prove of safe or commendable use? Where the causes and diseases
are both common and vulgar, and no circumstance requires more then ordinary
consult, there without doubt ordinary harmless remedies without deeper
counsel or advice, may by themselves sufficiently Sed and medicus optime
singulorum natural rationemque habuerit qui genus vniuersum cognouerit. Verunta
men nihil prohibet quo minus etiam is qui sit nescius vni alicui pulchre
consulat, dummodo experiendo quae cuique accidunt accurate prospexerit:
quemadmodum multos sibi ipsis optimos medicos videmus, cum alteri subuenire
atque opitulari non possint. Aristot. Eth. 10.
satisfy an usual need. For this cause the Emperick is justly to be preferred
before all other sects, for that (for the most part) never changing his
approved ordinary good remedies, he thereby in ordinary cases does more
commonly benefit; while other sectaries from the wild Methodici debitae
pharmacorum compositionis ignari opera Artis inuertunt. Galen. de Sect.
composition of their confused and deceived minds (ever therefore vainly
continually varying the mixture of their medicines) must needs thereby both
pervert the ordinary benefit of usual and tried medicines in common diseases,
and in all other also by their misgouerned rules, and mistaking reason, ever
either ouerrunne or come short of that happy and safe issue, which more
distinct, judicious and truly understanding accommodation from more prudent
right deliberation does more certainly and assuredly bring forth. This is the
reason that Galen. lib. de sectis in Suasor. ad arts. lib Isagoges Med.
Galen instituting and counselling a young Physician, does chiefly instruct him
first to bend all his whole labor and endeavor to aim at that unstained
purity of sight and discerning sagacitie, which is only proper unto the truly
learned and soly orthodoxe Physician, whereunto if his power and means will not
advance him, he then advises him to make choice of the Empericke soly to
Eaedem in ^j^dem affectibus medelae ab ijs qui rationem profitentur and
Empiricis medicis trahuntur. De ratione inueniendi eas inter eosdem dissentio
est. Galen de Sect.
imitate before all other sects; because his plain constant course in ordinary
diseases does most often good, and in other most commonly least hurt, though with
the rest never sure, and not ever safe. And thus far (deserving reader) I
have pointed thy better remembrance into the right way of the most likely
inquisition. Virtue is likewise a needful companion unto sufficience of
understanding, a grace and ornament unto a Physician, and in him a benefit and
advantage unto the patient; by the one well gained, discreetly and justly
steering his sufficience, by the other well known, Natura siquidem vtraque
haec largita est nobis, and ipsa judicia and sidem. Naturalia iudicia sunt
sensus and ratio. Ordiuntur haec a maxim facilimis vsu and cognitione. Fides
and per ^uasio sine vlla ^isciplina natura d^^e i^d^cijs adhibentur. Galen* lib
9 de dog. Hipp. and Plat.
assuring his confidence: but being every man's common duty to learn, the
Philosophers subject, and beside my promised performance, I will commend it
unto easy observation in every man his own trial and proof, the ordinary
judgment more easily knowing virtue in the Natura siquidem vtraque haec
largita est nobis, and ipsa judicia and sidem. Naturalia iudicia sunt sensus
and ratio. Ordiuntur haec a maxim facilimis vsu and cognitione. Fides and per
^uasio sine vlla ^isciplina natura d^^e i^d^cijs adhibentur. Galen* lib 9 de
dog. Hipp. and Plat.
outward shape of fair action, then readily conceiving or examining it by the
general Non omnes ita sunt ^ole^^es vt ex solo universally ipsi particularia
inueniant. Galen. lib. 5. de san. ^uend.
idea or large description. It only now remains thou call once again
remembrance unto remembrance, by recovering in our passed discovery in few
words the general brief sum for better impression and continuance. It has
been manifested how senseless common use does draw fond custom unto
mechanical counsel. Reason and prudence have also given thee a taste and
better sense of the unobserved mischief therein, and has taught thee a more
wise fear. Nor has it been the least wisdom, to know to hold suspected
among those whom learning has exempted out of the unlearned multitude, such as
make profession of double perfection in two Sua ipsius propria agere and
alienis negotijs non implicari, est iustitia, (...). Plato de Rep.
faculties, where one in true reason is never sufficiently or above needful
measure fulfilled in the most excellent, beside the perfection and right habit
of understanding, the attendance in care and circumspect action requiring never
less then the whole and utmost endeavor; Qui omnes in art aliqua minutias and
subtilitates persequitur, exitum nullum inueniet: si vero in illis modum
vtilitate terminauerit, non mediocre fructum ex illis capiet. Non enim omnia ex
singulis disciplinis, sed necessaria, and ad vsum magis accommodata sunt
addiscenda. Osor. de Reg. instit.
which he that thinks too much for his own calling, profession or faculty
whatsoever, is the least of all worthy of it, or well deserving in it. It has
been likewise farther noted unto prudent observation, that among men honestly
limited within one calling, notwithstanding immoderate, extrauagant and
impertinent curiosity too prodigally dispent in things of least moment, least
pertinent or profitable unto necessary use, does vainly sometimes e divert the
more serious and chiefly fixed study and respect upon the more maine ends and
offices therein, (as has been before noted of curious Astrologers and
superstitious Ephemerides-masters) whereby that which is most necessary, is
dangerously often neglected, and that which is least needful, fondly more
preferred and esteemed. Lastly has been pointed the man whom thou may most
discreetly and with most likely safety choose to trust with thy life and
health. First thou art advised to consider that he be a man free from the
former imputations; and secondly that he be commended unto thee by the seven
forementioned testimonies: one whom nature Praeclara aute^ studia non omnibus
orname^to esse possunt, sed ijs tantum qui praeclaro ingenio and egregia
virtutis indole praediti sunt. Osor. de Reg. instit.
has fitted and set forth by common good parts expressed in open and apert,
just and discreet word and action, and also in special proof and use, the
same in all occasions, capable, sensible, wise temperate, and understanding; in
his profession carrying credited assurance by his former times, place,
institution, study and industry well known, commendably formerly, and ever
dispent. If thou make this careful and likely good election of thy Physician,
thou shall not so usually find so many lucklesse events of after-repented
choices, nor so commonly heedlesly draw upon thy self so many miserable
calamities as daily fall out in want of more reasonable fore considered care
thereof. Happy is he who does converse with the prudent, Prudentia ad rationis
norma^ quae cogitat quae que agit vniuersa dirigit, and nihil praeter rectum
and laudabile facit. Macrob.
consulteth the wise, trusts the just and honest, and imploreth skillful
help. God has promised his blessing unto the prudent, in his unaltered decree
destining unto providence both more certain prevention of evil, and also more
likely forestalling of otherwise more casual good. In the wise (with caution
and difficulty ever admitting any suspected or doubted trust) succeeds ever
for the sometimes A^tem in plerisque certam subuertere non debet paucoru^ vel
in paucis error. Galen. de Med. opt.
deceived issue, ordinarily redoubled recompense, of fools vngusted, but unto
the (...), etc. Omnia secuudum rationem facienti licet no^ succedat secundum
rationem non est ad aliud transeundum dum manet quod a principio visum est.
Hipp. Aph. lib. 2.
end deserving it, repaying the unknown inexplicable nectar of inf^^te
acquiescence of mind, and ample content of rich joy of heart unto it self. In
the skillful, error is barred frequence, and folly common or ordinary a
admittance. These things common experience does rarely know, because seldom
regarded: folly for ever possessing this world of fools, and a (...).
Solertia est dexteritas in verum scopum seu finem collimandi. Aristot. Eth. 6.
mite of wisdom being ever more rare e then ten mines of gold. Vir bonus and
sapiens, (...) repperit vnum Millibus e cunctis hominum consultus Apollo, (...)
ipse sui, etc. (...)
Know thou therefore the best pattern, aim ever to attain his nearest
affinity, with discreet coertion of that desire in want of so plentiful
supply, contentedly also accepting reasonable mediocritie, but ever eschuing
the hated name and inured note of known ignorance and adulterate Tantum^e otij
est a re tua tibi, aliena vt cures quae nihil ad te pertinent. Tere^^
bigamie of two callings, the one in common use wholly insufficient, the other
for the most part, but in partable to supply either outward presence or inward
worth. Commit thy life into his hand that esteems it worth his whole study
and endeavor, that understands the causes in nature, wherein consists life,
and is skilfully able to draw forth thy destined line unto the ^^most length
and date in nature: that knows (...) and opportunity of life, (...), etc.
Medicu^ vti prouidentia vt mihi videtur optimum est. Hipp. lib. 1. praenot.
that fears God, and lo^^ (...) man: unto whom known danger gives careful
caution, safety security, judgment resolution, variable circumstance more
wary circumspection, and general In medico nulla potest esse perfectio sine
illa encyclopedia quae homini viam munit ad foelicitatem. Scalig.
knowledge vnscanted counsel in all occurrents. Thus shall thou not betray thy
life to folly, nor by thy blame shall others (...). ^st and hoc vile and
miser^m cum stultis and fatuis insipere. Eurip.
ignorance deservedly punish and interrupt thy quiet ease. Foelix qui potuit
tran^uillam ducere vitam, Et laetas stabili claudere fine dies. Maximian.
Thus may thou both live in more free con^ent, and often more happy days,
Quasi poma ex ^rboribus cruda si sint vi auelluntur, si matura and cocta,
decidunt: sic vitam adolescentibus is aufert, senibus maturitas. Cicero.
and die in thy full time by a ripe and mature death, in the blessing of God,
and ^ight of nature, yielding thy life unto the common law ^wrod^ of
mortality, not falling under the heavy burden of thy own guilt in rash
exposall, or careless neglect.

FINIS.
Gentle Reader, I pray thee to correct these faults, escaped partly by reason
of the difficulty of the copy, and partly by absence of the Author.

Epist. p. 2. l. 6. r. any long burden. Epist. 2. p. ^. r. this necessary
plane talk. (...) compare r. compute. Page 3. lin. 20. for courses read
chances. ibid, l 26. (...) known^ certain p. 6. l. 6. r. the as well. ibid.
l. 19. grow, r. growing. (...) these. page 10 (...) (...) iteretur. p. 13. l.
4. deliuerage* r. delivering. (...) r. my. p. 17. l. 26. r. to diverse parts
diverse feauers. ib. l. 34 delivation. r. (...) l. 9. death. r. health p. 19. l.
14. cannot, r* runnot p. 21. l. 8. which r. with, ib. l.(...) r. these, p. 24.
l 30. liberty r. literature. p. 25. in marg. r. (...) (...) sole. p. 39. l.
35. r. content. p. 43. in marg. l. 37. r. (...) p 45. privy (...) 4^. l. 14.
r. be more completely. p. 56. l. 29. r. the other opposite. p. 62. l. 8. (...)
motions. p. 63. l. 13, motives, r. motioo^s. p. 69. l. 32. on, r. any one. p.
74. (...) p. 79 orderly, r ordinarily. p. 82. l. 36. eminent, r. emunct. p. 85.
marg. Scalig. (...) p. 88. l. vlt. ends, r. means. page 94. l. 21 precepts, r.
pretexts. Ib. first note (...) (...). p. 97. last note in marg after, ea quae
fecit, r, per ea quae (...) 103. the third note, (...). p. 104. l. 25. r.
indications. Ib. l. 29. (...) p. 106. l. 21. their, r, her p. 111. l. 3 r. the
illulion. ib. l. 14. divining, r diuing (...) continuing, r. confirmed. Ib l.
4. pofiting, r. profiting. p. 113. l. 21. wondes, r. (...) pa. 124, l. 10.
different, r, indifferent. p 127. l. 24. mean, r, meagre. Ib. l. vlt. (...)
fertility. page 130. himself, read it self.


