ANATOMY OF A CHRISTIAN Man.

WHEREIN IS PLAINE^ showed out of the Word of GOD, what manner of man a true
Christian is in all his conversation, both inward, and outward.

FVLL OF HEAVENLY INSTRUctions, by practice whereof we may be (...) in the life
to come, our Creator in his glor^* and our Redeemer at his right hand.

By M. WILLIAM COVVPER, Minister of Gods Word.

2 Cor. 519. If any man be in Christ Jesus let him becom^ (...) creature.
LONDON. Printed by T. S. for John B^dge, and are (...) at the great south do^
of (...) Bri^aynes (...)

TO THE MOST SACRED, CHRISTIAN, TRVLY CATHOLIQVE, AND mighty Prince, JAMES,
King of great Britayne, France and Ireland, defender, etc.
AMong many most excellent graces wherewith your Princely Mind is beautified,
your Highnesses ever constant, and vndiuertable affection toward all your
loyal servants is not one of the least.

Principis est virtus maxima nosce suos. Martial.
This emboldeneth me to offer to your Highness patronage this little Treatise
which first I dedicated to your Highness honorable servant, of good memory,
the Earl of Dunbar, and presented to himself in writing, while he was here
in this Country, but before it could be finished by the Printer, he was taken
away by bitter and untimely Death. For so, after that memorable saying of
Plinius secundus, justly may I tell it. Mihi acerba semper, and immatura
videtur esse mors illorum, qui immortale aliquid parant: Nam qui voluptatibus
dediti quasi in diem viuunt, viuendi causas quotidie finiunt, qui vero posteros
cogitant, and memoriam su^ operis ostendunt, his nulla mors non immatura est,
vt quae semper inchoatum aliquid abrumpat. But of this, what I might speak, (I
doubt not) with your Highness approbation, and of such your Majesty's
subjects as love truth, and peace, I dare not: -- -- -- -- Nam vulneramentis
Intempestiue, qui mouet illa, nouat. Yet when all is reckoned to the uttermost,
our account in the end is, that we can lose nothing by the death of any, so
long as we enjoy the benefit of your Highness life, which I pray God may be
long and happy, exceeding all our days, who from our young years has felt
the sweetness of your Majesty's most wise, and peaceable regiment. For what he
was, either for gravity in conversation, or wisdom in government, he was it
by your Highness instruction, as a Disciple trained up by your self: who out
of the treasure of your Princely mind can imprint the like stamp of good
things in others, which you did in him, if so be (which I must crave pardon to
speak) your Highness fore-gather with such another object, as he was,
whereupon to work. For as the Sun in the firmament suppose he shine alike
upon many Palaces at one time, yet does most illuminate those, which have most
ample windows to receive his light: so that if any of them be not sufficiently
lightsome, the fault is not in the Sun, but in themselves, for he is alike
good unto them all, if they were alike capable of his goodness, so is it with
a King in the midst of his Nobles, Counsailours, and special servants. But
least I go beyond my line, profering to stretch mine arm higher then my
stature may carry it, I return to my humble supplication, that seeing he who
now translated to the Court of heaven, leads there a happy and blessed life,
has no other mean on earth, whereby to live among men but by his good name.
Your Majesty who gave him a wealthy and honorable life for his virtue, while
he was in the body, will continue to keep life to his name, when himself is
gone. For thus even in the estimation of Ethniques who had but Natures light,
is alterum patrimonium, which in this earth is the just reward of a virtuous
life; Et memorem famam qui been gessit, habet. And for this cause that your
Highness will grant your favorable countenance to this little Treatise,
which in token of my love toward him for his unfeigned affection toward your
Highness service, I did first put forth under his name, and now humbly craves
to be shadowed under your Highness protection.

Your Highness most humble Servant and daily Orator Mr. William Cowper
Minister at Perth.

Proverbs 10. 7. The memorial of the just shall be blessed, but the name of
the wicked shall rott.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GEORGE, EARL OF DOVNBAR, LORD HOWME OF BARWICKE, LORD
NORHAM, ONE OF THE LORDS Lieutenants of the middle Shieres of great Britayne,
Captain and Governor of his Majesty's Town and Garrison of Barwicke, Knight
of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Lord high Treasurer of Scotland, and one
of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel, in both Kingdoms.
RIght Noble Lord, that which in this Treatise containing the Anatomy of a
true Christian, I have publicly proposed for the use of many, I have now
particularly for many reasons dedicated to your Honor, but in special because
that which here is pointed out of the Christian, is in your Lordship performed
in a good measure, having by the grace of God learned so to govern your life,
that hitherto in a most high and difficill calling ye have lived si non sine
peccato, if not without si^ne, (for that is not given to any man upon earth, if
we say we have no sin we deceive our selves) 1 Ioh. 1. 8.
saltem sine crimine, at least without such offense of malicious wickedness,
as might make your Lordship culpable before men.

For your life toward God has been religious, as the private exercises of
godliness, customable to your Lordship by your self and with your family,
and the public reverence of the word, and observance of the Saboth in every
place does testify. Toward his Majesty faithful, from a most inward
affection, from whom ye have learned to rule others, by learning to obey him:
Optime enim imperandi rationem tenent, quieam been parendo didicerunt. In your
self a rare example, of humility in honor, of gravity, temperance, and
sobriety in the midst of wealth, and that in all the parts of your Lordships
behavior. Which is not a small thing, if it be considered, that as men of
honor, when they do evil plus exemplo peccant, quam culpa, are more hurtful
by their evil example, then by their evil deed; so if they live godly, they
do not so much good to themselves by well doing, as to others by their good
example. Toward evil men a iustitiar, not flexible from equity for fear or
favor. Toward good men courteous. Toward all men conscientious, that in no
part of the land is there any found to murmr, or charge your Lordship with
unrighteousness, unless it be such who in their blindness think the seruite
of God according to his word a servitude and bondage, not knowing quod sic
seruire Deo, est regnare. And esteems the law of a lawful King a tyranny,
who because they would do all things per vim potius quam virtutem, by violence
rather then virtue; whose pleasure is to live controling all, uncontrolled of
any, like Nimrods, or the sons of Anak, therefore they grudge as
Malcontents, that the law of the King is not, as Anarxexes spoke of the laws
of Solon, like the webbes of the Ettercope, through which the greater Flies may
break at their pleasure: where as among all reasonable men, it has ever been
received, as a principle, beatam esse rempublicam, in qualex dominatur, that
the commonwealth is happy, in which the law has dominion.

But to return to that which of all humane testimony is the greatest, the
honorable estimation his Majesty these thirty years bygone without
repenting has had of your Lordship, stands in the hearts of all his well
affected subjects, as a great commendation of your qualities, for, The pleasure
of a King is in a wise Servant (said Solomon) and the honor whereunto your
Lordship by his Majesty is preferred, is esteemed most justly so much the more
honorable, for that the Patron of virtue, for virtues sake has advanced you
to it. Thus by a right Marcellus, has your way to the Temple of honor, been
by the Temple of virtue.

For this moderation of life so evident in your Lordship, as I have said, even
among the natural Philosophers was accounted for true wisdom, and learning.
The practice of that golden precept Nosce teipsum, they esteemed to consist in
the government of a man his person, and actions according to the rule of
virtue, this they called the matter of wisdom, without which others, were
they never so learned, were accounted to have had, but the words of wisdom,
such as many now a days we have among us, with whom it fares, as of old with
Thales Milesius, who going out on a night to his contemplation, while he gazed
on the stars, he fell into the ditch. Many such Disciples I say has he left
behind him, who look so high with their learning, that they take no heed to
their own feet, to govern their ways with knowledge, they think it
sufficient to commend them, that they have travailed through many parts of the
world, have read much, and gotten some introduction to Sciences, when as in the
mean time they never travailed within themselves, never entered into their own
hearts, never read the book of their own conscience, and have not learned to
know, far less to rule themselves by wisdom.

But leaving them, I trust your Lordship will still continue to seek the
perfection of true wisdom, and knowledge there, where ye have gotten the
beginnings, for as the beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord, said
Solomon, so said he also, The end of all is, fear God, and keep his
commandments: this is the whole duty of man.

For this cause have I here presented to your Honor this Description of a
Christian, which not without great labor I have collected these ten or
twelve years bygone, out of the word of God, that in it your Lordship may
see, what manner of man a true Christian is, how his heart is continually at
his right hand, his mind upon good things, his will waiting upon his
superior, how a good conscience is his Paradise on earth, out of which he
will not go, how his eye is in his forehead, using so the time present, that
he prouides for the time to come, thinking on his end, and foreseeing that
wrath which is to fall on the wicked, that he may eschew it: how he refraines
his speech, when time of silence is? how he speaks in season the words of
knowledge, how he pondereth his paths, and orders all his way with equity.
In a word, how he is restored by grace in the regeneration to the image of God,
which was his most ancient glory communicated to him by his Maker in his first
creation, as more particularly will appear in the Anatomy following.

In reading whereof, where your Lordship finds a conformity with it, I am sure
it will be the matter of your joy, and thanksgiving to God, for the beginnings
of his grace in you, where not, I hope it will increase your Christian care to
proceed to a further perfection, unto the which these prayers interiected
between Gods precepts, and the Christians practice in every Chapter, for your
Lordships special use, I trust in his grace shall be profitable for you. I
have known by occasion that your Lordship makes conscience of the exercise of
prayer in private, and delights in it. I have therefore taken the more pains
to let your Lordship see, how God in his word teaches his children to pray in
the language of Canaan, that is, in such words as are dyted by his own Spirit,
and so coming from himself, we may be sure will be the more welcome, and
acceptable to him again, being offered in a golden censure, which is a heart
purified by faith, through the mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord.

Accept therefore (right Noble Lord) this Christian Man, who as one, who being
likest unto that which you are, at least which through grace would be, looks
for protection under your shadow, and offers himself ready to recompense
your Lordship with some comfort and instruction, at such time as your Lorship
may have the leisure to confer with him. Thus from mine heart praying unto
God for the continuance of his favor with you, which is the fountain of all
prosperity, both in this life, and in the life to come. I rest.

Your Lordships own to be commanded in Jesus Christ, WILLIAM COVVPER Minister
at Perth.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THis Treatise presents unto thee a lively image of a Christian man, as he is
delineate in the word by him who best knows him, that is, by the Spirit of God
that begets him: wherein it shall be evident, that albeit now in the world,
there be nothing rifer then the Christian name, yet is there nothing rarer then
the Christian man. Concerning which, a singular craft of Satan comes to be
discovered; for when the Christian name, which had the beginning in Antiochia
came first up in the world, Satan did what he could by false calumnies and
bloody persecution to suppress it. This sect, as witnesses S. Luke every where
Act. 8. 22. Act 6. Act. 16. Act. 17.
was spoken against, and Christians were accused to be blasphemers of God,
troublers of Cities, yea troublers of the whole world: worshippers of the
Sun, and of an Asses head, eaters of men's flesh, seditious, and vile abusers
of their bodies, and what ever else might make them odious to the ignorant
multitude. By the Jews they were called in contempt Nazari^s by Julian
scornfully they were termed G^lilaeans; by Ulpian under Seuerus impostores, as
if they had been coggers and deceivers; by Demetrian whom Cyprian confuted,
procurers of all the plagues of God that came upon the world. Yea, so far in
their ignorant malice did they proceed, that it was counted a capital crime
for any man to call himself a Christian. A most unreasonable thing indeed,
seeing as Tertullian reasons in his Apologet^que written in defense of
Christians. (...) nominis nullus est rea^s. Tertull. Apologet.


But now Satan has changed his course: for perceiving that do what he can,
Christianity flourishes like unto the Palm tree, which grows the more, the
more it is pressed down, he labors subtly to stain and obscure the glory of
that holy profession, which before by cruelty he could not overthrow: for now
the Christian name is become common, and men of most licentious life are
brought under the covering thereof; by which policy of Satan, men are put
into this false opinion, that it is an easy thing to be a Christian, and that
a man may live as he likes, and be a Christian good enough also: whereof it is
come to pass, that the Church is replenished, with such a number of bastards,
and counterfeit Christians, as this day we may see with grief of heart, some
Atheists, some Apostates, some adulterers, many murderers, most part
blasphemers: qui Christianum nomen ad ^dicium habent, non ad remedium. Aug. de
Temp. 215.
And under this general opinion of Christianity lives now many a one
miserably deceived, impugnant^s eum quem praedicant, either persecuting Gregor.
more. lib. 1.
the son of God by damnable doctrine, or else by their works denying him,
while they profess that they know him; turning the grace of God into
wantonness; having a name, that they are alive, but in truth are dead.

It is certainly a great pity to see so many of Adams sons, in word
condemners of their Fathers Apostasy; yet indeed imitators of his folly,
hiding their nakedness with a garment of Fig Tree leaves; not perceiving how
by so doing, they come near to the likeness of that Tree, which had fair
leaves, but no fruit, and therefore was once accursed by Jesus Christ, that it
might stand a perpetual example of that fearful curse, which these men may
look for at his hands, who have a show of godliness, but has denied the
power thereof, and are outwardly like unto painted Scpulchres, beautiful to
the eye of man, but in his sight who searches the heart, are full of
rottenness, and all filthiness; whereas indeed they should be the Temples of
the living God, far more glorious and beautiful within then without. Jacobs
heart under Esau his garment, were far more seemly for them who say they are
Jacobs brethren, then to have Jacobs voice only, that is, a tongue to speak
well, and yet the profane heart with the rough and cruel hands of Esau, which
sort of disguised Christians may look not for such a favorable success of
their dissembling with God as Jacob found with Isaac. For he being but a man,
was deceived through ignorance, but men deceive themselves, if they think that
in this manner God can be mocked, what ever shape men turn themselves into, the
Lord can discern the Israelite in whom there is no guile, and though Simon
Magus would seem so religious, as to redeem the graces of the spirit with the
loss of his money, yet can the Spirit of God paint him out in his colors, and
give him his own name, Thy heart is not upright in the sight of God.

Such is the power of godliness, that even they who love not the substance
thereof, are forced often times to lurk under the shadow of it: and such again
is the shame of sin, that they who love to commit it, yet do not love to
seem committers of it, hi sunt Ber. in Cant. ser. 66.
qui boni videri, non esse mal^ non videri, sed esse volunt, these are they who
will seem good, and not be so, will not seem evil, and yet will be so To
these we may speak as Chrysostom did to the like in his time. Dic hypocri^a,
si bonum est bonum esse, cur non vis esse, Chrisost. in Math.
quod vis apparere, quod autem ^urpe est apparere, turpius est esse? Tell me
hypocrite, if it be a good thing to be good, why will thou not be that which
thou would appear to be, for that which is a shame for a man to appear to
be, is it not much more shame for him to be it indeed? aut ergo esto quod
appares, aut appare, quod es, either else therefore be such, as thou appearest,
or then appear such as thou art.

It were happy for these men, if they could learn in time to examine
themselves according to that word, by which one day they will be judged, for
not every one that says Lord, Lord, will enter into the kingdom of God, He is
not a Jew, that is one without, neither has every one received an ointment
from that holy one: but he who is a Christian indeed, sicut particeps Ber. in
Cant. ser. 15.
est nominis, it a and haereditatis, with the name of Christ, the oil of grace
from Christ is also communicated to him, by which with Christ he is pertaker of
the inheritance. Qui vero Christum i^se non habet, Aug. de Temp. ser. 17
Christianus dici non potest, but he that has not Christ living in him by his
spirit, cannot be called a Christian. It is a notable saying of Basile, quid
inquit est Christianimus? what said he is Christianity? similitudo Basil.
hexa^ hom. 10.
Dei quoad eius capax est Natura humana, a similitude and conformity with God,
so far forth, as the nature of man is capable thereof.

Seeing then it is the doing, not the speaking of righteousness, must prove us
to be the children of God, For if we say we have fellowship with God, and
walk in darkness, we lie, and do not truly, and if any man be in Christ Jesus
he must become a new creature, let us study to prove our new generation by our
new manners, conforming our selves to the rule of a Christian conversation. A
pattern and example whereof I have gathered out of holy Scripture, and
proposed unto thee, wherein thou shall see first how the Christian who by his
first birth was borne a Natural man, by his second becomes a Christian, with
such other things as with his new birth he receives to make him a new man.
Secondly, what is the disposition of his inward man, by which he walks with
God. And thirdly, the disposition of his outward man, by which he walks among
men, and that in all the points of his conversation both inward and outward.
Every one whereof as ye have them set down particularly in several Chapters,
so does every Chapter consist of these four things. First, Gods precept to the
Christian: secondly, the Christians prayer to God: thirdly, his practice of
both: and these three have you set down in words of holy Scripture alanerly.
The fourth is, in the end of every Chapter some observations teaching us how to
make our own profit of the words of God. This is the order I have observed
here: for the Christian, because he knows that he is bound to live to the
Lord, and not to himself, does in all his ways set before him the
commandments of his God. And next, because he knows his own Natural
inability to fulfill these commandments, he turns all the precepts of God
into prayers, the use whereof I hope in all the parts of thy life, shall not be
unprofitable for thee. And last of all, he lives in a continual practice of
those du^ties of godliness which God in his word has commanded him, and he
himself does pray for.

Now in the end I have only to obuiate two sorts of men: by the one it is
surmized that I have plowed with the Heifer of another, specially of
Cashmannus, who has written before me, de nouo homine: by the other it may be
objected that I have presented an imperfect image of a Christian, and have left
out many things which profitably might have been pointed out concerning him.
For the first, as I give thanks to God for the labors of that worthy man: so
if I had borrowed any thing from him, I would never think shame to confess
it: nam ingenui pudoris est, vt ait Plinius, fateri per quos profecerimus, and
haec quasi merces authori iure optimo pensitanda est, ne fures esse videamur:
but the truth is, that many years before he came in this Country, this
Anatomy was drawn and portraited, as now you see it. As for the second I
humbly confess it, Malim tamen aliquid agendo maiorem ame doctrinam, and
sapientiam desiderari, quam nihil agendo prudentior, doctiorque iudicari. It
was a commendable policy of these Indian Philosophers, called Gymnosophista,
qui a suis discipulis, seuerius otis, quam negoti^ rationem exigendam esse
arbitrabantar. What I have done in this little labor, is a part of my
negotiation with that one talent I have received from the Lord, and which he
has charged me to put to the uttermost profit. And therefore had I rather by
doing of some good, lay open my infirmities to the censure of men, then to hide
by idleness my talent in the earth, and so to incur the indignation of my
Master. I know my self I have not done what I should, nay, not what by the
grace of God I could, yet that which in regard of my daily labor in the work
of the Ministry I might.

Accept therefore from me, this image of a Christian in a Christian manner;
apply it to thy self and look what similitude or dissimilitude thou find
between thee and it. Do as Elizeus did to the widows son, when he raised
him from death to life, he stretched himself over the child, he put his
mouth on the childs mouth, his eyes on his eyes, his hands on his hands, and
therewithal he joined prayer, and the child revived: so compare thou thy
self with this ensample; thy mind, thy will, thy affections, thy words, thy
actions with these of the new man: where thou ^indest a conformity, give thanks
to God for the beginning of the work of his grace in thee: where not, pray to
God further to quicken thee, that thou may grow in an holy similitude and
conformity with him, to the glory of his holy name, and thy everlasting comfort
in Christ Jesus, to whom be praise, glory, and honor for ever.

Thine in the Lord Jesus Mr. WILLIAM COWPER Minister at Perth.

PSALM. 49. Come, and I will tell you what the Lord has done to my soul.
THE ANATOMY of a Christian.
CHAPTER I. OF HIS NEW BIRTH OR REGENERATION.
The Lords Command concerning it.
I Knew that thou art obstinate, Mark our natural misery.
and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass, Esa. 48. 4. I knew that
thou would grievously transgress, therefore have I called thee a
transgressor from the womb, verse. 8. In thy nativity when thou wast borne,
thy nauill was not cut, thou wast not washed with water, I saw thee polluted in
thine own blood, Ezech. 16. 4. 6. Nevertheless, for my names sake, and for my
praise, have I refrained my wrath from Behold what a love the Father has ^ewed
us.
thee, that I cut the^ not off, Esa. 48 9. Yea, even when thou wast in thy
blood, I said unto thee, thou shall live, ^ swear unto thee, and entered into a
covenant with thee, says the Lord, and thou art become mine, Ezech. 16. 8. For
why shall I cause others to travail and bring forth, and shall I remain
barren, says the Lord? Esa. 66. 9. No; But in the mids of my children, the
work of mine hands, shall my name be sanctified, Esa. 29. 23. Thou shall call
me father, and not turn from me, Ierem 3. 19. And I will put a new spirit in
thy bowels, that thou may walk in See the will of God concerning our
sanctification.
my statutes, Ezech. 11. 19. Old things are passed away, behold all things are
made new: if any man be in Christ, let him become a new creature, 2. Cor. 5.
17. Verily I say unto you, except a man be borne again, he cannot see the
kingdom of God, Ioh. 3. 3. Be ye therefore renewed in the spirit of your
mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. Putting on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after
the image of him who created him, Coloss 3. 10.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this command.
O Lord, 1. Cor. 15. 50.
since flesh and blood cannot inherit thy kingdom, Matthew. 5. 8.
and none can see thee, but the pure in heart, 1. Ioh. 3. 2.
and such as are like thee; I beseech thee Lord 2. Cor. 3. 18.
to transform me into thine image from glory to glory by thy spirit, that Ioh.
17. 24.
where thou art, there I may be, to behold thy glory. Matthew. 5. 36.
It lies not in my power to change one hair of my head, to make it white,
which is black; Job. 14. 4.
far less can I change mine heart, to make it clean, which is filthy. James
3. 8.
No man can tame the nature of man, Eccles. 1. 15.
that which is crooked he cannot make straight: but, O Lord, Luke 18. 27.
that which is impossible with man, is possible with thee, Psalm. 146. 8.
thou give sight to the blind, thou raisest up the crooked, thou Psalm. 107.
34.
turnest a barren wilderness into a fruitful land, Psalm. 104. 30.
thou sendest forth thy Spirit, and renewest the face of the earth, Romans 4. 17.
thou call things which are not, and make them to be; 2. Cor. 1. 9.
yea thou raisest up the dead. O Lord declare this thy great power in mercy
upon me, turn the barren wilderness of mine heart into a fruitful garden,
water it with the dew of thy grace, that receiving Heb. 6. 7.
a blessing from thee, it may bring forth fruit unto thy glory. Send forth thy
Spirit, and breath life into my dead soul, that I may live, and praise thee, O
God of my salvation for ever thorough Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The Christians Practice of this command.
I Was conceived, and borne in sin, Psalm. 51. I God is the author of our
regeneration, it is not done by us.
walked as a child of wrath, according to the course of the world, after the
spirit that works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. But now I am
received to mercy, 1. Tim. 1. 16. and am by the grace of God, 1. Cor. 15. 10.
the workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus to good works, Ephesians. 2. 10.
And this the Lord has made me, I made not my self, Psalm. 100. 3. he quickened
me when I was dead in sin, and trespasses, Ephesians. 2. and of his abundant
mercy has begotten me to a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus from the
dead, 1. Pet. 1. 3. and has given me power to be one of his sons, borne
again, not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
God, Ioh. 1. 13. for of his own will he begat The seed of our new birth is
Gods word.
me with the word of Truth, Iam. 1. 18. Of a seed not mortal, but immortal,
the word of God who lives and endures for ever, 1. Pet. 1. 23. As the wind
blows where it lusts, and we hear the sound The manner of his working it,
unspeakable.
thereof, but cannot tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes; so is every man
who is borne of God, Ioh. 3. In the natural generation, we cannot tell what
way the bones grow in the womb of her that is with child, Eccles. 11. 5. Far
less can we know the unsearchable ways of God, Romans 11. 33. In this new
generation, it is the Lords doing, and is marvelous in our eyes; Psalm. 18. 23.
His holy name be blessed therefore for ever and ever.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
ELection is the first spring that flows from the 1 Our election is not known
to us before our Regeneration.
bottomless fountain of Gods love, but for a long time it runs so secret
that we cannot see it, till it break forth and appear in our Regeneration, or
effectual calling.

Regeneration is the first manifest effect of 2 Regeneration is the first
manifest effect of God his mercy toward man.
Gods mercy toward a man: as we could not be men, if we had not been
conceived and borne; so can we not be Christian men, unless we be borne
again. Therefore it is, that when Nicodemus a Master in Israel, was to be made
a Disciple of Christ, the first Doctrine that our Savior taught him, was of
Regeneration.

And it stands as a rule for all men in Christ's 3 And the first lesson we must
learn in Christ's school.
school, If any man will be my Disciple, let him deny himself. Now, both
learned and unlearned live as if Christianity consisted in speaking, and
professing; but sure it is, the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power
and practice, and he has not learned Christ, who has not learned to cast off
the old man, who is corrupted through deceivable lusts.

In the first generation we were begotten 4 Our first generation and our
second compared together.
men by the will of fleshand blood, in the second we are begotten Christian men
by the will of God. In the first, our mortal father begat us to succeed him;
in the second, our immortal father has begotten us for ever to abide with
him. By the first, we may say to corruption, thou art my Job. 25. 6.
father, and to the worms, ye are my brethren and sisters: by the second, we
may say to God, thou art my father, and to Jesus Christ, elect Angels, and holy
men, ye are my brethren. For in the Ephesians. 2.
first, we were conceived and borne in sin, and consequently heirs of wrath
and eternal damnation; but in the second, we are the workmanship of God,
created in Christ to good works, and consequently heirs of grace and glory.

If our first generation had been good, 5 By nature we have nothing in us can
profit us to salvation.
there had not needed a second. In natural men, there are some remnants of
Gods image, and some sparckles of light, by which they differ from beasts, and
a fellowship is entertained among men; but these cannot profit man to
salvation, but rather makes him inexcusable, and increases his damnation.
Vigens ratione, and non viuens Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 35.
ratione, Man endued with reason, and not living by reason, turns that which
is his glory into shame, because he detaines and withholds Romans 1. 18.
the truth in unrighteousness.

Our blessed Savior far abaseth the pride 6 For in a natural man there is
nothing but the blind leading the crooked.
of nature, when he says that man cannot enter into Gods kingdom till he be
borne again. What ever the Semipelagians of our time say to magnify the arm
of flesh, and to diminish the praise of Christ's grace; certain it is, there is
nothing in man by nature, but the blind leading the crooked; that is, a blind
mind leading a perverse and crooked will: and so no marvel that both of them
at length, if they be left unto themselves, fall into perdition.

It is a pity to hear silly worldlings boasting 7 Nat^lists boasting of the
privileges of their first birth, are to be pitied.
of the privileges of their first birth, such as Nobility of blood, and
ancietie of their inheritances, and are not humbled by considering that they
are borne heirs of Gods wrath, which they shall inherit for ever, when all the
comforts of their earthly inheritances shall forsake them. Be what thou will,
if thou have no more then thou have by thy first birth, it were better for thee
thou had never been borne, thou shall curse for ever the loins that begat
thee, and the womb that bare thee, and the pappes that gave thee suck, thou
shall curse the day wherein it was said of thee, A man is borne; and thy vain
temporal gloriation, shall end in a sore eternal lamentation.

Nicodemus was somewhat excusable though 8 Ignorance of the doctrine of
Regeneration is now mexcusable.
he understood not the doctrine of regeneration, because he had never heard it
before; but now, if we be ignorant of it, we are altogether inexcusable; both
because it is so clearly taught us in the word, and so necessarily required of
us, that without it we cannot, as says our Savior, enter into the kingdom of
God.

The names which regeneration receives in 9 By what names Regeneration is
expressed in holy Scripture.
holy Scripture, may help us some way to know it, if they be considered; for
it is called sometime a new creation, sometime a new birth, sometime a
renouation, and sometime a transformation. There are (says Basil) two sorts of
creation: vnum Basil. in Epist. 41. ad Caesar.
eorum quae ex nihilo, cum non essent sunt condita^ alterum eorum, quae ex
prioribus ad meliora immutantur: and of this last sort is Regeneration.

Of this, it is evident that Regeneration is a 10 What Regeneration is.
mutation of the whole man, both soul and body from one thing to another;
namely, from sin to sanctification, from darkness to light, from death to
life, from the power of Satan to God, Act. 26. 18.

In every mutation one thing remooues, and 11 Of the change made in
Regeneration.
another succeeds. As in every generation, vnius ortus est alterius interitus;
so is it in this generation, that which dies is corrupted nature, called the
Old man; that which is quickened, is renewed nature, called the New man: he
who has rightly learned Christ, cast, off, concerning the conversation Ephesians.
4. 22.
in time past, the old man, which is corrupt thorough deceivable lusts, and
put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness. Oportet enim eum qui alteram vitam Basil. de Sancto. cap. 15.
incepturus est priori finem imponere.

The Regeneration then of the soul has two 12 Regeneration of the Soul
consists in two.
parts; the first is, the mortification of the old man, called also the
circumcision of the heart, and the crucifixion of the flesh: the second, the 1
The first is mortification of the old man.
vi^ification of the new man, called also the first resurrection.

Corrupted nature is called the old man for 13 Corrupted nature compared to an
old man for three causes.
three causes; first, because it is almost as old as our nature: for it began
in Adam, soon after his creation. Secondly, it is called the old man, in
respect of the new man arising to succeed in his room, to the possession of
soul and body, which before we possessed by him. And thirdly, because in the
godly this corruption waxes weak and infirm, wearing daily nearer and nearer
to death, after the manner of old men.

But it is to be marked, that in these two last 14 Sinful nature is never old
in the wicked.
respects, sinful corruption of nature is named the old man, in men regenerate
only, and in no other; for in men unregenerate, their corruption shall for
ever possess them, it increases upon them, and is young, strong, and lively,
even when they themselves are weak, and wearing to the grave.

Now, a^ no birth can be without sorrow, nor 15 Regeneration cannot be without
spiritual pain and dolor.
death without dolor, nor circumcision, or cutting of the flesh, without
pain; so cannot our regeneration be wrought without godly sorrow, and anguish
of spirit: which I mark for the comfort of the godly, that they may know that
sanctified troubles of conscience, are but the dolours of the new birth, and
therefore should not be discouraged with them.

The infant that has lien but nine months 16 Satan a great troubler of us in
the work of our Regeneration.
in the mothers womb, cannot throng out into the world without pain; and
think thou to be lighter of sin, wherein thou wast conceived and borne,
and which also has been so many years nourished in thy bowels without pain?
As Pharaoh grieved Israel forest, when they strove fastest to liberty; and as
that dumb spirit tormented that young man worst, when he saw he was to be cast
out of him, Mark. 9. 25. So Satan troubles the godly most heavily, when he
sees the time of their deliverance from his servitude and bondage nearest.

But our comfort is, that God is faithful, as he begins the work, so will he
finish and end it: 17 But he fights in vain, for God will finish it.
Strong is Satan indeed, but Christ our Lord is that stronger one. Pharaoh may
repine, but he shall perish, and the Israelites of God shall go Luke 11. 22.
through; that unclean spirit in our parting from him may rend us, and cast us
as dead men to the ground, but out shall he go, and Christ by his hand shall
raise us up again.

The other part of the Regeneration of the 18
Soul is called, as I said, the vivification of the 2 The second is
vivification of the new man.
new man, and the first resurrection, where in our heavenly father communicates
to us his own seed, 1. Pet. 1. his nature, 2. Pet. 1. 4. and his image, 2.
Cor. 3. 18. For since earthly fathers beget creatures like unto themselves,
shall we think that the heavenly father begets children to another
similitude, not his own? Surely they do greatly dishonor the Lord, who in
their words say they are the sons of God, and yet in their actions resemble
the image of Satan.

The Regeneration again of the body consists 19 Regeneration of the body
consists in two.
also in two; first, in a right using of the members of our body, as weapons of
righteousness to serve God, which we are taught to do by grace: Next, in a
full deliverance of them from mortality and corruption.

Of this, it is clear that the Regeneration of 20 Regeneration will not be
perfected til the resurrection.
the whole man will not be perfected till the day of resurrection, called for
that cause by our Savior, the Regeneration, Matthew. 19. 28. Now, through grace
the Soul lives a happy life in the body, though not as yet fully cleansed and
separated from sin. Out of the body it lives a more happy life: being freed
from all sin; but yet not contented, for the soul was not made to live by it
self, but in the body, and therefore cannot rest contented, so long as it wants
his own organe and companion; but when the body shall be raised again, and
soul and body reunited, both of them fully delivered from sin, and from the
fruits of sin, then shall our generation which now is begun, be perfected and
absolved.

As for our parents in this generation, we 21 Of our parents in the new
generation
have God for our Father in Christ, and Jerusalem, which is from above, to wit,
the Church of Christ, the mother of us all. The Apostle to the Corinthians
calls himself their Father; Though ye have ten thousand instructers, yet have
ye not many fathers, for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you, through the
Gospel, 1. Cor. 4. 15. And again to the Galathians, he calls himself their
mother; My little children, of whom I travail in birth again, till Christ be
formed in you, Gal. 4. 19. But Preachers are only ministerial parents, ye^
for this same should they be honored of people as their fathers, and should
again carry toward their people no less affection then fathers have to their
children, specially to procure their everlasting salvation.

But here both the natural mother is to be 22 The natural mother discerned
from the stepmother.
discerned from the stepmother, and the bastard children from the lawful; for
the chaste spouse of Christ will receive no seed into her bosom, but the seed of
her immortal husband, which is the word of God; and the lawful mother of the
sons of God will not give them any other milk to feed upon, but the sincere
and unmingled milk of Gods word, as Saint Peter calls (...), which she
offers to be sucked out of the pappes of the old and new Testament.

And therefore the Church of Rome, which 23 The Church of Rome a strumpet and a
stepmother.
withdrawes these pappes from the mouths of Gods children, or gives them the
milk of the word, mingled with the Traditions of men, pretend what she will,
is but a strumpet and stepmother.

And as there is a stepmother, so is there also 24 The lawful and kindly sons
of God, discerned from the bastard.
bastard children, they sit upon the knee of Christ's spouse, but never sucked
her pappes, to draw life and grace out of her breasts: such a one was Cham in
the Arc, such was Ismael in Abraham's house, such was Esau brought up with
Jacob on the knee of Rebecca: and alas, such are many in our time, who in
regard of profession are in Gods Church, pretending they are sons, but are in
very deed bastards, no way in their life resembling the image of their heavenly
father.

The Censure.
By these rules it is manifest that all are not Christians indeed, who this day
usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER II. Of his New Senses.
The Lords Command concerning them.
THou know not how, by Nature Naturally we are borno senseless of heavenly
things.
thou art wretched, and miserable, and blind, and poor, and naked, Reu. 3. 17.
For the natural man perceiues not those things which are of the Spirit of God,
1. Cor. 2. 14. he savors only the things of the flesh, Romans 8. 5. his wisdom
is death, for it is enmity with God verse 6. Hearken therefore unto my words,
and keep them in the midst of thine heart, Prou. 4. 21. Come Spiritual
Senses required to salvation.
and buy from me eye-salue to annoint thine eyes that thou may see, Reu. 3.
18. for I am he, who makes both the eye to see, and the ear to hear, Prou.
20. 12. I will bring forth the blind people, and they shall have eyes, and the
deaf, and they shall hear, Esa. 43. 8. He that walks in the dark, knows not
whither he goes, Ioh. 12. 35. But I am come a light into the world, that
whosoever believes in me should not abide in darkness, verse. 46. While
therefore ye have the light, walk in the light, that ye may be the children of
light, Ioh. 12. 36.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this command.
LOrd remove from me that curse, Luke 8. 10.
that in seeing I should not see, and in hearing I should not understand; Psalm.
119. 88.
quicken me according to thy loving kindness, so shall I keep the testimonies
of thy mouth. Specially work faith in my heart, Ephesians. 2. 8.
for it is thy gift. Mark. 9. 24.
I believe, O Lord, but help thou my unbelief: Luke 17. 5.
Increase my faith that mine eyes may Psalm. 119. 18.
be opened to see the wonders of thy law. Hos. 2. 14.
Speak to the heart of thy servant, that Revel. 2. 29.
I may get cares to hear what thy Spirit says, Psalm. 34. 8.
that I may taste how gracious thou art, that I 2. Cor. 2. 16.
may smell the savor of life in thy Gospel, and may so touch thee, that in
believing Ioh. 20. 31.
I may get life through thy holy name, and may so be joined with thee, 1. Cor.
6. 17.
that I may become one spirit with thee, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
for ever.

The Christians Practice of this command.
I Was borne of my natural mother deaf, The Christian by regeneration
receives the new senses.
dumb, and blind, but now the Lord has opened mine ears, Esa. 50. 5. so that
I discern the voice of my shepherd, and will not Of hearing.
hear the voice of a stranger, Ioh. 10. 5. for the Lord has given unto me
ears to hear what the spirit says, Revel. 2. he has also anointed mine
eyes with eye-salue, Reu. 3. 18. I look not Of seeing.
on things which are seen, but on things which are not seen, 2. Cor. 4. 18.
And have attained to some in-sight of that glorious inheritance prepared for
the Saints, Ephesians. 1. Yea, with open face I behold as in a mirror the glory of
the Lord, 2. Cor. 3. 18. I have smelled the sweet savor of Of smelling.
his garments, Psalm. 45. 8. and of his ointments, for which I love him, Cant.
1. 2. I have tasted Of tasting.
how gracious the Lord is, Psalm. 34. 8. his word is sweeter to my mouth then
the honey, or the honey comb, Psalm. 119. And I have touched my Of touching.
Lord, and his virtue has stayed the filthy issue of my sin, Luke 8. 44.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
THe Natural man lives not till forty and 1 The Christian lives as soon as
he is conceived.
five days after his conception be expired, but the Christian begins to live
as soon as he is conceived.

The principal effects of life are Sense and 2 Sense and motion two principal
effects of life.
Motion, and the more excellent the life is, the Sense and Motion is. In the
Natural man, Motion goes before Sense, at least before the use of In the
natural man motion goes before Sense. not so in the Christian.
the Senses; but in the Christian, Sense goes before Motion. For it is the new
Sense which causes the heart to move and stir in a new manner. Therefore is
it, that first we will speak of the Christians Senses, and then of his motion
or disposition.

Natural parents often times bring out their 3 No imperfect nor mutilate
children borne by the new generation.
children either dead, or wanting some Sense, or mutilate of some member; but
in the new generation it is not so, for the Lord begets no dead, no senseless,
no imperfect children, but living, endued with all their Senses, and perfect in
regard of the number of their parts.

The first Sense by regeneration restored to 4 The first Sense restored in
Regeneration is Hearing.
the Children of God, is the Sense of Hearing. As the ear was the first port
by which death was conuayed to the soul; so is it the first by which Bern. in
Cant. Sermon. 28.
life enters into it. Euah by hearing what the Serpent said, was brought to a
delectation in sin: and the Christian by hearing what the Spirit says, is
brought to a contrary hatred of sin.

The Spirit of God opens our ears, before 5 We must hear the Lord before we
see him.
he open our eyes; if we refuse to hear the Lord, we shall never see him:
Auditus est gradus ad visum, Hearing is a step to Seeing. As Adam after Bern.
in Cant. sermon. 41.
his Apostacy heard the Lord when he cried to him, but saw him not; so is it
with all his children, we may live in the body, and hear him, but no man can
live and see him.

It is the order appointed by God, that we 6 For by hearing our ^ies are
cured, and prepared to see God.
should hear him before we come to see him: Auditus aspectum restituet, we
lost our sight by transgression of Gods word, we get it again by obedient
hearing thereof. Sanet itaque auditus Bern. in Cant. sermon. 48.
oculum, qui turbatus est, vt serenus vi leat, quem turbatus non potuit. Let us
therefore by hearing learn how to cure our eye, that the eye being made
clear, may see the Lord, whom it cannot see, so long as it is troubled; then
shall we sing, As we have heard, so have we seen, in the Psalm. 48. 8.
city of the Lord of Hoasts.

Oh what a fearful sentence they seal against 7 A warning for such as refuse
to hear the word of the Lord.
themselves, who delight not to hear the word of the Lord? He that turns
away his ear from hearing of the Law, even his prayer shall Prou. 28. 9.
be abominable: for if on earth they get not access to God when they pray to
him, how shall they in heaven get access to see him? A just punishment of man's
rebellion, if he will not hear when God speaks, God shall not hear when he
prays, and shall never admit him to see his face in heaven.

But the ears required in the Christian are 8 Ears of the man regenerate are
internal.
internal, by which he may hear what the spirit says. Of these speaks our
Savior, He that has ears let him hear. All that heard him, says Revel. 2.
Matthew. 13.
Augustine, had ears, and yet few of them had Aug. Him. 28.
ears; Omnes habebant aures audiendi, and pa^ci aures obediendi: Ears to
hear, but not ears to obey; like those of Samuel, Speak Lord for thy 1. Sam.
servant hears: and of David, I will hearken Psalm. 85. 8.
what the Lord God will say, for he will speak peace to his people, and
Saints, that they turn not again to folly.

And they who have received these ears do 9 How the internal ears are known
by sanctification.
hear in such sort, that they are sanctified by hearing according to that of
our blessed Savior, Now are ye clean through the word which I Ioh. 15. 3.
have spoken to you. But alas, how great is the number of them, who after so
long a hearing of the Gospel, do still retain the filthiness of Iam. 1. 22.
their old sins? they are hearers only, and not 10 Carnal hearers of the
word discovered.
doers of the word, deceiving themselves: for either else when they hear the
word, they understand it not; or if they understand it, they are not moved with
it; or if they be moved, they are not mended by it, their motion being but
like that of Foelix, and their repentance like unto the Act. 24. 26.
morning dew; but few they are, whose ears God has opened by the grace of
Regeneration.

The second Sense we receive in the Regeneration, 11
is the Sense of Seeing. Satan promised 2 The second Sense we receive in
Regeneration is Seeing.
to our parents, that if they would eat of the forbidden tree, they should
become like God in knowledge; but like a false deceiuer as he is, he made them
like unto himself: for the knowledge of good, which they had by creation,
instantly they lost it by their transgression, and learned by experience that
evil which before they knew not; for their eyes were opened to see their
nakedness, and they were ashamed of it.

The eye of the body was made to behold the 12 As a troubled eye cannot behold
the light, so a wounded conscience dare not look to the Lord.
light, that by it we might see the rest of the creatures, and in them the
goodness of the Creator; but if the eye be hurt and wounded, non solum auertit
se a luce, sed etiam poenalis illi sit lux, It does not only turn away from
beholding the light, but the light also, which otherwise is delightful,
becomes painful to it. Sic and oculus cordis perturbatus and sauciatus
auertit se a iustitiae lumine, nec audet eam contemplari nec valet. So the eye
of the soul being hurt and troubled, turns it self away from the light of
righteousness, neither dare it, neither can it behold it.

An example whereof we may see in our first 13 An example hereof proposed in
Adam.
father Adam, who rejoiced at the presence of God, so long as he kept a good
conscience; but from the time the eye of his soul was wounded with
transgression, he ran away from God, he could not see the Lord as he was wont
to do, but was afraid to hear him. So cursed and consuming a canker is sin,
that it changes our sweetest comforts, and makes them become bitter terrors unto
us.

But this sight which we lost by the sin of 14 Sight lost by Adam restored
by Christ.
Adam, is restored again unto us by the grace of Christ, who annoynts our eyes
with eye salve, Revel. 3.
by which we are made to see, and discern things that are excellent: in a
word, he indues us with the gift of faith, by which we have fellowship with
God, so that we dare in assurance draw near the throne of his grace.

Now the eyes of Christ's spouse are two; by 15 The eyes of a Christian are two.
the one we know our misery, which causes us deny our selves: by the other
we know his mercies, Adam knew his misery before he was restored by grace, but
we cannot do so, and why?
which causes us to run unto him. Apostate Adam before his restitution by
grace, had his eyes opened to know his misery; for the knowledge of that good
which he had in the estate of innocence, made him incontinent sensible of
that evil, into which he had fallen by his Apostacy. But now man cannot know
his misery, till by the grace of Regeneration his eyes be opened; for till
that be, he knows no other estate, but the estate of sin, wherein he was
conceived, borne, and brought up, and which in his darkened cogitation he
esteems to be good enough, until such time he be translated into a better.

Sight once received should be diligently 15 Sight restored should be
diligently conserved.
conserved, for as the eye of the body is very tender, and easily offended, for
which cause God has guarded it with liddes which close and open most speedily
at the pleasure of man; so is it with the eye of the mind, and therefore the
good that may preserve it should be much esteemed, and the evil that may hurt
it carefully eschewed.

Three things are required for the help of 16 Three things helpful to
spiritual sight.
those spiritual eyes, by which the Lord is seen: first, that we have
another light beside the light of our own understanding; for sicut Sol sine
First, that Gods light illuminate our understanding.
Sole non videtur, ita nec Deus sine deo videri potest: as the eye albeit it
were never so clear, yet can it not see without the light of the sun; so our
understanding though it were never so quick, cannot attain to know the Lord,
unless that he by his own light reveal himself unto us in his word. And
therefore is it that the most wise Naturalists being destitute of this light,
had Romans 1.
their foolish hearts full of darkness, and became vain in their own
imaginations.

The second thing required is, that we have 17 Secondly, that we have some
conformity with God in holiness.
some conformity with God in holiness; for as no member in the body can
perceive the light of the sun, but the eye, by reason of a similitude which
is between them, both of them being appointed vessels and organes of light,
the one in the great, the other in the little world; so can no man see the
Lord, except in some measure he be like him: Blessed are the pure in Matthew. 5.
8. Heb. 12. 14.
spirit, for they shall see him, but without peace and sanctification no man
can see the Lord.

The third thing required, is attention: for even 18 Thirdly, that the heart be
stablished by attention and consideration.
as a tumbling and rolling eye sees not those things which are before it; so a
wandering mind not stablished by consideration and divine contemplation, cannot
see the Lord.

The bodily sight is two manner of ways 19 Sight two manner of ways offended.
offended, either by exterior dust cast into it, or by interior humors stopping
the opticke nerves within; so Satan either casts into our eyes the dongue of
the world, to blind us by it; or then by our own gross and carnal affections
stops the conduits of our sight, that we should not see the Lord: and
therefore both the one and the other should carefully be eschewed.

If the eye be once offended with the smallest mote, we delay not to remedy
it, but do implore 20 The sight offended should be cured without delay.
the help of such as are nearest us to take it out. Since by nature we are so
careful to keep the eye, by which we see the sun, how careful should we be
to conserve the eye, by which we see him who made the sun.

The third Sense restored in the Regeneration, 21 The third Sense restored in
regeneration is Smelling.
is Smelling. All the garments of our Bridegroom smell of Myrrh and Cassia,
but the virgins only feel the savor of his ointments, Psalm. 45. Cant. 1.
for which they run after him, they smell in the Gospel the savor of life;
and therefore as the Eagle smelling the carrion a far off, resorts unto it;
so the Christian senting lively in the word of Christ Jesus, slees speedily
after him, ascending after him in his affection, there where he is, to wit, at
the right hand of God in heaven.

But miserable are the wicked, for they savor 22 To the natural man nothing
savors well but dongue.
only those things which are after the flesh, like those unclean beasts in
the Law, which creep with all their four upon earth, senting nothing but
dongue, the puddle being more pleasant to such filthy swine then the pearl.
Woe be to them, for even in the Gospel of grace they smell no other thing but
the savor of death.

The fourth is the Sense of Tasting, by which the Christian so tastes the
sweetness of Gods mercy and the saving grace of Christ in the Gospel, 23 The
fourth sense restored in regeneration is tasting.
that it descends into his bowels to nourish him, and make him grow in
godliness: where as the wicked, if at any time they taste thereof, yet they
never digest it, the corruption of their nature being so strong in them, that
it suffocates and choakes the seed of the word, so that it profits them not to
salvation.

And the last is the sense of touching, which 24 The sift sense is touching.
in effect is done by believing, for, tangere Christum est credere in Christum,
like as the rest of Aug. in Joan. ^ract, 16.
the senses are comprised in faith, that iustifies a supernatural gift, which
Adam in his innocence had not, but in Christ is given us, a most How all these
senses are comprehended in faith.
ample gift, for it not only makes all things our own in Christ, but makes us
all manner of ways to enjoy Christ, it being most certain, that by faith we
hear him, and discern his voice, by faith we see him, by faith we smell him,
by faith we taste his saving grace, and by faith we so touch him, that we draw
virtue out of him.

In Nature, that which is the object of one 25 In the Christian the object of
one sense, is the object of all.
sense, is not always the object of another, as for example: a voice is heard by
the ear, but is not seen by the eye, but in the Christian renewed by grace,
that which is the object of any one sense, is also perceived by all the rest.

And herein has the Lord made his abundant love manifest unto man; for look
what manner 26 Gods great goodness, who by all possible ways communicates
himself unto man.
of ways a man may enjoy any thing that i^ good, all those ways does God
communicate himself to man, some good things we enjoy by seeing, and some by
hearing, and some by tasting; but the Lord not content to communicate himself
unto us by hearing, does also call us to see him, to smell him, to taste him,
to touch him, that so all manner of ways we may enjoy him: everlasting praise
therefore be unto him.

Again, we see that as in nature those things 27 No speech can give
understanding, where sense is wanting.
which are learned by Sense, cannot be understood of him who is destitute of
Sense; what auailes it to teach the harmony of Music to him that is without
ears? or to discourse of the comfortable light of the Sun to him that is
without eyes? Can any eloquence so well express the sweetness of honey, as it
is felt by tasting? Basil. exhort. ad Bapti.
Sensus enim omni sermon est efficacior. But it is more impossible that they
who are destitute of these new and spiritual Senses should understand those
things which concern the spiritual life.

Pitiful then is the ignorance of Naturalists, 28 As the beast knows not the
life of the man natural: so the natural man knows not the excellent life of
the Christian.
even of them who seem to the world to be most wise; for surely, as the bruit
beast understands nothing of the natural life of man, and knows not how far
it excels that sensitive life by which it lives, and therefore desires not a
better, because it knows no better; so the natural man knows nothing of the
excellency of that spiritual life, which the Christian has begun to live
here, and by which he shall live for ever hereafter: and therefore being
delighted with his own miserable life, has not so much as a desire of a
better.

The Censure.
By these rules it is evident that all are not Christians indeed, who now
usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER III. Of his New Food.
The Lords Command.
I Am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall not hunger, Jesus Christ is
the true bread of life.
and he that believes in me shall not thirst, Ioh. 6. 35. Labor not for the
meat, which perishes, but for that which endures to eternal life, which the
Son of man shall give you, Ioh 6. 27. Wherefore do ye lay out your silver,
and not for bread: The folly of worldlings who seek life in other things,
neglecting Christ.
and your labor without being satisfied? Every one that thirsts come ye to the
waters, and ye that have no silver, come, buy, and eat: come, I say, buy wine
and milk without silver, and without money. Hearken diligently unto me, and
eat that which is good, and let your soul delight in fatness: Incline your
ears, and come to me, hear, and your soul shall live, and I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Esa. 55. 1. 2. 3.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
O Lord, 1. Pet. 1. 3.
thou who of thine abundant mercy have begotten me again, 1. Pet. 1. 23.
by the immortal seed of thy word, in the bosom of Gal. 4. 26.
Jerusalem thine own spouse, and my mother, Esa. 66. 11. 13.
grant that I may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolation,
Psalm. 119. 41.
that so thy loving kindness may come to me, O Lord, and thy salvation
according to thy promise, Colos. 2. 2.
and mine heart may be comforted of thee my God in Christ, unto whom be praise,
and glory for ever.

Another.
O Thou Cant. 1. 6.
whom my soul loves, show me where thou feedest. Psalm. 4. 6. 7.
Many say who will show us any good, but, O Lord, lift up the light of thy
countenance upon me, so shall thou give me more joy of heart, then they have
when their wheat and their wine do abound. Cant. 2. 4. 5.
Bring me into thy wine-seller, stay me with thy slagons, and comfort me with
thine apples. John. 4. 14.
I know O Lord, that he who drinks of the water which thou give him, shall
never thirst any more, but it shall be in him a well of water springing up to
everlasting life; John 4. 15.
Lord give me of that water, that I may not thirst: John. 6. 33.
thou art that bread which came down from heaven, and gives life to the world,
John. 6 34.
Lord evermore give me of this bread, Ephesians. 3. 16.
that I may be strengthened in the inward man: Psalm. 119. 77.
Let thy tender mercies come down unto me, that I may live to thee my God for
ever in Christ Jesus.

The Christians Practice of this command.
HOw sweet are thy commandments to my How the Christian feeds on Gods word.
mouth? yea more then honey unto my mouth, Psalm. 119. 103. The Law of thy mouth
is better to me then thousands of gold and silver, Psalm. 119. 72. My delight
shall be in thy commandments, which I have loved, verse. 47. 1 In his Infancy.
In mine infancy, as a newborn babe I desired the sincere milk of the word,
that I might grow 2 When he comes to rip^ ^ge.
thereby, 1. Pet. 2. afterward coming to age, I delight in stronger meat, Heb.
5. 14. Having by custom my wits exercised to discern both good and evil,
ibid. and I know that when I shall be a perfect man, having attained to the 3
When he shall be a perfect man.
measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13. the Lord will give
me to eat of his hidden Manna, Revel. 2. 17. he will satisfy me with the
fatness of his house, and give me drink out of the rivers of his pleasures,
Psalm. 36. 8.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
IN the Law of Moses, every creeping thing that 1 No earthly thing can feed us
to eternal life.
creeps upon earth, and goes on the breast, was an abomination, and it was
not lawful for Israel to eat thereof: this was to signify, that no earthly
thing can be a lively food to nourish true Israelites to eternal life. The
proper food 2 Christ is the proper food of a christian, and how he is offered
and received.
of a Christian is Jesus Christ offered and presented to us in the Word and
Sacraments, received of us by faith, digested by prayer; for which cause the
Word is called our food by S. Peter, like as prayer is called our food by
Nazianzen: Nazian. orat. 18 ad ciues trepidantes.
quod corpori cibus, hoc animae est oration, Look what meat is to the body,
that same is prayer to the soul.

Israel was fed with Manna in the wilderness, 3 The more we eat of this
food, the greater appetite have we to it.
and they loathed it; it is not so with this bread, the more we eat of it, the
more we desire it, so far is it from working in us a loathing, that it
wakeneth in us a new appetite, the more we eat of it, the more we desire to be
further refreshed by it.

To the Christian in his infancy the word is 4 How the word is meat, milk,
and Manna.
milk, in his age it is stronger meat, and when he shall be perfected, it
shall be to him as hid Manna. Let us not therefore think at the first to
attain to those sweet and secret consolations which are locked up, and lie hid
in the word: three days did the people wait upon Christ, before he fed them
with miraculous bread, and many days must we wait upon Comforts of the word
cannot be attained at the first.
Christ, before that he feed us with his mystical Manna: But alas, we are no
less foolish then they, who knowing the place wherein a treasure is hid, gives
over the seeking thereof, because the first day they did not find it: except
with hearing and reading, we join diligent meditation, prayer, and practice
of Gods word, we cannot attain to the comforts contained in it.

Solomon says, that the people will curse him 5 Cursed are Papists who
withdraw the food of Gods word from Gods people.
who withdrawes the corn, but more justly deserve they to be cursed, who by a
more sacraligeous tyranny withdraw the bread of life from the people of God.
As the envious Philistims closed the fountains of water which Isaac had dug
for his family; so the hateful Papists stop from Gods people, the wholesome
fountains of lively Waters, which God in his Word has opened for their
refreshment.

They pretend that the Scripture is obscure. 6 The Scripture is not so obscure
in some places, that it is not plain in others.
But is it so obscure in some places, that it is not plain in others? Or is it
reason, that because strong meat is hurtful to Infants, therefore no milk
shall be given them? Gregory the Gregor. Moral. lib. 1.
great, compares the Scripture unto water, which in some place is so shallow,
that a Lamb may go through; in other parts so deep, that an Elephant may
swim in it. And to the same purpose, he says again, that some part Ibid.
of the Scripture is like unto bread, which must first be cut and broken before
that conveniently we can eat it: such is the Scripture which without help we
cannot understand. Other parts of it again, are like unto drink, that is more
easily received.

As the word is the seed of our new birth; 7 How the word is both the seed of
our birth, and food of our life.
so is it the food whereupon we are nourished when we are borne, that we may
grow up by it to everlasting life.

Every creature by instinct of Nature seeks 8 How all creatures seek the
increase and perfection of their life there, where they got the beginning, and
that by instinct of Nature.
nourishment, and increase of life, where it got the beginning: the beasts of
the field, such as the tender silly Lambs, so soon as they are procreated,
do turn them toward the breast of their mother, seeking the increase of life
there, where they got the beginning. The fowls of the air so soon as they
are hatched and brought out of the shell, gather themselves under the wings of
their Damme, seeking nourishment to their life there, where they got the
beginning. The Plants of the earth, so soon as receiving sap from their
mother, they begin to spring upward, so soon do they shoot their roots
downwards into her bosom, seeking continuance of life there, where they got
the beginning. And the same is also to be seen in the fishes of the sea.

Like as this by the instinct of Nature holds 9 The same also does hold true in
the Christian by instinct of grace.
true in the Creature, so is it also by instinct of Grace, true in the
Christian: for so soon as he is borne of the immortal seed of Gods word, he
turns himself toward the same word, seeking the increase and perfection of
his life there, where he got the beginning For it is most certain, that to
whom soever the Word becomes a seed of regeneration, to them also it becomes a
spiritual food, after which they hunger and thirst, that they may be nourished
thereby to eternal life.

As for them therefore who delight not in the Word of God, esteeming it a
weariness to them to hear it; let them excuse it as they will, 10 They who
delight not in the Word, declare that they were never begotten by it to a new
life.
the true cause is, that the Word was never unto them, the seed of their
regeneration: they are yet in the state of Nature, and most fearful is the
recompense of their error: for as they delight not in Gods Word, so has God
declared, that he has no pleasure nor delight Malach. 1. 10. 13.
in them.

The Censure.
And by these rules it is evident that all have not the Christians disposition,
who now usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER IIII. Of his New Growth.
The Lords Command.
FOllow truth in love, and in Lively members of Christ's mystical body grow
continually till they come to perfection.
all things grow up in him who is the head, Christ Jesus, by whom all the body
being coupled and knit together by every joint, for the furniture thereof
(according to the effectual ^ower which is in the measure of every part)
receives increase of the body unto the edefying of it self in love. Ephesians. 4.
15. 16. Cleanse ye therefore also your selves from all ^ilthnesse of the slesh
and Spirit, and grow up unto ^ull holiness in the fear of God. 2 Cor. 7. 1.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
O Lord Phil. 1. 6.
who perfectest every work which thou beginnest, bring forward I beseech thee
in me this work of my regeneration, Psalm. 62.
Stablish O God that which thou have wrought in me, that I may grow daily in
grace, till ^ be perfected. Luke. 8.
Alas, Lord, my corruption has in such sort choked the seed of thy word,
that it is scarce sprung up to the blade, which after so long planting and
watering, should have brought out long ere now the ripe fruit of godliness:
Heb. 5. 12.
where in regard of the time, I ought to have been a teacher of others, I am
yet alas but a babe, Heb. 5. 13.
inexpert in the word of righteousness. Lord s^ue me from that curse of the
wicked, 2. Tim. 3. 13.
that I should wax worse and worse, let G^l. 3. 3.
me not end in the sl^sh, when I have begun in the spirit: Punish not my former
sins with a barren heart, that I should be like that accursed earth, Heb. 6.
8.
which bears nothing but thorns and briars, Gal. 5.
these are the fruits of the slesh, which Ephesians. 4. 30.
grieves thy spirit, but as a lively member of Christ's body, quickened by his
spirit, Colos. 2. 19.
I may increase with the encreasings of God, and be daily filled with the
fruits of righteousn^sse, which are to the praise and glory of thy name,
through Jesus Christ.

The Christians Practice of this Command.
THE light of the righteous shines more The Christian grows in light and
strength.
and more unto the perfect day, Pro. 4. 18. and he goes from strength to
strength, till he appear before God in Sion, Psalm. 84. 7. When I was a
child, I spoke as a child, I understood It is a shame for professors to be
always children in understanding.
as a child, and thought as a child, 1. Cor. 13. 11. But as I grow in grace,
and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus, 2. Pet. 3. 18. I put childish things
from me, 1. Cor. 13. And now I give all diligence to join virtue with faith,
and with virtue knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and with temperance
patience, and with patience godliness, and with godliness brotherly
kindness, and with brotherly kindness, love, 2. Pet. 1. 5. Thus being knit to
the head by joints and bands, I increase with the encreasings of God, Coloss.
2. 19. fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of God,
Coloss. 1. 10. till at length I become a perfect man in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 4.
13.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
What the inclination of a child is, cannot 1 The Christians growth why
entreated of in this place.
well be known in his infancy, but with time as he grows, his disposition is
more and more manifested, therefore do we first speak of the Christians
growth, before we come to speak of his manners.

Growth in grace and godliness, is an inseparable 2 Growth an inseparable
consequent of life.
consequent of spiritual life. Elijah fed by God, walked in the strength of
that bread forty days: but the Christian being nourished, as is said before,
does walk all his days in the strength thereof, making a daily progress in
godliness, till at last he become a perfect man.

The blessing pronounced by the Lord upon 3 Gods blessing both in the first and
second creation, is never ineffectuall.
man in the first creation, was this, Increase and multiply: and the blessing
pronounced upon man in the second creation, is this, Grow in Esa. 61. 3. 11
grace and knowledge. The Christians being as trees of righteousness, and
planting of the Lord, He is not blessed of God, that grows not in godliness.
in whom he will cause righteousness to grow for his own glory. Seeing we see
that the first stands effectual unto this day, shall we think that the second
can be ineffectuall? No indeed, he is not blessed of the Lord, who grows not
in grace.

For it is promised under Christ's kingdom, 4 For growth is a grace promised
under the kingdom of Christ.
Esa, 55. 13. that the Fur should grow in place of the thorn, and the Myrrh
tree should grow in place of the Nettle, that is, the seed of grace should
spring up in that heart, wherein the root of bitterness had budded before. And
except we find this change wrought in us, we cannot as yet say that we are
translated into the kingdom of Christ.

The growth of a Christian is expressed in holy 5 The growth of a Christian
compared to the growth of a child unto an old man.
Scripture by sundry similitudes: first he is compared to a child that grows
till he become a man. It is thought strange to see a man of many years, who
yet in stature, strength, and wit, went never beyond the measure of a child,
such a one is counted for a monster, and truly no better is the careless
Christian, who after so many years profession, grows not in grace nor
knowledge, but still remains a child in understanding.

Secondly, he is compared to a trauailer that 6 Compared secondly to the
pro^sse made by a trauailer.
bides not always in one place, but every day cuts off some piece of his way,
which he leaves behind him, and draws daily nearer and nearer to the end
proposed to him, and at last comes to it: so the Christian forgetting that
which is behind, endeavors himself to that which is before, following hard
toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
Phil. 3. 13.

But the wicked, ambulant in circuitu, they still 7 The miserable servitude of
the wicked, in which they labor continually without making either progress or
profit.
go on in a compass, walking round about in the circle of their sins, from
one to another, and returning back again to the same, like the blinded horse,
who labors and draws about the Mill continually, but at evening is in the
same place, wherein he was in the morning. So they being borne in sin, go
about in sin, like blinded captives of Satan, having no other refreshment, but
to exchange one sin with another, and at last they die in their sins, for
whom it had been good that they had never been borne.

Thirdly, his growth is compared to the 8 The growth of a Christian compared
thirdly to the growth of a tree.
growth of a tree, which being planted by the rivers of waters, has abundance
of moisture and sap, and brings out fruit continually, Psalm. 1. specially
to the Palm tree, which all seasons of the year is both flowrishing and
fruitful, as Naturalists write of it.

Fourthly, it is expressed by the growth of 9 Compared fourthly to the growth
of corns in the fields.
Corns in the fields, which as says our Savior: Mark. 4. first, spring up to
the blade: secondly, have ears; and then bring out ripe corns, so does the
Christian by degrees grow to his perfection.

And fifthly the Christians grouth is expressed 10 Compared fifthly to the rising
of the Sun till the noon day.
by the rising and ascending of the Sun, which increases and shines more
and more to the noone-tide of the day. For as for a declining time, or an
evening, wherein his light should die out, the Christian by the grace of God
shall never know it, for he that illuminateth him is that bright and excellent
Sun of righteousness, who is ever gloriously rising, and never declining nor
going down.

Last of all, he is compared to a burning 11 And last to the light of the
golden candlestick continually supplied by Oil.
Lamp, Luke 12. or to that golden candlestick whereunto through the seven
pipes of gold, Oil is carried continually from the two Olives that stand
before the ruler of the world, Zach. 4 2. whereof it comes to pass, that his
light can Zach. 4. 2.
never fail.

Which yet is not so to be understood as 12 This is not so to be understood as
if the Christian were not subject to falls and diseases.
though the Christian were not subject to his own fainting, falling, and
dwining diseases, for he has his own Winter and Summer, falling and rising,
decaying and renewing. But it is sure that by these same temporal falls and
decays his grouth is the more advanced, in as much as they work in him a
greater hatred of his sinful corruption, and a more earnest desire of Grace,
by which he may stand. Minime vero bonus est, qui melior non vult fieri, but
truly Bern. epist. 91.
he is not good who has not a fervent desire to be better.

Yet is it not possible that he can utterly decay, 13 Yet is it not possible
that the Christian can fall finally.
and finally fall away, and that because he bears not the root, but the root
bears him. Where other Parents bear their Children no longer then during the
time of their Infancy, that is the Lords praise that he bears his children to
their old age, Esaias 46. 4. Whereof it comes to pass that they who are planted
in the courts of the Lord, flourish even in their old age. Psalm. 92. 13. We
will therefore rejoice in our God, for it is he who keeps our souls in life.

But cursed are the wicked, who instead of 14 The grouth in the show of
godliness made by the wicked what it is like.
growing proceed from evil to worse: or if at any time they make a show of
godliness, it is like the grouth of Corn on the tops of houses; or like the
seed springing out of stony ground, which has an apparent grouth for the
time, but euanishes quickly, because it has no root.

Surely as the fall of the leaf is a token of 15 Falling away of the wicked
foreshewes a Winter of Wrath to come upon them
Winter approaching: so the falling away of the wicked in this life, is a
foretoken of that endless winter of fearful wrath, which from God is to come
upon them.

A double curse of God is upon them: for in this life their present barrenness
is plagued with final sterilitie: and their state full rightly being shadowed
in that Fig tree, which because 16 The barrain hearts of the wicked are
plagued in this life with final sterilitie.
it had no fruit to give our Savior when he required it, was cursed with this
curse: never fruit any more grow upon thee. Oh that wicked men would consider
this, that a barraine heart, which can bring forth no good fruit, is a
fearful curse of God, being like unto that earth, which after labor bears
Heb. 6.
nothing but Thorns and Briars, whose end is burning!

But the other is worse, for in the life to 17 And in the life to come with
endless and remediless scarcity.
come a remediless scarsitie of all good things shall come upon them: which
like unto those seven years of famine in Egypt, eating up the seven years
of plenty, shall devour all the apples of their former worme-eaten pleasures;
all fat and excellent things shall then depart Revel. 18. O most unhappy
condition!
from them; the earth shall give them none of her increase; the water shall not
lend them out of her treasures so much as a drop to cool them: the light of
the Sun shall not comfort them; yea, the light of a candle shall not Revel.
18. 23.
shine unto them, because they despised the light of the Lord, and rendered no
fruit unto him in all the time of their life.

And now the great number of Professors, 18 A warning to carnal Professors.
who stand like fruitless trees in the Lords Vineyard, who in stead of
growing, decay, having lost their first zeal with the Church of Ephesus,
Revel. 2. 4.
looking back to Sodom with the wife of Lot; Genesis 19.
longing again for the Onyons and flesh pots Numb. 15.
of Egypt with the carnal Israelites; returning 2 Pet. 2. 22.
like dogs to their vomit, and so ending in the Galat. 3. 3.
flesh where they made a show of beginning in the spirit, evidently proves,

The Censure.
That all have not the Christians disposition, who now usurp the Christian
name.

CHAPTER V. Of his New Apparel.
The Lords Command concerning it.
THou art miserable, and naked Man's miserable nakedness by nature.
by nature, and know it not: Revel. 3. 18. I counsel thee, come and buy
from me white raiment, that thy filthy nakedness do not appear. verse. 1^.
If thou will hearken to my wisdom, and hide my commandments within thee,
Prou. 2. 1. I will spread my skirts over thee, and cover thy nakedness. Ezech.
16. 8.

Put ye therefore on the Lord Jesus Christ, and What garments make the
christian honorable in the eyes of God.
take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: Romans 13. 14. But
as the elect of God, holy, and beloved, put on tender mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness and long suffering: Col. 3. 12. and above all
things, put ye on Love. Col. 3. 14. Finally, be strong in the Lord, and put on
the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the assaults of
the devil. Ephesians. 6. 10. 11.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
O Lord, Psalm. 29.
who give all health and grace to thy people, Psalm. 35. 26.
take from me I beseech thee, the filthy garments of sin, shame, and
confusion, Psalm. 51.
wherewith I was conceived and borne, Psalm. 132. 9. 16.
and cloth me with thy righteousness and salvation: Mat. ^2. 12.
give me that marriage garment, whereby I may have place at thy banqueting
table, Acts. 20. 32.
and get inheritance among them, who are sanctified by faith in Christ Jesus.

The Christians Practice of this Command.
THE Lord has taken from me my filthy How the Christian is first clothed with
Christ's imputed righteousness for Justification.
garments, and clothed* me with change of raiment: Zach. 3. 4. he has given
me the Lord Jesus to be my righteousness: 1. Cor. 1. him have I put on, and am
baptized in him: Secondly, how he is clothed with inherent righteousness for
sanctification.
Gal. 3. 27. I have cast away the works of darkness, and walk honestly as in
the day: Romans 13. clothed with a garment (not party-colored as Joseph's was,
but compact of many virtues) tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind,
meekness, and long suffering: Col. 3. 12. Judgment is a crown to my head, I
have put on Justice, and it has covered me: Job. 29. 14. I have also put on
love, 1. These. 5. 8. and have decked the hid man of my heart with a meek and
quiet Spirit: 1. Pet 3. 4. these are excellent ornaments which God has given
me. Ezech. 16. 7. Above them all, I have put on the whole complete Thirdly,
with the whole complete armor: the several pieces whereof are reckoned up.
armor, Ephesians. 6. even the armor of light, Romans 13. the armor of
righteousness, 2. Cor. 6. 7. the armor of God. Ephesians. 6. The hope of salvation
is my helmet, Righteousness is my breast plate, Verity my girdle, Faith is my
Bucklar, and my feet are shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. And
the Lord has put into mine hands the shield of salvation, Psalm. 18. 35. the
sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. Ephesians. 6. and the sling of Why the
Christian must always walk in his armor.
Prayer. Ephesians. 6. Thus am I forced to walk armed continually because of mine
Adversary: for my life on earth is a warre-fare, Job. 7. 1. and as the good
soldier of Jesus Christ, 2. Tim. 2. 3. I must fight against principalities,
powers, and spiritual wickedness. Ephesians. 6. And I am sure Fourthly, how he
shall be clothed with a glorious garment when his Sabbath comes.
that when the week of my warre-fare shall end, then shall appear the day of
my refreshment, Acts. 3. 20. my everlasting Sabbath, and my marriage day with
the Lamb: Revel. 19. 7. then shall I be thoroughly covered with white raiment:
Revel. 3. 5. then shall this mortal put on immortality, and this corruptible
incorruptibilitie. 1. Cor. 15. The Lord shall cloth me with broydred work, a
frontlet on my face, earings in mine ears, a chain about my neck, and
bracelets on my hands, and he shall put a crown upon my head. Ezech. 16. Yea,
the Lord himself shall be unto me a crown of glory, and Diadem of beauty:
Esaias. 62. thus will he deck me like a Bride attyred with Jewels, Esaias. 61.
10. and as a chaste spouse, to be presented to my immortal Husband the Lord
Jesus. 2. Cor. 11.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
THE Christian ye see has four suites of 1 The Christians four suites of
apparel severally considered.
Apparel; three whereof he puts on ordinarily in this life, the fourth is
his holy days garment: for when the week of his warrefare is ended, and the
Sabbath comes, which is the day of the consummation of his marriage with
Christ, after which shall never come a night; then shall his Father cause his
best robe to be brought out, and shall cover him with it.

His first garment is the garment of Christ's 2 The garment of imputed
righteousness defends him from Gods wrath.
righteousness, which on the part of God being imputed to him, that is, by the
free gift of God, given to be his own; and on his part, received by faith, and
covered therewith, defends him against the stormy and consuming wrath of God.

By this righteousness of Christ is not understood that holiness of his
divine nature, which is incommunicable, neither that righteousness 3 By this
righteousness is neither understood the holiness of his divine nor humane
nature.
of his humane Nature, consisting in a perfect observance of the Law Moral,
which he never transgressed in thought, word, nor deed, and by virtue whereof
Christ the man was sufficiently able to inherit life by the condition of the
covenant of work: Do this and live.

But that righteousness which he as our 4 But that acquired righteousness
which he purchased by* suffering.
Mediator, by fulfilling that singular Law of a Redeemer, has acquired and
purchased, that he might communicate it to his brethren, for their salvation,
who had none of their own by which they could be saved.

For this singular law of a Redeemer, which 5 Of the singular law of a Redeemer
imposed upon Christ.
was never imposed to man, nor Angel, but only to Jesus Christ, required that
he should love God and his brethren in such sort, as to bear in his own body
the punishment of their sins, and satisfy the justice of God to the
uttermost for them, that so the praise both of Justice and Mercy might be
reserved unto God.

If all Adams posterity had perished in sin, 6 How the praise both of Gods
mercy* and justice is preserved by Christ.
where should have been the praise of Gods mercy? and if their sin had not
been punished, where should have been the praise of his justice? but the Lord
Jesus has vindicated the glory of both.

For this law of a Redeemer, found out by the 7 How Christ has fulfilled that
singular Law of a Redeemer, to purchase us a righteousness by which we might
be saved.
marvelous wisdom of God, as the Lord Jesus did willingly accept it for the
love he bare to the glory of his Father, and salvation of his brethren, so
has he perfectly fulfilled it. In his blessed body he bare our sins on the
cursed tree; the chastisement of our peace was laid upon him, he has
satisfied the Justice of his Father, and so has purchased a righteousness,
not for himself, he needed it not, but that as I said, he might communicate
it to his brethren.

And this garment of righteousness, is so perfect 8 This righteousness is
perfect, and couers all our filthy nakedness.
that it couers all our nakedness from head to foot, both of the Soul and
Body, for in both he suffered. His blessed head was crowned with thorns, that
he might satisfy for the proud imaginations of our brain: His hands and
feet, which never offended, were pierced with Nails, that he might satisfy
for the unrighteous deeds we have done with our hands and feet, and so of the
rest of his sufferings.

As Iacoh covered with the garment of his 9 How by it, we are not only
pardoned of evil, but also blessed with all good.
elder brother got the blessing, so we covered with the sweet smelling garment
of our elder Brother the Lord Jesus, are acceptable to God, for in him the
Father is well pleased.

The second garment which under this the Christian puts on, is the garment of
sanctification, compact as we said of many virtues, 10 Of the garment of
inherent righteousness, wrought in us by Christ.
both these at one instant are given to the Christian, the one defends him from
the wrath of God, the other sanctifies and reformeth corrupted Nature.

Other garments may cover the nakedness, 11 For Christ as he couers our
nakedness, so he cures our diseases.
and filthy sores of the body, but cannot cure them. This garment both couers
and cures our filthy nakedness: it turns our sickness into health: our darkness
into light: for whosoever puts on the Lord Jesus for his righteousness to
justification, puts him on also for holiness to sanctification; so full of
Grace and Virtue is the Lord Jesus, that not only by the merit of his
sufferings does he pacify the wrath of God toward all them in whom he is,
but also by his virtue sanctifies them, by creating a new mind and a new
heart in them, he makes them new creatures.

The third is, a suite of complete armor, most 12 This garment of holiness
cannot be kept without the whole complete armor.
necessary for the Christian, for Satan envying this new happiness of man,
endeavors continually to defile, or rent in pieces our garment of holiness:
sometime he assaults our Patience: sometime our Temperance, etc. so that it is
not possible for the Christian to keep vnviolated the several pieces of his
holy garment, unless he put on the whole complete armor of God.

The several pieces of armor, requisite to 13 Why this armor is called the
armor of God.
preserve the several graces of the Spirit, are set down, Ephesians. 6. called
there the armor of God, both because it is that God furnishes us with them,
and also because no other then these can serve us in the spiritual warre-fare.

For in the bodily war-fare, men commonly 14 We must not sight with our
enemies by such armor as they use against us.
do resist their adversaries by such weapons as their enemies do impugn them
with all: but in the spiritual, if we sight against Satan in his
Instruments, with such weapons as they use in sighting against us, the
adversary shall easily overcome us.

And therefore as David cast from him the 15 As David fought with Goliath with
armor far unlike to his.
armor of Saul, and took him to weapons far unlike those that Goliath
brought against him: so must we, when we go out in the name of God against
that unclean uncircumcised Philistim, cast from us carnal weapons, and take
us to the armor of God, if we would be sure of victory.

That is, we must not render evil for evil, 16 So must we overcome evil in
the wicked by good.
nor rebuke for rebuke; but if our enemies curse us, let us bless them; if
they persecute us, let us pray for them, that so we may overcome evil with
good.

The last garment is his Sabbath days 17 Of his garment in the life to come.
garment, which in this life is not put upon him, but is kept in his Fathers
Treasure till his warre-fare be ended, then shall he be decked with all those
excellent ornaments, whereof we have spoken.

The Censure.
But the want of these garments proves that all are not Christians indeed, who
now usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER VI. Of his New Names.
THe Christian being born again, as we have said, is advanced by the Lord with
many honorable styles in holy Scripture: Many honorable styles given by God
to the Christian.
for he is called, The Son of God, 1. Ioh. 3. the heir of God, Romans 8. Christ's
brother, John. 20. Christ's fellow-heyre, Romans 8. a spiritual man who
discerns all things. 1. Cor. 2. 15. a new creature. 2. Cor. 5. a freeman
Ioh. 8. a holy man, 2. Cor. 6. a Citizen with the Saints and Burges of heavenly
Jerusalem, Ephesians. 2. 19. the Lords domestique or household man, Ephesians. 2. the
Lords anointed, 1. John. 3. a branch of a wild Olive, contrary to nature,
ingrafted into the right Olive, Romans 11. 14. an Israelite in whom there is no
guile, Ioh. 1. one of the congregation of the first borne, Heb. 12. 23. one of
Gods peculiar people. 1 Pet. 2. 9. a member of Christ, 1 Cor. 6. the Temple of
the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. a royal Priest, 1 Pet. 2. 9. the elect man of God,
Col. 3. 12. a vess^ll of mercy, Romans 9. a child of the marriage Chamber, Mat.
9. an excellent one, Psalm. 16. 3.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to answer these Names.
O Lord, Esaias. 62. 2.
who promised that thy Children should be called with a new Name which the
mouth of the Lord should name, Nomb. 6. 27.
and according there to have put thy name upon thy Children, 1 Chro. 17. 23.
confirm I beseech thee all this great goodness which thou have spoken to thy
servant: let it please thee to bless me, and I shall be blessed, Esaias. 56. 4.
teach me to choose that which pleases thee, and to take hold of thy covenant,
Esaias. 29. 23.
that thy name may be sanctified in me, Ephesians. 4. 1.
and I may walk worthy of my heavenly vocation, Esaias. 56. 5.
so shall thou fully perform to me thy promise, and give me that everlasting
name which shall never be ^ut out, and thy name shall be stable and magnified
for ever, praise, and honor, and glory without and appertayning to thee.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
THE first man being blessed of God, in the 1 The dignity of a Christian far
about the dignity of Adam appears in his new names.
day wherein he was created had his name called Adam, to remember him that he
was taken from the dust, but now higher styles and names are given by God to
the Christian, to declare that high honor and dignity whereunto by Christ he
is advanced in this his new Creation.

For albeit it be customable among men to 2 For Gods gives no vain styles, but
with the name he gives the matter answerable to it.
usurp styles which do far surmount their estate, for there he that is a
vessel of dishonor oftentimes is named honorable, and many slaves of Satan
go under the name of great Lords. Yet is it not so with God, for to whom
soever he gives a name, to them also he gives the thing signified by that
name.

In the eyes of worldlings a Christian is despised and accounted but the
offskowring of the earth, the cause of this contempt is their ignorance, 3 A
Christian is despised of worldlings and why.
they see the earthen vessel but know not the treasure which is within it, or
else for love of the treasure, they would embrace the vessel.

But against this contempt of men we have 4 But he is honorable in Gods
estimation.
to set that honorable estimation which God has of a Christian: for the high
and honorable styles which Gods gives him, testify, that in the Lords account
the Christian is an high and honorable person.

Again the manifold names which are given 5 Many graces must concur to make
a Christian.
him, declare that it is not one grace only, but manifold graces of God, which
must concur to make up a Christian, and this does teach us, that it is not so
easy a thing to be a Christian, as commonly is supposed.

Last of all, the honorable styles given the 6 The Christian by his names is
admonished of his duty.
Christian, admonish him to walk worthy of his calling, that he may answer
the names which God has given him: since he is the freeman of God, the
brother and the member of Christ, why shall he abase himself to the servitude
of Satan and sin?

The Censure.
But now the contrary conversation of many, proves, that all have not the
Christians disposition, who now usurp the Christian name.

THE SECOND PART: WHEREIN IS DISCRIBED THE DISPOSITION OF HIS INWARD MAN.
CHAPTER. I. Of his Inward Man.
The Lords Command.
MAN looks to the outward With what care a Christian should keep his heart.
appearance, 1. Sam. 16. 7. but I am the Lord who searches the heart and the
reins: Iere. 11. 20. therefore my Son keep thine heart with all diligence,
Prou. 4. 23. wash it from thy wickedness, Ierem. 4. and give it unto me. Pro.
23. 26. Let the hid man of the heart be vncorrupt, 1. Pet. 3. 4. and keep thy
self in thy spirit, Malach. 2. 15. Cast off concerning the conversation in
time past, which is corrupted, and put on the new which after God is created in
righteousness, and true holiness. Ephesians. 4. 22.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
O Lord my God, 1. Chron. 29.
I know that thou tryest the heart, and have pleasure in righteousness, and
that the Psalm. 84. 5.
man is blessed in whose heart are thy ways, Ezech. 11. 19.
therefore O Lord, take away from me the stony heart, and give me a heart of
flesh, put a new spirit into my bowels: Hos. 10. 2.
let never mine heart be divided from thee O my God, Psalm. 119. 80.
but let it be upright in thy statutes, Nehem. 9. 8.
and faithful before thee: Psalm. 86. 11.
knit it to thee, that I may fear thy Name, Psalm. 119. 80.
so shall I never be ashamed.

Another.
O Lord my God Heb. 13. 20.
who brought again from the dead, our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the
sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, work I beseech thee,
that which is pleasant in thy sight, Ephesians. 2. 16.
and grant according to the riches of thy grace, that I may be strengthened by
the spirit in the inward man, that Christ may dwell in mine heart by faith, 1.
These. 5. 23.
and so my whole Spirit, soul and body, may be kept blameless to the coming
of the Lord Jesus, to whom be praise and glory for ever.

The Christians Practice of this Command.
I Have prepared mine heart to seek the Law How the Christi^n answers the
commandments of God.
of the Lord, and to do it: Ezra. 7. 10. I will not regard wickedness in mine
heart: Psalm. 66. 18. for I have set the Lord as a seal on my heart, and signet
on my arm. Cant. 8. 6. My heart abhorres all labor that is wrought under the
Sun, Eccles. 2. 20. only I delight in the Law of God as concerning the
inward Man. Romans 7. When the Lord says to me, seek ye my face, my heart
answers, O Lord, I will seek thy face. Psalm. 27. My heart is purified in
obaying the truth, 1. Pet. 1. 22. and it shall clea^e to the Lord without
separation. 1. Cor. 7. 35.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
THE Christian soiourning in the body consists 1 How in the Christian man
there are two men.
of an outward Man, and an inward, either of them having their own kind of
life, senses, actions and operations of so contrary qualitities, that as says
the Apostle, when the one is decaying, the other is renewing. By the one, he
walks among men, and has his conversation honest in the world, by the other
he walks with God as Henoch did, and has his conversation in heaven.

In all his outward behavior he shows himself an example of godliness: so
that even 2 The Christian is holy both without and within.
in his countenance, gesture and language he carries a print of godliness, as
the high Priest had graven on his forehead, holiness to the Lord: but his
chief care is to deck the hid Man of the heart, which before God is a thing
much set by.

But in this age many carry the name of Christians, 3 Carnal Christians
compared to painted Sepulchers.
who never knew what this inward Man is, and far less has felt the power of
his spiritual life; they are not the holy temples of God, which should be more
beautiful within then without, as was Ierusalems Temple, but are painted
sepulchers, pleasant without, full of rottenness within, having the faces of
men, and the hearts of beasts.

If the Lord Jesus, whose eyes are like fire, and 4 They are not like
Nathaniel, but like Simon Magus.
who with one look can see them both within, and without, come to judge them,
he will not give sentence of them as he did of Nathaniel, Behold an
Israelitie in whom there is no guile, but John. 1. 47.
will charge them with that which Simon Peter said to Simon Magus, I see that
thou art in the Acts. 8.
gall of bitterness and band of iniquity, and that thy heart is not right in
the sight of God.

The Censure.
And hereby also it may be known that all have not the Christians disposition,
who now usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER II. Of his New Mind.
The Lords Command.
THE light of the body is the Three singular ornaments of the mind of the new
Man.
eye, if the eye be single, the whole body shall be light, but if thine eye be
wicked, 1 The first is light.
then all the body shall be dark: wherefore if the light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is the darkness. Math. 6. 22. Take heed then that the
light which is in you be not darkness: Luke. 11. 35. for ye are the children
of light, therefore sleep not as others do, but watch, and be sober, 1. These.
5. 6. not as unwise, but understanding what the good will of the Lord is. Ephe.
5. 17. Not as other Gentiles, who walk still on in the vanity of their mind,
having their cogitation darkened, and being strangers from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them: Ephe. 4. 17. but be ye changed by the
renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good and acceptable will
of God, Romans 12. wise in* that which is good, simple as concerning evil. Romans
16. 19.

But be not wise in your selves, neither high 2 The second is humbleness.
minded. Romans 12. 16. If any man think that he knows any thing, the same
knows nothing as he ought, 1. Cor. 8. 2. An high mind goes before a fall:
Prou. 29. 23. Neither will the Lord regard any that are wise in their own
conceit, Job. 37. 24. but pronounces a woe against them. Esaias. 5. 21. Let
therefore the same mind be in you which was in Jesus Christ, who being in the
form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but made himself
of no reputation, and was found in shape, as a servant. Philip. 2. Deck ye
also your selves in lowliness of mind, 1. Pet. 5. 5. that ye may walk
worthy of the calling whereunto ye are called, with all humbleness of mind.
Ephe. 4.

Furthermore think of those things which are 3 The third is holiness.
of good report, are which and true, honest, just, pure, pertaining to love.
Philip. 4. 8. Let there not be in your heart a wicked thought: Deuteronomy. 15. 9. for
many mind earthly things, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is their
shame. Philip. 3. 19. But unto him who does think on good things, shall be
mercy and truth. Prou. 14. 22.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
O Lord, Deuteronomy. 32.
I am a man void of Counsel, neither is there any understanding in me, I am 2.
Cor. 3. 5.
not sufficient of my self, so much as to think a good thought, but my
sufficiency is of thee: Prou. 26.
for thou Lord do give wisdom, and out of thy mouth comes knowledge and
understanding: thou Job. 38. 36.
art he who put wisdom into the reins, and Esaias. 29. 24.
give understanding to them, who have erred in spirit: I therefore pray thee,
Exodus 33. 13.
O Lord, if I have found favor in thy sight, show me thy way, that I may know
thee, Psalm. 119.
thy hands have made me, and fashioned me, Lord give me understanding, that I
may learn thy commandments: Psalm. 18. 28.
lighten my darkness, Colos. 1. 9.
that being filled with the knowledge of thy will, Esaias. 2. 5.
I may walk in thy light, Heb. 13.
studying always to do that which is good and pleasant in thy sight, through
Jesus Christ.

Another.
O Lord 2 Cor. 4. 6.
who did command light to shine out of darkness, make it I beseech thee, to
shine in mine heart, to give me the light of the knowledge of thee my God, in
the face of Jesus Christ: 2. Cor. 3. 13.
take away (good Lord) the veil, wherewith my mind is covered, that I may
behold as in a mirror thy glory with open face, and may be changed into the
same Image by thy spirit: 2. Cor. 4. 4.
let me not be of the number of those Infidels, whom the God of this world has
blinded, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of
God, should not shine unto them: Phil. 1. 9.
but make me to abound more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment, 1.
King. 3.
that I may discern between good and evil, Phil. 1.
and between things which differ one from another, g Phil. 1.
and may be kept pure and without offense, till the day of Christ, filled with
the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus, unto the praise and glory of
God.

Amen.
The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
ONce I was darkness, but now I am light in What a change is made in the mind
by regeneration.
the Lord: Ephesians. 5. 8. I walked in darkness, and dwelt in the land of the
shadow of death, but now the light has shined upon me, and I have seen light.
Esaias. 9. 2. and God has given me a mind to know him who is true: 1. John. 5.
20. for his word is my wisdom and understanding, Deuteronomy. 4. 6. and his
commandments have made me wiser than mine enemies, for they are ever with me;
yea, I have had more understanding then all my teachers, for thy testimonies
are my meditation. Psalm. 119. 99. I will not (any more) lift up my mind unto
vanity, but I will think upon, God in the night, Psalm. 63. 6. and I will
meditate in the Law of the Lord continually, Psalm. 119. 97. and of the beauty
of his glorious Majesty, and his wonderful acts. Psalm. 145. 5. And I will
always give thanks to him, who has made me meet to be partaker of the
inheritance of his Saints in light, who has delivered me from the power of
darkness, and has translated me into the kingdom of his dear Son: to whom
be praise and glory for ever. Amen. Col. 1. 13.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
AS in the first creation, God began at the 1 In the new creation God begins at
the light.
light, so in the second, he begins at the illumination of the mind; and the
mind changed and renewed by the Lord, works a change also of the will, and
affections.

Naturally the mind of man is dark, proud, 2 The mind of man by nature is,
first, dark; secondly, proud; thirdly, profane.
and profane; the ignorance that is in it, being both a punishment of man's
first sin, a sin it self, and the cause of all other sin.

For man aspiring to an higher knowledge 3 Some knowledge left in the mind of
apostate man to make him inexcusable.
then God vouchsafed upon him, lost the knowledge wherewith God endued him by
creation, except some general notices of good and evil, which like sparkles
of fire covered with the ashes of man's corrupt nature, are left in him to make
him inexcusable.

By his first creation he was made a companion 4 Man by his first fall is
become a companion of beasts.
of Angels, but falling from that honor, he became a companion of beasts: and
has so far degenerated from that which God made him, that he has assumed the
very properties of beasts, wherefore also God gives unto him Bern. in Cant.
Sermon. 53.
the name of a beast: Quidenim, an non tibi videtur ipsis bestijs bestialior
homo ratione vigens, and ratione non viuens.

And now seeing restitution is proclaimed 5 If now he fall by despising grace,
he shall go to a worse estate.
in Christ, how carefully should he take heed to himself, that he despise
not grace which is offered: by his first fall he fell from light to darkness,
his second fall shall cast him into utter darkness: the transgression of the
covenant of works, made him a companion of beasts, but the contempt of the
covenant of grace, shall make him a companion of damned Devils.

And as this ignorance is a punishment of 6 Ignorance is, 1. A Stone. 2. A
Punishment of sin.
man's first sin, so is it also a sin, as is evident out of 2. These. 5. 1.
The Lord shall appear in staming fire to render vengeance unto all them that
know not God.

Thirdly, it is a cause of other sins, as we 7 3. A Cause of sin
are taught by the Apostle. Ephesians. 4. that the Gentiles were strangers from the
life of God, through the ignorance that is in them. As Balaam went on
blindlings in an evil course, because he saw not the Angel standing with a
naked sword against him, so the wicked walk boldly in their sins, because they
know not the danger thereof.

A body destitute of eyes, cannot discern the day from the night, a friend
from a foe, nor the pit from the plain; no more can a darkened 8 A cause also
of a most fearful damnation.
mind discern the manifold snares of Satan, but as our Savior says, where
the blind leads the blind, both of them must fall at length Math. 15. 14.
into the ditch: so where a blinded mind is the directer of a corrupted will,
what can the end be but fearful damnation? and yet no better is man's
miserable estate by Nature.

But this natural ignorance is removed in 9 Light created in the mind by
degrees.
the regeneration, and a holy light created in the mind of man, which the Lord
works by degrees, as he opened the eyes of that blind man Math. 9. 29.
by degrees.

And this light as it increases in the mind, 10 Every knowledge does not
sanctify.
has always following it holiness and humility; not that every knowledge
does sanctify and humble him that has it: for albeit the Lord illuminateth
every one that comes into the world yet does he not sanctify every one; yea,
there is knowledge in many which does not humble but puff up; not convert, but
convince.

The Gentiles were endued with great knowledge 11 Gentiles and carnal
Christians shut up the light in the prison of their unrighteousness.
of God the Creator, by the light of Nature, but they withheld it in
unrighteousness, to their iuster condemnation: the bastard Christians of our
time, are endued also with the knowledge of God the Redeemer, by the light of
the word, but it is likewise shut up in the prison of their inordinate
affections.

For either in their actions they never seek 12 For either they seek not the
counsel of light, or else they do against it.
counsel at the light, which God has put in their minds, or else if at any
time the light that is in them warn them of the good which they should do, and
reprove them for the evil that they have done, it is oppressed and borne down
by the tyranny of their sinful affections.

But this lively knowledge created in our 13 Lively knowledge works humility,
and banisheth a threefold pride.
minds by God in the regeneration, does work in us both humility and
holiness: For first it banisheth out of our mind that threefold natural pride
which is in it, to wit, Blind pride, Foolish pride, and Vain pride.

Blind pride, is when decepta and deceptrix cogitatio, 14 Blind Pride.
the deceiving and deceived cogitation of man's mind makes him to think he is
far better then indeed he is; and this may be seen in many, who are proud
without any cause at all. 15 Foolish Pride.


Foolish pride, is when a man is puffed up with that which he has, as if it were
his own; this is, as if the Axe should take to it self the praise of hewing,
or the Pen should usurp the praise of writing or the Wall should wax proud
because the Sun shines upon it: so is it with the man who waxes proud
because God has looked upon him, and does any notable work by him.

Vain Pride, is when a man is puffed up with 16 Vain Pride.
that which he has indeed, but it is without him, like Nebuchadnezzer
glorying in his golden Image, and worldlings proud of their gorgious apparel:
surely it is the pitiful folly of a base mind, for a man to think that any
thing can make him great, which is less then himself: but it is the
recompense of man's error, that because he lost the glory which God gave him, he
vainly seeks his glory in things which cannot profit him. 17 Pride both a
dangerous and deceitful evil.


Pride is a dangerous evil, and most deceitful: No^erca virtutum, matter
vittorum, the mother of all vices, the stepmother of virtues; it can never
attain to that whereat it would be: Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 14. c. 13.
Quid aliud superbia, quam propriae excellentiae appetitus? but a proud man can
never be high nor excellent; for seeing the Angels by pride fell from heaven to
hell, is it not folly to think that man by pride can rise from the doung-hil to
glory?

But our Savior by his example has taught 18 Humility taught us by the
example of our Savior.
us, that an humble mind is the way to an high and glorious estate, therefore
it is recommended to us in that pretext; Let the same mind be Philip. 2. 5.
in you that was in Christ, who being equal with God, made himself of no
reputation, and was found in shape like a servant. As Rebecca leaped down from
her Camel, when she saw her husband Isaac walking on his feet, so the
Christian casts from him the proud conceits of an high mind, when he
considers the humility of his Lord Jesus Christ.

Neither peace nor grace can be in that soul, 19 No peace can be to a proud
heart.
in which is not Humility: Peace cannot be to him, because he seeks his
own glory, and not the glory of God, therefore does the Lord always resist
him; yea, at peace with himself can he not be, but as a tree on the top of a
mountain, which is tossed with every wind, so is a proud man perturbed with
every accident that falls out contrary to his humor, but humility is the
resting bed of the soul, Learn of me (says Christ) that I am lowly and
meek, and 20 No grace can lodge in a proud heart.
ye shall find rest to your fowls. And as for grace it can no more bide to
lodge in a proud heart, then rain can abide on the tops of mountains. The
Church of Christ is called Lilium conuallium, a Lilly of the valleys: for with
the humble and low in spirit his grace remains, but the curse of the
mountains of Gilboe, whereon Isreal's glory was obscured, belongs properly to
the proud and high heart, wherein the glory of God is defaced: let never the
rain nor dew (of 2 Samuel 1. 21.
Gods grace) fall upon it.

Humility is not only a Grace, but a conseruer 21 Examples of humi^e in the
godly.
of all the rest of the Graces of the Spirit, therefore have the Saints of God
specially regarded it to practice it, I am but Dust and ashes, said Abraham: I
am not worthy of the least of thy mercies, said Jacob: who am I, said David: I
am not worthy to loose the shoes of my Lord, said the Baptist: I am not worthy
to be called thy son, said the Prodigal Child: I am not worthy thou
should come under my roof, said the Centurion: Go from me, for I am a
sinful man, said Saint Peter: I am not worthy to be called an Apostle; yea, I
am the least of all Saints, and the chief of all sinners, said Saint Paul.

These were little in their own eyes, and yet 22 How the Servants of God are
great by humility.
none of the children of men, greater in Gods eyes then they: for he accounted
Abraham the father of the faithful; Jacob his servant; David a man after his
own heart; the Baptist the greatest Prophet; the Centurion a man of greater
faith then any in Israel; the Prodigal is clothed with the best robe; Peter a
blessed of the Lord; and Paul a chosen vessel.

Where on the contrary, the proud are an 23 The greatness of Pride is but like
a swelling.
abomination to the Lord, great in their own eyes, contemptible in his eyes,
their greatness is but swelling and not soliditie: Superbia non magnitudo est,
sed tumor, or like vessels puffed and August. 63.
blown up with wind, which seem large without, but are empty within: so are
the minds of the wicked good for nothing but to be the nests and habitations
of Satan.

I have spoken the more of this evil, because Pride is the firstborn child
of Infidelity, the 24 No obedience to God till pride be slain.
first poison that Satan poured into our nature. As the Egyptians would not
let Israel go, till their first borne were slain; so will not our sinful
affections give subjection to God, till the first borne among them, natural
Pride, be slain in us.

And with humility there is always wrought 25 Lively knowledge with humility
does work holiness.
holiness: for these three, light, humbleness, and holiness are the special
ornaments of the mind of the new man. As a new sight of God made Esaias lament
his sinful corruption, and made Job to abhor himself; so new light arising in
the Christians mind, works in him a new disposition, as God willing, we
shall see in the Treatises following.

The Censure.
But now the pride and profaneness of life, flowing from the ignorance of
God, which is evident in many, proves that all have not the Christians
disposition, who now usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER III. Of his New Will.
The Lords Command.
FRom henceforth as long as If we renounce not our own will, we cannot be the
servants of God.
ye remain in the flesh, walk not after the lusts of men, but after the will
of God: 1. Pet. 4. 2. for the lusts of the flesh fight against the Soul, 1.
Pet. 2. therefore prove ye what is the good and acceptable will of God. Romans
12. And honor me not by doing your own will, Esaias. 58. 13. going a whoring
after your own abominations: Number. 15. 39. for unto them who do so, I will lay
their way upon their own head. Ezech. 11. 21.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
O Lord 1. Chron. 29.
I know that thou tryest the heart, and have pleasure in righteousness, and
that thou Phil. 2. 13.
art he who do work in thy children both the will and the deed, Psalm. 143.
10.
teach me therefore O Lord to do thy will, for thou art my God: Psalm. 27.
let me not be given over to the lust of mine adversary, Romans 1.
nor to mine own hearts desire, Psalm. 119. 103.
that iniquity should have dominion over me, Heb. 13. 21.
but make me perfect to every manner of good work, to do thy will, working in
me that which is pleasant in thy sight through Jesus Christ.

The Christians Practice of this Command.
I Had my conversation in times past, among the Children of disobedience,
fulfilling the will of my flesh, but now the Lord who is rich in The perfection
of a Christian in this life is in a willing of good, rather then doing of it.
mercy, through his great love, wherewith he loved me has sanctified me to do
his will, so that now I have begun both to will and to do, 2 Cor. 8 lamenting
that I cannot do the good, which feign I would, Romans 7. for in all things I
desire to do thy will O my God, Psalm. 40. 8.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
THere is no question between God and man 1 The only question between God
and man is whose will should be done.
but this one, whose will should be done, whether Gods will or ours: for all
our transgressions proceeds from this, that against all reason we prefer our
will before the most holy will of the Lord our God.

For naturally the will of man is neither rightly 2 Man's will by nature how far
disordered*
affected toward his own mind, nor yet toward the Lord his God. The will
should be directed and governed by the mind, but as if the Cart should draw
the Horse, such misorder is there, when the will enthralles the light of the
mind to her perverse and inordinate desires.

The will of man unregenerate exercises a 3 It is not subject to God and yet
usurps dominion over his creatures.
perpetual inimitie against God: for first it refuses subjection to God,
albeit many manner of ways it be obliged to give it. And next, as if that were
too little, it usurps a dominion, and commandment over all the creatures of
God.

An intolerable rebellion that the will of man 4 An intolerable rebellion to
seek service from Gods creatures, and give none to himself.
refusing subjection to God, who is his superior, should require subjection to
himself of all the Creatures of God: He will have the Sun and Moon to serve
him with their light: He will have the clouds of the Air to serve him with
their rain, he will have the earth to serve him with her fruits, and yet with
his will, he will not give service to God who made both him and them.

Yea, let be his usurpation over unreasonable 5 The will of man would have the
wills of all men subject unto it.
creatures, the man unregenerate does also what he can to draw the will of all
other men in subjection unto his: the adulterer craves that same ^ilthy will in
another that is in himself; the murderer craves the same cruel will in
another, that is in himself, and so become guilty both of their own and other
men's damnation so far 6 It rises also into a plain opposition to the Creator
himself.
as they can get them to serve their will.

It proceeds yet further to an insurrection against the creator himself, and
albeit no malice of man can impair his eternal Majesty, yet man's cursed and
corrupted will does what it can to make him not to be: for either the
unregenerate man wishes that God knew not his sin, or else if he knew it,
had no power to punish it, or else were iniust to ouersee it: execranda plane
and crudelis malitia quae d^i potentiam, Bern. d^ r^sur. Se^. 3.
(...), iustitiam perire desiderat.

Therefore also is it, that the Lord is an enemy 7 For this cause God is an
enemy to man's will, for in all his plagues he (...) of seth the will.
to man's self-will: for in all his present plagues which he lays upon man,
his strokes especially is upon his corrupted will, compelling him to suffer
that evil of punishment which is ^ore against his will. And in Hell the will
shall be punished with stripes proportional to her innumerable sinful
desires. A just recompense of man's rebellion, who intends his will against God,
that God should also intend and prepare his plagues against him, laying that
wrath upon man which he is no way willing to bear: Cesset itaque voluntas
propria and infernus non erit.

But albeit these two, the holy will of God, 8 Thus in resisting God man
receives the worst.
and corrupted will of man, fight together, yet the loss and hurt ever
befalles to man, never to the Lord: for man does no other thing but rash his
heel against the prick: which as our Lord said to Saul is very hard: durum
calcitranti, non stimulo. Vae itaque oppositis voluntatibus solam Bern. de
consid^. lib. 5.
suae auersionis ref^rentibus poenam: Woe therefore to all wills contrary to
Gods will, who reap no other fruit, but the punishment of their auersion from
God.

For what more miserable estate then this, 9 For he wills that which shall
never be, but be the contrary.
Semper velle quod nunquam erit, and semper nolle quod nunquam non erit: in
aeternum non obtinebit quod vult, and in aeternum ^ustinebit quod non vult:
ever to will that which never shall be, and always not to will that which
always shall be? for the wicked shall never obtain that which he would have,
and he shall for ever sustain that which he would not; this is the unhappy
condition of him that lives after his corrupted will.

But beside all this, man's will is now at variance 10 Man's will justly at
variance with it self.
with it self; if he had kept true light in his mind, he should never have
had but one will, and all his affections, with one harmony had been carried
to that which his will had willed: but now it is strange to see how within
himself, his will is rent asunder, that what one way he wills, another way
he wills not, as is evident in the example of any proud covetous worldling,
who as he is a proud man has a will, which as a covetous man he will not.

So that in these three now by Nature is 11 A threefold disorder of the will
of man.
man's will exercised: first, in the dishonouring of God: secondly, in the
disquieting of himself: thirdly, in the abusing of the creature, which
corruption of will, man by transgression brought upon himself: libero arbitrio
male vtens Aug. enchirid. cap. 30.
homo and se perdidit, and illud: Again, Ber. in Cant. Sermon. 81.
voluntas cum esset libera seruum se fecit peccati.

So that now it is, as says Augustine, a wonderful 12 In man's nature no
free will to good.
great blindness not to see the inabilitie of our natural will to any good;
vulnerata, Aug. cont. Pelag. lib. 2. c. 48. and 53
sanciata, vexata, perdita est: vera confessione, non falsa defensione opus
habet. He that says, that Man, per Naturae vigorem, may Council. Arausi.
acanum. can. 7. an. 445.
think, or make choice of any good pertaining to eternal life, he is
deceived with the spirit of Herisie: Quod amissum nisi, a quo potuit Can. 13.
dari, non potest reddi, vnde ipsa Veritas dicit, Si vos Filius liberauit, tunc
vere liberi eritis.

But most clearly does the Apostle decide 13 The natural man has a mind
that cannot understand, a will that cannot be subject to God till it be
regenerate.
this controversy, by declaring our natural inabilitie to any good, when he
says, the natural man has such a mind as cannot understand the things of
God; and such a will as is not subject to the Law of God, nor yet can be, to
wit, so long as it abides a natural will, not renewed by the grace of
Regeneration.

And hereunto these words of Bernard may 14 Necessity of sin lying on the
will excuses it not, and why.
serve for a clear commentary: Nescio quo prauo and miro modo, ipsa sibi
voluntas, peccato in deterius mutata necessitatem facit, vt nee necessitas,
Bern. in. Cant. Sermon. 81.
cum voluntaria sit, excusare valeat voluntatem, nec voluntas cum sit illecta
excludere necessitatem: I cannot tell by what marvelous and wicked manner it
is come to pass, that the will being changed to the worse, has brought upon
herself a necessity of evil, doing in such sort, that neither the
necessity, seeing it is voluntarily brought on, can excuse the will, nor yet
the will seeing it is snared and allured can exclude the necessity.

And again in the same place: Ita anima 15 How the will is both bound and free.
miro quodam, and malo modo, sub hac voluntaria quadam, and male libera
necessitate, and ancilla Ibid.
tenetur, and libera: ancilla propter necessitatem, libera propter voluntatem;
and quod magis mirum, magisque miserum est, eo ipso rea quo libera, eoque
ancilla, quo rea, ac per hoc, eo ancilla, quo libera.

But this cursed corruption of our will, which 16 The will is renewed in the
regeneration
by nature is contrary both to Gods will and our weal, is cured by the renewing
grace of Christ in the regeneration.

For the first lesson Christ Jesus does teach 17 For the first lesson a
Christian learnes is to renounce his own will.
his Disciples that enter into his School, is to deny themselves, to captive
their will, and to submit themselves in all things to the will of God. As the
Christian carefully keeps the light of God, as a heavenly Oracle in his mind,
so in all his resolutions and actions, he will not conclude, far less
enterprise, till first he enquire what is the will of God.

The Censure.
But now the great multitude of professors, who live so addicted to their own
will as if they had not a superior in heaven, evidently proves, they are not
all Christians indeed, who now usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER IIII. Of his Conscience.
The Lords Command.
THis Commandment commit No fighting without faith and a good conscience.
I unto thee, that thou fight a good fight, having faith and a good conscience:
1. Tim. 1. 19. for if thy The power of conscience.
heart condemn thee, God is greater then thy heart, and knows all things; but
if thy heart condemn thee not, then have thou boldness toward God. 1. Ioh. 3.
20. Yea, a good conscience is a continual feast: Prou. 15. 15. walk therefore
before me, and be thou perfect, Genesis 15. and draw near to me with a true
heart in assurance of faith, sprinkled in thy heart from an evil conscience.
Heb. 10. 22.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
O Lord my God, 1. These. 3. 13.
I humbly pray thee, make my heart stable, and unblameable before thee in
holiness, 2. Tim. 1. 3.
that I may serve thee with a pure conscience, Esaias. 38. 3.
and may walk before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, doing that which
is good in thy sight, Philip. 4. 7.
that so thy peace, which passes all understanding may preserve mine heart and
mind in Christ Jesus.

The Christians Practice of this Command.
I Have in all good conscience served God unto Alas how far are we from this
perfection, so to order our ways, that our heart reprove us not?
this day; Act. 23. 1. yea, in all things I have a good conscience, desiring to
live honestly. Heb. 13. 18. And herein also will I (for the time to come)
endeavor my self to have always a a good conscience toward God and man, Acts
24. 16. setting the Lord always before mine eyes, Psalm. 16. and doing all
things as in the sight of God, Heb. 4. 13. I will keep my righteousness, and
not forsake it, my heart shall not reprove me of my days, Job. 27. 6. so
shall my rejoicing be the testimony of my conscience, that in simplicity and
godly pureness, not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, I have had my
conversation in the world. 2 Cor. 1. 12.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
COnscience is to be considered in her Nature, 1 Conscience considered as
concerning her Nature.
and Office. As for the nature of Conscience, it is better felt then it can be
discerned: for in it we feel not only an understanding power, as is in the
mind, but also an agent or working power, as is in the will; so that it is not
a faculty Theoricke only, as the understanding, nor practicke only, as the
will, but compounded and mixed.

And that it is a different faculty from them 2 It is a different faculty
from the will and mind.
both is evident by this, that it sits in the soul as a Controller both of the
thoughts, of the mind, and desires of the will.

As for the office of Conscience, we may define 3 Conscience considered as
concerning her Office.
it thus. It is a spiritual judge, depute by God the supreme judge, and
placed in the soul of man, to determine of all his actions, with him, to
excuse him, or against him, to accuse him, and that for the conversion of some,
and conviction of others.

First then it is Gods deputy which under him 4 The word of conscience imports
that another with it is upon our secrets.
houlds court in the Soul of man: for even the word of Conscience imports that
there is another with it upon the knowledge of our secrets; Science may be of
one alone, but Conscience is of more then one which are privy to the same
knowledge.

The same is evident from this, that Conscience 5 God and Conscience know our
deeds together and will judge them together.
is said to bear witness; where, of necessity we must distinguish between
him to whom the witness is borne, and him of whom it is borne: the witness
bearer is Conscience, the party of whom the testimony is made, is man. The
great Judge, who together with Conscience knows our secrets is God: wherefore
also Saint John couples God and Conscience together; for they know our deeds
together, and will judge them together.

That Conscience is Gods deputy, it warnes 6 Conscience is Gods deputy, and
therefore not to be despised.
us, not to despise the judgment of Conscience, for the Lord in the end will
ratify the sentence of Conscience. If Conscience upon light condemn us, God who
is greater then Conscience, 1 John 3. 20.
and knows much more then Conscience does know, will much more condemn us.

An example whereof we may see clearly 7 The sentence given by Conscience
will be confirmed by God.
in Adam, who immediately after that he had sinned ran away, and hid
himself among the bushes: No man pursued him; no Angel reproved him, the
Lord was not yet come to judge him, only he found himself condemned in the
judgment of his own conscience, which he could not abide, and the Lord when
he comes condemns him for the same fact, for which his conscience had
condemned him before.

And from this also that Conscience is Gods 8 The majesty and authority of
Conscience, it stands against all the world.
deputy proceeds the authority of Conscience, whose sentence is pronounced
with such majesty and power, that albeit the whole world would oppone unto it,
yet neither are they able to revoke it, nor resist it. Wherefore S. Paul sets 1 Corinthians. 4. 4.
the sentence of his Conscience that did justify him, against the calumnies of
all men whatsoever that did condemn him.

On the contrary, if Conscience do accuse 9 If Conscience terrify no creature
can comfort.
and terrify, all the men and creatures in the world are not able to comfort.
We may see this in Adam; the pleasures of Paradise auailed him nothing after
that his Conscience condemned him: the same we may see in Baltasar, who Dan. 5.
had about him all wordly comforts that the heart of man could desire, but
because conscience was against him, none of these could remedy his terror.

But this is more also, that Conscience is the 10 The seat of conscience is not
the body but the soul.
deputy of God in the soul of man: Conscience has not her seat in the face,
no other man can know it; nor yet in the speech, no hypocrisy nor
dissimulation of man can thrall Conscience to justify his words, albeit a
thousand times he would allege it.

Again, the corruptible body will be dissolved 11 After death of the body
conscience lives.
by dust, but Conscience which has her seat in the soul, shall live when the
body is dead, and stand up before God after death, either for thee or against
thee. To the wicked after death, Conscience shall be a biting worm, for ever
to torment them; but to the godly it shall be as a pleasant Paradise, rendering
to them infinite joys, wherein they shall abide for ever.

The offices of Conscience are three especially* 12 The threefold office of
Conscience.
first, it records and keeps in remembrance deeds that we have done:
Secondly, it determines and judges of them with us or against us: thirdly, it
executes the sentence determinate.

As for the first, we may feel in experience, that we do nothing, which
Conscience writes not, and lays up in register; we may change 13 Conscience
goes with us whereuer we go to bear record of all that we do.
our place, but still we find that conscience goes with us; we may cast off
our garments, but not our Conscience we may separate our selves from men, but
when we are most solitary, then do we find, that Conscience is most familiar
with us: go where we will, do what we will, Conscience is always upon our
secrets.

As for the second, like as Conscience knows 14 In every action Conscience
determines with us or against us.
and registreth all that we do, so in every action, it determines either
with us, or against us, accusing or excusing us.

And in this determination Conscience proceeds 15 In determining of our
doings Conscience proceeds according to light.
according to her light, which is twofold; either the light of Nature, or the
light of the Word. As for the light of Nature, there are no people so
barbarous, but that part of Conscience which is called (...) keeps in them
some sparks of the knowledge of good and evil, which the most profane man
that ever was cannot get utterly suffocated, albeit feign he would wish it
were not in him to convince him.

Now the reasoning of Conscience is very 16 How the reasoning of conscience is
very forcible.
strong even when it conuinceth Pagans by the light of Nature, but much more
strong when it conuinceth Christians by the Word of God: for that part of
Conscience (...) which does keep the light of the Law, furnishes the
proposition, adulterers, murderers, and so forth, are worthy of fearful
judgment: (...) again that part of Conscience, wherein is the knowledge and
remembrance of thy deeds, makes the assumpsion; but so it is, thou have
committed adultery or murder, and shall remember thee both of time and place,
and other circumstances, whereupon will follow an inevitable conclusion.

But here we must remember to put a difference 17 Difference to be put between
Conscience and error of Conscience.
between Conscience and error of Conscience: for Conscience may err for want
of clear light, and become either over strict, counting that evil and
unlawful which is good and lawful; or else over large, thinking that lawful
which is plainly unlawful: and here diligent pains would be taken by prayer
and reading, to inform the conscience with sufficient light out of Gods word.

And herewithall we must remember that 18 The sentence of Conscience is
neither perfect nor supreme.
conscience suppose it give a divine sentence, yet is it neither perfect nor
supreme: not perfect, because the light that informs it is but in a part; for
if the conscience be evil, yet can it not accuse thee of all the evil that is
in thee; and if it be good it cannot also remember and record all the good
which God by his grace has done in thee, and that as I said, by reason of the
weakness of her light.

Whereof it comes to pass that in this life, 91 Therefore when it absolues, it
gives not perfect and permanent peace in this life.
the Conscience cannot have perfect nor continual peace without fear, because
it looks continually for the definitive sentence of that supreme and highest
Judge; then shall it be pacified, and never doubt any more, when it shall
receive that joyful sentence; Come to me thou faithful servant.

And yet Conscience having once given out 20 Yet in this life it begins the
execution of the sentence given by it.
sentence, begins the execution thereof, with great authority, rendering joy
to them that have done well, fear and terror to them that have done evil,
which is no other thing but a forerunner of that great and final retribution
which God, who will justify the decree of conscience, shall render to all men.

Whereof we are admonished never to neglect 21 Affections are now louder then
Conscience, but it will not be long so.
the accusations of Conscience: for albeit that now the perturbation of unruly
affections be so loud that the voice of Conscience condemning the foolish and
crooked ways of men, is either but weakly heard, or else not at all; yet is
there a day coming, wherein these perturbations shall be silent, and
Conscience shall speak with so loud a voice that the deafe^ ears of men shall
hear it, the Lord himself also taking part with Conscience, and justifying
all her accusations against them.

And therefore seeing we can neither get 22 Good to agree with conscience in
time.
Conscience corrupted to conceal our faults, neither yet smothered and put out
by any length of time, as is manifest in Joseph's brethren, whose Genesis 42. 21.
Consciences troubled them in Egypt, for that cruelty which many years before
they had done against their brother in Canaan: but that still if we do
against God, Conscience will speak against us, it is good for us to agree with
Conscience in time, and in all our ways to seek her approbation.

Now the ends for which God has under 23 For what ends is Conscience placed in
man.
himself deputed Conscience in the soul of man, are the conversion of his
own, and just conviction of his enemies: for herein greatly appears his
equity toward all men, and special love and favor toward his own.

As the Lord has protested by an oath that 24 Conscience proves that God
desires not the death of a sinner.
he desires not the death of a sinner; so by his deed he declares it in this,
that he has put in man a warner to foretell unto him that heavy wrath,
whereinto he will fall, unless in time he repent, and turn from his evil
ways.

And wonderful it is how this shall convince 25 The wicked who live against
Conscience, will before convicted.
the wicked man in the hour of death, when their conscience shall stand up
before the supreme Judge, and testify against him in this manner; O Lord I
have given this man according as thou deputed me, warning every day for his
sins, and has terrified him for them, but he would not receive my
correction. Oh that impenitent men could consider how this despising of
Conscience shall be a great augmentation of their judgment!

But on the other part, to the children of God, 26 Use of Conscience to the
godly is: 1. As a Paedagoge to lead them the right way.
Conscience, of his special mercy is given for these two uses: first, it is as
a Paedagoge appointed by God to guide his children in the right way.

Secondly, when they go wrong, it is a divine 27 2. As a warner to tell them
when they go vvrong.
warner within them, which suffers them neither to eat nor sleep long in
rest, till they return to the Lord by repentance: for as Peter was wakened by
the crowing of the Cock, and made to weep bitterly for his sins, so is the
crowing and accusing voice of Conscience to the godly.

Thus we see how it is a great benefit to Gods 28 A feeling conscience a great
benefit to Gods children.
children, to have a living, feeling, and wakeing Conscience: for either it
keeps them that they do not evil, or that they continue not in it, as we may
see in David, whose Conscience was more troubled for cutting the lap of Saul's
garment, then Saul was for cutting off the lives of fourscore servants of the
Lord.

Whereas on the contrary, the Lord in his anger 29 A conscience past feeling is
wrath to the wicked.
suffers Satan so to benumbe the conscience of the wicked, as if they were
burnt with an hot iron, whereof it comes to pass, that being past feeling,
they commit iniquity with greedines.

Surely a good conscience is man's paradise 30 A good conscience is man's
paradise on earth.
upon earth, therefore Solomon called it a continual feast; it is the fruit of
righteousness, and ever brings out peace and joy: in these three stands the
beginning of eternal life.

But as Satan enuyed Adam dwelling in his 31 Satan enuieth man's dwelling in
it.
Paradise, so does he envy every Christian that dwells in the Paradise of a good
Conscience, and therefore does what he can to entise him to sin, that so he
may drive him out of it: for which cause we have need by daily repentance to
take away the evil we have done, and by godly circumspection to eschew his
snares in time to come.

The Censure.
But now the small regard which is made of a good Conscience, proves that all
have not the Christians disposition, who now usurp the Christians name.

CHAPTER V. Of his Affections: And first, Of his Love.
The Lords Command.
Love ye the Lord al his Saints: 1 The love of God commanded.
Psalm. 31. 23. for they who love him shall he as the Sun when he rises in his
might. Judge. 5. 31. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be had in
execration; yea, excommunicated to the death: 1. Cor. 16. 22. Love not the
world, nor the things that are in the world: if any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him. 1. John. 2. 15. He that loves silver shall
not be satisfied, and he that loves riches shall be without the fruit thereof:
Eccles. 5. 9. but keep you your selves in the love of God, looking for the
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. Jude. 21. 2 The love of our
neighbor.
A new commandment also I give unto you, that you love one another: John. 13.
34 yea, that you serve one another by Love, Gal. 3. and let the peace of God
rule in your hearts, to the which you are called in one body, and be ye
amiable. Colos. 3. 15 He that loves his brother abides in the light, and
there is no occasion of evil in him. 1. John. 2. 10. but he that loves not,
knows not God: for God is Love, 1. John. 4. 7. and Love comes of God. Every
one that loves is borne of God: 1. John. 4. 7. therefore love one another
without faining, with a pure heart and fervently, 1. Pet. 1. 22. that your love
may be without dissimulation. Romans 12. 9. not in word nor in tongue only, but
in very deed and in truth. 1. John. 3. 18. Moreover love your 3 The love of our
enemies.
enemies, bless them that curse you; do good to them that hate you; pray for
them that persecute you: for if ye love them that love you, what reward shall
ye have? do not the Publicanes the same? Mat. 5. 44. Finally, let all your
things be done in Love. 1. Cor. 16. 14.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
O Lord, 1. Cor. 13. 1.
I know that though I speak with the tongue of Angels, if I have not love, I
am but as a sounding brass, or tinckling Cymball, and though I had the gift of
prophecy, and knew all secrets and knowledge; yea, if I had all faith, so that
I could remove mountains, and had no love, I were nothing: 2. These. 3. 5.
therefore guide thou mine heart in thy Love: 1. These. 3. 12.
Increase me also, and make me to abound in Love toward all men.

Another.
O God Romans 15. 5.
of all patience and consolation grant unto us, that we may be all alike
minded one toward another, according to Christ, that with one mind, and with
one mouth we may praise thee: Ephesians. 4. 3.
endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, Phil. 1. 9.
and so our Love may yet more and more abound in all knowledge, and in all
judgment, to the glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ.

The Christians Practice of this Command.
I Love thee dearly O Lord my God, Psalm. 18. 1. How the Christian loves the
Lord with an earnest and unsained Love.
the desire of my soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee: whom
have I in heaven but thee, and I have desired none on earth with thee. Psalm.
73. 25. Surely as the Heart brayeth for the rivers of water, so pants my soul
after thee, O God. Psalm. 42. 1. My soul desires after Oh how cold is our life
if it be compared with this.
thee, as the thirsty land, Psalm. 143. 6. and waits on thee more then the
morning watch waits for the morning: Psalm. 130. 6. Yea, it faints, O Lord,
for thy salvation. Psalm. 119. 81.

And as for the Lord Jesus Christ, albeit as Of the Christians Love toward
Jesus Christ.
yet I have not seen him, yet I love him, and rejoice in him with joy
unspeakable and glorious. 1. Pet. 1. 8.

And as for thy Law, except it had been my delight, I should now have perished
in my affliction: Psalm. 119. 92. for thy promises are What a Love he has to
the word of God, and public exercises thereof in the assembly of the Saints.
sweeter then honey to my mouth, Psalm. 119. 103. and I love thy Commandments
above gold. Psalm. 119. 127. O how love I thy Law? it is my meditation
continually: Psalm. 119. 97. yea, for the love I bear to thy Law, I love the
habitation Let bastard Christians be ashamed, who love not the house of God.
of thy house, and the place where thine honor dwells, Psalm. 26. 8. and I
desire nothing more then this one, that I may dwell in the house of my God all
the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his holy
temple: Psalm. 27. 4. for thy Tabernacles are amiable to me, blessed are they
who dwell in thy house: one day in thy Courts is better then a thousand else
where; yea, I had rather be a doorekeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell
in the tents of wickedness. Psalm. 84. How the Christian for Gods sake loves
all his Saints.


Concerning thy Saints also that dwell on earth, even the excellent ones, all
my delight is in them: for my goodness extends not to thee: Psalm. 16. 3. but I
honor and make much of them that fear thee. Psalm. 15. 4. And by this I know
that I am translated from death to life, because thou have given me a heart to
love the brethren. 1. John. 3. 14.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
AS Love is the first affection which Faith sanctifies 1 Love is the first
affection sanctified in the regeneration.
in the man regenerate, and whereby also Faith works in the sanctification of
the rest, so is it the strongest: for unto it all the rest of the affections
give place, and therefore do we first begin at it.

It should be sufficient to provoke us to love, 2 The great commendation of
love.
that it is reckoned among the first fruits of the Spirit; that our Savior
calls it the badge and cognizance of his Disciples: that the Apostle John. 13.
35.
calls it the band of perfection, and fulfilling of Romans 13. 10.
the Law: for Love has both the heart and the tongue of every virtue in it. It
is the balance of the Sanctuary: no work, had it never so great a show of
godliness can be acceptable to God, unless it flow from Love sanctified by
Faith.

In the right ordering of our Love two things 3 Two things considered in
ordinate Love* first, the object: secondly, the measure.
are to be considered: First, that it be set on the right objects: Secondly,
that it be moderate in the due measure*

The objects of our Love are three: the first 4 The (...) of love is the ^old.
is God: the second our selves: the third is our Neighbor.

It is customablie thought among men, an 5 None can love the Lord but the elect.
easy and common thing to love God, and therefore in word all men profess it,
but in truth it is not so. His love is as narrow, as his election, and it is
impossible that any can love him, but they who first have been beloved of him.
Herein is love, not that we loved God first, but that 1 John 4. 19.
he loved us. Diligere donum Dei est, quoniam ipse Aug. in Joan. tract. 10^.
vt diligeretur dedit, qui non dilect us dilexit.

So that we need not ascend into the secret 6 If we love God it is an
argument, that he loved us.
counsel of God to enquire there whether we are beloved of God or not, let us
enter into our own heart, and see if in a good Conscience we dare say with
David, I love the Lord: and then we may be sure that first we were beloved of
him. Amor Dei amorem animae parit, nec dubitet se amari, qui amat. As Saint
John beloved of Christ was replenished with love; so are all they who are
beloved of him.

Two things are requisite in the love of God: 7 God is to be loved above all
things.
the first is, that we love him above all things. It was the conviction of the
Gentiles, that they worshipped the creature neglecting the creator, and it
shall much more be the conviction of the Christians, if they love the creature
more then the Creator. He that loves Father or mother, wife or children, better
then me, is not worthy of me, says the Lord Jesus. Certe non amant illi
Christum, Aug. de temp. Sermon. 223.
qui aliquid plus quam Christum amant.

And in deed, what is there to be compared 8 For the most excellent creatures
are but as beams of his beauty.
with him? whatsoever beauty or goodness is in the creature, is but splendour
summi illius honi, a beam of that great and infinite good which is in God that
made it: and then only are his creatures rightly used, when by them we
return to the Lord who made them. Si autem deseris illum qui te fecit, and
amas illa quae fecit, Augustine.
adulter es: but if passing by him who made thee thou set thy love on those
things which he has made, thou go a whooring from God, and playest the
adulterer with his creatures.

The second is that we love him for himself, 9 God is to be beloved for
himself.
and this excludes that mercinary love of worldlings, who love him for his
gifts more then for himself: this is ac si sponsa plus diligeret acceptum
annulum quam sponsum, and diceret, sufficit Augus. in Joan. tract. 2.
mihi annulus, saciem illius videre non desiderio: such is the unkindly and
unchaste love of those who are so delighted with Gods gifts, that they desire
not to enjoy himself.

This mercinarie love Satan objected it to 10 Mercinary love objected to Job
by Satan.
God: does Job serve the Lord for nothing? but he was proved a false accuser:
for when all the moveable gifts of God were taken from Job, yet the love of God
abode deeply rooted in his heart, and after trial he was found to have loved
God not for his gifts, but for himself.

And this should move us the more carefully to fly this mercinarie love,
because Satan places 11 We should the more carefully eschew it.
his great vantage in it, where he may prove it against us. Cauere debemus ne
propter praemium diligamus Deum: beware we love not God for a reward only: and
if we will, Quod quaeso dabitur praemium, cum quicquid tibi datur us est, minus
sit quam ipse? what reward can be given us, seeing what ever other thing he
gives, is less then himself? Surely it is the purest love which loves God
for himself.

The second object of our Love is ourselves: 12 The second object of our Love
is our selves.
for in that I am commanded to love my neighbor as my self, it is first
required of me, that I should love my self: Prius vide si nosti diligere Aug.
de temp. Sermon. 43.
teipsum, and tunc committo tibi proximum, quem diligas sicut teipsum; first
see if thou have learned to love thy self, then will I commit thy neighbor to
thee, that thou may love him as thy self: qui amas iniquitatem nolo quenquam
Ibid. Sermon. 239.
diligas: si te sic diligas, vt perdas te, sic profecto perditurus es que^
diligis, sicut te; thou that love iniquity, I will not thou love any man: if
so thou love thy self that thou destroy thy self, thou will also after the
same manner destroy him whom thou love as thy self.

There is in man by nature a self-love, by 13 Man's natural selfeloue is
selfe-hatred.
which he is carried to please himself in the following of his own will, but
this in very deed, is selfe-hatred: for Amor nequitiae, odium est Aug. de temp.
256.
animae: the love of sin is the hatred of the soul. As Saul, Achitophel and
Judas were slain with their own hands, and no man can say they loved
themselves; so do all the wicked perish by their own transgressions, and that
same which in Nature is called self-love, in truth is selfe-murther.

And most justly is this come upon man, as 14 He that loves not God cannot
love himself.
a recompense of his error, that because he will not love God, he cannot love
himself. A lover of God he is not, who does continue in his Aug. de temp. 256.
sins: Quomodo amas Deum, cum adhut amas, quod in te odit Deus? how can
thou love God, who as yet love that in thy self, which God hates? and as
little can he be called a lover of himself who nourishes a serpent in his
bosom, which cannot live but upon his life, that is, delights in sin,
which does breed his own destruction.

The third object of our Love is our neighbor: 15 The third object of our love
is our neighbor.
where, first, we are to regard those of our family, least we be found worse
then Infidels: secondly, those that are of the family of Faith: thirdly, all
men; yea, even our enemies in so much as they are the workmanship of God: for
he loves his neighbor truly, who love God in his neighbor, that is, who
loves his neighbor, either because he sees that God is in him, or else
because he would have God in him.

Now as for the measure of our Love, it is 16 The right measure of our love to
God is, to love him with out measure, not so toward man.
not one and alike toward all the objects of our Love: the right measure of our
Love to God, is to love him without measure, at least with all that we have,
with all our heart, all our mind, and all our strength: but the love of our
selves and our neighbor is limited; so far forth may we love our selves and
them, as may stand with the love of God. Beatus qui te amat, and amicum in te,
and inimicu^ propter te: nam solus is nihil charum amittit, cui omnia chara
sunt in eo, qui non amittitur; blessed is he who loves God, and his friend in
God, and his enemy for God, only that man cannot loose any thing which he
loves, who loves nothing but in God, who cannot be lost.

Thus the affection of Love being ordered by 17 Love compared to a fire ever
tending up.
grace, is in the soul like a sparkle of heavenly fire, which no way can be
borne down, but carries up by course and degree the desires of our heart
toward the Lord, from whom it came, till at length we be consummate with his
Love.

The Censure.
But now the great number of them who want this Love, proves that all are not
Christians indeed, who now usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER VI. Of his Hatred.
The Lords Command.
Ye who love the Lord hate What hatred is commanded to a Christian.
that which is evil: Psalm. 97. 10. for they that call on the name of the Lord,
should depart from iniquity, 2. Tim. 2. 19. and should hate even the garment,
that is spotted with the flesh: Jude. 23. but thou shall not hate thy brother
What hatred is forbidden.
in thine heart; Leuit. 19. 17. for if any man say that he loves God, and hates
his brother, he is a liar: 1. John. 4. And he that says he is in the light,
and hates his brother is in darkness unto this time. 1. Ioh. 2. 9. He walks
in darkness and knows not whither he goes, because that darkness has blinded
his eyes. 1. John. 2. 11. Yea, he that hates his brother is a manslayer, and
ye know that no manslayer has eternal lise abiding in him. 1. John. 3. 15.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
QVicken Psalm. 119. 88.
me O Lord, according to thy loving kindness, so shall I keep the testimonies
of thy mouth. Deal Psalm. 119. 124.
with thy servant according to thy mercy, and teach me thy statutes: I am thy
servant, grant me therefore understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.

The Christians Practice of this Command.
I Hate falsehood and abhor lies, Psalm. 119 163. It is the sh^me of many now,
that they love that which a Christian should hate.
I hate vain inventions, 119. 113. and all false ways. 119. 128. I hate the
assemblies of the evil, Psalm. 26. 5. and them that give themselves to
deceitful vanity. Psalm. 31. 6. My soul hates Idols, 2. Sam. 5. 8. and the
work of them that fall away, it shall not cleave to me. Psalm. 101. 3. Do I
not hate them O Lord that hate thee? and do I not earnestly contend with those
that rise up against thee? surely I hate them with unfeigned hatred, as if they
were mine utter enemies. Psalm. 139. 21.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
AS by nature man's heart is emptied of all 1 Man by nature is filled with a
sinful hatred.
holy Love, so it is filled with a sinful hatred, a monstrous evil, offensive
to God, to our neighbor, yea, and to our selves.

Naturally Man hates the Lord, according 2 For naturally man hates the Lord.
to that which our Savior says he that does evil hates the light: the
evil Conscience of the wicked abhors the Lord, who is that first, and great
light, from whom all others have that light which they have; wishing that
either there were not a God at all, or else that he were like them.

He hates in like manner good men, even for that good which is in them, and
that with such 3 And he hates also good men for the good that is in them.
a raging malice that no band of Nature can restrain it: thus Caine hated his
brother Abel, and why? only because his works were good: Rahel hated her
Sister Leah; and why? only because she was fruitful, her self being barren:
and Joseph also was hated of his own brethren, for no other cause, but for
that his earthly Father loved him, and his heavenly Father had blessed him with
the gift of Revelation or Prophecy above them.

O cursed root of bitterness which does 4 It is a devilish thing to hate a
man for good.
cause man to hate his own, and that only for the good that is in them! O
greatest evil so directly contrary to the greatest good! God is so good, that
of every evil he works good to his own: and hatred is so evil that the
good things of God become unto it a matter of greater evil. 5 Man a second
Satan, inferior to him in two things only.


Thus is man who was made to the similitude of God, become an incarnate devil,
or as Augustine calls him, Secundus Diabolus, inferior Ad frat. in Erem. Sermon.
28.
only to Satan in two respects.

For whereas Satan being now very near 6 First, that being of shorter
continuance then Satan, he is not of so great experience.
six thousand years old, has the subtlety of his Nature (wherein also he
does exceed man,) helped by long experience to do wickedly, Man being of
shorter continuance, cannot equal him.

Again, man is clogged with a body, which 7 Secondly, that he is clad with a
body, which is a great impediment to his wicked conceptions in their
execution.
is a great impediment to the perfection and accomplishment of that which his
Spirit conceiueth; it being far otherwise with the actions of the body,
which require the circumstances of place, and persons, then with the
conceptions of the mind, which without any such thing are perfected.

Otherwise, if the wickedness of man's 8 What a world of wickedness should
be in man if his thoughts were executed as they are conceived?
heart brake out as it is conceived; if every hateful thought brake out into
murder; and every unclean lust into a carnal act, O what a world of
wickedness should then be discovered in man? then should it be manifest, that
Man for similitude of Natures, were but an incarnate Devil, as I have said.

As the graces of the Spirit keep one fellowship, 9 Vices go together linked
in one Chain.
so disordered affections, which under their proper name, in effect are but
vices, go together like the linkes of one chain.

For Hatred comes of evil parents: Pride 10 Hatred is bred of very evil
Parents.
begets Anger; Anger breeds Envy; and Envy brings out Hatred. If any man love
not the daughter, suffoca matrem, and non erit filia: let him suffocate and
slay the mother, and the daughter shall not be.

Anger is festuca in occulo, but if it benourished, 11 Anger continued turns
into hatred.
fit grandis trabes, ira enim inveterata fit odium: of a mote in the eye of our
Conscience it becomes a beam: for inveterate anger turns into Hatred.
Against this evil we are to embrace the wholesome counsel of the holy Ghost:
Let not the Sun go down upon your Math. 5. 22.
wrath.

Hatred again strengthened by time brings 12 Hatred brings out most
abominable Children.
out as abominable Children; to wit, Lying, Detraction, and Murder. By Lying
the hateful man lays that evil upon another which is not his: and by
Detraction takes from him the praise of that good which appertains to him:
therefore the Apostle ioynes these as twins together (...) and (...), Euny
and Murder: Galath. 5. 21.
for Envy having begotten Hatred, Hatred brings out Lying and backbiting, and
afterward actual Murder; if God do not stay.

Yea, as the Basiliske slayes the man, and it 13 The hateful man slayes like
the Basiliske.
is not perceived how, so the hateful man murders his brother, though no man
can see how he stroke him.

The Apostle calls Avarice the root of all evil, 14 Hatred exceeds Avarice in
evil.
and so it is; yet Hatred exceeds it in evil. The auaritious man will give
nothing of his own, yet he cares not how much be given by another: but the
hateful man can neither give himself, nor be content another should give to
him whom he hates: yea, his eye is evil because God is good.

In a word, among all wicked men a hateful man is the worst: other wicked men
delight in 15 Of all wicked men a hateful man is the vvorst.
their own good, at least in appearance, but the hateful man is tormented
with the good of others: ille diligit mala, hic odit bona, vt prope
tolerabilior Ambros. off. lib. 2. cap. 30.
sit, qui sibi vult bona (saltem apparenter) quam qui mala omnibus.

But of all this the evil returns to himself, 16 All the evil of hatred
returns to him that has it.
for the malice of the wicked slayes themselves: therefore Basil compares
Envy to the Viper, that rends the bowels wherein it was conceived: and
Augustine to the rust that consumes the iron wherein it was bred: among the
Ethnicks Socrates called it Serram animae, a Saw that cuts and diuides the
soul in two. Thus in Envy (said Basil) are many evils, and one only good
thing, to wit, that it is a plague to him that has it.

The Censure.
But now the great number of them who nourish in their hearts this poison of
the Serpent, proves that all have not the Christian disposition, who now
usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER VII. Of his Fear.
The Lords Command.
BLessed is the man who fears What excellent blessings accompany the fear of
God.
always, for he that hardens his heart shall not prosper. Prou. 28. 18. The
fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, Prou. 1. 7. it leads to
life, and he that is visited therewith, shall not be visited with evil, Pro.
19. 23. It is the wellspring of life to avoid the snares of death. Prou. 14.
27. in the fear of the Lord is assured strength, Pro. 14. 26. and nothing
shall be lacking to them who fear him. Psalm. 34. 9.

As high as the heaven is above the earth, so great Promises of enduring mercy
made to them who fear God.
is the Lords mercy to them who fear him. Psalm. 103. 11. The Lord has
compassion on them that fear him, even as a father has compassion on his
Children: ver. 13. his loving kindness endures for ever upon them, verse. 17.
the Lord delights in them that fear him, and attend upon his mercy, Psalm.
147. 11. and he will fulfill their desires. Psalm. 145. 19. When thou eatest the
labor of thy Promises of temporal wealth and prosperity.
hand thou shall be blessed that fear God, and it shall be well with thee:
Psalm. 128. 2. The Lord will increase his graces toward thee, and thy children.
115. 14.

Therefore fear the Lord ye his Saints, and depart The fear of God commanded.
from evil, Prou. ^. working out your own salvation in fear and trembling:
Phil. 2. 12. pass all the time of your dwelling here in fear: I. Pet. 1. 17.
for nothing else does the Lord thy God require of thee, but that thou fear
him, and walk in his ways, to love him, and to serve him, with all thine
heart, and all thy soul. Deuteronomy. 10. 12. But if ye will not keep this, and
fear this great and fearful name, THE LORD THY GOD, then the Lord will make
thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy scede great plagues, and of long
continuance. Deuteronomy. 28. 58.

And next unto God, give fear to them to A fear of man also commanded.
whom ye owe fear. Romans 13. 7. My Son fear the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with them that are seditious: for their destruction shall rise
suddenly. Prou. 24. 21. And ye shall fear every man his Father and his
mother, Leuit. 19. 3. and be ready to give an answer to every one that asks
you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear; that in all
things having a good conscience, they who speak evil of you as of evil doers
may be ashamed. 1. Pet. 3. 16. The fear of other Gods forbidden.


But fear ye no other Gods, neither bow down unto them: 2. Kings. 17. 35. for
they can neither do good nor evil. Ierem. 10. 5. Neither fear ye the Signs
of heaven, whereof the Heathen are afraid. A fear of man also forbidden.
Ier. 10. 2. And ye that know righteousness, and in whose heart is my Law,
fear not the reproach of men, nor be afraid of their rebukes, for the Moth
shall eat them like a garment. Esa. 51. 7. Remember that I have redeemed thee,
I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine. Esaias. 43. 1. I am thy God, and
will be with thee to strengthen thee and help thee, and sustain thee with the
right hand of my Justice. Esaias. 41. 10. I, even I am he, who comforts thee: who
art thou that thou should fear a mortal man, and the Son of man who
shall be made as grass? Esaias 51. 12. But sanctify the Lord God of hosts, and
let him be thy fear, Esaias. 8. 13. not fearing them who kill the body, but him
who is able to cast both soul and body into hell. Mat. 10. 28.

And as for thy sins, for which thou fear least I forsake thee; fear
indeed, but yet so that Comfort against the fear of sin.
thou misbelieue not and distrust my mercy.) Fear not little stock it is your
Fathers will to give you the kingdom: Luke 12. 32. for you are not now under
the Law but under grace, Romans 6. 14. and have received not the spirit of
bondage to fear again, but the spirit of Adoption, whereby ye cry Abba
Father. Romans 8. Fear not therefore, for thou shall not be confounded, nor put
to shame, thou shall forget the shame of thy youth, and shall not remember the
reproach of thy widdow-hood any more. ( If) for a little while I forsake
Comfort against the fear of spiritual desertion.
thee, yet with great compassion will I gather thee: for a moment may I hide my
face from thee, but with everlasting mercy will I have compassion on thee,
says the Lord thy Redeemer: the mountains shall remove, and the hills shall
fall down, but my mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant
of my peace fall away, says the Lord that has compasson upon thee. Esaias. 54.
4.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
THou Exodus 15. 11.
O Lord, like unto whom there is none among all the Gods so glorious in
holiness, fearful in praises, and doing wonders, Nehem. 1. 11.
I beseech thee hearken to the prayer of thy servant, who desires to fear
thee: Malach. 2. 5.
Give me (good Lord) that holy fear of thy Name, which thou have commanded,
Esaias. 63. 17.
that I may not err from thy ways, nor harden my heart from thy fear: Psalm.
31. 9.
for I know that great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that
fear thee. Lord Psalm. 110.
therefore knit mine heart unto thee, that I may fear thy Name, and Heb. 12.
28.
may receive grace to serve thee, so that I may please thee with reverence and
fear, through Jesus Christ.

The Christians Practice of this Command.
Who would not fear thee O King of the What a reverent fear of God is in
the Christian.
nations? for to thee appertains dominion. Iere. 10. 7. Surely I tremble for
fear of thee, and am afraid of thy judgments. Psalm. 119. 120. My whole
conversation has been in weakness, fear, and much trembling, 1. Cor. 2. 3.
I have had fightings without and terrors within: 2. Cor. 7. 5. Yea, from my
youth I have suffered thy terrors, doubting of my life, Psalm. 61. yet will I
not fear what Flesh can do unto me, Psalm. 56. 4. nor be afraid of ten He
that fears God aright, fears no other thing.
thousand of the people that should beset me round about. Psalm. 3. 6. Neither
will I be afraid of evil tidings, because mine heart is fixed, and believes in
the Lord, Psalm. 112. 7. he is mine hope and strength in trouble, ready to be
found, therefore I will not fear though the earth be moved, and the mountains
cast into the sea: Psalm. 46. 1. Yea, though I should walk through the valley of
the shadow of death, yet will I fear none evil: for the Lord is with me, his
staff and his rod, they comfort me. Psalm. 23.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
Fear among the rest of our Affections is 1 Naturally men fear Satan's
shadovv more then Satan himself.
also disordered by Nature, so far, that now we fear where there is no
cause, and do not fear, where we have cause to fear. Naturally men are more
afraid of Satan's shadow, then of Satan himself: his apparition without
terrifieth men, but the power of his kingdom commanding their affections
within, is not feared.

It is now the matter of man's fear, which 2 Yea, they fear God in such sort,
that they fly from him.
should be the matter of his joy. Adam in his innocence placed not his joy in
the creatures which were under him, and gave him obedience but in the Lord who
was above him, and with whom he had his familiar conversation, but now after
his apostacy, it is become far otherwise, the Lord is become a fear and
terror unto man, who before his fall was his principal joy.

And where it shall be our joy in heaven to 3 Now man is afraid at the sight
of God
see that glory of Christ, which he had with his Father from the beginning,
wonderful it is that those three Disciples, who were pillars of the Church,
should have been confounded and afraid at the only representation of that
glory which was made to them on mount Tabor, so unmeet are we now to have
fellowship with God, by reason of our sins, that as I said, the matter of our
joy, is become the matter of our fear.

Yea, so far are we now fallen away from a 4 Feared also at the sight of one
of his Angels.
similitude with our God, that we are afraid at the sight of one of those holy
Angels that minister unto him. Nay, if a man like our selves in regard of our
bodies should come from him, illuminate with his brightness, we might not
abide him, no more then Israel could abide the shining face of Moses, when he
came down from the Lord, but ran away from him: therefore does Basile call
our corrupted fear a certain Basil. Sermon. 2. de te^unio.
ebrietie, which makes us be strange with our friends, and start at shadows,
that is to say, fear where no cause of fear is.

We are therefore to consider how in the regeneration 5 Fear in the
regeneration is rectified.
this affection is renewed and rightly ordered, and how in holy Scripture there
is a fear commanded, and commended, which we must embrace; another forbidden,
and condemned, which we must eschew.

Fear renewed in our regeneration is the 6 The Nature of fear renewed.
daughter of Faith, the sister of Love, the mother of Humility and Obedience.
Therefore Moses Deuteronomy. 10. 12. ioynes these three together: that to fear the
Lord, to love him, and to serve him, is all that God requires of Israel.

The objects of godly fear in the man regenerate, 7 The three*fold object of
Fear.
are either in God, in our selves, or in the creature without us.

The objects of our fear in God are first his 8 We fear God for his
judgments and for his mercies.
judgments; secondly, his mercies: For first we are taught to fear him as our
judge; then to fear him as our Father. For the holy Spirit in the work of our
regeneration keeps this order: first, he rebukes us for sin, and terrifies us
with the judgments of God due to them, and then comforts us with the sense of
his mercy in Christ.

This fear of Gods judgments primus est incipientium gradus: it is the first
step of them 9 The first thing we fear in God is his judgment.
who are beginning to learn godliness. If thou have not yet learned to love
God dearly, yet it is a good beginning if thou fear him. If thou Greg. Moral.
lib. 19.
love not the pleasures of Paradise, yet be afraid of the torments of Gehenna:
Sicut enim Bern. de mutatione aquae in vinu^.
aqua extinguit ignem, etc. For as water quenches the fire, so this fear
queneth the heat of sin.

And this fear of judgment in the Christian 10 The next thing we fear in God
is his mercy.
begets at length a fear of God for his mercies: therefore Basile called it a
Paedagogue, that instructs the man to godliness. Timor transit in Basil in
Psalm. 32. Gregor. Moral. lib. 22.
Charitatem, said Gregory. Vincat itaque in te pius timor, and erit amor: let
therefore godly fear Aug. de temp. Sermon. 52.
overcome in thee, and at length there shall be love: fear shall not abide in
thee, but as a Master shall lead thee unto love.

Therefore said I, that the second object of 11 His Saints only fear him for
his mercies.
our fear in God, is his mercy: according to that in the Psalmist. Mercy is
with thee that thou may be feared.

And this reconciles that apparent discord 12 Fear of God for his mercy casts
out at length all fear of his judgments.
between the Psalmist, and the Apostle: The fear of the Lord is clean, and
endures for ever, says David. Perfect love casts out fear, says Saint Psalm.
19. 1. John. 4. 18.
John. If fear be cast out, how does it endure? but the answer is, that fear
whereby we fear the judgments of God, and is as I said in the godly an
introduction to the love of God, shall be cast out, when our love is perfected:
but that fear, whereby we fear him for his mercies, and reverence him as our
Father, shall endure for ever.

In heaven we shall have no fear of Gehenna, 13 Fear of Gods judgment shall
not be in heaven.
we shall be so filled with his Love; yea, even on earth, the more we grow in
the love of God, the less fear of his judgments is in us: Mayor Aug. de
temp. 214.
est peregrinantium timor, minor propinquantium, nullus peruenientium.

The objects of Fear in our selves are our 14 The object of our fear in our
selves, are our sins and infirmities.
sins which we have done, and our infirmities by which we are ready and
prone to sin again.

This fear arises in the godly from the fear 15 Why a Christian fears these
two continually.
of God for his mercies: for the sweeter and more desired his mercies are unto
us, the more fearful unto us are our sins and our infirmities; these two a
godly man fears continually; the one because by them he has fallen from
God; the other least they should procure a new diuorcement between him and the
Lord whom his soul loves.

And this fear is so necessary to keep us 16 What a fearful thing it is to
be without fear.
within the compass of godliness, that if any man be without it, hoc ipsum
vehementius timere August. Ibid.
debeat, quod non timeat, he ought so much the more to fear, because he is
without fear.

I have learned said Bernard by experience, 17 A threefold holy fear
succeeding by course one another in the soul of a Christian.
that for obtaining and retaining of grace it is very profitable that these
three fears succeed by course in the soul of man, vt timeas pro accepta
gratia, amplius pro amissa, long plus pro Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 54.
recuperata: If thou have received grace, fear thou procure it not to be taken
from thee: if again in thy sense thou find it to be lost, fear much more
because thy keeper has left thee, and he is gone from thee that sustained
thee: And last, when again it is restored unto thee, fear most of all, least
again thou procure by thy sins, that it should be taken from thee. 18
Objects of our fear without us, are men of sundry rancks.


Now the objects of our fear without us are men of sundry ranckes, whom under
God we are commanded to fear, among whom the first place belongs to the King.
1. The King.


The second to our natural Parents, Leuit. 19. 19 2 Our natural Parents.
Let every man fear his Father and his Mother: where we are to observe that
the infirmities and imperfections of our Parents must no way be the matter of
our sport, far less of our disdain: if we fear God and look to be
blessed Cursed are the children that contemn their parents.
of God with Iapheth and Sem, we must reverence them, and cover their
nakedness, otherwise the contempt and mockry of Parents even where they
deserve it, shall bring upon children the curse of Cham.

The third belongs to our spiritual Fathers, to whom also we owe fear and
reverence in 20 3. Our spiritual Fathers.
the Lord, according to that, were ye not afraid to speak against my Servant?
Numb. 12. 8.


And the fourth is, to al men among whom we 21 4. We are to fear all men among
whom we live, and why.
should live of a pure conversation with fear: for if they be profane, they
are Satan's snares, and we are to fear least living among them, we be
tempted to evil by them; if they be godly they are the Lords holy ones, and we
should also fear to offend them.

Now as our Fear should be set upon the 22 Of the right measure of our fear,
for want whereof many fall into fears forbidden.
right objects, so should it be rightly ordered. The judgments of God are not
so to be feared, that we distrust his mercies; nor our sins so to be feared,
that we misbelieue his promises; neither men so to be feared, as if they were
not under God; nor shadows so to be feared, as if we had not a most sure word,
to which we should take heed: and to one of these sorts are to be referred
all fears forbidden in holy Scripture.

The wicked either are without Fear, their 23 The wicked are either without
fear, which is false security, or full of vain Fear.
prosperity increasing careless security: because they have no changes, they
fear not God: and again, because I hold my tongue, and that of a long time,
therefore thou fear me not. And Psalm. 55. Esaias. 57. 11.
this security ends always in a most horrible and confused fear: or else if
they have any fear it is distemperate and out of order.

For there is a vain and blind fear, whereby 24 Sundry sorts of faithless
fear in the wicked.
they fear when there is no cause, Psalm. 13. and this is the fruit of an evil
conscience, yet even the godly are not exempted from these 1. A vain Fear.
sorts of blind fears, because they are regenerate in a part only, but at
length these fears in them are banished, and chased away by the true fear of
God.

Again, there is in them a carnal fear, the 25 2. A carnal Fear.
object whereof is man, this is a fear in extremity, when man is so feared
that God is offended: of it speaks Solomon: The fear of man brings a snare.
Prou. 29. 25.

And from this fear also the godly are not 26 How with these also the godly
are exercised*
fully exempted: this fear made Abraham deny his wife; it made Jacob afraid of
Esau, notwithstanding that God had twice comforted him; it made Samuel fear to
anoint David, least Saul should slay him; it made Jonas decline from the
calling of God; and it made Peter deny his Master: but it is certain that in
the godly the true fear and love of God at length does overcome it.

Beside this, there is in them a servile fear, 27 3. A servile Fear.
by which they fear God for his judgments only: for the most profane
mockers among them are afraid when the Lord shows himself angry, as is
evident in Pharaoh: and this Fear is never alone in the godly, but conjoined,
as I said, with a fear of God for his mercy, which at length shall overcome,
and cast out all fear of his judgments.

But in the wicked servile fear increases always, 28 In the wicked servile
fear increases until it end in desperate fear.
until it end in desperate fear; as we may see in Saul, who feared David,
because he saw that God was with him, and became always his enemy. O most
miserable and unhappy 1 Samuel 18.
condition, to hate a man because God loves him; to be enemy unto him, because
God is with him! for as Gods love toward his own can never end; so matter of
fear and perturbation Misery of them who fear not God is, that they can never
be without fear to trouble them.
to the wicked can never be lacking, the end whereof can not be hurt to the
godly, but desperate destruction to themselves. As it was unto Saul, so let all
thy enemies perish O Lord. And this fear is also in damned Devils, but godly
men never fall into it.

For this cursed fear is the daughter of Infidelity, 29 How cursed a fear
the servile fear of the wicked is.
the sister of Hatred, the mother of Disobedience and Despair. Timor tristis
and inutilis qui veniam quia non quaerit, non consequitur: Bern. ad Oger.
Epist. 87.
a sad and unprofitable fear, which never gets mercy, because it cannot seek
it. Hic timor cum infidelitatis filius sit, salutaris non est: this fear
Basil. in psalm. 33.
being the child of distrust cannot be profitable unto salvation.

Of all this it is evident, that the wicked who cast off the fear of God, are
not for all that with out fear, yea, rather as is threatened, if thou 30
Endless* fear is the just punishment of them who fear not God.
wilt not fear this great and fearful name, The Lord thy God, the Lord shall
give thee a trembling heart, and thou shall fear continually. Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
Merito certe omnia timet, qui vnum non timet: it stands with Gods just
judgments, that he should fear all things who fears not one, to wit, The
Lord his God.

The Sovereign remedy therefore against 31 For the true fear of God
banisheth all other fear.
all disordered fear is the true fear of God: if there be any wickedness in
thine hand, put if from thee, and let not evil dwell in thy tabernacle, so
shall thou lift up thy face without spot, and thou shall be safe without fear.
32 A great commendation of godly fear.


This holy fear of God is the beginning of wisdom: Pro. 1. 7. yea, it is the
end of all Eccl. 12 It is Custos innocentiae, said Cyprian: It is Anchora Cyp.
lib. 2. epi. 2. Gregor. Moral. lib. 6.
cordis, the anchor of the heart, said Gregory: which keeps it vncarryed away
by the waves of raging tentation: vbi timor Dei non est, ibi Aug. de Temp.
Sermon. 112.
dissolutio est vitae, said Augustine, where no fear of God is, there is
dissolution of life: It is semen Bern. in Cant. Ser. 37.
Iustitiae, said Bernard, the seed of righteousness: without which can be no
ingresse into godliness: without it can be no religion, said Lactantius,
Lactant* de ira Dei. cap. 8. 11.
quod enim non metuitur, contemnitur; quod contemnitur, non colitur; for that
which is not feared, is contemned; and what is contemned, cannot be worshipped.

In a word, it is in holy Scripture compared 33 It is the nail which keeps
the heart sure unto God.
to a nail, which being stricken into the heart of man by the hand of God,
keeps it stable, that neither the tyranny nor deceit of sin, can carry it
away: therefore does the holy Ghost conioyne these two, fear God, and clean
to him.

The Censure.
But now the licentious lives of many, in this age, led without all fear of
God, prove that all have not the Christians disposition, who now usurp the
Christian name.

CHAPTER VIII. Of his Confidence.
The Lords Command.
THe Lord is God in heaven Confidence in God commanded and commended for most
excellent blessings it brings to them that have it.
above, and in earth beneath, Ios. 2. 11. blessed is the man, that makes the
Lord his trust, and regards not the proud: Psalm. 40. 4. for they who trust in
the Lord, shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be removed, Psalm. 125. 1. The
eye of the Lord is upon them that trust in his mercy, to deliver their soul in
death, and to preserve them in famine. Psalm. 33. 18. The Lord is good, and as a
strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them that trust in him.
Nahum. 1. 7. Therefore trust in the Lord for ever, and you shall be assured. 2.
Chron. 20. Trust in the Lord, and he shall comfort thine heart. Psalm. 2^. 14.
Commit thy way to the Lord, trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass.
Psalm. 37. 5. He that walks in darkness and has no light, let him trust in
the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God: Esaias. 50. 10. for in the Lord is
strength for evermore. Esaias. 26. 4.

But in his own might let no man be strong, Confidence in man forbidden and
condemned, whether it be in our selves or in others.
1. Sam. 2. 9. lean not to thine own wisdom: Prou. 3. 5. for he that
trusts in his own heart is a fool. Prou. 28. 26. Neither put you your trust
in Princes, nor in the Son of man: Psalm. 146. for confidence in man is like a
broken tooth, Prou. 29. there is no help in him, his breath does depart, and
he returns to his earth, then his thoughts perish. Psalm. 146. 4. Cursed is
the man that trusts in man, and does make Flesh his arm, and with-drawth his
heart from the Lord. Ierem. 17. 5.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
O Lord, Prou. 2. 7.
who do preserve the state of the righteous, and Ierem. 45.
art the hope of Israel, seeing all that forsake thee shall be confounded, and
they that depart from thee, shall be written in the earth, Psalm. 73. 27.
it is good for me to draw near unto thee, O Lord: Psalm. 71. 3.
therefore be thou my strong rock, whereunto I may alwyes resort: Psalm. 89. 17.
be thou the glory of my strength, that by thy favor my horn may be exalted:
for my shield appertains to the Lord, and my King is the holy One of Israel.
Psalm. 57. 1.
Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me: for my soul trusts in thee, and
in the shadow of thy wings will I trust till these afflictions ouerpasse. Psalm.
60. 11.
Give me help against trouble for vain is the help of man, and let thy mercy
be upon me, as I trust in thee, h Psalm. 33. 2.
through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The Christians Practice of this Command.
Truly the hope of hills is but vain, and the The strength of a Christian is
in God alone.
multitude of mountains, but in the Lord our God is the health of Israel.
Jeremy 3. 23. Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but I will remember
the name of God my Lord Psalm. 20. 7. The eternal God is my refuge, and under
his arms I am for ever. Deutro. 33. 27. Let Idolatrous worldlings who make
gold their God, think shame of their sin.
I will not say to the wedge of Gold, thou art my confidence, Job. 31. 34. but
O Lord thou art my fort, my strength, and my refuge in the day of affliction,
Ierem. 16. 9. I trust not in my Bow, nor my sword, thou sauest me from mine
adversaries. Psalm. 44. 6. My defense is in the munition of rocks, Esaias. 33. 16.
even in the Lord, who preserves the upright in heart: Psalm. 7. 10. he is my
rock, my fortress, the horn of my salvation, and my refuge: Psalm. 81. 21. he
is the strength of my heart, Psalm. 73. 26. his Name is a strong tower: Prou.
18. therefore I will trust in the Lord, and will not fear what flesh can do
unto me. Psalm. 56. 4.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
IN a worldling fear and confidence consists 1 In a Worldling fear and
confidence consists not, it is otherwise in the Christian.
not together, the one of them weakeneth the other: in a Christian it is not
so, his fear of God is not without confidence in God, neither is his
confidence in God without fear of God; and of this it is evident that the
confidence by which the fear of God is weakened and empayred is carnal, and
not Christian. Christian confidence is that grace of God, whereby the believing
man rests so upon the promises of God, that in greatest commotions and
temptation he abides fixed steadfast and unmoved.

As a rock in the Sea beaten with the waves 2 As a Rock in the Sea beaten
with the waves of every wind, so is a christian in the world.
which are raised by every Wind, so lives a Christian in the world, an object
of all tentations: sometime impugned by trouble coming from God: sometime by
trouble coming from men: and sometime by trouble coming from Satan: but in
all these assured confidence sustaines him.

For in such troubles as come immediately from God, it is the Nature of faith
that by it 3 The confidence and refuge of a Christian in such troubles as come
from God immediately.
his Children cleaues fastest to God when he seems sharpliest to put them
from him; they run to the hand that strikes them, and will know no other.
Come, and let us return to the Lord, for he has spoiled and he will heal
us, he Hosea. 6. 1.
has wounded and he will bind us up. So deeply is the assurance of Gods truth
rooted in their hearts, that their conclusion is set down with that holy man
Job, albeit the Lord would slay Job. 4.
me, yet will I trust in him.

And as for all those troubles that come by 4 The confidence of a Christian in
such troubles as come by men.
men, they consider that they are moderated by God, according to that which our
Savior said to Pilate: Thou could have no power over me were it not given
thee from above. And in this Matthew. 27.
by manifold experience has God confirmed them.

For he made the Barbarians courteous to 5 He knows the hearts of men are in
the hands of God.
Paul: Artarxerxes favorable to Nehemiah: the keeper of the prison friendly to
Joseph: yea the Lions peaceable to Daniel. Again he raised Absalom against
David to chastise him: he made Pharaoh rigorous to Israel, that so he might
win them from the love of Egypt. Seeing it is so that their hearts are ruled
by God to like or dislike his Children as he sees may be for their good, why
shall trouble coming from them disquiet us?

And by the same consideration is the Christian 6 The confidence of a Christian
in such troubles as come by Satan.
sustained in all those troubles that come from Satan: he knows he can do
nothing but by divine permission, and therefore in trouble from Satan, he
seeks his comfort from God. Thus is the Christian shaken with many
temptations, but is never removed.

But the confidence of Worldlings, is either 7 The confidence of worldlings is
either in themselves.
in themselves, as namely in their own might, and these prove weak like
Goliath; or in their own wisdom, and these prove fools like Achitophel; or
in their own righteousness, and these prove most unrighteous, as the
Pharisees, Luke 18. 13.
before whom Publicans and sinners shall go into the kingdom of heaven.

Or else their Confidence is without them, as 8 Or in others without them.
either in men; and of all these it is true which Rabsache spoke of the King of
Egypt, they are but broken staves of Reed: or else in strong holds, which are
as easily shaken by the Lord, as ripe figs fall from a tree, said Nahum: or
else in riches, which are deceitful refuges of vanity, and cannot help in the
day of trouble.

Outward means are good to use, but evil 9 How in trouble outward and second
mea^ are to be used.
to trust in: if we set them in Gods room, they become either very pernicious,
or most unprofitable. Example of this, one for many we have in Asa and Ezechia,
whereof the one being diseased but in his se^, (...) thereof, because he sought
Physicians and not the Lord, the other being diseased in his bowels recovered
of it, because he looked to GOD, more then to means. 10 Miserable are the
wicked, whose confidence is not in God.


Thus we see how the wicked like a Reed shaken with the wind, are tossed with
every tentation, because their confidence is not in God.

The Censure.
Now the great number of them who either turn aside to unlawful means, or
look to the lawful means more then to God, proves that all are not
Christians indeed, who now usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER IX. Of his Joy.
The Lords Command.
BE glad ye righteous, and The matter of a Christian man's joy is.
joyful all ye that are upright in heart: Psalm. 32. 1 The Lord our God.
11. let the heart of them who seek the Lord rejoice. Psalm. 105. 3. But let
not your joy be in wine and oil: Psalm. 4. nor in Men: 1. Cor. 3. 21. nor in
this, that Spirits are subdued to you: Luke 10. 20 but in God through Jesus
Christ, by whom ye have 2 Our own salvation.
received atonement, Romans 5. 11. by whom also your names are written in the
book of life. Luke 10. 20. Rejoice ye also with Jerusalem, and be glad with 3
The prosperity of the Church.
her, and all that love her, rejoice with joy for her, all ye that mourn for
her, that ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolation,
that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the brightness of her glory. Esaias.
66. 10. And pray continually for her peace. Psalm. 122. 6. If men revile you 4
Sufferings with Christ.
and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you for Christ's sake,
rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. Mat. 5. 11. Count it
exceeding joy when ye fall into many tentations, James. 1. (specially) in as
much as ye are made pertakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory
shall appear, ye may be glad and rejoice. 1. Pet. 5 All the gifts of God.
4. 1^. Finally, rejoice in all good things, which the Lord thy God has given
thee and thine household, Deuteronomy. 26. 11. but see thy joy be in trembling. The
Christians joy is tempered with fear.
Psalm. 2. 11.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
BLessed Psalm. 89. 16.
are the people that can rejoice in thee, O God, they shall walk in the light
of thy countenance, they shall rejoice in thy Name continually, and in thy
righteousness shall they exalt themselves. Psalm. 119. 77.
Let therefore thy tender mercy come to me, that I may live: for thy Law is my
delight. Psalm. 51. 6.
Make me to hear joy and gladness, and rejoice the soul of thy servant: Romans
15. 13.
Yea Lord, fill me with thy joy and peace in believing, that I may abound in
hope, through the power of the holy Ghost, by Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
The Christians Practice of this Command.
I Will rejoice in the Lord, and my soul shall 1 The Christian rejoices first
in God, and that salvation conquered for him by the Cross of Christ.
be joyful in my God: Esaias. 61. 10. I will be glad O Lord, and rejoice in thy
mercy, for thou have seen my trouble, and known my soul in adversity: Psalm.
31. 7. thou have increased my joy according to the joy of the Harvest, and as
men rejoice when they divide the spoil: for the yoke of my burden, and the rod
of my oppression have thou broken. Esaias 9. 3. In Christ Jesus therefore will I
rejoice, in those things that pertain to God. Romans 15. 17. And God forbid I
should rejoice in any thing, save only in his Cross, by whom the world is
crucified to me, and I to the world. Gal. 6. 14.

(For this cause) Thy word O Lord is unto 2 What a joy the Christian has in
the word of God.
me the joy and rejoicing of my heart. Ierem. 15. 16. As the friend of the
bridegroom who stands and hears him, reioyces greatly because of the
bridegromes voice, Ioh. 3. 29. so do I rejoice at thy word O Lord, as one that
finds a great spoil, for thy promises are my comfort in trouble, Psalm. 119.
50. I have taken thy testimonies as an heritage for ever, Psalm. 119. 111. and
have had as great delight in them as in all riches: 119. 14. therefore I
rejoiced when they And in the house of God.
said to me, we will go to the house of the Lord; Psalm. 122. 1. for it is my
joy to draw water out of the Wels of thy salvation. Esaias. 12. 3.

And like as Israel rejoiced with a great joy 3 How the Christian reioyces in
well doing, albeit he should suffer evil for it.
when they offered willingly to the Lord with a perfect heart: 2. Chron. 29. 9.
Or as Judah rejoiced, when all the Land bound themselves by an oath to seek
the Lord: 2. Chron. 15. 15. So is it my joy, always to do well and justly;
Prou. 21. 15. yea, though trouble follow well-doing, yet in my greatest trial
of affliction my joy shall abound, 2. Cor. 8. 2. and I will rejoice that God
has counted me worthy to suffer for righteousness, and for the name of
Christ. Acts. 5. 41. Neither shall the spoliation of my goods impair my joy,
knowing that I have in heaven a better and more enduring substance. Heb. 10. 34.

And as for Jerusalem I will prefer it to my The welfare of Gods Church is
also a joy to the Christian.
chief joy, Psalm. 137. 6 I will love the stones, and dust of Sion better then
the palaces of Babell. 102. 14. I will ever wish that peace may be within her
walls, and prosperity within her palaces. Psalm. 122. 7. that her sons may be
as plants growing up in their youth, and her daughters as corner stones, graven
after the similitude of a palace. Psalm. 144. 12.

(Generally) I will not rejoice at the destruction The conversion of a sinner
rejoices the Christian.
(of any man, nay not) of him that hated me, Job. 31. 29. But with the Angels
will rejoice at the conversion of a sinner.

Last of all, as Sara rejoiced in the Child He has joy in all Gods gifts, as
in the tokens of his love.
which God had given her; so I know it is lawful for me to rejoice in all the
gifts that God has given unto me, Deuteronomy. 26. 11. and therefore I will rejoice
in the works of thy hands O Lord, Psalm. 92. 4.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
MAn by his fall lost not the natural affections 1 Man by his fall lost not
the affections, but the holiness of them.
which GOD created in him, but the rectitude and holiness of his affections,
which now are moved in him no otherwise then members in a paraliticke body, to
wit, out of order.

Neither does the grace of Regeneration take 2 Neither does Christ's grace take
away affections, but only rectifies them.
away from man natural affections, but only the perverse inclination and
disordered motion of them by restoring them again to their original rectitude
and holiness.

What the Nature of joy is, may better be 3 The nature of joy.
felt then can be defined. It is an affection of the soul, whereby the soul
upon knowledge of some good either present, or to come, is enlarged, as says
the Apostle: or exalted, as says Psalm. 89. 16. Basil. de great. Deo agendis.
the Psalmist: Ita vt animam prope exilire and ad exterior a prorumpere dicas.

This joy is either Natural, such as is the 4* Joy is either natural or
spiritual.
joy of men unregenerate; or Spiritual such as is in the regenerate.

The Natural man again has his joy, either 5 The objects of natural joy are
Gods gifts abused, Satan's b^its disguised.
in the gifts of God, wickedly abused by himself; or else in the baits of
Satan cunningly disguised: for the Natural man does in such sort use the
gifts of God, that he neither 6 How Gods gifts are abused by the wicked.
seeks nor finds comfort in God who gave them, and this is Idolatry, to set up
in thy affection the creature before the Creator: beside this, he uses not the
creature after the will of him who gave it, but after the lust of his own
will, and this also is sacrilege, to abuse that to wicked and profane ends
which God created good and holy.

And hereof it comes to pass, that unto the 7 Abuse of Gods gifts punished in
the wicked.
wicked, the good creatures become the means of their greater condemnation,
yea, and ofttimes also of their present confusion in this life. The Lord most
justly suffering them to perish in the abuse of that creature, wherein they
rejoiced more then in him: and of this daily examples have we before our eyes.

Thus Haman like a fool rejoiced in his preferment, 8 Natural men have their
joy in that which is their destruction.
specially, that he was bidden to the Banquet by Queen Esther, not knowing
that the same was the beginning of his fall: thus Achitophel thinking by his
wit to bear out an evil cause, was snared thereby himself: so Absalom
carnally rejoicing in his beautiful hair, found it at length a rope to hang
himself: so the Philistims eating and drinking before Dagon, and rejoicing to
make a play-foole of blind Sampson, had their banqueting house by him made
their burial.

Yet the other object of their joy is worse, by 9 How they rejoice in the
baits of Satan disguised.
which they joy in the disguised baits of Satan, covered* with a show of
deceitful pleasures that endure but for a season, but under it lurkes the hook
that slaies them to death, that endures for ever: here is a most lamentable
case to see men with a carnal joy swallowing up the pleasures of sin, which
will be their perdition, Lachrymarum causas tripudiantes peragunt, and Gregor.
Moral. lib. 20. Sermon. 8.
ridentes mortis negotium exequ^ntur.

In this they are like Birds which lay down 10 They are like birds eating meat
under the fowlers net.
their heads to take up the corns of Wheat cast to them by the Fowler, but see
not the snare which he has spread over to take them: or like the Fish in the
pleasant stream of Jordan, taking pleasure in that same water, which carries
them that they know not of into the salt sea, where incontinent they die.

As also this joy arising of the pleasure of 11 Their joy compared to the
burning of a Candle.
sin, is not improperly compared to the light of a candle, which in burning
consumes that same which nourishes it, till at length both of them die
together, and the light end in darkness and stinking smoke. It is even so
with carnal joy, which consumes by degrees, those same things which nourish
it, as outward substance, and strength of body; and then being consumed it
self, ends in fearful anguish and perturbation.

But the joy of the man regenerate has these 12 Three properties of a
Christans joy: it is,
three properties: first, it is a great and solid joy, for he never lays it
upon any small thing; God is the matter of his joy: secondly, his joy is
internal; 1. Solid.
whereas the heart of the wicked even 2. Internal.
in laughing is sorrowful, the heart of the godly in mourning is joyful:
thirdly, it is eternal, and 3. Eternal.
endures for ever, where the joy of the wicked is but like a point, wherein
there is no continuance.

The objects of a Christians joy are, as I said, 13 Objects of a Christians joy
are; first, God.
first, God; and then those benefits which of his love and mercy slow from him
to us in Christ Jesus, and these are either principal or secondary.

Principal benefits wherein the Christian rejoices, 14 Then Gods benefits
principal.
are Election, Calling, Justification, Sanctification, deliverance in
tentations, which breeds experience, and experience begets and increases a
sure and lively hope of our Glorification, which makes our joy to abound.

Secondary benefits are also the matter of 15 And secondarie.
the Christians joy, according to that, Deu. 26. 11 Not so much for the gifts
themselves, as for that they are given of God, tokens of his fatherly love, and
pledges of better things to come. Where it is to be marked, that in one and the
self same external gift, where the Natural man is only delighted with the
goodness of the thing it self, the Spiritual man is much more refreshed with
the sense of Gods love, from which the gift came, then he is with the gift it
self.

The Censure.
But the want of this disposition proves that all are not Christians indeed*
who usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER X. Of his Grief.
The Lords Command.
BLessed are they that mourn: Mourners for sin are blessed and marked of God.
for they shall be comforted. Math. 5. The sacrifices of God are a contrite
Spirit; a contrite and a broken heart the Lord despises not. Psalm. 51. 17. Set
a mark on the forehead of them that mourn, and cry for all the abominations
that are committed in the City. Ezech. 9. 4. It is better to go to the house
of mourning then to the house of banqueting, because this is the end of all
men, and the living shall lay it to his heart: Eccle. 7. 4. Mourn To
worldlings sin is a joy, correction a grief: to the christian by the
contrary, sin is a grief, correction a joy.
ye therefore with them that mourn; for if one member suffer, allought to
suffer with it. 1. Cor. 12. 26. But be not grieved with the Lords correction:
for he corrects those whom he loves. Prou. 3. 11. But concerning them who
are asleep, sorrow not as others do which have no Hope. 1. These. 4* 13.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
O Lord, Esaias. 66. 1.
thou to whom heaven is for a throne and the earth for a footstool, and yet
have said in thy word, that thou will look unto him that is of a poor and
contrite spirit, and trembles at thy words: Psalm. 51. 10.
create, I beseech thee, in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within
me. Ierem. 9. 1.
fill my head with water, and make mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I may
weep both night and day, Esaias. 38. 15.
recounting my former sins in the bitterness of my heart* Psalm. 126. 5.
and so may now sow in tears, that after this I may reap in joy, through
Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The Christians Practice of this Command.
MY life is wasted with heaviness, and my The life of a Christian is fraughted
with heaviness, and that:
years with mourning: Psalm. 31. 10. All the work wrought under the Sun is
grievous to me; for all is vanity and vexation of Spirit. 1. For his own
sins.
Eccle. 2. 17. (Specially) because the good I would, I do not; but the evil I
would not, that I do: for there is a Law in my members rebelling against the
Law of my mind, and leading me captive to the Law of sin. Romans 7. O 2. For
his absence from the Lord.
miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death. ver.
24. Woe is me that I remain in Mesech, and dwell in the tents of Kedar: My
soul has too long dwelt with them that hate peace: Psalm. 120. 5. for I am in
daily heaviness through continual temptations, 1. Pet. 1. 6. therefore I sigh
in my self, waiting for the adoption even the redemption of my body. Romans 8.
23.

And beside this, I am vexed every day, with 3. For the sins and
abominations committed by others.
godly Lot, by hearing and seeing the unlawful deeds of the wicked, among whom
I soiourne. 2 Pet. 2. 8. as David was grieved when he saw how that
transgressors did not keep Gods law Psalm. 119. 158. for which his eyes gushed
out rivers of water. verse. 136. As Jeremy weeped in secret for the sins of
his people, Ier. 13. 17. and as Ezra rent his clothes, and plucked his hair
off his head and beard when he heard that the people who came home from the
captivity had sinned against the Lord, Ezra. 9. 3. As our Savior mourned for
the hardness of heart in the Jews, Mar. 3. 5. and weeped sore because
Jerusalem knew not those things that belonged to her peace, Luke 19. 41. As
Paul had great sorrow and heaviness of heart for his brethren, Romans 9. 2. and
in great affliction and anguish with many tears craved their amendment to whom
he wrote, 2 Cor. 2. 4. even so has my tears been my meat night and day, Psalm.
42. 3. and I mourn for all the abominations that are done by others in the
City, Ezech. 9 4.

Moreover, as godly Nehemiah was sorrowful 4 For the trouble of the Church.
for Ierusalems desolation, Nehe. 2. 3. and as the Jews weeped in Babell, when
they remembered Sion, Psalm. 137. 1. As the wife of Phinees was not so sorrowful
for the loss of her husband, as for the captivity of the Arc, and departure
of the glory of God from Israel, so do I mourn for the affliction of Joseph,
Amos. 6. 6 and mine eyes drops down tears night and day for the trouble of
Jerusalem, Ier. 14. 17. for above all things I wish her peace and prosperity.
Psalm. ^22.

Finally, I am sorrowful with him that is afflicted, 5 For every one that is
in trouble.
and I weep for every one that is in trouble; and my soul is in heaviness
for the poor one, Job. 30. 25. yea with godly Samuel, I will mourn even for
wicked Saul: 1 Samuel 15. 35. and with loving David for rebellious Absalom, 2 Samuel 18. 33. but much more with good Jonathan will I weep sore, if David be
reviled and persecuted, 1 Samuel 20. 34.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
Our joy in this life is not without grief, and 1 Our joy in this life not
without grief.
heaviness; so witnesses Saint Peter, we rejoice in the salvation prepared
for us, and yet we 1 Pet. 1. 5. 6.
are in heaviness through manifold tentations: the like we find in our own
experience.

As wine failed even in that banquet at which 2 Comfort is sometime scant even
in the heart of the Christian.
Christ was present; so comfort sometime is interrupted, even in that heart
wherein Christ dwells, but as in the one he turned water in wine in the end, so
in the other shall he turn all sorrow into joy at the last.

The causes of grief in a Christian are threefold: 3 Causes of grief arising
from our selves are threefold.
the first is the consideration of that which we have been: the second is the
consideration of that which we are: the third, the consideration of that which
we would be, and are not.

As for the first: so long as a man and his sin 4 A man so long as he is in his
sins thinks them no cause of grief.
are one, he neither feels the weight of it, nor the wrath that follows it,
but rejoices in that which should be the matter of his grief, but so soon as
man by grace is parted from his sin, then becomes sin a burden to him, and a
matter of his grief, which before was the matter of his joy.

One example of this we have in David, who 5 An example hereof in David.
having committed adultery, and going about to cloak it with murder, was
neither troubled himself with this abominable sin, nor yet would have
others troubled with it, and therefore wrote he to Ioab a command, indirectly to
slay Vriah, and there withal subioyned; let not this 2. Sam. 11. 25.
trouble thee: but how much it troubled him when God renewed him by repentance,
the 32. and 51. Psalms do testify.

Another we have in the Apostle Saint Paul, 6 Another in Paul.
who while he was in his sins persecuted with pleasure the Saints of God:
but when God sundred him from his sins, what a grief that sin in special
was to him, he witnesses himself; I am not (said he) worthy to be called an
Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God.

For when the Lord loses a sinner from his 7 When God looses a man from sin,
he binds him to an hatred of sin.
sin, he binds him to a perpetual hatred of his sin: and therefore is
it, that when he has taken away the guiltiness of a sin, yet he will have
the memory thereof to remain: for as thorns which are evil in the garden,
are Why the memory of sin remains when the guilt thereof is removed.
good in the hedge to fence it; so sins which are evil in the affection,
hindering the growth of grace in the soul, are good in the memory, to humble
us for our former sins, and guard us against sins to come.

And this godly sorrow for sin committed, 8 Persian Kings could suffer no
mourners in their presence, but it is not so with God.
being no other but the dolors of our new birth, should not discourage Gods
children, but rather they are to be comforted with it. Certainly the Lord our
God is best pleased with us, when we are most displeased with our selves.
Mourners might not stand in presence of the Persian Kings, therefore Mordecai
clad in sackcloth, got not entrance at the Kings gate; but whom does the Lord
comfort? is it not those who mourn? to whom grants he most familiar access?
surely, to those that are most entirely humbled and cast cowne before him.

Then are we most welcome to God, and 9 The Lord likes our mourning
countenance best.
our face most pleasant unto him, when it is watered with the tears of
repentance: therefore is it his comfortable speech to his Church, My Dove,
which mournes in the clefts of the rock, Cant. 2. 14
show me thy face.

As for the second: the consideration of that 10 The Christians tentations are
a grief to him.
which we are, is also to a Christian the matter of his grief; first, in
regard of our continual temptations to sin, Satan ever seeking to recover
his old possession in us. As Pharaoh followed Israel, so Satan follows the
redeemed man, doing all that he can to bring him back again to his former
servitude and bondage. 11 And his manifold crosses.


Secondly, also in regard of our manifold crosses and troubles which like unto
the waves of the sea, one after another, come upon us.

And herewith also comes in the troublesome 12 And the troubles of Gods Church.
estate of Gods Church: as good Nehemiah was not so merry for the preferment he
had in the Court of King Artashashte, as sorrowful for the desolation of
Jerusalem; why should not (said he) Nehem. 2. 3.
my countenance be sad, when the city of my fathers lies waste? so is it with
the Christian, though his own particular estate, be never so good, yet is it
his grief to see the Church of God in trouble.

The third matter of our grief arises of the 13 And the long delay of that
promised Kingdom.
consideration of that which we are not, but would be. The Christian has some
lively foretaste of the excellent pleasures of the life to come, and therefore
it is a grief to him to be holden from it, and a joy to remove toward it; but
certainly he shall never go out of the body with joy, who lives not in the
body with grief for his absence from God: Si desideras Aug. de sanct. sermon.
45. Psalm. 56.
quod non habes, funde lachrymas, vnde dicturus es Deo, posuisti lachrymas meas
in conspectu tuo; If thou desire that which thou have not, shed tears that
thou may obtain it. Alas, how shall the Lord gather our tears into his
bottle, if we shed them not? or how shall he give us that comfort for which
we never mourned?

In worldlings, joy and grief agree not together, 14. Joy and grief agree not
in worldlings, it is otherwise in Christians.
the one of them excels the other: It is not so with a Christian, Lachrimae
sunt illi vice deliciarum, for in mourning he finds unspeakable Macar. hom. 15
joy. And as after rain the air becomes more pure, so after the showers of
tears the Conscience is cleared and comforted: Quae enim secundum Deum sunt
lachrymae iugem pariunt certamque laetitiam; for those tears which are
according to God, do always bring forth most sure consolation.

The Censure.
But the want of this holy mourning, which is evident in many, proves that all
are not Christians indeed, who now usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER XI. Of his Grief arising of a troubled Conscience.
OH that my grief were well Let them mark this who do think their tentations
singular, and that none of Gods children were troubled ever so sore as they.
weighed, and my miseries laid together in a balance! it would now be heavier
then the sand of the sea. Job. 6. 2. The Lord does renew his plagues, and
increases his wrath against me: Job. 10. 17. his hand is heavy upon me
night and day: Psalm. 32. 4. he writes bitter things against me, and makes
me possess the iniquities of my youth, Job. 13. 26. his indignation lies
upon me, Psalm. 88. 7. he fills me with bitterness, and suffers me not to
take my breath. Job. 9. 18. Changes and armies of sorrows are against me. Job.
10. 17. My spirit is in perplexity, my soul is amassed: Psalm 143. 4. I go
mourning all the day long, and am sore broken: I roar for the very grief of
my heart Psalm. 38. 6. My bowels swell, and mine heart is turned within me. Lam.
1. 20. Mine eyes are dim through grief: Psalm. 6. My flesh has no rest at
all, but fightings without, and terrors within. 2. Cor. 7. 5. As a woman with
child, who draws near to the trauatle is in sorrow, and cries in her
pain, so am I in thy sight O Lord. Esaias. 26. 17.

The Christians Prayer for deliverance from these terrors.
ALas O Lord, Psalm. 77. 7.
will thou absent thy self for ever? Esaias. 63. 15.
is the multitude of thy mercies and compassions restrained from me? Ierem. 15.
18.
shall my heaviness be continual, and my plague desperate, that it cannot be
healed? Psalm. 13. 2.
Alas Lord, how long will thou forget me? how long will thou hide thy face from
me? how long shall I take counsel within my self, having weariness daily in
my heart. Deuteronomy. 4. 31.
O Lord, it is thy praise that thou art gracious and merciful, Thou Esaias. 42.
3.
breakest not the bruised Reed, and quenchest not the smoking slaxe. Thou
Job. 5. 11.
exaltest the sorrowful to salvation. Job. 13. 24.
Hide not therefore thy face from me O Lord, neither take me for thine
enemy, Lam. 1. 20.
but have mercy upon me, and consider how I am sore troubled. Esaias. 57. 16.
Contend not with me any more, Psalm. 6. 2.
neither rebuke me in thine anger, Ierem. 10. 24.
least thou turn me to nothing. Job. 7. 20.
What shall I say unto thee? O thou who art the preserver of men, I have sinned
against thee, Psalm. 51. 9.
but according to the multitude of thy compassions have mercy upon me, and
put away my iniquities, Psalm. 51. 12.
restore me to the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free spirit.
O Lord, who speak peace to thy Saints, make me to hear joy and gladness,
that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice: then shall my tongue sing
joyfully of thy righteousness, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

THE LORDS ANSWER TO THE CHRISTIAN.
NO tentation has overtaken you but such as appertains to man, 1 Cor. 10. 13.
Remember that I am faithful, and will not suffer you to be tempted above that
you be able, but Every tentation has an issue.
will even give the issue with the temptation, that ye may be able to bear it.
1. Cor. 10. 13. I will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench Comfort against
spiritual desertions.
the smoking Flax: Esaias. 42. for a little while have I forsaken thee, but with
great compassion will I gather thee: for a moment in mine anger have I h^d my
face from thee, but with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on Gods mercy
to his Children is sure and everlasting.
thee. The mountains shall remove, and the hills fall down, but my mercy
shall not depart from thee: neither shall the Covenant of my peace fall away,
says the Lord, who has compassion on thee. Esaias. 54. 7.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
THE heauiest, grief of a Christian is that 1 The greatest grief is grief of
Conscience
which does proceed from a troubled Conscience: The Spirit of a man may
sustain his infirmities, but a wounded Spirit who can Prou. 19.
bear it. 2 The health of conscience consists in two things.


The health of conscience consists in these two; first, in a sense of Gods
mercy pardoning our sins in Christ: secondly, in a holy disposition to
spiritual exercises.

And the disease or trouble of conscience proceeds 3 Where-from the disease
of conscience proceeds, to wit.
from the contrary evil: for if the soul be forsaken for a time, it becomes
unable for spiritual exercise. Faith becomes weak, Love 1 When God forsakes
it, and takes away the sense of mercy, then is the soul sore troubled.
waxes cold, Grace to pray is relented; yea, as the Moon is but a dark body
when the Sun looks not upon it, so the soul is but dead when God does not
work in it, and in this absence of God, no man can tell how sore the soul is
troubled, but he who has felt the comforts of his presence.

But the other evil is much more fearful, 4 2. But when he pursues it with
a sense of his wrath, then it is worse troubled.
when God erects a tribunal in the conscience, and gives out into it a just
condemnatorie sentence for sin which cannot be denied; there follows upon it
a sense of wrath, which like a fire burning within it, does miserably torment
the soul of him in whom it is.

Whereupon there follows such a distemperature 5 Trouble of mind distempers
the whole body.
of the whole body, that as David felt in himself, the moisture thereof is
turned into the drought of Summer: the reason hereof is Psalm. 32.
given by Bernard, the soul has under it a body, Bern. in paruis. sermon. 48.
which it gouernes, above it the Lord, in August. in Joan. tract. 19.
whom it rests. Viuificat Anima and viuificatur: if that life by which the
soul lives relinquish it, that is, if the help and comfort of Gods blessed
Spirit forsake it, how can it be, but the soul must also relinquish the body?

And yet both these ways it pleases the Lord 6 The first of these spiritual
troubles compared to a lingering disease.
to exercise his children in this life: first, by desertion, wherein sense of
mercy and spiritual strength unto good is with-drawne from them, and this is
unto them as a lingering disease; the fruit whereof is, first, to humble them
for their former sins; secondly, to make them esteem more of the presence of
God when he grants it unto them.

But the other is worse, when not only he 7 The second to a fearful
consumption.
forsakes them, but also as it were, does pursue them with his wrath: this is
like unto a fearful consumption, which if it continued would undo them:
Infernus enim quidam animae rea Bern. in assump. Mariae. sermon. 4.
conscentia est, for an evil conscience is a certain infernal prison of the
soul.

And with this accusing and tormenting conscience 8 For three causes does the
Lord exercise his Children with these inward sufferings.
it pleases God also to exercise his children: first, to work in them a
conformity with Christ in spiritual sufferings: secondly, to teach them by
experience the bitterness of that wrath to come, that they may fly from it.
And thirdly, to learn them some knowledge of that incomprehensible love Christ
carried toward them, who for their sakes drank out the dregs of that cup, the
drops whereof are so intolerable unto them.

The first of these the wicked know not, they 9 The wicked are not grieved with
the absence of God because they never felt the comforts of his presence.
were never comforted with his presence, and how can they be grieved with his
absence, but the second they shall know, how ever for a time their consciences
being burnt as it were with a hot iron, are without feeling of sin, and no
way troubled for it, yet shall it at length waken them, and trouble them with a
gnawing worm that never shall dye.

The Censure.
Now the great number of them, who being lodened with sin were never troubled
in consciscience for sin, proves that all are not Christians indeed, who now
usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER XII. Of his Patience.
The Lords Command.
He that is slow to wrath is The praise of Patience.
of great wisdom: and he that rules his own mind is better then he that
wins a City, Proverb. 16. possess therefore your souls in patience, Luke.
21. 19. and let your patient mind be known to all men: Phil. 4. 5. for ye
have great need of patience, that What need we have of Patience.
after ye have done the good will of God, ye may receive the promise. Heb.
10. 36. Render not evil for evil, nor rebuke for rebuke: but contrariwise
bless, knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye The cause should be good
for which we suffer.
should be the heirs of blessing. 1 Pet. 3. 9. And ( indeed) if ye be railed
on for the name of Christ, blessed are ye, for the spirit of glory and of God
rests on you, which on their part is evil spoken of, but on your part is
glorified. 1 Pet. 4 14. If therefore ye suffer not as murderers or evil
doers, he not ashamed. ver. 16. Say not thou I will recompense evil, but wait
on the Lord, and he shall save thee: Prou. 20. 22. Be patient and settle your
heart: Iam. 5. 7. The fruit of Patience.
for the patient abiding of the righteous shall be gladness. Prou. 10. 28. The
Lord is a God of judgment, and they are blessed that wait for him. Esaias. 30.
18.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
LOrd Psalm. 115. 14.
increase thy graces toward me, so that 1 Cor. 1. 7.
I be not destitute of any gift, waiting for the appearance of my Lord Jesus
Christ: Lord confirm to the end, that I may be blameless in that day, and
Colos. 1. 10.
may walk worthy of thee, pleasing thee in all things, Colos. 1. 11.
and may be strengthened with all might, through thy glorious power to all
patience and long suffering with ioyfulnesse.

The Christians Practice of this Command.
I Will wait on the Lord, Zeph. 3. 8. and my The christian waits on the
Lord, whereas the worldling runs about seeking relief and rest in other
things, but can never find it.
soul shall keep silence unto my God: for of him comes my salvation. Psalm.
62. I will approve my self unto him in much patience, in afflictions, in
necessities, in distresses, 2. Cor. 6. 4. submitting my self unto the will of
my God, and in all things giving thanks to him through Jesus Christ. 1. These.
5. 18.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
THE Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, is 1 The Gospel a mirror, wherein we see
the similitude of Gods Image, and are transformed into it.
compared by S. Paul to a mirror, wherein we behold the glory of God with
open face, and by which we are transformed into the similitude of his Image:
for so many as are the Sons of God by regeneration, to them he communicates his
Image by his word and spirit.

His goodness is extended over all his creatures, 2 The light and goodness of
God is extended unto all men.
and he illuminateth every one that comes into the world: for every man by
nature has in him as much light as furnishes to him some principles of good
and evil, to make him inexcusable in all the evil that he does.

But as for his own Children, he marks 3 But his Image is communicated to
his children only.
them from the rest of the world by his own image: and this is it wherein we
should chiefly try our selves whether we be the workmanship How we may know
whether we be Gods workman ship by the new creation, or no.
of God by regeneration, as we are his creatures by the first creation or not:
and this trial is to be made by our similitude and conformity with him.

As other affections are reformed in the regeneration, 4 Patience is reformed
also in our regeneration.
so also is our Patience. Concerning it, three things are to be considered;
first, the nature of Patience; secondly, the necessity; thirdly, the utility
thereof.

Patience, as says the Apostle, is a grace very 5 A description of the Nature
of Patience.
needful for us, to sustain us in the doing of Gods will, and in the
expectation of his promises. Heb. 10. From this is borrowed that description
Hebrews 10.
of Augustines: Patience is a grace of the Spirit, flowing from faith, by which
we suffer evil things willingly, because we will not forsake those good
things by which we may come to better.

The evils which with Patience we must suffer, are not the evils of sin; for
it is not Patience but effeminate feebleness to suffer it, but the 6 Patience
suffers not the evils of sin but the evils of affliction.
evil of affliction. Again, the good which we will not forsake, is as says
the Apostle, the doing of the good will of God, and the better things which God
has promised, and we doc hope hereafter to obtain.

The second is the necessity of Patience. In 7 Patience necessary for two
causes: 1. Because the good that God has pro mis^ dis not presently performed.
two respects Patience is most necessary: first, the good which God has
promised and we hope for is suspended and delayed for a time: which time
though in regard of the dispenser it be short, because he knows when he will
give it, yet to the expectant it is very long, therefore have we need with
Patience to wait for it.

Next because of the present manifold evils 8 2. Because of the present evils,
wherewith now we are exercised.
wherewith in this life we are exercised. We live in the company of the wicked,
who are unto us as the Cananits were to Israel, pricks in our side, and thorns
in our eyes. Neither will the Lord have them separated from us* but the popple
must grow with the good Wheat till the day of harvest. Patienter itaque
ferendum est, quod festinanter auferendum non est.

There will never be peace, where God has 9 No peace between the elect and
reprobate.
proclaimed inimitie: the blessed seed of the woman, and seed of the cursed
Serpent will never agree; let there be but two of them in the world suppose
brethren, the one of them shall slay the other, as Caine did Abel: let them be
in one house under one discipline, yet the one shall persecute But in this
discord the reprobate are always the persecuters.
the other, as Ismael did Isaac: yea, put them into one womb, as were Jacob
and Esau, yet the one shall strive with the other.

As the rock in the sea (said Nazianzen) lies 10 As a rock in the sea, so is
a Christian in the earth.
object to the waves of the sea, raised by every wind, from whatsoever coast
it blow: so is the Christian in the world, subject to the trouble of every
wicked man that can come near him, and therefore has he need to be armed
with patience, and to walk among them circumspectly, as among snares.

Now to the third, the utility of Patience: 11 The principal praise of
Patience.
Every grace of the spirit has in it some special virtue, whereby it excels
another, but the principal praise of Patience is pointed out by our Savior in
that precept, Possess your souls in Patience.

These are three excellent graces, Faith, Love 12 By Faith we possess Christ,
by Love our neighbor, by Patience our selves.
and Patience: by Faith I possess Christ Jesus; by Love I possess my
neighbor and make him mine own; by Patience I possess my self: he that
has not Faith is without the Head, he that has not Love is without the body,
and he that has not Patience is without himself, no master nor possessor of
himself, but still ouer-ruled by the will of another.

Beside this, Patience entertaines all the rest of 13 Patience preserues the
other Graces of the Spirit.
the graces of the spirit: it a enim proposita est Dei rebus patientia, vt
nullum opus Deo complacitum Tertul. de patien.
perpetrare possit extraneus a patientia: for it is so set over the affairs of
God, that without it no spiritual work acceptable to God can be done; no
prayer to God, yea, no piety, no duty of love to man can be discharged without
patience.

Moreover, Patience mittigates evils, and makes 14 It mittigates evil, and
makes heavy crosses easy.
heavy and difficult crosses easy to be born: Patientia enim fit vt homo
liberetur a malo, non exteriore and alieno, sed intimo ac suo: where as August.
Marc. Epist. 5.
Impatience were it never so great, re^ieues not men of the evils that offend
them, but rather increases it, so that by it, small crosses become greater and
heavier to be borne: Impatientes dum mala patinolunt, non efficient, vt malis
eruantur, August. de Patien. chap. 2.
sed vt mala grauior a patiantur.

Therefore Satan seeks by many means 15 Three ways chiefly is our Patience
impugned by Satan.
to bereave us of so great a good, but specially by these three injuries; in
our person, in our goods, and in our name. Hoc velu titriplici ariete pulsatur
Patientia nostra: against these three Bern. in co^uers. Pauli.
therefore are we to confirm our selves.

As for the afflictions of our persons, if they 16 Troubles coming from evil
men should not commoue us, and why.
come mediately upon us by men, we are to remember that which our Savior said
to Pilate, Thou could have no power over me at all, if it were not given
thee from above: and that which David spoke to Abishai concerning Shimei that
2. Sam. 16. 12.
cursed him: Suffer him, for the Lord has bidden him* it may be that the Lord
will look on mine afflictions, and do me good for his cursing this day.

And again we are to remember that of the 17 Wicked men are but Satan's
instruments.
Apostle, we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities
and powers, etc. that is, that it is not so much men clothed with flesh and
blood that fights against us, as Satan that works in them; nihil enim aliud
sunt omnes impij, Gregor. Moral. lib. 13. cap. 15.
quam membra Diaboli? for what else are the wicked but members of Satan, moved
by him? and therefore not them, but him we are to account our enemy.

If so we do, we will never fight against the 18 It is great weakness to be
provoked to wickedness by wicked men.
wicked of the world with their own weapons, to render evil for evil, or
rebuke for rebuke: for if they provoke us to evil, and we in our impatience be
provoked by them, what difference is there between us, but that they sinned
first, and we sinned next? nihil enim inter prouocantem, Tertul. de Patient.
and prouocatum interest, nisi quod ille prior in malesicio deprehenditur and
ille posterior.

As ravening and devouring beasts cannot 19 We should not sight against Satan
with his own armor.
hurt us unless they find us in their way, so cannot the wicked of the world
harm us, if we go not their way, that is, if we do not as they do, but keep
a way different from theirs, that is, as our Savior commands us; Pray for them
when they persecute us: otherwise it is certain, that if any man will fight
against Satan with satan's armor, he shall suffer a shameful overthrow at
his hands.

He that cannot suffer a small cross, is there 20 He that cannot suffer evil
words, how will he suffer a sharper cross?
any hope he will sustain a greater? if the distemperate breath of another
man's mouth, put thee out of patience, how will thou for Christ's sake resist to
the blood? Absit a seruo Christi tale inquinamentum vt Patientia maioribus
praeparata rebus, in minimis excidat.

It is true that as a good conscience is necessary 21 A good conscience and a
good name are both necessary, and why.
for our selves to approve us to God, so our good name is necessary for others,
that we may be the more able to edify them: mihi quidem sufficit conscientia
mea, vobis autem necessaria Aug. ad frat. in Erem. sermon. 53.
est fama mea; my conscience (said Augustine) is sufficient for me, but my
good name is necessary for you. And to this same purpose said Philo, Non est
negligenda bona fama, res tum ad Philo. lib. d^ migratione Abrahae*
custodiam, tum ad dignitatem vitae vtilissima.

But where neither a good conscience within, 22 But no innocence can defend us
against the tongues of wicked men.
nor a good conversation without can preserve our good name, we must with
Patience endure it. Never one lived in the world so holy and without spot as
Jesus Christ, and yet what contradiction did he sustain of sinners? If they
called the Master of the house Beelzebub, what will they do to the servants?
no innocence can guard thee against the slanderous tongues of the wicked.

This is the very work of the Devil, who was 23 It is Satan's work to obscu^e
the good name of Gods children.
a liar from the beginning: vt seruos Dei mendacio laceret, and falcis
opinionibus gloriosum nomen infamet, vt qui conscientiae suae luce clarescunt,
alienis Cyp: Antoniano frat. Epist. 52.
rumoribus sordidentur; to rend the servants of God with lies, and stain them
in their name, whom he knows honorable in their good conscience.

It is a great praise so to live, that others be 24 Hs is poor that stands in
need of another man's praise.
compelled to commend thee, but great pusillanimitie to stand in need of
another man's praise. As the Moon that borrowes her light from the Sun, is
under a continual change, so the mind which is made up and down by the
breath of other men, can never be stable.

As a true Christian is not puffed up when he is 25 How the Christian depends not
upon the estimation of other men.
esteemed of others to be better, then he knows he is himself, so is he not
casten down when he is esteemed to be worse then indeed he is. As a rich man
will laugh, if he be called poor, because he knows it is false, so a
Christian when he is charged with evils, whereof he knows he is not guilty.
Been sibi conscius non debet falsis Amb. offic. lib. 1 cap. 5.
moueri, nec aestimare plus ponderis in alieno esse conuitio, quam in suo
testimonio.

Now as for those troubles which come immediately 26 Troubles coming
immediately from God, are most patiently to be borne.
from God, we ought so much the more patiently to bear them, whether they be
in our bodies or our goods: shall we receive good things Ioh. 27.
from him, and not receive evil?

Moreover, we have had fathers of our bodies 27 Seeing we suffer willingly
corrections from men y^a the cutting of our flesh, it is a shame not to suffer
Gods corrections.
who have corrected us at their pleasure, and we have been subject to them,
how much more should we be subject to the father of Spirits, who always
corrects us for our profit? Yea, seeing under hope of health we can be content
that Physicians cut and burn our bodies, let us be ashamed to murmr when the
Lord chastises us; seeing he does it for no other end but that after it we
may enjoy the quiet fruit of righteousness.

But how many men shall ye nowfinde professing 28 A rebuke of those that
cannot abide to be touched with any wrong.
Christ, and yet like unto those of whom Micah said in his time, the best of
them are briars? they think it religion good enough, if they be Micah 7. 4.
quiet when none offends them; but if you touch them with the smallest injury,
ye shall find them thistles and thorns to prick you.

The Censure.
And of this also it is manifest that all have not the Christians disposition,
who now usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER XIII. Of his Anger.
The Lords Command.
BE not of an hasty spirit to Carnal anger forbidden, and the manifold evils
that come by it.
be angry: for Anger rests in the bosom of fools. Eccles 7. 11. Whosoever is
angry with his brother unadvisedly is culpable of Judgment. Math. 5. 22. The
discretion of a man differs his anger, and it is the glory of a man to pass
by an offense. Prou. 19. 11. The fool is known by his anger: but the wise
covers shame, Pro. 12. 16. Cease therefore from anger, and leave off wrath,
Psalm. 37. 8. But Holy Anger allowed.
(if ye) be angry sin not, and let not the Sun go down upon your wrath.
Ephesians. 4. 26.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
O Lord, Esaias. 43. 21.
thou have formed me for thy self: Psalm. 119. 73.
therefore give me understanding, that I may learn thy Commandments. Esaias.
32. 15.
Pour thy Spirit upon me from above: Esaias. 38. 3.
and teach me in all things to do that which is good in thy sight. Psalm. 25.
8.
Thou art gracious and righteous, and teach sinners thy way, ( specially)
them that be meek will thou guide in judgment. Deliver me Gal. 5. 20.
from wrath, contention and debate, which are the works of the flesh: 1. Pet.
3. 4.
and work in me a meek and a quiet spirit, which before thee is a thing much
set be: Iam. 3. 13.
so shall I show by good conversation my works in the meekness of wisdom,
to the glory of thy Name, through Christ Jesus.

Amen.
The Christians Practice of this Command.
I Am the Lords servant, I will not forget him: The Christian is governed by
the word of the Lord.
Esaias. 44. 21. but will lay up his words in my heart, that I sin not against
him. Psalm. 119. I will not walk after the stubbornness of mine heart, that I
should not hear the Commandments of my God. Ierem. 16. 12. I will not strive
but will be gentle toward all men, instructing He is gentle toward all men,
even those that are contrary minded.
with meekness them that are contrary minded: 2. Tim. 2. For I have no such
custom as to be contentious; 1 Cor. 11. 16. but I cannot for-beare them which
are evil. Revel. 2. 2. I cannot suffer But yet so that he is z^lous.
such as deceive the servants of the Lord; Revel. 2. 20. saying they are
Apostles, and are not: Revel. 2. 2. for the zeal of thine house has eaten me,
and the rebukes of them that rebuked thee are fallen upon me. Psalm. 69. 9. Yea,
my zeal has consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy word. Psalm.
119. 139.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
THat same holy Spirit that descended upon I The holy Spirit appeared first in
the likeness of a Dove, after that in likeness of Fire.
the Apostles in the similitude of ^e, descended first on the Lord Jesus in the
similitude of a Dove, to teach us that in some things we should be patient and
meek, in others inflamed with an holy Anger, and that both the one and the
other are the effects of Gods Spirit.

In our own particulars we should be patient, 2 Teaching us meekness in our
own cause, but burning zeal in the cause of God.
in the cause of God we should be zealous, after the example of Moses, who was
the meekest man upon the face of the earth, but wonderful angry when he saw
God dishonored by Idolatry, he spared not to put to the edge of the sword
those people whom otherwise he loved most dearly. But alas, our corruption
carries us a contrary way, making us fiery beyond measure in revenging our
own wrongs, but wondrous cold in pleading the cause of God.

Anger is a natural affection, by which the soul of man is commoued to remedy
the evil done against the will thereof, by revenge. I call 3 Anger a natural
affection created by God in man.
it a Natural affection, such as God created in Adam in the state of
innocence, otherwise it had not been in our blessed Savior.

Now there are two sorts of Anger: one carnal, 4 Anger is either carnal or
spiritual.
which is the work of the flesh and forbidden: another holy, which is a work
of the spirit and commanded. Alia est ira quam impa^ientia Gregor. Moral. lib.
^. Sect. 125.
excitat, alia quam zelus format, illa ex vitio, haec ex virtute.

For the commotion of the mind is according 5 For the commotion of the mind
is according to the mouer thereof.
to the mouer thereof, if the Spirit of God commoue thy mind, it is an holy
anger raised for just causes, and tempered in ordinate measure: Affectiones
dona Dei sunt, cum a ratione Nazian. Cygneorum ca^minum. lib.
duce ac imperatore mouentur; Affections are the gifts of God, when they are
moved by Reason, as their leader and commander: and in special, Iracundia
moderate spirans Zeli est armatura; Ibid.
moderate Anger is the armor of Zeal.

But if the Spirit of Satan commoue thy 6 Anger stirred by Satan is either
without a cause, or without moderation.
mind, he raises an anger which either is unjust, or at least so immoderate,
that thou neither can keep under it reverence toward thy God, love toward
thy nighbour, nor compassion toward thy self.

This carnal Anger is a raging evil: Momentanea insania; a momentanie
madness, said Basil: compositum malum, a compound evil 7 What a compound evil
carnal anger is.
of many evils, said Nazianzen: Spirituum legio, a legion of many evil
spirits, by which the will Nazian. ibid.
of him who was the first murderer of man is satisfied, and many horrible
evils are effected.

It casts off all reverence of God: for the 8 It makes a man usurp the room
of God.
man this way angry, does set himself in the room of God, and would have the
Lord subject to him as his servant to execute without delay all that wrath he
wishes for by cursed imprecations.

It disioyneth a man from God and makes 9 It makes a man like unto Satan.
him like to the devil: in rerum natura quid mitissimum? an non Deus? quaenam
natura biliosa Nazian. ibid.
est? ea quae hominem peremit: De his tibi quamvis partem elige, nam vtramque
non licet habere: the meekest thing in the world is God, the most angry For a
man cannot keep the meeknes of God and malice of Satan together.
and bilious thing in the world is Satan; choose thee which of those two thou will have, the meekness of God or the malice of Satan, for it is sure both of
them together thou can not have.

Again, it shakes off all reverence of man; 10 It shakes off all reverence of
man.
Iratus in tantam insaniam vertitur, vt dominari omnibus appetens, nequaquam
suae irae dominetur; Gregor. Moral. lib. 34. 17.
for an angry man becomes so mad, that he will overrule all others, even then
when he cannot rule his own passion.

As a raging river ouer-flowing the bancks, 11 Compared to a raging river, and
to that destroying beast in Daniel.
takes all with it, that it finds in the way; so a raging mind spares none,
neither Father, nor Mother, nor Wife, nor Children, nor any to whom it owes
reverence, not unlike that beast in Daniel, with seven horns and iron teeth,
destroying all that are before it. It feltreth the How it deformeth the body.
tongue, it sireth the eye, it wryeth the mouth, and marreth the most comely
countenance of man, and so makes him unpleasant in himself, and undutiful to
others.

Neither does it disgrace the countenance 12 How it disturbeth the soul.
only, but as a sore tempest falling on the sea, raises raging waves in it;
so Anger, manifest a mentis tempestas, changes the state of the mind,
commouing it with fearful perturbations, which before was peaceable: and so
becomes a just punishment to him that conceiues it. Cogitationes Gregor. Moral.
lib. 5. cap. 121.
enim iracundi, Viperae sunt generationes, comedunt matrem suam; for the
cogitations of an angry man, are the generations of the Viper, which destroy
their mother.

But it does yet worse, it suffocateth grace, 13 How it interrupts prayer, and
cuts off fellowship with God.
and so cuts off fellowship and familiarity with God by prayer* nunquam enim
commotioni contemplatio iungitur. As the beams of the Sun Ibid.
are not seen when the clouds commoued with winds, cover the face of heaven,
and as a troubled water renders no representation of his image, that looks
into it: no more can a heart troubled with disordered affections be familiar
with God.

For strengthening us therefore against this 14 The Apostles precept serves for
a remedy against this evil.
evil we have a notable exhortation given us by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 26. Be
angry but sin not, and let not the Sun go down upon your wrath.

Wherein we have three things to be considered: 15 Three things considered in
the precept.
first, a Precept, be angry, commanding moderate anger: secondly a Prevention
of carnal anger, but sin not: thirdly a Prescription of a remedy against
carnal anger, if at any time it overtake us; Let not the Sun go down upon
your wrath.

Of the first we learn that there is a holy 16 A holy anger, which is
commended.
anger commendable, because commanded: examples of it we have in Moses, in
Phinees, in Nehemiah, in our Savior, when he saw the temple abused; in the
Pastor of Ephesus: and this is so far from being a sin, that it is a great
sin not to have it, as we see in El^, who is sharply corrected of God,
because he was not angry at his sons when they ran into an open slander.

In the second we have a prevention of carnal 17 Three helps against carnal
anger.
anger, but sin not: to help us to the practice of this, three things are
needful, when we are provoked unto anger; 1. silence: 2. consideration: 3.
Prayer.

The first is determinate silence: where there is 18 The first is determinate
silence.
no timber the fire dies out, says Solomon; but as the barking of one dog does
provoke the barking of another, so the words of Anger returned to him that
injured thee, stirs up but more contention. If thou esteemest him Many men
ignorantly make their adversaries their masters, learning at them how to
speak evil for evil.
thine adversary that has abused thee by words, why will thou make him thy
master? which in effect thou do when thou learnest at him, by the like
speeches to abuse thy self, which he has used before thee.

The turbulent waves of the sea, though they 19 How meekness and patience
overcome stormy words.
seem as if they would raise themselves unto heaven, yet coming to their
bounds, if they fall upon the soft and plain sands, they return Nazian.
back peaceably and calm; but if they encounter with hard rocks, they break
and become more turbulent: so thou if thou meetest thine adversary with
meekness, thou shall send him away pacified; if otherwise thou stand as a
rock to resist him, setting thy pride against his pride, thou encreasest the
storm of perturbation both in his heart, and thine own also.

The second remedy is a fourfold consideration; 20 The second help is
consideration.
first, of thy self; secondly, of thy Savior; thirdly, of thine enemy Satan;
fourthly, of his Instruments.

As for thy self, consider thou art but dust and ashes, no contempt can be
laid upon thee due to thy sins; the most worthy men of God 21 Consider thou
have deserved more contempt then man can lay on thee.
considering their own unworthiness have been content to be contemned of men:
et tu velut omnium praestantissimus iniurias far recusas? and thou as if thou
were the most excellent man in the world, refusest to suffer injuries. Naz.
Cyg. car.


If the evil spoken of thee be false, it pertaines 22 How all the evil words
of men whether they be true or false are to be received.
not to thee; if it be true, thou have cause to be angry at thy self, and mend
it; and if it be already mended in thee, and yet by another uncharitably
objected to thee, quantumcunque ille Aug. cont. Pet. lib. 3. cap. 10.
accusat vitium tuum, tantum tu laudato medicum tuum: as much as he reproues
thee for thy vice, so much give thou praise to the heavenly physician that
healed thee of it.

Consider that revenge is both unreasonable 23 It is unreasonable for us to
seek revenge, seeing Christ and his Saints are not yet revenged.
and hurtful. Unreasonable: the blood of the Saints shed from Abel to this day
is not yet revenged, as you may see by their own complaint, Revel. 6. Yea, the
blood of thy Savior is not yet fully revenged, and will thou in the pride of
thine heart not rest till thou be revenged? 24 It is also hurtful, all carnal
revenge being like that of Thamers.


It is also hurtful to thy self: all carnal revenge is but like Thamers
revenge; because Judah delayed to give her his third son, she allured
himself to commit incest with her: thus she hurt her self to get amends of
him. It is no otherwise in all such private reuenges, then if thou should
first put a sword through thy self, that afterward thou might strike thy
neighbor with it.

Secondly, consider thy Savior, who when 25 The Patience of Christ, stands for
an example of patience to us.
he was reviled for thy sake, reviled not again: when he was buffetted bare
it patiently, and prayed for them on the Cross that persecuted him: and if
there be any spark of grace in us, it should make us ashamed of our natural
pride, which carries us to revenge our smallest injuries.

Thirdly, hold thine eye upon Satan, and 26 In all our wrongs we are to
consider Satan as our principal enemy.
remember what ever instrument he set before thy face to divert thee, he
himself is lying in secret ambushment, as thy principal enemy to snare thee,
who has no other end proposed to him, in all injuries done to thee, but to
provoke thee to impatience, that so thou may blaspheme God, at least murmr
against him.

Last of all, look aright to the visible instruments 27 For the wicked are his
members moved by him.
of thy trouble, considering them not as naked persons working by themselves,
but as members of Satan, moved and provoked by him. Be not beastly like the
Dog, who runs to the stone, and not to him that cast it: turn the force of
thine anger against Satan, but pity the weak creature who is abused by him
to offend thee.

In the third room we have a prescribed 28 Remedy against carnal Anger.
remedy against carnal Anger if it ouer-take us: Let not the Sun go down
upon thy wrath.

There are some men slow to Anger, but if 29 Three sorts of men diversely
disposed tovvard Anger.
once they conceive it, they cannot easily be pacified: others are both hastily
angry, and stubborn in continuance in it: the third sort are slow to anger and
ready to forgive, and these are the best, ad tranquillitatus bonum plus
appropinquant, Gregor. Moral. lib. 5. sect. 122.
for they come nearest the nature of God.

It is an evil thing to conceive this carnal 30 It is humane srailty to
conceive Anger, but a devilish thing to keep it.
Anger, but it is far worse to keep it: such is our corruption received from
the first Adam, that we cannot hold Anger out of our heart, but such is the
obedience we owe to the second Adam, that we should not let it lodge in our
hearts after the setting of the Sun.

As Briars and thorns which prick every 31 The wicked are like briars and
thorns that prick every one who touch them.
hand that does handle them, are the cursed fruit of the earth; so are these
spightfull men, whom if thou do stir never so lightly, they prick thee
with bitter speeches; yea, oftentimes though thou do not stir them, they
sting thee in secret with their backbitings, manifested by their fruits to be
of the cursed race of Caine, the first murderer of his Brother.

But the Children of God are full of gentleness, 32 It is far otherwise
with the children of God.
love and meekness, they will not prick thee, no when thou do handle them
roughly by the words of soberness and truth, they endeavor to make evil men
better, rendering good even to those that have offended them.

The Censure.
But now the want of this holy disposition, proves, that all are not
Christians indeed, who now usurp the Christian name.

THE THIRD PART: WHEREIN IS DISCRIBED THE DISPOSITION OF HIS OVTWARD MAN.
CHAPTER. I. Of his Outward Man.
The Lords Command.
I Beseech you brethren, by It is not enough to keep the heart for God, he
will have the service of the body also.
the mercies of God, that ye give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and
acceptable to God, which is your reasonable serving of God. Romans 12. 1. And
suffer not sin to reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in
the lusts thereof. Neither give your members as weapons of unrighteousness to
sin, but give your selves to God, and your members as weapons of
righteousness to God. Let them mark it who think they may bovv their knee
to Baal.
Romans 6. 12. The night is past, the day is at hand: cast away the works of
darkness, and let us put on the armor of light, so that we may walk honestly
as in the day, not in gluttony or drunkenness, or chambring and wantonness,
nor in strife and envy, but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no
thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. Romans 13. 12. Let your
conversation be Professors living profanely dishonor God and shame the
Gospel, but it shall turn to their own shame in the end.
such as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. that ye may walk worthy of God,
who has called you to his heavenly kingdom and glory: 1 These. 2. 12. for the
grace of God which brings salvation to men, has appeared unto us, and
teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world. Tit. 2. 11. Therefore as obedient
Children, fashion not your selves to the former lusts of your ignorance, but as
he who has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. 1
Pet. 1. 14. A good life is the best defense of a Christian.
Cleanse your selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and grow up
unto full holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. having an honest
conversation, that they who speak evil of you as of evil doers, by your good
works which they shall see, may glorify God.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
Show Psalm. 119. 135.
the light of thy countenance O Lord upon thy servant, and teach me thy
Statutes, that I may 2 These. 1. 11.
walk worthy of thy calling: Phil. 2. 15.
blameless and pure as thy Son without rebuke in the midst of this noughty
and crooked generation, and may shine among them as a light in the world. To
this effect Psalm. 138. 8.
I beseech thee good Lord to perform thy work toward me: thy mercy endures
for ever, therefore forsake not the work of thine hands: 2 These. 1. 11.
but fulfill in me the good pleasure of thy goodness, and the work of Faith
with power, that the Name of my Lord Jesus may be glorified in me, and I in
him, according to the grace of thee my God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The Christians Practice of this Command.
When I was in the flesh, the motions of It is a great shame if now
professing Christ, we bring not forth the fruit of godliness, seeing when
we were in the estate of Nature, we were fruitful to sin.
sin which were by the Law, had force in my members to bring forth fruit unto
death; but now I am delivered from the Law, being dead unto it whereof I was
holden, that I should serve God in newness of spirit Romans 7. 5. God therefore
be thanked, that albeit I was once the servant of sin, yet now I have obeyed
from the heart the form of doctrine whereunto I was delivered, and so being
now made free from sin, I am become the servant of Let carnal Christians be
ashamed to read this.
righteousness: Romans 6* 17. and do bring forth fruit in holiness. ver. 22.
For I know that my body is the Temple of God, and that the holy spirit of God
dwells therein: 1 Cor. 3. 16 and I know that I am not mine own but bought
with a price; 1 Cor. 6. therefore do I beat down my body by discipline, and
study by all means to glorify God both in body and spirit. 1 Cor. 6.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
HItherto we have spoken of the new disposition 1 Now follows the disposition
of his outward man.
of the inward man in the Christian, it remains that now we speak of his
outward Man.

In regeneration first the soul is renewed, then 2 For first the soul is
renewed, and then the body restored:
the body restored: Sin began in the soul, and from it shame and death came
upon the body: Grace again first reformes the soul, and then proceeds to
reform and restore the body: for as the inward Man is, so is the outward.

The regeneration of the body has in it two 3 The regeneration of the body
consists in two things. 1. A restitution of it to original glory. 2. A
sanctification of all the members thereof.
things: first, a restitution of it to original dignity and glory and
greater, this shall be done in the resurrection: secondly, a sanctification of
all the members thereof, whereby they are made weapons of righteousness, and
this is presently done by grace.

For as by grace the Christian is renewed in 4 The Christian is like the Angels,
holy both within and without.
the spirit of his mind, so also in all his external conversation. As those
holy Angels that stand about the throne of God are full of eyes within and
without; so all the Saints of God, foris se and intus circumspiciunt, within
them they Gregor. Moral. lib. 19. Sect. 30.
have light and holiness, by which they look to their Judge, ever seeking to
please him, without them also light and holiness, by which they look to their
brethren, ever laboring to give good example to them.

Fidelem decet vndique esse manifestum, a godly 5 A Christian should be known
by all the parts of his life.
man should be manifested and known by all the parts of his life, and ab
incessu, and aspectu, Chrisost. in. Mat. hom. 4.
and a ves^e, and a voce; both from his vestment and his voice, from his
looking and his walking: Vox enim quidam est animae corporis motus; for the
motion or gesture of the body is a certain voice or speech of the soul.

But as Chrysostom complained of bastard 6 Many Christians now being tried by
the parts of their behavior will be found counterfeit.
Christians in his time, so may we of ours: whereby (said he) shall I judge
and discern you to be Christians? shall I judge thee by the place whereunto
most frequently thou resortest? thou love the Theater or the tavern better
then the Temple. Shall I judge thee by the gesture of thy body? thy dissolute
laughter declares thy dissolute affection. Shall I judge thee by thy apparel?
even by it also the vanity of thy mind is discovered. Shall I judge thee by
thy companions? If thou see a thief, thou runnest with him, and art partaker
with the adulterers. Oh how poor He is a poor man who has his tongue only,
and not his deeds to defend him.
and miserable a man is he, who has all the parts of his life giving sentence
against him, and nothing but his tongue falfely procuring for him that he
should be reputed a Christian.

It is a great argument that the blood is foul 7 How an evil life is an
argument of an evil heart.
and infected, when the Leprosy breaks out into the face, and a token that
the house is full of smoke within, when it brusts forth at doors and windows
without: so is it an undoubted Mar. hom. 15.
argument of superabundant corruption in the heart within, when filthiness
breaks out in the mouth, the eye, and hand. O what a filthy heart has he, who
even by his breath infects such as are near to hear him!

The Censure.
But now the great number of these bastard Christians evidently proves, that
all have not the disposition of a Christian, who now usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER. II. Of his Ears.
The Lords Command.
CAuse thine ear to hear wisdom: God should dwell in the Ear as in the
door of his own Temple.
Prou. 2. 2. and give ear to learn understanding. Prou. 14. Incline your
ears, come to me, hear counsel and receive instruction, that ye may be
wise The Ear of the wicked is open to Satan, but closed to God.
in the latter end. Prou. 19. 20. Be not as the wicked who have ears and hear
not: Ezech. 12. 2. their poison is like the poison of the serpent, and they are
deaf like the Adder, that stops his ears, and hears not the voice of the
enchanter, though he be most expert in charming. Psalm. 58. 4. But if thou
hearken to my laws and observe them, then the What blessings are promised to
them who lend their ear to the Lord.
Lord shall keep with thee his covenant, he shall love thee and bless thee.
Deuteronomy. 7. 12. The ear that hearkens to the correction of life, shall lodge
among the wise: Prou. 15. 3. But take heed how ye hear: Luke. 8. 18. for he
that hears and does not, is like that foolish man who built his house upon the
sand. Math. 7. Or like one, who beholds his natural face in a glass, who when
he has considered himself, goes his way, and forgets immediately what manner
of one he was: Iam. 1. 24. therefore be ye doers of the word, and not hearer^
only. Iam. 1. 22.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
O Lord Job. 33. 16.
thou who openest the ears of men by corrections, Job. 36. 10.
and commands them to return from their iniquity: Esaias. 6. 10.
take away from me the heavy Ierem. 6. 10.
and uncircumcised ears. Psalm. 40. 8.
Prepare mine ears Esaias. 50. 4.
that I be not rebellious any more, nor turn back from thee, but may have mine
ear opened to hear, as the learned Luke. 8. 15.
with an honest and good heart, and so may bring forth fruit with patience, to
the glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ.

The Christians Practice of this Command.
THE Ear of the wise seeks learning, Prou. The ear is the taster of the
soul.
18. 15. and his Ear tries words, as his taste tries meat. Job. 34. 3. He
stops his ears from hearing of blood: Esaias. 33. 15. but has his cares open to
hear what the spirit says. Let such as delight not to hear the word of the
Lord be ashamed.
Apoc. 2. As Mary sat at Christ's feet and heard his preaching: Luke. 10. 39.
and Josiah rent his clothes at the hearing of the Law: 2. King. 22. and as the
godly Jews were pricked in their hearts when they heard their sin reproved.
Act. 2. 37. So the Christian with a good and honest heart, hears the word of
the Lord, and keeps it. Luke. 8.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
ALbeit the mind of man be a very divine thing, endued with most excellent
gifts from above, yet the good thereof could not be communicated 1 Suppose the
mind be divine, yet the good in it could not be communicated without an Organ.
to others, unless the Lord of his goodness had provided in the body
convenient organes and instruments by which the motions of one man's mind may
be contuayed to another.

For the Lord made not man for himself, that 2 Man first made for God,
secondarily for man.
he should lock up and keep within himself all the good that God
communicated to him: but as first he made him for his own glory, so
secondarily for the use and edification of other men. 3 Therefore has God
given him a mind by which he has intelligence with God, and bodily organes by
which he has intelligence with men.


And therefore has not only given him a mind, by which he may have
intelligence with his maker, but also therewithal Organes and instruments of
the body, by which we give and receive intelligence of our inward motions one
of us from another.

By the tongue we make intelligence of our 4 For by the tongue we give and by
the ear we receive intelligence.
minds to others, and by the ears again we receive it from them. How great
benefits these are, and how necessary to entertain fellowship among men, is
best known if we look unto those who wants them. O how great a grief do
they breed to themselves, and also how great a trouble to others, while they
would express and utter their minds by speech, and for want of the corporal
Organe and necessary instrument cannot.

God has given unto man two ears which 5 The fabric of man's ear, teaches
him to be ready to hear.
being at one time affected by the voice, receive the sound coniunctly: they
are not set within the head as is the tongue, but set without on either side of
the head continually open, to teach man how by all occasions he should be swift
to hear, says S. James, such instructions as may make him wise toward God.

Therefore also has he made them upright 6 But to hear only such things as
come from God.
toward heaven, because they should be open to those things which are of God,
but many have their ears like unto the ears of those Dogs, which are closed
above, but open beneath, such are worldlings, who have an ear to hear those
things which are of the earth, but not those which are of God.

Yea, which is worse, an open ear toward 7 The wicked have an ear for Satan,
but none for the Lord.
Satan, but a closed ear toward God: of them the Lord complains, that they
are strangers from the womb, that their ears are turned away Psalm. 58. 4.
Iere. 6. 10. Esaias. 6. 10. Zach. 7. 11.
from hearing of him, they are of heavy and uncircumcised ears, open to any
that will speak, but stopped to the Lord more obstinately then the Adder,
which stops his ear from the enchanter.

But under Christ's kingdom it is promised 8 An ear opened to God is a great
grace.
that he will open the ears of the deaf, Esaias. 35. and it is performed in our
regeneration. Under the Law a bored ear was an argument of perpetual
subjection; and under the Gospel: an ear inclined to hear the Lord is a sure
argument of an heart brought in subjection to God, ready to be governed by the
commandment of his voice.

And as by Christ's grace our ears are opened 9 How the Christian closes his
ear upon Satan.
to God, so are they closed upon Satan: the Christian as he will not speak
filthy language, so he will not hear it. As he will not murder with his
hands, so stops his ears from hearing of blood, Esa. 33. and as he will not
slander with his tongue, so will he not receive in his ears a false report,
when another has made it, Psalm. 15.

For I pray you what difference is there between 10 As he will not carry satan
in his tongue to lie, so not in his ear to receive a false report.
the willing reporter and receiver of a false tale, but that where the one
carries Satan in his tongue, the other carries Satan in his ear?

The forger of falsehood is the striker of Satan's 11 The author, hearer and
reporter of lies compared together.
coin; the willing hearer is Satan's resetter; and he that after hearing
reports it for a truth which he knows not to be true, is Satan's ventor: this
man turns his ears into his eyes, while as that which he has heard, he
gives out for as undoubted a truth, as if he had seen it.

Therefore is it that as the mouth tastes the meat, and lets none go down to
the stomach, unless it be approved; so the ear of the godly 12 The ear is
the taster of the soul.
tastes words, and lets none go down to the soul which is not from God.

And herein the Christian takes not so much 13 A Christian mesureth words by
their own weight, not by the quality of the speaker.
heed to the speaker, as to that which is spoken, were the person never so
honorable; yea, like an angel of God, the heart that fears God, receives not
his speech without examination; so Mary discussed in her mind the words of the
Angel, and thought with herself, What manner of salutation may this be?

And if otherwise for outward estate the person 14 Great folly to reject the
word of God for the baseness of the person that speaks it.
were never so contemptible, yet if he speak the words of God, he is
reverenced of the Christian; for even the feet of him that brings the glad
tidings of peace are beautiful to him. No man despises good corn because he
finds it in a contemptible sack; nor reiects precious pearls because they are
in earthen vessels, far less will the Christian refuse the message of grace
because it is brought by a base messenger.

As the ear was the first port by which the 15 As the ear was the first port
of death, so is it made the first port of life.
Seducer entering in, brought death to the soul; so is it the first by which
our Savior enters, and restores life unto it. Hearing must go before seeing,
we must sit down and reverently hear the Lord on earth, that we may ascend
and joyfully see the Lord in heaven, then shall we sing that song: As we have
heard, so have we seen in the city of our God: but if we will not hear the
Lord speaking in his word on earth we shall never see the Lord showing his
joyful face in heaven.

The Lord Jesus accounts our voice sweet to 16 Seeing Christ delights in our
voice it is a double sin for us not to delight in his.
him, and delights to hear it. My Dove let me hear thy voice, for it is
sweet, Cant. 2. 14. And shall not we esteem his voice sweet unto us, and
delight to hear it? Certainly if we delight not in his word, whereby he
speaks to us, he shall take no pleasure in our prayers, whereby we speak
unto him: For he that turns away his ear from hearing of the Law, his Prayer
shall be abominable.

Yet it is not enough to hear: Our Savior 17 It is no^ enough to hear, we
must take heed how we hear for some hear maliciously, to trap the Preacher.
also warnes us to take heed how we hear. Some hear maliciously, such as
come to trap the Preacher, as the Pharisees often heard Christ, that they might
snare him. This now is a common sin that men resorts to preaching, as if they
come to amend the Preacher, and not to amend themselves.

Others hear for curiosity, seeking rather tidings 18 Others hear for
curiosity, not for Conscience.
of occurrents among men, then the glad tidings of peace, sent from God: these
are like unto Herod, who having our Savior Christ present before him, sought a
miracle to feed his curiosity, but sought not grace, whereby he might be
saved.

Some again are not so evil disposed, as 19 Some hear unprofitably.
any of the former two, yet they hear vnpofitably* for the present they are
somewhat moved, but carry nothing away whereby they may be mended: these go out
of the Church as the unclean beasts went out of the Arc, that is, they go out
unclean as they came in unclean. 20 Compared to vessels that run out.


The Apostle compares them to vessels that run out, or to the sieue, (
^ribrum) which as long as it is in the water, is full, but if you take it up,
no water remains in it: something they have while they hear, but so soon as
they go out, it goes from them: the remedy of this evil were to lay up the
word in our heart as Mary did. 21 In the body the ear, the tongue and the hand
are not far a sunder, to teach us, what we hear and profess we should
practice.


The last sort of evil hearers are they, who hear the word, remember it, and
can report much of it to others, but not as of a thing that concerns their
life, and therefore while they speak of it to others, they forget to do it.
God has placed in the body the ear, the tongue, and the hand, not far
asunder, to teach us, that what we hear with our ear and profess with our
mouth, we should practice with our hand.

The Censure.
And of this also it is evident, that all are not Christians indeed, who now
usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER. III. Of his Eyes.
The Lords Command.
THe eyes of a fool are in the The eyes of fools are in the corners of the
world.
corners of the world: Prou. 17. 24. but the wise They are cast upon that which
is nothing.
man's eyes are in his head, Eccles. 2. 14. Cast not thine eyes upon that which
is nothing, Pro. 23. 5. For all that is in the world, as the lust of the slesh,
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the father, but of the
world, Ioh. 2. 16. As the grave and destruction can never be satisfied, Pro.
Eyes for covetousness can never be satisfied.
27. 20. so the eyes of man are not satisfied with seeing, Eccles. 1. 18. Let
not therefore thine eyes and heart be for covetousness, Ierem. 22. 17. neither
full of adultery, Jude. 7. Haughty eyes the Eyes full of adultery
Lord abhors, Pro. 6. 17. and the high look of Eyes of pride.
the proud shall be humbled. Esa. 2. 11. The eye that Eyes of disdain.
mocketh his father and despises the instruction of his mother, let the Ravens
of the valley pick it out, and the young Eagles eat it, Pro. 30. 17. Cast away
therefore the abomination of thine eyes, Ezech. All these are abomination to
the Lord, and abhorred by the christian
20. 7. Let not my word depart from thine eyes, but observe wisdom, and
counsel, Prou. 3. 21. that thine eyes may behold the right, and thine eyelids
direct thy way before thee. Prou. 4. 25.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
BE Psalm. 67. 1.
merciful to me O Lord, and bless me: cause thy face to shine upon me,
that I may know thy way upon earth. Romans 3. 18.
Let me not be like the wicked who have not the fear of God before their
eyes: Prou. 20. 12.
But as thou have made both the ears to hear and the eyes to see: so I pray
thee good Lord, Psalm. 34. 11.
to teach me thy fear. Psalm. 119. 37.
Turn away mine eyes from regarding vanity: Job. 31. 1.
and let not mine heart walk after mine eye, Esaias. 17. 7.
except when I look to my Master, and when mine eyes are toward the holy One
of Israel; 2 Timothy 4. 18.
that so I may be delivered from every evil work, and preserved to thy
heavenly kingdom, through Jesus Christ, to whom be all praise for ever and
ever.

Amen.
The Christians Practice of this Command.
I Have made a Covenant with mine eyes: How the Christian governs his eyes
according to the will of his master.
Job. 31. I will shut them up from seeing evil. Esaias. 33. 15. I will set no
wicked thing before mine eyes. Psalm. 101. 3. In mine eyes a vile person shall
be contemned: but I will honor them that fear the Lord; Psalm. 15. 4. for I
set the Lord always before mine eyes. Psalm. 16. 8. As the eyes of a servant
look to the hands of his master, so mine eyes wait on thee O Lord, till thou
have mercy upon me. Psalm. 123. 2.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
IT is not possible to keep the heart in a good 1 The heart cannot be kept,
unless the senses be kept.
estate without diligent observation of the senses, no more then a besieged
City can be defended, where the ports thereof are neglected, and left open to
every one that likes to enter into it.

There are two sorts of evils within us which 2 Two sorts of evil in man, 1.
innatum, 2 seminatum.
trouble us; first, malum innatum; secondly, malum seminatum: the first is
evil bred in us of our own nature; the other is evil sown in us by that
Wicked one: yet is there no man of so quick a sense, that he is always able to
distinguish between these two.

Both of these evils have their passage by the 3 Both of these have their
course by the senses, for evil bred within us breaks out by the senses.
senses: for the one, malum innatum, homebred corruption, cannot lurk within,
but seeks to burst out at the senses, to the infection of others, according
to that of our Savior; Out of the heart comes murders, adulteries, etc. the
principal passages of this infecting evil are the eye, and the mouth.

The other again, Malum seminatum, is conuaied 4 And evil without us is
conuayed in by the senses, specially by the eye and ear.
to the heart by the subtlety of Satan, from exterior objects, unto which he
labors to allure the heart, that he may divide it from God. And this evil
is conuaied to the heart specially by the eye and ear: whereof it is evident
with what continual care the senses are to be observed, that from without,
evil come not to make the heart worse then it is, and from within, evil come
not to infect others that are without.

For as that City is in great danger, which 5 A Christian like a besieged
city that has traitors within.
has not only without it strong enemies assaulting it, but has also within
it false traitors to betray it: so is it with our souls, who without us have
Satan with his invisible legions of spiritual wickedness, and visible armies
of worldly allurements ready to impugn us: and within have our own traitorous
affections confederate with him ready to betray us.

And therefore (as I said) great need have we 6 We have need therefore to watch
that these two armies of evils do not meet within us.
to watch over our selves, that these two corruptions which are as several
armies against us, meet not together: for if Malum seminatum come in to
strengthen Malum innatum, they shall breed a very dangerous and hard battle
unto us.

Whereas if we take pains to fortify our selves against the enemy that is
without and to slay the corruption that is bred within us, so 7 We must
fortify our selves against both.
soon as it is conceived, we shall possess our selves in peace. It is great
wisdom to fight with our enemy when he is weakest, the best time to slay a
Cockatrice is while it is in the shell, before it come to be a Serpent: if we
dash 8 It is best to sight against the beginnings of evils with in us.
not the heads of the infants of Babell, they will breed us more trouble, when
they come to be stronger men. Sin is a strong enemy when it is in the
Cogitation, stronger when it is in the affection, strongest when it breaks out
into action, confirmed in strength if we continue in it. Therefore even the
beginnings of it are to be resisted.

This as I said cannot be done without a diligent 9 The soul cannot be kept if
Satan possess the ports of the Bare and the Eye.
custody of the Senses, specially of the Ear, and the Eye; these are the
first ports at which Satan carried in death to the soul of our mother Euah:
for by hearing the seducer her heart was infected, and by looking out of her
corruption to the forbidden Tree, she was entangled in the actual
transgression of Gods commandment.

Besides this, many ways in Nature has God 10 The Eye sees not it self, and
therefore has need of the help of another.
warned us that the eye has need with continual care to be observed: for
albeit it be a lively Organe of sight, yet it sees not the own self, and
therefore has need to be helped with the counsel and custody of another.

Again, God in Nature has provided a 11 The covering made by God for the eye
warnes us it should not be open to every object.
covering for the eye, which with a marvelous volubilitie opens and closes
at the pleasure of man; wherein the Lord who has done all his works in great
wisdom, has warned us that it is expedient sometime the eye be closed, and
not holden open to every object.

There are two rules good to be observed for 12 Two rules good for government
of the eye:
the government of our eyes: first, that before we open the bodily eye to look
to the creature, we first open the eye of our mind, and look The first rule
is, that we look to God before we look to the creature.
to the Creator, otherwise if we look to the creature before we look unto
God, we shall assuredly be snared.

As God has given us an eye to see his 13 For as God has given us an eye to
see his works, so an eye to see himself.
works, so has he given us an eye whereby we may see himself: shall we
think he will have us to look to the Sun, and not to him that made the
Sun? Let the eye that looks to God, direct the eye that looks to the
creature, and we shall look out without danger.

It is said of Adam after his fall, that his eyes 14 How Adams eyes were opened
after the fall.
were opened; which is not so to be understood as if they had been closed
before, but because where before all that he saw was good: now his eyes were
opened to see his evil which before he had not, and therefore could not see it.

And no better are the eyes wherein his miserable posterity foolishly
rejoices; they have eyes in some part to see their misery, the fruit 15 So are
the eyes of his miserable posterity.
of their sin: they have eyes to look to the baits of pleasure and profit,
wherewith they are snared unawares, but have not eyes to look unto the Lord.

As the beasts in looking to other creatures 16 Man by nature looks as the
beast, regarding nothing but the belly.
regard nothing but the commodity of their belly: where they see any thing
that may serve unto it, they lay down their heads; where not, they go by it:
so natural men look unto the the creatures, seeking, vt addant aliquid
ventri, non menti.

Thus Euah looked to the apple, and thinking 17 As Euah considered no more in
the apple but that it was good for meat.
it good for meat, plucked it, but considered no more: so her children when
they look to the fowls that fly, to the fishes that swim, to every good
and pleasant creature in the kind, of all they gather no other collection but
they wish for their bellies sake it were in their hand.

Thus where the sight of Gods creatures 18 Creatures far abused by natural men
to covetousness.
should work in the heart of man a reverence and love of God, a meditation of
his goodness with thanksgiving, it produces only an inordinate and sensual
covetousness of the creature.

Others again, looking to the creature more 19 Creatures also to an evil
governed eye are the snares of concupiscence.
negligently then they should, are snared before they consider of it; so Sichem
in looking to Dinah, and David in looking to Bathsheba: for it is come to pass
by a most just recompense, vt qui exteriori negligenter vtitur oculo, interiori
Gregor. Moral. lib. 21.
non unjust caecetur; that he who negligently uses the exterior eye, should
justly be blinded in the interior.

The necessity of this rule shall yet better appear 20 As the heart is, so i^
the eye.
to us, if we consider that it is not the eye which sees, there is one within
that looks out at the window of the eye, to wit, the soul: if the soul be
spiritually disposed, there is nothing we look to shall offend us; if
otherwise, then every thing we look unto becomes a snare unto us. M^lta enim
retia tenduntur nobis a diabolo; Ambr. de poenit. lib. 1. cap. 14.
for many nets are spread out by Satan, wherein to trap us; yea, if our hearts
be not kept in a good estate, ipsi nobis oculi retia sunt.

The second rule for government of our eyes 21 The second rule is that we
acquaint our eyes with tears, so shall they not be carried away easily with
vanity.
is, to acquaint them with pouring out of tears for the miseries which our
sins have brought upon us. The same eyes which God has given us for organes
of our sight, he has also given us for conduits of our tears* therefore we
see that in Nature children first mourn with their eyes, before they look on
any thing to delight in it.

Thus if the sight of the creature moved us to 22 Every creature presents to
us some matter of mourning.
mourn, as there is no creature which has not in it a witness of that
vanity whereunto for our sin it is subject, it should not so readily be a
snare unto us to entrap us in sin as it is.

For as the Children of Noble men looking 23 Why the apparent beauty of the
creature should not delight us.
to pleasant buildings and lands, which sometime belonged to their Fathers, but
now are possessed by others, are rather moved to mourn then to laugh: so we,
when we see the heavens altered, the earth accursed, the sovereignty over the
creatures taken from us; and in every creature a foot-step of that misery which
is the punishment of our Apostacy, have more need to mourn for those
miserable effects of our sin, then vainly to be delighted with an apparent
beauty of the creature.

The Censure.
But now the great number of them who look with wandering eyes, Esaias. 3. 16.
with eyes full of adultery, 2 Pet. 2. 14. with hauty eyes, and eyelids lifted
up, Prou. 30. 13. proves that all are not Christians indeed, who now usurp
the Christian name.

CHAPTER. IIII. Of his Tongue.
The Lords Command.
He that keeps his mouth How our tongue should be governed in speaking to
God.
keeps his life: Pro. 13. 3. yea, he keeps his soul from affliction;
Prou. 21. 23. for life and death are in the power of the tongue. Prou. 21. 23.
Specially, be not rash with thy mouth, neither let thine heart be hasty to
utter a thing before God: for God is in the heaven, and thou art in the earth,
therefore let thy words be few: Eccles. 5. 1. and use not thou vain repetition
as the heathen, who think to be heard for their much babbling. Mat. 6. 7.

But before all things swear not, neither by Swearing forbidden.
heaven, nor by earth, nor any other oath; Iam. 5. 15. but let your
communication be yea, yea; nay, nay: for whatsoever is more then these comes
of evil. Mat. 5. 37.

And say not, this day or to morrow we will go Presumptuous speaking condemned.
into such a city, but if the Lord will; and we live, we will do this or
that. Iam. 4. 13.

In many words there cannot want iniquity, Babbling and much talking condemned
but he that refraines his lips is wise. Pro. 10. 19. If any man among you seem
to be religious and refrain not his tongue, but deceiues his own heart, this
man's religion is vain. Iam. 1. 26. A wise man concealeth knowledge, Prou. 12.
23. and he that has knowledge spares his words; yea, even a fool when he
holds his peace is counted wise. Prou. 17. 27. In all labor there is
abundance, but the talk of the lips brings want: Pro. 14. 23. be ye
therefore swift to hear, but slow to speak. Iam. 1. 19.

Put away from thee a froward mouth, Prou. Cursed and froward speaking.
4. 24. and cursed speaking: Colos. 3. 8. for cursing and blessing ought not to
proceed out of one mouth, no more then out of one fountain proceeds sweet
water and bitter. Iam. 3. 10.

Lie not one to another, James. 4. 11. keep All lying and backbiting forbidden.
thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile. Psalm. 34. 13.
Speak the truth every man to his neighbor: Zach. 8. 16. for a righteous man
hates lying words. Pro. 13. 5. And see you speak not evil one of another.
Iam. 4. 11. Filthy and profane speaking.


Put away all filthy speaking also out of thy mouth, Colos. 3. 8. neither let
fornication once be named among you, nor filthiness nor foolish talking, nor
jesting, which are things not comely, but rather giving of thanks: Ephesians. 5. 3.
for evil speeches corrupt good manners. 1 Cor. 15. 33. Generally all corrupt
communication forbidden.


And generally let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, but
that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the
hearers, your speech being gracious always, and powdered with salt. Colos. 4. 6.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
SEt Psalm. 141. 3.
a watch O Lord, I beseech thee before my mouth, and keep thou the door of my
lips. Take Psalm. 119. 43.
never the word of truth utterly out of my mouth: but Psalm. 51. 15.
open thou my mouth, and my lips shall show forth thy praise: yea, Psalm. 71. 8.
I shall be filled with thy praises, and with thy glory every day. So let thou
Psalm. 19. 14.
the words of my mouth be always acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my redeemer.

Amen.
The Christians Practice of this Command.
I Will keep my mouth brideled, and will take How the Christian uses his
tongue to the honoring and praising of God.
heed that I sin not with my tongue: Psalm. 39. 1. I have purposed that my
mouth should not offend. Psalm. 17. 3. I will speak no vain word: Esaias. 58.
13. but with my mouth will I declare thy praises O Lord, from generation to
generation. Psalm. 79. 13. I will not hide thy righteousness within my heart,
but will declare thy truth and thy salvation, and will not conceal thy mercy
and thy truth from the great congregation. Psalm. 40. 10. Yea, the praises of
God shall be in my mouth continually, Psalm. 34. and my tongue shall entreat of
thy word. Psalm. 119. 172. I will sing to the Lord all my life, and will praise
him while I live. Psalm. 104. 33. At midnight will I rise to give thanks Let
them be ashamed who delight to speak of any subject, but not of Gods salvation.
to thee O Lord. Psalm. 119. 62. I prevent the morning watch to cry to thee.
Psalm. 119. 147. Seven times in the day do I praise thee; Psalm. 119. 164. yea,
all the days of my life will I praise thee, as long as I have any being, will
I sing to my God. Psalm. 146. 2. Thy statutes shall be my songs in the house of
my pilgrimage, Psalm. 119. 54. and my mouth shall daily rehearse thy
righteousness and thy salvation: for I know not the number. Psalm. 71. 15.

Moreover I will speak (unto man) as before How the Christian uses his tongue
to the edisication of others.
God in Christ Jesus. 2 Cor. 12. 19. A deceitful tongue shall not be found in
my mouth: Zeph. 3. 13. but my words shall be in the uprightness of mine heart.
Job. 33. 3. Neither will I suffer my mouth to sin, by wishing a curse to the
soul of him that hated me. Job. 31. 30. There is no lewdness nor
frowardness in my words. Prou. 8. 8. My tongue also shall spread abroad
knowledge: Prou. 15. 7. and my mouth shall be as a wellspring of life. Prou.
10 11. I will utter the words of grace, Eccles. 10. 12. that my lips may feed
many, Prou. 10. 21. and the comf^ of them may assuage the sorrow of the
afflicted, Job. 16. 15. confirming him that is ready to fall, and strengthening
the weak knees: Job. 4. 4. for God has given me the tongue of the learned,
that I should know how to minister a word in season, to the weary, Esa. 50. 4.
and has enriched me with all kind of speech, and necessary knowledge, for the
which grace I thank my God in Christ Jesus.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
AS in the Apostasy of Adam the poison of 1 The grace of regeneration does go
through the whole man.
sin, like a fretting canker, ran through the whole nature of man, so in
the regeneration the grace of our Lord Jesus goes through the whole man,
sanctifying him throughout both in soul and body to make him a new creature.

Sin has not taken away the members of 2 Sin has taken away, not the
members, but the right motion of them.
man's body, but the right motion and use of them: for the eye still looks, the
tongue speaks, the hand moves, but not as they should.

When the Palsy loses the members of the 3 Man naturally is diseased with a
spiritual palsy.
body, to move against the will of him that possesses them, it is counted a
pitiful disease: but now when sin has loosed them to move against the will
of him that made them, and the well of them that owe them, it is a pity to see
how foolishly natural men rejoice in it, not considering it is a sickness
which tends to the second death. 4 How necessary the tongue is to the mind of
man.


If man had been created for God only, he should not have needed a tongue,
for the Lord knows the meaning of the mind without the tongue: and if he had
been made for himself only, the motions of the mi^e had been sufficient for
himself also, but God has made one man to be a comfort to another, and
therefore has given him such Organe^ as whereby every man may give intelligence
of his mind to another.

For this is the office of the tongue, to be a 5 The office of the tongue is to
be a trench-man be tween heart and heart.
faithful interpreter of the mind, and a trenchman between heart and heart,
but as they who understand not others languages, though they see others faces,
can conclude nothing between them, without the help of a faithful
interpreter, so cannot the heart of one man communicate the conceptions thereof
to another, unless the tongue be as Ambrose calls it speculum mentis, a glass
wherein the mind may be seen.

But that which God made for good, Satan 6 The tongue by Satan divided from
the heart.
has turned into evil, for now the heart and tongue are so perverted from
their original innocence that now the tongue is employed by the heart to
deceive, exponing in word the thoughts of the heart, otherwise then they are
indeed.

A threefold division has ensued upon the ^ A (...) on has (...) on the fall
o^ (...).
sall of man, as a punishment thereof: first, a division of hearts: secondly a
division of tongues: thirdly, a division of the tongue from the heart.

The division of one man's heart from another 8 The division of one man's heart
from an other is a punishment of man's division from God.
is a just punishment of man's division from God: so long as Adam and Euah lived
at one with God, they lived at one among themselves, but so soon as they were
divided from God by sin, they became also divided among themselves, Adam
blaming Euah, and accusing her to God, in whom before he rejoiced, as bone of
his bone, and flesh of his flesh.

And this has proceeded so far among their 9 In great wisdom has God hid
one man's heart from an other.
posterity, that look how many men there are in the world, as many sundry
judgments and wills there is among them, which would not fail to breed
horrible confusion, if God had not locked up the heart of man, and made it
unknown to another; or otherwise where it is known, did not restrain the
heart of man, and that for entertaining a society and fellowship among men.

As for the division of tongues it came into 10 The division of tongues is also
a punishment of man's sin.
the world as a just punishment of man's rebellion against God in the building
of Babel: for where before the sloud for the space of one thousand and six
hundred years and more, the whole world spoke one language, and one hundred
and thirty year after the Flood also: for their high conceit in building of
Babell, to get themselves a name, God confounded their languages.

And yet it is strange, that this division of 11 Yet is it received for a
blessed policy in the Popes Church, which God laid on for a bitter curse.
tongues inflicted on man for a punishment of his pride, and threatened also by
God as a curse upon his people, to send a nation upon them whose language they
understand not, should be received into the Popes Church as a blessed policy:
for there he that is in the room of a builder, speaks that which the people
understands not.

But the division of the tongue from the heart 12 Division of the tongue from
the heart is both a sin, and a punishment of sin.
is the worst of all, being not only a punishment of sin as the former, but
a sin also, and such a sin as is a protector and maintainer of many sinful
and mischievous conceptions of the heart.

Whereof it comes to pass, that innumerable 13 A world of wickedness
committed by the tongue.
evils are committed by the tongue: for which Saint James justly terms it A
world of wickedness, and accounts so much of the government or misgouernment
of the tongue, that the one he esteems the proof of a perfect man, the other
an argument of an irreligious man. 14 Not the half only but our whole life is
full of the sins of our tongue.


For this cause also Nazianzen affirms that the half of the sins of our life
are committed by the tongue: lingua dimidiam humanoru^ vitiorum partem Nazian.
in deplor. call. animae. Basil. in Psalm. 32.
sibi vendicat: but Basil going further, says, tota vita nostra linguae
delictis est referta, that our whole life is full of the sins of our tongue.

If we go through the decalogue, we shall 15 By the tongue we transgress
all the Commandments.
find the tongue guilty of the transgression of all the precepts thereof, a
servant to all sorts of sins, which break out in action.

Against the first Commandment it offends 16 Sins of the tongue against the
first Commandment.
by blaspheming God, as Pharaoh did, while he said, Who is Jehovah? as
Sennacherib did, your Exodus 5. 2. Esaias. 36. 14. Psalm. 14. 1. Psalm. 94. 7.
God is not able to deliver you: as the foolish do, who say, there is not God:
as the profane do, who say, he sees not, or he does not regard: these are
stout words against the Lord.

Or else in cursing by the name of the Devil: 17 Cursing also by the name of
the Devil.
some customably sacrifice to him, deuoting that in their anger to Satan,
which should be dedicated to God: others seek vengeance from Satan upon such
as have offended them, not remembering that God is the God of vengeance: thus
both of them by a most horrible impiety set up Satan in the room of God.
Lamentable it is to hear how this sin abounds in this Land, as if it were
Calicut or Narsinga, where Satan is worshipped.

Against the second Commandment the 18 The second Commandment transgressed by
reverent speaking of Idols.
tongue offends in speaking reverently of Idols, which are to be abhorred, as
the Jews, who called the works of their own hands Baali, my Lord; or as
Micah did, who when they of Dan had taken his Idols from him, he ran crying
and lamenting after them, ye have taken away my gods, and what more have I? as
if all were gone when they were gone.

The Ethnickes may make them ashamed, 19 Vanity of Idols known by Natures
light.
who, by Natures light, saw that this was vanity. Plato dissuaded the people
from having Gods of gold, least they should expone them unto thieves: and
Fabius when he spoiled Tarentum, took not away their Idols, relinquamus,
inquit, Tarentinis Deos suos iratos; let us leave unto the Tarentines, their
Gods angry at them, for these Gods that could not defend Tarentum, will never
defend Rome.

But the light of the Word does more clearly 20 But much better by the light of
the Word.
instruct the Christian, that the Gods which made not heaven and earth should
not have place on earth, except it be to be burnt under an oak, as Jacob did
with them, far less will he give them any honorable place in his tongue,
to name them with any reverence.

Against the third Commandment the 21 The third Commandment transgressed by
idle and vnreuerent using of Gods Name.
tongue is abused in the vain, idle, and vnreuerent using of the Name of God
to the smallest toy and trifle which does occur. It was Sacrilege for any
man to anoint his own flesh with the holy Oil which was appointed for the
Tabernacle, much more sacrilege is it to abuse the Name of God unto follyes
which are neither for his glory nor man's edification.

Yet this abusing of Gods Name in idle and foolish talking is counted a
necessary recreation to pass the time withal; but why do not men remember
that they must give an account 22 Idle talking counted a necessary recreation.
of idle talking? or why are men so prodigal, as for to spend the time of
Grace which God has lent them, that in it they might be reconciled with him,
in unprofitable and vain sports, which do increase their enmity with him?

No merchant will spend the time of his market 23 The time of grace should not
be vainly spent.
any other way but in buying or selling. Or will the Husbandman when seed-time
comes, let it go by, and delight himself in matters of smaller importance?
what folly then is this, that the time of Grace, wherein we should make peace
with God, is passed over with vain and merry talking among men?

Beside this, by rash and unnecessary swearing, 24 It is transgressed also by
rash and unnecessary swearing.
this Commandment is broken; An oath (says the Apostle) is the end of all
Controversy, it is the last refuge whereunto Truth runs for credit: for
three ways have we to confirm our speech; first, affirmation or denial; when
this is not credited, then we go to asseueration; when this also can have no
place, then we go to swearing: but that which is the last band of Truth, now
men commonly do make it the first.

Yea, many not content in simple manner 25 Horrible oaths made customable.
to swear by the Name of God, as if that were too base a thing for such hautie
spirits as theirs are, proceed in their blind presumption to more horrible
oaths, by the blood, the wounds, and the body of the Lord, by which they were
redeemed; thereby proclaiming to all the world, that the love and reverence of
God was never in their heart.

It is recorded of a certain Judge, who having 26 How a certain Judge tried
the right child of a dead father.
three of the children pleading before him for the goods of their defunct
father, he took up the dead body and set it to them as a mark, promising that
which of them shot nearest his heart, should be made possessor of all his
goods, whereupon the first did shoot, the second also, but the third refused,
whom for that cause the Judge adjudged to be possessor of all his fathers
goods, as the most kindly and natural son of the three.

Thus as Solomon tried the right mother by 27 Not unlike as Solomon tried the
right mother of a dead child.
her kindly affection toward her Child: so this Judge tryes the right child
by his kindly affection toward his father.

But if the professors of this age were tried 28 By this same rule godless
swearers are proved not to be the sons of God.
by this rule, many of them would be found to be none of the sons of God: for
they spare not to shoot the venomous arrows of their blasphemous speeches
against the heart of their heavenly Father, against the blood, the wounds and
the body of their blessed Redeemer: for so Leuit. 24. 11. the blasphemer is
said to have pierced the heart of God.

The offenses of the tongue against the fourth 29 The fourth Commandment
transgressed by rashness in prayer.
Commandment, are especially two: the first is rash uttering of prayers or
praises without sanctification or premeditation going before. Be not rash with
thy mouth, neither let thine heart Eccles. 5. 1.
be hasty to utter a thing before God.

The other is speech in hypocrisy, whereby 30 Or by speech in hypocrisy.
men draw near to God in their mouths while they are far from him in their
hearts, the Lord loves truth in the inward affections, and delights to be
worshipped in spirit and truth, otherwise if we have him in our mouths and not
in our hearts, fearful is our recompense, for he shall have us in his mouth
to spue us out, not in his heart to keep us for ever with himself.

Thus we see how the tongue is abused to 31 The tongue not right ordered
toward God, will never be right ordered toward man.
transgress the Commandments of the first Table, but here the unruliness
thereof rests not, it proceeds also against the second Table: for the tongue
which is not rightly ordered toward God, will never be reverent toward men, nor
spare to dishonor even those whom most of all they are bound to honor. 32
Three comely ornaments of our speech toward all meant.


There are three comely ornaments of our speech toward all men: first, truth:
secondly, love; thirdly, meekness and modesty: For first we should see that
we speak the truth; secondly, that we speak it in love; thirdly, with
meekness.

But in speaking to our superiors we ought 33 In speaking to our superiors we
must use reverence.
to join the fourth, which is reverence: if we be not silent in the presence
of our betters, as El^hu was at the presence of the ancients, at least let us
speak with reverence, as Sarah is commended for that she spoke reverently to
her Husband. 34 Against the sixth commandment murder committed by the tongue.


Against the sixth commandment the tongue is an instrument of transgression
many ways: for more are slain with the tongue then with the hands: as Daniels
accusers flew him with their false accusing tongues, when they durst not stir
him with their hands.

Therefore David compares an evil tongue to 35 How an evil tongue is
described by David.
the venom of Aspes; to Juniper coals, and to arrows; and indeed it is worse
then any of these. As for the venom of Aspes, there are Antidotes to preserve
thee from it; but what will keep thee from the sting of an evil tongue? not
Innocence it self. And Juniper coals though they be very hot, burn none but
such as touch them, but the evil tongue hurts them that never offends it: and
for the arrow, distance of place will defend thee from it, but go where thou will the malice of an evil tongue shall still persecute thee.

The seventh Commandment is transgressed 36 The seventh commandment
transgressed by filthy speaking.
by the filthy and corrupt communication of the tongue: for filthiness
conceived in the heart, imployes the tongue to prepare a way for committing of
the deed: yea, Prauis assuescere Basil. de legend. lib. Gentil.
sermonibus via quaedam est ad rem ipsam. But to the children of God it is a
very grief to hear any thing that does not edify their hearts in the love of
God: intoller abile aestimant quicquid illud Gregor. Moral. lib. 7. sect. 21.
non sonat, quod intus amant.

In all purposes the holy Spirit keeps a holy 37 Of all purposes Gods Spirit
speaks in a holy manner.
language: when he speaks of Adams copulation with Euah, he says, that Adam
knew his wife; when he speaks of Saul's going to the cave for natural
purgation, he says, he went in to cover his feet.

This as it teaches us to speak of all things 38 They are led with an
unclean spirit who speak filthily.
in an holy manner, so it shows of what spirit they are, whose lips are no
sooner opened to speak, but incontinent ye may smell the stinking corruption
of their heart, infecting with their filthy breath both the air and the ears
of the hearer.

Against the eight Commandment it transgresses 39 The ^yght Commandment is
transgressed by flattery or backbiting.
in like manner in one of these extremities, either in giving to men more then
is due by flattery and assentation; or else in taking from them by slandering
and backbiting, that which justly appertains unto them.

For where a man has two things necessary 40 Satan laboreth to defame the
name, where he cannot corrupt the conscience.
to make him a profitable instrument of Gods glory, and the good of others, to
wit, his Conscience, by which he is approved to God, and his good name, by
which he has favor with men; Satan because he cannot corrupt their
conscience does what he can by evil tongues to steal away their good name,
that they should be the less able to do good to others.

The ninth commandment is transgressed 41 The ninth Commandment transgressed
by lying.
generally by lying, which becomes the more grievous sin, the more
artificially it is set out. As a potsheard ouerlayed with silver dross, Pro.
26. 23. so is falsehood and hatred, when by dissimulation they are cloked with
the shadows of truth and love.

This disposition to lie with dissimulation belongs 42 Lying with dissimulation
belongs to the feed of the Serpent.
to the feed of the crooked Serpent, who having his head one way, can wry his
heart another way; but the children of God are upright men, who have their
hearts and their tongues going upon one line. 43 This is the shame of the Popes
Church.


It is therefore an exceeding great shame to the Popes Church that they
profess and practice so abominable and damnable a doctrine as that a man may
think one thing with his heart, and swear another thing with his tongue. This
also amongst many other shows of what spirit they are.

Thus we see how the tongue is subject unto 44 Two necessary rules for
government of our speech.
many spiritual diseases, for remedy whereof two rules in all our speech would
be used; meditation before we speak, and then moderation in speaking.

It is very expedient that meditation go before 45 First, that before we
speak we use meditation.
speech: wherein we are to consider, first, if that we would speak be lawful,
and though it be, yet are we to see whether also it be expedidient to be
spoken, at such time, in such place, to such persons: our first thought may be
corrected with a second, better without hurt or shame, but it is not so with
our words.

The next, that in speech we use moderation: 46 Next that in speaking we use
moderation.
for this cause God has given man but one tongue with two ears, to teach him
he should be more ready to hear then to speak: he has also placed it within,
and guarded it with a double hedge, one of flesh another of bone, and
therewithal has bound it by a bridle to the breast, by all these recommending
to us moderation of speech.

The Censure.
But now the great number of them, who abuse their tongues to all the sins
whereof I have spoken, evidently proves that all are not Christians indeed, who
now usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER. V. Of his Eating.
The Lords Command.
EVery Creature of GOD is The great bountifulness of God appears in that he
has made all his creatures to ser^e for man's use.
good, and nothing ought to be refused if it be received with thanksgiving: 1 Timothy 4 4. for it is good that the heart be stablished with grace, and not with
meats: Heb. 13. 9. therefore eat and drink of such things ( after
thanksgiving) as shall be set before you: Luke. 10. 7. for thou may kill and
eat flesh, whatsoever thine heart desires, according to the blessing of the
Lord thy God, which he has given thee. Deuteronomy. 12. 15. Every thing that moves
and lives shall be meat for you: as the green herb, have I given you all
things. Genesis 9. 3. But whether ye eat or ye drink, or whateuer ye do, do
all to the glory of God. 1 Cor. 10. 31.

Take heed least at any time your hearts be overcome But he will not have us
to use them with any excess.
with drunkenness and surfeiting, least that day come upon you unawares. Luke.
21. 34. Be not filled with wine wherein is excess: but be ye filled with the
spirit. Ephe. 5. 18. Eat for strength, and not for drunkenness: Eccles. 10.
17. for he that refraines not his appetite is like a City broken down without
walls. Prou. 25. 28.

Neither eat ye the bread of oppression, but Nor to take them from others by
oppression.
work with quietness and eat your own bread, 2 These. 3. 12. being content
with that which God has given you: for better is a little in the fear of the
Lord, then great treasure, and trouble therewith. Prou. 15. 16.

And when ye have eaten and are satisfied, then Neither yet to take them from
himself without thanksgiving.
praise ye the name of the Lord: Joel. 2. 26. and deal thy bread to the
hungry, and bring the poor that wandereth into thine house, then shall thy
light spring out in the darkness, and the Lord shall guide thee continually,
and satisfy thy soul, and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a
spring of water, whose waters fail not. Esaias. 58. 10.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
THE Psalm. 145. 15.
eyes of all things do wait upon thee, O Lord, thou give them meat in due
season, thou openest thine hand and fillest all living things of thy good
pleasure. Psalm. 136. 25.
Thou give food to all flesh; Psalm. 147. 9. Job. 39. 3.
yea, even to the beasts and young Ravens that cry: Prou. 30. 8.
feed me also (O Lord) with food convenient for me, Psalm. 69. 22.
and let never my table be a snare unto me, Hose. 13. 6.
that when I am filled, my heart should be exalted against thee: Ephesians. 3. 16.
but strengthen me in the inward man Job. 6. 33.
with that bread of life that came down from heaven, and does give life to the
world. Deuteronomy. 33. 23.
So shall I be satisfied with thy favor, and filled with thy blessing through
Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The Christians Practice of this Command.
I Esteem the words of thy mouth more then The Christian eats his meat with
thanksgiving.
mine appointed food: Job. 23. 12. I will rejoice continually in thy name,
Psalm. 89. 16. and in all things give thanks to thee. I have learned in
whatsoever estate to be contented: Phil. 4 11. Therefore I will eat to the
contentation With contentation of his own mind.
of my mind. Prou. 13. 25. And albeit to the clean all things be clean, Tit.
1. 15. and all things be lawful to me; 1 Cor. 6. 12. yet will I not use my
liberty as an occasion to the flesh: Gal. 5. 13. neither will I eat of any
thing With Charity toward others.
whereof my brother may be offended; 1 Cor. 8. 13. far less will I eat of
meats sacrificed to Idols, or otherwise forbidden, whereby my God should be
offended. The fatherless also do eat thereof, and I will not eat my morsels
alone. Job. 31. 17. I will pour out my soul to the hungry, Esaias. 58. 10. and
send a part to the poor, for whom none is prepared. Nehem. 8. 12.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
THe Lord our God has dealt very liberally 1 Sufficiency of food allowed by
God to man.
with the Christian, as concerning his meat, for he has not only given him
every green herb, but every thing also that moves and lives has God given
him for meat, Genesis 9. 3. yea all his creatures has he subdued to serve man,
man being a servant to his God, according to that of the Apostle, All are
yours, and ye 1 Cor. 3. 12.
are Christ's.

But the wicked eye of that evil one, enuies 2 Satan makes man count it
lawful meat which God calls unlawful, or by the contrary.
that man should enjoy this great goodness of God, and therefore as he tempts
man to think that meat lawful which God has proclaimed to be unlawful, for
so he did to our Parents in Paradise: so also he tempts man to count that meat
unlawful, which God has proclaimed to be lawful, that so by one of two
extremities, he may snare the consciences of men.

This is that Doctrine of devils, so called by 3 Doctrine of Devils defended by
Papists.
the Apostle, which forbids to marry, and commands to abstain from meat,
which God has created to be received with thanks, 1. Tim. 4. 4. and now is set
out to the world by that Apostate Church of Rome, under the show of holiness
and truth, for so unto some men they command abstinence from all flesh at all
times, as to their Charter House Monks: to others they command abstinence from
flesh at certain times, and that not for fasting and prayer only, Durand. lib.
6. cap. de alijs Ieiunijs.
but because forsooth in the days of Noah all flesh was accursed, but not the
fish.

Is not this to bind the Conscience where 4 Thus they pollute that which God
has purified.
God has made it free? Is not this to pollute that which God has purified?
Act. 10. 15. Woe be unto them, for they put darkness for light, and light for
darkness, they speak good of evil, and evil of good. Esaias. 5. 20.

And yet the Christian notwithstanding that 5 How the Christian in eating
respects God, his neighbor, and himself.
God has given him this liberty, has a great care that he use not his
liberty as an occasion to the flesh: therefore in eating he has first a
respect to God that he offend him not in the using of his creatures: secondly,
a respect to his brother that he offend him not: and thirdly, a respect to
himself that his Table be not a snare to him, and the nourishment of his
body, become not the nourishment of sin in his body. 6 First, he respects
God, and receives his meat with prayer.


First then in eating he looks up to GOD, and receives his meat with prayer
and thanksgiving, and that for two causes.

For he knows that man lives not by bread 7 For it is not bread but Gods
blessing that maintains life.
only, but by every word that comes out of the mouth of God, and that it is
not the meat, but the blessing of God that continues life: for if it were, then
they who are best fed, would prove most lively and healthful: but we see the
contrary by experience, that as Daniel grew better upon his pottage, then the
other children did on the Kings portion, so are poor laborers more healthful
and lively, then they who are more delicately nourished.

Again, he knows that in every creature 8 In every creature Satan has a
snare therefore he eats circumspectly.
Satan has laid his secret snare to trappe him, and therefore does he eat
circumspectly, so putting down his hand and his head to those creatures which
are beneath him, that he also lifts up his eyes and his heart to God who is
above him: not unlike to the watchful Cock, of whom Naturalists write, that
when with the one eye he does look down to his meat, with the other he
does look upward, least any ravening Bird unawares should come upon him.

And as patient Job when his children were 9 As Job in banqueting sacrificed
for his children, so the Christian for himself and others.
banqueting sent for them, sanctified them, and sacrificed for them every day,
fearing least they had sinned and blasphemed God in their hearts; so the
Christian knowing the malice and subtlety of Satan, fearing his own
weakness, armeth himself before meat, at meat, and after meat, with
continual prayer.

Secondly, the Christian so regards himself 10 Secondly, he respects his
brother and will not eat to offend him.
in eating, that he keeps a duty to his neighbor: for albeit all things be
lawful to him, yet will he not eat of any meat, whereby his brother may be
offended.

And as for them who are in necessity, he 11 He has a respect also of them
who are in necessity.
is mindful of them, that of his abundance something may be forth-comming to
them. Worldlings like churlish Nabal, do account all that they have their
own; Shall I take my bread and my flesh? (said he) etc. 1 Samuel 25. 11. and
they cannot suffer willingly any thing to go by their own mouths, as if they
only were the sons of God, for whom all things were made: but the Christian
deals his bread to the hungry, he will not eat his morsels alone, as Job
does protest of himself, at least with godly Nehemiah, he will have a care to
send a part to the poor for whom none is prepared.

The third point of the Christians discretion 12 Thirdly, he respects
himself, eating with contentment and temperance
in eating, does respect himself: if his portion be small, he uses it with
contentment, he does know that God is the great steward of the whole family,
who gives to every one of his Children, their portion in due measure, as he
knows to be meetest for them, and therefore will he not murmr in any case.

If again his portion be more then may 13 Temperance is not so well known in
want as in wealth.
content him, he does use it with sobriety: for Temperance is not so well
known in want as it is in wealth To abstain when thou have not, may be of
compulsion, but in the midst of wealth to be continent is great sobriety.

As Satan got the vantage of Adam and 14 Satan tempts either to forbidden
meat or to forbidden measure.
Euah by tempting them to eat of forbidden meat, so he does seek vantage of
their children, by tempting them to eat in a forbidden measure. And as a City
without walls is an easy pray to a stronger enemy, so is a man (says Solomon)
who cannot restrain his appetite.

Intemperance is not only a sin, but a mother 15 Intemperance is both a
sin, and a mother of many sins.
of many sins: and therefore is Satan the more careful to drive
inconsiderate men unto it.

For first toward thy God it does make thee 16 It makes a man unable for all
spiritual exercises.
unable either to give him service, or to receive any good from him: he that
is overcome of surfeiting, can neither pray to God, nor praise him, nor yet
receive any Grace from him. As in mirie and watery places nothing grows, were
the seed never so good which is sown in them: so in a heart overcome with
drunkenness, which is as Augustine called it, magna animae submersio; a great
drowning of the soul, no instruction can take place; wherefore wisely did
Abigail, who told not Nabal his folly till his wine was gone from him.

Neither does it only enable us to do good, 17 It prouokes him to manifold
evils, and that first against God.
but prouokes us also to manifold evils against the Lord our God; as Israel
sat down to eat and rose up to play, so when men have stuffed their bellyes
above measure, they are exalted against God, and then they fall to their
blasphemies, raylings, wantonness, and all sort of inordinate behavior.

The first man blotted with drunkenness in 18 The first example of
drunkenness that ever was in the world.
holy Scripture was Noah, then his nakedness was discovered, and his own
child did mock him: he stands for an example to the worlds end, that the
reward of drunkenness is the manifestation of a man's own shame. By it, thou
come into contempt with those, who of all others are most bound to hau^ thee
in honor and reverence.

The second was Lot, and he by drunkenness 19 The second example.
was easily drawn to commit incest with his own daughters: for drunkenness
is Satan's Dalilah; if once by her deceit the spiritual Philistims that are
against us, twinne us and our strength, they shall easily make a playfoole of
us, and draw us into all kind of licentiousness.

Secondly, it draws thee to enormious offenses 18 It provoke also man to
evil against his neighbor.
against thy neighbor: to whom is woe? to whom strife? to whom murmuring? to
whom wounds without cause? even to them who tarry long at the wine: they sit
down with peace, Prou. 23. 29.
they rise with war; and where no quarrel is, drink does make discord, even
to the shedding of blood; yea, oftentimes to death it self.

And thirdly, it brings upon thy self manifold 19 What evil it does to a
man himself.
inconveniences both of soul and body. Justly did Plinius call an intemperate
man, a prodigal man of his own life: it does weaken Plin. lib. 24. c. 22
the natural senses, so that a drunkard can not discern between a friend and
a foe, a shadow and a body. Wherefore Basil called it, Mortem momentaneam; and
compared such as are overcome with it to the Idols of the Gentiles, who have
eyes and do not see, tongues and do not speak, and feet and cannot walk.

Neither are these the least effects it works 20 A drunkard in gods judgment
becomes his own executioner.
in the body: for it weakeneth greatly the natural life, drowneth the radical
moisture, and breeds most dangerous diseases; it corrupts the stomach,
infecteth the breath, darkneth the eyes, loses the joints, and hastneth death:
thus a drunkard becomes his own executioner, and in Gods righteous
judgments his life is shortened by the same means by which he thought to
prolong it.

And which yet is worst of all, a drunkard 21 More profane then Esau.
is profane like Esau. As the one sold his birthright for a mease of pottage,
so the other does sell his part of Gods eternal kingdom for a belly-full of
drink: for the Scriptures tells us that no drunkard shall inherit the
kingdom of God.

But to return, three things are to be observed 22 Three rules to be observed
in eating by a Christian.
of a Christian in his eating: first, that he eat not forbidden meat:
secondly, that he eat not in a forbidden measure: and thirdly, that he eat
not in a forbidden manner.

Forbidden meat is whatsoever God has 23 First, that he eat not forbidden
meat.
not given with his blessing, but man usurps either by oppression, theft,
deceit, rapine, or any other such like unlawful means. David in his great
extremity of thirst would not drink the water of the Well of Bethleem, and
that because three of his valiant men had brought it to him with the hazard and
danger of their lives, through the huge army of their enemies the Philistims,
and far less will a Christian live on the bread of oppression, and blood of
the poor.

But were the meat never so lawful, his next 24 Secondly, that he eat not in
a forbidden measure.
care is to take diligent heed that he eat not in a forbidden measure. For as
Manna gathered more then was commanded, turned into worms; so meat and drink
received in greater measure then we should, in stead of being helpful does
become hurtful unto our bodies.

Yet now in drinking nothing is more spoken 25 Drinking by measure without
measure a customable sin now.
of then measure, and nothing less done then to drink by measure: Nouum genus
mensurae inuentum est, in quo nulla est mensura, vt Basil. de ebriet.
per poculorum aequalitatem nulla inter homines sit inuidia: there is now a new
kind of measure, wherein there is no measure, that by equality of cups among
men there should be no envy nor contention.

This evil, damned by Basil, continued not 26 The same sin damned in the days
of Basil and Augustine.
the less to the days of Augustine: whereof he complains, that they
thought no shame ad mensuram sine mensura bihere: in the which Aug. de temp.
Ser. 131.
strife, he that may drink most, laudem meretur ex crimine. From this most
filthy custom he exhorts them to fly, as from the poison of the devil,
calling drunkenness procured by it, Patrem superbiae, matrem omnismali,
sororem luxuriae.

And last of all, when both the meat and 27 Thirdly, that he eat not in a
forbidden manner.
the measure is lawful, yet the Christian has a care to eat also in a
lawful manner, not grudging nor murmuring at his portion, not longing for a
more delicate food then GOD has allowed unto him, but content with that which
the Lord has given him, he does look down to the poor, to give them a
part, and does look up unto God to give him thanks.

The Censure.
But now the want of this Christian disposition in many, evidently proves that
all are not Christians indeed, who now falsely usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER. VI. Of his Hands.
The Lords Command.
BLessed is the man that keeps How the hands of a Christian should be
governed toward God.
his hands from evil doing: Esaias. 56. 2. Consecrate therefore your hands to
the Lord, Exodus 32. 29. that in every place 1 Timothy 2. ye may lift up your
heart with your hands to God in heaven, Lam. 3. 41. to praise his name. Psalm.
134. 2. If iniquity be in thy hand put it far away: Job. 11. 14. for he
whose hands are pure shall increase his strength. Job. 17. 9. And because there
shall ever be some Toward the poor.
poor in the Land, I command thee that thou open thine hand to thy brother, to
the needy, and to the poor in the Land. Deuteronomy. 15. 11. Let not your hands be
weak: for your work shall have a reward. 2 Chronicles. 15. 7. And in his own
vocation.


M^ddle with your own business, and work with your own hand as I commanded
you. 1 These. 4. 11. He that s^ole, let him steal^ no more, but rather let him
work with his own hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to
him that needs. Ephe. 4. 28.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
LEt not Esaias. 3. 8.
O Lord, the work of mine hands be against thee, to provoke the eyes of thy
glory: Psalm. 90. 17.
But let thy beauty be upon me, to direct the work of my hands, Psalm. 24. 41.
that they may be kept innocent and pure; Psalm. 141. 2.
that so the lifting up of mine hands may be unto thee as the evening
sacrifice: Deuteronomy. 33. 11.
and thou may accept the work of mine hands, through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The Christians Practice of this Command.
I Will wash mine hands in innocence O Lord, Hands unclean, idle, bloody,
blackt with bribes, not open to the poor, are not the hands of a Christian.
and compass thine Altar. Psalm. 26. 6. I will shake mine hands from taking of
gifts. Esaias. 33. 15. No blot shall clea^e to them. Job. 31. 7. I will
strengthen mine hands to good, Nehe. 2. 18 laboring and working with my own
hands: 1 Cor. 4. 12. so that by them I minister to my necessities. Acts. 20.
34. Yea, of the increase which God gives me I will stretch out mine hands to
the poor and needy: Prou. 31. that so (in my need) I may stretch out my hands
to the Lord. Psalm. 143.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
AS God has given to man a tongue to speak, an eye to see, and an ear to
hear, so has he also given him an hand to work: 1 He is a monstrous man
who has a mouth to speak and eat, and has no hands to do good.
it were a monstrous thing to see the mouth of a man bigger then his whole
body: and to see the most part of man's life spent in eating and idle talking
with his mouth, rather then in doing any good with his hands, is certainly no
less unseemly.

Idleness was never tolerated by God: even 2 Idleness was not suffered by
God, nay, not in innocent Adam.
when Adam was in his innocence, he would not have him to live without
labor, and therefore appointed him to dress the garden of Eden, and laid it
as a law on him and on all men; In the sweat of thy brow shall thou live: Genesis
3. 19.
Caine and Abel were borne Lords and heirs of all the world, yet were they not
brought up without a calling; the one was a keeper of sheep, the other a tiller
of the ground.

Jacob being demanded by Pharaoh what his 3 The wages of an idle man is, that
he should want his meat.
vocation was, gave him a very good answer: but if it were demanded of many
now a days, they would not know what to answer: on whom it were good for the
commonwealth, the Apostles Canon were practiced; he that laboreth not with his
hands should not eat.

To no Country has God given all things, 4 Every man has something wherein he
should work.
not to Canaan in her best estate: therefore when Solomon built the Temple, he
sent to Tirus for Timber, to Ophir for Gold: yea, to no man in the world has
God given all things, but has so dispensed his gifts among men, that every man
should work, one for the help of another.

The actions of the hands of a Christian are 5 The actions of a Christians hand
are three.
three: first, he lifts them up to God by prayer: secondly, he puts them down
to labor in his vocation: and thirdly, he extends them to do the works of
mercy and compassion toward the needy.

The first action of his hands is the lifting up 6 The first is to lift them up
to God by prayer.
of them to God by prayer, and that is a testimony of the lifting up of his
heart: this he does, because he knows that all labor is vain unless the
Lord bless it. It is in vain to Psalm. 127. 2.
rise early, and to lie down late, and to eat the bread of sorrow, the Lord
will surely give rest to his beloved.

Adam without the Lords command made a 7 For man's labor in any calling is
nothing without gods blessing.
garment to himself, but it covered not his nakedness: Jonas made a booth,
but it defended him not from the heat: Rahel sought children by artificial
means, as the eating of Mandrakes; by natural means, as copulation with her
husband, but she got none, till she sought them from God by prayer: Peter
fished all night and took nothing, but when Christ commanded him to cast in
the net then he prospered.

On the other hand Prayer draws down a blessing upon the works of our hands.
The marriage of Isaac could not but prosper, for Abraham 8 Actions begun and
prosecuted with prayer cannot but prosper.
in the beginning of it sought Gods blessing by prayer: Eliazer in procuring
it, he uses prayer: Rebecca her parents and brethren sent her away by prayer:
and Isaac received her with Prayer. Thus our works sanctified by prayer, shall
prosper; and if we call the Lord to the beginning of our actions, we shall
not fail to see his blessing upon the end of them.

The second action of the hand is to work 9 The second action is to work with
them in our calling
in the lawful trade and vocation whereunto God has called us. A lawful
trade I call that manner of life which is allowed in the word of God, and these
are of diverse sorts: for God in his wisdom has so distributed his gifts among
men, that unto none has he given all, but has made every one to stand in
need of the help of another.

Religion then takes not away lawful Trades 10 Religion takes not away lawful
trades and vocations.
and vocations, but rather establishes them. When those men of war asked John
the Baptist what they should do, they received this answer; do violence to no
man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages: he commanded
them not to forsake their calling, but the corruptions of their calling. Thus
Cornelius after his conversion to be a Christian, remained a Captain: and if
Religion take not away the calling of a Soldier, far less are we to think
it takes away other callings.

Only it corrects the abuses of the calling, 11 Only it corrects the abuses
of them.
whereby men add to the good ordinance of God, the deceit of Satan: using a
lawful calling in an unlawful manner as when the merchant in making of his
merchandise uses deceitful balances, or weights of a double measure. As
indeed there is no calling in the world so good, which has not the own worm
to corrupt it.

The third action of the hand is to stretch 12 The third action is to stretch
them out to the poor.
out, and give to the poor. It is true of all the godly, which Solomon says
of the godly woman; She stretches out her hand to the wheel, and then she
stretches out her hand to the poor: for after that God has increased them in
their lawful calling, then of their abundance they give to the needy.

The Lord has made some of his children 13 Why God has made some rich, others
poor.
rich in worldly things, and others he has made poor, that the one should be
examples of mercy, the other patterns of patience in his Church.

Under the Law God forewarned Israel, that 14 As we take from God so should we
give to the poor.
the poor should ever be with them, and our Savior has sore-warned us of the
same under the Gospel: and therewith the commadement is given; Withdraw not
therefore thine hand Deuteronomy. 15. 7.
from thy needy brother. For this cause was it enjoined to the Israelite in
the time of harvest that he should leave a part of his corns standing in the
fields, that the poor might take it; teaching us that as we have a hand
willingly to take from the Lord: so we are bound to open it, and liberally give
to the poor.

For this liberality to the indigent and needy 15 Liberality toward the
needy recommended by the example of God.
is recommended to us both by the example of God himself, and of his most
excellent creatures. The goodness of God is extended to all, he makes his
Sun to shine, and his rain to fall, even upon those which are unjust;
teaching us not to neglect, far less to contemn other men, who are Gods
creatures, even then, when for their evil qualities, we may make just
exception against them, that so we may be the children of our heavenly father.

And as for the creatures of God we see that 16 And of his creatures.
as they excel in goodness, so they communicate their good unto others. Omne
enim bonum est communicatiuum sui.

The Sun keeps not his light to himself 17 Specially of the Sun,
Clouds, Trees, yea and of the Angels.
but sends out his beams to give light and heat to the world* the Clouds when
they are full drop down their rain to the earth: the Trees of their own
accord lets fall their fruit to the use of man, albeit no man does require it:
yea, the Angels do delight to Minister unto our necessities, for why is Manna
wherewith God fed Israel in the wilderness, called Angels food? surely not
because the Angels did either make or eat it, but were only the stewards of
God to convey it to his people.

Thus are we taught that it is a more blessed 18 A more blessed thing to give
then to receive.
thing to give then to receive, if either we will follow the Lord, or his most
excellent creatures in heaven and earth.

But strange it is to see how many wretched 19 Worldlings live like monsters of
the earth.
worldlings there are like unto Nabal, monsters of the earth, living so in it,
as if their mouths were wide enough for all Gods creatures, and whatsoever
were given them, were given them for themselves only.

Or like that cursed gulf in the salt and dead 20 Compared to the lake of
Sodom.
sea, which swalloweth up the whole river of Jordan into her bosom, and is
neither her self bettered thereby, neither yet sends out any part thereof
again to the good of others: such cursed creatures are they who receive good
things from God in great abundance, and are neither changed by them in
themselves, neither yet will suffer any of those goods to flow from them to the
benefit of others; their barraine hearts having caused to them withered hands
which are able to give nothing.

Or if at any time they give, it is as if their right hand should give unto
their left, that is, they give to their own only. Or as if the 21 If
worldlings give they are like clouds pouring rain on the Sea.
Clouds being full of rain and standing over some thirsty ground should be
carried away by the wind to disburthen her treasures of water in the Sea: so
do they while all they give is bestowed on such as have more then themselves,
and that under hope of a greater benefit to return to themselves again.

To move us therefore to the performance 22 Motives to alms giving.
of this christian duty, we will shortly consider the loss that comes by
neglect thereof, and the great vantage by the faithful discharge of it.

The loss is evident; if we will keep that 23 He which keeps that which God
bids give does lose it.
which God bids us give, be sure we shall lose it. As Manna gathered more then
God commanded turned into worms: so riches kept more then God allows
becomes unprofitable to the possessor.

Yea, where men will not pay to God that 24 How he punishes such by his
officers.
duty for their goods which he requires; it is a righteous thing with him to
send his officers to punish them, such as the Caterpiller, the Canker-worme,
and the Grasshopper.

Many have cast their wares unprofitably into 25 How otherwise also he
crosses them.
the Sea, with the mariners of Jonas ship, which they would not profitably
bestow upon the land; and by pestilence many have been compelled to cast out
the provision which they had gathered for their own mouths to the use of
others, for whom it never came into their minds to provide it,

The gain again we get by giving, is evident 26 The gain we get by giving
is more then that which we give.
out of that place; Psalm. 112. He that distributeth and gives to the poor,
his righteousness remains for ever: if we compare that which we give unto
others, with that which remains to our selves, that which we give is a
perishing thing, but that which remains is enduring.

And this shall yet appear more clearly, if 27 This is manifested by the
example of the widow and Elijah.
we consider the example of Elijah and the widow of Sarepta: the Lord ^ed his
Prophet sometime by Angels, sometime by Ravens, and so he might have done
still all the time of the famine; but it pleased him to change his steward, and
to send him to the widow of Sarepta, not so much that Elijah should be
nourished by the widow, whom before without her he had nourished, as that the
widows portion might be blessed by Elijah.

Thus is it true that the giver of alms if he 28 What vantage he reapes who
rightly gives alms.
give it rightly, gets more then he gives, as Abraham and Lot gave perishing
meat, but received immortal Angels. Plus pauper tibi confert, quam a te
accipit; the poor gives thee more Amb. ossic. lib. 1 cap. 30.
then he gets from thee, said Ambrose. Si nudum vestias, teipsum induis
iustitia; if thou clothe the poor, thou do clothe thy self with
righteousness: Si peregrinum sub tectum inducis, ille acquiret tibi sanctorum
amicitias, and aeterna tabernacula; if thou bring the stranger under thy
roof, he shall purchase to thee the friendship of the Saints, and eternal
tabernacles.

Therefore S. Paul when he was going to Jerusalem 29 He that ministers to the
necessities of the poor does him self more good then he does them.
to relieve the necessity of the Saints there, with a contribution from the
Churches of Grecia, besought them to pray for him that his service at Jerusalem
might be accepted. What is this? he comes to give alms, and yet prays that
his gift may be accepted: Surely because the service by which we minister to
Gods Saints, brings more good to us then any thing we give is able to do unto
them: vtilior Nazian. orat. 46 in ecclesiast.
est eleemosyna danti, quam illi cui datur.

The Censure.
But now the hands of many, which are either stained with idleness, or blotted
with bribery, blood, tricks of deceit, and all sorts of uncleanness, proves
that all are not Christians indeed, who now usurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER. VII. Of his Feet.
The Lords Command.
GOD pondereth all the paths How the Christian is commanded to govern his
feet by measure and rule.
of men: Prou. 5. 21. therefore ponder thou also all the paths of thine own
feet, and let all thy ways be ordered aright: turn not to the right hand, nor
to the left, but remove thy foot from evil. Prou. 4. 26. Make straight steps
to your feet, least that which is halting be turned out of the way. Heb. 12.
13. Refr^ne thy feet from the path of the wicked: Prou. 1. 15. and keep the
way of the righteous. Prou. 2. 20. The path of the righteous is, to decline
from evil: and he keeps his soul that keeps his way. Prou. 16. 17. But
above all take heed to thy soote when thou entrest into the house of God.
Eccles. 4. 17.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
O Lord, 1* Sam. 2. 9.
thou who keep the feet of thy Saints, Esaias. 35. 8.
and have prepared an holy way, by which, they who are polluted cannot pass: I
beseech Psalm. 5. 11.
thee to make thy way plain before my face, that Psalm. 17. 5.
my feet slide not from thy paths. Psalm. 119. 5.
Direct my ways to keep thy statutes: Luke. 1. 79.
and guide my feet in the way of peace, to the glory of thy name, through Jesus
Christ,

Amen.
Another.
I Know Ierem. 10. 23.
O Lord, that the way of man is not in himself: neither is it in man to walk
and direct his steps, Psalm. 43. 6.
Therefore I pray thee send out thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, and
bring me to thine holy mountain, and to thy tabernable, Psalm. 5. 10.
that so my goings being ordered by thee, Psalm. 119. 133.
my steps may be directed in thy word, and iniquity have never dominion over
me, for Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
The Christians Practice of this Command.
MY feet have followed thy steps, I have kept The feet of a christian how they
are refrained from evil.
thy way, and have not declined. Job. 23. 11. my feet have not made haste to
deceit: Job. 31. 5. and I will still refrain them from every evil way, that I
may keep thy word: Psalm. 119. 101. for thy word is a lantherne to to my feet,
and a light to my paths. Psalm. 119. 105. Therefore will I not walk in
vanity, Job. And directed to good.
31* 5. nor in the counsel of the wicked: Psalm. 1. but my feet shall delight
to stand in thy gates, O Jerusalem. Psalm. 122. 2.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
IT was the most ancient glory of man, that he was made to the Image of God,
and it will be his last and his greatest glory to be restored 1 Man's first and
last glory is to have the Image of God.
again to this same image, without which the most excellent Monarchs of the
world are most inglorious.

For it is a most fearful thing to remember 2 How miserable are they who
shall be found to want gods Image.
that they who want the Image of God, God shall deny them to be his Creatures:
Depart from me, I know you not ye workers of iniquity; ye are not that which I
made you; I planted you a noble Vine, whose plants were all natural, how is it
then that ye are turned unto me Ierem. 2. 21.
in the plants of a strange Vine?

Deceitful Satan stole away this glorious 3 Satan first and last enuieth
this Image of God in man.
Image from our first Parents, and as craftily labors he to steal from
their children that second blessing of the Gospel, by which the Lord Jesus
offers to restore that Image again unto us. And therefore what unjustly Esau
spoke of Jacob, may most justly be spoken of him, he is a supplanter indeed, a
Satan, an adversary: oh that we could take it more deeply into our hearts, and
so arm our selves against him as against the first and last most deadly enemy
of our salvation.

As other members of the body are reformed 4 The grace of regeneration teaches
us also how to govern our feet.
and employed to the right use by the grace of regeneration: so the feet also
which God has given to carry man to and fro upon earth, Solomon calls them
The strong men: for they Eccles. 12. 3.
are as pillars upholding the whole body, and carrying man most easily whither
he would go.

They are basest in the body, but very artificially 5 The feet of man
artificially made by God.
made, consisting of forty and four bones: whereof one is in the heel, as
the socket of the pillar; another in the palm of the foot, from thence one
proceeding from side to side to every toe; and then in every toe three bones,
meruailously knit together for the nimbler moving and surer fastening of the
steps of 6 That in the basest part of his body, man might have cause to praise
God
man.

So that if man did consider himself in the basest part of his body, even in
the feet, by which he treads upon clay and doung, as often as he did look to
himself, he would glorify his Maker, saying with the Psalmist, I am
fearfully 7 But by nature the canker of sin has run from the heart to the
feet also.
and wondrously made. Psalm. 139.

But what is there so good given unto man by God, which sin has not
infected: the poison thereof beginning at the soul has run like a canker
through the whole body, so that from the top of the head to the sole of the 8
For naturally man's feet are impotent to good.
foot, there is nothing sound in man.

For by Nature the feet of man are impotent and unable to walk in the good way
which God has commanded: like that cripple of Lystra, born lame of his feet
from the womb, who could not walk till the Apostle in the name of Jesus cured
him, so is every man till the grace of Christ renew him.

They are nimble enough to walk in the 9 But nimble enough and able to evil.
ways of sin: yea, as the horse rusheth into* the battle, so can natural
men make have with their feet to run their own way; their feet are swift to
the shedding of blood, but in the end they are recompensed with a fearful
judgment: for as they delight to wander from the Lord, so the Lord has no
delight in them. Ier. 14. 10. and because now they lose their feet to every way
of wickedness, God in the end shall bind them hand and foot, and cast them
into utter darkness.

But the grace of regeneration teaches the 10 The Christian by regeneration
receives the right use of them.
Christian how to walk with his feet, to the doing of good, and declyning from
evil. My feet (says Job 23. 11.) has followed the steps of the Lord, and
not declyned.

As a servant walking at the back of his Master 11 For he walks after God, as
a servant after his Master.
has his eye upon him to follow his steps, and to turn where he turns: so
the Christian walks with the Lord, as Henoch did, and refuses to go any way
wherein his Master has not gone before him. 12 And therefore delights to haunt
those places wherein most frequently his Master appears that is, holy
assemblies.


And because his Master is in heaven, and himself on earth, he waits most
diligently on his Master in those places of earth wherein most frequently he
appears, that is, in the assembly of Gods Saints in his holy Temples, for
those are the places upon earth which are most like unto heaven.

Moreover, because with his feet he treads 13 With his feet he treads upon
earth but with his face he look* to heaven
upon earth, and with his face looks up to heaven; he delights not much in
those works by which the earth may be gained, but rather in those by which the
great and excellent glory of heaven may be obtained; for even by this that God
has made him to tread upon the earth, he learnes to despise the earth,
counting the best things that are in it but dongue, in respect of the Lord
Jesus.

The Church is described having the Sun 14 So the whole Church is described
having the World under her feet.
and the twelve stars on her head: for Christ and the doctrine of the
Apostles is as a Diadem of beauty to her, the Moon figuring the world, she
has under her feet: it is a shame to alter this order, as carnal men do,
who tread Christ and his word under their feet, and puts the world as a
garland upon their heads: but the Christian will never place that in his heart,
nor upon his head, which God has placed under his feet.

Thus, while as he walks upon the earth 15 Thus vvalking on earth he keeps
an heavenly mind.
with his feet, he keeps within him an heavenly mind, and so orders his
ways as may best serve to prepare a way for his ascension to his Lord.

For in all the ways wherein he goes he looks 16 For in all his vvayes he
looks either to Gods command or his license.
either to Gods commandment or his license: if he go to a work which is
absolutely good, as to hear the Word, to visit the sick, to give alms to the
poor, his feet move thereto with cheerfulness, being surely warranted by Gods
commandment. If otherwise he be to go to a work which is indifferent, such as
is his bodily recreation by honest game, he will not move his foot unto it, till
first in his conscience he be sure of license obtained from his Lord.

But in all this let the Christian remember, 17 Satan's snares laid in all his
vvayes.
how he is greatly envied by Satan, who in all his ways has spread out
deceivable snares, wherein to trap him; Psalm. 57. at least to make him if he
can, stumble and fall.

Therefore first of all has the Christian need 18 Against which the Christian
armeth himself with prayer and consideration.
to pray continually, that the Lord who keeps the feet of his Saints, would
save him from the snare of his enemy. Secondly, he has continual need in
all his ways to walk circumspectly. As he that walks among thorns sets
not down his foot without consideration: so the Christian seeing in every step
there is a snare, should take diligent heed to all his ways. 19 Seeing we
look to tread Satan under our feet, let us not pollute them.


And herewith all let the Christian join these meditations. Seeing thou
look at length to be partaker of this glory of the Saints, that Satan shall
be trodden under thy feet, suffer him not to pollute thy feet, nor to use them
at his will, which thou hopest against his will at length to set on his neck.

Again, seeing all the works of Gods hand 20 God has honored us by subduing
all his works under our feet, let us not dishonor them.
are put under thy feet again by Christ Jesus, in whom thou art restored to
thy Lord-ship and superiority over them; dishonor not thy self so far as to
make them servants to Satan, by running at his will into the works of
uncleanness.

And last of all, remember that our blessed 21 In that our Savior once vvashed
his Disciples feet it was to teach us all to use our feet in holiness and
humility.
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ did once wash the feet of his own Disciples,
not only to teach all his servants humility, but holiness also: for it is a
great shame for us to pollute and dishonor those parts of our body, which were
so greatly honored by the Lord.

The Censure.
But now the great number of them, who have feet to follow Satan any way that
he will lead them, but none to follow the Lord, evidently does prove that all
are not Christians indeed who now vsurp the Christian name.

CHAPTER. VIII. Of his Company.
The Lords Command.
Mr Son, if sinners do entise Company with the wicked forbidden.
thee, consent thou not: if they say, Come to us, we will lie in wait for
blood, and lie privily for the innocent without a cause, cast in thy lot among
us: my Son, walk not thou in the way with them, but refrain thy feet from
their path, Prou. 1. 10. and withdraw thy self from every one that walks
inordinately. 2 These. 3. 6. Depart from the tents of the wicked, and touch
nothing that is theirs, least ye perish in their sins. Numb. 16. 26. Above
all make no compact with Cor ^anting and marrying* with them much more
forbidden.
Idolaters, least they be the cause of thy ruin: Exodus 34. 12. and be not
unequally yoked with Infidels: for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what communion has light with darkness? 2 Cor. 6. 14.
Meddle not also with them that are seditions; Prou. 24. 21. Neither make
friendship with an angry man, neither go with a furious man, least thou
learnest his ways, and receive destruction to thy soul. Prou. 22. 24. Keep
not company with drunkards and gluttons. Prou. 23. 20. Yea, if one that is
called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a railer, or
a drunkard, or an extortioner', with such a one eat not. 1 Cor. 5. 11. He
that walks with the wise shall be wise: but a companion of fools shall be
afflicted. Prou. 13. 20. Therefore depart from a foolish man, when thou see
not in him the lips of knowledge. Prou. 14. 7.

The Christians Prayer for Grace to obey this Command.
LORD Psalm. 26. 9.
gather not my soul with the Sinners, nor my life with the bloody men, in
whose hand is wickedness, and their right hand is full of bribes. Prou. 2. 13.
Deliver me from the men that speak froward things, and from them that leave
the way of righteousness to walk in the way of darkness. Psalm. 141. 4.
Keep me that I work not wicked works with them who work iniquity: Psalm.
119. 79.
but let such as fear thee turn unto me, and those that know thy
Testimonies. Psalm. 16. 3.
Fill mine heart with the love of thy Saints, and let my delight be on thy
excellent ones which are upon earth, 1 John. 4. 10.
that thereby I may know I am translated from death to life, through Jesus
Christ.

Amen.
The Christians Practice of this Command.
I Have not haunted with vain persons, nor How the Christian flies the
company of the wicked.
kept company with dissemblers: I have hated the assembly of the evil, and
have not companied with the wicked. Psalm. 26. 4. I fate not in the assembly of
mockers: Ierem. 15. 17. Neither shall any deceitful person dwell within my
house: he that tells lies shall not remain in my sight: Psalm. 101. but mine
eyes shall be to the faithful of the Land, that they But delights in the
company of them who fear the Lord
may dwell with me. He that walks in a perfect way shall serve me: Psalm.
101. for I am companion of all them that fear thee, and keep thy Precepts.
Psalm. 119. 63. Away therefore from me ye wicked, for I will keep the
Commandments of my God. Psalm. 119. 115.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
Neither in this life nor in the life to come, 1 Man by creation made a sociall
creature.
has God ordained man to live alone. By his first creation he was made a
social creature; It is not good (said the Lord) for man to be alone. Genesis 2.
Two (says Solomon) are better then one, for if Eccles. 4. 9.
they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe to him that is alone.
Therefore our Savior when he first sent out his disciples he sent them out
two and two, and has called his Church a fellowship and communion of Saints,
wherein every one should edify another in the most holy faith.

Yea, the Angels, Gods most excellent creatures, 2 Angels delight in mutual
society and fellowship.
his ministering spirits, are coupled four and four together in chariots in an
happy fellowship serving their God.

But this good ordinance of God is abused by 3 How this good ordinance is
abused to two extremities, for some run to the solitary life.
men in two extremities: for some under a color of holiness, separate
themselves from all society of men, counting the solitary life vitam
perfectissimam. These foolishly bind themselves unto a necessity, whereunto
godly men in time of persecution were driven by compulsion, that is, (as the
Apostle says) to h^de themselves in dens and caves, of whom the world was not
worthy.

But indeed, neither is this life so profitable 4 Which is neither so
profitable for Gods glory nor good of the Church as is the public.
to glorify God and ed^fie his Church, as is the public godly life: wherein
he that does help others, multo melius facit and virilius, does much better,
and more valiantly, Born. in Cant. Sermon. 12.
then he, who casting off all care of others, does separate himself in private
to care only for himself: hic sib^ tantum vsui est, nec quicquam ab co
vtilitatis ad alios permanat, profitable to himself only, said Nazianzen, but
no way unto others.

But this is not the worst, (as says that 5 Solitary life repudiates Charity
in the judgment of Nazianzen.
same Father) for that life does repudiate Charity, which is in the number of
most excellent virtues: and does break the band Nazian* erat. 33 in laude^
Heronts.
of humane fellowship and Society: and it has also this incommoditie with it,
that the virtue of them who live in it, cannot be manifested. For as there is
no reason (as says Chrisost. de Sacerd. lib. 6.
Chrysostom) to count him a skillful Mariner, who within the harbor sits
at the Rudder of the Ship, and never went out into the deep to give proof how
he can govern her in the storm: so cannot a solitary life be a sufficient
trial of a good Christian.

If these Eremits and Monks be the lights 6 The superstitious folly of Eremits
now rebuked.
of the world, why do they hide the light under a bushel? if they be endued
with excellent graces, why are they as clouds with*drawne into the wilderness,
and do not communicate the rain of grace to the edification of others? If on
the other hand they fear their infirmity, and do find themselves scant of
grace, why come they not to seek it where God has promised to give it? why
forsake they the assemblies and congregations of the Saints, where they may
hear God speaking to all, and every one edifying and confirming an other?

On the other extremity are they, which 7 On the other extremity are they who
live in fellowship, but not conjoined by the right band.
live in fellowship and company which God has ordained, but not in such
manner as God has commanded: for ye shall find few fellowships of men, which
are united and knit together by the right bands.

Some go together only of a custom, 8 Some keep company only of custom
as the beasts do.
and to these it is a grief for one of them to want the company of another:
Ista est amicitia consuetudinis non rationis, habent illam and Pecora: This is
a Fellowship made by custom, Aug. hom. 38.
and not by Reason, a man shall see it among the brute Beasts, who because of
a long time they have haunted together, have no will to be parted or sundered
one from an other.

Others keep fellowship only upon a self 9 Others are moved to keep company
by self-love.
love; so Laban loved the company of Jacob, and had no will to want him, not so
much for love of Jacob himself, as love of the gain got by Jacob: this cannot
continue, but in the end is turned into inimitie: for these men use their
companions as a man uses his flower, who keeps it no longer then it yeeldes a
sweet and pleasant smell unto him.

Others there are who are moved to keep 10 Some by similitude of manners.
company by the similitude of manners, and these are of two sorts: some are
conjoined and linkt together by the similitude of their evil manners: so were
Simion and Leui brethren in evil; and Herod and Pilate made friends by their
mutual meddling with an evil cause. Thus we see that as beasts and birds of
one kind go together; so men of one fashion and condition delight to go
together.

But the similitude of good manners is the 11 Similitude of good manners is the
sureest band of friendship.
surest bond of friendship: and it is by this sure mark that true Christians
do make choice of their companions; for he loves another for the grace of
God that he sees in him. He makes much of those that fear the Lord, but in
his eyes a vile person is contemned: where he sees no grace, he looks for no
good, were a man never so wise, if he be not godly, it is great wisdom to
eschew him: Quis enim vtilem causae alt^nae iudicet, quem videt inutilem Amb.
offic. lib. 2 cap. 12.
vitae suae.

It is one of the continual cares of a Christian 12 A Christian flies the
company of the wicked for fear of the evil they may do him.
to sly from evil company: first, for fear of the evil the wicked may do
to him: for the nature of things is such, that when good is joined with the
evil, the good is sooner corrupted by the evil, then the evil is rectified
by the good.

And this the Spirit of God does teach us 13 How dangerous their company is in
the judgment of Gods spirit.
both by significant Phrases, and clear examples: Can a man take fire in his
bosom, and walk upon coals and not be burnt? Can thou be a brother to
Dragons, and companion to Ostriches, and not savor of their wildness?

How often have men of most excellent 14 Men of excellent graces have been
hurt by the company of the wicked.
Graces, and singular virtues been snared by the Company of the wicked. In
the Court of Egypt, Joseph was snared to swear by the life of Pharaoh: In the
company of the Philistims godly David was drawn to be a dissembler, and was
forced to show himself in arms against Israel, though sore against his heart:
In the Hall of Caiaphas the Apostle Saint Peter was tempted to deny his Lord
and Master. Yea, as Nazianzen did warn Caesarius, the least evil we do
incur by keeping company with the wicked, we are blackt with their smoke, if
we be not burnt with their fire.

Neither does the Christian slye the company 15 A Christian also slies the
company of the wicked for fear least he do them evil.
of the wicked, for fear of the evil they may do to him only, but also for
fear he do evil unto them: for wicked men, when they see that godly men do
not abhor their company, are so much the more strengthened and confirmed to
proceed on forward in their sins.

Finally, the Christian in joining himself 16 A Christians respect in all
company is first to do good.
to any company, does ever keep this twofold respect: first, to do good if
he may: secondly, to get good. If he do come into the company of evil men,
he has a care both by admonition and conversation to make them better; if
they do blaspheme, he does bless; if they go to excess, he does conform
himself to sobriety, ever keeping a godly care by his example to do them
good, at least that by their evil example he receive not evil.

His second respect in haunting company, 17 Secondly, to get good.
is to get good: and therefore his delight is in the fellowship of the Saints
of God. He knows that grapes cannot be gathered of thorns, nor sigges of
Thistles: he has an eye to the trees of righteousness, which are planted
Romans 12. 8.
in the house of the Lord, that by mutual faith he may both give and receive
comfort from them.

The Censure.
But now the want of this holy disposition in many professors now, proclaims
to the world, that all are not Christians indeed who now vsurp the Christian
name.

A SHORT DESCRIPTION OF THE CHRISTIANS DEPARTVRE OVT OF the Body.
The Christians disposition toward Death, before death come.
FEW and evil have been the days of my pilgrimage. Genesis 49. 7. I have had as
inheritance the months of vanity, and painful nights have been appointed
unto me. Job. 7. 3. And I know that hereafter there is laid up for me a crown
of righteousness, and not for me only, but for all them, who love the
appearing of the Lord Jesus. 2 Timothy 4. 8. Therefore all the days of my life
will I wait till my changing shall come: Job. 14. 14. For I desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ. Philip. 1. I love to remove out of the body,
and to dwell with the Lord: 2 Cor. 5. 8. For I know if this earthly house of
this tabernacle were destroyed, I have a building given of God, that is, an
house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens: therefore I sigh,
desiring to be clothed with mine house which is from heaven. 2 Cor. 5. And I
heartily look for, and do hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that
with all confidence, Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by
life or by death: Philip. 1. 20. For whether I live, I live to the Lord; or
whether I die, I dye to the Lord: whether therefore I live or I dye, I am the
Lords. Romans 14. 8. To him therefore be praise and glory for ever.

Amen.
His willing Resolution in the hour of death.
I Have foughten a good fight, I have kept the Faith: 2 Timothy 4. I know whom I
have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
credited unto him against that day. 2 Timothy 1. 12. The Lord will quicken my
mortal body, Romans 8. and make it like to his own glorious body: Philip. 3.
20. Yea, though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God
in my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none
other for me: though my reins be consumed within me: Job. 19. 26. therefore I
willingly lay down my life and commit my soul unto God, as unto my faithful
Creator. 1. Pet. 4. 19.

The Christians last prayer made in the body.
HOW excellent is thy mercy O God: therefore do I trust under the shadow of
thy wings. Psalm. 36. 7. O blessed is the man whom thou do choose, and causest
to come unto thee, he shall dwell in thy Courts, and shall be satisfied with
the pleasures of thine house, even of thy holy Temple: Psalm. 65. 4. Thou shall
give him drink out of the rivers of thy pleasures: for with thee is the well
of life, and in thy light shall we see light. Psalm. 36. Send out therefore thy
light and thy truth, Psalm. 43. 3. and let thy good spirit lead me unto the Land
of righteousness. Psalm. 143. 10. Carry me O Lord, by thy mercy, and bring me
in thy strength to thy holy habitation: plant me in the mountain of thine
inheritance, even the place which thou have prepared, and the sanctuary which
thou have stablished. Exodus 15. 3. that I may see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living. Psalm. 27. 13. Turn away my soul from the pit, and
illuminate it in the light of the living. Job. 33. 30. Let me behold thy face
in righteousness, and let me be satisfied with thine Image: Psalm. 17. 15. For
in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore. Psalm. 16. 9. Into thine hands O Lord I commend my spirit, for thou
have redeemed me O Lord God of truth. Psalm. 31. 5. Lord Jesus receive my
spirit. Act. 7.

The end of the upright man is peace. Psalm. 37. 37. As many as walk according
to this rule peace shall be upon them, and upon the Israel of God. Gal. 6. 16.
A THANKSGIVING.
NOW unto him that is able to keep us, that we fall not, and to present us
faultlesse before the presence of his glory with joy. To God, only wise, be
glory, majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen. Jude. 24.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
The Table of the first Part.
Chap. 1 OF his new birth or Regeneration. Fol. 1 Chap. 2 Of his new Senses.
Fol. 14 Chap. 3 Of his new Food. Fol. 28 Chap. 4 Of his new Growth. Fol. 36
Chap. 5 Of his new Apparel. Fol. 46 Chap. 6 Of his new Names. Fol. 56
The Table of the second Part.
Chap. 1 OF his inward man. Fol. 60 Chap. 2 Of his new mind. Fol. 65 Chap. 3
Of his new Will. Fol. 78 Chap. 4 Of his Conscience. Fol. 87 Chap. 5 Of his
Love. Fol. 99 Chap. 6 Of his Hatred. Fol. 110 Chap. 7 Of his Fear. Fol. 117
Chap. 8 Of his Confidence. Fol. 133 Chap. 9 Of his Joy. Fol. 141 Chap. 10 Of
his Grief. Fol. 150 Chap. 11 Of his grief arising of a troubled Conscience.
Fol. 159 Chap. 12 Of his Patience. Fol. 166 Chap. 13 Of his Anger. Fol. 177
The Table of the third part.
Chap. 1 Of his outward Man. Fol. 190 Chap. 2 Of his Ears. Fol. 197 Chap. 3 Of
his Eyes. Fol. 206 Chap. 4 Of his Tongue Fol. 216 Chap. 5 Of his Eating. Fol.
234 Chap. 6 Of his Hands. Fol. 248 Chap. 7 Of his Feet. Fol. 260 Chap. 8 Of his
Company. Fol. 269 A short description of the Christians departure out of the
body. Fol. 280
FINIS.

