The Author to the Reader.
If thou do read or hear this work,
Only see thou do this,
Have care to mend thy evil ways,
Now past and done amiss.
All those that still presume in sin,
Not minding to amend,
Daily this Book will witness be
Reuengefull in the end.
Each day repent, Oh still repent
With speed, I humbly pray,
Even for his Sons sake, Jesus Christ,
So sin is washed away.
Anagramma: Annon Jesus reads?
ANDREWS Resolution: To return unto God by Repentance.

Directed unto all the Elect Children of God, which truly repent, perfectly
guiding them in the right way therein.

Right godly to read, as delightful to hear, but most profitable to be
practiced.

Newly published by John Andrews, Minister and Preacher of the Word.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, 1621.

The Contents of the book.
1 What Repentance is. 2 God is the Author of Repentance. 3 Of Contrition. 4 Of
Examination. 5 Of Confession. 6 Of Faith. 7 Of the time when to repent.
These parts are al Authentical, and exactly comprised in a most short and
compendious Method, briefly to be read, that it may be effectually practiced.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, Francis, Lord Verulam, Lord high Chanceller of
England, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel, Grace, Mercy,
and peace be multiplied in this life: and a Crown of eternal felicity in the
life to come.
RIght Honorable: Although man was made according to the Image of the Trinity,
that he might attain unto the knowledge of the Deity, yet by reason of sin,
which so greatly abounds in this our last, evil, and declining age; it is to
be feared, too too many are become so alienated and estranged from God, and
have so accustomed themselves daily to commit wickedness, that the sin of the
whole world is ready to come to maturity, and to cry unto the heavens for
vengeance against us. Wherefore that man should search himself, that he might
see (as in a looking-glass) the abominable horror, and crying of sin, to the
end that it might induce him speedily to return unto God by Repentance: I have
therefore imboldened my self (although unknown) to dedicate these my poor
and unlearned labors unto your learned View: the which I have entitled (
Andrews Resolution) shrowding it under your Patronage, from the prejudice of
contempt.

Thus, my humble duty remembered, I take my leave, desiring almighty God that
these my labors may breath out such sound and godly doctrine, that they may
become a salve to cure and preserve the souls of the Readers.

Your Honors in all Christian duty to be commanded, John Andrews.

To the Christian Reader, health in the Lord.
Read to gain thereby.
Judge indifferently.
Repent unfeignedly.
Receive instruction willingly.
Meditate thereon zealously.
Lest you enter into temptation carelessly.
Vale in Christo. John Andrews.

First, what Repentance is.
THere is no Doctrine in the Church of God more necessary the^ the doctrine of
Repentance and amendment of life; neither does the holy Ghost so much labor in
all the Scripture, as he does to beat repentance into men's heads.

It was not only the only Sermon which S. John Baptist preached, to prepare the
way for Christ, but also it was the first that ever was made, it was preached
by God himself, to our first parents in Paradise; and ever since both the
Prophets, Apostles, and many of Gods faithful Ministers have preached
Repentance unto the people.

Yet notwithstanding many are so wedded unto sin, and they are become so
godless, so graceless, so rooted and fully resolved to live therein, yt the
most part little understand the Doctrine of Repentance, and less practice the
duty. Many presume to describe it, though few know it: many can talk of it,
but few walk in it; many speak of it, but few feel it; and many think they
have caught it, when they have but the shadow of it; because it is so slippery
that few can hold it, and so secret that many cannot find it: it is hid from
the world, and revealed unto none but to the elect Children of God.

It is a work that no men with their sine heads and deep devices can
comprehend, for the conversion of a sinner is supernatural. And whosoever does
or has not felt in himself what repentance is, shall be dammed; therefore he
that has ears to hear, let him hear, and he that has eyes to see, let him
see what Repentance is, and withal bring this precept of the Philosophers with
him, Nosce teipsum, Know thy self; it is the first thing to be done in
repentance, and the beginning of all grace.

Repentance is a work of grace* arising of a godly sorrow, from a true faith,
and knowledge of a man's own spiritual estate. It is a constant turning of man
in his whole life from all his sins, unto God; it is an hearty sorrow for
sin with amendment of life, having a godly Resolution to sin no more.

It is a most necessary thing for mankind; it is the very supersedeas and
discharge of sin, and the cause of unity between God and man. There is no
other means to make peace between Christ and us, but Repentance: No other to
discharge sin, nor course to avoid hell, but Repentance; neither any way to
win heaven, but Repentance: and therefore Repentance is most necessary.

What wounded body would not seek a salve? much more what wounded soul, slain
with sin, would not seek Repentance, seeing it is the only salve to cure the
soul?

It is an Ephod of purity; and a defiled man may not wear it. The dignity of
it is great, and honorable; and the Lord will not bestow it upon an unworthy
person. It is a magnificent guest, and will not come into a polluted Tabernacle.
It is an holy Saint, and will not dwell in the Synagogue of Satan.

It is not to be bought with silver or gold, nor to be had from the gifts of
Kings, Popes, or Potentates: it is a thing of inestimable value, it shows the
atonement between the Savior and the Sinner; and being gotten by Faith,
Prayer, and hearing the Word of God, it brings thee unto Christ. It is libera
Donatio, a gift absolute, without consideration, which God ever bestows upon
his friends, upon those that love him. It is called the Spirit of Burning;
therefore with speed repent, that repentance may burn thy sins, lest the
fire of hell burn thy soul. Esaias 4. 4.

The true Essence or nature of thy Repentance, only consists in turning from
all thy sins unto God: and therefore it is not altogether derived of the word
Poenitentia, because the Divines say, it does not comprehend Totum Terminum a
quo et ad quem, from what, and to whom thou must return.

But this is the true Repentance, which the Latins interpret by this word
Resipiscentia, or Conuersio; we is not only the changing of the mind, but it
is Recessus a malo, a forsaking of evil, Accessus ad bonum, and return unto
that which is good: Reuertimini vsque ad me, return as far as unto me. Thou
must not with Agrippa come we almost, for God delights not in those which will
but almost repent: but if thou will repent truly, thou must carefully give
unto God three things, viz. Primam Lunam, Rotam Solis, Canis iram:

The first quarter of the moon, COR
The circle of the Sun,
And the rage of a dog.
And withal have both a purpose in mind, and an inclination in will, and
endeavor in life, wholly to forsake all thy sins for ever, and turn unto God.

For better proof that true Repentance is a turning unto God, thou may find
examples in the holy Scriptures plentiously.

O ye children of Israel (says Esaias) turn again from al your infidelity,
wherein you have drowned your selves.

Turn you, turn you from all your evil ways, for why will ye dye O ye house
of Israel?

Repentance may be called a work of Grace; yea, a supernatural Grace of a
sanctified spirit, arising of a godly sorrow, from a true faith, and knowledge
of a man's own spiritual estate.

I may call Repentance a work, because it seems not to be a quality or
habit, but an action of a Repentant sinner, striving to return from all his
sins, to come unto God: and it cannot be practiced by any, but such as are in
the state of Grace.

Thou must leave all sin, and turn wholly to God: therefore to be contrite,
and not to convert; to convert, and not to reform; to forsake sin past, and
not to amend; to eschew* evil, and not to do good; and to acknowledge Gods
mercy, and not to give thanks: is indeed, not to repent truly.

To do one thing, and to leave all the rest undone; or to do all but one, and
to leave that undone, is to do nothing at all: but to leave all undone, is to
put the Devil out of one corner of thy heart into another.

For be thou well assured, that thy soul is a real thing, and cannot pass
but by livery; therefore if thou will deliver the whole possesso^ of thy soul
unto God by Repentance unfeignedly, thou must needs drive the Devil out of
all the corners of thy heart by amendme^t of thy life wholly.

Thou must resolve to leave sin fully and absolutely. If thou begin to
repent, and go not forward from Grace to Grace, thy Repentance is of no value:
Non progredi est regredi, Not to go forward (in thy Repentance) is to go
backward, without thy amendment: for there is no standing still (in the state
of sin) if thou mind to repent. Qui cessat esse melior, cessat esse bonus: He
that ceasseth to be better, ceasseth to be good; but he that does begin and
go on to the end, receives his reward, and this can never be obtained, except
thou repent truly.

To Repent, consists but of two syllables; yet unto the wicked it is so hard
to be learned, and so unapt to be practiced, that like as the Camelion can
change himself into all colors saving white, so would they change themselves
from all goodness to follow evil, rather then to return unto the Lord by
Repentance.

To conclude this point, thou shall no sooner repent, but heaven shall be
confirmed unto thee, habendum et tenendum, for ever and ever.

Secondly, God is the Author of Repentance.
REpentance is libera donatio, a gift absolute, without consideration; and it
comes freely from God, who is the very efficient Ier. 31. 18. Lam. 5. 21. Ier.
31. 18. Ier. 31. 18. 2. Tim. 25. 26.
and principal Author or Donor thereof. It is therefore to be held the more
precious, and to be desired with the more hope; yea, to be thy Summum Bonum,
for it obtains Salvation unto all those which truly repent and turn unto
God. And he that turns unto God by Repentance, must first of all be turned
by God: and so says Jeremiah, Ierem. 31. 19. Surely after I Ier. 31. 19.
was converted I repented, and after I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh; I
was ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.
And Ioh. 6..44.
our Savior Christ says, No man can come unto me except my Father draw 2 Timothy
2. 25 Ps. 118. 29. Ier. 33. 11. Mat. 19. 16 Psalm. 105. Psalm. 103. 8.
him. Therefore says S. Paul, Instruct them with meekness, proving if God
will at any time give them Repentance, that they may be saved.

For God is good and Ezech. 18. Romans 10. 1^. Psalm. 50. 15 Psalm. 91. 15 Psalm.
145. 18.
merciful unto all those that turn unto him by Repentance; he is full of
pity, and has no pleasure at all that the wicked should die: but is rich unto
all that call upon him for mercy; and has promised to hear thy petitions if
thou truly repent.

Furthermore, if thou had repentance in thine own power, and might repent
when thou would; yet it were but a folly; yea, it were a mere madness to
presume in sin because thou have a remedy. But now seeing thy repentance is
in the hand of God, and that none can repent without his especial Grace, it
were a double and a treble folly to delay thy Repentance from day to day, or to
seek it from any other but from God.

Thirdly, of Contrition.
COntrition is a fear and inward sorrow of conscience, perceiving that God is
angry with sin, and is sorry that it has sinned. And to speak more largely of
it, thou may know this; y^ Contrition also comprehends first the knowledge
of God, requiring Obedience, and discommending Disobedience; and not to remit
Sin without full and perfect satisfaction, either in respect of obedience it
self, or else in respect of punishment.

Secondly, the discussing and examining of thy Nature, thy thoughts, will,
affections, and all thy actions and deeds, according to the square and rule of
Gods Laws in every point: for as says S. Augustine, Peccatum puniendum est
aut a te, aut a Deo: si punitur a te, tunc punitur sine te: si vero a te non
punitur, tecum punietur. Sin must needs be punished, either of God, or of thy
self; if by thy self, then sin is punished without thee; if of God, then thou
and thy sin must be punished together. Therefore if thou would repent with a
true contrition, that thereby thou may reap a most plentiful harvest, thou
must sow in Gods field ye seeds of Repentance, and oftentimes water them with
the tears of thy humble Contrition: so shall thou gather the true fruits of
everlasting joy and felicity. For as ye deeper the wou^d, the more diligent the
cure: so let thy repentance bring forth as much sorrow, as sin gave thee
delight.

And as S. Ambrose says, Expectat lachrimas nostras Deus, vt profundat
Pietatem sua^: God looks for thy tears in thy Contrition, that he may power
down his grace upon thy amendment. Lauandum est cor Poenitentiae lachrimis.
Thou must wash thy heart in the troubled Poole of Bethesda, in the true tears
of Repentance, having an inward sorrow wrought by the holy Ghost, for thy
sins before committed, against so good and gracious a God; joined both with a
perfect faith to be forgiven for Christ his sake, and also from henceforth,
with a full and determinate purpose to amend and lead a new life.

Fourthly, of Examination.
BEfore thou confess thy sins unto God, thou must take heed to examine thy
self, that thereby thou may know them both in greatness and danger: for
until thou know thy sins, that thy conscience may be convicted by them, thou
can never humbly and heartily confess them.

For, let any repentant sinner ask his conscience, what was the first cause of
his conversion, and surely he will say, That when he began to repent, he did
first search himself; and finding his ways dangerous, and his cause fearful,
did thereupon resolve to take a new course. It is the beginning of all grace,
to search, try, and examine thy self. It is also a means to prevent Gods
judgment: for if thou do not search thy self, then God will search thee
with his fiery crosses and terror of his punishments.

But if thou truly examine thy self, first to be guilty of Adams sin.

Secondly, prone by Nature to all evil.

Thirdly, subject to the curse of Gods wrath.

Thus in the guiltiness of Adams sin, sin has his beginning; in the
original, his continuance; and in actual, his full perfection.

So, answerable thereunto is the wrath of God; it begins by leaving thee by
nature unto the slavery of Satan; it is continued by death, and accomplished
by damnation.

Now these three rules I leave to thy careful consideration, assuring thee
from God, thou can never be saved, unless thou repent; nor never repent,
except thou do search, try, and examine thy self.

Thus, if thou will repent truly, thou must search and look into thy self, to
see in what a miserable case thou art; as I have said before: and thou shall
find, that by nature thou art the child of wrath, out of the favor of God, not
only wretched and accursed by the Law, a bond-slaue unto Satan, but finally
subject to death, hell, and damnation.

Thus if thou would know, if thou art in the right way of repentance, or no,
thou shall find, if thou consider in thy self, whether thou had ever any
need of Gods pardon for thy sin, or of Christ his blood, to salve and cure
thy soul: Or was thy heart ever wounded or grieved for thy sin, so that thy
soul were even sick with the stink thereof?

Or did thou ever hunger and thirst after God in Christ? and with sighs,
groans and tears, beg for his mercy upon thy knees (as for life and death:)
If thou have not felt, nor done these things in some measure, surely thy case
is very fearful and dangerous; you art not yet in the way of Repentance:
therefore as yet the mercies of God belong not unto thee.

Fifthly, of Confession.
SAint Chrysostom says, that nothing pleases God more then Confession, if it
be joined with true contrition; and that it is a part of Humiliation, ever
joined with true Repentance, because they cannot be truly humble and repent,
who confess not their sins unto God: neither will he give them pardon; for God
couers when men uncover and acknowledge; he justifies when men condemn
themselves, and fly unto him for mercy. If any plead unto God, Non est factum,
and deny his deeds, and debts of sin; there is no reason why he should have
the Acquittance of Grace. Therefore, says Solomon, Prou. 28.
He that hides his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses them and
forsakes them, shall have mercy.

If thou confess them effectually, it will cause thee to weep like Mary
Magdalen; wrestle with God like Jacob; and pour forth floods of tears, like
Ezechia. Thou must confess the^ in this or such like manner. First, you must
put up an indictment against thy self, and accuse thee before God; wherein thou
must acknowledge both thy particular and unknown sins, generally without any
excuse, extenuation or defense, in hiding the least of them. An example thou
may find in David: I know my iniquity is ever before me.

Secondly, you must with grief of heart (as a Judge upon ye Bench) give sentence
against thy self, acknowledging thy unworthiness, by reason of thy sin, to
have deserved everlasting damnation; as the Prodigal child did, who said,
Father I have sinned against heaven and before thee: Or the Publican, who
standing a far off, would not so much as cast up his eyes unto heaven, but smot
his breast, crying: Lord be merciful unto me a sinner.

Thou must also accuse thy sins, thy very conscience must witness against
them, and thy heart convince them; thou must accuse them, first, as strangers
dejected; secondly, as adversaries convicted; and thirdly, as enemies professed.

In so doing, says Augustine, when thou accusest thy self by confessing thy
sins unto God, thou preuentest thereby the Devil of his purpose, so that he
cannot accuse thee at the day of Judgment. For, says he, thou blottest out
all thy sins by Repentance.

Where there is no accuser, there is no crime produced for the Judge to
condemn: For Eius quod non est, non est poena: peccatum remissum, non est;
ergo peccati remissi non est poena. That which is not, has no punishment;
forgiven sins are not; ergo forgiven sins have no punishment. And so says the
Author to the Hebrews, 10. 18. Leo says, that those sins shall never be
condemned which are purged before with confession and Repentance Neither is
Jesus Christ any longer thy Judge to condemn thee, but thy Advocate to plead
for thee, if you accuse thy self by confession.

Therefore confess thy sins unto God without any excuse or delay. For it is
another manner of thing to repent then many take it for; It is not every sob or
sigh, that brings Repentance; God is merciful, etc. And thus lightly dawbe
them over, as though Gods mercy were to be gained in a moment. Let no man
deceive himself; it will cost thee many a prayer, and many a tear in thy
confession, before thou can have pardon for thy sins.

If thou did feel the smart of sin but prick in thy wounded conscience,
you would never give God any rest; but like David, cry unto God again, and
again, until thou have found some comfortable persuasion of Gods mercy in
Christ, for the forgiveness of thy sins.

Until thou do thus, thou shall never find any quietness in thy conscience,
nor any sound comfort of Gods Spirit in thee.

David could never repent until God sent Nathan unto him; to reprove him for
his sin: but so soon as he saw his sin, and that it was not only committed
against Vriah, but also against God it presently so wounds his conscience,
killed his poor heart, and so grieved his soul, that he cried out in his
conscience; Against thee O Lord, against thee have I sinned, etc.

As if he would have said, Oh my God, it grieves me exceedingly, and wounds my
very soul, that ever I was so vile a sinner as to sin against thee, O my
most gracious and merciful God.

Therefore the only way to repent, is, from the bottom of thy heart, in thy
conscience to grieve for thy sin; especially for that it is against God, and
causes thee to break his Laws; for if thou could be sorry for thy sin,
because it is against God, more then for fear of punishment it were a good
sign that thou were in the ready way of Repentance.

Wherefore if there were no shame nor punishment, no Hell nor damnation, yet
thou ought to repent, because thou have sinned against so good and gracious
a God, who has created and redeemed thee.

Sixthly, Faith is the ground or root of Repentance.
FAith may be added unto Repentance, not as a part, but as the ground or root
thereof; for it cannot be, that the root and the fruit should be both one
thing: and without Faith there can never be any true Repentance, therefore they
are still joined together.

To clear this doubt, thou must consider three things: First, the order of
Nature; secondly, the time; thirdly, the manifestation of them both.

In order of nature, faith goes before Repentance: in manifestation of them,
repentance is first; in time, they are both joined together.

By order of nature, first a ma^s conscience must in some sort be settled,
touching his reconciliation with God in Christ, before he can truly repent.

As S. Ambrose says, No man can rightly repent, unless he hope for pardon. So
that remission of sins is believed, then upon that comes Repentance.

By manifestation Repentance goes before faith, for it is sooner descried then
faith.

Regeneration is like the sap of a tree, hid within the bark, when as
Repentance is like the bud, that speedily shows it self.

If we respect the time, neither of them are one before the other, but are
begotten both in an instant. So soon as there is fire, so soon it is hot: and
so soon as a man is regenerate, so soon he repents: for he that believes,
instantly repents. Therefore none can truly repent, except he believes that he
is Gods. And none can have belief, but he that has his grace, and faith in
him.

Furthermore, none can repent unless they hate sin; and faith causes a man to
hate sin: now none can hate sin, except he be sanctified; and none can be
sanctified, without he be justified; and this cannot be without faith; for
faith comprehends justification.

Again, the inward or isntrumental cause of Repentance, is faith, which may
be called the mother of repentance, because it brings it forth, as the Word is
the begetter; and so may have the name of a Father: for he that is without
faith is dead. No life without faith; no repentance without life: and therefore
neither ye Pharisees Prayer, the Harlots vow, the Traitors kiss, the Sacrifice
of Caine, the Fast of Iezabell, the Oblation of Ananias, nor the Tears of
Esau, could be accepted of God, because they were not truly devoted from a
lively faith.

Lastly, the efficie^t or principal working cause of faith in thy repentance,
is God, whereby, by faith every true believer receives Christ for himself, as
given for him, borne for him, dying for him, and rose again for him: for he
dyed for his sins, and rose again for his justification.

And to conclude, repentance separated from faith in Christ, is no true
Repentance.

And thus much concerning Faith.

Lastly, the time when to repent.
MAN has no time of repentance certain, no term of years but term of
life, and that is most uncertain.

Though God called Saul twice, Samuel thrice, his Spouse four times, the
Nineuites forty days, and the Jews forty years; yet he gives us no time to
repent, but to repent now.

The time of repentance is ye time present without delay, as ye holy Ghost
teaches: This day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: for
there is but one acceptable time, with being neglected, is as a Bird escaped out
of the hand, or a shaft shot out of a bow, not to be recalled. At what time
(says the Lord.) The Lord limits no time, if a man repent truly. The time of
repentance is double; First it must be done presently, without delay: Secondly,
continually, every day. It must be done speedily without delay: for who knows
whether this be the acceptable time, which if thou neglect when God calls thee
in thy youth, or in thy health, it may be he will not call thee hereafter in
thy age or sickness; and the longer thou do defer thy repentance, the
harder it will be for thee to repent. Therefore if thou have suffered the bud
of thy youth to be blasted, thy flower to fade, thy leaves to dry up, and thy
boughs to wither, yet keep life in the root, lest the whole become fuel for
hell fire.

Be not like those with begin not to live until they be ready to die, and then
after a foes desert, com to crave of God afrends enternainme^t. Nor think to
snatch up heaven in a moment, which the best can scarce attain unto in many
years: or iumpe from Dives diet to Lazarus Crown; that is, from the service
os Satan, to the solace of Saints. O Beloved, Heaven is not to be gained so
easily.

The thief indeed may be saved on the Cross, and mercy found at the last;
but late repentance is seldom or never true repentance. For if a man repent
when he can sin no more, then he leaves not sin, but sin leaves him.

Look in the whole book of God, there is but only one, and that was that good
thief, that truly repented at the hour of his death: and who knows whether
he had repented before or no, we read nothing to the contrary (yet howsoever)
Ille vt nullus desperet, solus vt nullus praesuma^, He is left unto us for an
example that no man should despair, he only that no man should presume.

Oh therefore if thou would be free from this doubt, avoid the uncertainty,
repent whilst thou art in good health, take time whilst it is offered thee, for
time and tide stays for no man. Common experience teaches us, that tempus
est pretiosum, breue, et irreuocabile, time is precious, short, and
irreuocable, which can never be redeemed: and withal consider, Qui non est
hodie, cras minus aptus erit, he that is not ready to repent to day, will be
less ready to morrow: it may be God has appointed this day to be the end of
thy life. Oh therefore always so live, that thou be ever prepared to dye:
remember the saying of Chrysostom, The wicked (says he) have this punishment,
in dying they forget themselves, because in their life time they forgate God.

And on thy deathbed (if thou should defer thy repentance until then) it
may be thou will be wearied with dolor and pain, thy thoughts may be amazed,
and thy memory decayed.

But thy guilty conscience burdened with sin, that would continually accuse
thee, and the Devil with all his cursed caitiues, will be there in a readiness
to persuade thee to despair, with their vasa furoris, their vessels of fury,
to attend and require their hire for their service, presenting before thine
eyes all those sins that they have tempted thee to do, alleging that thus
and thus they have done for thee.

O what then will thou do? What answer can thou make? Do thou think that
God whom thou never regardedst to serve, will then send his Angels to deliver
thee out of his claws? No, no. It is just and right, that thou being dead
should never want torment, that whilst thou liuedst would never want sin.

According unto Christ's own saying, Quantum in Reu. 18. 7.
delitiis fuit, tantum dato illi tormentum: Look how much they have delighted
in sin, so much torment shall be laid upon them.

If all this will not move thee to turn unto God by repentance; what will move
thee then? Would thou defer thy repentance until thy last day? Oh! who
knows whether the Lord will give thee grace and space to repent then or no?
If he would, it were an uncertain point, to hazard so great a Jewel as the
salvation of thy soul upon.

Or would thou continue in thy sins, and never repent, and yet think to
have eternal life? It is impossible. As soon thou may drive God out of
heaven: for Christ himself says; I tell you nay; Except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish. Or would thou forgo heaven, and escape hell too? It is
as much impossible.

Wherefore to conclude, I beseech thee gentle Reader, in the Name of Jesus, and
for Christ his sake, to beware that thou defer not thy repetance, lest thou
find thy heart deeply wounded, when thou shall find many sins committed
and not repented, and many of thy promises made to God, but in little or no
measure performed.

Therefore I besaech thee, shake off thy sins, banish the^, send thy darlings
packing, and never more pity them; for they seek thy very souls destruction.
If thou do defer thy Repentance until it be too late; Oh! then thou
would give a thousand worlds for one days repentance, or an hours
contrition. Record therefore a decree in thy heart, to keep all thy sins in
perpetual exile, and never admit them again in thy coasts. Now follows an
excellent mark to know the child of God which has truly repented.

He that has earnestly repented, and is truly converted from his sins, has
this special mark in him; he is none of those fruitles hearers, barren
believers, unregenerate knowers, or verbal Professors: but he is the
faithful doer of the will and Word of God.

( 1 Ioh. 2. 5
) Whosoever keeps Gods word, in him verily is the love of God perfected:
Hereby know we that we are in him: he that abides in God, ought also to
walk even as he has walked, that is, as S. John shows us, ( 1 Ioh. 3. 3.
) Every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure.

For the regenerate man desires nothing so much, as he desires God;
therefore he makes himself fit for him: ( Romans 4, 7 8.
) Blessed, ( Esaias 41. 8. Wisdom. 7. 27. Ioh. 15. 14. 15.
) the friend of God, ( Phil. 3. 8
) and do count all things but dung, that he may win Christ. Wherefore he
does ( Cor. 11. 1
) imitate the godly, ( Pro. 4. 14
) shun the wicked ( Mat. 5. 6
) embrace virtue, ( 1. Pet. 3. 9
) and fly sin.

For the Spirit of God assures no man pardon of his sins, but such as be
humbled for them, repent of ^he^, confess them to God, leave and forsake them,
and withal become a new creature, and walk in newness of life.

Those which walk in newness of life, are these which Christ calls ( Mark.
3. 35.
) his Mother, Sister and Brother, ( Romans 6. 18.
) his Servants, ( Ioh. 15. 14. 15.
) his Friends, ( Cant. 5, 1.
) his Sons, (o) and his Spouse. To conclude, those be terms of love, and that
from Christ himself, to requite the regenerate man that returns unto him by
unfeigned repentance.

Non tam audire, quam obedire, requir it Deus.

God regards more a faithful heart, than an attentive ear.

Now I have showed thee what Repentance is; how necessary it is; what benefits
it brings; and whose gift it is; and also how it is attained; and now lastly
the time when it is to be taken in hand.

Oh repent, repent therefore, that thou and I, and all the Elect children of God
may have all our sins freely forgiven us, and be with Christ Jesus our
Savior, who has so dearly bought us: to whom with the Father and the holy
Ghost, be all Honor, Power, Glory, and Dominion, both now and ever more. Amen.

FINIS.
The Book to the Reader.
If that my lines could speak with voice, Oh, then most loud still should they
cry; He that might hear them would rejoice No doubt to buy me presently.

A greater Book of price more (...) Now may thou have, yet (...) Directions
right, as I have hee^^, Repentance truly for to gain.

Each line does guide thee to rep^^^* With phrase most plain unto thine
Esteem me well, do not relent, (ears: Sweet is the fruit repentance bears.

Anagramma: Viveneranda sons.

