PRO REGE MEO PROSPERIS ET ADVERSIS


William Hopkinson.

Certain most godly, fruitful, and comfortable letters of such true Saints and
holy Martyrs of God, as in the late bloodye persecution here within this
Realm, gave their lives for the defense of Christ's holy gospel: written in
the time of their affliction and cruel imprysonment.

Though they suffer pain among men, yet is their hopeful of immortality.
Sap. 3. Jmprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath
Saint Martines. 1564.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis

For thy sake are we put to death every day, Psalm. 44.
And are counted as sheep appointed to be slain. Roma. 8.
men being burned alive

How long O Lord? Psalm. 13.
Behold, I come shortly. Apoc. 22.
Oh come Lord Jesus. Apoc. 22.
He will come, and nottary. Abac. 2.
Miles Couerdale unto the Christian Reader, most hartelye wysheth the
continual increase of heavenly taste and spiritual swetnesse, in the same
assured salvation which comes only through Jesus Christ.
THe more nigh that men's words and works approach unto ye most wholesome
sayings and fruitful doings of ye old ancient Saints and chose^ children of
god (which loved not only to hear his word, but also to live thereafter) the
more worthy are they to be esteemed, embraced, and followed. And therefore as we
hear and read of many godly, both me^ and women, whose co^uersatio^ in old
time was beautifyed with syngular gifts of ye holy ghost (according as ye
Apostle describes the^ in the.xi. chap. to ye Hebrews) so have we just cause
to rejoice, that we have been familiar and acquainted with some of those, which
walked in ye trade of their fotesteppes. For ye which cause, it does us good to
read and hear, not the lying legendes of feigned, false, counterfayted, and
popish canonized saints, neither ye triflyng toys and forged fables of
corrupted writers: but such true, holy, and approved histories, monuments,
orations, epistles and letters, as do set forth unto us ye blessed behavior of
gods dear servants. It does us good (I say) by such comfortable
remembrance, conceived by their notable writings, to be conuersaunt with
them, at the least in spirit.

S. Hierome, writing to one Nitia, and having occasion to speak of letters or
epystles, makes mention of a certain Author named Turpilius, whose words,
(says he) are these: a letter or epistle, is the thing alone yt makes men
present which are absent. For among those that are absent, what is so present,
as to hear and talk with those whom thou love? Also, that noble Clarke
Erasmus Roterodame, co^mendyng the book of the Epistles or letters which S.
Augustine did write, says thus: by some of Augustines books we may perceive,
what manner of man he was being an infant in Christ. By other some, we may know
what manner a one he was being a young man, and what he was being an old man.
But by this only book (meaning the book of the Epistles or letters) thou
shall know whole Augustyne altogether. And why does S. Hierome or Erasmus say
thus? No doubt, even because that in such writings, as in a clear glass, we
may see and behold, not only what plentiful furniture and store of heavenly
grace, wisdom, knowledge, understanding, faith, love, hope, zeal, patience,
mekenes, obedience, with the worthy fruits thereof, almighty god had bestowed
upon the same his most dear children: but also what a fatherlye care he ever
had unto them: how his mighty hand defended them: how his providence kept
watch and ward over them: how his loving eye looked unto them: how his
gracious ear heard their prayers: how he was always myndfull of them, never
forgot them, neither failed them, nor forsook them: how the arms of his mercy
were streytched out to embrace them, when soever they faythfullye turned unto
him: how valiaunte also and strong in spirit, how joyful under the cross,
how quiet and cheerful in trouble he made them: what victory of their
enemies, what deliverance out of bonds and captivity, what health from
sickness, what recouerye from plagues, what plentye from scarceness: to be
short, what help at all need and necessity he gave and bestowed upon them.

By such like mounmentes also and writings, it is manifest and plain, how the
same dear children of God in their time behaved themselves, as well toward him,
as also toward their friends and foes: yea what the very thoughts of their
hearts were, when they prayed (as their manner was incessantlye to do) when
they confessed their sins, and complained unto god: when they gave thanks:
when they were persecuted and troubled: when they were by the hand of god
visited: when they felt, not only the horror of death, the grief of sin,
and the burden of gods displeasure by reason of the same: but also the sweet
taste of his great mercy and eternal comfort through Jesus Christ, in their
conscience. Of the which things, like as we may evidently perceive rich and
plentiful experience in the heavenly treasury of that most excellent book
which we commonly call David's Psalter: so has not god now in our days, left
himself without witnesses: yea no more, then he did in other ages before us:
but of his aboundante goodness, even when the late persecution was most cruel,
and the enemies rage most extreme, he has raised up such zealous men and women
as (by the wonderful operation of his holy spirit) of weak were made so
valiant and strong in him (as well against all idolatry, superstition, false
doctrine and corrupted religion, as against their own old blemishes and sins)
that they have turned to flight, and confounded the whole rabble of such
malicious papists, as were the persecutors and murderers of them.

Whereby they that list not still to be blind, may plainlye behold and see, not
only the terrible judgments of God over and against the wicked, but also his
wonderful doings mixed wit mercy in and toward his chosen: unto whom, as unto
them that love him, he causes al things to work for the best. So that with
him, by the heavenly light of steadfast faith, they see life even in death: with
him, even in heaviness and sorrow, they fail not of joy and comfort: with him
even in poverty, affliction and trouble, they neither perish nor are forsaken.
How else could they be so patie^t, so quiet of mind, so cherefull and merye in
adversity and strait captivity: some being thrown into dungeons, vgsome
holes, dark, lothesome and stinking corners: other some lying in fetters and
chains, and loaded with so many irons that they could scarcely stir: some
tied in the stocks with their heels upward: some having their legs in the
stocks and their necks chayned to the wall with gorgets of iron: some both
hands and legs in the stocks at once: sometimes both hands in, and both
legs out: sometimes ye right hand with the left leg, or the left hand with
the right leg fastened in the stocks with manicles and fetters, having
neither stool nor stone to sit on, to ease their woeful bodies withal:
These engines are called Skeuingtons gives, the form and manner whereof you
shall see in the book of Martyrs. Fol. 1651.
some standing in most painful engines of iron with their bodies doubled: some
whypped and scourged, beaten with rods, and buffeted with fistes: some having
their hands burned with a ca^del to try their patience, or force the^ to
relente: some hunger pyned and most miserably famished. Al these torments and
many more, eue^ such as cruel Phalaris could not devise worse, If these
unmerciful monsters had the reward of their tyranny that Phalarts had, yet
should they not have so much as they have justly deserved.
were practiced by the papists, the stout sturdy soldiers of Satan, thus
delityng in variety of tyranny and torments, upon ye Saints of god, as it is
full well and too well known, and as many can testify which are yet alive, and
have felt some smart thereof. Yea and furthermore, so extremely were these
dear servants of god dealt withal, that although they were most desirous by
their pen and writing, to edify their brethren, other poor lambs of Christ,
and one to comfort an other in him, yet were they so narowly watched and
straightly kept from al necessary helps, as paper, ink, books and such like,
that great maruail it is how they could be able to write any one of these or
other so excellent and worthy letters. For so hardly were they used (as I said
before) for ye most part yt they could not end their letters begone:
Notwithstanding all this cruel dealyng, they wrote very many worthy and
fruitful letters more: whereof sundry are mentioned in this book which shall God
willing, be published hereafter, if they in whose hands they remain, will
bring them to light.
sometime for lack of ease, being so fettered with chains, and otherwise
handled as you have heard: sometime for lack of light, when they could neither
see to write well, nor to read their letters again: and sometime through ye
hasty coming in of ye kepers or officers, who left no corner nor bedstraw
unsearched: yea sometime they were put to so hard shifts, that like as for
lack of pens they were feign to write with ye lead of ye windows: so for
want of ink they took their own blood, (as yet it remains to be seen) and
yet sometime they were feign to tear and rent what they had written at the
hasty coming in of ye officers.

Thus, thus unkindly, thus churlishly, thus cruelly and unnaturally were eue^
they entreated and handled, whose most notable and godly writings are here set
forth in this book. For ye which, and such other momuments, great cause have
we to praise god: which he himself has preserved and brought to light, no
dout by his si^guler great providence, yt herby we being taught to have his
mighty mercy and merciful working ye more in reverent and tha^kful regard,
might not only consider what heavenly strength and rich possession of constant
faith, of ardent zeal, of quiet patience, of peace and joy in the holy ghost,
he uses to arm the^, yt can find in their hearts to abhor al ungodliness both
of doctrine and life: but also to join with the^ our selves in such sort, that
loking to Jesus our captain, abiding ye cross and despising ye shame, as they
did for ye joy yt was set before the^, may with much quietness of a good
conscience, end this our short course, to his glory, to ye edifyeng of his
church, to ye confusion of Satan, to ye hinderaunce of al false doctrine, and
to our own eternal comfort in the same our lord and alone Savior Jesus Christ.
To who^ with the father and ye holy ghost be all honor, al glory, al thanks
and all praise, world without end. Amen.

Faults escaped in the pryntyng.
Leaf Line Faults Corrected 3 22 I do I do know 19 1 Ridley Cranmer 19 30
Resilcat Rescilcat 20 34 proucratorum procuratorum 26 3 tanta constantia
tantaque constantia 26 8 Annunciaueri^t Annunciauerunt 26 22 pufillum pusillum
26 34 Religioni Religionis 32 15 Sat egistis Sategistis 32 25 q^ pij erant qui
pij crant 33 23 equae aeque 44 14 omium omnium 44 36 Cromerum Cromeum 44 21 per
manebit permanebit 45 6 veritati veritatis 49 16 fellows co^captiues fellows
and concaptiues 51 33 Gloria Christ Gloria Christi 53 5 before Ea. before
Easter 56 11 Commedo Commendo 70 1 have have done 72 2 Consilij Concilij 78 4
in the se. in the second 90 21 loeuers lovers 92 37 after the Christ's after
Christ's 96 30 truth it is truth is. 192 7 pupose purpose 214 20 worlynges
worldlinges 223 1 Saunders Philpot 249 28 Godtto God to 251 30 me from from me
297 15 thy vengeance gods vengeance 363 37 god gods 394 10 fair far 394 12
woulh would 427 9 loses lasts 429 9 inage Image 476 5 mine own for mine
own 591 38 wholes holes 567 1 R. Smith I. Careless

Certain godly and fruitful letters of D. Cranmer late Archbishop of
Canterbury, who first being imprisoned in the Tower of London, and afterward in
Oxford, was there cruelly burnt for the true testimony of Christ's gospel, in
the year of our Lord, 1556. the 16. day of Februarye.
Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Caunterbury to Queen Mary.
MOst lamentably mourning and moning himself unto your highness Thomas Cra^mer,
although unworthy either to write or speak unto your highness, yet having no
person that I know, to be mediator for me, and knowing your pitiful ears
ready to hear al pitiful complaints, and seeing so many before to have felt
your aboundaunt clemency in like case: He desired to be released of his offense
for consentyng unto king Edwardes will and so he was, but after was accused of
heresy, which he best liked for then he knew his cause was christ's.
am now constrained most lamentably and with most penitent and sorrowful heart,
to ask mercy and pardon for my heinous folly and offense, in consenting and
following the Testament and last will of our late sovereign Lord king Edward
the syxt your graces brother, which will god knows, God he knows I never
liked, nor never any thing grieved me so much that your graces brother did, and
if by any means it had been in me to have let the making of that will, I
would have done it, and what I said therein, as well to his counsel, as to
himself, diverse of your Majesty's counsel can report, but none so well as the
Marquis of Northha^pton, and the Lord Darcy then Lord Chamberlayne to the
kings Majesty, which two were present at the communication between the Kings
Majesty and me. I desired to talk with the kings majesty alone, but I could
not be suffered, and so I failed of my purpose, for if I might have commoned
with the king alone, and at good leisure, my trust was that I should have
altered him from that purpose, but they being present, my labor was in vain.
Then when I could not dissuade him from the said will, and both he and his
privy counsel also informed me that the Judges and his learned counsel said,
that the act of entayling the crown made by his Father, could not be
prejudicial to him, but that he being in possession of the crown, might make
his will thereof, this seemed very straung unto me, but being the sentence of the
Judges and other his learned counsel in the laws of this realm (as both he
and his Counsel informed me) me thought it became not me being unlearned in
the law, to stand against my prince therein, and so at length I was required by
the kings majesty him self to set to my hand to his will, saying yt he trusted
yt I alone would not be more repugnant to his will, tha^ the rest of the counsel
were (which words surely grieved my heart very sore) and so I granted him to
subscribe his will, and to follow the same, which when I had set my hand
unto, I did it unfeignedly and without dissimulation. For the which I submit my
self most humbly unto your majesty, acknowledging mine offense with most
grievous and sorrowful heart, and beseching your mercy and pardon, which my heart
gives me, shall not be denied unto me, being granted before to so many which
travailed not so much to dissuade both the King and his counsel as I did. And
where as it is contained in two acts of parliament (as I understand,) that I
with the Duke of Northumberland should devise and compass the deprivation of
your Majesty from your royal crown, surely it is untrue, for the Duke never
opened his mouth to me, to move me any such matter, nor I him, nor his heart
was not such toward me, seeking long time my destruction, that he would
either trust me in such a matter, or think that I would be persuaded by
him. It was other of the Counsel that moved me, and the King himself, the
Duke of Northumberla^d not being present. Neither before, neither after, had I
ever any privy communication with the duke of that matter, saving that openly
at the counsel table the duke said unto me, that it became not me to say to the
king as I did, when I went about to dissuade him from the said will.

Now, as concerning the estate of religion as it is used in this Realm of
England at this present, if it please your highness to license me, I would
gladly write my mind unto your majesty. I will never, God willing, be author
of sedition, to move subjects from the obedience of their heads and rulers,
which is an offense most detestable. If I have uttered my mind to your
Majesty, being a Christian Queen and Governor of this realm (of whom I am
most assuredly persuaded that your gracious intent is, above al other things
to prefer gods true word, his honor and glory) if I have uttered I say, my
mind unto your Majesty, then I shall think my self discharged, for it lies
not in me, but in your grace only, to see the reformation of things that be
amysse. To private subjects it appertains not to reform things, but
quietly to suffer that they cannot amend: yet nevertheless to show your
majesty my mind in things appertaining unto god, me think it my duty, knowing
that I do, and considering the place which in times past I have occupied: yet
will I not presume thereunto without your graces pleasure first known, and your
license obtained, whereof I most humbly prostrate to the ground do beseech your
Majesty, and I shall not cease daily to pray to almighty God for the good
preservation of your majesty from all enemies bodily and ghostly, and for the
increase of all goodness heavenly and earthly, during my life, as I do and will
do, whatsoever come of me.

An other letter to Queen Mary.
IT may please your Majesty to pardon my presu^ption, that I dare be so bold to
write to your highness, but very necessity constrains me, that your majesty
may know my mind rather by mine own writing, than by other men's reports. So
it is that upon Saturday being the.7. day of this month, I was cited to
appear at Rome, the.lxxx. day after, there to make answer to such matters as
should be objected against me, upon the behalf of the King and your most
excellent Majesty: which matters the Thursday followyng were objected
against me by Doctor Martin and doctor Story your majesty's Proctours, before
the bishop of Gloucester sittyng in iudgeme^nt by commission from Rome. But
alas, it can not but grieve ye heart of any natural subject, to be accused of the
king and Queen of his own Realm, The king and Queen make them selves no
better than subjects in complaning of their own subject to an outward judge,
as though they had no power to punish him.
and specially before an outward judge, or by auctority coming from any person
out of this Realm, where the king and Queen, as if they were subjects within
their own Realm, shall compain and require justice at a strangers hands
against their own subject, being already condemned to death by their own
laws: as though the king and Queen could not do or have justice within their
own Realm, against their own subjects, but they must seek it at a
strangers hands in a strange la^d, the like whereof (I think) was never seen.
I would have wished to have had some meaner adversaries, and I think that death
shall not grieve me much more, than to have my most dread and most gracious
sovereign Lord and lady (to whom under god I do owe all obedience) to be mine
accusers in judgment within their own realm before any stranger and
outward power. But forasmuch as in the time of the prince of most famous
memory King Henry the.8 your graces father, The first cause why he would not
make answer to the Popes co^missarye, is to avoid periurye. The second cause
is, for yt the popes laws ar co^trari to the crown and laws of England.
I was sworn never to consent, that the bishop of Rome should have or exercise
any authority or jurisdiction in this realm of England, therefore least I
should allow his authority contrary to mine oath, I refused to make answer to
the bishop of Gloucester sytting here in judgment by the Popes authority,
least I should run into perjury.

An other cause why I refused the Popes auctority is this, that his auctority
as he claymeth it, repugneth to the crown imperial of this realm and to the
laws of the same, which every true subject is bound to defend. First for that
the Pope says, that all manner of power, as well temporal as spyrytual, is
given first to him of God, and that the temporal power he gives unto emperors
and kings to use it under him, but so as it be always at his commandment
and beck. But contrary to this claim, the emperial crown and jurisdiction
temporal of this realm, is taken immediately from God to be used under him
only, and is subject unto none but to God alone.

Moreover themperial laws and customs of this realm the king in his
Coronatio^, The oath of the king and Justices, and the duty of subjects.
and al Justices when they receive their offices, be sworn, and all the whole
realm is bound to defend and maintayn. But contrary hereunto the Pope by his
authority makes void and commands to blot out of our books, all laws and
customs being repugnant to his laws, and declares accursed all rulers and
governors, all the makers, writers, and executors of such laws or customs,
as it appears by many of the Popes laws, whereof one or two I shall rehearse.
In the decrees, distin.x. is written thus: Co^stitutione contra canones and
decreta praesulu^ Romanorum vel bonos mores nullius sunt momenti. That is, The
constitutions or statutes enacted against the Canons and decrees of the bishops
of Rome or their good customs are of none effect. Also, Extra de sententia
excommunicationis, nouerit. Excommunicamus omnes haereticos vtriusque sexus
quocu^que nomine censeantur, and fautores, and receptatores, and defensores
eorum: nec non and qui de caetero seruari fecerint statuta edita and
consuetudines, contra ecclesiae libertatem, nisi ea de capitularibus suis intra
duos menses post huiusmodi publicationem sententiae fecerint amoueri. Item
excommunicamus statutarios, and scriptores statutorum ipsorum, nec non
potestates, consules, rectores, and consiliarios locorum, vbi de caetero
huiusmodi statuta and consuetudines editae fuerint vel seruatae, nec non and
illos qui secundu^ ea praesumpserint iudicare, vel in publicam forma^ scribere
iudicata. That is to say we excommunicate al heretics of both sexes, what name
soever they be called by, and their favorers and receptours and defendours,
and also them that shall hereafter cause to be observed, statutes and customs
made against the liberty of the church, except they cause the same to be put
out of their books or records within two months after ye publication of this
sentence. Also we excommunicate the statute makers and writers of those
statutes, and also the potestates consuls, governors and counsailours of
places where such statutes and customs shall be made or kept, and also
those that shall presume to give judgment according to them or put in to
publyke form of writing the matters so judged. Now by these laws, if the
bishop of Romes authority which he claims by God, be lawful, al your graces
laws and customs of your Realm, being contrary to the popes laws be
naught, and as well your majesty as your judges, justices and all other
executours of the same, stand accursed among heretics, which God forbid. And
yet this curse can never be anoyded (if the Pope have such power as he
claims) until such times as the laws and customs of this realm, The Popes
laws and the laws of England are contrary.
being contrary to his laws, be taken away and blotted out of the law books.
And although there be many laws of this Realm contrary to the laws of Rome,
yet I named but a few: as to convict a clarke before any temporal judge of
this Realm, for debte, felony, murder or for any other crime, which clarks by
the Pops laws be so exempte from the kings laws, that they can be no where
sued but before their Ordinary. Also the pope by his laws may give al
bishoprikes and benefices spiritual, which by the laws of this realm, can be
given but only by the kings and other patrones of the same, except they fall
into ye lapse. By ye popes laws ius patronatus shall be sued only before ye
ecclesiastical judge: but by the laws of this realm, it shall be sued before
the temporal Judge, and to be short the laws of this Realm do agree with the
Popes laws like fire and water. And yet the kings of this Realm have provided
for their laws, by the praemunire: so that if any man have let the excecution
of the laws of this Realm by any authority from the sea of Rome, he falls
into the praemunire. But to mete with this, the popes have provided for their
laws by cursinge. For who so ever lets the Popes laws to have full course
within this realm, by the Popes power stands accursed: So that the Popes
power treads all the laws and customs of this Realm under his fete,
cursing all that execute them, until such time as they give place unto his
laws. But it may be said, that notwithstanding all the popes decrees, yet we
do execute still the laws and customs of this Realm. Nay not all quietlye
without interuption of the pope. And where we do execute them, yet we do it
unjustly, if the popes power be of force, and for the same we stand
excommunicate, and shall do, until we leave the execution of our own laws and
customs. Thu^ ^o ^e be well reconciled to Rome, allowing such authority. (...)
^hy the Realm stands accursed before God, if the p^ (...) ^ue any such
authority.

These things (...) ^uppose) were not fully opened in the parliament house,
when the popes authority was received again within this Realm, for if they
had. I do not believe that either the king or Queen's majesty or the nobles of
this Realm, or the commons of the same would ever have consented to receive
again such a foreign autoritye, so injurious, hurtefull and prejudicial,
as well to the crown, as to the laws and customs, and state of this realm,
as whereby they must needs acknowledge themselves to be accursed. But none
could open this matter well but the clergy, and that such of them as had red the
popes laws, whereby the pope has made himself as it were, a God. These seek
to maintain the pope, whom they desired to have their chief head, to the
intent they might have, as it were, a kingdom and laws within themselves,
distinct from the laws of the crown, and wherwyth the crown may not meddle,
and so being exempted from the laws of the crown might live in this realm
like Lords and kings, without damage or fear of any man, The papists to set
up a kingdom of their own, disse^ble the known truth and are false to the
crown.
so that they please their high and supreme head at Rome. For this
consyderation, I ween, some that knew the truth, held their peace at the
Parliamente, where as, if they had done their duetyes to the crown and whole
realm, they should have opened their mouths, declared the truth, and showed
ye perils and dangers that might ensue to the crown and realm. And if I
should agree to allow such autoritye within this realm, whereby I must needs
confess that your most gracious, hyghenes and also your Realm should ever
continue accursed until you shall cease from the execution of your own Laws
and customs of your realm: I could not thyncke my self true, either to
your highness, or to this my natural country, knowing that I do know.
Ignorance, I know may excuse other men, but he that knows how prejudicial
and injurious the power and autoritye which he chalengeth every where, is to
the crown, laws and customs of this realm, and yet will allow the same, I
cannot se in any wise how he can keep his due allegeaunce, fydelity and truth
to the crown and state of this realm.

An other cause I alleged, The third cause why he could not allow the Pope.
why I could not allow the autoritye of the pope, which is this, That by his
authority he subuerteth not only the law (...) realm, but also the laws of
God, The popes religion is against Christ's religion.
so that whosoever be under his authority, he suffers them not to be under
Christ's religion purely, as Christ did command. And for one example I
brought forth, that whereas by Gods laws al christian people be bounde^
diligently to learn his word, that they may know how to believe and live
accordingly, for that purpose he ordained holy days when they ought, leauyng
apart all other business, Why latin service ought not to be restored in
England.
to give themselves wholly to know and serve God. Therefore Gods will and
commandment is, that when the people be gathered together, the ministers
should use such language as the people may understand, and take profit thereby,
or else hold their peace. For as an harp or lute, if it give no certain sound
that men may know what is stricken, who can dance after it, for all the sound
is in vain? so is it vain and profits nothing, says almighty god, by the
mouth of S. Paul, if the priest speak to the people in a language which they
know not, for else he may profit himself, but profits not the people says
S. Paul. But herein I was answered thus, that S. Paul spoke only of preaching,
that the preacher should speak in a tongue which the people did know, or else
his preaching avails nothing. But if the preaching avails nothing, being
spoken in a language, which the people understand not, how should any other
service avail them, being spoken in the same language? And that yet S. Paul
meant not only of preaching, it appears plainly by his own words, for he
speaks by name expressly of praying, singyng, laudyng, and thankyng of God
and of al other things which the Priests say in the churches, whereunto the
people say Amen, which they used not in preaching, but in other divine
service: that whether the Priests rehearse the wonderful works of god, or
the great benefits of god unto mankind above all other creatures, or give
thanks unto god, or make open profession of their faith, or humble confession
of their sins, with earnest request of mercy and forgeuenes, or make suit or
request unto god for any thing: then all the people understanding what the
Priests say, might join their minds and voices with them and say Amen, that
is to say, allow what the Priests say, that the rehersall of Gods
universal works and benefits, the geuyng of thanks, the profession of
faith, the confession of sins, and the requests and petitions of the
Priests and the people, might ascend up into the ears of god altogether, and
be as a sweet savor, odor, and incense in his nose: and thus was it used many
hundred yerrs after Christ's ascension. But the aforesaid things cannot be
done, when the priests speak to the people in a language not known, and so
they or their clarke in their name say, Amen, but they cannot tell whereunto:
where as saint Paul says, how can the people say Amen to thy well saying,
when they understand not what thou say? And thus was S. Paul understood
of all interpretours, both the Greeks and Latins, old and new, scholeautors
and others, that I have read, until about xxx. years past, at which time one
Eckius with other of his sort began to deuyse a new exposition, understanding
S. Paul of preaching only. But when a good number of the best learned men
reputed within this realm, some fauouryng the old some the new learning, as
they term it (where in deed that which they call the old, is the new and that
which they call the new, is in deed the old) but when a great number of such
learned men of both sorts were gathered together at wynsor for the reformation
of the service of the Church: It was agreed by both without controversy,
(not one saying contrary) that the Service of the Church ought to be in the
mother tongue and that Saint Paul in the.14. chapter to the Corynthians was
so to be understood. And so is saint Paul to be understood in the civil
law more then a thousand years past, where Instinianus amoste godly Emperor,
in a synod writes on this manner. Iubemus vt omnes episcopi pariter and
praesbyteri non tacito modo, sed clara voce quae a fideli populo exaudia^tur,
sacram oblationem and preces in sacro baptismate adhibitas celebre^t, quo
maiori exinde deuotione in depromendis Domini Dei laudibus audientium animi
efferantur. Ita enim and Diuus Paulus docet in epistola ad Corinth. Si
solummodo benedicat spiritus, quomodo is qui priuati locum tenet, dicet ad
gratiarum actionem tuam, Amen, quandoquidem quid dicas non videt? Tu quidem
pulchre gratias agis, alter autem non aedificatur. That is to say: we command,
that all bishops and Priests celebrate the holy oblation and prayers used in
holy baptism, not after a still and close manner, but with a clear loud voice,
that they may be plainly heard of the faithful people, so as ye hearers minds
may be lifted up thereby with the greater devotion, in vtteryng the praises of
the Lord God. For so Paul teaches also in the epistle to the Corinthians: 1,
Cor. 14.
If the spirit do only bless or say well, how shall he that occupies the
place of a private person, say Amen to thy thanks geuyng, for he perceives
not what thou say? Thou do give thanks well, but the other is not
edified. And not only the civil law, and al other writers a thousand and
five hundredth years continually together, have expounded S. Paul not of
preaching only, but of other Service said in the church: but reason also
gives the same, that if men be commanded to hear any thing, it must be
spoken in a language which the hearers understand, or else as S. Paul says
what avails it to bear? So that the Pope geuyng a contrary commandment,
The Pope commands ^oth against God and natural reason. The sacrament ought
to be received in both kinds of all christians.
that the people coming to the church shall hear they wot not what, and
answer they know not whereto, takes upon him to command not only against
reason: but also directly against god. And again I said, whereas our savior
Christ ordained the Sacrament of his most precious body and blood, to be
received of all christian people under the forms both of bread and wine, and
said of the cup, drink ye all of this: the Pope gives a clean contrary
commandment, that no lay man shall drink of the cup of their salvation: as
though the cup of Salvation by the blood of Christ, pertained not to lay
men. And whereas Theophilus Alexandrinus, (whose works Saint Hierom did
translate about eleauen hundred years passed) says that if Christ had been
crucified for the Devils, his cup should not be denied them: yet the Pope
denies the cup of Christ to christen people, for whom Christ was crucified:
so that if I should obey the Pope, in these things I must needs disobey my
savior Christ. But I was answered hereto (as commonly the papists do answer,)
that under the form of bread, is whole christ's flesh and blood, so that
whosoever receaueth the form, of bread receives as well christ's blood as his
flesh. Let it be so: yet in the form of bread only, Christ's blood is not
dronken but eaten, nor received in the cup under form of wine as Christ
commanded, but eaten with the flesh under the form of bread, and moreover
the bread is not the sacrament of his blood, but of his flesh only, nor the
cup is not the sacrament of his flesh, but of his blood only and so the Pope
keeps from al lay persons the Sacrament of their redemption by Christ's blood,
which Christ commanded to give unto them. And furthermore Christ ordained the
sacrament in two kinds, the one separated from the other, to be a
representation of his death, where his blood was separated from his flesh,
which is not represented in one kind alone: so that the lay people receive
not the whole sacrament, whereby Christ's death is represented as he commanded.
Moreover as the Pope takes upon him to give the temporal sword or royal and
imperial power to kings and princes: so does he likewise take upon him to
depose them from their imperial states, if they be disobedient to him, and
commands the subjects to disobey their princes, assoyling the subjects
as well of their obedience, as of their lawful oaths made unto their true kings
and Princes directly contrary to gods commaundeniente, who commands all
subjects to obey their kings or other rulers under them. One John Patriarche
of Constantinople in the time of S. Gregory, claimed superiority above all
other bishops, to whom saint Gregorye writes, that therein he did injury to
his iij. brethren which were equal with him, that is to say, the bishop of
Rome, of Alexandria, and of Antiochia, which iij. were patriarchal seas, as well
as Constantinople, and were brethren one to an other. But says Saint
Gregorye, if any one shall exalte him self above all the rest to be the
universal bishop, the same passes in pride: but now the bishop of Rome
exalts himself not only above all bishops, but also above all kings and
Emperors, and above the whole world taking upon him to give and take away, to
set up and put down, as he shall think good. And as the devil having no such
authority, The deuil^ and the Pope are like.
yet took upon him to give unto Christ all the kingdoms of the world, if he
would fall down and worship him: in like manner the Pope takes upon him to
give Empyres and kingdoms being none of his, to such as will fall down and
worship him and kiss his feet. And moreover his lawyers and glosers so
flatter him, that they say he may command Emperors and kings to hold his
stirroppe when he lights upon his horse and to be his footmen, and that if
any Emperor or king give him any thing, they give him nothing but that is his
own, and that he may dispense against Gods word, against the old and new
Testament, against S. Paul's epistles and against the Gospel. And furthermore
whatsoever he does, although he draw innumerable people by heaps with himself
into hell: yet may no mortal man reprove him, because he being judge of al men,
may be judged of no man, and thus he sytteth in the temple of god, The Pope is
Antichrist that is Christ's enemy Wherefore the Pope is Antichrist.
as he were a god and names him self Gods Vicar, and yet he dispenses against
God. If this be not to play Antichrists part, I cannot tell what is Antichrist,
which is no more to say but Christ's enemy and adversary, who shall sit in the
temple of God, aduauncyng himself above all other, yet by hipocrisy and feigned
religion shall subvert the true religion of Christ, and under pretense and
color of Christian religion, shall work against Christ and therefore has the
name of Antichrist. Now if any man lift himself higher then the Pope has
done, who lifts him self above all the world, or can be more adversary to
Christ the^ to dispense against Gods laws, and where Christ has given any
commandment, to command dyrectly ye contrary ye man must needs be taken for
Antichrist. But until ye time that such a person may be found, men may easly
conjecture where to find Antichrist. Wherefore seeing the Pope thus, to overthrow
both gods laws and man's laws, takes upon him to make Emperors and kings to
be vassals and Subjects unto him, specially the crown of this realm, with the
laws and customs of the same, I see no mean how I may consent to admit this
usurped power within this realm, contrary to mine oath, mine obedience to gods
law, mine allegeaunce and duty to your majesty, and my love and affection, to
this realm. This that I have spoken against the power and authority of the
Pope, I have not spoken, (I take God to record and judge) for any malice I owe
to the Popes person, whom I know not, but I shall pray to god to give him grace,
that he may seek above al things to promote gods honor and glory, and not to
follow the trade of his predecessors in these latter days, nor I have not
spoken it for fear of punishment and to avoid the same, thynkyng it rather an
occasion to aggrauate, then to diminish my trouble: but I have spoken it for my
most bounden duty to the crown, liberties, laws, and customs of this realm,
but most especially to discharge my conscience in vtteryng the truth to gods
glory, castyng away all fear, Luke. 12
by the comfort which I have in Christ's words, who says: Fear not them
that kill the body and cannot kill the Soul, but fear him that can cast both
body and soul into hell. He that for fear to lose this life will forsake the
truth, shall lose the everlasting life: and he that for the truths sake will
spend his life, shall find everlasting life. And Christ promises to stand
fast with them before his father which will stand fast with him here: Mathe. x.
which comfort is so great, that whosoever has his eyes fixed upon Christ,
cannot greatly pass of this life, knowing that he may be sure to have Christ
stand by him in the presence of his father in heaven.

As touching the Sacrament, I said that forasmuch as the whole matter stands
in the understanding of these words of Christ: This is my body, This is my
blood, I say that Christ in these words made demonstration of the bread and
wine, and spoke figuratively, The sacraments have the names of those things
whereof they are sacraments.
calling bread his body and wine his blood, because he ordained them to be the
sacraments of his body and blood. And where the Papists say in these two
points contrary unto me, that Christ called not bread his body, but a
substance uncertain, nor spoke fyguratiuely, herein I said I would be
judged by the old church, and which doctrine could be proved the elder, that I
would stand unto. And forasmuch as I have alleged in my book many old autors
both Greeks and Latynes, which about a thousand years after Christ continually
taught as I do, if they could bring forth but one old author that says in
these two points as they say, I offered vi. or vij. years ago, and do offer
yet still, that I will give place to them. But when I bring for the any author
that says in most plain terms as I do, yet says the other part, that
the authors mente not so: as who should say, that the authors spoke one thing
and mente clean contrary. And upon the other part, when they cannot find
any one author that says in words as they say, yet say they that the
authors me^t as they say. Now whether they or I speak more to the purpose
herein, I refer it to the judgment of all indifferent hearers. Yea the old
church of Rome about a thousand years together, nether believed nor used the
Sacrament as the church of Rome has done of late years. For in the beginning
the church of Rome taught a pure and a sound doctrine of the sacrament, but
after that the church of Rome fell into a new doctrine of tra^substantiatio^
and with the doctrine they changed the use of the sacrament, contrary to yt
Christ commanded, and the old church of Rome used above a M. years. And yet
to deface the old they say that ye new is the old: wherein for my part I am
content to the trial to stand, But their doctrine is so fond and
uncomfortable, that I marvel that any man would allow it, if he knew what
it is, and what so ever they bear the people in hand, The Papists make Christ
two bodies.
that which they write in their books has another truth nor comfort. For by
their doctrine, of one body of Christ is made two bodies: one natural having
distance of members with form and proporcion of a man's perfect body, and
this body is in Heaven, but the body of Christ in the Sacrament by their
own doctrine, must needs be a monstrous body, having neither distance of
members nor form, fashion or proporcion of a man's natural body, and such a
body is in the sacrament (teach they) and goes into the mouth with the form
of bread, and enters no farther than the form of bread goes, nor tarieth no
longer tha^ the form of bread is by natural heat in digesting, so that when
the form of bread is digested, that body of Christ is gone. And forasmuch
as evil men be as long in digesting as good me^, the body of Christ (by their
doctrine) enters as far, and tarieth as long in wicked as in godly me^. And
what comfort ca^ be herein to any Christian man, to receive Christ's vnshape^
body, and it to enter no father than the stomach, and to depart by and by, as soon as the bread is consumed? It seems to me a more sound and comfortable
doctrine, that Christ has but one body, and that has form and fashion of a
man's true body, which body spiritually enters into ye whole man body and
soul, and though the sacrament be consumed, yet whole Christ remains and
fedeth the receauer unto eternal life, if he continue in godliness and never
depart, until the receauer forsake him. And as for the wicked, they have not
Christ within the^ at al, who ca^ not be where Belial is. And this is my faith,
and as me seems a sound doctrine according to Gods word, and sufficient for a
Christian to believe in that matter. And if it can be showed unto me, that the
popes authority is not prejudicial to the things before mentioned, or that my
doctrine in the sacrament is erroneous (which I think can not be showed) then
I was never nor will be so perverse, to stand wilfully in mine own opinion, but
I shall (with al humility) submit my self unto the Pope not only to kiss his
feet, but an other part also.

An other cause why I refused to take the B. of Gloucestre for my judge, was
the respect of his own person, being more than once perjured First, for that
he being diverse times sworn, never to consent that the B. of Rome should
have any jurisdiction with in this realm, but to take the king and his
successors for supreme heads of this realm, as by gods laws they be:
contrary to this lawful oath the said B. sat then in judgment by authority from
Rome, wherein he was perjured, and not worthy to sit as a judge.

The second perjury was, yt he took his bishoprike both of the Queens Majesty
and of the Pope, making to each of the^ a solemn oath, which oaths be so
contrary, that in the one he must needs be perjured. And furthermore in swering
to the Pope to maintain his laws, decrees, a constitutions, ordinances
reseruations, and provisions, he declares him self an enemy to the Imperial
crown and to the Laws and state of this Realm, whereby he declared himself
not worthy to sit as a judge within this Realm, and for these considerations I
refused to take him for my Judge.

This was written in an other letter to the Queen.
J Learned by D. Martin, that at the day of your majesty's coronacion, you took
an oath of obedience to the pope of Rome, and the same time you took an other
oath to this realm to maintain the laws, liberties and customs of the same
And if your Majesty did make an oath to the pope, I think it was acording to the
other oaths, which he uses to minister to princes, which is to be obedient to
him, to defend his person, to mayntayn his authority, honor, laws lands and
privileges. And if it be so, than I beseech your majesty to look upon your
oath made to the Crown and the realm, and to expende and way the two oaths
together, to see how they agree, and then to do as your graces conscience shall
give you, for I am surely persuaded that willingly your majesty will not
offend nor do against, your conscience for nothing. But I fear me there be
contradiction in your oaths and that those which should have informed your
grace thoroughly, did not their duties therein. And if your majesty ponder the
two oaths diligently, I think you shall perceive that you were deceived, and
then your hyghnes may use the matter as god shall put in your heart. Furthermore
I am kept here from company of learned me^, from books, from council, from
pen and yncke, saving at this time to write to your Majesty, which all were
necessary for a man in my case. Wherefore I beseech your majesty that I may have
such of these as may stand with your majesty's pleasure. And as for mine
appearaunce at Rome, if your Majesty will give me leave I will appear there,
and I trust that god shall put in my mouth to defend his truth there, as well as
here, but I refer it wholly to your Majesty's pleasure.

Your poor orator. T. C.

To the Lords of the Counsel.
IN most humble wise sueth unto your right honorable Lordships, Thomas Cranmer
late Archbishop of Canterbury, beseching the same to be a means for me unto
the queen's hyghnes for her mercy and pardon. Some of you know by what means I
was brought and trained unto the will of our late sovereign lord king Edward
the vi. and what I spoke against the same: wherein I refer me to the reports of
your honors. Furthermore this is to sygnifye unto your lordships that upon
Mu^day, Tuesday, and Wednisday last past, were open disputations here in Oxford
against me, They put to him three questions but they suffered him not to answer
fully in one
master Ridley, and M. Latymer, in three matters concerning the Sacrament.
First of the real presence, secondly of transubstantiation, and thyrdly
concerning the sacrifice of the mass. How the other two were used I cannot
tell, for we were separated, so that none of us knew what the other said nor
how they were ordered. But as concerning my self I can report, that I never
knew nor heard of a more co^fused disputation in all my life. For albeit there
was one appointed to dispute against me, yet every man spoke his mind and
brought forth what him lyked with out order, and such have was made, that no
answer could be suffered to be given fully to any argument, and in such
weighty and large matters there was no remedy, but the disputations must needs
be ended in one day, which can scantlye well be ended in three months. And
when we had answered them, then they would not appoint us one day to bring
forth our profes that they might answer us again, being required of me
thereunto, whereas I my self have more to say then can be well discussed
in.xx. days. The means to resolve the truth, had been to have suffered us to
answer fully to all that they could say, and then they again to answer to
all that we could say. But why they would not answer us, what other cause
can there be, but that either they feared yt matter that they were not able to
answer us, or else (as by their have might well appear) they came, not to
speak the truth, Behold Satan slepeth not. Their cruel desire to revenge
cold abide no delay.
but to condemn us in post have before the truth might be thoroughly tried and
heard, for in all have we were al three condemned of heresy upon friday. This
much I thought good to signify unto your Lordships, that you may know the
indifferent ha^dling of matters, leaving the judgment thereof unto your
wisdoms, and I beseech your Lordships to remember me a poor prisoner unto the
Queen's majesty, and I shall pray, as I do daily, to god for the long
preservation of your good Lordships in all godliness and felicity.

A letter wherein he reproves and condemns the false and sclaunderous
reports of the papists which said that he had set, up mass again at
Canterburye.
AS the Deuel Christ's ancient adversary ^s a liar and the father of lyinge:
Even so has he sturred up his servants and members to persecute Christ and
his true word and Religion with lyinge, which he ceasseth not to do most
earnestly at this present. For whereas the prince of famous memory king Henry
the viij. seeing the great abuses of ye latin mass, reformed some thing therein
in his time, and also our late soueraign lord king Edward the vi. took the
same whole away for ye manifold errors and abuses thereof, and restored in the
place thereof Christ's holy supper according to christ's own institution and as
the apostles in the primative church used the same: the devil goes about by
lying to overthrow the lords holy supper and to restore his latin satisfactory
mass, a thing of his own inue^tio^ and devise: and to bring the same more
easily to pass, some have abused the name of me Thomas Archb. of Canterbury,
bruting abroad yt I have set up the mass at Canterb. and that I offered to say
mass at ye burial of our late sovereign prince king Edward the.6. and also
that I offered to say mass before ye Queen's highness and at Paul's church, and I
wot not where. And although I have been well exercised these xx. years to
suffer and bear evil reports and lies, and have been much grieved thereat,
but have borne al things quietly: yet when un true reports and lies turn to
the hindera^ce of gods truth, they be in no wise to be suffered. Wherefore these
be to signify unto the world, yt it was a false, flattering, lying and
disse^bling monk which caused mass to be set up there without, This was D.
Thornton, afterward a cruel murderer of gods saints: of whose horrible end,
read in the book of martirs. Fol. 1706.
mine advise or counsel, Reddat illi dominus in die illo. And as for offering my
self to say mass before ye queen's highness, or in any other place, I never did
it, as her grace well knows. But if her grace give me leave I shall be ready to
prove against all that will say the contrary, yt all that is said in the holy
communion set out by ye most Innocent and godly prince king Edward the vi. in
his high court of parliament, is conformable to ye order which our sovereign
Christ did both observe and commanded to be observed, and which his apostles
and primative church used many years: where as the mass in many things not
only has no fou^datio^ of Christ, his apostels nor the primative church, but
is manifestly contrary to the same, and contains many horrible abuses in it.
And although many unlearned and malicious do report ye master Peter Mattyr is
unlearned, yet if the Queen's highness will grant thereunto, I with the said
master Peter Martyr, and other iiij. or v. which I shall chose, will (by gods
grace) take upon us, to defend not only ye common prayers of the church, ye
ministration of the sacraments and other rites and ceremonies, but also al ye
doctrine and religion set out by our sovereign lord king Edward the 6. to be
more pure and according to gods word than any other yt has been used in
England this M, years: so that gods word may be the judge, and that the reasons
and profes upon both parties may be set out in writing, to the intent as well
that all the world may examine and judge thereon as that no man shall start back
from his writing. And where they bost of the faith that has been in the church
this M. and v. hundredth years, we will join with them in this point, and that
the doctrine and usage is to be followed which was in the church a M. and
five hundredth years past: and we shall prove that the order of the church set
out at this present in this realm by act of Parleame^t, is the same yt was
used in ye church.1500. years past, and so shall they be never able to prove
theyrs.

An epistle to a certain lawyer for his advise and counsel touching his appeal.
NAturae lex hoc ab omnibus postulat, vt quatenus citra didiuini numinis
iniuriam fieri potest, quisque vitam tueatur suam. Quod cum tribus abhi
nodiebus mihi in mentem venisset, simulque memoriae occurisset appellatio
Martini Lutheri, a Leone decimo ad conciliu^ generale: co^stitui and ipse
co^cilium generale legittimu^ and liberu^ appellare, ne temere and inco^sulto
vita^ prodere^ mea^. Veru^ cu^ appellationis materia ad legisperitos spectet,
cuius ego ignarus su^, cu^que Lutheri appellatio ad manu^ mihi no^ sit: de
creui amico alicui fido and Iurisperito, co^ciliu^ meu^ hac in re pandere,
cuius opera in hoc negotio vterer: ac tu quidem vnus occurristi, qui mihi in
hac Academia visus es ad hoc muuns idoneus. Sed summam haec res taciturnitatem
postulat, vt antequa^ res fiat, nemo refiscat. Dies mihi dictus est vt
respondea^ Rhomae 16. huius mensis, ante quem mihi prouocandu^ esse puto, ac
post sente^tia^ appella^dum. Sed an mihi primum prouocandum, and appella^du^sit
a iudice delegato ad ipsu^ po^tifice^, ac deinde ad co^ciliu^ generale, an
omisso pontifice ad concilium primum appellandu^ sit, co^cilio mihi opus est
tuo. Porro appellationis causae mihi multae sunt. Primo quod iuramento
astrictus sim, nunquam me co^sensurum in authoritatem Romani Pontificis. Deinde
cum ego respondere omnino renuerem, ad articulos mihi obiectos ab Episcopo
Glocestrensi iudice delegato, responderam tame^ doctori Martino and Storeo cum
hac protestatione quod respo^sio mea non datur iudici neque in iudicio, sed
extraiudicialis esset, and post responsum datum petebam responsionis meae
copiam, vt eandem mihi emendare liceret, vel addendo, vel mutando, vel
subtrahendo. Quanqua^ haec m^hi promissa sunt, and a Glocestrensi and a
procuratoribus regis and Reginae, omnino tame^ fefellerunt fidem, non dantes
emendandae responsionis meae copiam, and nihilomiuns (vt audio) inter acta
iudicialia adscripserunt. Postremo, cum causa defectionis a Romano ponttifice
and a papistica religone in ius vocor, vt iam mibilis sit aduersus po^tificem
Romanum, and nemo aequus iudex sit in causa propria: aequum mihi videtur vt
co^ciliu^ appelle^, praesertim cu^ ius naturae (vt aiu^t) appellationis
remedium nemini negandu^ ce^seat. Iam cum ad hanc rem maxima taciturnitate opus
sit, si forsan ob rerum imperitia^ alioru^ consiliis tibi opus sit, obtestor
tum te per christianam fidem ac charitatem, vt cuius causa sit nemini
significes. Et cum iam instet tempus, and mature opus sit facto, hoc me sinas
ate impetrare, vt sepositis aliis studiis atque negotiis, huic vni incumbas
quousque perfeceris. Potissima sane appellationis meae causa est, vt (si ita
deus voluerit) donetur eousque viuendi tempus, quousque caeptum contra Marcum
Antonium Constantium responsu^ absoluero. Quod si veritatis hosts meae
appellationi defer nolint, (quod existmo) fiat voluntas dei, susque de que
fero, modo glorificetur Deus, sieve per vitam, sieve per mortem: melius est enim
multo mori pro Christo and cum illo regnare, quam in hoc carnis ergastulo
concludi, nisi in fratrum vtilitatem ad maiore^ Dei gloriam propagandam, liceat
aliquamdiu militare, Cui sit omnis gloria in aenu^, Ame^. Est and alia
appellationis causa, quod cum Roman vocatus sim illic dictutus causam, interim
carcere de tineor vt comparere mihi ad dictum diem non liceat. Cum autem de
statu and vita mea agitur and pro defensione mea Iurisperitorum consilio mihi
opus esset, quum id peterem, negatum est omne aduocatorum, proueratorum and
iurisconsultorum co^silium and auxilium. Vale.

The same in english

THe law of nature requires of al men, that so farforth as it may be done
without offense to god, every one should seek to defend and preserve his own
life. Which thing, when I about three days ago bethought my self of, and
therewithal remembered how that Martyn Luther appealed in his time from Pope
Leo the tenth to a general counsel (least I should seem rashlye and
unadvisedly to cast away my self) I determined to appeal in like sort to some
lawful and free general counsel. But seeing the order and form of an appeal
perteyneth to the lawyers, whereof I my self am ignorant, and seeing that Luthers
appeal comes not to my hand: I purposed to break my mind in this matter to
some faithful fre^d and skilful in the law, whose help I might use in this
behalf, and you only among other came to my remembrance as a man most meet
in this university for that purpose. But this is a matter that requires great
silence, so that no man know of it before it be done. It is so that I am
su^moned to make mine answer at Rome, the.xvi. day of this month, before the
which day I think it good after sentence pronounced to make mine appeal. But
whether I should first appeal from the judge delegate to the Pope, and so
afterward to the general counsel, or else leauyng the Pope, I should
appeal immediately to the counsel: herein I stand in need of your counsel.
Many causes there be for the which I think good to appeal. First because I
am by an oath bound never to consent to the receiving of the bishop of Romes
authority into this realm. Besides this, where as I utterly refused to make
answer to the articles objected unto me by the bishop of Gloucester appointed
by the Pope to be my judge, yet I was content to answer Martyn and Story,
with this protestation, that mine answer should not be taken as made before a
judge, nor yet in place of judgment, but as pertaining nothing to judgment at
al: and moreover after I had made mine answer I required to have a copy of
the same, that I might, either by addyng thereunto, by alteryng or taking from
it, correct and amend it, as I thought good. The which though both the bishop
of Gloucester and also the king and Queen's proctors promised me yet have they
altogether broken promise with me, and have not permitted me to correct my
said aunsweres according to my request, and yet notwithstanding have (as I
understand) regestred the same as acts formally done in place of judgment.
Finallye forasmuch as all this my trouble comes upon my departinge from the
bishop of Rome and from the popish religion, so that now the quarrel is
betwixt the Pope himself and me, and no man can be a lawful and indifferente
judge in his own cause: it seems (me think) good reason that I should be
suffered to appeal to some general counsel in this matter: specially saying
the law of nature (as they say) denies no man, the remedy of appeal in
such cases. Now, since it is very requisite that this matter should be kept
as close as maye^ be, if perhaps for lack of perfect skill herein you shall
have need of further advise: then I beseech you even for the fidelity and love
you bear to me in Christ, that you will open to no creature alive whose the
case is. And forasmuch as the time is now at hand, and the matter requires
great expeditio^, let me obtain this much of you, I beseech you, that layng a
side all other your studies and business for the time, you will apply this my
matter only till you have brought it to pass. The chiefeste cause in very
deed (to tell you the truth) of this mine appeal is, that I might gain time
(if it shall so please God) to live until I have finished mine answer
against Marcus Antonius Constantius which I have now in hand. This Constantius
was Steven Gardener as constant in deed as a wether cock, who thus named him
self writing against this good father
But if the adversaries of the truth will not admyt mine appeal (as I fear
they will not) Gods will be done: I pass not upon it so that God may therein be
glorified, be it by my life or by my death. For it is much better for me to
dye in Christ's quarrel and to reign with him, then here to be shut up and
kept in the prison of this body, unless it were to continue yet still a while
in this warrefare for the commodity and profit of my Brethren and to the
further aduauncyng of Gods glory, to whom be all glory for evermore, Amen.
There is also yet an other cause why I think good to appeal, that where as I
am cited to go to Rome to answer there for my self, I am notwythstandyng
kept her fast in prison that I cannot there appear at the time appointed.
And moreouerforasmuch as the state I stand in is a matter of life and death,
so that I have great need of learned counsel for my defense in this behalf:
yet when I made my earnest request for the same, all manner of counsel and
help of proctors, advocates, and lawers was utterly denied me.

Your loving friend T.C.

To maistres Wilkinson a godly matrone, exhorting her to fly in the time of
persecution and to seek her dwelling where she might serve God according to
his word.
THe true comforter in all distress is only God through his son Jesus Christ,
and who soever has him, has company enough although he were in a wilderness al
alone, and he that has xx. thousand in his company, if god be absent, is in a
miserable wilderness and desolation. In him is all comfort, and with out him is
none. Wherefore I beseech you seek your dwelling there, as you may truly and
rightly serve God and dwell in him and have him ever dwelling in you. What can
be so heavy a burden as an unquiet conscience, to be in such a place as a man
can not be suffered to serve God in Chrysts true religion? If ye be loath to
depart from your kin and friends, remember that Christ calls them his mother
suffers and brothers that do his fathers will. Math. 3.
Where we find therefore god truly honored according to his will, there we can
lack neither friend nor kin. If you be loath to depart for slaunderyng of gods
word, remember that Christ when his hour was not yet come, departed out of
his country into Samaria, John. 4. Mat. 5
to avoid the malice of the scribes and phariseis, and commanded his Apostles
that if they were pursued in one place, they should fly to an other. And was
not Paul let down by a basket out at a window to avoid ye persecution of
Areta: 2. Corin. 2.
And what wisdom and policye he used from time to time to escape the malice of
his enemies, ye acts of ye Apostles do declare. And after the same sort did ye
other Apostles: albeit when it came to such a point, yt they could no longer
escape danger of the persecutours of gods true religion, tha^ they showed the^
selves, yt their flyeng before came not of fear but of Godly wisdom to do
more good, and that they would not rashelye without vrgente necessitye offer
themselves to death, which had been but a temptation of god. Yea when they were
apprehended and could no longer avoid, then they stood boldly to the
profession of Christ, the^ they showed how little they passed of death, how much
they feared god more then men, how much they loved and preferred the eternal
life to come above this short and miserable life. Wherefore I exhort you, as well
by Christ's commandment, as by the example of him and his Apostles, to
withdraw your self from the malice of your and gods enemies, into some place
where god is most purely served, which is no slaunderyng of the truth, but a
preserving of your self to god and the truth, and to the society and comfort
of Christ's little flock. And that you will do, do it with speed, least by
your own follye you fall into the persecutors hands, and the Lord send his
holy spirit to lead and guide you where soever you go, and all that be godly
will say. Amen.

T. C

Letters of Doctor Rydley late Bishop of London, who afterlonge imprisonment,
was spitefully and cruellye martyred in Oxford for the constante confession of
gods true religion, In the year of our Lord God.1555. the xvi. day of
October.
Ad fratres in captiuitate carnis and per varios carceres dispersos, sed in
vnitate spiritus atque sacrosanctae religionis in visceribus Jesus Christi
conglutinatos.
GRatia vobis and pax ac misericordia multiplicetur. Quam gratiaru^ actionem
pro vobis fratres red dear possumus domino, super omni consolatione quam de
vobis concepimus in domino, qui Sathana saeuiente, and peromnia fallaciarum
genera mundo imponere studente, and regnum suum iampridem collabascere,
ruinamque minitari incipiens, erigere atque denuo instaurare sedulo satagente,
tanquam in Petra firmissime fundati, permanetis immobiles. Iamque licet Satan
per suos satellites ac ministros, multos (vt audiuimus) quotidie pertrahat ad
sese, vt stellas etiam e coelo prosternere dicatur, alijs nimiru^ metum mortis,
aut amissionis commodorum huius mundi incutiendo, alijs pollicendo aut
ostenta^do illecebras huius mu^di, opes videlicet, atque omnis generis
lautitias, aedes amplas, lata praedia, opimasacerdotia, ac quid non? vti
prostrati adorent non in domino, sed in dracone, serpente antiquo qui est
diabolus, Apoc, oxii.
magnam illam bestiam and imaginem eius, vtque cum regibus terrae and minore
bestia and pseudo prophetis scortari velint cum Babilonica meretrice and cum
illa laetari atque luxuriari, and de vino prostitutionis eius inebriari:
Benedictus tamen deus, Apo. xvii
and pater domini nostri Jesus Christi, qui vohis dedit pectus masculum, quique
fortitudine spiritus ita vos in interno hominecorrohorauit, vt is it haec oi^a
sieve terri culame^ta, five huius mundi illicebras pro vanitatibus ac meris
nugis nihilique tricis contemnere possitis, quiqueita cordibus vestris, ta^ta
co^sta^tia, fiducia^ ac amore^ domini nostri Jesus Christi persuasit, inseuit,
alteque impressit, vt nullis Antichristi machinis, quantum nis alioqui aut
terribilibus aut plausibilibus, sinatis vobis alium Iesum aut aliu^ Christu^,
praeter eum que^ prophetae praedixeru^t, apostoli annu^ciauerijt, and sancti
dei martyrs suo sa^guine co^fessi sunt. In hac fide (fratres) state, and ne
rursus iugo seruitutis aut superstitionis implicemini. Math. 24
Nostis enim fratres que^admodu^ seruatornoster praemonuit suos, futuru^ vt
venire^t qui aliu^ Christu^ mu^do ostenta re^t, eumque tot miraculoru^ and
fallaciaru^ dolis atque fraudibus common dare^t, vt electi quoque, si fieri
posset, seducere^tur: tam forte^ futuram esse praedixit illusione^ seruator.
Sed durate (fratres) atque co^fidite, and memineritis mu^du^ a nostro
Agonotheta deuictu^ esse. Mayor enim est qui in nobis est, 1. John. 4.
qua^ qui est in mu^do: and pollicetur nobis dominus vt propter electos, dies
malitiae ahhrenie^tur. Interea vos, quod sacitis, fratres, durate, durate
inqua^ and vosmet rebus, vt quidam gentilium poetaru^ dixit, Virgil Aeneid. 1.
Heb. x
seruate secundis: pergite praehere vos s^re nuos athletas domini, and adiuuate
decertantem euangelij fide^. Patie^tia vobis opus est, vt cu^ volu^tate^ domini
peregeritis, reportetis promissione^. Adhuc enim pufillu^ te^poris, and qui
venturus est veni et and no^ tardabit: Iustus enim ex fide victurus est, and fi
se subdux erit non p^^^abitur animo meo, dicit dominus. At nos non sumus qui
subducamus nos in perditione^, sed ad fide^ pertinemus in acquisitione^ animae.
Math. 10.
No^ sinamus (fratres) vllis mu^di tonitruis verba illa Christi nostris
cordihus excidere: ne terreamini ab illit qui occidu^t corpus: reliqua nostis.
No^ enim scribo vobis vt ignorantibus veritate^, sed vt eam cognoscentibus,
ta^tu^ vt per mutua^ fide^ co^solatione^ co^munem capiamus confirmemurque.
Nulla vnqua^ melior aut mayor causa vel contemnendae vitae vel profundendi
sa^guinis. Nulla esse potest causa, aut certioris veritatis, euidentiae, aut
claritatis. Non enim agitur controuersia de ceremoniola aliqua, sed de
substantia vniuersae religioni nostrae, adeoque de Christo ipso. Number alium
Christum pro eo qui solus est aeterui patris aeternus filius, qui est splendour
gloriae and expressa imago substantiae patris, in quo vno plenitudo diuinitatis
corporaliter inhabitat, qui est solus via, veritas and vita, admittere
agnoscereque volumus aut possumus? Absit fratres, absit ta^ta procul impietas a
nobis. Na^ qua^qua^ etia^ sint qui dica^tur dij, sieve in coelo sieve in terra, 1
Cor. 8
que^admodu^ sunt dij multi and domini multi, nobis tame^ vnus est deus, qui
est pater ille ex quo omnia and nos in illum, and vnus Dominus Christus per
que^ omnia and nos per illu^: sed non in omnibus est scientia. Haec est (inquit
Johannes) vita aeterna vt cognoscant te solum verum deum and quem misisti Iesum
christum. John. 17
Si quis igitur nobis alium deum obtrudere velit praeter eum quem Paulus and
Apostoli docuerunt, non audi amus, sed vt anathema procul fugiamus.
Profunditates Satanae non ignoratis fratres, non enim cessabit ille circuire
vos, vt quaerat quouis modo quem deuoret: sed viriliter agite, and co^fortemini
in Domino: and licet hosts vestri, and aduersarij veritatis omnibus mundi
prefidijs muniti fuerint, and vos adoria^tur, nolite tame^ propterea animu^
despo^dere, sed confidite duci vestro Christo, confidite spiritui veritatis and
veritati causae vestrae, quae vt tenebris per nequitia^ Satanae obduci, ita
extingui non potest. Stant enim a nobis (inge^tes deo gratiae) certissime,
euide^tissime, clarissimeque, o^nes prophetae, apostoli, and o^nes, procul
dubio, veteres ecclesiastici scriptores vsque ad te^pora neotericoru^.
Co^fidamus ergo and plena^ in domino capia mus co^solatione^: nec terreamini ab
aduersarijs, quae eni^ illis causa est perditionis, vobis aute^ salutis, and
hoc a deo, phil. 1
quia vobis donatu^ est no^ solu^ vt in eu^ credatis, veru^ etia^ vt pro illo
patiamini, and du^ probris afficimini in nomine christi, cogitate vos voce
Petri, imo and christi saluatoris, beatos esse cu^ prophetis, cu^ apostolis,
cu^ martyribus christi, quonia^ gloria and spiritus domini super vos
requiescit. 1. pet. 4
Iuxta illos seruator noster maledictis afficitur, iuxta vos glorificatur: quid
eni^ aliud vos perseque^do aut etia^ crudeliora designa^do vobis facere
possu^t, qua^ vestras vobis coronas insignire, ornare, and multipli ear, sibi
vero plagas suas and iras dei graves accumulare and aggrauare? Ergo, ne tu^
qnide^ cu^ maxim in nos de baccha^tur, male precemur illis fratres, scientes
quoniam dum nos ob Christum insectantur, Romans 12 1. pet. 3.
in seipsos maxim saeuiunt ardentesque in capita propria carbones congerunt:
sed been precemur potius, scientes nos in Christo vocatos esse, vt
benedictionem haereditate possideamus. Precemur ergo vt dominus e cordibus
eorum errorum tenebras dispellat and veritatis luce^ illis faciat illucescere,
vt agnitis erroribus, supplices paenitudine ad dominu^ conuerta^tur, and
nobiscu^ solu^ illu^ veru^ deu^ qui est pater luminu^ and eius vnicu^ filiu^
dominu^ Jesus, christum agnoscant atque in spiritu and veritate adorent, Amen.

Vester in Domino frater, quem tabellarius vobis denunciabit, per Dei gratiam
ad conuiuendum and commoriendum.

The same in English.

To the Brethren remaynyng in Captivity of the flesh, and dispersed abroad in
sundry prisons, but knit together in unity of spirit and holy religion in the
bowels of the Lord Jesus.
GRace, peace, and mercy be multiplied among you. What worthy thanks can we
render unto the Lord for you my brethren, namely for the great consolation
which through you we have received in the lord, who notwithstanding the rage
of Satan that goes about by all manner of subtle means to begyle the world,
and also busilye labors to restore and set up his kingdom again that of
late began to decay and fall to ruin: ye remain yet still immovable as
men surely grounded upon a strong rock. And now albeit that Satan by his
soldiers and wicked ministers daily (as we hear) draws numbers unto him,
so that it is said of him that he plucketh even the very stars out of heaven,
whiles he dryueth into some men the fear of death and loss of all their
goods, and shows and offers to other some the pleasant baits of the
world, namely riches, wealth and all kind of delights, and pleasures, fair
houses, great revenues, fat benefices, and what not? and all to the intent
they should fall down and worship, Apoc. xii
not in the lord but in the dragon the old Serpent which is the devil, that
great beast, and his image, and should be enticed to commit fornication with
the strompet of Babylon, together with the kings of the earth, with the lesser
beast, Apo. xvii^
and with the false prophets, and so to rejoice and be pleasant with her, and
to be dronke^ with the wine of her fornication: yet blessed be god the father
of our Lord Jesus Christ which has given unto you a manly courage and has so
strengthened you in the inward man, by the power of his spirit, that you can
contemn as well all the terrors, as also the vain flatteryng allurements of
the world, estemyng them as vanities, mere trifles, and things of naught, who
has also wroughte, planted, and surely stablished in in your hearts so
steadfast a faith and love of our lord Jesus Christ, joined with such
constancy, that by no engines of Antichrist, be they never so terrible or
plausible, ye will suffer any other Jesus or any other Christ to be forced
upon you, besides him whom the Prophets have spoken of before, the Apostels
have preached and the holy Martyrs of God have confessed and testified with
the effusion of their blood. In this faith stand ye fast my brethren, Gal. 5
and suffer not your selves to be brought under the yoke of bondage and
superstition any more, For ye know brethren, how that our Savior warned
his before hand, that such should come as would point unto the world an
other Christ and would set him out with so many false miracles and with such
deceaueable and subtyle practices, that even the very elect (if it were
possible) should be thereby disceaued: such strong delusion to come did our
Savior give warnyng of before. But continue ye faithful and constante and be
of good comfort, and remember that our grau^d captayn has overcome the world,
1. John. 4.
for he that is in us is stronger then he that is in the world, and the Lord
promises unto us that for the electes sake the days of wickedness shall be
shortened. In the mean season abide ye and endure with patience as ye have
begun, endure I say, Virgil eneid. 1. Phil. 1. Heb. 10.
and reserve your selves unto better times, as one of the Heathen Poets said.
Cease not to show your selves valiant Soldiers of the lord and healpe to
maintain the trauelyng faith of the gospel. Ye have need of patience, that
after ye have done the will of god, ye may receive the promises. For yet a very
little while, and he that shall come will come and will not tarry, and the just
shall live by faith: but if any withdraw himself, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him (says the Lord. But we are not they which do withdraw our
selves unto damnation, but believe unto the salvation of the soul. Let us not
suffer these words of Christ to fall out of our hearts, by any manner of
terrors or threatenings of the world: fear not them which kill the body, the
rest ye know. 1. John. 2
For I write not unto you as to men which are ignorant of the truth but which
know the truth, and to this end only, that we agreeyng together in one
faith, may take comfort one of an other, and be the more confirmed and
strengchened thereby. We never had a better or more just cause either to
conte^ne our life, or shed our blood: we can not take in hand the defense of a
more certain, clear and manifest truth. For it is not any ceremony for the
which we contend but it touches the very substance of our whole religion, yea
even Christ him self. Shall we, either can we receive and acknowledge any
other Christ in stead of him who is alone the everlasting son of the
everlasting father, and is the brightness of the glory, and lively image of the
substance of the father, in whom only dwells corporally the fulness of the
godhed, who is the only way, the truth, and the life? Let such wickedness (my
brethren) let such horrible wickedness be far from us. For although there be
that are called gods, 1. Corin. 8.
whether in heaven either in earth, as there be many gods and many Lords, yet
unto us there is but one God, which is the father, of whom are all things and
we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ by whom are all things and we by him:
but every man has not knowledge. This is life eternal (says s. John) ye they
know thee to be the only true god and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. John.
17.
If any therefore would force upon us any other God besides him whom Paul and
the Apostles have taught, let us not hear him, but let us fly from him and
hold him accursed. Brethren ye are not ignoraunte of the deep and profound
subtilties of Satan, for he will not cease to raunge about you, seeking by all
means possible whom he may devour: but play ye the men and be of good
comfort in the Lord. And albeit your ennemies and the adversaries of the
truth armed with all worldly force and power that may be, do set upon you: yet
be not ye fainte hearted, nor shrink not therefore: but trust unto your captain
Christ, trust unto the Spirit of truth, and trust to the truth of your
cause, which as it may by the malice of Satan be darkened, so can it never
be clean put out. For we have (high praise be given to God therefore) most
plainly, evidently, and clearly on our side, all the Prophets, all the
Apostles, and undoubtedly all the aunciente Ecclesiastical writers which have
written until of late years paste. Let us be hartye and of good courage
therefore, and throughlye comfort our selves in the Lord. Be in no wise
afraid of your adversaries, Phil. 1.
for that which is to them an occasion of perdition, is to you a sure token of
salvation, and that of God. For unto you it is given, that not only ye should
believe on him, but also suffer for his sake. And when ye are railed upon for
the name of Christ, remember that by the voice of Peter, yea and of Christ
our Savior also, ye are counted with the Prophets, 1. pet. 4
with the Apostles and with the holy Martyrs of Christ, happy and blessed
therefore: for the glory and spirit of god rests upon you. On their part our
savior Christ is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified. For what
can they else do unto you by persecuting you and workyng all crueltye and
vilanye against you, but make your crowns more glorious, yea beautify and
multiply the same, and heap upon themselves the horrible plagues and heavy
wrath of god: and therefore good brethren, though they rage never so fiercely
against us, yet let us not wyshe evil unto them again, knowing, that whiles
for Christ's caufe they vex and persecute us, they are like mad men, most
ouragious and cruel against themselves, heapyng hot burning coals upon
their own heads: but rather let us wyshe well unto them, knowing that we are
thereunto called in Christ Jesus, 1. pet. 3.
that we should be heyers of the blessyng. Let us pray therefore unto god that
he would drive out of their hearts this darkness of errors, and make the
light of his truth to shine unto them, that they acknowledging their
blyndnesse, may with all humble repentance be converted unto the Lord, and
together with us confess him to be the only true God, which is the father of
light, and his only son Jesus Christ, worshipping him in spirit and veritye,
Amen. The spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ comfort your hearts in the love of
God and patience of Christ. Amen.

Your brother in the Lord, whose name this bears shall signify unto you, ready
alwais by the grace of god to live and die with you.

Ad fratres qui Christum cum cruce amplectuntur.
GRatia vobis and pax a Deo and domino nostro Jesus Christo multiplicetur, Amen.
Licet a vobis (fratres) nihil nuper accepimus, neque vobis aliquid noui nunc
nu^tiandum habemus, tamen ideo vi sum est nobis aliquid vohis scribere, vt
intelligatis nos memoriam vestri bonam habere perpetuam, sicut vos de nobis
habere mimine dubitamus. Veniente nuper ad nos harum latore, and anuntiante
nobis vestra^ omnium in domino constantia^, fortitudinem and patientiam multam,
repleti sumus consolatione and gaudio, gratias agentes deo and patri per
dominum nostrum Iesum Christu^, qui ita illuminauit vultum suum sup vos and
lumine intelligentiae spiritualis ita illustrauit corda vestra, vt quod nuper
du^ essetis in mu^do liberi, verbo and doctrina passim prestare sategi stis,
nunc propter Christum captiui, qua^tum licet verbo, sed multo magis opere atque
vestro exemplo, prestare non cessastis, hoc est sermonem vitae sustinentes,
phil. 2
lucetis tanquam luminaria in munda in medio nationis prauae and tortuosae,
idque ta^to cum maiore domini nostri Jesus Christi gloria fratrumque vestrorum
emolumento and vtilitate, quanto nunc Satan magis saeuit, maioresque luci
euangelicae conatur inducere tenebras. De tenebris autem quas nunc ecclesiae
Anglicanae Satan offundit, quis potest dubitare? Nuper Christus, saluator,
Apostoli, prophetae and doctores ipsius in te^plo loquebantur populo Anglicano
anglice, ita vt ab eis q^ pij erant and rerum coelestium studiosi, in ijs que
ad vitae eternae redemptionem de necessitate salutis pertinebant, clare and
absque enigmate facile intelligi poterant: nunc vero quae ab illis olim in
edificationem ecclesiae scripta sunt, leguntur in lingua peregrina citra
interpretatione^, manifest contra preceptum Pauli Apostoli, ita vt a nemine
prorsus qui aliena^ and peregrina^ illa^ linguam non didicerit, intelligi
possint. Nuper sacro sancta illa mysteria coelestia, quibus nos sibi Christus
inseuit and suo corpori complantauit atque nos inter nos mutuo colligauit,
quibus natos deo aluit, auxit, atque corroborauit, denique quibus aut ordinem
inter sanos docuit, aut egrotis velaia vel corpore veluti salubria pharmaca
tradidit, oia populo clare in sua lingua tradeba^tur, ita vt quisque, qua^ta
and quam imme^sa a deo accepisset, quid cuique ex dei prescripto deberet, quid
in sua quis que vocatione professus esset and obseruare teneretur, vnde
languenti remedium esset petendum, facile is cui deus mentem and animum hec
intelligendi au^dum dedit, qua^ facillime intelligere poterat: nunc vero omnia
hec ita traduntur, vt eorum omnium populus Christi sa^guine redemptus, and cui
hec maxim a Christo in stituta sunt, ne tantillum quidem intelligere possit.
Nuper (quum quid orare debemus vt oportet, nescimus) dominus noster Jesus
christus in sua quam omnibus tradi voluit oratione, atque etiam spiritus
sanctus in psalmis, hymnis and cantionibus spiritualibus quae in sacris biblijs
reperiuntur, vniuersum populum Anglicanum anglice docuit, vt and quae petenda
essent iuxta volu^tate^ patris petere^t, and corda cu^ labijs in oratione
co^iu^gere^t: nunc vero oi^a sub inuolu croli^guae peregrinae iube^tur claudi,
vnde necessario sequi oportet, populu^, neque quid orat neque quid orare debeat
posse intelligere: and quomodo potest cor voci co^iungere quu^ quid vox valeat,
magis quam brutu^ intelligere nequeat? Postremo, audio passim in pulpitis nunc
damnari catechesim illa^ edita^ nuper in sermon vulgari. Oh malitiam
demoniacam and humani generis per Christum salut^ partae, plane inuidam. Omnino
Satan tantam lucem vulgari per or^ be^, diu sustinere no^potuit: nihil equae in
suo regno subuertendo effi cere posse intellexit, quam si a teneris annis
sacris iu^buti pueri Christum didicissent: vnde non tantum pueros, sed and
senes atque aetate prouectiores, qui ab infa^tia christu^ prius no^
didicisse^t, vna cu^ pueris christu^ discere necesse erat. Ergo nu^c exclamat
and nociferae tur. Sed quid faciu^t aliud (fratres) qui satanae in hac
impietate open ra^ impendunt atque ministra^t, qua^ illi quibus Christus
seruator no ster in euangelio, dirum illud interminatur and intonat dicens:
Math. 23
Vae vobis qui clauditis regnum ante homines, qui tulictis clauem scientiae:
ipsi non introijstis, and introire volentes prohibuistis. Et vnde frates
dixerimus has tetras and exitiosas tenebras in mundum inuectas exhalasse? vnde
quaeso, Apoca, 9.
qua^ ex fumo fornacis magni putei ahyssi, vt iam obscuratus sit sol and aer ex
fumo putei? Iam iam procul dubio, fratres, apudnos puteus apertus est, locustae
luxuria^tur, and abaddon regnat. Ergo fratres qui estis Christi, qui signum dei
habetis in frontibus vestris, Apoc. vij. i. John. v.
hoc est arra spiritus, obsignati estis in populum peculiarem Deo: viriliter
agite and confortamini. Mayor enim est qui est in nobis quam qui est in mundo.
Scitis autem quod omne quod natum est ex deo vincit mundum, and haec est
victoria quae vincit mundum, fides nostra. Fremat, frendat and insaeniat
quantumlibet mundus, scitote quod nemo potest nos tollere de manu patris, quia
mayor est omnibus: qui proprio filio suo non pepercit, sed pro nobis omnibus
tradidit illum, Romans viij
and proinde qui steri potest vt non cum illo omnia nobis donet. Quis
intentabit crimina aduersus electos dei? Deus est qui iustificat, quis ille qui
condemnet? Christus est qui mortuus immo and qui suscitatus est, qui and
intercedit pro nobis. Quis nos seperabit a dilectione Dei? Number afflictio? Number
angustia? Number persecutio? Number fames? Number nuditas? Number periculum? Number gladius?
reliqua nostis fratres. Speramus plane cum Paulo, per gratiam Domini nostri
Jesus Christi, quod nihil prorsus nos poterit separare a dilectione Dei quae est
in Christo Jesus Domino nostro. Quod, vt and vobis sit and nobis omnibus
contingat gratia and miserecordia seruatoris nostri Jesus Christi, and nos pro
vobis (Deo volente) indesinenter orabimus, and vos pro nobis ne aliquando orare
desinatis, etiam atque etiam in visceribus Jesus christi (fratres in Domino
charissimi) quantum possumus obnixe precamur. Been valete fratres charissimi.
Gratia domini nostri Jesus Christi sit semper cu^ omnibus vobis. Ame^.

Vester in domino. N.R.
The same in English.



To the brethren which constantly cleave unto Christ in suffering affliction
with him and for his sake.
GRace and peace from GOD the father and from our Lord Jesus Christ be
multiplied unto you, Amen. Although brethren, we have of late heard nothing
from you, neither have at this present any news to send you: yet we thought
good some thing to write unto you, whereby ye might understand that we have good
remembrance of you continually, as we doubt not but ye have of us also. When
this messenger coming unto us from you of late, had brought us good tidinges
of your great constancye, fortitude and patience in the Lord: we were filled
with much joy and gladness, geuynge thanks to god the father through our lord
Jesus Christ, which has caused his face so to shine upon you, and with the
light of spiritual understanding, has so lyghtned your hearts, that now
being in captivity and bands for Christ's cause, ye have not ceased, as much
as in you lies, by words, but much more by deed and by your example, to
stablishe and confyrme that thing, which when ye were at liberty in the world,
ye labored to publish and set abroad by ye word, and doctrine: that is to say,
holding fast the word of life, ye shine as lights in ye world in ye mids of a
wicked and crooked nation, Phi. 2.
and that with so much the greater glory of our Lord Jesus Christ and profit
of your brethren, by how much Satan more cruelly now rages and busily
labors to darken the light of the gospel. And as for the darkness that
Satan now brings upon the church of England, who needs to doubt thereof? Of
late time our savior christ, his Apostles, prophets and teachers, spoke in
the temple to the people of england in the english tongue, so that they might
be understand plainly and without any hardness, of ye godly and such as sought
for heavenly knowledge in matters which of necessity of salvation perteyned to
the obteyning of eternal life: but now those things which once were written
of them for the edifienge of the congregation, are red in a strange tongue
without interpretation, manifestlye against Saint Paul's commandment, so
that there is no man hable to understand them, which has not learned that
strange and unknown tongue. Of late days those heavenly mysteries, wherbye
Christ has engraffed us into his body, and has united us one to an other,
whereby also being regenerate and borne a new unto God, he has nourished,
increased and strengthened us, whereby moreover, either he has taught and set
forth an order emonges them which are whole, or else to the sick in soul or
body has given, as it were, wholesome medicines and remedies: those I say, were
all plainly set forth to the people in their own language, so that what great
and exceeding good things every man had received of god, what duty every one
owed to an other by gods ordinance, what every one had professed in his
vocation and was bound to observe, where remedy was to be had for ye weak and
feeble: he, to who^ God had given a desire and wyllyng heart to understand those
things, might sone perceive and understand: But now all these things are
taught and setforth in such sort, that the people redeemed with Christ's
blood, and for whose sakes they were by Christ himself ordained, ca^ have no
manner of understanding thereof at all. Of late (forasmuch as we know not how
to pray as we ought) our Lord Jesus Christ in his prayer, whereof he would
have no man ignorant, and also the holy ghost in the psalms, hymns, and
spiritual songs which are set forth in the bible, did teach and instruct all the people of England in the english tongue, that they might ask such things
as are according to the will of the father, and might join their hearts and
lips in prayer together: but now al these things are commanded to be hid
and shut up from the^ in a strange tongue, whereby it must needs follow, yt the
people neither can tell how to pray nor what to pray for: and how can they join
their hearts and voice together when they understand no more what the voice
sygnifyeth, then a brute beast? Finally I hear say that the Catechism which
was lately set forth in the english tongue, is now in every pulpet condemned. Oh
deuelish malice, and most spite fully injurious to the salvation of mankind
purchased by Jesus Christ. In deed Satan could not long suffer that so great
light should be spread abroad in the world: he saw well enough that nothing was
hable to overthrow his kingdom so much as if children being godly enstructed
in religion, should learn to know Christ whiles they are yet young: whereby not
only children but the elder fort also, and aged folks yt before were not taught
to know Christ in their childhode, should now eue^ with children and babes be
forced to learn to know him. Now therefore he roareth now he rages. But what
else do they brethren, which serve Satan and become his ministers and slaves in
mainteynyng of this impiety, but even the same which they did, Math. 2^.
to whom Christ our savior threatens this curse in the gospel: woe unto you
which shut up the kingdom of heaven before me^, and take away the key of
knowledge from them: ye your selves have not entered in, neither have ye suffered
them that would enter to come in. And from whence shall we say (brethren) that
this horrible and mischeuous darkness proceeds which is now brought into the
world? from whence I pray you, but even from the smoke of the great furnace,
the bottomless pit, Apoc. 9.
so that the son and the air are now darked by the smoke of the pit? Now,
even now out of doubt (brethren) the pit is opened emongs us, and the locusts
begin to swarm and abbadon now reigns. Apoca. 7.
Ye therefore (my brethren) which perteine unto Christ, and have the seal of
god marked in your foreheads, that is to wit, are sealed up with the earnest
of the spirit to be a peculier people unto god, quite your selves like men and
be strong, for he that is in us, is stronger then he which is in the world: i.
John. 5
and ye know that all that is borne of god overcomes ye world, and this is our
victory that overcomes the world, even our faith. Let the world freate, let
it rage never so much, be it never so cruel and bloody, yet be ye sure that no
man can take us out of the fathers hands, for he is greater then al: who has
not spared his own son but has given him to death for us all, and therefore
how shall he not with him, give us all things also? who shall lay any thing to
the charge of gods elect? It is god that justifies, who shall then condemn?
It is Christ that is dead, yea rather which is risen again, Romans 8
who is also at the right hand of god and makes request also for us. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or
persecution, or famine or nakedness, or peril, or sword? the rest ye know
brethren. We are certainly persuaded with S. Paul by the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that no kind of thing shall be hable to separate us from the love
of god which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Which thing, that it may come to
pass by the grace and mercy of our lord Jesus Christ to the comfort both of
you and of us all, as we for our pa^tes will continually God willing, pray for
you: so (dear Brethren in the Lord) with all earnest and hearty request, we
beseech you even in the bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye will not
cease to pray for us. Fare ye well dear brethren. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all evermore. Amen.

Yours in the Lord Nicolas Ridley.

To the Queen's majesty.
IT may please your majesty for Christ our saviors sake in a matter of
conscience, and now not for my self but for other pore men, to vouchsafe to
hear and understand this mine humble supplication. It is so honorable
princes) that in the time whiles I was in the ministry of the sea of London,
diverse poor men tenants thereof, have taken new leases of their tenantries and
holdinges, and some have renewed and changed their old, and therefore have paid
fines and sums of money both to me and also to the Chapter of Paul's for the
confirmation of the same. Behold the cruel and unjust dealing of Bo^ner.

He can not deal justly and truly with men, which is untrue to god, and a
hater of al truth.


Now I hear say, that the B. which occupies ye same rowme now, will not allow
the aforesaid leases, which must redound to many pore men's utter ruin and
decay. Wherefore, this is mine humble supplication unto your honorable grace,
that it may please the same for Christ's sake, to be unto the foresaid pore men
their gracious patron and defe^dour, either that they may enjoy their foresaid
leases and years renewed, as when their matter shall be heard with conscience, (I
suppose) both justice, conscience and equity shall require, for that their
leases shall be found (I trust) made without fraud or couen either of their
part or of mine, and also the old rentes always reserved to the sea without
any kind of damage thereof: or if this will not be granted, then that it may
please your gracious highness to command that the poor men may be restored to
their former leases and years, and may have rendered to the^ again such sums
of money as they paid to me and to the chapter for their leases and years so
now taken from the^. Which thing, concerning the fines paid to me, may be
easily done, if it shall please your majesty to co^mau^d some portion of those
goods which I left in my house, to be given unto them. I suppose that half of
the value of my plate which I left in mine offices, and specially in an iron
cheste in my bed Chamber, will go nighe to restore all such fines received:
the true sums and parcels whereof are not set in their leases, and therefore if
that way shall please your hyghnes, they must be known by such ways and
means as your majesty by the advice of men of wisdom and conscience shall
appoint. If to succo^ the widow and fatherles is pure and undefiled religion as
Saint James says: Then is Boner and his relio^^g filthye and abominable
which does such wrong to the Widow and fatherles.
But yet for Christ's sake I crave and most humbly beseech your majesty of your
most gracious pitye and mercy, that the former way may take place. I have also
a poor sister that came to me out of the north, with iij. fatherles children
for her relief, whom I married after to a servant of mine own house: she is
put out of that which I did provide for them. I beseech your honorable grace,
that her case may be mercifullye considred, and that the rather in
conte^platio^ that I never had of him which suffered indurance at my entrance to
the sea of London, one penye of his moveable goods, for it was almost half a
year after his deposition, before I did enter in that place: yea, and also if
any were left known to be his, he had license to carry it away, or there for
his use it did lie safe, and his officers do know, that I paid for ye lead
which I found there when I occupied any of it to the behoof of the church or
of ye house. And moreover I had not only no part of his moveable goods, but
also as his old receiver and then min, called M. Stau^ton ca^ testify, I paid
for him toward his servants common liuertes and wages after his deposition
53. li. or 55. pou^des, I cannot tell whether. Notwithstanding these godly and
just requests, no justice could be had until that now of late some of these
shameful injuries, by order of law have been redressed.
In all these matters I beseech your honorable majesty to hear the advice of
me^ of conscience, and especially the archbishop now of York, which for that
he was continually in my house a year and more before mine imprisonment, I
suppose he is not altogether ignorant of some part of these things, and also
his grace does know my sister, for whose succor and some relief, now unto your
highness, I make most humble suit.

The.xvi. day of October. Anno. 1555. N. R.

An answer to a letter written unto him by West sometime his Chaplayne.
I Wish you grace in god and love of the truth without the which truly
stablished in men's hearts, by the mighty hand of almighty god, it is no more
possible to stand by the truth in Christ in time of trouble, then it is for the
wax to abide the heat of the fire. Sir, know you this, that I am (blessed be
God) persuaded that this world is but transitory, and (as saint John says)
the world passes away and the lust thereof. i. John. 2 Math. 10.
I am persuaded christ's wor^es to be true: whosoever shall confess me before
men, him will I confess also before my father which is in heaven, and I believe
that no earthly creature shall be saved, whom the redemer and savior of the
world shall before his father deny. This the lord grant that it may be so
graffed, established, and fixed in my heart, that neither things present nor
to come, high nor low, life nor death be able to remove me thence. It is a
goodly wish that you wish me depely to consider things pertaynyng unto gods
glory: but if you had wished also ye neither fear of death, nor hope of
worldly prosperity should let me to maintain gods word and his truth, which is
his glory and true honor, it would have liked me well. You desire me for gods
sake to remember my self. In deed sir, now it is time so to do, for so far
as I can perceive, it stands me upon no less danger, then of the loss both
of body and soul, and I trow then it is time for a man to awake, if any thing
will awake him. He that will not fear him that threatens to cast both body
and soul into everlasting fire, Luke 12.
whom will he fear? With this fear, O Lord, fasten thou together our frail
flesh, that we never swerve from thy laws. You say you have made much suite
for me. Sir God grant that you have not in saving for my worldly deliverance,
empayred and hindered the furtheraunce of Gods word and his truth. You have
known me long in deed, in the which time it has chanced me (as you say) to
mislyke some things. It is true, I grant: for sudden chaunges without
substantial and necessary cause, and the heady setting forth of extremities, I
did never love. Canfession unto the minister which is able to iustruct,
correct, comfort, and inform the weak, wounded, and ignorant conscience,
in deed I ever thought might do much good in Christ's congregation, and so I
assure you I think even at this day. My doctrine and my preaching, you say you
have heard often, and after your judgment have thought it godly, saving only
for the Sacrament, which thing although it was of me reverently handled and a
great deal better then of ye rest (as you say) yet in the marge^t you write
warely, and in this world wisely: and yet me thought all sounded not well.
Sir, but that I see so many chaunges in this world and so much alteration, else
at this your saying I would not a little maruayle. I have taken you for my
friend, and a man whom I fansied for plainness and faith fulness as much (I
assure you) as for your learning: and have you kept this so close in your heart
from me unto this day? Sir, I consider mo things then one, and will not say all that I think. But what need you to care what I think, for any thing that I
shall be able to do unto you, either good or harm? You give me good lessons to
stand in nothing against my learning and to beware of vain glory. Truly sir,
I herein like your counsel very well, and by Gods grace I entend to follow it
unto my lives end.

To write unto those whom you name, I cannot see what it will avail me. For
this I would have you know, that I esteem nothing auailable for me, which also
will not further the glory of God. And now, because I perceive you have an
entire zeal and desire of my deliverance out of this captivity and worldly
misery, if I should not bear you a good heart in god again, me think I were
to blame. Sir how nighe the day of my dissolution and departure out of this
world is at hand, I can not tell: the Lords will be fulfilled how soon soever
it shall come. I know the Lords words must be verified on me, that I shall
appear before the incorrupt judge, and be countable to him of al my former
life. And although the hope of his mercy is my shooteanker of eternal
salvation, yet am I persuaded, that whosoever wittingly neglects and
regards not to clear his conscience, he cannot have peace with God nor a
lively faith in his mercy. Conscience therefore moves me, considering you
were one of my familye and one of my householde, of whom then I think I had a
special cure, and of all them which were within my house, which in deed ought
to have been an example of godliness to all the rest of my cure, not only of
good life, but also in promotyng of gods word to the uttermost of their power:
but (alas) now when the trial does separate the chafe from the corn, how
small a deal it is, god knows, which the wynd does not blow away: this
conscience I say does move me to fear least the lightness of my family shall be
laid to my charge for lack of more earnest and diligent instruction which
should have been done. But blessed be god which has given me grace to see this
my default and to lament it from the bottom of my heart before my departing
hence. This conscience does move me also now to require both you and my friend
Doctor Haruy, to remember your promises made to me in times past, of the pure
setting forth and preaching of gods word and his truth. These promises,
although you shall not need to fear to be charged with them of me hereafter
before the world, yet look for none other (I exhort you as my fre^des) but to
be charged with them at gods hand. This conscience and the love that I bear
unto you, bids me now say unto you both in gods name, fear god and love not
the world: for god is able to cast both body and soul into hell fire. Psa. 2.
When his wrath shall suddenly be kindled, blessed are al they that put their
trust in him. And the saying of S. John is true: John. 2.
al yt is in the world, as ye lust of ye flesh, ye lust of the eyes and the
pride of life, is not of the father, but of the world, and the world passes
away and the lust thereof, but he that does the will of god abides for ever. If
this gift of grace, which undoubtedly is necessarily required unto eternal
salvation, were truly and unfeignedly graffed and firmly stablished in men's
hearts, they would not be so light, so suddenly to shrink from the
mainteynaunce and confession of the truth, as is now (alas) seen so manifestly
of so many in these days. But here peradventure you would know of me what is ye
truth. Sir, gods word is the truth, as s. John says, John. 17. Eccl. 27
and that even the same that was heretofore. For albeit man does vary and
change as the moon, yet Gods word is stable and abides one for evermore: and
of Christ it is truly said, Christ yesterday and to day, the same is also for
ever.

Heb. 13
When I was in office, all that were esteemed learned in gods word, agreed this
to be a truth in gods word written, that the common prayer of the Church should
be had in the common tongue. You know I have conferred with many, and I ensure
you I never found man (so far as I do remember) neither old nor new,
Gospeller nor Papist, of what judgment so ever he was, in this thing to be of
a contrary opinion. If then it were a truth of gods word, think you that the
alteration of the world can make it an untruth* If it cannot, why then do
so many men shrink from the confession and maintenance of this truth
received once of us all? For what is it I pray you else to confess or deny
Christ in this world, but to maintain the truth taught in gods word, or for
any worldly respect to shrynke from the same? This one thing have I brought
for an ensample: other things be in like case, which now particularly I need
not to rehearse. For he that will forsake wittingly, either for fear or gain
of the world, any one open truth of gods word, if he be constrained, he will
assuredly forsake god and all his truth, rather then he will endaunger himself
to lose or to leave that he loves better in deed then he does God and the
truth of his word. I like very well your plain speaking, wherein you say: I must
either agree or dye, and I think that you mean of the bodily death which is
common both to good and bad. Sir, I know I must dye whether I agree or no. But
what folly were it then to make such an agreement by the which I could never
escape this death which is so common to al, and also incur the gilte of
death and eternal damnation? Lord grant that I may utterly abhor and
detest this damnable agreement so long as I live. And because (I dare say) you
wrote of friendship unto me this short earnest advertisement, and I think
verelye wishyng me to live and not to die, therefore bearing you in my heart no
less love in god than you do me in the world, Apostata was he which fled from
his captain to the enemy. He was also so called that departed from ye
chrystyans to the Jews and Gentiles
I say unto you in the word of the lord (and that I say to you I say to all
my friends and lovers in god) that if you do not confess and maintain to
your power and knowledge, that which is grounded upon gods word, but will
either for fear or gain of the world shrink and play the Apostata, in deed
you shall dye the death: you know what I mean. And I beseech you al my true
friends and lovers in God, remember what I say, for this may be the last
time peraduentute that ever I shall write unto you.

From Bocardo in Oxford, the 18. day of April. 1554. N.R.

Chariss. fratri and venerabili in Christo compresbytero Ioanni Hopero gratiam
and pacem.
DIlecte frater and venerabilis in Christo compresbyter, co^donet mihi precor
tua dilectio, quod hactenus a tua captiuitate, tua simul and mea, tuam
dilectionem meis literis non salutauerim, quando (ingenue fateor) mihi abs te
(quae tua erat humanitas) binae literae datae fueru^t, diuersis quidem
temporibus, sed eis se^per profecto in quibus aut mihi per iniquitatem temporis
rescribere been non licuit, aut si rescripsissem de literis ad te tuto
perferendis multum dubitaui. Iam vero charissime frater, quum ex illis tuis
lucuhrationibus, quas mihi non nisi obiter videre contigit, facile intelligo
nos in ijs quae sunt nostrae religionis fundamenta and bases omium (aduersus
quas mundus hodie tantopere insanit) probe conuenire, and in vnu^ conspirare,
vtcu^que in rebus minoribus and religionis appe^dicibus olim tua prudentia and
mea simplicitas, in aliquibus (fateor) vterque suum se^sum habebat: iam inquam
cognoscat tua dilectio, quod ex animo (deus mihi testis est) in viscerihus
Christi te diligam frater in veritate, propter veritatem quae permanet in
nobis, and vt mihi per suasum habeo, per gratiam dei per manebit nobiscum in
aeternu^. Quoniam autem (vti video frater) mundus causam suam igere no^ cessat,
and co^tra Christum seruatore^ quantu^ potest maximis munitionibus co^spirat,
1. Corin. 10
and su^mas conatur erigere altitudines a duersus cognitione^ Dei: iungamus
frater dextras in Christo, and pro nostra viriliquantumque in nobis situm erit,
non armis carnalibus sed spiritualibus, si non possumus demoliri, saltem
pulsemus illas altitudines, and simul nos iam Frater praeparemus ad diem
dissolutionis nostrae, per quam cum Christo post momentaneam carnis iftius
nostrae afflictionem, in aeternum gratia Domini Jesus Christi, simul cum illo
triumphabimns in gloria sempeterna. Ohsecro frater, saluta meo nomine
venerandum illum tuum concaptiuum and mihi vere venerahilem patrem D. Cromerum,
de quo (mihi creed) ex primo die quo de eius sanctissima and grauiss.
constantia in confessione veritatis euangelicoe audiui, semper maxima^
consolationem maximumque gaudium concepi in domino: integritatem enim eius
viri, grauitatem and innocentia^, ia^pride^ vniuersa pene (credo) nouit Anglia.
Benedictus igitur deus qui nobis in tanta abundantia iniquitatis, and in tanta
ruina pietatis, talem nobis dedit in isthac veneranda canitie teste^ sui
Euangelij veritati. Infoelix quem tanti viri, tam grauis and innocentis pietas
and constans confessio nihil permouere possu^t ad cognoscendam veritatem dei.
Non peto iam, frater, vt mihi quicquam rescribas, multum enim vereor ne literae
intercipiantur: quanqua^ scias mihi de tua constantia and fortitudine in Domini
caussa audire semper fore gratissimum. Et vt tuae fraternitati hactenus non
rescripserim, bis tame^ vt potui tibi significandum curaui quod a me in tuis
literis cognoscere voluisti. Nec adhuc profecto frater, possum animum meum
mutare: tot enim mihi videre videor pericula, quae me impellunt vt consulam, ne
tuarum lucubrationum editionem festinare velis, saltem sub titulo nominis tui.
Multum enim vereor ne hac occasion and tibi os obstruatur in posterum, and
alijs quoque captiuis omnia anferantur, quihus, alioqui multis (deo ita
volente) poterunt pro desse. Been vale in Domino Chaaiss. frater, and si qui
alij in vestris aedibus su^t vobiscum in causa Christi concaptiu i, precor
illis meo nomine salutem vti possis, velis impartiri, et omnium uestru^
precibus apud dominum me, atque meos concaptiuos in domino, etia^ atque etiam
humillime commendo, and rursus atque in aeternum in Christo been vale frater
Chariss.

The same in english

To my most dear brother, and reverend fellow Elder in Christ, John Hoper,
grace and peace.
MY dearly beloved brother and fellow Elder, who^ I reverence in the lord,
pardon me I beseech you, that hitherto since your captivity and mine, I have
not saluted you by my letters: whereas, I do in deed confess, I have received
from you (such was your gentleness) two letters at sundry times, but yet at
such times as I could not be suffered to write unto you again, or if I might
have written, yet was I greatly in dout, lest my letters should not safely come
unto your hands. But now my dear brother, for as much as I understand by your
works, which I have yet but superficially seen, that we thoroughly agree and
wholly consent together in those things which are the grounds, and substa^tial
points of our religion, against the which ye world so furiously rages in these
our dais, howsoever in time past in smaller matters and circu^sta^ces of
religion, your wisdom and my simplicity (I confess) I have in some points
varied: Now (I say) be you assured, that even with my whole heart (God is my
witness) in the bowels of Christ, I love you and in truth for the truths sake,
which abides in us, and (as I am persuaded) shall by the grace of God, abide
with us for evermore. And because the world, as I perceive brother, cease not
to play his pageant, 1. Cor x.
and busely conspireth against Christ our savior, with all possible force and
power, exaltyng high things against the knowledge of god: let us join hands
together in Christ, and if we cannot overthrow, yet to our power and as much
as in us lies, let us shake those high things, not with carnal but with
spiritual weapons: and withal brother, let us prepare our selves to ye day of
our dissolution, whereby after the short time of this bodily affliction, by the
grace of our lord Jesus Christ, we shall triumph together with him in eternal
glory.

I pray you brother salute in my name that reverend father, Of this good
fathers godly end and constant confession of the truth, you shall read in the
next editio^ of the book of martyrs
your fellow prisoner Doctor Crome, by whom since the first day, yt I heard of
his most godly and fatherly constancy in confessing ye truth of the gospel, I
have conceived great consolation and joy in the lord. For the integrity and
vprightnes, the gravity and innocency of that man, al England I think, has
known long ago. Blessed be God therefore, which in such abundance of iniquity,
and decay of all godliness, has given unto us in this reverend old age, such
a witness for the truth of his gospel. Miserable and hard hearted is he, who^ the
godliness and constant confession of so worthy, so grave, and innocent a man,
will not move to acknowledge and confess the truth of god. I do not now
brother require you to write any thing to me again, for I stand much in fear
lest your letters should be intercepted before they can come to my hands.
Nevertheless know you, that it shall be to me great joy to hear of your
constancy and fortitude in the lords quarrel. And albeit I have not hitherto
written unto you, yet have I twice as I could, sent unto you my mind touching ye
matter which in your letters you required to know, neither can I yet brother be
otherwise persuaded, I see me thinks so many perils whereby I am earnestly
moved to counsel you not to haste^ the publishyng of your works, especially
under the title of your own name. For I fear greatly least by this occasion,
both your mouth should be stopped hereafter, and al things taken away from the
rest of the prisoners whereby otherwise, if it so please god, they may be
able to do good to many. Farewell in the lord my most dear brother, and if
there be any more in prison with you for Christ's cause, I beseech you as you
may, salute them in my name: to whose prayers, I do most humbly and heartily
comme^d my self and my fellow prisoners concaptiues in the lord, and yet o^ce
again and for ever in Christ, my most dear brother, Farewell.

A letter of M. Edmunde Grindal, then being in exile for the testimony of the
truth, and now bishop of London, to D. Ridley prisoner in Oxforde, which we
thought good here to place, for that the letter followyng is an answer thereof.
GRatiam and consolationem a Domino and seruatore nostro Jesus christo. Sir I
have often been desirous to have written to you and to have heard from you, but
the iniquity of the times have hitherto always put me forth of all hope and
comfort. Now at this present god seems to offer some likelyhode, that these
might come to your hands, which I thought to use, referring the rest to Gods
disposition. Your present state, not I only (who of all other am most bound)
but also all other our brethren here, do most heartily lament, as joined with
the most miserable captivity that ever any church, of Christ has suffered.
Notwithstanding we give god most humble thanks, for that he has so
strengthened you and others your concaptiues, to profess a good profession
before so many witnesses. And I doubt nothing, but he that has called you and
them not only to believe upon him, but also to suffer for him, does not leave
you destitute of that unspeakable comfort which he uses to minister abundantly
to his in the schole of the cross. He grant that his name may be glorified
in you, whether it he by life or death, as may be most to his honor, and your
everlasting consolation.

Sir I thought it good to advertise you partelye of our state in these parties.
We be here dispersed in diverse and several places. Certain be at Tigurye good
students of either university a number, very well entreated of master
Bullinger, of the other minysters and of the whole city. An other number of us
remain at Argentine, and take the commodity of master Martyrs lessons, who is
a very notable father. Master Scory and certain other with him be in
Frisland, and have an english church there, but not very frequent. The
greatest number is at Frankeforde where I was at this present by occasion, a
very fair city, the magistrates favorable to our people, with so many other
commodities as exiles ca^ well look for. Here is also a church, and now (god be
thanked) well quieted by the prudency of master Coxe and other which met
here for that purpose. So that now we trust god has provided for such as will
fly forth of Babylon, a restyng place where they may truly serve him and hear
the voice of their true pastor. I suppose in one place and other dispersed,
there be well nigh an hundredth students and ministers on this side the seas.
Such a lord is god to work dyuersly in his, according to his unsearchable
wisdom, who knows best what is in man. Cyprianus de lapsis.
Primus est victoriae titulus gentilium manibus apprehensum, dominum confiteri.
Secundus ad gloriam gradus est, cauta secessione subtractum domino reseruari.
Illa publica, haec priuata confessio est. Ille iudice^ seculi vincit, hic
contentus deo suo iudice, conscientia^ pu^a^ cordis integritate custodit.
Isthic fortitudo promptior, hic solicitudo securior. Ille appropinquante hora
sua iam maturus inuentus est, hic fortasse dilatus est, qui patrimonio
derelicto idcirco secessit, quia non erat negaturus, confiteretur vtique si
fuisset and ipse detentus. We have also here certain copies of your answers in
the disputation. Ite^ Antoniana obiecta cum responsione. The treatise in
english against transubstantiation, which in time shall be translated into
Latin. It has been thought best not to printe them till we see what god will
do with you, both for incensyng of their malicious fury, and also for
restraining you and others from writing hereafter, which should be a greater
loss to the church of Christ, than forbearing of these for a time. If I shall
know your will to be otherwise in it, the same shall be followed. Thus much I
thought good to let you understand concerning these matters and concerning the
poor state of men here: who most earnestly and incessantly do cry unto god for
the delivery of his church, to behold the causes of the afflicted, and to
hear the groans of his imprisoned, knowing that you, who in this state have
more familiar access unto god, do not forget us. God comfort you, aid you,
and assist you with his spirit and grace, to continue his unto thend, to the
glory of his name, the edification of his church, and the subversion of
Antichrists kingdom. Amen.

From Franckford the 6. of May. 1555. E. G.

The answer of D. Rydley to the former letter.
BLessed be god our heavenly father which inclined your heart to have such a
desire to write unto me, and blessed be he again which has heard your request
and has brought your letters safe unto my hands: and over all this I bless him
through our lord Jesus Christ, for the great comfort I have received by the
same, of the knowledge of your state and of other our dearly beloved brethren
and country men in those parties beyond the sea.

Dearly beloved brother Grindall I say to you and all the rest of our brethren
in Christ with you, rejoice in the lord, and as ye love me and the other my
reverend fathers and concaptiues (which undoubtedly are gloria Christi) lamente
not our state, but I beseech you and them all to give unto our heavenly father
for his endless mercies and unspeakable benefits even in the mids of all our
troubles given unto us, most hearty thanks. For know ye that as the weight of
his cross has increased upon us, so he has not nor does not cease to
multiply his mercies to strengthen us, and I trust, yea by his grace I dout
nothing, but he will so do for Christ our masters sake eue^ to thend. To hear
yt you and our other brethren do find in your exile favor and grace with the
magestrates, ministers and citizens at Tigury, at Frankforte and other where,
it does greatly comfort (I dare say) al here that do in deed love Christ and
his true word. I ensure you it warmed my heart to here you by chance to name
some, as Scory and Coxe etc. Oh that it had come in your mind to have said
somewhat also of Cheek, of Turner, of Leauer, of Sampso^, of Chambers, but I
trust to god they be all well. And sir, seeing you say that there be in those
parties with you of students and ministers so good a number, now therefore care
you not for us, otherwise then to wish that gods glory may be set forth by us.
For whenever god shall call us home (as we look daily for none other, but
when it shall please god to say, Come) ye, blessed be God, are enoughe through
his aid, to light and set up again the lantern of his word in England. As
concerning the copies ye say ye have with you, I wonder how ever they did
wander and could find the way to come to you. This disputation of his own
penning is in the book of Martyrs.
My disputation, except you have that which I gathered my self after ye
disputation done, I can not think ye have it truly. If ye have that, then ye
have there withal the whole manner after the which I was used in the
disputation.

As for the treatise in english contra transubstantiatione^, vix possu^ adduci
vt credam operoepretiu^ fore vt in latinu^ tra^sferatur. Caeteru^ quicquid sit,
nullo modo velim vt quicqua^ quocunque modo meo nomine ederetur, donec quid de
nobis dn^s co^stituerit fieri, vobis prius certo co^stiterit: and thus much
unto your letters. Now although I suppose ye know a good part of our state
here (for we are forth coming, eue^ as when ye departed. etc) you shall
understand yt I was in ye tower about the space of ij. months close prisoner,
and after yt had granted to me without my labor, the liberty of ye tower, and
so continued about half a year, and then because I refused to allow the mass
with my presence, I was shut up in close prison again.

The last Lent save one, it chanced by reason of the tumult stirred up in
Kente, there was so many prisoners in the Tower, that my L. of Canterb. M.
Lacimer, M. Bradforde and I were put altogether in one prison, where we
remained still almost to the next easter, and then we three, Caunterb. Latymer
and I, were suddenly sent a little before Gato Oxford, and were suffered to have
nothing with us, but that we carried upon us. About the Whitsontide following was
our disputations at Oxford, after the which was al taken from us, as pen and
ynke, etc. our own servants were taken from us before, and every one had put
to him a strange man, and we each one appointed to be kept in several places,
as we are unto this day.

Blessed be god we three at the writing hereof, were in good health and (in
god) of good cheer. We have looked long ago to have been dispatched, for we
were all three on one day within a day or two of our disputations, of D.
Weston being the head commissioner, condemned for heretykes, and since that
time we remain as we were of him leaft. The Lords will be fulfilled in us,
as I do not doubt, but by his grace it shall be to his glory and our endless
salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Likewise the Lord hitherto has preserved above al our expectation our dear
brother, and in Christ's cause a strong Champion I Bradford. He is likewise
condemned, and is already delivered unto the seculer power, and writtes, (as we
have heard say) given out for his execution, and called in again. Thus ye lord
so long as his blessed pleasure is, preserves whom he lysteth, notwithstanding
the wonderful ragyng of the world* Many (as we hear say) have suffered
valiauntly, confessyng Christ's truth, and nothing yelding to the adversary,
yea not for the fear or pains of death.

The names of them which I knew, and have now suffered are these, Farrer the B.
of S. David's, Hoper the B. of Worceter, Rogers tuus olim comprebendarius, D.
Tailor of Hadley, M. Saunders, and one Tomkyns a weauer, and now this last day
M. Cardmaker with an other were burnte in Smithfield at London, and many other
in Essex and kent, whose names are written in ye book of life, who^ yet I do
not know.

West your old companion and sometime mine officer (alas) has relented (as I
have heard) but the lord has shortened his days, This West when he had
relented and said mass against his conscience, shortly after pined away and
died for sorrow.
for anon he died and is gone. Grimbolde was caught by the heel and cast into
the marshalsee, but now is at liberty again, but I fear me he escaped not
without some beckyng and bowyng (alas) of his knee unto Baal.

My dear friend Thomas Ridley of the Bulheade in cheap, which was to me the
most faithful friend that I had in my trouble, is departed also unto god. My
brother Ship side that has married my sister, has been almost half a year
in prison for deliueryng (as he was accused) of certain things, I ween, from
me: but now, thanks be to god, he is at liberty again, but so that the bishop
has taken from him his park.

Of al us three co^captiues at Oxford I am kept most strait, and with least
liberty, vel quia viro in cuius edibus, ego custodior, vxordominatur (licet
modo sit prefectus ciuitatis) mulier vetula, morosa, and superstitiosiss: quae
etia^ hoc sibi laudi ducit quod me dicatur arctissime and cautissime custodire,
vir autem ipse Irischius nomine, mitis satis est omnibus, vxori vero plusquam
obsequentiss. Licet vxorem (vti nosti) nunquam habuerim, tamen ex hac
quotidiana consuetudine quam cum istis coniugibus habeo, videor mihi non nihil
posse intelligere quam grave malum and intollerabile iugum sit cum mala
mulierein coniugio colligari. Recte ergo sapiens dixit, vxor bona donum Dei:
and iterum, mulieris bonae beatus vir. Vel haec inquam causa est, vel quia a
magnis magistratibus (nescio quas ob causas) illud est vt ita fieret, ipsis
ma^datum: id quod illi si quando de meanimia seruitute apud eos conqueror,
sedulo soepe rursus mihi inculcant.

At Cambridge (as I hear say) Omnes studioru^ and statutoru^ reformationes
nuper factae, nunc sunt denuo deformatae and deletae, and omnia sunt in
pristinum chaos and in antiquum papismum reducta: omnes collegiorum prefecti
qui synceritati eua^gelij faueba^t, vel qui coniugati era^t, loco moti sunt,
and alij papisticae factionis in eorum loca surrogati, quod and de socijs
collegiorum qui noluerunt flectere genu Baall factu^ esse audio. Nec miru^, na^
and istud passim factu^ est in vniuerso regno angliae, in omnibus
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Decanis, prebe^darijs, Sacerdotibus ecclesiarum and
in toto clero: and to tell you much naughty matter in a few words, Papismus
apud nos vbique in pleno fuo antiquo robore regnat. The Lord be merciful and
for Christ's sake pardon us our old unkindness and unthankfulness: for when
he powered upon us the gifts of his manifold graces, and favor (alas) we did
not serve him nor rendered unto him thanks according to the same. We pastors
many of us were to cold and bare to much (alas) with the wicked world, our
magistrates did abuse to their own worldly gain both gods Gospel and the
ministers of the same, the people in many places was waywarde and unkind. Thus
of every side and of every sort we have provoked Gods anger and wrath to fall
upon us: but blessed might he be that has not suffered his to continue in
those ways, which so wholly have displeased his secrate majesty, but has
awaked them by ye fatherly correction of his own sons cross, unto his glory
and our endless salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord. My daily prayer is (as
god does know) and by gods grace shall be so long as I live in this world, for
you my dear brethren that are fled out of your own country, because ye will
rather forsake al worldly things, the^ ye truth of gods word. It is even the
same that I use to make to God for all those churches abroad through the world,
which have forsaken the kingdom of Antichrist, and professed openly the purity
of the gospel of Jesus Christ: that is that god our eternal father for our
savior christ's sake, will daily increase in you ye gracious gift of his heavenly
spirit to the true setting forth of his glory and of his gospel, and make you
to agree brotherly in the truth of the same, that there rise no rote of
bitterness among you, yt may infect that good sede that god has sowe^ in your
hearts already, and finally yt your life may be so pure and so honest according
to the rule of Gods word and according to that vocation whereunto we are
called by the Gospel of Christ our savior, that the honesty and purity of the
same may provoke all that shall se or know it, to the love of your doctrine, and
to love you for your honestye and virtues sake, and so both in the brotherly
unity of your true doctrine and also in the godly virtue of your honest life,
to glorify our father which is in heaven.

Ex nostratibus magni aliquoc magistratus, Cancellarius Wint. Comes Arundellus,
and dn^s Pachetusiam legatione fu^gu^tur vna cu^ Cardinali Polo, in partibus
tra^smarinis ad co^pone^da^ (vt aiu^t) pace^ inter imperatorem, regem nostrum,
and Francorum regem. Post illorum magistratuum nostrorum reditum, and partum
reginae, que^ iam quotidie expectamus and iam aliquandiu expectauimus, queque
deus pro sui nominis gloria dignetur been illi fortunare: nos tunc statim nihil
aliud quam nostrae confessionis de host nostro antiquo, triumphales in domino
coronas expectamus.

Omnium vestrum precibus me humillime and ex toto cord co^me^do. In primis
tuis o chariss. in Christo frater and dilectiss. Grindalle, and chariss.
fratru^ and vnice mihi in dn^o dilectoru^ Checi Coxi Turneri, Leueri,
Sampsonis, Chamberi, and omniu^ fratru^ nostroru^ and conterraneorum qui apud
vos degunt and diligunt dominu^ nostrum Iesum Christum in veritate. Co^medo
etiam vobis reuerendiss. patres and concaptiuos meos in domino Thomam Cranmerum
iam vere magnipastoris and Archipresulis nomine digniss. and veteranum illum
nostrae gentis Anglicanae verum Apostolum and Christi. H. Latimerum. Condona
mihi frater harum prolixitatem, non enim post hac credo chariss: frater, meis
literis iam amplius ali quando turbaberis. Oxonij.

To M. Cranmer and M. Latymer being separated from him and prisoners in
several places.
THe cause of my brothers enpriso^me^t is this, so far as I can perceive.
There is a young man called M. Grymbolde which was my chaplain a preacher, and
a man of much eloquence both in the english and also in the Latin. To this man
being desirous of al things which I had written and done since the beginning of
mine emprisonme^t, my brother as is said) has sent copies, no more but of all
things yt I have done. First a little treatise which M. Latymer and I wrote in
the toure, where is before my my sayings. N. R. and before M. Latimer. H. L.
Also an other draught which I drew out of the Evangelists and of S. Paul, yt
the words of ye lords supper, are figuratively to be under stand, alleging
out of the doctors only vi: three of the greek church, which are Origin,
Chrisost. ad Cesa. monachu^, and Theodoret and three of the latin church:
Tertullian, Augustine, and Gelasius, He had of my brother also a copy of my
iij. positions to the three questions here propounded to us at Oxford: the^ also
a copy of my disputation in the schools as I wrote it my self after the
disputation. Item the letter Ad fratres in diuersis carceribus. All these
things they have gotten of Grymbold (as my brother does suppose) not that
Grymbold has bewrayed him but (as is supposed) one which my brother trusted
to carye his letters unto Grymbolde: for it will not synke into my head to
think that Grymbold would ever play me such a Judas part. Although these
things are chanced far otherwise then I had thought they should (for my
mind was that they should not have comme abroad until my body had been laid to
rest in peace) yet truly I suppose this is not thus chanced without gods
graciouse providence which he has over al his, and I trust that god of his
goodness shall turn it to his own glory. For it shall evidently appear to the
reader of these things which they have, that the cause why I do dissent from
the Romish religion is not any study of vain glory or of singularitye, but of
conscience, of my bound duty toward god and toward Christ's church and the
salvation of mine own soul, for the which by gods grace I will wyllingly
ieoperd here to lose life lands and goods, name and fame, and what else is or
ca^ be unto me pleasant in this world. My brother as yet, because they nether
showed any comissio^ or authority wherbye they did examine him nor also any
thing of his letters (although they said they had them) as yet I say my
brother has confessed nothing. But I look for none other but he shall be forced
to tell where he had the copies and where they be, and I wylbe content that he
shall say the truth, that he had them all of me, let them come and take them and
cast them into the fire, if god know they will promote his glory: they can do
no more then he will suffer them. Because in the book of N. R. and H. L. it is
said in the end that. H L. has caused his servant to write it, I would
Austine should have word if any farther search be, to keep him out of the way.
God shall reward you both for my brother: You my Lord of Caunt. for your meat
and daily comfort, and you father L. for your money and comfortable messeges. I
trust in God my brother though he be young yet will study to, learn to bear
Christ's cross patienly as a young Scholar in Christ's Schole: God increase his
grace in us all. Amen.

To master Bradford prisoner in the kings Bench.
Well-beloved in Christ our savior, we all with one heart wish you, with all
those that love god in deed and truth, grace and health, and specially to our
dearly beloved companions which are in Christ's cause and the cause both of
their brethren and of their own salvation, ready and willing to put their
neck under the yoke of Christ's cross. How joyful it was to us to hear the
report of D. Tailor and of his godly confession etc: I ensure you, it is hard
for me to express. Blessed be God which was and is the geuer of that and all
godly strength and stomach in the time of adversity. As for the rumors that
have or do go abroad either of our relenting or massing, we trust that they
which know god and their duty toward their brethren in Christ, will not be to
light of credit to believe them. It is not the sclaunderers evil tongue but a
man's own evil deed, that can with God defile a man, and therefore by gods
grace, you shall never have cause to do otherwise then you say you do, that is
not to doubt but that we will continue, etc. Like rumor as you have heard of
our coming to London has been here spread of the coming of certain
learned men prisoners hither from London: but as yet we know no certeyntye
whether of these rumors is or shall be more true. Know you yt we have you in our
daily remembrance, and wish you and all the rest of our foresaid companions,
well in Christ. It should do us much comfort if we might have knowledge of the
state of ye rest of our most dearly beloved, which in this troublesome time
do stand in Christ's cause, and in the defense of the truth thereof. We are in
good health thanks be to God, and yet the manner of our entreting does chaung
as sour ale does in so^mer. It is reported to us of our kepers, that the
university bears us heauely. A cole chanced to fall in the night out of the
chimney and burnt a hole in the floor, and no more harm was done, the balifes
servants sitting by the fire. An other night there chanced a drunken fellow to
multiply words, and for the same he was set in Bocardo. Upon these things as
is reported, there is rise^ a rumor in the town and country about, that we
would have broken the prison with such violence, as if the balifes had not played
the pretty men, we should have made a escape. We had out of our prison a wall that
we might have walked upon, and our servants had liberty to go abroad in the
town or fields: but now both they and we are restrained of both. The bishop
of Worceter passed by us through Oxford, but he did not visit us. The same day
began our restraint to be more, and the book of the communion was taken from
us by the balifes at the Mayors commandment. No man is licenced to come unto
us: before they might that would, see us upon the wall, but that is so grudgod
at and so euel reported, that we are now restrained etc. Sir blessed be God,
with all our evil reports, grudginges and restrayntes, we are merry in God,
and all our ear is and shall be by gods grace, to please and serve him, of whom
we look and hope after this temporal and momentany miseries, to have eternal
joy and perpetual felicity, with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Peter and Paul and
all the blessed company of the angels in heaven, through Jesus Christ our lord.
As yet there was never learned man or any scholar or other yt visited us since
we came into Bocardo, Bocardo is a stinking and filthy prison for drunkards
whores and harlottes and the vilest sort of people.
which now in Oxford may be called a college of quonda^s: for as you know we
be no fewer here the^ three, and I dare say, every one well contented with his
portion, which I do reckon to be our heavenly fathers gracious and fatherly
good gift. Thus fare you well. We shall with gods grace one day mete together and
be merry: the day assuredly approaches apace, ye lord grant yt it may shortly
come, for before yt day come I fear me the world will wax worse and worse: but
the^ al our enemies shall be ouerthrown and trodden under foot, righteousness,
and truth then shall have the victory and bear the bell away, whereof the lord
grant us to be partners and all that sincerely love the truth. We al pray
you, as you can to cause al our comme^dations to be made to all such as you
know did visit us and you when we were in the tower with their friendly
reme^brances and benefits. Mistres Wilkinson and mistres Warcup have not
forgotten us, but even since we came into Bocardo with their charitable and
fre^dly benevolence, have comforted us: Not that else we lack, (for god be
blessed which ever hitherto has provided sufficiently for us) but it is a
great comfort and an occasion for us to bless god when we se that he makes
them so friendly to tender us, whom some of us were never familierly acquaynted
withal.

Yours in Christ N. R.

To master Bradford.
Dearly beloved, I wysh you grace mercy and peace. According to your mind I
have run over all your papers, and what I have done (which is but small) therein
may appear. Sir what shall best be done with these things, This was a
treatise of the communion with other things which M. Bradforde sent to him to
peruse and to give his judgment thereof.
now you must consider: for if they come in sight at this time, undoubtedly
they must to the fire with their father, and as for any safegarde that your
custody can be unto them, I am sure you look not for it: for as you have been
partner of the work, so I am sure, you look for none other, but to have and
receive like wages and to drink of the same cup. Blessed be god that has
given you liberty in the mean ceason, yt you may use your pen to his glory,
and to the comfort (as I hear say) of many. I bless god daily in you and all
your whole company, to whom I beseech you to commend me hartly. Now I love my
countreyman in deed and in truth, I mean. D. Tailor, not now for my earthly
countries sake, but for our heavenly fathers sake, whom I heard say, he did
so stoutly in time of peril confess: and yet also now for our countries sake
and for all our mothers sake, but I mean of the kingdom of heaven and of
heavenly jerusalem, and because of the sprite which brings in him, in you,
and in your company such blessed fruits of boldness in the lords cause, of
patience, and consta^cy. The Lord which has begone this work in you al,
perform and perfect this his own deed, until his own day come. Amen.

As yet, I perceive you have not been baited and the cause thereof God knows,
which will let them do no more to his then is his pleased will and good pleasure
to suffer them to do for his own glory and to the profit of them which be
truly his, for the father which does guide the^ that be christ's to Christ
is more mighty than all they, and no man is able to pulle the^ out of the
fathers hands: except, (I say) it please our father, it please our master
Christ to suffer them, they shall not be able to stir one hear of your
heads. My brother. P. the bearer hereof, would that we should say what we
think good concerning your mind: that is, not for to answer except ye
might have somewhat indifferent judges. We are (as ye know) separated, and one
of us can not in any thing consult with an other, and much strait watching of
the baylifes is about us that there be no privy conference amongst us. And yet
(as we hear) the scholars bear us more heauelye then the townsemen. A
wonderful thing, among so many, never yet scholar offered to any of us (so far
as I know) any manner of favor either for or in Christ's cause. Now as
concerning your demand of our counsel, for my part I do not mislike that
which I perceive ye are minded to do: for I look for none other, but if ye
answer before the same commissioners that we did, ye shall be served and
handled as we were, though ye were as well learned as ever was either Peter or
Paul. And yet further I think that occasion afterward may be given you, and
the consideration of the profit of your auditory may perchance move you to
do otherwise. Finallye, determinately to say what shall be best, I am not
able: but I trust he, whose cause ye have in hand, shall put you in mind to do
that which shall be most for his glory, the profit of his flock, and your own
salvation. This letter must be common to you and M. Hoper, in whom and in his
prison fellow good father Crome, I bless god even from the bottom of my
heart: for I doubt not but they both do to our master Christ, true,
acceptable and honorable service and profitable to his flock, the one with his
pen and the other with his fatherlye example of patience and constancye and
all manner of true godlynes. But what shall I need to say to you, let this be
common among your brethren? among whom (I dare say) it is with you as it is
with us, to whom all things here are common: meat, money, and what soever
one of us has that can or may do an other good. Although I said the
baylifes and our hosts straightly watch us that we have no conference or
intelligence of any thing abroad, yet has God provided for every one of us
in ye stead of our servants faithful fellows which will be content to hear and
see, and to do for us what so ever they can: it is Gods work surely, blessed
be God for his unspeakable goodness. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and
the love of God, and the communion of the holy ghost be with you all, Amen,
Amen. As far as London is from Oxford, yet thence we have received of late
both meat, money, and shyrtes, not only from such as are of our acquayntance,
but of some whom this bearer can tell, with whom I had never to my knowledge
any acquaintance. I know for whose sake they do it: to him therefore be all
honor glory and due thanks, And yet I pray you do so much as to show them
that we have received their benevolence, and (god be blessed) have plentye of
all such things. This I desire you to do, for I know they be of master Hopers
and your familier acquayntaunce. Master Latimer was crased, but I hear now
thanks be to God that he amendeth again.

Yours in Christ N. R.

To master Bradford.
BRother Bradford I wish you and your company in Christ, yea and all the holy
brotherhode that now with you in diverse prisonnes suffers and bears
patiently Christ's cross for the mayntenance of his gospel: grace, mercy and
peace from god the father and from our Lord Jesus Christ. Sir, consideringe
the state of this chivalry and warfare, wherein I doubt not but we be set to
fight under Christ's banner and his cross against our gostly enemy the devil
and the old serpent Satan, me think I perceive two things to be his most
perilous and most dangerous engines which he has to impugn christ's verity,
his gospel, his faith: and ye same two also to be the most massye posts and
most mighty pillars, whereby he mainteyneth and vpholdeth his Satanical
sinagoge. These two sir, are they in my judgment: the one his false doctrine
and idolatry call use of the Lords supper, and the other, the wicked and
abominable usurpation of the primacye of the sea of Rome. By these two Satan
seems to me principally to manteine and uphold his kingdom: by these two, he
drives down mightily (alas) I fear me, Apo. 8.
the third part of the stars in heaven. These two poysonfull rotten posts he
has so painted over with such a pretense and color of religion, of unity in
Christ's church, of the catholic faith and such like, yt the wily serpent is
hable to deceive (if it were possible) even the elect of god. Wherefore John
said not without great cause, Apoc. ij.
if any know not Satan's subtilties and the doungeons thereof, I will wish him
no other burden to be laden withal. Sir, because these be his principal and
maine posts whervppon stands all his falshode, craft, and trecherye,
therefore according to the pore power that God has given me, I have bended mine
artillary to shoot at the same. I know it to be but little (God knows) that
I can do, and of my shote I know they pass not. Yet will I not (God willing)
cease to do the best that I can, to shake those cankered and rotten posts. The
Lord grant me good success, to the glory of his name and the furtheraunce of
Christ's gospel. I have now already (I thank god) for this present time spent
a good part of my powder in these scryblyngs, whereof this bearer shall give you
knowledge. Good brother Bradforde, let the wicked surmise and say what they
list, know you for a certeynty by gods grace, without al doubt, that in
Christ's gospelles cause, against and upon the foresaid gods enemies, I am
fully determined to live and die. Fare well dear brother, and I beseech you
and all the rest of our brethern, to have good remembrance of the condemned
heretics (as they call them) of Oxforde in your prayers. The bearer shall
certifye you of our state. Fare well in the Lord.

From Bocardo. Yours in Christ. N.R.

To master Bradford
DEarelye beloved brother, blessed be God our heavenly father for his
manifold and innumerable mercies toward us, and blessed might he be that
has spared us thus long together, that each one of us may bless his mercy
and clemencye in other unto this day above the expectation and hope of any
worldly appearance.

Where as you write of he outrageous rule that Satan our gostly enemy bears
abroad in the world, wherbye he stirs and rayseth so pestilente and heinous
heresies, as some to deny the blessed trinity, some the divinity of our savior
Christ, some the divinity of the holy ghost, some the baptism of infants, some
original sin, and to be infected with the errors of the pelagia^s, and to
rebaptise those that have been baptized with Christ's baptism already: alas sir
this does declare this time and these days to be wicked in deed. But what can
we look for else of Satan here and of his ministers but to do the worste that
they can so far forth as god shall or will suffer them. And now me think he
is less to be merueled at at this time if he bestirre him by all manner of
means, yt the truth in deed do take no place. For he sees now (blessed be
God) that some go about in deed and in truth, not trifeling, but with the
loss of all that they are able to loose in this world, goods lands, name,
fame and life also, to setforth Gods word and his truth, and by Gods
grace shall do, and abide in the same unto the end: now therefore it is time to
be stir him I trow. And as for the diuersitye, of erroures, what cares he
though one be never so contrary to an other? He rekeneth all (and so he may)
to be his who soever prevail, so that truth prevail not. Nevertheless good
brother, I suppose that the universal plage is most dangerous which at this
day is (alas) fostered and maisterfully holden up by wit, worldly policy,
multitude of people, power and al worldly means. As for other the deuilles
Galtroppes that he casts in our ways by some of his busye headed yonkers, I
trust they shall never be able to do the multitude so great harm. For
blessed be god, these heresies before time when Satan by his servants has been
about to broch them, have by gods servants already been so sharply and truly
confounded, that the multitude was never infected with them, or else where they
have been infected, they are healed again, that now the peril is not so
great. And where you say that if your request had been heard, things (you
think) had been in better case then they be: know you ye concerning the matter
you meant, I have in latin drawn out the places of the scripures and upon the
same have noted what I can for the time. Sir in those matters I am so fearful,
that I dare not speak farther, yea almost none otherwise then the very text
does (as it were) lead me by yt hand. And where you exhort us to help etc: He
meane^ here the matter of Gods election, whereof he afterward Wrote a godly and
comfortable treatise remaynyng yet in the hands of so^^^ and hereafter shall
come to light, if god so will.
O lord what is else in this world yt we now should list to do? I bless my lord
god I never (as me thinks) had more nor better leisure to be occupied with my
pen in such things as I ca^ do to set forth (when they may come to light) gods
glory. And I bless my lord god through Jesus Christ, my heart and my work
are therein occupied, not so fully and perfectly as I would, but yet so as I
bless god for ye same. Fare well dear brother, the messenger tarieth and I
may not now be longer with you. The lord I trust verily shall bring us thither
where we shall each one with other in Christ our savior, rejoice and be merry
everlastingly.

Your brother in Christ, N. R.

To master Bradford.
Dearly beloved brother Bradforde, I had thought of late that I had written
unto you your last farewell, until we should have met in the kingdom of
heaven, by our dear brother Austine, and I sent it to meet you in
Lankeshyre, whether it was said here you were appoincted to be sent to suffer.
But now, since they have changed their purpose and prolonged your death, I
understand it is no other thing, then that once happened to Peter and Paul.
The which although they were of the first which were cast in prison, and as
little shoned peril as any other did, yet god would not have them put to death
with the first, because he had more service to be done by their ministry,
which his gracious pleasure was they should do: so without doubt dear brother
I am persuaded that ye same is the cause of the delay of your Martyrdom.
Blessed be the holy Trinity, the father, the son and the holy Ghost. for you
threefolde confession. I have read all three with great comfort and joy and
thankesgeuyng unto God for his manifold gifts of grace, wherewith it is
manifesse to the godly reader that GOD did assyste you mightilye. And blessed
be God again and again, which gave you so good a mind and remembrance of
your oath once made against the bishop of Rome, least you should be pertaker of
the common perjury which all men almost are now fallen into, in bringyng in
again that wicked usurped power of his. Jeremy, 4.
Which oath was made according to the Prophet, in judgment, in ryghteousnes,
and in truth, and therefore can not without perintye be revoked: let Satan roar
and rage and practice all the cruelty he can. Oh good lord that they are so
busye with you about the church. It is no new thing brother that is happened
unto you, for that was always the clamor of the wicked bishops and priests
against gods true prophets: the temple of the lord, the temple of the lord, ye
temple of ye lord: EZechi. 7.
and they said ye law shall not depart from the priest nor wisdom from the
Elder, and yet in them whom they only esteemed for their priests and sages,
there was neither gods law, nor godly wisdom. It is a marvelous thing to hear
what vain communication is spread abroad of you. It is said here that you be
pardoned your life, and when you were appointed to be banished and to go, I can
not tell whether, you should say that you had rather here suffer, then go where
you could not live after your conscience, and that this pardon should be begged
for you by Borne the Bishop of Bathe, for that you saved his life. Again, some
say and among other mine hosts reported, that you are hyghlye promoted, and
are a great man with my lord Chauncelor. This I could not believe, but did
deny it as a false lie: so surely was I always persuaded of your constancye.
What god will do with us he knows. In the mean time wonderful it is to
behold how the wisdom of GOD has in fatuated the policye of the world and
scattered the crafty devises of the worldly wise. For when the state of
religion was once altered, and persecution began to wax whote, no man douted
but Cranmer, Latymer, and Rydley, should have been the first to have been
called to the stake. But the subtyle policye of the world setting us aparte,
first assaulted them, by whose infirmity they thought to have more vauntage,
but god disapoynted their subtle purpose. For whom the world esteemed weakest
(praised be god) they have found most strong, sound and valyaunte in Christ's
cause unto the death, to give such an onset as I dare say all the angels in
heaven do no less rejoice to behold in them, then they did in the victorious
constancy of Peter, John. 15.
Paul, Esaias, Helyas or Hieremy. For greater love no man has than to bestow
his life etc. Good brother have me and us all continuallye in your remembrance
to god in your prayers, as God willing we shall not be in our prayers forgetful
of you.

Your own in Christ. N. R.

To master Bradford.
BRother Bradford, I wish you in Christ our Savior, grace, mercy, and peace,
and to al the^ which are with you or any where else captives in Christ, and to
hear that ye be al in good health and stand consta^tly in the confession of
Christ's gospel, it does heartily rejoice us. Know you likewise that we all
here be (thanks be to god) in good health and comfort, watchyng with our
lamps light (I trust in god) when it shall please our master the brydegrome,
Math. 25.
to call us to wait upon him unto the marriage. Now we suppose the day does
approach apace, for we hear that the Parliamente is dissolved. The Burgesses
of Oxforde are come home, and other news we bear not, but that the king is
made protector to the prince to be borne, And that the bishops have full
authority Ex officio, to enquire of heresies. Before the Parliament began, it
was a rumor here that certain from the Convocation house was appointed, yea
ready to have come to Oxford, and then there was spyed out one thing to lack
for want of a law, to perform their entente. Now seeing they can want no
law, we cannot but look for them shortly, I trust to gods glory, let them come
when they will. etc.

Brother Bradford I maruayle greatly of good Austine where he is, for that I
heard say he promised his master to have been here before this time, and he
had from me that I would be loathe to loose, yea to want when time shall be
that it might do, nay help me to do my lord and my master Christ service. I
mean my scriblynges de abominationibus sedis Romanae and po^tificu^ Romanoru^.
I have no copye of the same, and I look daily to be called in certamen cum
antiquo Serpente, and so I told him, and I ween you also by whose means I
was more moved to let him have them. I doubt not of his fidelitye: I pray God
he be in health and at liberty, for I have been and am careful for him. I
have heard that master Grimbolde has gotten his liberty: If without any
blemishe of Christ's glory I am right glad thereof. My brother in law is where he
was that is in Bocardo the common Iayle of the town. I have written her a
letter to master Hooper, I pray you cause it to be written to him again.
Commend me to all your prison fellows and our brethren in Christ. If Austine
were here I would have had more to say. The lord grant that all be with him
well, who ever preserve you and all that love our savior Christ in synceritie
and truth, Amen.

Yours by gods grace in our master Christ's cause unto ye stake, and
the^ceforth without al danger and peril for ever and ever. I am sure you have
heard of our new apparel, and I dout not but London will have their talk of
it. Sir know you that although this seems to us in our case much thanks
worthy, yet have we not that apparel that we look for, for this in time will
wear, and that which we look for ryghtly done on will endure, and is called
stola immortalitatis.

N. R.

To master Bradford.
OH dear brother, seeing the time is now come wherein it pleases the heavenly
father for Christ our savior his sake, to call upon you, and to bid you to
come, happy are you that ever ye were borne, thus to be awake at the lords
calling. Euge serve bone and fidelis, quia super pauca fuisti fidelis, super
multa te constituet, and intrabis in gaudium domini. O dear brother, what
means this, that you are sent into your own native country? The wisdom and
policy of the world may mean what they will, but I trust god will so order the
matter finally by his fatherly providence, that some great occasion of Gods
gracious goodness shall be plenteouslye powered abroad amongst his, our dear
brethren in that country by this your Martyrdom. Where the Martyrs for
Christ's sake shed their blood and lost their lives, O what wondrous things has
Christ afterward wrought to his glory, and confirmation of their doctrine? If
it be not the place that sanctifi eh the man, but the holy man does by Christ
sanctifye the place: Brother Bradford, then happy and holy shall be that place,
wherein thou shall suffer, and shall be with thy ashes in Christ's cause sprinkled
over with all. Al thy country may rejoice of thee that ever it brought forth
such a one, which would render his life again in his cause, of whom he had
received it.

Brother Bradford, so long as I shall understand yt thou art in thy journey, by
gods grace I shall call upon our heavenly father for christ's sake, to set thee
safely home: and then good brother speak you and pray for the remnaunt that are
for to suffer for christ's sake, according to that thou the^ shall know more
clearly.

We do look now every day, when we shall be called on, blessed be god. I went,
I am the weakest many ways of our company, and yet I thank our Lord god and
heavenly father by Christ, yt since I heard of our dear brother Rogers
departing and stout confession of Christ and his truth even unto the death, my
heart (blessed be God) so rejoiced of it, that since yt time I say, I never felt
any lu^pish heaviness in my heart, as I grant I have felt sometimes before. O
good brother, blessed be god in thee, and blessed be the time that ever I knew
thee. Farewell, farewell.

Your brother in Christ, N. R. Brother farewell.

To master Bradford.
GRatiam and pacem. etc. Although I ween it is not yet iii. days ago, since
you heard from me, yet having such a messe^ger and so diversely enforced, I
cannot but say some thing to you. What? shall I thank you for your golden token?
what mean you man? This token was a piece of gold, which he sent to relieu^ his
brother Shipside prisoner in Bocardo.
Do you not know that we have victum and amictu^ e penario regio? I was so
moved with your toke^ that I commanded it straight way to be had to Bocardo
which is our common Iayle. I am right glad of Austines return for I was (as I
told you) careful for him. Blessed be God that all is well. I have seen what he
brought from you, and shortly surueyed the whole, but in such celerity, that
other also might see the same before Austines return: so that I noted nothing
but a confused some of the matter, and as yet what the rest have done, I can
tell nothing at al, and it was at the writing hereof in their hands. To your
request and Austines earnest demand of the same, I have answered him in a
brief letter, He means here Harry Harta froward free will man, who had
written a treatise against gods free election, which Bradford sent to M.
Rydley, Cranmer, and Latymer to pervse, desyring M. Rydley to answer the same.
and yet he has replied again: but he must go without any further answer of
me for this time. I have told Austine that I for my part, as I can and may for
my tarditie and dulnes, will think of the matter. We are so now ordered and
straitlye watched, that scantly our servants dare do any thing for us: so much
talk and so many tales (as is said) are told of us abroad. One of us cannot
easily nor shortly be of knowledge of an others mind, and you know I am youngest
many ways. Austines persuasions may do more with me in that I may do
conveniently in this matter, armed with your earnest and zealous letters, then
any rhetorike either of Tullye or Demosthenes, I ensure you thereof. With us it
is said yt M. Grymbold was adjudged to be hanged drawn and quartered, of whom
we hear now, Note the lyeng spirit of the papists, whereby you may se whose
children they are.
that he is at liberty. So we heard of late, yt M. Hooper was hanged drawn and
quartered in deed, not for heresy but for treason, but blessed be god, we here
now that all is true in like. False tongues will not cease to lie and mischeuous
hearts to imagine the worst. Farewell in Christ, and token for token now I send
you not, but know this, that (as it is told me) I have two scarlet gowns that
escaped I cannot tell how, in the spoil, whereof you shall have your part. Commend
me to all our brethren, and your fellow prisoners in the Lord.

Yours in Christ. N, R

To Augustine Berneher, then servant to M. Latymer, and now a faithful
minister in Christ's church, to whom because he might not come to the prison
to speak with him, he wrote as follows.
BRother Austine you are hartelye welcome to Oxford again you have made good
speed in deed, and blessed be god for his gracious goodness that al is well with
you. That our dearly beloved brethren in Christ are al in good comfort, hearty
in christ's cause and stand steadfast in the confession of his true doctrine: it
reioiseth (I ensure you) my heart in god to hear of it. This day was D. Croke
with me, and both he and mystres Irish mine hosts, told me that M. Hoper is
hanged drawn and quartered for treason, but I did not believe them, for it is
not the first tale that mine hosts has told me of M. Hoper. And I trust the
tidings that were here spread abroad since your departure, that M. Grymbold also
should have been arraigned and condemned for treason to be hanged and
quartered, was not true: let me hear if there be any such thing. Not three
dais ago, there was a privy warning given me from a man of god, one Lisley a
glouer, that we prisoners here al iij. should be shortly and suddenly conveyed
into iij. several colleges: for what purpose and how to be ordered god knows.
At ye which time and at the earnest request of that forenamed man of god, I did
deliver unto him some of the things I had in hand to write out: what they be
you shall know of him. Besides the things which he has, I have some things
else, which (if it please god) I would wish might come to light, if perchance
any thereby might receive the light to love the truth ye better and to abhor
the falsehode of Antichriste. I have written annotations in priorem libru^
Tonstalli before, in secundum vero parcius: optarem vt transcribere^turne
fortassis vna mecum fiant subito Vulcani cihus. I have also many things, but as
yet confusedly set together, of the abominable vsurpatio^, pride arrogance,
and wickedness of the sea and bishop of Rome, and altogether in Latin. If those
things were written out, I would wyshe that M. Bradford would take them and
translate and order them as he should think might best help to open the
eyes of the simple for to se the wickedness of the Synagoge of Satan. But that
at your last being here you cast cold water upon mine affection toward
Grimbold, else me think I could appoint where he might occupy himself to his
own profit in learning which he lyketh, and to no small profytte which might
ensue to the church of Christ in England: as if he would take in hand to
interpret Laurentius Valla, which (as he knows) is a man of singular
eloquence, his book I mean, which he made and wrote against that false fained
fable, forged of Consta^tinus magnus, and his dotatio^, and glorious exaltation
of the sea of Rome: and when he has done that, let him translate a work of
Eneas Siluius de gestis Basiliensis consilii. In the which although there be
many things that sauoureth of the pan, and also he himself was afterward a
bishop of Rome: yet I dare say the papists would glory but a little to see
such books go forth in English. If you will know where to have these books
or treatises, you may have them both together and many like treatises which
painteth out the wickedness of the sea of Rome, in a book set forth by a
papist called Ortwinus Gratius, entitled Fasciculus rerum ex petendarum and
fugie^darum. In that book you shall have confessionem fratrum Waldensium, men of
much more learning, godlynes, sobernes, and understanding in Gods word, then I
would have thought them to have been in that time, before I did read their
works. If such things had been set forth in our English tongue heretofore,
I suppose surely great good might have come to Christ's church thereby. To my
good Ladies grace and to my Lady Vane, what thanks can I give, but desire
almyghtye God to lyghten, comfort, and strengthen them evermore in his ways.
The other two whom you mention, I know not, but the Lord knows them: to whom
in them all and for all their kyndnesse, I give most hearty thanks. Master
Bradford desires that thanks should be rendered unto you, for your comfortable
aid, wherwyth you comfort him, but you must tell him that he must bid them
thank you for him, which are not bound to thank you for them selves, and if
he do so, then I ween, all we prisoners of Oxford, shall so stop his mouth.

Brother Austine, you for our comfort do run up and down, and who bears
your charges God knows. I know you must needs in so doing take much
pains: I pray you take this poor token of my good will toward your charges.

To Augustine Bernher.
BRother Augustine, I bless god with all my heart in his manyfold merciful
gifts given unto our dear brethren in Christ, especially to our brother
Rogers whom it pleased to setforth first, no doubt but of his gracious goodness
and fatherly favor toward him. And likewise blessed be God in the rest, as
Hoper Saunders, and Tailor, whom it has pleased the Lord likewise to set in
the forefrount of the battle, against his adversaries, and has endewed them
al (so far as I can here) to stand in the confession of his truth and to be
content in his cause and for his gospels sake to lose their life. And evermore
and without end blessed be eue^ the same our heavenly father for our dear and
entierly beloved brother Bradford, whom now the Lord (I perceive) calls
for: for I wene he will no longer vouchsafe him to abide among the adulterous
and wicked generation of this world. I do not doubt but that he (for those
gifts of grace which the Lord has bestowed on him plenteously) has helped
those which are gone before in their journey, that is, has animated and
encouraged them to keep the high way, and sic currere vti tandem acciperent
premium. The Lord be his comfort, whereof I do not doubt, and I thank God
heartily that ever I was acquaynted with him, and that ever I had such a one in
my house. Protomartyr is the first Martyr: whom he so called, because he was
the first that suffered here in those bloody days.
And yet again I bless God in our dear brother and of this time protomartyr
Rogers, that he was also one of my calling to be a prebendarye preacher of
London. And now because Grindall is gone (The Lord I doubt not has and koweth
wherein he will bestow him) I trust to God it shall please him of his goodness
to strengthen me to make up the trynytye out of Paul's church, to suffer for
Christ, whom God the father has anointed, the holy spirit does bear
witness unto, Paul and all the Apostles preached. Thus fare you well. I had no
paper, I was constrained thus to write.

To Augustine Berneher.
BRother Austine I thank you for your manifold kindness. This alms was
sent him by the Lady Katherin Duches of Suffolk, to who he wrote again a
worthy letter, which is l^st and many other written bot^ to her and others.
I have received my Ladies graces alms, six Royalles six shillinges and
eyghte pence. I have written a letter here unto her grace, but I have made no
mention thereof, wherefore I desire you to render to her grace hearty thanks.
Blessed be God, as for my self I want nothing, but my Ladies alms comes
happilye to relieve my poor brothers necessity, whom you know they have cast
and keep in prison (as I suppose) you know the cause why. Farewell brother
Austine, and take good heed I pray you, and let my brothers case make your ye
more wary. Read my letter to my ladies grace. I would maistres Wilkinso^ and
maystres Warcup had a copy of it: for although ye letter is directed to my
ladies grace alone, yet the matter thereof pertains indifferently to her grace
and to all good women, which love God and his word in deed and truth.

Yours in Christ. N. R.

To Maistres Glouer, a woman zealous and hearty in the cause and furtherance of
Gods gospel.
MAistres glouer, I wysh you grace and peace, and although I am not acquainted
with you, yet nevertheless, hearing that your husband master Glouer is in prison
for gods words sake, and also that you are a woman hearty in gods cause, and
thirdly that old father Latimer is your uncle or nere cousin, who^ I do think
ye lord has placed to be his standerd bearer in our age and country against
his mortal foe Antichrist: I was thus bold to write unto you in gods behalf,
to do according to the report which I here of you: that is, that you be hartye
in Gods cause, and hartye to your master Christ, in furdering of his cause
and settinge fourth his soldiers to his wars to the uttermost of your
power. Let no carnality nor worldly regard of any thing set you to declare
your true heart, which you are said to bear to your master christ above all
other things. Be hearty now also to your husband, and declare your self to
love him in God as the true faithful christian woman unto her husband is bound
to do. Now seeing your husband which is set by gods ordinance to be your head,
is ready to suffer and abide in adversity by his masters cause, and to cleave to
his head christ: see like wise that you do your duty accordyngly, and cleave
unto him your head: suffer with him yt you may further his cause. His cause now
I understand to be Christ's cause, and therefore beware good sister in
Christ, that in no wise ye hinder it. Love so his body and the case and
wealth thereof, as your love may further him to the winning both of body
and soul unto everlasting life. And this love shall both God allow, your
husband shall have just cause to rejoice thereof, and all the godly to
commend you therefore, and to number you for the same, among the godly and
holy women of God. To your husband I have written more: And thus fare you
well now good dear Sister in our savior Christ. I was the bolder to write
unto you, for that I understood my dearly beloved brother Austyne, whom I
call Faustus, shouldbe the carier, a man whom I think God has appointed
to do much pleasure for his priest servants to his wars.

Yours in Christ. N.R.

To a friend that came to visit him in prison but could not speak with him.
Well-beloved I thancke you hartelye for your manyfolde kyndnes, but the Lord
shall, (I trust) acquit you your meede. Though Satan rage, the Lord is
strong enough to bridle him, and to put an iron chain over his nose when it
shall please him. In the mean time they that are the Lords, will flee unto
him, and assuredly he will not forsake them that seek unto him, in very deed
and in truth. This bearer my manne is trustye, you may send your token by
him. Let Nycolas keep still the shyrtes. The Lord reward that Lady VViatte,
which for his sake has thus remembered me: I do not know her person. What
can I render to maystres Wylkynson for all her benefytes? Nothing surely but
to desire the Lord to acquit her with his heavenly grace. If you tarry I
shall have more to say to you peradventure hereafter. Now Vale in Domino
charissime.

Yours in Christ. N. R.

The manner of D. Ridleyes handlinge in the Schools at Oxford, and of the
impudent, spite full, and cruel dealing of the papists: which he set before
his disputation by way of a preface, and is not unfit here to be placed among
the letters, translated out of his lattin copy into englysh.
I Never yet in all my life saw or heard any thing done or handled more
vaynelye or tumultuously, then the disputation which was had with me of late in
the schools at Oxford. And surely I could never have thought, that it had
been possible to have found any within this realm, being of any knowledge,
learning and ancient degree of schole, so brazen faced and so shameless, as to
behave themselves so vainly and so like stage plaiers, as they did in that
disputation.

The Sorbonical clamours which at Paris when popery most reigned, I in times
paste have seen, might be worthily thought, in comparison of this Thrasonicall
and glorious ostentation, to have had much modesty. Howbeit, it was not to be
wondered at, for that they which should there have been Moderatoures, and rulers
of others, and which should have given a good example in word grauitye etc.
1. Tim. 4.
as Paul teaches, gave worst example of all, and did, as it were, blow the
trompet to other, to rail, rage, roar, and cry out. By reason whereof good
christian reader, it is manifest that they never sought for any truth, but only
for the glory of the world, and a bragginge victory. But besides the
innumerable raylinges, rebukes, and taunts wherewith I was bayted on every side,
least our cause, which in deed is gods cause, and his churches, should also by
the false examples of our disputations, be euel spoken of and slaundered to the
world, and so ye verity sustain hurt and hindera^ce thereby: I have thought
good to write my aunsweres my self, that whosoever is desirous to know them
and the truth withal, may thereby perceive those things, which were chiefly
objected against me, and also in effect, what was answered of me to every of
them. Howebeit good Reader, I confess this to be most true, that it is
impossible to set forth either al yt was (God knows) tumultuously spoken, and
like as of mad men objected of so many, which spoke oftentimes hudle, so that
one could not well hear an other: either all that was answered of me briefly
to such and so diverse opponentes. Moreover, a great part of the time appointed
for the disputations, was vaynly spente in most contumelious tauntes,
hyssinges, clapping of hands and triumphs more then tolerable even in stage
plays, and that in the english tongue to get the peoples favor withal. All
which things, when I with godly grief did suffer, and therwithall did openly
bewail and witness, that that company of learned men, and schools which were
appointed to grave men and to grave matters, were contaminate and defiled by
such folish and Robinhode pastimes, and that they which were the doers of such
things, did but thereby openly show their vanity: I was so far by my such humble
complaynt from doing good, or helping any thing at al, that I was enforced,
what with hissing and showting, and what with authority, to hear such great
reproaches and slanders uttered against me, as no grave man without blushing,
could abide the herynge of the same spoken of a most vile knave against a most
wretched ruffiane. At the beginning of the disputation, when I should have
confirmed mine answer to the first proposition in few words, and that after
the manner of diputations, before I could make an end of my probation, which
was not very long, even the doctors them selves cried out, he speaks
blasphemies, blasphemies, blasphemies. And when I on my knees most humbly and
hartly besought the^, that they would vouchsafe to hear me to ye end, whereat
ye Prolocutor something moved (as it seemed) cried out let him read it, let
him read it: Yet when I again began to read it, there was by and by such a cry
and noise blasphemies, blasphemies, as I (to my remembrance) never heard or
read the like, except it be one which was in the acts of the Apostles stirred
up of Demetrius the silver smith and others of his occupation cryenge out
against Paul, great is Diana of the Ephesians, great is Diana of the
Ephesians: and except it were a certain disputation which the Arrians had
against the Orthodoxes and such as were of godly judgment in Affricke, where it
is said that such as ye presidents and rulers of ye disputation were, such was
also yt end of ye disputation. Al was done in hurly burly, and the slanders of
the Arrians were so outrageous, that nothing could quietly be heard. So
writes Victor in the sebooke of his historye. And thus the cries and tumultes
of these men against me, now so prevailed, that whether I would or no, I was
enforced to leave of the readinge of my probations although they were but
short. And of the truth hereof, I have al those that were present being of any
discretion or honestye to be my witnesses. But hereof will I cease to complain
any further. etc.

To Doctor Weston, requiring performaunce of certain promises made unto him,
but never fulfilled, according to thaccustomed wily and unfaithful dealyng of
the papists.
Master Prolocutor, ye remember I am sure how you promised me openly in the
Schools after my protestation, that I should see how my aunsweres were there
taken and written of the notaries, whom you appointed (Me fateor neminem
recusante) to write what should be said, and to have had license for to have
added unto them, or for to have altered them, as upon more deliberation should
have seemed me beast. Ye granted me also, at the deliuerye of mine answer
unto your first proposition, a copye of the same. What promises he made openly
in the schools that were never performed, read in the book of Martyrs Folio.
958.
These promyses be not performed. If your suddeyne departure be any part of the
cause thereof, yet I pray you remember that they may be performed, for
performance of promyses is to be looked for at a righteouse judges hands.

Now I send you here mine aunswers in writynge to your second and third
propositions, and do desire and require earnestlye a copye of the same, and I
shall by Gods grace, procure the pains of the writer to be paid for and
satisfied accordinglye. When I would have confyrmed my sayenges with
authorities or reasons, you said there openly that I should have had time
and place to say and bring what so ever I could an other time. And the same
your saying was then there confyrmed of other of the Commissioners: Yea and I
dare say the audience also thought then that I should have had another day to
have brought and said what I could say, for the declaration and confyrmation
of mine assertions. Now that this was not done, but so suddenly sentence given
before the cause was peefectlye heard, I can not but merueil at all, and the
due reformation of all things which are amiss, I commit unto almighty god my
heavenly father, which by his dear son our savior Christ (whom he has made
the universal judge of all flesh) shall truly and rightuously judge both you
and me,

Master Proloquutor I desire you, and in Gods name require you, that you truly
bring forth and show al my three aunswers written and subscribed with mine own
hand, unto ye higher house of the co^uocatio^, and specially unto my lord
chauncelor, my Lords of Duresme, Elie, Norwich, Worcetor, and Chichester, and
also to show and exhibit this my writynge unto them, which in these few lines
I write hereunto you. And that I do make this request unto you by this my
writing, know you yt I did take witness of the^, by whom I did send you this
writing, and of those which were then with the^ present, that is of the
baylifes of Oxford, and of Master Irish Alderman than there called to be a
witness.

By me N. Rydley.
23. Aprilis. 1554.
To a Cousin of his.
GOds holy spyrite be with you now and ever, Amen. When I call to reme^brabnce
(beloved cosine) the state of those yt for fear of trouble, either for loss of
goods, will do in the sight of the world, those things that they know and be
assured are contrary to the will of God, I can do no less but lament their
case, being assured that the end thereof will be so pitiful, without spedye
repentance, that I tremble and fear to have it in remembrance. I would to
God it lay upon some earthly burden, so that fredome of conscience might
begenen unto them. I write, as god knows, not of presumption but only
lamentinge their state whom I thought now in this dangerous time, should
have given both you and me comfortable instructions. But alas, instead
thereof, we have persuasions to follow (I lament me to rehearse it)
superstitions idolatrye, yea and that worste of all is, they will seek to
prove it by the scripture. The Lord for his mercy turn their hearts. Amen.

Yours N. R.

A letter which he wrote as his last farewell, to al his true and faythefull
friends in God a little before he suffered: with a sharp admoniton by by the
way, to the papists the enemies of the truth.
AT the name of Jesus let every kne bow, both of things in heaven, and things
in earth, and things under the earth, and let every tongue confess that Jesus
Christ is the lord unto the glory of God the father. Amen.

As a man minding to take a far journey and to depart from his familiar
friends, commenly and naturally has a desire to bid his friends farewell
before his departure: so likewise now I loking daily when I should be called
for to depart hence from you (O al ye my dearly beloved brethren and sisters
in our Savior Christ, that dwell here in this world) having a like mind
toward you all, and also blessed be God of this such time and leisure,
whereof I right heartily thank his heavenly goodness: do bid you all my dear
brethren and sisters (I say) in Christ, that dwell up on the earth, after such
manner as I can, Farewell.

Farewell my dear Brother George Shypside, whom I have ever found faithful,
trusty, and louinge in all state and conditions, and now in the time of my
cross, over all other to me most friendly, and steadfast, and that which liked
me best, over all other things, in Gods cause ever hearty.

Farewell my dear sister Alice his wife: I am glad to bear of thee that
thou do take Christ's cross, which is laid now (blessed be God) both on
thy back and mine, in good part. Thank thou GOD that has given thee a
godly, and a loving husband: se thou honor him, and obey him, according to Gods
law. Honor thy mother in law his mother, and love al those that perteyne
unto him, being ready to do them good as it shall lie in thy power. As for thy
children, I doubt not of thy husband, but that he which has given him a
heart to love and fear God, and in God them that pertayne unto him, shall
also make him frendely and benefyciall unto thy children, even as if they had
been gotten of his own body.

Farewell my well-beloved brother John Rydley of the Waltowne, and you my gentle
and loving Sister Elizabeth, whom besides the natural league of amitye, your
tender love which you were said ever to bear toward me above the rest of
your brethren, does bind me to love. My mind was to have acknowledged this
your loving affection, and to have acquyted it with deeds, and not with
words alone. Your daughter Elizabeth I bid farewell, whom I love for the
meek and gentle Spirit that God has given her, which is a precious thing in
the sight of God.

Farewell my beloved Sister of Vnthancke, with all your children my nephews
and nices. Since the departure of my Brother Hughe, my mind was to have been
unto them in the stead of their father: but the Lord god must and will be
their father, if they will love him and fear him, and live in the trade of his
law.

Farewell my well-beloved and worshipful Cosyns master Nicholas Ridley of
Wyllimountswick and your wife, and I thank you for all your kyndnesse showed
both to me, and also to all your own kynsefolke and mine. Good Cosyn, as GOD
has set you in that our stock and kyndred, not for any respect of your
person, but of his aboundaunte grace and goodness to be as it were the
Belweather to order and conducte the reaste, and has also endued you with his
manyfold gifts of grace both heavenly and worldly above others: so I pray
you good Cousin (as my trust and hope is in you) continue and increase in the
mayntenaunce of truth, honestye, righteousness and all true godliness, and
to the uttermost of your power, to wythstande falsehode, untruth,
unrighteousness and all ungodliness, which is forbid and condemned by the
word and laws of God.

Farewell my young Cousin Rafe Whitfield. Oh your time was very short with me:
my mind was to have done you good, and yet you caughte in that little time a
loss, but I trust it shall be recompensed as it shall please almighty god.

Farewell al my whole kyndred and countrymen, farewell in Christ altogether.
The Lord which is the searcher of secrets, knows that according to my hearts
desire, my hope was of late that I should have come among you, and to have
brought with me abundance of Christ's blessed Gospel, according to the
duetye of that office and ministerye, whereunto among you I was chosen, named
and appoincted by the mouth of that our late piereles Prince king Edward, and
so also denounced openly in his court by his priuye counsel.

I warn you all my well-beloved kynsfolke and countrymen, that ye be not amassed
or astonished at the kind of my departure or dissolution, for I ensure you I
think it the most honor that ever I was called unto in all my life, and
therefore I thank my Lord GOD heartily for it, that it has pleased him to call
me of his great mercy unto this high honor to suffer death wyllynglye for
his sake, and in his cause: unto the which honor he called the holy Prophets,
and his dearly beloved Apostels, and his blessed chose^ martyrs. For know ye
that I doubt no more, but that the causes wherefore I am put to death, are
gods causes and the causes of the truth, then I doubt that the Gospel which
John wrote is the Gospel of Christ, or that Paul's Epystles are the very
word of GOD. And to have a heart wyllyng to abide and stand in gods cause and
in Christ's quarrel even unto death, I ensure thee (O man) it is an inestimable
and an honorable gift of GOD given only to the true electes and dearly
beloved children of GOD, and inheritoures of the kingdom of heaven. For the
holy Apostle, and also Martyr in Christ's cause, Sayncte Peter says: ^. Pet.
4
if ye suffer rebuke in the name of Christ, that is in Christ's cause, and for
his truths sake, then are ye happy and blessed, for the glory of the Spirit
of God rests upon you. If for rebukes sake suffered in Christ's name, a man
is pronounced by the mouth of that holy Apostle, blessed and happy: how
much more happy and blessed is he that has the grace to suffer death also?
Wherefore al ye that be my true lovers and friends, rejoice and rejoice with me
again, and render with me hartye thanks to God our heavenly father, that for
his sons sake my Savior and redemer Christ, he has vouchsafed to call me,
being else without his gracious goodness in my self but a synnefull and a vile
wretch, to call me (I say) unto this high dygnitye of his true Prophets, of
his faithful Apostles, and of his holy elect and chosen Martyrs, that is to
die and to spend this temporal life in the defense and mayntena^ce of his
eternal and everlasting truth.

Ye know that be my Countrymen dwelling upon the borders, where (alas) the
true man suffers oftentimes much wrong at the thieves hand, if it chance a
man to be slain of a thief (as it often chances there) which went out with
his neighbor to help him to rescue his goods again, that the more cruelly he
be slain, and the more steadfastly he stooke by his neighbor in the fight
against the face of the thief, the more favor and frendeship shall all his
posterity have for the slain man's sake of al them that be true, as long as
the memory of his fact and his posteritye does endure: even so, ye that be
my kynsefolke and countreyemen, know ye (how soever the blind, ignorant and
wicked world hereafter shall rail upon my death, which thing they can not do
worse then their fathers did of the death of Christ our savior, of his holy
prophets, Apostles and Martyrs) Know ye (I say) that both before God and all
them that be godly, and that truly know and follow the laws of God: ye have
and shall have by gods grace ever cause to rejoice, and to thank God highlye,
and to think good of it, and in god to rejoice of me your flesh and blood,
whom God of his gracious goodness has vouchsafed to associate unto the blessed
company of his holy martyrs in heaven, and I dout not in ye infinite goodness of
my lord god, nor in the faithful fellowship of his elect and chose^ people, but
at both their hands in my cause, ye shall rather find the more favor and grace:
for the Lord says that he will be both to them and theyrs that love him, the
more loving again in a thousand generations: Deuteronomy. 7. John. 15.
the Lord is so full of mercy to them (I say) and theyrs which do love him
in deed. And Christ says again, that no man can show more love then to
give his life for his friend.

Now also know ye all my true lovers in god, my kynsfolk and countrymen, that
the cause wherefore I am put to death, is even after the same sort and
condition, but touching more nere gods cause and in more weighty matters, but
in the general kind al one, for both is Gods cause, both is in ye mainteina^ce
of right, and both for the comme^ wealth, and both for the weal also of the
christian brother: although yet there is in these two no small difference, both
concerning the enemies, the goods stolen, and the manner of the fight. For
know ye all, that like as there, when the poor true man is robbed by the
thief of his own goods truly gotten, whereupon he and his household should
live, he is greatly wronged, and the thief in stealyng and robbyng with
violence the poor man's Goods does offend god, does tra^sgresse his law, and
is injurious both to the poor man and to the commen wealth: so I say know ye
all that even here in the cause of my death it is with the church of england, I
mean the congregation of the true chosen children of god in this realm of
england, which I knowledge not only to be my neighbors, but rather the
congregation of my spiritual brethren and Sisters in Christ, yea members of
one body, wherein by gods grace I am and have been grafted in Christ. This
Church of England had of late of the infinite goodness and aboundaunte grace
of almighty God, great substance, great riches of heavenly treasure, great
plentye of gods true and sincere word, the true and wholesome administration
of Christ's holy Sacraments, the whole profession of Christ's religion
truly and playnelye set forth in Baptism, the plain declaration and
understanding of the same taught in the holy Cathechisme to have been
learned of all true Christians. This church had also a true and sincere
form and manner of the Lords Supper, wherein according to Jesus Christ's own
ordinance and holy institution, Christ's commandments were executed and
done. For upon the bread and wine set upon the Lords table, thanks were given,
the commemoration of the Lords death was had, the bread in the remembrance of
christ's body torn upon the cross, was broken, and the Cup in the
remembrance of Christ's blood shed, was distributed, and both communicated
unto all that were present and would receive them, and also they were
exhorted of the minister so to do. All was done openly in the vulgar
toungue, so that every thing might be both easily heard and plainlye
understand of all the people to Gods high glory, and the edification of the
whole church. This church had of late the whole Divine service, all common
and public prayers ordained to be said and heard in the co^me^ congregation,
not only framed and fashioned to the true vain of holy Scripture, but also
all things so set forth, according to the commandment of the Lord and
Sayncte Paul's doctrine for the peoples edification in their vulgar toungue.
It had also holy and wholesome Homelies in commendation of the principal
virtues, which are commended in Scripture, and likewise other Homelies against
the most pernicious and capital vices that uses (alas) to raygne in this
Realm of England. This church had in matters of controuersye, articles so
penned and framed after the holy Scripture, and grounded upon the true
understanding of Gods word, that in short time, if they had been universally
received, they should have been able to have set in Christ's church, much
concord and unity in Christ's true Religion, and to have expelled many false
erroures and heresies, wherewyth this church (alas) was almost ouergone. But
(alas) of late into this spyrytuall possession of the heavenly treasure of
these godly riches, are entered in thieves that have robbed and spoiled all this
heavenly treasure away. I may well complain on these thieves, and cry out
upon them with the Prophet, saying: Deus venerunt gentes in haereditatem
tuam. etc. Psalm, 79. O Lord GOD the Gentiles, heathen nations are come into
thy heritage, they have defiled thy holy Temple, and made Jerusalem an heap
of stones, that is, they have broken and beat down to the ground thy holy
city. This hethenyshe generation, these thieves of Samaria, these Sabei and
Caldei, these robbers have rushed out of their dens, and have robbed the
Church of England of all the foresaid holy treasure of god: they have carried
it away and overthrown it, and in the stead of Gods holy word, the true and
right administration of Christ's holy Sacraments, as of Baptism and others,
they mixte their ministerye with men's folishe fantasies, and many wicked and
ungodly traditions withal. In the stead of the Lords holy table, they give
the people, with much solemn disguising, a thing which they call their Mass,
but in deed and in truth it is a very maskyng and mockerye of the true supper
of the Lord, or rather I may call it a crafty iuglynge, whereby these false
thieves and iuglers have bewitched the minds of the simple people that they
have brought them from the true worship of GOD unto pernicious idolatry, and
make them to believe that to be Christ our Lord and Savior, which in deed
is neither God nor man, nor has any life in it self, but in substance is the
creature of bread and wine, and in use of the lords table is the Sacrament
of Christ's body and blood, and for this holy use, for ye which the Lord has
ordained them in his Table to represent unto us his blessed body torn upon
the cross for us, and his blood there shed, it pleased him to call them his
body and blood, which understanding, Christ declares to be his true
meaning, when he says: Luke. 22.
do this in the remembrance of me. And again Saint Paul likewise does set
out the same more plainly, speaking of the same Sacrament after the words of
the consecration, say^ng: as often as ye shall eat of this bread and drink of
this Cup, ^. Cor. 11.
ye shall set forth (he means with the same) the Lords death until his
coming again And here again these thieves have robbed also the people of the
Lords cup, contrary to the plain words of Christ, written in his Gospel.

Now for the commen public prayers which were in the vulgar tongue, these
thieves have brought in again a strange tongue, whereof the people understand
not one word. Wherein what do they else but rob the people of their divine
Service, wherein they ought to pray together with the mynyster, and to pray
in a strange toungue, what is it but (as Saint Paul calls it)
barbarousnes, chyldishenes, unprofitable follye, yea and plain madness? For
the godly articles of unity in Religion, and for the wholesome Homelies, what
do these thieves place in the stead of them, but the Popes laws and decrees,
lying Legendes and feigned fables and miracles, to delude and abuse the
symplycitye of the rude people. Thus this robbery and theft is not only
committed, nay sacrilege and wicked spoil of heavenly things, but also in
the stead of the same, is brought in and placed the abbominable desolacion of
the tyraunte Antiochus, of proud Senacheryb, of the shameless faced king, and
of the Babilonical beast. Unto this robberye, this theft and sacrilege, for
that I cannot consent nor (God wyllyng) never shall so long as the breath is
in my body, because it is blasphemye against God, high treason unto Christ
our heavenly King, lord, master, and our only Savior and redemer, it is
plain contrary to Gods word and to Christ's Gospel, it is the subversion of
all true godliness, and against the everlasting salvation of mine own soul,
and of all my brethren and systers whom Christ my Savior has so dearly
boughte with no less price then with the effusion and sheddyng forth of his
most precious blood: therefore (all ye my true lovers in GOD, my kynsefolke
and countrymen) for this cause (I say) know ye that I am put to death, which
by Gods grace I shall wyllynglye take, with hartye thanks to GOD therefore, in
certain hope without any doubtyng, to receive at gods hand again of his free
mercy and grace, everlasting life.

Although the cause of the true man slain of the thief helpyng his neighbor
to recover his goods again, and the cause wherefore I am to be put to
death, in a generalitye is both one (as I said before) yet know ye that
there is no small difference. These thieves against whom I do stand, are
much worse then the robbers and thieves of the borders. The goods which they
steal, are much more precious, and their kinds of fight are far diverse.
These thieves are worse (I say) for they are more cruelll, more wicked, more
false, more deceytfull and craftye: for those will but kill the body, but
these will not stycke to kill both body and soul. Those for the general
theft and robberye, be called and are in deed thieves and robbers: but these
for their spiritual kind of robberye are called Sacrilegi, as ye would say,
church robbers. They are more wicked: for those go about but to spoil men
of worldly things, worldly riches, gold and silver, and worldly substance:
these go about in the ways of the Devil their ghostlye father, to steal
from the universal church, and peritcularlye from every man, all heavenly
treasure, true faith, true charity and hope of salvation in the blood of
our Savior Jesus Christ, yea to spoil us of our Savior Christ, of his
gospel, of his heavenly spirit, and of the heavenly heritage of the kingdom
of heaven so dearelye purchased unto us with the death of our Master and
Sauyoure Christ. These be the goods and godly substance whereupon the
Christian before God must live, and without the which he cannot live: these
goods (I say) these thieves, these church robbers, go about to spoil us
of. The which goods, as to the man of God they excel and far pass all
worldly treasure: so to wythstande even unto the death such thieves as go
about to spoil both us and the whole church of such goods, is most high and
honorable service done unto God. These church robbers be also much more
false, craftye, and deceytfull then the thieves upon the borders: for these have
not the craft so to commend their theft that they dare auouche it, and
therefore as acknowledgyng themselves to be evil, they steal commenlye upon
the night, they dare not appear at judgments and sessions where justice is
executed, and when they are taken and brought thither, they never hang any
man, but they be often times hanged for their faults: But these Church robbers
can so cloak and color their spiritual robbery, that they can make the people
to believe falshed to be truth, and truth falshod, good to be euel, and evil
good, light to be darkness, and darkness light, superstition to be true
religion, and idolatry to be the true worship of god, and that which is in
substance the creature of bread and wine, to be none other substance but only
the substance of Christ the living Lord both God and man. And with this their
falshed and craft, they can so iuggle and bewitch the understanding of the
simple, that they dare avouch it openly in court and in town, and fear
neither hanging nor hedding as the pore thieves of the borders do, but stout
and strong like Nembrothe, dare condemn to be burned in flaming fire quick
and alive, whosoever will go about to bewray their falshed.

The kind of fight against these church robbers, is also of an other sort and
kind, then is that which is against the thieves of ye borders. For there the
true men go forth against the^ with spear and lance, with bow and byl and al
such kind of bodily weapons as the true men have, but here as the enemies be
of an other nature, so the watchmen of Christ's flock, the warriors that fight
in the Lords war, must be armed and fight with an other kind of weapons
and armor. For here the enemies of God, the soldiers of Antichrist, although
the battle is set forth against the church by mortal men being flesh and
blood, and nevertheless members of their father the devil: yet for yt their
graund master is the power of darkness, their members are spiritual
wickedness, wicked spirits, spirits of erroures, of heresies, of all deceate
and ungodliness, spirits of idolatry, Ephe 6,
superstition and hipocrisye, which are called of S. Paul Principates and
powers, Lords of the world, rulers of ye darkness of this world, and
spiritual subtilties concerning heavenly things: and therefore our weapons must
be fit and mete to fight against such, not carnal nor bodily weapons as spear
and lance, but spiritual and heavenly: we must fight against such with the
armor of God, not entendinge to kill their bodies, but their errors, their
false craft and heresies, their idolatry, superstition and hipocrisy, Ephesians 6.
and to save (as much as lies in us) both their bodies and souls. And
therefore, as S. Paul teaches us, we fight not against flesh and blood,
that is, we fight not with bodily weapon to kill the man, but with the weapons
of God, to put to flight his wicked errors and vice, and to save both body and
soul. Our weapons therefore are faith, hope, charity, righteousness, truth,
patience, prayer unto God, and our sword wherwyth we smite our enemies, we
beat and batter and bear down all falshed, is the word of God. With these
weapons, under the banner of the cross of Christ we do fight, ever having our
eye upon our graunde Master, Duke and captain Christ, and then we reckon our
selves to triumph and to win the crown of everlasting bless, when
enduringe in this battle without any shrinking or yelding to the enemies,
after the example of our graund Captain Christ our Master, after the example
of his holy Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, when (I say) we are slain in our
mortal bodies of our enemies, and are most cruelly and without all mercy
murdered down like a me any of sheep. And the more cruel, the more payneful,
the more vile and spiteful is the kind of the death, whereunto we be put: the
more glorious in God, the more blessed and happy we reckon, without all
doubts, our Martyrdom to be.

And thus much, dear loeuers and friends in god, my country men and kinsfolk, I
have spoken for your comfort, least of my death (of whose life you looked
peradventure sometimes to have had honestye, pleasures, and commodities) ye
might be abashed or think any evil: whereas ye have rather cause to rejoice
(if ye love me indeed) for that it has pleased God to call me to a greater
honor and dignitye, than ever I did enjoy before either in Rochester or in
the Sea of London, or ever should have had in the Sea of Durham, whereunto I
was last of all elected and named: yea I count it greater honor before God in
deed to die in his cause (whereof I nothing doubt) then is any earthlye or
temporal promocion or honor that can be given to a man in this world. And
who is he that knows the cause to be Gods, to be Christ's quarrel and of
his Gospel, to be the common weal of all the elect and chosen children of
God, of all the inheritoures of the kingdom of Heaven, who is he (I say) that
knows this assuredlye by Gods word, and the testimonye of his own
conscience (as I through ye infinite goodness of god, not of my self, but by his
grace, acknowledge my self to do) who is he (I say) yt knows this and both
loves and fereth god in deed and in truth loves and believes his master
Christ and his blessed gospel, loves his brotherhode the chosen children of
god, and also lusts and longs for everlasting life, who is he (I say
again) that would not or can not find in his heart in this cause to be
content to dye? The Lord forbid that any such should be that should forsake
this grace of God. I trust in my Lord God, the God of mercies and the father
of all comfort through Jesus Christ our Lord, that he which has put this
mind, will, and affection by his holy spirit in my heart to stand against
the face of the enemy in his cause, and to chose rather the loss of all my
worldly substance, yea and of my life to, then to deny his known truth:
that he well comfort me, aid me, and strengthen me evermore even unto the end,
and to the yelding up of my spirit and soul into his holy hands: whereof I
most heartily beseech his most holy sacred Majesty of his infinyte goodness and
mercy, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Now that I have taken my leave of my country men and kinsfolk, and the
Lord does lend me life and gives me leisure, I will bydde my other good
friends in God of other places also, farewell. And whom first or before
other, then the Vniuersytye of Cambridge whereas I have dwelte longer, found
more faithful and hartye friends, received more benefits (the benefytes of my
natural parents only excepted) then ever I did even in mine own natyue
country wherein I was borne.

Farewell therefore Cambrydge my loving mother and tender nurse. If I should not
acknowledge thy manyfold benefits, yea if I should not for thy benifits, at the
lest love the again, truly I were to be counted ungrate and unkind. What
benyfytes had thou ever, that thou use to give and bestow upon thy best
beloved children, that thou thoughtest to good for me? Thou did bestow on
me all thy Schole degrees: of thy common offices, the Chaplaynshyppe of the
university, the office of the P^ortorship and of a common reader, and of thy
private co^modyties and emolume^tes in colleges, what was it that thou made
me not partner of? First to be Scholar, then Fellow, and after my departure
from thee thou calledst me again to a Mastership of a right worshipful
college. I thanck thee my loving mother for all this thy kindness, and I pray
God that his laws and the sincere Gospel of Christ, may ever be truly taught
and faithfully learned in thee.

Farewell Pembroke hall, of late mine own College, my cure and my charge: what
case thou artin now God knows, I know not well. Thou wast ever named since
I knew thee (which is now a.xxx. years ago) to be studious, well learned,
and a great setter forth of Christ's Gospel and of Gods true word: so I found
the and blessed be god, so I left thee in deed. Woe is me for thee mine own
dear College, if ever thou suffer thy self by any means to be brought
from that trade. In thy Orcharde (the walls, buttes and trees, if they could
speak would bear me witness) I learned with out book almost all Paul's
Epistles, yea and I ween all the Canonical Epistles save only the Apocalipse.
Of which study, although in time a great part did depart from me, yet the
sweet smell thereof, I trust I shall carry with me into heaven: for the
profit thereof I think I have felt in all my life time ever after, and I wene
of late (whether they abide there now or no I can not tell) there was, that did
the like. The Lord, grant that this zeal and love toward that part of gods
word, which is a kay and a true co^mentary to al holy scripture, may ever abide
in that college so long as the world shall endure.

From Cambridge I was called into Kent by the Archbishop of Caunterbury Thomas
Cranmer that most reverend father and man of god, and of him by and by sent to
be Vicar of Herne in East kente. Wherefore fare well Herue thou worshipful and
wealthy parish, the first cure whereunto I was called to minister gods word.
Thou have heard of my mouth ofttimes the word of god preached, not after the
popish trade but after the Christ's gospel: oh that the fruit had answered to
the seed. And yet I must knowledge me to be thy dettour for the doctrine of
the Lords supper which at that time I acknowledge God had not reveled unto me:
but I bless God in all that godly virtue and zeal of Gods word, which the
Lord by preachinge of his word did kindle manifestly both in the heart and in
the life and works of that godly woman there my Lady Phines: the Lord
grant that his word took like effect there in many other more.

Farewell thou Cathedral church of Caunterburye, the Metropolitike sea,
whereof once I was a member. To speak things pleasante unto thee I dare not
for danger of conscience and displeasure of my lord God, and to say what lies
in my heart, were now to much, and I fear were able to do thee now but
little good. Nevertheless for the frendeship I have found in some there, and
for charity sake, I wish thee to be washed clean of al worldliness and
ungodliness, that thou may be found of God after thy name Christ's Church in
deed and in truth.

Farewell Rochester, sometime my Cathedral Sea, in whom (to say the truth) I
did find much gentleness and obedience, and I trust thou will not say the
contrary, but I did use it to Gods glory and thine own profit in God. Oh
that thou had and might have continued and gone forewarde in the trade
of Gods law wherein I did leave thee: Then thy charge and burden should not
have been so terrible and dangerous as I suppose verily it is like to be
(alas) on the latter day.

To Westminster, other advertisement in God I have not now to say, then I have
said before to the Cathedral church of Caunterbury, and so God give thee of his
grace that thou may learn in deed and in truth to please him after his
own laws. And thus fare you well.

Oh London, London, to whom now may I speak in thee, or whom shall I bid
farewell? Shall I speak to the Prebendaryes of Paul's? Alas, all that loved
Gods word and were true setters forth thereof, are now (as I hear say) some
burnt and slain, some exiled and banished and some holden in hard prison and
appointed daily to be put to most cruel death for Christ's Gospel sake. As for
the rest of them, I know they could never broke me well, nor I could never
delighte in them. Shall I speak to the Sea thereof, wherein of late I was
placed almost, and not fullye, by the space of.iii. years? But what may I
say to it, being (as I hear say I am) deposed and expuised by judgment as
an unjust usurper of that room. O judgment, judgment. Can this be just
judgment to condemn the chief minister of Gods word, the pastoure and
bishop of the dioces and never bring him into judgment, that he might have
heard what crimes were laid to his charge, nor never suffer him to have any
place or time to answer for him self? Think thou that hereafter when true
justice shall have place that this judgment can ever be allowed either of
God or of man? Well, as for the cause and whole matter of my deposition and
the spoil of my goods which thou possessest yet, I refer it unto God
which is a just judge, and I beseech God, if it be his pleasure, that that
which is but my personal wrong, be not laid to thy charge in the latter
day: this only can I pray for.

O thou now wicked and bloudye Sea, why do thou set up again many
alters of idolatrye, which by the word of God were iustlye taken away? Why
haste thou overthrown the Lords Table? Why do thou daily delude the
people, maskinge in thy masses in the stead of the Lords holy Supper, which
ought to be commen as well (says Chrysostom, yea the Lord him self) to the
people as to the priest? How dare thou deny to the people of Christ,
contrary to his express commandment in the gospel, his holy cup? Why
bablest thou to the people the commen prayer in a strange tongue, wherein
Saint Paul commands in the lords name that no man should speak before the
congregation, except it should be by and by declared in their commen tongue
that all might be edified? Nay harken thou whorishe baude of Babylon, thou
wicked lymme of Antichriste, thou bloodye Wolf, why slayest thou down and
make hauoke of the Prophets of God? Why murtherest thou so cruellye
Christ's poor seely sheep, which will not hear thy voice because thou art
a stranger, and will follow none other but their own pastoure Christ his
voice? Thinckest thou to escape, or that the Lord will not require the blood of
his Saints at thy handse? Thy God, which is the work of thy hands, and
whom thou say thou haste power to make, that thy deaf and dumme God (I
say) will not in deed nor cannot (although thou art not ashamed to call him
thy maker) make thee to escape the reuenginge hand of the high and almightye
God. But be thou assured that the lyuinge Lord our savior and redemer, which
sits on the right hand of his father in glory: he sees all thy wicked ways
and cruelty done to his dear members, and he will not forget his holy ones,
and his hands (O thou whorish drabbe) shall thou never escape. In stead of my
farewell to thee now I say, fie upon thee, fie upon thee filthye drabbe and
all thy false Prophets.

Yet O thou London, I may not leave thee thus. Although thy Episcopal Sea, now
being joined in league with the seat of Satan, thus has now both handled me
and the saints of God: yet I do not doubt but in that great City there be
many privy mourners which do daily mourn for that mischief, the which never
did nor shall consent to that wickedness, but do detest and abhor it as the
ways of Satan. But these preuy mourners here I will pass by and bid them fare
well with their fellows hereafter, His farewell to these mourners is in the
letter next followyng,
when the place and occasion shall more conveniently require. Among the
worshipful of the City, and specially which were in office of the Meraltye,
yea and in other Citizens also (whom to name now it shall not be necessary) in
the time of my Ministerye, which was from the later part of sir Rowland hills
year unto sir George Barnes year and a great part thereof, I do acknowledge
that I found no small humanity and ge^tlenesse, as me thought: but (to say the
truth) that I do esteem above al other for true christian ki^dnes which is
showed in gods cause and done for his sake. Wherefore O Dobbes, Dobbes, Alder
man and knight, thou in thy year did win my heart for ever more, for that
honorable act, that most blessed work of god of the erection and setting up of
Christ's holy hospitales and truly religions houses which by thee and through
thee were begone. For thou like a man of God, when the matter was moved for the
relief of Christ's poor selye members to be helped from extreme miserye,
hunger and famine, thy heart (I say) was moved with pity, and as Christ's high
honorable officer in that cause, thou calledst together thy Brethren the
Aldermen of the City, before whom thou brakest the matter for the poor, thou
did plead their cause, yea, and not only in thine own person thou did
setforth Christ's cause, but to further the matter, thou broughtest me into the
counsel Chamber of the City before the Aldermen alone, whom thou had
assembled there together to hear me speak what I could say as an advocate by
office and duetye in the pore men's cause: the Lord wrought with thee, and gave
thee the consent of thy brethren, whereby the matter was brought to the common
counsel, and so to the whole body of the City, by whom with an uniform
consent, it was committed to be drawn, ordered, and devised by a certain
number of the most wittye citizens and politic, endued also with godliness,
and with ready hearts to setforward such a noble act, as could be chose^ in all
ye whole city, and they like true and faithful ministers both to their city and
their master Christ, so ordered, devised, and brought forth the matter, that
thousands of sely poor members of Christ, which else for extreme hunger and
misery should have famished and perished, shall be relieved, helped and brought
up, and shall have cause to bless ye Aldermen of that time, the common counsel
and the whole body of the city, but specially thee O Dobbes, and those chosen
men, by whom this honorable work of god was begone and wrought, and that so
long through out al ages, as that godly work shall endure, which I pray almighty
god may be ever unto the worlds end, Amen.

And thou O Sir George Barnes, (the truth it is to be confessed to gods glory,
and to the good example of other) thou wast in thy year not only a furtherer
and contynuer of that which before thee by thy predecessor was well begone: but
also did labor so to have perfyted the work, that it should have been
an absolute thing and a perfect spectacle of true charity and godliness unto all
christendom. Thine endeavor was to have set up an house of occupatio^s, both
that al kind of poverty being able to work, should not have lacked whereupon
profytablye they might have been occupied to their own relief, and to the
profit and commodity of the commen wealth of the City, and also to have
retired thithers the poor babes brought up in the Hospitales, when they had
come to a certain age and strength, and also al those which in the
Hospitalles aforesaid have been cured of their diseases. And to have brought
this to pass, you obteinedst (not without great diligence and labor both of
thee and thy brethren) of that godly king Edward, that christian and pierles
Princes hand, his princely place of Bridewell, and what other things to the
performance of the same, and under what condition, it is not unknown. That this
thine endeavor has not had like success, the fault is not in thee, but in the
condition and state of the time, which ye lord of his infinite mercy vouchsafe
to amend, when it shall be his grations will and pleasure.

Farewell now al ye Citizens that be of god, of what state and condition so ever
ye be: undoubtedly in London ye have heard Gods word truly preached. My hearts
desire and daily prayer shall be for you (as for whom, for my time, I know to my
lord God I am countable) that ye never swerve, neither for loss of life nor
worldly goods, from Gods holy word, and yield unto Antichrist, whereupon must
needs follow ye extreme displeasure of God, and the loss both of your bodies
and souls into perpetual dampnation for evermore.

Now that I have gone through the places, where I have dwelt any space in the
time of my pilgrimage here upon earth, remembringe that for the space of king
Ewardes raygne, which was for the time of mine office in the Seas of London and
Rochester, I was a member of the higher house of the parliament: therefore
(seeing my God has given me leisure and the remembrance thereof) I will bid my
Lords of the temporalty farewell. They shall have no just cause (by Gods
grace) to take it, that I entende to say, in ill part. As for the spiritul
Prelacy that now is, I have nothing to say to them, except I should repeat
again a great part of that I have said before now alredye to the sea of
London. To you therefore my Lords of the temporaltie will I speak, and this
would I have you first to understand, that when I wrote this, I looked daily
when I should be called to the change of this life, and thought that this my
writing should not come to your knowledge, before the time of the dissolution of
my body and soul should be expired, and therefore know ye, that I had
before mine eyes only the fear of God, and christian charity toward you,
which moved me to write: for of you hereafter I look not in this world,
either for pleasure or displeasure. If my talk shall do you never so much
pleasure or profit, you cannot promote me, nor if I displease you, ye can not
hurt me or harm me, for I shall be out of your reach. Now therefore if you
fear God, and can be content to hear the talk of him that seeks nothing at
your hands, but to serve God and to do you good: hearken what I say. I say
unto you, Gala. 3
as S. Paul says to the Galathians: I wonder my Lords what has bewitched
you, that ye so suddenly are fallen from Christ unto Antichrist, from Christ's
gospel unto men's tradicions, from the Lord that bought you, unto the bishop now
of Rome. I warn you of your peril, be not deceived, except you will be found
willingly consenters unto your own death. For if ye think thus: we are lay
me^, this is a matter of religion, we follow as we are taught and led, if our
teachers and governors teach us and lead us amysse, the fault is in them,
they shall bear the blame: my Lords this is true (I grant you) that both
the false teacher, and the corrupt governor, shall be punished for ye death of
their subject, whom they have falsely taught and corruptly led, yea and his
blood shall be required at their hands: but yet nevertheless shall that
subject dye the death himself also, Ezech. 3 Luke. 6
that is, he shall also be dampened for his own sin, for if the blind lead the
blind, Christ says, not the leader only, but he says both shall fall in the
ditche. Shall the Sinagoge and the Senate of the Jews (trow ye) which forsook
Christ and conse^ted to his death, therefore be excused, because Annas, and
Cayphas, with the Scribes and Phareseis and their clergy, did teach them
amiss? yea and also Pilat their governor and the Emperors Lieuetena^t by his
tira^ny did without cause put him to death? Forsooth no my lords, no. For
notwithstanding that corrupt doctrine, or Pilates washinge of his hands,
neither of both shall excuse either that Sinagoge and Seigniorye, or Pilate: but
at the Lords hand, for the effusion of that innocents blood, on the latter
day all shall drink of the deadly whyp: ye are witty and understand what I
mean. Therefore I will pass over this, and return to tell you, how ye ar^
fallen from Christ to his adversary the bishop of Rome.

And least my Lords ye may peradventure think, thus barely to call the bishop of
Rome Christ's adversary, or (to speak it in plain terms) to call him
Antichrist, that it is done in mine anguish, and that I do but rage, and as a
desperate man do not care what I say, or upon whom I do rail: therefore, that
your Lordships may perceive my mind, and thereby understand that I speak the
words of truth and of sobrietye (as S. Paul said unto Festus) be it known
unto your Lord shyps all, that as concerning the bishop of Rome, Acts. 26.
I nether hate the person nor the place. For I ensure your Lordships (the
living lord bears me witness, before whom I speak) I do think many a good
holy manne, many martyrs and Saints of god, have sit and taught in that
place Christ's gospel truly, which therefore justly may be called Apostolici,
that is, true disciples of thapostles, and also that church and congregation of
Christians, Apostolic church, yea and that certain hundredth years after the
same was first erected and builded upon Christ, by the true Apostolical
doctrine taught by the mouths of the Apostles them selves. If ye will know how
long that was, and how many hundredth of years, to be curious in poyntinge the
precise number of years, I will not be to bold, but thus I say, so long and so
many hundredth years as that Sea did truly teach and preach that gospel, that
religion, exercised that power, and ordered every thing by those laws and
rules, which that Sea received of the Apostles and (as Tertullian says) the
Apostles of Christ, and Christ of God: so long (I say) that Sea might well have
been called Peter and Paul's chair and Sea, or rather Christ's chair, and the
bishop thereof Apostolicus, or a true disciple and successoure of the Apostles,
and a minister of Christ. But since the time that that Sea has degenerated
from the trade of truth and true religion, the which it received of the
Apostles at the beginning, and has preached a another Gospel, has set up an
other religion, has excercised an other power and has taken upon it to order
and rule the church of Christ by other strange laws, Cannons and rules, then
ever it received of the Apostles or the Apostles of Christ, which things it
does at this day and has continued so doing (alas, alas) of to to long a
time: Since the time (I say) that the state and condition of that Sea has thus
been changed: in truth it ought of duty and of right, to have the names
changed both of ye Sea and of the sitter therein. For understand my Lords,
it was neither for the privilege of the place or person thereof, that that Sea
and bishop thereof, were called Apostolic: but for the true trade of Christ's
Religion, which was taught and mainteyned in that Sea at the first, and of
those godly men. And therefore as truly and justly as that Sea the^, for that
true trade of religion and consanguinity of doctrine with the religion and
docrtne of Christ's Apostles, was called Apostolic: so as truly and as justly
for the contrariety of religion and diversity of doctrine from Christ and his
Apostles, that Sea and the bishop thereof, at this day both ought to be called,
and are in deed Antichristian. The Sea is the seat of Satan, and the bishop
of the same, that maynteineth the abominations thereof, is Antichriste
himself in deed. And for the same causes this Sea at this day is the same
which Saint John calls in his reuelacion, Apoc. 17 Apo. 11.
Babylon, or the whore of Babylon, and spirituully Sodoma and Egyptus, the
mother of fornications, and of the abominations upon the earth. And with
this whore does spiritually mell, and lies with her and commits most
stinking and abominable adultry before god, all those kings and Princes, yea
and all nations of the earth, which do consent to her abominations and use or
practice the the same: that is (of the innumerable multitude of them to rehearse
some for example sake) her dispensations her pardons and Pilgrimages, her
invocation of saints, her worshipping of images, her false counterfayte
religion in her monkerye and frerage, and her traditions, whereby Gods laws
are defiled: as her massing, and false ministering of Gods word and the
sacrementes of Christ, clean contrary to christ's word and the Apostles
doctrine, whereof in particularity, I have touched something before in my talk
had with the Sea of London, and in other treatises more at large: wherein (if
it shall please god to bring the same to light) it shall appear I trust by gods
grace, plainly to the man of god, and to him whose rule in judgment of
religion is gods word, that that religion, that rule and order, that doctrine
and faith, which this whore of Babylon and the beast whereupon she does sit,
mayntaineth at this day withal violence of fire and sword, Apo. 17. Daniel. 7.
with spoil and banishment (according to Daniels Prophecy) and finally with
all falshed, deceyte hypocrysy, and all kind of ungodliness: are as clean
contrary to Gods word, as darkness is unto light, or light to darkness,
white to black, or black to white, or as beliall unto Christ, or Christ unto
Antichrist him self,

I know my Lords and foresaw when I wrote this, yt so many of you, as should
see this my writing, not being before endued with the spirit of grace and the
light of Gods word, so many (I say) would at these my words Lord like stamp
and spurn and spit thereat. But sober your selves with patience and be still,
and know ye that in my writing of this, my mind was none other, but in God,
(as the living God does bear me witness) both to do you profit and pleasure.
And otherwise, as for your displesure, by that time this shall come to your
knowledge, I trust by gods grace to be in the hands and protection of the
almighty, my heavenly father and the living Lord, which is (as S. John says)
the greatest of all, and then I shall not need (I trow) to fear what any Lord,
no nor what king or prince can do unto me.

My Lords, if in times past ye have been contented to hear me sometimes in
matters of relygion before the Prince in the pulpit, and in the Parliament
house, and have not seemed to have despised what I have said (when as else if ye
had perceived just occasion, ye might the^ have suspected in my talk, though
it had been reasonable, either desire of worldly gain or fear of displeasure)
how has then your Lordeshyppes more cause to harke^ to my word, and to hear
me pacie^tly, seeing now ye cannot justly think of me being in this case
appointed to dye, and loking daily when I shall be called to come before the
eternal judge, otherwise but that I only study to serve my Lord God, and to
say that thing which I am persuaded assuredly by Gods word shall and does
please him, and profit all them to whom God shall give grace to hear and
believe what I do say? and I do say even that I have said heretofore both of
the sea of Rome, and of the bishop thereof, I mean after this their present
state at this day. Wherein if ye will not believe the ministers of God, and true
preachers of his word, verelye I denounce unto you in Verbo domini, except ye
do repent betime, it shall turn to your confusion and to your smarte on the
latter day. Forget not what I say my Lords, for Gods fake forgette not,
Psalm. 4.
but remember it upon your bed. For I tell you moreover, as I know I must be
countable of this my talk and of my speakinge thus, to the eternal judge (who
will judge nothing amiss) so shall you be countable of your duty in hearing,
and you shall be charged, if ye will harke^ to gods word, for not obeing to the
truth. Alas my Lords how chances this that this matter is now a new again
to be persuaded unto you? who would have thought of late, but your Lordshyps
had been persuaded in deed sufficientlye, or else that ye could ever have
agreed so vniformelye with one consent to the abolishme^t of the vsurpatio^ of
ye bishop of Rome? If that matter were then but a matter of policy, wherein the
prince must be obeyed, how is it now made a matter, wherein (as your clergy
says now, and so says the popes laws in deed) stands the unity of the
catholic church, and a matter of necessitye of our salvation? Has the time,
being so short since the death of the two last kings, Henry the.viij and
Edward his son, altered the nature of the matter? If it have not, but was of
the same nature and danger before God then as it is now, and be now (as it is
said by the popes laws, and the instructions set forth in english to the
curates of the dioces of York) in deed a matter of necessitye to salvation:
how then chanced it that ye were all (O my Lords) so light and so little
passed upon the catholic faith and the unity thereof (without the which no man
can be saved) as for your princes pleasures, which were but mortal men, to
forsake the unity of your catholic faith, yt is to foresake Christ and his
holy gospel? And furthermore, if it were both then and now so necessary to
salvation, how chanced it also, that ye, all the whole body of the Parliament
agreing with you, did not only abolish and expel the bishop of Rome: but also
did abjure him in your own parsons, and did decree in your acts great oaths to
be taken of both the spiritualty and te^poralty, whosoever should enter into any
weighty and charge able office in the common wealth? But on the other side, if yt
law and decree, which makes the supremacye of the sea and Bishop of Rome over
the universal church of Christ, a thing of necessity required unto salvation,
be an Antichristian law (as it is in deed) and such instructions as are given
to the dioces of York, be in deed a settinge forth of the power of that beast
of Babylon, by the craft and falshod of his false prophets (as of truth,
compared unto Gods word, and truly judged by the same, it shall plainly appear
that they be) then my Lords never think other, but the day shall come, when
ye shall be charged with this your undoing of that, that once ye had well done,
and with this your perjury and breach of your oath, which oath was done in
judgment, justice and truth agreeable to Gods law. The whore of Babilo^ may well
for a time dally with you, and make you so dronke^ with the wine of her filthy
stews and whoredom (as with her dispensations and promises of pardon A pena
and culpa) that for dronkennes and blinnes ye may think yourselues safe. But
be ye assured, when the living Lord shall try the matter by the fire, and
judge it according to his word, when all her abominations shall appear what
they be: then ye my Lords (I give your Lordships warning in time) repent if ye
be happy, and love your own souls health, repent I say, or else without all
doubt ye shall never escape the hands of the living Lord for the gilt of
your perjury and the breach of your oath. As ye have ba^keted and layne by the
whore in the fornication of her whorysh dispensations, pardons, idolatry, and
such like abominations: so shall ye drink with her (except ye repent betime)
of the cup of the Lords indignation and everlasting wrath, which is prepared
for the beast, his false prophets, and al their partakers. For he that is
partner with the^ in their whoredom and abhominatio^s, must also be partner
with the^ of their plagues, and on the latter day shall be thrown with them
into the lake burning with brimstone and unquenchable fire. Thus fare ye well
my Lords all. I pray God give you understanding of his blessed will and
pleasure, and make you to believe and embrace the truth. Amen,

An other farewell to the prisoners in Christ's gospels cause, and to all them
which for the same cause are exiled and banished out form their own country
chosing rather to leave al worldly commodity, then their master Christ.
Farewell my dearly beloved brethren in Christ, both ye my fellow prisoners,
and ye also that be exiled and banished out of your countries, because ye will
rather forsake all worldly commodity then the gospel of Christ.

Farewell al ye together in Christ, farewell and be merry: for ye know that the
trial of your faith brings forth patience, and patience shall make us perfect,
whole and sound on every side, and such after trial ye know shall receive the
crown of life according to the promise of the lord made to his derely beloved:
let us therefore be pacient unto the coming of the Lord. Jacob. 5
As the husbandman abides patiently the former and latter rain for the
increase of his croppe: so let us be patiente and pluck up our hearts, for
the coming of the lord approaches apace. Let us my dear brethren, take
example of patience in tribulation of the Prophets, which spoke likewise Gods
word truly in his name. Let Job be to us an example of patience: and the end
which the Lord suffered, 1. Pet. 1.
which is full of mercy and pity. We know my brethren by gods word, that our
faith is much more precious then any corruptible gold, and yet that is tried
by the fire: even so our faith is therefore tried likewise in tribulations, that
it may be found when the Lord shall appear, laudable, glorious and honorable.
1. Pet. 2.
For if we for Christ's cause do suffer, that is grateful before God, for
thereunto are we called, that is our state and vocation, wherewith let us be
content. Christ we know suffered for us afflictions, leuinge us an example that
we should follow his fotesteppes, for he committed no sin nor was there any
guile found in his mouth: when he was rayled upon, and al to reviled, rayled
not again: when he was evil entreated, he did not threaten, but committed the
punishment thereof to him that judges a right.

Let us ever have in fresh remembrance those wonderful comfortable sentences
spoken by the mouth of our savior Christ: blessed are they which suffer
persecution for righteousness sake, for theyrs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are ye when men revile you, Math. 5
persecute you, and speak all evil against you for my sake: rejoice and be
glad, for great is you reward in heaven, for so did they persecute the
prophets, which were before you. Therefore let us always bear this in our
minds, that if any incommodity do chance unto us for rightousnes sake, happy
are we whatsoever the world does think of us. Luke. 21.
Christ our master has told us before hand that the brother should put the
brother to death, and the father the son, and the children should rise
against their parents and kill them, and that Christ's true Apostles should be
hated of all men for his names sake: but he that shall abide patie^tly unto
thend shall be saved. Let us the^ endure in all trobles pacie^tly after the
example of our master Christ and be co^te^ted therwt for he suffered being our
master and lord, how does it not the^ become us to suffer? Luke. 6.
For the disciple is not above his master nor ye servant above his lord. It
may suffice the disciple to be as his master, and the servant to be as his
lord, If they have called the father of the family, Math. 10.
the master of the household Beelzebub, how much more shall they call so the^
of his household? Fear the^ not then says our savior, for all priuities
shall be made plain: there is now nothing secret, but it shall be showed in
light. Of Christ's words let us neither be ashamed, nor afraid to speak
them, for so Christ our master commands us, saying: that I tell you
privily, speak openly abroad, and that I tell you in your ear preach it upon
the house top. And fear not the^ which kill the body, for the soul they can
not kill: but fear him which can cast both body and soul into hell fire. Know
ye that the heavenly father, has ever a gracious eye and respect toward
you, and a fatherlye providence for you, so that without his knowledge and
permission, nothing can do you harm. Let us therefore cast al our care upon
him, and he shall provide that which shall be best for us. For if of ij. small
sparowes which both are sold for a mite, one of them lights not on the ground
without your father, and all the hears of our head are numbered, Math. 10.
fear not then says our Master Christ, for ye are more worth then many small
sparowes. And let us not stick to confess our master Christ for fear of
danger whatsoever it shall be, remembryng the promise that Christ makes
saying: whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall I confess before my
father which is in heaven: but whosoever shall deny me, him shall I likewise
deny before my father which is in heaven. Christ came not to give unto us hear
a carnal amity, and a worldly peace or to knitte his unto the world in ease
and peace: but rather to separate and divide the^ from the world, and to ioyn
the^ unto himself, in whose cause we must if we will be his, forsake father and
mother, and stycke unto him. If we forsake him or shrink from him for trouble
or deaths sake, which he calls his cross: he will none of us, we cannot be
his. If for his cause we shall loose our temporal lives here, we shall find
them again and enjoy them for evermore: but if in his cause we will not be
contented to leave nor lose them here: then shall we lose them so, that we
shall never find them again, but in everlasting death. What though our troubles
here be painful for the time, and the sting of death bitter and unpleasant:
yet we know that they shall not last in comparison of eternitye, no not the
twincklyng of an eye, and that they patiently taken in Christ's cause, shall
procure and get us unmeasurable heaps of heavenly glory, 2. Cor 4.
unto the which these temporal pains of death and troubles compared, 1. Pet.
4.
are not to be esteemed, but to be reioysed upon. Wonder not, says S. Peter, as
though it were any strange matter that ye are tried by the fire (he means
of tribulation) which thing says he, is done to prove you. Nay rather in
that ye are parteners of Christ's afflictions, rejoice, that in his glorious
reuelacio^, ye may rejoice with merry hearts. If ye suffer rebukes in Christ's
name, happy are ye, for the glory and spirit of god rests upon you. Ol them
God is reviled and dishonored, but of you he is glorified. Let no man be
ashamed of that he suffers as a christian and in Christ's cause: for now is the
time that judgment and correction must begin at the house of god, and if it
begin first at us, what shall be the end of those think ye, which believe not the
gospel? And if the righteous shall be hardly saved, the wicked and the sinner,
where shall he appear? Wherefore they which are afflicted according to the will of
god, let them lay down and commit their souls to him by well doing, as to a
trusty and faithful maker. This (as I said) may not seem strange to us, for we
know that all the whole fraternity of christ's congregation in this world, is
served with the like, and by the same is made perfect. For the fervent love
that the apostles had unto their master Christ, and for the great commodities
and increase of all godliness which they felt by their faith to ensue of
afflictions in Christ's cause, and thirdly for the heaps of heavenly joys
which the same do get unto the godly, which shall endure in heaven for
evermore, for these causes (I say) the apostles of their afflictions did joy,
and reioiced in that they were had and accounted worthy to suffer co^tumelies
and rebukes for christ's name. And Paul, as he gloried in the grace and favor
of god, whereunto he was brought and stood in by faith: so he rejoiced in his
afflictions for the heavenly and spiritual profits which he numbreth to rise
upon them: yea, he was so far in love with that, that the carnal man lotheth
so much, 1. Cor. 2.
that is with Christ's cross, that he judged himself to know nothing else, but
Christ crucified: be will glory (he says) in nothing elses but in Christ's
cross, yea and he blesses all those, as the only true Israelits and elect
people of god with peace and mercy, which walks after that rule and after
none other. O Lord what a wonderful spirit was that that made Paul, in
setting forth of himself against the vanity of Satan's Pseu dopostels and in his
claim there that he in Christ's cause did excel and pass the^ al, 2. Cor. 11
what wonderful Spirit was that (I say) that made him to reckon up al his
troubles, his labors, his beati^gs, his whippings and scourgings, his
shipwracks, his dangers and perils by water and by land, his famyne, hunger,
nakedness, and cold, with many more, and the daily care of all the congregations
of Christ, among whom every man's pain did pearce his heart, and every man's
grief was grievous unto him? O Lord is this Paul's Primacy, whereof he thought
so much good, that he did excel other? Is not this Paul's saying unto Timothy
his own scholar, 2. Timo. 2
and does it not pertain to whosoever will be Christ's true soldiers? bear
thou (says he) the afflictions like a good soldier of Jesus Christ. This is
true: if we die with him (he means Christ) we shall live with him, if we suffer
with him, we shall reign with him, if we deny him, he shall deny us, if we be
faithless, he remains faythefull, he cannot deny himself. This Paul
would have known to every body: for there is none other way to heaven, 2.
Tim. 3
but Christ and his way, and all that will live godly in Christ, shall
(says Sayncte Paul) suffer persecution. By this way went to heaven the
Patryarckes, the Prophets, Christ our master, his Apostels, his Martyrs, and
all the godly since the beginning. And as it has been of old, that he which was
born after the flesh, Gal. 4,
persecuteth him which was borne after the spirit, for so it was in Isaackes
time: so said Saint Paul, it was in his time also. And whether it be so or no
now, let the Spyrytuall man, the self same man (I mean) that is endued
with the Spirit of almighty God, let him be Judge. Of the cross of the
Patryarckes as ye may read in their stories if ye read the book of Genesis,
ye shall perceive. Of other, Saint Paul in few words comprehends much
matter, speaking in a generality of the wonderful afflictions, death, and
torments, which the men of God in gods cause and for the truth sake,
willingly and gladly did suffer. Heb. 11.
After much particular rehearsal of many, he says: other were racked, and
despised, and would not be delivered, that they might obtain a better
resurrection. Other again were tried with mockinges and scourgings, and
moreover with bonds and imprisonment: they were stoned, hewn a sunder,
tempted, fell and were slain upon the edge of the sword, some wandered to and fro
in shepes pilches, in goats pylches, forsaken, oppressed, afflicted, such
godly me^ as ye world was unworthy of, wandryng in wilderness, in mountains, in
caves, and in dens, and all these were commended for their faith. And yet
they abide for us the servant of god, and for those their brethren, which are
to be slain as they were for the word of gods sake, that none be shut out, but
that we may all go together to meet our master Christ in the air at his
coming, and so to be in bliss with him in body and in soul for evermore.

Therefore, seeing we have so much occasion to suffer and to take afflictions
for Christ's names sake patiently, so many commodities thereby, so waightye
causes, so many good examples, so great necessitye, so sure promises of
eternal life and heavenly joys, of him that cannot lie: Let us throw away
whatsoever might let us, all burden of sin, and all kind of carnalitie, and
patiently and constantly let us run for the best game in this race that is
set before us, ever having our eyes upon Jesus Christ the ryngleader, Heb. 12.
capitain, and perfiter of our faith, which for the joy that was set before
him, endured the cross, not passing upon the ignomy and shame thereof, and is
set now at the right hand of the throne of god. Consider this, that he suffered
such strife of sinners against him self, that ye should not give over nor
fainte in your minds. As yet brethren we have notwithstande unto death,
fyghtyng against sin. Let us never forget dear brethren for Christ's sake,
that fatherly exhortation of the wise yt speaks unto us as unto his children
the godly wisdom of god, saying thus: my son despise not the correction of
the Lord, nor fall not from him, when thou art rebuked of him, for whom the
Lord loves him does he correct, and scourges every child whom he
receives: what child is he whom the father does not chasten? If ye be free
from chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastardes and no
children. Seeing then, when as we have had carnal parents which chastened us, we
we reverenced them, shall not we much more be subject unto our spiritual
father, that we might live? And they for a little time taught us after their
own mind: but this father teaches us to our commoditye, Heb. 12.
to give unto us his holiness. Al chastisement for the present time, appears
not pleasant but payneful: but afterward it renders the fruit of ryghtuousnes
on them, which are exercised in it. Wherefore let us be of good chere (good
brethren) and let us pluck up our feeble members that were fallen, or began to
fainte, heart, hands, knees, and all the rest, and let us walk vprighte and
straighte, that no lymping nor haultyng bring us out of the way. Let us look,
not upon the things that be present, but with the eyes of our faith let us
stedfastlye behold the things that be everlasting in heaven, and so choose
rather in respect of that which is to come, with ye chosen members of Christ,
to bear christ's cross, then for this short life time, to enjoy all the
riches, honors, and pleasures of the broad world. Why should we christians
far death? Can death depryue us of Christ, which is all our comfort, our
joy, and our life? Nay forsothe. But contrary, death shall deliver us from
this mortal body, which lodeth and bears down the Spirit, 2. Cor 5.
that it can not so well perceive heavenly things: in the which so long as we
dwell, we are absent from God.

Wherefore, understanding our state in that we be christians, that if our
mortal body, which is our earthlye house, were destroyed, we have a
building, 2. Cor. 5
a house not made with hands, but everlasting in heaven etc: therefore we are
of good cheer, and know that when we are in the body, we are absente from
God, for we walk by faith and not by clear syghte. Nevertheless we are
bold and had rather be absent from the body and present with God.
wherefore, we strive whether we be present at home, or absent abroad, that we
may always please him. And who that has true faith in our savior Christ,
whereby he knows somewhat truly what Christ our Savior is, that he is the
eternal son of God, life, light, the wisdom of the father, all goodness, al
righteousness and whatsoever is good that heart can desire, yea infinite plenty
of al these, above that that man's heart can either conceive or think, (for in
him dwells the fullness of the godhead corporally) and also that he is given
us of the father, and made of God to be our wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.
our righteousness, our holiness, and our redemption: who (I say) is he that
believes this in deed, that would not gladly be with his master Christ? Phili.
1.
Paul for this knowledge coueted to have been losed from the body, and to have
been with Christ, for that be counted it much better for himself, and had
rather to be losed than to live. Therefore these words of Christ to the thief
on the cross, that asked of him mercy, were full of comfort and solace: this
day thou shall be with me in paradise. Luke. 23.
To dye in the defense of Christ's gospel, it is our bounded duty to Christ,
and also to our neyghbor. To Christ, Romans 9 1. John. 3.
for he died for us, and rose again ye he might be lord over all. And seeing he
dyed for us, we also (says S. John) should ieopard, yea give our life for
our brethren. And this kind of geuyng and losyng, is gettyng and wynnyng in
deed: for he that gives or loses his life thus, gets and wynneth it for
evermore. Apo. 14.
Blessed are they therefore that die in the lord, and if they die in the Lords
cause, they are most happy of all. Let us not then fear death, which can do us
no harm, otherwise than for a moment to make ye flesh to smart: but that our
faith which is surely fastened and fyxed unto the word of god, tells us that
we shall be anon after death, in peace, in the hands of god, in joy, in
solace, and that from the death we shall go straight unto life. For S. John
says, John. 11. John. 5
he that lives and believes in me, shall never dye. And in an other place: he
shall depart from death unto life. And therefore this death of the christian, is
not to be called death, but rather a gate or entrance into everlasting life.
Therefore Paul calls it but a dissolution and resolution, and both Peter and
Paul, 2. Pet. 1. 2. Cor. 5
a puttyng of of this Tabernacle or dwelhouse, meaning thereby ye mortal body,
as wherein the soul or spirit does dwell here in this world for a small time.
Yea this death may be called to the christian, an end of all miseries. For so
long as we live here, Acts. 14.
we must pass through many tribulations, before we can enter into the
kingdom of heaven. And now, after that death has shot his bolt, all the
christian man's enemies have done what they can, and after that they have no
more to do. What could hurt or harm poor Lazarus that lay at the rich man's
gate? his former penury and poverty, his miserable beggerye and horrible sores
and sycknes? For so soon as death had stricken him with his dart, so sone
came the angels, Luke. 16.
and carried him straight up into Abraham's bosom. What lost he by death, who
from misery and pain, is set by the ministry of Angels in a place both of
joy and solace.

Farewell dear brethren, farewell, and let us comfort our hearts in all
troubles, and in death with the word of God: for heaven and earth shall
perish, but the word of the lord endures for ever.

Farewell christ's dearly beloved spouse here wandering in this world as in a
strange land, far from thyn own country, and compassed about on every hand
with deadly enemies, which cease not to assault thee, ever seeking thy
destruction.

Farewell, farewell, O ye the whole and universal congregation of the chosen
of god here living upon earth, the true church militant of Christ, the true
mystical body of Christ, the very household and family of god, and the sacred
temple of the holy ghost. Farewell.

Farewell, O thou little flock of the high heavenly pastor Christ, Luke. 12
for to thee it has pleased the heavenly father to give an everlasting and
eternal kingdom. Farewell.

Farewell thou spiritual house of god, thou holy and roi all priesthode, thou
chosen generation, thou holy nation, thou won spouse. Fare well. Farewell.

N. R.

This that follows, which he further wrote concerning his cruel handlyng in
the schools at Oxford, and also of the comdemnation of him, O. Cranmer, and M.
Latymer etc: we would not here omit, though in order in should before have
been placed, next after the preface to his disputation, Folio 78.
KNow (gentle Reader) that master Prollocutour did promise me in the
disputations publicly, that I should see mine aunswers how they were collected
and gathered of the Notaries, and that I should have license to add or
diminishe, to alter or change afterward, as I should think best would make
for me to the aunsweryng of the propositions. He promised moreover publicly
that I should have both time and place for me to bring in franlkely all that I
could, for the confyrmation of mine answers. Now when he had promised all these
things openly in the hearing of other Commissioners, and of the whole
university of Oxforde, yet (good reader) mark this, that in very deed he
performed nothing of all that he promised: what faith then shall a man look
to find at such judges hands in the secret mysteries of God, which in theyrs
promises so openly made and so duly det (I will not speak of the witnesses of
the matter) are found to be so faithless both to God and man? well I will
leave it to the judgment of the wise.

And now, for that is lest for us to do, let us pray that God would have mercy
on his church of England, that yet once, when it shall be his good pleasure,
it may clearly see and gredely embrace, in the face of Jesus Christ, the will
of the heavenly father, and that of his infinite mercy, he would either turn
to him the ragyng and ravening wolves, and most subtle seducers of his people,
which are by them altogether spoiled and bewitched, either that of his most
rightuous judgment, he would drive these faythlesse feeders from his flock,
that they may no more be able to trouble and scatter abroad Christ's sheep
from their shepeherd, and that spedely: Amen, Amen. And let every one that has
the spirit (as S. John says) say Amen. Yet further know thou, that when
Master Prolocutour did put forth three propositions, he did command us to
answer particularly to them all. After our answers, neither he nor his fellows
did ever enter into any disputation of any one of the^ saving only of the
first. Yea, when that he had asked us after disputations of the first (as ye
have heard for my part) whether we would subscribe to the whole, in such sort,
form, and words as there are set forth, without further disputation, (which
thing we denied) by and by he gave sentence against us all, that is against
me, Doctor Cranmer and Doctor Latimer my most dear fathers and brethren in
christ co^demning us for heinous heretics concerning every of these
propositio^s, and so separated us one from another, sending us severally into
sundry and diverse houses to be kept most secretlye to the day of our burning,
and as before, so still commanded, that all and every one of our servants
should be kept from us, whereto he added that at his departure thence, pen,
ink, and paper, should depart from us also. He means here that godly and
fruitful report of his disputation in Oxford which he penned with his own
hand.
But thanks be to God that gave me to write this before the use of such
things were utterly taken away. Almighty God which beholds the causes of
the afflicted, and is wonted to lose and look mercifully on the bonds and
gronings of the captives, he vouch safe now to look upon the causes of his
pore church in England, and of his great wisdom and unspeakable mercy, with
speed to make an end of our misery, Amen, Amen, Amen,

Letters of master John Hoper late Bishop of Gloucester: where, after his long
and cruel imprisonmente in the flete, he was burnte with most terrible kinds
of torments (as you may read in the book of martyrs fol. 1062.) for the
defense of the sincere truth of the gospel, the 9. day, of January, in the
year of our Lord. 1555.
A letter which he wrote to certain godly persons, professors and lovers of
the truth, instructing them how they should behave them selves at the
beginnynge of the change of religion.
THe grace, mercy, and peace of God the father through our Lord Jesus
Christ, be with you my dear brethren and with al those that unfeignedly love
and embrace his holy gospel, Amen. It is told me that the wicked Idol the
mass is stablyshed again by a law, and passed in the Parleament house. Learn
the truth of it I pray you, and what penalty is appointed in the act, to such
as speak against it. Also whether there be any co^pulsion to constrain men to
be at it. The statute throughlye known, such as be abroad and at liberty,
may provide for them selves and avoid the danger the better. Doubtless there
has not been seen before our time, such a parleament as this is, that as many
as were suspected to be favorers of gods word, should be banyshed out of
both houses. But we must give god thanks for that truth he has opened in the
time of his blessed servant king Edward the syxte, and pray unto him that
we deny it not, nor dyshoner it with idolatrye but that we may have strength
and patience rather to dye ten times, then to deny him once. Blessed shall we
be if ever god make us worthy of that honor, to shede our blood for his
names sake. And blessed then shall we think the parents which brought us
into this world, that we should from this mortalitye be carried into
immortalitye. If we follow the commandment of Saint Paul that says, if
ye be risen again with Christ, Col. 3.
seek the things that be above where Christ sytteth at the right hand of
God: we shall neither depart from the vain transitorye goods of this world,
nor from this wretched and mortal life, with so great pains as other do.
Let us pray to our heavenly father that we may know and love his blessed
will, and the glorious joy prepared for us in time to come, and that we may
know and hate all things contrary to his blessed will and also the pain
prepared for the wicked men in the world to come. There is no better way to be
used in this troublesome time for your consolation, then many times to have
assemblies to gether of such men and women as be of your religion in
Christ, and there to talk and renew among your selves the truth of your
religion, to see what ye be by the word of God and to remember what ye were
before ye came to the knowledge thereof, to waygh and confer the dreams and
false lies of the preachers that now preach, with the word of God that
retayneth all truth, and by such talk and familiar resortinge together, ye
shall the better find out all their lies that now go about to deceive you,
and also both know and love the truth that God has opened to us. It is much
requisite that the members of Christ, comfort one an other, make prayers
together, confer one with another: so shall ye be the stronger, and Gods
spirit shall not be absent from you but in the myds of you to teach you, to
comfort you, to make you wise in all godly things, patiente in adversity and
strong in persecution. Ye se how the congregation of the wicked by helping one
an other, make their wicked religion and themselves strong against Gods truth
and his people. It ye may have some learned man that can, out of ye scriptures
speak unto you of faith and true honoryng of God, also that can show you the
descente of Christ's church from the beginning of it until this day, that ye
may perceive by the life of your forefathers these two things: the one that
Christ's word, which said that al his must suffer persecution and trouble in
the world, be true: the other that none of all his before our time, escaped
trouble: then shall ye perceive that it is but a folly for one that professes
Christ truly, to look for the love of the world. Thus shall ye learn to
bear trouble and to exercise your religion and feel in deed that Christ's
words be true: in the world, ye shall suffer persecution. John. 16
And when ye feel your religion in deed, say ye be no better then your
forefathers, but be glad that ye may be counted worthy souldioures for this
war, and pray to God when ye come together, that he will use and order you
and your doyinges to these three ends, which ye must take heed of: the
first that ye gloryfye God, the next that ye edifye the church and
congregation, the third that ye profit your own souls. In all your doings
beware ye be not deceived. For although this time be not yet bloodye and
tyrannous as the time of our forfathers that could not bear the name of
Christ without danger of life and goods: yet is our time more perellous
both for body and soul. Therefore of us Christ said: Luke. 18.
think ye when the son of man comes, he shall find any faith upon
earth? He said not, think ye he shall find any man or woman chrystened and
in name a christian: but he spoke of the faith that saves the christian man
in Christ, and doubtless the scarsitye of faith is now more (and will I fear
increase) then it was in the time of the greatest Tyrannes that ever were: and
no marvel why. Read ye the syxte chapter of Saint John's Revelation and ye
shall perceive among other things, that at the opening of the fourth seal,
came out a pale horse, and he that satte upon him was called death, and hell
followed him. This horse is the time wherein hypocrites and dissemblers entered
into the Church under the precente of true religion, as monkers, Friars
Nonnes, massynge priests, with such other, that have killed more souls with
heresies and superstystitio^, the^ all the Tyra^nes that ever were, killed
bodies with fire, sword, or banishement, as it appears by his name that
sits upon the horse, who is called death: for all souls that leave Christ
and trust to these hipocrytes, live to the diuil in everlasting pain, as is
declared by him that follows the pale horse which is hell. These prete^sed and
pale hypocrites, have stirred the earthquakes, that is to wit, the princes of
the world, against Christ's church, and have also darkened the son, and made
the moon bloody, and have caused the stars to fall from heaven, that is to
say, have darkened with mistes and daily do darken, as ye hear by their
sermons, the clear son of Gods most pure word: the moon, which be Gods
true preachers, which fetch only light at the son of Gods word, are
turned into blood, prisons, and chains, that their light can not shine unto
the world as they would: Whereupon it comes to pass that the stars, that is
to say Christian people, fall from heaven that is to wit, from Gods most true
word, to hypocrisye, most deuelyshe superstition and idolatrye. Let some
learned man show you all the articles of your belief and monuments of Christian
faith, from the time of Christ hitherto, and ye shall perceive that there was
never mention of such articles as these hypocrites teach. God bless you, and
pray for me as I do for you.

Out of the Flete by your brother in Christ John Hoper

To all my dear brethren, my relieuers and helpers in the City of London.
THe grace of God be with you, Amen. I have received from you (dearelye
beloved in our savior Jesus Christ) by the hands of my servant william
Downton, your liberality, for the which I do most hartly thank you, and I
praise god hyghly in you and for you, who has moved your hearts to show
this kindness toward me, prayinge him to preserve you from all famyne,
scarcity, and lack of the truth of his word, which is the lively food of your
souls, as you preserve my body from hunger and other necessities, which should
happen unto me, were it not cared for by the benevolence and charity of godly
people. Such as have taken all worldly gooddes and lands from me, and
spoiled me of all that I had, have emprisoned my body and appointed no one
halfepeny to feed or to relieve me wythall. But I do forgive them and pray
for them daily in my poor prayer unto God, and from my heart I wyshe their
salvation, and quietlye and patiently bear their injuries, wyshyng no farther
extremity to be used toward us. Yet if it seem contrary best unto our
heavenly father, I have made my reckenyng, and fullye resolved my self to
suffer the uttermost that they are able to do against me, yea death it self,
by the aid of Christ Jesus, who dyed the most vile death of the cross for us
wretches and miserable sinners. But of this I am assured, that the wicked world
with all his force and power, shall not touch one of the hears of our heads
without leave ad license of our heavenly father, whose will be done in all
things. If he will life, life be it: if he will death, death be it. Only
we pray, that our wylles may be subject unto his will, and then although
both we and all the world see none other thing but death, yet if he think
life best, we shall not dye, no although the sword be drawn out over our
heads: as Abraham thought to kill his son Isaac, yet when god perceived
that Abraham had surrendered his will to Gods will, and was content to kill his
son, god then saved his son. Dearly beloved, if we be contented to obey
gods will, and for his commandments sake, to surrender our goods and our
selves to be at his pleasure, it makes no matter whether we keep goods and
life, or loose them. Nothing can hurt us that is taken from us for Gods cause,
nor nothing can at length do us good, that is preserved contrary unto Gods
commandment. Let us wholye suffer God to use us and ours after his holy
wisdom, and beware we neither use nor govern our selves contrary to his
will by our own wisdom, for if we do, our wisdom will at length prove
folishnes. It is kept to no good purpose that we keep contrary unto his
commandments. It can by no means be taken from us that he would should tarry
with us. He is no good christian that rules him self and his, as worldly
means serves: for he that so does shall have as many chaunges as chances in
the world. To day, with the world he shall like and praise the truth of GOD,
to morrow as the world will, so will he like and praise the falshode of man:
to day with Christ, and to morrow with Antichriste. Wherefore dear brethren,
as touching your behauoure toward God, use both your inward spirytes and
your outewarde bodies, your inward and your outward man (I say) not after
the means of men, but after the infallible word of God. Refrain from
evil in both, and glorify your heavenly father in both. For if ye think ye
can inwardly in the heart serve him, and yet outwardlye serve with the world in
external service, the thing that is not GOD, ye deceive your selves, for
both the body and the soul must together concur in the honor of God, as
Saint Paul plainly teaches. 1. Cor 6. For if an honest wife be bound to
give both heart and body to faith and service in marriage, and if an honest wives
faith in the heart, cannot stand with an whorysh or defiled body outwardlye:
much less can the true faith of a christian in the service of christianitye,
stand with the bodily service of external idolatry: for the mystery of
marriage is not so honorable between man and wife, as it is between Christ and
every Christian man, as Saint Paul says. Therefore dear brethren, pray to
the heavenly father, that as he spared not the soul nor the body of his
dearelye beloved son, but applied both of them with extreme pain, to work
our salvation both of body and soul: so he will give us all grace to apply
our bodies and souls to be servants unto him, for doubtless he requires
as well the one as the other, and cannot be miscontented with one, and well
pleased with the other. Either he hates both or loves both: he deuideth not
his love to one and his hatred to the other. Let not us therefore good
brethren, divide our selves, and say our souls serve him whatsoever our
bodies do to the contrary, for civil order and policy. But (alas) I know
by my self what troubles you, that is, the great danger of the world that will
revenge (ye think) your service to God, with swoorde and fire, with loss
of goods and lands, But dear brethren way of the other side, that your
enemies and Gods enemies shall not do as much as they would, but as much as God
shall suffer them, who can trappe them in their own counsels, and destroy them
in the mids of their furies. Remember ye be the workmen of the Lord, and
called into his vineyard, there to labor till evening tide, that ye may
receive your penny, Math. 20.
which is more worth then all the kings of the earth. But he that calls us
into his vyneyard, has not told us how sore or how fervently the son shall
trouble us in our labor: but has bid us labor and commit the
bytternesse thereof unto him, who can and will so moderate all afflictions, that
no man shall have more laid upon him, then in Christ he shall be able to bear:
unto whose merciful tuitio^ and defense, I commend both your souls and your
bodeis. 2. September. 1554.

Yours with my poor prayer, John Hooper.

An answer of a letter whereby he was advertised of a godly company, to the
number of thirty, taken at prayer in a house in Bowchurchyarde and carried to
prison.
THe grace of God be with you, Amen. I perceived by your letter, how that
upon new years day at night, there were taken a godly company of
Christians, whilst they were praying. I do rejoice, in that men can be so well
occupied in this perilous time, and and fly unto God for remedy by prayer, as
well for their own lackes and necessities, as also charitably to pray for the^
that persecute them. So does the word of God command all men to pray
charitablye for those that hate them, and not to revile any maiestrate with
words, or to mean him evil by force and violence. They also may rejoice that
in well doing they were taken to the prison. Wherefore I have thought it good
to send them this little writing of cosolation, prayng god to send them
patience, charity, and constancye in the truth of his most holy word. Thus fare
you well, and pray to God to send his true word into this realm again
amongst us, which the ungodly bishops have now banished, 4. January. 1554.

To the godly and faithful company of prisoners in both the Counters, which
were taken together at prayer in a house in Bowchurchyard.
THe grace, favor, consolation, and aid of the holy ghost be with you now and
ever: so be it.

Dearly deloued in the Lord, ever sythens your imprisonment, I have been
maruelously moved with great affections and passions, as well of mirth and
gladness, as of heaviness and sorrow. Of gladness in this, that I perceived how ye
be bent and given to prayer and invocation of gods help, in these dark and
wicked procedings of men against gods glory. I have been sorry, to perceive the
malice and wickedness of me^ to be so cruel, devilish, and tyrannical, to
persecute the people of god, for seruyng of god, for saying and hearing of the
holy psalms and the word of eternal life. These cruel doings do declare,
that the papists church is more bloody and tyrannical, then ever was the sword
of the Ethnickes and gentiles. When I heard of your taking, and what ye were
doing, wherefore, and by whom ye were taken: I remembered how the christians in
the primitive church were used by the cruelty of unchristened heathens in the
time of Traiane the emperor, about 77 years after Christ's ascension into
heaven. The christians were persecuted very sore, as though they had been
traitors and mouers of sedition. Whereupon the gentile emperor Traiane required
to know the true, cause of christian men's trouble. A great learned man called
Plinius secundus wrote unto him and said, it was because the christians said
certain psalms before day unto one called Christ, whom they worshipped for
god. When Traiane the emperor understood it was for nothing but for conscince
and religion: he caused by his commandments every where, that no man should be
persecuted for seruyng of god. Lo, a gentile and heathen man would not have
such as were of a contrary religion, punished for serving of god. But the pope
and his church have cast you into prison, being taken even in doing the work
of god, and one of the most excellent works that is required of christian
men, that is to wit, whiles ye were in prayer, and not in such wicked and
superstitious prayer, as the papists use: but in the same prayer that Christ
has taught you to pray, and in his name only ye gave god thanks for that ye
have received, and for his sake ye asked for such things, as ye want. O glad
may ye be that ever ye were born, Math. 5
to be apprehended whilst ye were so virtuously occupied. Blessed be they that
suffer for righteousness sake. For if god had suffered them that took your
bodies, then to have taken your life also: now had ye ben following the la^be in
perpetual joys away from the company and assemble of wicked men. But the lord
would not have you suddenly so to depart, but reserueth you gloriously to
speak and maintain his truth to the world. Be ye not careful what ye shall say,
for god will go out and in with you, and will be present in your hearts and in
your mouths to speak his wisdom, although it seem folishnes to ye world. He
that has begone this good work in you, confirm, strengthen, and continue you
in ye same unto the end, and pray unto him, that ye may fear him only, that
has power to kill both body and soul, and to cast the^ into hell fire. Be of
good comfort, all the hears of your heads be numbered, Math. 10.
and there is not one of them can perish, except your heavenly father
suffer it to peryshe. Now ye be eue^ in the field, and placed in the
forefront of Christ's battle. Doubtless it is a singular favor of God, and a
special love of him toward you, to give you this foreward and preeminence,
and a sign that he trusts you before others of his people. Wherefore (dear
brethren and sisters) continually fight this fight of the Lord. Your cause is
most just and godly, ye stand for the true Christ, who is after the flesh in
heaven, and for his true religion and honor, which is amplye, fully,
sufficiently and abundantly contained in the holy Testament sealed with
christ's own blood. How much be ye bound to god, to put you in trust with so
holy and just a cause? Remember what lokers upon ye have, to see and behold
you in your fight, even god and all his holy angels, who be ready always to take
you up into heaven, if ye be slain in this fight. Also you have standing at your
backs al ye multitude of the faithful, who shall take courage, strength and
desire, to follow such noble and valiaunte christians as ye be. Be not afeard of
your adversaries, i. Iobn. 4.
for he that is in you, is stronger then he that is them. Shrynke not although
it be pain to you. Your pains be not now so great as hereafter your joys
shall be. Read the comfortable chapiters to the To. 8.10.15. Heb. 11.12. And
upon your knees thank god that ever ye were accou^pted worthy to suffer any
thing for his names sake. Read the second chapter of S. Lukes gospel, and
there ye shall see, how the shepheardes that watched upon their sheep all
night, as soon as they heard that Christ was borne at Bethlem, by and by they
went to see him. They did not reason nor debate with themselves who should keep
the wolf from the sheep in the mean time, but did as they were commanded, and
committed their sheep unto him whose pleasure they obeyed. So let us do now,
when we be called, and commit all other things unto him that calls us. He
will take heed that all things shall be well: he will help the husband, he
will comfort the wife, he will guide the servant, he will keep the house, he
will preserve the goods, yea rather then it should be undone, i. Pet. 5
he will wash the dishes and rock the cradell. Cast therefore all your care upon
god, for he catech for you. Besides this, ye may perceive by your impriso^ment,
that your adversaries weapons against you, be nothing but flesh, blood, and
tyranny. For if they were able, they would maintain their wicked religion by
gods word: but for lack of that, they would violently compel such as they
can not by the holy scripture persuade, because the holy word of God and all
Christ's doings be clean contrary unto them. I pray you pray for me and I will
pray for you. And although we be a sunder after the world, yet we are in
Christ (I trust) for ever, joining in the spirit, and so shall meet in the
palace of the heavenly joys after this short and tra^sitory life is ended.
Gods peace be with you, Amen.4. of January. 1554.

To certain of his beloved friends in god, exhortyng them to stick
constantlye to the professed truth of the gospel in those days of trial, and
not to shrynke for any trouble.
THe grace of God be with you, Amen. I did write unto you of late, and told you
what extremity the parliamente had concluded upon concerning religion,
suppressyng the true, and setting forth the untrue, entendyng to cause all men
by extremity to forswear themselves and to take again for the head of the
church, him that is neither head nor member of it, but a very enemy, as the
word of god and all ancient writers do record: and for lack of law and
authority they will use force and extremity, which have been the arguments to
defend the Pope and popery since his wicked authority began first in the
world. But now is the time of trial, to see whether we fear more God or
man. It was an easy thing to hold with Christ, whiles the prince and world held
with him: but now the world hates him, is the true trial who be his.
Wherefore in the name and in the virtue, strength, and power of his holy
spirit, prepare your selves in any case to aduersitye and constancy. Let
us not run away when it is most time to fight. Remember that none shall be
crowned but such as fight manfully, and he that endures unto the end, shall be
saved. Ye must now turn all your cogitations from the peril ye see, and
mark by faith what follows the peril: either victory in this world of your
enemies, or else a surrender of this life, to inherit the everlasting kingdom.
Beware of beholding to much the felicity or the myserye of this world: for the
consideration and earnest love or fear of either of the^, draws from god.
Wherefore think with your selves as touching the felicity of the world, it is
good, but yet none otherwise then it stands with the favor of god: it is to
be kept, but yet so far forth as by keeping of it, we loose not god. It is
good to abide and tarry still among our friends here, but yet so that we tarry
not therwithall in gods displeasure, and hereafter to dwell in hell with the
devils in fire everlasting. There is nothing under god by may be kept, so that
god being above all things we have, be not lost. Of adversity judge the same.
Imprisonment is paynefull: but yet liberty upon evil conditions is more
payneful. The prisons stincke, but yet not so much as sweet houses, where as
the fear and true honor of god lacks. I must be alone and solitary, it is
better so to be and have god with me, thou to be in company with the wicked.
Loss of goods is great, but loss of gods grace and favor is greater. I am a
poor simple creature and cannot tell how to answer before such a great sort
of noble, learned, and wise: It is better to make answer before the pomp and
pride of wicked men, then to stand naked in the sight of all heaven and earth
before the just God, at the latter day. I shall dye then by the hands of the
cruel man: he is blessed that loses this life full of mortal miseries and
fyndeth the life full of eternal joys. It is a grief to depart from goods and
friends, but yet not so much as to depart from grace and heaven it self.
Wherefore there is neither felicitye nor adversity of this world, that can
appear to be great, if it be wayed with the joys or pains in the world to
come. I can do no more but pray for you: do the same for me for Gods sake.
For my part I thank the heavenly father, I have made mine accou^ptes and
appointed my self unto the will of the heavenly father: as he will, so I will
by his grace. For gods sake, as soon as ye can, send my poor wife and
children some letter from you, and my letter also which I sent of late to
Downton. As it is told me, she had never letter from me, since the coming of
master S unto her: the more to blame the messengers, for I have written diverse
times. The lord comfort them and provide for them, for I am able to do no thing
in worldly things. She is a godly and wise woman, and if my meanynges had been
accomplished she should have had necessary things: but that I meant god can
perform, to whom I commend both her and you all. I am a precious jewel now
and deintely kept, never so deintely: for neither mine own man nor any of the
servant of the house may come at me, but my keeper alone, a simple rude man
god knows. But I am nothing careful thereof. 21. Ianu. 1554.

Yours bounden. John Hooper.

An other letter to certain godly parsons written to the same effect.
THe grace of god be with you, Amen. I do give our heavenly father thanks,
that moves you to remember your afflicted brethern, and I do (as I am bound)
pray for you, that with your remembrance of me, ye provide help, and succor
me with such goods, as god does endue you withal. Doubtless if ever wretch
and vile sinner was bound unto God, I am most specially bound: for these ten
months almost, ever since my imprisonmente, I have had no living nor goods to
sustain my self wythall, yet such has been the favor of our heavenly
father, that I have had sufficient to eat and drink and the same paid for.
Seeing he is so merciful and careful for my synful body, I doubt not but he
has more care of my wretched soul, so that in both I may serve his majesty,
and be a lively and profitalbe member of his poor afflicted church. I do not
care what extremity this world shall work or devise, praying you in the bowels
of him that shed his precious blood for you, to remember and follow the
knowledge ye have learned of his truth. Be not ashamed nor afraid to follow
him, beware of this sentence, that it take no place in you: Luke. 9
no man (says Christ) that puts his hand to the ploughe and looks
backewarde, is meet for the kingdom of God. Remember that Christ wylled him
that would build a Tower, to sytte down first and look whether he were able
to perform it, least he should begin and leave of in the myddest and so be
mocked of his neyghbors and lose therwythall as much as he bestowed. Luke. 14
Christ told such as would build in him eternal life, what the price
thereof was, even at the beginning of his doctrine, and said they should be
persecuted. Math. 10.
Also they should sometime pay and bestow both goods and lands, before the
Tower of salvation would be builded. Seeing the price of truth in religion
has been always the displeasure and persecution of the world, let us bear
it, and Christ will recompense the charges abundantly. Yt is no loss to lack
the love of the world, and to find the love of God, nor no harm to suffer
the loss of worldly things and find eternal life. If man hate and god love,
man kill the body and god bring both body and soul to eternal life, the
exchange is good and profitable. For the love of God use synglenes toward
him, beware of this folyshe and disceytfull collusion, to think a man may
serve god in spirit secretly to his conscience although outwardly with his
body and bodily presence, he cleave for ciuyl order, to such rytes and
ceremonies as now be used contrary to god and his word. Be assured that
whatsoever he be that gives this counsel, shall be before God hable to do you
no more profytte then the fygge leaves did unto Adam. 1. Cor. 6.
Glorifye GOD both in your bodies and in your spirits which are gods. Take
heed of that commandment, no man is able to dispense with it. Such as be yet
clear and have not been present at the wicked mass and idolatrous service
let the^ pray to god to stand fast: such as for weakness and fear have been
at it, repent, and desire god of forgeuenes, and doubtless he will have mercy
upon you. It is a fearful thing, that many do not a lonelye thus dissemble
with God, but also excuse and defend the dissimulation: beware of that dear
brethern, for it is a sore matter to delight in evil things. Prouer. 2
Let us acknowledge and bewail our evil, then god shall send grace to amend
us, and strength, better to bear his cross. I doubt not but ye will judge of
my writing as I mean toward you in my heart, which is doubtless your
eternal salvation in Christ Jesus, to whom I hartelye commend you. 14.
June. 1554.

To a merchaunte of London, by whose means he had received much comfort in his
great necessity in the Fleet: where how cruelly he was handled, you shall see
in the letter next followyng.
THe grace of god be with you, Amen. I thank god and you for the great help
and consolation I have received in yt time of adversity by your charitable
means, but most rejoice that you be not altered from truth, although falshod
truelly seeks to distayne her. Judge not (my brother) truth by outward
appearance, for truth now worse appears and more vily is rejected, the^
falshod. Leave the outward show, and see by the word of god what truth is, and
accept truth and dislike her not though man call her falshode. As it is now, so
has it ben heretofore, the truth rejected and falshod received. Such as have
professed truth, for truth have smarted, and the friends of falsehode laughed
them to scorn. The trial of both has been by contrary success, the one
having the commendation of truth by man, but the co^demnatio^ of falshode by
god, flourishing for a time with endless destruction: the other afflicted a little
season with immortal joys. Wherefore dear brother ask and demand of your
book, the testament of Jesus Christ in these woeful and wretched dais, what you
should think, and what you should stay upon for a certain truth, and
whatsoever you hear taught, try it by your book whether it be true or false.
The days be dangerous and full of peril, not only for the world and worldly
things, but for heaven and heavenly things. It is a trouble to loose the
treasures of this life, but yet a very pain if they be kept with the offense
of god. Cry, call, pray, and in Christ daily require help, succor, mercy,
wisdom, grace and defense, that the wickedness of this world prevail not
against us. We began well, god preserve us until the end. I would write
more often unto you, but I do perceive you be at so much charges with me that I
fear you would think when I write, I crave. Send me nothing till I send to
you for it, and so tell the good men your partners, and when I need I will be
bold of you.3. December. 1554.

Yours with my prayer, I. Hoper.

A report of his miserable imprisonment and most cruel handlyng by Babington,
that enemy of god and of his truth, then Warden of the Fleet.
THe first of Semptember. 1553. I was committed unto the Flete from Richmont,
to have the liberty of the prison, and within vi. dais after, I paid for my
liberty five pounds sterling to the Warden for fees, who immediately upon the
paymente thereof, complained unto Steven Gardener, bishop of Winchester, and so
was I committed to close prison one quarter of a year, in the Tower chamber of
ye Fleet, and used very extremely. Then by the means of a good gentlewoman, I
had liberty to come down to dinner and supper, and not to speak with any of
my friends: but as soon as dinner and supper was done, to repair to my
chamber again. Notwithstanding, whiles I came down thus to dinner and supper,
the Warden and his wife pyked quarrels with me, and complained untruly of me to
their great friend, the bishop of winchester.

After one quarter of a year, and somewhat more, the Warden and his wife fell
out with me, for the wicked mass and thereupon, the warden resorted to the
bishop of Winchester, and obtained to put me into the wards, where I have
continued a long time, having nothing appointed to me for my bed, but a
little pad of straw, a rotten covering, with a tike and a few feathers therein,
the chamber being vile and stynckynge, until by Gods means, good people sent
me bedding to lie in: of the one side of which prison, is the synke and filth
of all the house, and on the other side, the town ditch: so that the stinche
of the house has infected me with sundry diseases. During which time, I have
been sick, and the doors, bars, haspes and chains being all closed, and
made fast upon me, I have mourned, called and cried for help. But the warden,
when he has known me many times ready to dye, and when the poor men of the
wards have called to help me, has commanded the doors to be kept fast,
and charged that none of his men should come at me, saying: let him alone,
it were a good riddaunce of him. And among many other times, he did thus the
18. of October. 1553. as many can witness. I paid always like a Baron to the
said warden, as well in fees as for my board, which was xx. shyllinges a weke,
besides my man's table, until I was wrongfullye deprived of my bishoprycke. And
since that time, I have paid him, as the best gentleman does in his house?
yet has he used me worse and more vylye, then the veriest slave that ever came
to the hall commons. The said warden has also emprisoned my man, Wylliam
Downton, and strypped him out of his clothes to search for letters, and could
find none, but only a little remembrance of good people names, that gave me
their alms to relieve me in prisonne. And to undo them also, the Warden
delivered the same bill unto the said Steven Gardener, Gods enemy and mine.

I have suffered emprisonmente almost eighten months, my goods, living,
friends, and comfort taken from me, the Queen owyng me by just account four
score pounds or more. She has put me in prison, and gives nothing to
find me, neither is there suffered any to come at me, whereby I might have
relief. I am with a wicked man and woman, so that I see no remedy (saving Gods
help) but I shall be cast away in prison, before I can come to judgment. But I
commit my just cause to God, whose will be done whether it be by life or
death.

John Hoper.

A letter concerning the vain and false reports which were spread abroad of
him, that he had recanted and abiured that doctrine which he before had
preached.
THe grace and peace of God be with al them that unfeignedly look for the coming
of our savior Christ, Ame^.

Dear brethren and sisters in our lord, and my fellow prisoners for the cause
of Gods gospel, I do rejoice and give thanks unto God for your constancy and
perseverance in affliction, wyshing and praying unto him for your continuance
therein to the end. And as I do rejoice in your faithful and constant
affliction that be in prison: even so do I mourn and lament to hear of our
dear brethren abroad, that yet have not suffered nor felt such dangers for
Gods truth as we have and do feel, and are like daily to suffer more, yea the
very extreme death of the fire: Yet such is the report abroad (as I am
crediblye informed) that I John Hoper a condemned man for the cause of Christ,
now after sentence of death, being in Newgate prisonner, lokinge daily for
execution, should recante and abjure that heretofore I have preached. And this
talk rises of this, that the bishop of London and his chapleines resort
unto me. Doubtless if our brethren were as godly as I could wish them to be,
they would think, that in case I did refuse to talk with them, they might have
just occasion to say that I were unlearned, and disdained to speak with them.
Therefore to avoid just suspicion of both, I have and do daily speak with
them when they come, not doubtinge but they will report that I am neither
proud nor unlearned. And I would wysh all men to do as I do in this point,
for I fear not their arguments, neither is death terrible unto me. wherefore I
pray you to make true export of the same as occasion shall serve, and also that
I am more confyrmed in the truth that heretofore I have preached, by their
communication: and ye that may, send to the weak brethren abroad, prayinge
the^ yt they trouble me not with such reports of reca^tation as they do. For I
have hitherto left all things of this world, and suffered great pains and long
imprisonment, and I thank God I am ready, even as gladly to suffer death for
the truth I have preached, as a mortal man may be. Oh Lord, how slipper the
love of man, yea man him self is. It were better for them to pray for us,
rather then to credit or reise rumors that be untrue, unless they were more
certain thereof, then ever they shall be able to prove: we have enemies enough
of such as know not God. Truly this report of weak brethern, is a double
trouble and a triple cross. I do wyshe you eternal salvation in Christ Jesus,
and also require your continual prayer, that he which has begone in us, may
save us to the end. I have taught this truth with my tongue and pen
heretofore, and hereafter shortly will confyrme (by Gods grace) the same with
my blood. Pray for me gentle brethern and have no mistrust.

From New gate: 2. February Your brother John Hoper

To maistres Wilkinson, a woman hearty in gods cause, and comfortable to his
aflicted members.
THe grace of God and the comfort of his holy spirit be with you, Amen.

I am very glad to hear of your health and, do thank you for your loving
tokens. But I am a great deal more glad to hear how christianly you avoid
idolatry, and prepare your self to suffer the extremity of the world, rather
the^ to endaunger your self to God. You do as you ought to do in this behalf,
and in suffrynge of transitory pains, you shall avoid permanent torments in
the world to come. Use your life, and keep it with as much quietness as you
can, so that you offend not God. The ease that comes with his displeasure,
turns at length to unspeakable pains: and the gains of the world with the
loss of his favor, is beggary and wretchedness. Reason is to be amended in
this cause of religion: for it will choose and follow an error with the
multitude if it may be allowed, rather then turn to faith and follow the truth
with the people of God. Moses found the same fault in himself and did amend
it, choosyng rather to be afflicted with the people of God, Heb. 11.
then to use the liberty of the kings daughter that accounted him as her
son. Pray for contentation and peace of the spryte, and rejoice in such
troubles as shall happen unto you for the truths sake, for in that part Christ
says you be happy. Math. 5.
Pray also for me and I pray you) that I may do in all things the will of our
heavenly father, to whose tuition and defense I commend you.

To my dearly beloved Sister in the Lord maistres. A. W.
THe grace of god be with you, Ame^. I thank you for your loving token. I pray
you burden not your self to much, it were mete for me rather to bear a pain,
then to be a hinderance to many. I did rejoice at the coming of this bearer,
to understand of your consta^cy, and how that you be fully resolved by gods
grace, rather to suffer extremity, the^ to go from that truth in God which you
have professed. He that gave you grace to begin in so infallible a truth, will
follow you in the same unto ye end. But my loving Sister, as you be traueling
this perilous journey, take this lesson with you, practiced by wise men:
whereof ye may read in the second of Sayncte Mathewes gospel. Such as
traueled to find Christ, followed only the star, and as long as they saw
it, they were assured they were in the right way, and had great mirth in thery
journey. But when they entered into Jerusalem, where as the star led them not
thither but unto Bethelem, and there asked the citizens the thing that the
star showed before: as long as they tarried in Jerusalem and would be
instructed where Christ was borne, they were not only ignorant of Bethelem,
but also lost the syghte of the star that led them before. Whereof we
learn, in any case whiles we be going in this life, to seek Christ that is
above, to beware we lose not the star of Gods word, that only is the mark
that shows us where Christ is, and which way we may come unto him. But as
Jerusalem stood in the way, and was an impedimentte to these wise men: so
does the sinagoge of Antichryste that bears the name of Jerusalem, which by
interpretacion is called the vision of peace, and among the people now is
called the catholic church, stands in the way that pilgrymes must go by
through this world to Bethelem the house of saturity and plentifulnes, and is
an impediment to al Christian travelers: yea and except the more grace of God
be, will keep the pilgrims still in her that they shall not come where Christ is
at al. And to stay them in deed, they take away the star of light which is
Gods word that it can not be seen, as as ye may see how the celestial star
was hyd from the wise men, when they asked of the Phareseis at Jerusalem where
Christ was borne. Ye may see what great dangers happened unto these wise men,
whiles they were a learning of liers where Christ was. First they were out of
their way, and next they lost their guide and conductour, the heavenly star.
Christ is mounted from us into heaven and there we seek him, as we say let us
therefore go the the^ward by the star of his word, and beware we happen not
to come into Jerusalem the church of men and ask for him. If we do, we go out
of the way and lose also our conductor and guide that only leads us straight
thither. The Poets write in fables, that Jason when he fought with the dragon
in the I Will of Colchis was preserved by the medicines of Medea, and so wan the
golden fleese. And they write also that Titan, whom they feign to be son and
heir of the high God Iubiter, would neades upon a day have the conducting of
the Sun round about the world, but as they feign, he missed of the accustomed
course, whereupon when he went to high, he burned heaven, and when he went to
low, he burned the earth and the water. These profane histories do shame us
that he christian men. Jason against the poison of the dragon, used only the
medicine of Medea. What a shame is it for a Christian man against the poison
of the devil, heresye, and sin, to use any other remedy, then Christ and his
word? Titan for lack of knowledge, was afearde of every sign of the
Zodiake that the son passes by: wherefore he now went to low and now to high,
and at length fell down and drowned him self in the sea. Christian men for
lack of knowledge, and for fear of such dangers as Christian men must needs
pass by, go clean out of order, and at length fall into the pit of hell.
Sister take heed, you shall in your journey toward heaven, mete with many a
monstrous beast: have salve of gods word therefore ready. Ye shall mete husband,
children, lovers and friends, that shall if god be not with them (as god be
praised he is, I would it were with all other a like) be very lettes and
impedime^ts to your purpose. You shall meet with slander and contempt of the
world and be accounted ungracious and ungodly: you shall hear and mete with
cruel tyranny to do you al extremities: you shall now and the^ see the
troubles of your own conscience, and feel your own weakness: you shall hear that
you be cursed by the sentence of the catholic church, wit such like terrors:
but pray to God, and follow the star of his word, and you shall ariue at
the port of eternal salvation by the merits only of Jesus Christ, to whom I
commend you and all yours most heartily.

Yours in Christ John Hoper.

To master Ferrar bishop of S. David's. D. Tailor, master Bradford and master
Philpot, prisoners in the kings Bench in South warke.
THe grace of God be with you, Amen. I am advertised by diverse, as well such
as love the truth, as also by such as yet be not come unto it, that ye and I
shall be carried shortly to Cambrige, there to dispute in the faith and for the
religion of Christ (which is most true) that we have and do profess. I am
(as I doubt not ye be) in Christ ready not only to go to Cambridge, but also
to suffer by gods help, death it self in the mayntenance thereof. Weston and
his accomplices have opteined forth the commission already, and spedely (most
like) he will put it in execution. Wherefore dear brethren, I do aduertyse you
of the thing before for diverse causes. The one to comfort you in the Lord,
that the time draws nygh and is at hand, that we shall testifye before gods
enemies, gods truth. The next, that ye should prepare your selves the better for
it. The third to show you what ways I think were best to use our selves in
this matter, and also to hear of every one of you, your better advise, if mine
be not good. Ye know such as shall be Censours and Judges over us, breath and
thurst our blood, and whether we by gods help overcome after the word of god,
or by force and subtilty of our adversaries be overcome, this will be the
conclusyon, our adversaries will say they overcome, as you perceive how they
report of those great learned men, and godly personages at Oxford. Wherefore I
mind never to answer them, except I have the books present, because they use
not only false allegation of the doctors, but also a piece of the D. against the
whole course of the doctors mind. The next, that we may have sworn notaries to
take things spoken, indifferently, which will be very hard to have, for the
adversaries will have the ouersyght of al things, and then make theirs better
then it was, and ours worse then it was. Then if we see that two or three or
more will speak together, or with scoffs and tauntes illude and mock us, I
suppose it were best to appeal, to be heard before the Queen and the whole
Counsel, and that would much setforth the glory of god. For many of them know
already the truth, many of them err rather of zeal then malice, and the
others that be iudurate should be aunsweared fully to their shame (I doubt not)
although to our smarte and bloodsheedyng. For of this I am assured, that the
commissioners appointed to hear us and judge us, mean nothing less then to
hear the cause indifferentlye, for they be enemies unto us and unto our cause,
and be at a point already to give sentence against us: so that if it were
possible with Saint Stephen to speak so that they could not resyst us, or to
use such silence and patience as Christ did, they will proceed to revenging.
Wherefore my dear brethren in the mercy of Jesus Christ, I would be glad to
know your advise this day or to morrow, for shortly we shall be gone, and I
verelye suppose that we shall not company together, but be kept abroad one
from the other. They will deny our appeal, yet let us challenge the appeal,
and take witness thereof of such as be present, and require for indiffencye of
hearing, and judgment to be heard either before the Queen and the Counsel,
or else before all the parleame^t, as they were used in king Edwards days.
Further, for my part I will require both books and time to aunsweare. We have
been prisoners now three quarters of a year, and have lacked our books, and
our memories by close keepynge and ingratitude of their parts, be not as
present and quick, as theyrs be. I trust God will be with us, yea I doubt not
but he will, and teach us to do all things in his cause godly and consta^tly.
If our adversaries that shall be our judges, may have their purpose, we shall
dispute one day, be condemned the next day, and suffer the third day. And yet
is there no law to co^de^ne us (as far as I know) and so one of the co^uocatio^
house said this weke to D. Westo^. To whom Weston made this answer, it
forces not (quoth he) for a law, we have commission to proceed with them:
when they be dispatched, let their friends sue the law. Now how sone a man may
have such a commission at my Lord chau^cellours hand, you know: it is as hard
to be opteined, as an indictment for Christ at Cayphas hand. Besides that,
the bishops having the Queen so upon their sides, may do all things both
without the advice, and also the knowledge of the reast of the Lords of the
temporalty, who at this present have found out the mark that the bishops
shoot at, and doubtless be not pleased with their doings. I pray you help that
our brother Sau^ders and the rest in the Marshalsey may understand these
things, and send me your answer be time.

Judas non dormit: nec scimus diem neque horam. Dominus Jesus Christus suo
sancto numine nos omnes consoletur and adiuuet. Amen. 6. Maii. 1554.

Yours and with you unto death, in Christ, John Hoper.

To my dear friends in God master John Hall and his wife.
THe grace of God be with you, Amen. I thank you for your loving and gentle
friendship at all times, praing god to show unto you such favor, that
whatsoever trouble and adversity happen, ye go not back from him. These days
be dangerous and full of peril, but yet let us comfort our selves in calling
to remembrance the days of our forefathers, upon whom the Lord sent such
troubles that many hundrethes, yea many thousands died for the testimony of
Jesus Christ, both men and women, suffering with patience and consta^cy as much
cruelty as Tyrannes could devise, and so departed out of this miserable world
to the bliss everlasting, where as now they remayn for ever, loking always
for the end of this sinful world, when they shall receive their bodies again in
immortality, and see the number of the elects associated with them in full and
consummate joys. Heb. 11,
And as virtuous men suffering martyrdom, and tarieng a little while in this
world with pains, by and by rested in joys everlasting, and as their pains
ended their sorrows, and began ease: so did their constancy and stedfastnes
animate and confyrme al good people in the truth, and gave them encouragement
and lust to suffer the like, rather then to fall with the world to consent
unto wickedness and Idolatrye. Wherefore my dear friends, seeing god of his part,
has illuminated you with the same gift and knowledge of true faith, wherein
the Apostles the Evangelists, and all martyrs suffered most cruel death,
thank him for his grace in knowledge, and pray unto him for strength and
perseverance, that through your own fault, you be not ashamed nor afearde to
confess it. Ye be in the truth, and the gates of hell shall never prevail
against it, nor Antichrist with all his Impes prove it to be false. They may kill
and persecute, but never overcome, be of good comfort and fear more god then
man. This life is short and miserable, happy be they that can spend it to the
glory of god. Pray for me as I do for you, and commend me to all good men and
women. 22. December. 1554.

Your brother in Christ. John Hoper.

To one that was fallen from the known truth of the gospel, to Antichriste
and his damnable religion,
GRace, mercy and peace of conscience, be multiplied in all penitent hearts,
Amen. Dear brother in Christ Jesus, it is not long since I was informed what
love and serue^t zeal ye have heretofore born to gods true religion, appearing
as well by your life and conversation, as by absentynge your self from the
Idolaters temple and congregation of false worshippers. But now (alas) through
the deuilishe persuasions and wicked counsel of worldly men, ye have declined
from your former profession, buildyng again that which before ye destroyed and
so are become a trespaser, Gala. 2 2. Cor. 6.
bearyng a strangers yoke with the unbelievers. Of which thing, ever since I
was informed, I have been meruelously moved with inward affections, much
lamenting so great and sudden a change, as to be turned from him that called
you in the grace of Christ, unto the dissimulation of wicked hypocrites, Gala.
1.
which (as S. Paul says) is nothing else, but yt there be some, which trouble
you, inte^ding to make you like as they are, even lovers of them selves, whose
hearts are wedded to the perishing treasures of this world, wherein is their
whole joy and felicity, contrary to S. John, i. John. 2.
which says: see that ye love not the world neither those things which are
in the world. But they as men without ears and having hearts without
understanding, do neither weigh the terrible threatninges of god against such
offenders, and the most woeful punishment dew for the same, nor yet consider
the loving admonition and calling of god, who both teaches how to avoid his
wrath, and also by what means to attain to salvation. Wherefore (dear brother)
I humbly beseech you, even by the mercifulnes of god, and as you tender your
own salvation, to give ear no longer to their pestilent perswasio^s, but even
now forth with to repent: and have no longer fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, Ephe. 5, Romans 12 James. 4. Ephesians. 4. Apo. 2.
neither fashion you your self again gain like unto the world, delight not in
the friendship thereof, for all such be made the enemies of god: grieve not any
longer the holy spirit of god, by whom ye are sealed unto ye day of redemption.
Acknowledge your offense and from whence ye are fallen: prostrate your self
before god, asking mercy for christ's sake. Mourn with Mary Magdalen, lament
with David, Math. 20.
cry with Jonas and weep with Peter, and make no tarieng to turn to the lord,
whose pitiful eyes attend alwais to wipe away the tears from every troubled
conscience. Such is his entiere love toward al those yt turn unto him, EZechi.
18
making them this sweet promise confirmed by a mighty and vehement kind of
speaking: tell them as truly as I live (says he) I will not the death of a
sinner, but much rather that he turn from his evil ways and live. Turn you,
turn you from your ungodly ways, O ye of the house of Israel, O wherefore will
ye die. Behold ye are here forgiven, your sin is blotted out, and the most
joyful countenance of god turned again toward you. What now remains?
Verily this, that you from he^ceforth keep circu^spect watch, and become a
follower of Christ, sustaining for his names sake, all such adversities as
shall be measured unto you by the suffraunce of god our heavenly father, who so
cares for us, that not one hear of our head shall perish without his will, who
also considering the tender and weak faith of his children, not able as yet to
stand against the force of Antichrists tyranny, gives them this loving
liberty: when ye be persecuted in one city, fly to an other. Math. ^
O most tender compassion of Christ, how careful is he over his people? who
would not now, rather then to offend so merciful a God, fly this wicked
realm, as your most christian brother and many other have done, or else with
boldness of heart, and patience of the spirit, bear ma^fully the cross eue^
unto the death (as diverse of our brethren have don before us) as is declared at
large in Paul's epistle to the Heb. which I pass over, and come to our savior
Christ, whose example for our singular comfort S. Paul encourages us to
follow, saying: let us also, Heb. 11*
seeing yt we are compassed with so great a multitude of witnesses, lay away all that presses down, and the sin that hangs on, and let us run with
patience unto the battle that is set before us, loking unto Jesus the author
and finisher of our faith, who for the joys that was set before him, abode the
cross and despised the shame, Heb. 12.
and is set down on the right hand of the throne of god. etc. From whence he
shall come shortly says S. John, and his rewards with him, Apo. 22.
to give every man according as his deeds shall be. Blessed are they that do his
commandments, that their power may be in the tree of life, and may enter in
through the gates unto the City, where they (says Esaias) shall have their
pleasure in the lord, who will carry them on high, Esaias. 58.
above the earth and will feed them with the heritage of Jacob their father, for
the lords own mouth has so promised. Thus I have been bold to write unto
you for christian love sake that I bear to you, whose salvation I wish as mine
own, beseching god that your whole spirit, soul and body may be kept fautl^s
unto the coming of our lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Your brother in Christ. John Hoper.

To the faithful and lively members of our savior Jesus Christ, inhabityng
the city of London, grace and peace from the heavenly father through our lord
Jesus Christ.
YOur faith and firm hope of eternal life (dearly beloved) which of long
time ye have learned and throughlye persuaded your selves in, by the truth and
infallible veritye of the heavenly word, sealed with christ's most precious
blood, is very sore and daungerouslye assaulted, and by all means possible
attempted to be taken from you, that ye should have no longer credit to gods
truth, but believe ma^s lies, nor have you salvation by Christ that once died
and offered himself for sin once for all, but that ye should believe now your
salvation in Christ, to be many times offered by wicked men every day in the
abominable mass, to the utter conculcation and defacing of christ's death, as
the wicked pope and his adherents would persuade you, and not as Christ your
savior has taught you. But this sudden and miserable change from the truth
unto falshode, and from god and Christ to the devil and Antichrist, doubtless
comes of god for our manifold sins toward the heavenly father our
shephard, that taught us a long time with his blessed word, and we were neither
thankful for it, nor yet put our trust in him, as in one that only could
save and defend his own word, but we thought in our folishnes, that the world
was so much and so many ways with the word of God, that even by man's
strength it might have been defended, whereas the truth of gods word is permanent
and never fails, saying: Jeremy. 17 Psalm. 30,
cursed be they that make flesh their defense and shield. For as king David,
when god had brought him to possess his kingdom peaceably, said (like a
fool as he was) I shall never be more unquieted, but yet the Lord turned his
face from him, and he found straight way such an alteration as he never found
before, with increase of new, dangers more troublous then ever he had before:
even likewise when god had given us a blessed and holy king, and such
maiestrates (although they were sinners) as wished the glory of god only to
be preferred by true doctrine: we like carnal men thought our selves so sure
and so stablished, that it had not been possible to have seen such a pitious
and miserable change, and the truth of gods word so oppressed as we see at
this present day. But we be most worthily punished, and even the same ways
that we have offended. We did put our trust in flesh, and where as Gods
spirit in flesh dwelled, as in our holy and blessed king Edward the sixte, he
is now dead in the flesh, and his holy soul rests with the heavenly father
in joys for ever: he is now (I say) taken from us and cannot help us, and
such as in his time, seemed much to favor the glory of god, are become gods
enemies, and can both hear other to proced against the glory of god, and also
set fort ye same themselves as much as they may: so yt such spiritual and
godly persons as sought in the flesh gods glory are taken from us, or else in
such case, as they can do us no good. And such flesh as followed and loved God
in the sight of the world, and had great vauntage by his word, are become his
very enemies, and not only his, but also enemies to his members. But yet as
king Dauyd knew his folish folly, and with repentance repented and found grace:
so it may please god to give us of his grace and holy spirit, to amend our
faults in the like offense, and help us, as he did him. But doubtless great is
our iniquity. For there was never so great abomination read of and so quickly
to prevail, as this abomination of the wicked mass has prevailed in
England. And all Christen men know that the Turks and heathen, neither have
nor yet had ever, any so sensibly known, and manifest an Idol.

Wherefore, Upon this psalm (as upon diverse other) he wrote a godly and most
comfortable treatise, when unto he annexed this letter as a preface.
that almighty god of his mercy may preserve his people in this noble City of
London, I have write upon the 23. psalm. of king David, to advertise men how
they shall beware of heresies and false doctrine, and so to live to his honor
and glory. Albeit I know (dearly beloved) that all those which seek Gods
honor, and the furtheraunce of his gospel, be accounted the Queen's enemies,
although we daily pray for her grace and never think her harm: but we must
content to suffer slander, and patie^tly to bear al such injuries.
Nevertheless this is out of doubt, that the Queen's highness has no aucthoritye
to compel any man to believe any thing, contrary to gods word, neither may the
subject give her grace that obedience: in case he do his soul is lost for
ever. Our bodies, goods and lives be at her highness commandment, and she
shall have the^ as of true subjects: but the soul of man for religion is bound
to none but unto god and his holy word.

To a certain godly woman, instructing her how she should behave her self in
the time of her widowhode.
THe grace of god, and the comfort of his holy spirit, be with you and with all
them that unfeignedly love his holy gospel, Amen.

I thank you (dear sister) for yor most loving remembrance, and although I
can not recompense the same, yet do I wish with all my heart that god would
do it, requiring you not to forget your duty toward god in these perilous
days, in the which the Lord will try us. I trust you do increase, by
readyng of the Scriptures, the knowledge you have of God, and that you
diligently apply your self to follow the same: for the knowledge helps not,
except the life be according there unto. Further, I do heartily pray you, to
consider the state of your widowhode, and if God shall put in your mind to
change it, remember the saying of Saint Paul. 1. Corinthians. 7: it is
lawful for the widow or maiden to mary to whom they list, so it be in the
lord: that is to say, to such a one as is of Christ's religion. Dearly beloved
in Christ, remember these words, for you shall find thereby great joy and
comfort, if you change your state. Whereof I will when I have better leisure
(as now I have none at all) further advertise you. In the mean time, I
commend you to God and the guidyng of his good spirit, who stablyshe and
confirm you in all well doing and keep you blameles to the day of the Lord.
Watch and pray for this day is at hand.

Yours assured in Christ. Ioh Hoper.

An answer to a friend of his for a woman that was troubled with her husband
in matters of religion, how she should behave her self toward him.
THe grace and peace of God our dear father through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.

As concerning the party whom you wrote unto me of, I have here sent you mine
advise, and what I think is best in this case to be done. First she shall
remember the counsel of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 7. where he speaks to such as be
coupled in matrimoy and be of two sundry and diverse religions: If the
unbelieving man will dwell with the faithful woman, the wife cannot forsake
him. Or in case the unbelieving woman will dwell with her believing husband, the
husband cannot forsake her. But if the unbelieving party (whether it be husband
or wife) will depart, the believing party is at liberty. Now in this time, to
believe that the priest can make God, or to believe that which was not God
yesterday, can be both God and man to day, and so to honor that which was but
very bread yesterdaye, for the true God that made both heaven and earth and all that be in them, and for the body and soul of Christ that suffered for our
redemption, and took from us our sins upon the cross: is very idolatry and
to be committed of no christian man, for the pain of it with out repentance,
is everlasting dampnation. In matrimony it is mete therefore, that which
party so ever be persuaded and knows the truth, be it the husband or the
wife, the truth be spoken, taught, and opend unto the party that is not
persuaded. For as Saint Paul says: how know thou O man, whether thou
shall save thy wife, or how know thou O woman, whether thou shall save thy
husband. Therefore let the best and more godly party be diligent in sauinge
(by his or her labors) the party that is not instructed nor persuaded in the
truth. If it prevail, then is the worse part amended, and the best part has
done his or her duty and office, as it is commanded. Ephesi. 4. Colloss. 3. 1.
Pet. 3.

In case the worse part will not be amended, but tarry still in error, and so
offend the almighty God the author of marriage, let the best part that is
persuaded and knows the truth, as in this case the woman, labor with her
co^panio^ to be free and at liberty, and not to be compelled to honor any
false God, or to serve God otherwise then she knows she may do with a good
conscience, as she is taught by the word of God. And if she may thus obtain
to be at liberty, and be not compelled to do things against her conscience,
she may not in any wise depart from him that she is married unto. If this woman
cannot wyn her husband to the truth, nor obtain to live freelye and at
liberty in the faith of Christ her self, let her cause some godly and
grave men or women to persuade with her husband, as well for his own better
knowledge, as for the freedom and liberty of her self, and let her and
whosoever entreats of the matter, use modesty, sobernes, and charity, and
pray unto God that their doings may take virtuous and godly success. In
case (which God forbid) the husband will not reform himself of his error,
nor suffer his wife to refrain the company and fellowship of such as be present
at the mass, whereas an idol is honored for God: this wife must make
answer soberly and christianly, that she is forbidden by gods laws to commit
Idolatrye, Acts. 5. Exodus 20.
and that gods is more to be obeyed then man, and so in any case beware she
offend not against the first commandment which is, thou shalt have no
other Gods but me. It may come to pass, that when the husband shall perceive
the wifes love and reverence toward him, and also her constancye and
strength in the truth and true religion of GOD, although he be not converted
unto the truth by her, yet he will be contented to suffer her to use the
liberty of her conscience, without compulsion to any religion that she does by
Gods word detest and abhor. But if there be no remedy, but either the wife
must follow in idolatry her husbands commandment, or else suffer the
extremity of the law: here must the wife remember and learn whether there be
any law or not, that can compel her ordinarilye to come to the mass,
whereas idolatrye is committed. If there be no law or other means to compel
her then her husbands foul words, which be nothing else but threatninges to put
her in fear, she must if she can with wisdom, and womanhode amend the
same: if she cannot, then must she christianly and patiently bear them as a
woman of God, that for his sake must suffer as much, as his pleasure is to
lay upon her. In case there be a law to compel her and al other, if otherwise
she will not obey to come to the mass: first she must wisely and discretly
way her husbands nature, whether he is wont to be in deed, works, and
offers, cruel as he is in words. If she can find that his nature is (as the
most part of men's be) more churlish and cruel in words then in works, then
howsoever he threatens by dangerous words, he will not accuse his wife to
harm her, but rather excuse her. In case either for lack of love, or for
fear of losing of his goods, she perceive verily that he minds to bring her
in danger by a law: then must she pray to God and use one of these two extreme
remedies. First if she find by prayer her self strong to abide the extremity
of the law, yea though she should dye, let her in no case depart from her
husband. In case she find her self to weak to suffer such extremity, then
rather then to break company and marriage between God and her, conjoined by the
precious blood of Christ, she must convey her self into some such place as
idolatry may be avoided. For if ye husband love the wife, or ye wife the
husband more tha^ Christ, he nor she be not mete for christ. Math. 10.16. Luke.
14.9. Yea if a man love his own life more then Christ he is not mete for
Christ. And what does it avail a man to win all the world and to lose his
soul? But here the woman must take heed that incase for the keeping of the
marriage between god and her, she depart from her husband: that she be always
in honest, virtuous, and godly company, that she may at al times have record
for her godly behavior, if any thing should be laid to her charge, and let
her live a sole, sober, and modest life, with prayer and sobernes to god, that
it may please him to banishe such wicked laws and wicked religion, as make
debate between God and man, and husband and wife, and then God shall from time
to time give counsel to every good man and woman, what is best to be done in
such pitiful cases, to his honor and to the salvation of our woeful and
troubled consciences. Out of the Flete by the prisoner of the lord.

John Hoper.

To my beloved in the Lord. W. P.
THe grace of God be with you. I have sent you letters for my wife, who is at
Franckford in high Almayne. I pray you convey them trustely and spedelye, and
seal them close after ye marchau^ts fashion, that they be not opened. William
Dounton my servant has the first copy of that I wrote concerning master Hales
hurt. I would master Bradforde did se it, and then the copy to be well kept,
least any man of malice should add any thing to the matter more and worse
then I have made it. I pass not of that may come of it, I thank God: and my
conscience bears me record that I did it of zeal to the word of God, which
the bishop of Winchester called the doctryn of desperation. Not only my heart
but also my mouth, my pen, and all my power shall be against him even till
death (by Gods help) in this case, let god do with the matter as it pleases
his high majesty: to whom I commend you. 29. April. 1554.

Yours John Hoper.

To my dearly beloved friend in Christ master John Hal.
THe grace of God be with you, Ame^. It was much to my comfort I assure you,
when I understood by this bearer my faithful servant William Dou^ton that you
and your wife were in health. Many times I had occasion to enquire for you
before the departure of my poor wife, to have helped her out of the land from
the hands of the cruel, but I could hear nothing where you were. It was told
me you abode in the country with your wife, to whom make my hearty
commendations, and to the rest of al your house that fear God: and my trust
is, you do not forget your duty toward God in this troublesome world. See
that you tarry with him in one hour of trouble, and doubtless he will keep you
for ever with him in the joys everlasting. I would write more, but this bearer
can tell what need I have to make have. Fare you well as my self and be strong
in Christ, for I thank him, for my part I am not ashamed of his gospel,
neither afeard of the Pope, the devil, nor the gates of hell. The lords will
be done. Written the.4. day of August. Anno. 1554.

Your poor friend John Hoper

An exhortation to patience, sent to his godly wife Anne Hoper: whereby all the
true members of Christ may take comfort and courage, to suffer trouble and
affliction for the profession of his holy Gospel.
Our savior Jesus Christ (derely beloved and my godly wife) in S. Mathewes
gospel said to his disciples, Math. 18.
yt it was necessary slau^ders should come: and yt they could not be avoided,
he perceived as well by the condition of those that should perish and be lost
for ever in the world to come, as also by their affliction that should be
saved. For he saw the greatest part of the people would contempne and neglect,
what soever true doctrine, or godly ways should be showed unto them, or else
receive it and use it as they thought good, to serve their pleasures, without
any profit to their souls at all, not caringe whether they lived as they were
commanded by Gods word or not: but would think it sufficient to be counted to
have the name of a Christian man, with such works and fruits of his profession
and christianity, as his fathers and elders after their custom and manner,
esteem and take to be good fruits and faithful works, and will not try them
by the word of God at all. These men, by the just judgment of God, be
delivered unto the craft and subteltye of the devil, that they may be kept by
one slanderous stumblinge block or other, that they never come unto Christ,
Math. 2 4
who came to save those that were lost: as ye may see how god delivers wicked
men up unto their own lusts, to do one mischief after an other careless, until
they come into a reprobate mind, Rom i 1. These. 2.
that forgetteh it self and cannot know what is expediente to be done or to
be left undone, because they close their eyes and will not see the light of
Gods word offered unto them, and being thus blinded, they prefer their own
vanities, before the truth of Gods word. Whereas such corrupt minds be, there
is also corrupt election, and choice of Gods honor: so that the mind of man
takes falshode for truth, supersticion for true religion, death for life,
dampnation for salvation, hell for heaven, and persecution of Christ's members,
for Gods service and honor. And as these men wilfullly and voluntarily
reiecte the word of God: even so God most justly delivers them into the
blyndnes of mind, John. 8.9.
and hardness of heart, that they cannot understand, nor yet consent to any thing
that God would have preached and setforth to his glory after his own will, and
word: wherefore they hate it mortally, and of all things most derest gods holy
word. And as the devil has entered into their hearts, that they the^ selves
cannot, nor will not come to Christ to be instructed by his holy word: even so
can they not abide any other man to be a christian man, and to lead his life
after the word of God, but hate him, persecute him, rob him, imprison him,
yea and kill him, whether he be man or woman, if God suffer it. And so much are
those wicked me^ blinded, that they pass of no law whether it be gods or
man's, but persecute such as never offended, yea do evil to those that daily
have prayed for them and wish the^ Gods grace. In their Pharaonicall and blind
fury, they have no respect to nature: for the brother persecuteth the brother,
the father the son and most dear friends, in deuelishe slander and offense
are become most mortal enemies. And no maruayle, for when they have chosen
sundry masters, the one the devil the other God, the one shall agree with the
other, as god and the devil agree between themselves. For this cause that the
more part of the world does choose to serve the devil under cloked hipocrisy
of Gods title, Christ said it is expedient and necessary that slanders should
come, and many means be devised to keep the little babes of Christ from the
heavenly father. Math. 18.
But Christ says, woe be unto him by whom the offense comes: yet is there
no remedy, man being of such corruption and hatred toward God, but that the
evil shall be deceived and persecute the good: and the good shall understand
the truth and suffer persecution for it, Gene. 4 Gala. 4
until the worlds end. For as he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted
in times paste him that was borne after the spirit, even so it is now.

Seeing therefore we live for this life emonges so many and great perils and
dangers, we must be well assured by gods word, how to bear them, and how
patiently to take them, as they be sent to us from God. We must also assure
our selves that there is no other remedy for christians in the time of trouble,
Luke. ij
then Christ him self has appointed us. In S. Luke he gives us this
commandment: ye shall possess your lives in patience, says he. In the
which words, he gives us both commandment what to do, and also great
consolation and comfort in all troubles. He shows also what is to be done
and what is to be hoped for in troubles: and when troubles happen, he bids
us be pacient, and in no case violently nor seditiously to resist our
persequutors, because God has such cure and charge of us, that he will keep in
the mids of all troubles the very hears of our head, so that one of the^
shall not fall away without the will and pleasure of our heavenly father. Math.
10.
Whether the hear therefore tarry in the head, or fall from the head it is
the will of the father. And seeing he has such care for the hears of our head,
how much more does he care for our life it self? wherefore let gods adversaries
do what they lust, whether they take the life or take it not, they can do us no
hurt, for their crueltye has no further power then god permits them: and
that which comes unto us by the will of our heavenly father, can be no
harm, no loss, neither destruction unto us, but rather gain, wealth, and
felicitye. For all troubles and adversity that chance to such as be of god,
Romans 8.
by the will of the heavenly father, can be none other but gain and advantage.

That the spirit of man may feel these consolations, the geuer of them the
heavenly father, must be prayed unto for the merits of Christ's passion:
Jacob. 1. 1. Cor. 1.8.
for it is not the nature of man that can be contented until it be regenerated
and possessed with gods spirit, to bear patiently the troubles of the mind
or of the body. When the mind and heart of a man sees of every side sorrow
and heaviness, and the worldly eye beholds nothing but such things as be
troublous and wholly bent to rob the poor man of that he has, and also to
take from him his life: except the man weigh these brittle and uncertain
treasures that be taken from him, with the riches of the life to come, and this
life of the body with the life in Christ's precious blood, and so for the love
and certeynty of the heavenly joys contemn al things present, doubtless he
shall never be able to bear the loss of goods, life, or any other things of
this world. Therefore S. Paul gives a very godly and necessary lesson to
all men in this short and transitorye life, and therein shows how a man
may best bear the iniquytye, and troubles of this world: Col. 3.
if ye be risen again with Christ (says he) seek the things which are
above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God the father. Wherefore the
christian man's faith must be always upon the resurrection of Christ when he
is in trouble, and in that glorious resurrection he shall not only see
continual and perpetual joy and consolation: but also the victory and
triumph of all persequution, trouble, sin, death, hell, the devil, and all
other persequutors, and tyrannes of Christ and of Christ's people, the tears
and weepinges of the faithful dried up, their wounds healed, their bodies
made immortal in joy, their souls for ever praysynge the Lord, and
conjunction and societye ever lasting with the blessed company of Gods electes
in perpetual joy. But the words of S. Paul in that place, if they be not
marked, shall do little profit to the reader or hearer, and give him no
patience at al in this impacie^t and cruel world. In the first part Saint Paul
commands us to think or set our affections on things that are above. When
he bids us seek the things that are above, he requires that our minds
never cease from prayer and study in Gods word, until we see, know, and
understand the vanities of this world, the shortness and mysery of this life,
and the treasures of the world to come, the immortality thereof, and the joys
of that life, and so never cease seking, until such time as we know certeynly
and be persuaded what a blessed man he is that seeks the one and finds it,
and cares not for the other though he lose it: and in seking to have right
judgment between the life present, and the life to come, we shall find how
little the pains, imprisonment, slanders, lies, and death it self is in this
world, in respect of the pains everlasting, the prison infernal, and doungeon
of hell, the sentence of gods just judgment, and everlasting death.

When a man has by seeking the word of God, found out what the things above
be: then must he (as Saint Paul says) set his affections upon them. And
this commandment, is more hard then the other. For man's knowledge many times
sees the best, and knows that there is a life to come better then this life
present, as you may se how daily men and women can praise and commend, yea and
wysh for heaven and to be at rest there, yet they set not their affection upon
it, they do more affect and love in deed a trifel of nothing in this world
that pleases their affection, then a treasure of all treasures in heaven,
which their own judgment says is better then all worldly things.
Wherefore we must set our affections upon the things that be above: that is to
say, when any thing worse then heaven upon the earth offers it self to be
ours, if we will give our good wills to it and love it in our hearts: then to
see by the judgment of gods word, whether we may have the world without offense
of god, and such things as be for this worldly life, without his displeasure.
If we cannot, S. Paul's commandment must take plate: set your affection on
things that are above. If the riches of this world may not be gotten nor
kept with gods law, neither our lives be continued with out the denial of his
honor, we must set our affection upon the riches and life that is above, and
not upon things that be on the earth. Therefore this second commandment of S.
Paul requires, that as our minds judge heavenly things to be better then
things upon the earth, and the life to come better then the life present: so
we should choose them before other, and prefer the^, and have such affection
to the best, that in no case we set the worst before it, as the most part of
the world does, and has done, for they choose the best and approve it, and
yet follow the worst.

But these things (my godly wife) require rather cogitation, meditation and
prayer, then words or talk. They be easy to be spoken of but not so easy to
be used and practiced. Wherefore seeing they be gods gifts and none of ours to
have as our own when we would, we must seek them at our heavenly fathers hand,
who sees and is priuye how poor and wretched we be, and how naked, how
spoiled and destitute of all his blessed gifts we be, by reason of sin. He
did command therefore his disciples, when he showed them that they should take
patiently the state of this present life full of troubles and persecution, Math.
24. Luke. ij
to pray that they might well escape those troubles that were to come, and be
able to stand before the son of man. When ye find your self to much
oppressed (as every man shall be sometime with the fear of gods judgment, use
the 77. psalm. that begins: psalm. 77.
I will try unto god with my voice, and he shall harken unto me. In which
psalm is both godly doctrine and great consolation unto ye man or woman that
is in anguish of mind. Read also his exposition upon this psalm, most
comfortable for all broken and afflicted hearts.
Use also in such troubles the.88. psalm, wherein is contained the prayer of a
man that was brought into extreme anguish and misery, and being vexed with
adversaries, and persecutions, saw nothing but death and hell, and although he
felt in himself, that he had not only man but also god angrye toward him:
yet he by prayer humbly resorted unto god as the only port of consolation,
and in the mids of his desperate state of trouble, put the hope of his
salvation in him whom he felt his enemy. How be it no man of him self can do
this, but the spirit of god that strikes the man's heart with fear, Romans 8
prays for the man stricken and feared, with unspeakable groninges. And when
you feel your self or know any other oppressed after such sort, be glad: for
after that god has made you to know what you be of your self, he will doutles
show you comfort, Note this well to thy comfort that art afflicted, and read
the 4. chap. of Eccle.
and declare unto you what you be in Christ his only son: and use prayer
often, for that is the means whereby god will be saught unto for his gifts.
These psalms be for the purpose, when the mind can take no understanding, nor
the heart any joy of gods promises: and therefore were these psalms also
made.6.22.30.31.38.69. from the which you shall learn both patience and
consolation. Remember that although your life (as all christian men's be) be hyd
and appears not, Col. 3.
what it is, yet is it safe (as S. Paul says) with god in Christ: and when
Christ shall appear, the^ shall our lives be made open in him with glory. But
in the mean time with seeking and setting our affections upon the things that
be above, we must patiently suffer whatsoever god shall send unto us in this
mortal life. Notwithstanding it might fortune some would say, who is so
perfect that can let all things pass as they come, and have no care of them,
suffer all things and feel nothing, be attempted of the devil, the world
and the flesh, and not be troubled? Verily no man living. But this I say, yt
in the strength of Jesus Christ, things that come may pass with care, for we
be worldly, and yet are we not carried with the^ from Christ, for we be in him
godly. We may suffer things and feel them as mortal men: yet bear them, and
overcome the^ as christian men. We may be attempted of the devil, the flesh,
and the world: but yet although these things pinche they do not pearce, and
although they work sin in us, Romans 8.
yet in Christ no damnation to those that be grafted in him.

Hereof may the christian man learn both consolation and patience.
Consolation, in that he is compelled both in his body and goods to feel
pain and loss, and in the soul heaviness and anguish of mind: how be it none
of the^ both shall separate him from the love that God bears him in Christ.
He may learn patience, for as much as his enemies both of the body and soul,
and the pains also they vex us withal for the time, if they tarry with us as
long as we live, yet when death comes they shall avoid and give place to such
joys as be prepared for us in Christ: for no pains of the world be
perpetual, and whether they shall afflicte us for all the time of our mortal
life, we know not, for they be the servants of god to go and to come, as he
commands them. But we must take heed we meddle not forceably nor
seditiously, to put away the persecution appointed unto us by God, but remember
Christ's saying: Luke. 2
possess you your lives by your patience. And in this commandment, god
requires in every man and woman this patient obedience. He says not, it is
sufficient that other holy Patryarckes, Prophets Apostles, Evangelists and
Martyrs continued their lives in patience and pacient sufferyng the troubles of
this world: but Christ says to every one of his people, by your own
patience ye shall continue your life: not that man has patience of him self,
but that he must have it for himself of God, the only geuer of it, if he
purpose to be a godly man. Now therefore, as our profession and religion
requires patience outwardlye without resistaunce and force: so requires it
patience of the mind, and not to be angrye with God, although he use us that
be his own creatures, as him lists. We may not also murmr against God, but
say alwais his judgments be right and just, and rejoice that it pleases him
by troubles to use us as he used heretofore such as he most loved in this
world, and have a synguler ear to this commandment: Gaudete and exultate,
be glad and rejoice, for he shows great cause why: Math. 5.
your reward (says he) is great in heaven. These promises of him that is the
truth it self, shall (by gods grace) work both consolation and patience in
the afflicted christian person. And when our savior Christ has willed men in
trouble to be content and pacient, because god in the end of trouble in Christ
has ordained eternal consolation: he uses also to take from us all shame and
rebuke, as though it were not an honor to suffer for Christ, because the
wicked world does curse and abhor such poor troubled Christians. Wherefore
Christ places all his honorably, Math. 24.
and says: even so persecuted they the Prophets that were before you. We may
also se with whom the afflicted for Christ's sake, be esteemed, Heb. 11.
by S. Paul to the Hebrews, where as the number of the blessed and glorious
company of Saints appear now to our faith in heaven in joy: yet in the
letter, for the time of this life, in such pains and contempt, as was never
more. Let us therefore consider both them and all other things of the world
since the fall of man, and we shall perceive nothing to come to perfection,
but with such confusion and disorder to the eye of the world, as though
things were rather lost for ever, then like to come to any perfection at all.
For of godly men, who ever came to heaven (no not Christ himself) until such
time as the world had thought verily that both he and al his, had been clean
destroyed and cast away? Sap. 5.
as the wise man says of the wicked people: we thought them to be fools, but
they be in peace.

We may learn by things that nourishe and mainetayne us, both meat and
drink, to what loths^ menes and (in manner) abhorryng they come unto, before
they work their perfection in us. From life they be brought to the fire, and
clean altered from that they were when they were alive: from the fire to the
trencher and knife, and al to hacked: from the trencher to the mouth, and as
small ground as the teeth can grynde them: and from the mouth into the
stomach, and there so boiled and digested before they nourishe, that whosoever
saw the same, would loathe and abhor his own nourishment before it come to
his perfection. Is it then any marvel if such christians as god delights
in, be so ma^gled and defaced in this world, which is the kitchyn and myll to
boil and grynde the flesh of Gods people in, till they acheaue their
perfection in the world to come? And as man looks for the nutrimente of his
meat when it is full digested, and not before: so must he look for his
salvation when he has passed this troublous world, and not before. Raw
flesh is not meat wholesome for man: and unmortified men and women, be no
creatures mete for God. Therefore Christ says, Math. 10.
that his people must be broken and all to torn in the myll of this world,
and so shall they be most fine meal unto the heavenly father. And it shall be
a christian man's part, and the duetye of a mind replenished with the spirit
of God, to mark the order of god in all his things, how he deals with them,
and how they suffer and be content to let god do his will upon them: As S. Paul
says, Romans 8.
they weep until the number of the elects be fulfilled and never be at rest,
but look for the time when gods people shall appear in glory.

We must therefore patiently suffer, and willingly attend upon gods doings,
although they seem clean contrary after our judgment, to our wealth and
salvation: as Abraham did when he was hyd to offer his son Isaac, in who^ god
promised the blessing and multiplyeng of his sede. Joseph at ye last came to
that which god promised him, although in the mean time, after the judgment of
ye world, he was never like to be (as god said he should be) lord over his
brethern. When Christ would make the blind man to see, John. 9,
he put clay upon his eyes, which after the judgment of man was means rather
to make him double blind, the^ to give him his syghte: but he obeyed and knew
that God could work his desire, what means so ever he used contrary to man's
reasons: and as touching this world, he uses all his after the same sort. If
any smarte, 1. Pet. 4.
his people be the first: if any suffer shame, they begin: if any be
subject to sclaunder, it is those that he loves, so that he shows no face
or favor nor love almost in this world outwardly to the^, Col. 3.
but lays clay upon their sore eyes that be sorrowful: yet the patient man
sees (as S. Paul says) life hyd under these miseries and adversities, and
sight under foul clay, and in the mean time he has the testimony of a good
conscience and believes gods promises to be his consolation in the world to
come, which is more worth unto him then all the world is worth besides, and
blessed is that man in whom gods spirit bears record that he is the son
of God, Romans 8
whatsoever troubles he suffer in this troublesome world.

And to judge things indifferently (my godly wife) the troubles be not yet
generally as they were in our good fathers times, soon after the death and
resurrection of our savior Christ Jesus, Math. 24.
whereof he spoke in S. Matthew. Of ye which place you and I have taken many
times great consolation, and especially of the latter part of the chapter,
where in is contained the last day and end of all troubles (I dout not) both
for you and me, and for such as love the coming of our savior Christ to
judgment. Remember therefore that place and mark it again, and ye shall in
this time see great consolation, and also learn much patience. Was there ever
such troubles as Christ threatened upon Jerusalem? Was there since the
beginning of the world such affliction? Who was then best at ease? The Apostles
that suffered in body persecution, and gathered of it ease and quietness in the
promises of god. And no marvel, for Christ says, lift up your heads for
your redemption is at hand, Luke. 2
that is to say, your eternal rest approaches and draws nere. The world
is stark blind, and more folishe then folishnes it self, and so be the
people of the world. For when god says trouble shall come, they will have ease.
And when God says be merye and rejoice in trouble, we lamente and mourn, as
though we were castawais. But this the flesh (which is never merry with virtue,
nor sorry with vice, never laugheth with grace, nor ever weepeth with sin)
holds fast with the world, and lets god slip. But (my dearly beloved
wife) you know how to perceive and to beware, of the vanitye and crafts of
the devil well enough in Christ. And that ye may the better have patience in
the spirit of god, read again the.24. chap of S. Mat. and mark what difference
is between the destruction of Jerusalem and the destruction of the whole
world, Math. 24.
and you shall see, that then there were left alive many offe^dors to repent:
but at the latter day there shall be absolute judgment and sentence (never to be
revoked) of eternal life and eternal death upon all men, and yet toward the
end of the world, we have no thing so much extremity, as they had then, but
even as we be able to bear. So does the merciful father lay upon us now
imprisonment, (and I suppose for my part shortly death) now spoil of goods,
loss of friends, and the greatest loss of all, the knowledge of Gods word.
Gods will be done. I wyshe in Christ Jesus our only mediator and savior,
your constancy and consolation, that you may live for ever and ever, whereof
in Christ I doubt not: to whom for his blessed and most paynefull passion I
commit you. Amen. 13. October. 1553.

Your brother in Christ. John Hoper.

A letter sent to the Christian congregation, wherein he proves that true
faith cannot be kept secret in the heart without confession thereof openly to
the world when occasion serves.
SAint Paul in ye.10. chap. to the Romans annexeth the faith of Christ in the
heart, with the confession of the mouth, so that the one (it seems by him) can
be no more without the other, then fire can be without heat, saying these
words: with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth he
confesses unto salvation, Wherein he declares, that even as the cause of our
acceptance through Christ, is the confidence and faith of the heart in the
promises of god: so is the confession outwardlye of the same faith by the
mouth, the fruit that all christian faithful hearts bring forth through
the same gift of GOD. And where as this effect of confession of faith is
not, there wants also the cause of confession, which is true faith: for as
the tree is known by her fruits, so is faith by her effects. And as the
want of fruit is a demonstration that the tree is unprofitable: so the want
of true confession of faith, is a token that the faith is dead. The end of
the unprofitable tree, Math. x. 1. Pet. 3.
is cuttyng down and casting into the fire: the end of the fruitles faith is
death and castyng to eternal dampnation. Wherefore Saint Peter requires us
to make answer to every man that demau^deth of us, of such hope as is in us,
with gentleness and reverence, which is a very testimony that we sanctify god in
our hearts, as it is before expressed in the same chapter. For the greatest
honor that man can give to god, is to confess in the time of trouble, truly
and faithfully his holy word and faith. Wherefore it is the duty of every
christian, to pray and study to have a through knowledge of his faith in
Christ, and as the glory of god shall require, and the cause of his religion,
to be ready to make answer for the same (how soever the world, fear,
displeasure, friendship, or other lettes shall move us to the contrary) upon
pain, says Christ in the x, Math. x.
of Matthew, that I will deny him before my father which is in heaven. But how
hard a thing it is to confess Christ in the days of trouble, not only the
scripture, but also daily experience in good men and women does declare. True
confession is warded on every side, with many dangers, on the right hand and
on the left hand, now with fair means, then with foul threatenings,
fearful and dangerous: as it is said by Christ our Savior, they shall
betray you to the judges, and of them ye shall be beaten and judged to death.
Of the other side shall pull us back the love of wife, children, brother,
Sister, kin, friends, and the love unto our selves. But he that is ouercommen by
any of these means, has his judgment: he is not meet for me says Christ.

These things be impossible unto men, yet to christian men, in Christ
possible, and so necessary, that christianity and true religion cannot be in
him, that is a fearde to confess Christ and his gospel in the time of
persecution. The wisdom of the world does say, although I accomplish the
desire of my friends, and to the sight of the world am present at the mass,
and with my body do as other men do, or as I may do: yet my heart is clean
contrary to their belief, and I do detest such Idolatry and believe yt the thing
that I am present at, is mere idolatry, and abhominatio^. Here be fair words
for an evil purpose, and pretenced excuse, for a just condemnation before God.
For if it be true that ye know the thing which ye resort unto, to be the
dishonor of god, why do ye honor it with your presence? If ye know it to be
evil, why refrain ye not from it? If your conscience say it is Idolatry, why
serves your body such things as your faith abhors? If in your heart you know
but one God, why with your exterior presence, serve ye the thing that ye know
is not God? If your faith see idolatrye, why does your silence confess and
allow the same? Two me^ in one, god loves not. If the inward man know the
truth, why does the outward man confess a falsehode? If your spirit be
persuaded that the mass is idolatry, why do ye with your bodily presence, use
it as a God and give godly honor to it? Do ye not perceive that it is written
Esaias. 25. Math. 15. these people honor me with their mouth, but their hearts be
far from me? The cause why God was offended with these people, was that
outwardly they confessed him and served him, but their hearts were far from
him inwardly. Wherefore ye may see what it is to bear two faces in one hoode,
outwardly to serve God, and inwardly to serve the devil. Now mark of this
place, if it be so horrible and damnable a thing to be false in the heart, which
none knows but God, and is worthy also of damnation: what is to be judged of
the outward and manifest use of idolatry, which not only God, but also every
good man knows and abhors? There is no coulor, nor cloked hypocrisy, that
God ca^ away with. If the heart think not as the tongue speaks, or else ye tongue
speak otherwise the^ the heart thinks, both be abominable before God. 2.
Cor. 6.
Read ye the.3. and the.6. Chapters of the first Epistle of S. Paul to the
Corinth, where as S. Paul says: know ye not that your body is the temple of
the holy ghost? If your body be the temple of ye holy ghost, what agreement has
it with idolatry? Can one body at one time, be the temple of the holy ghost,
and be present at such idolatry as god abhors and detesteth? Can a man serve
two masters? If he do, he loves (as Christ says) the one and hates the
other. Math. 6.
As god requires of a faithful man, a pure heart: even so requires he that his
external profession in all things be according thereunto, for both body and
soul be detters unto god, and he redeemed them both. The word of God says
unto us, 1. Cor. 6.
glorifye and bear God in your bodies. If we be present at such idolatry as
God forbids, and our own knowledge in conscience is assured to be evil, do
we glorifye God in our bodies? No doutlesse we dishonor him, and make our
bodies the servants of idolatry, not only to Gods dishonor, but also to the
great danger both of body and soul. For this is a true saying of S.
Augustine, he that does against his conscience, builds to hell fire.

It is not enough for a Christian man to say, I know the mass is naught, but
to obey civil laws and orders I will do outwardly as other men do, yet in my
heart abhor it and never think it to be good. Doutlesse these two minds, the
spirit to think well and the body to do evil, in this respect be both naught,
and god will spue yt whole man out of his mouth, as he did ye minister of ye
congregation of Laodicia. Apo. 3. The 8. chap. and the.10 of the first to ye
Corinthians in this matter and in this time, be places very much expedient to
lead and govern the judgment of every Christian man: where we may see that
the Corinthians in deed had knowledge and perceived right well that neither the
idols amongst them, neither the meat dedicated unto the idols were any
thing, and passed as light of both, as of things of nothing, and upon that
knowledge used to be present and also to eat at the feast, and of the meat
dedicated unto Idols. Wherewithal Paul was so sore offended, that he gave
this sentence: if a man see thee which have knowledge, 1. Cor. 8
sit at table in the Idols temple, shall not the conscience of him which is
weak, be boldened to eat those things which are sacrificed to Idols? and
through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for who^ Christ died. Now
when ye sin so against ye brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye
sin against Christ. This judgment of Paul is more to be followed, the^ al
our own feigned and wrested defenses, which would feign seem to do well, when we
halt on both sides, which god abhors. Paul has a profounde and deep
consideration of that man's fault that has knowledge, and perceaueth his
dissimulation to be dangerous and perilous to al persons which he dwells
with all. First such as be of a right and stayed judgment and will not
prostrate their bodies to an Idol, do condemn, and needs must, such
dissimulation. The very Idolaters themselves, have a defense of their
abomination, by the presence of him yt the Christian congregation knows to
have knowledge. The weaker sort yt would gladly take the best way, by a
dissemblers halting and playing of both hands, embraces both in body and in
soul, the evil that he abhors in his heart, and though he have knowledge,
yet with his presence he estemeth it as other do which have no knowledge. If S
Paul said yt the weak brother does perish for who^ Christ died, by him that
abused knowledge in meats and drinks that of themselves be indifferent: how
much more by the knowledge of him that uses manifest Idolatry forbidden of
God as a thing not indifferent? Take heed what s. Paul means, and what he
would prove against this man which had knowledge that neither the Idols
neither ye meats dedicated to Idols were any thing. Forsooth this would he
prove: that a poor man that wants knowledge, by the example of him that has
knowledge, does there adventure to do evil, which he would not do in case he
saw not those that he has good opinion of, to go before him as authors of the
evil. And in deed the ignoraunte people, or those that be half persuaded in a
truth, yea or else thoroughly persuaded what is evil, when they have any notable
men or women for an example to follow, they think in following of them, they
be excused, yea although peradventure they do it against their consciences: as
ye may see how many good men by the example of Peter began to dissemble, yea
Barnabas himself the Apostle of the Gentiles. Gala. 2
But how great offense this is before god, so to make a doubtful conscience or
striuig against knowledge to do any thing that is not godly, let the judgment
of men pass, and measure it from gods word. Christ says, Math. 18
it were better a millstone were hanged about such an offenders neck, and cast
into the sea. And doutlesse the pain must be the greater, because we give
offense willingly, and against our own consciences: and this before God is a
wicked knowledge that causes an other to perish. Woe be unto him that is
learned to bring his brother to destruction. Does a Christian man know the
truth to bring his brother to a lie? For those weaklinges that we make to
stomble, Christ died, as S. Paul says. God defend we should confyrme any man's
conseience in evil. Let every man of god way with himself the doctrine of S.
Paul that commands us to fly Idolatrye. 1. Cor. 10
And mark what s. Paul in that place calls Idolatrye. It is to be seen
plainly yt he speaks not of such idolatry as men that lack knowledge in
their hearts what god is and and what god is not, do commit. For in the.8.
chapter before he says, yt men know that the idols were no gods, and that
although by name ye gentiles had many gods, yet they knew that there was but
one god. Therefore he means nothing by this commandment, fly idolatry, but
to avoid such rites, ceremonies, and vsages, as outwardly were used in the
honor and reverence of the idols yt were no gods, and waying the right use of
the Lords supper and the dignity thereof, with the manner and use of the
Gentiles toward their gods, he would bring the church of the Corrinthians to
understand how that, as the divine and sacrate rites, ceremonies and use of the
sacrament of Christ's body and blood, did sanctifye him and declare him that
used it to be the servant and child of God: so did the rites and sacraments
of the Gentiles defile the users thereof, and declared them to be the servants
and children of the idol, notwithstanding that they knew in their hearts ye
idol was nothing. God by his sacrament does couple us unto him: let us pray
therefore to him that we pollute not our selves with any rites, ceremonies, or
vsages not instituted by god, and so divide our selves from him.

In this cause, if a faithful man should be at the mass, it is to be
considered with what mind those that he does there accompany himself withal,
do come thither, and what the end is of the work that the priest does. The
people come to honor the bread and wine for god, and the priest purposes to
consecrate both god and man, and so to offer Christ to the father for
remission of sin. Now do they that adioyne them selves unto those people,
profess and declare a society and fellowship of the same impietye, as s. Paul
laid to the Corrinthians charge. S. Paul was not offended with the Corinthians
because they lacked knowledge of the true God, but because contrary to their
knowledge, they associated the^ selves with idolaters. For this is true, yt in all rites, sacraments and honorings, whether they be of god or of ye devil,
there is a profession of a communion: so that every man protests to be of the
same religion, yt the rest be of, yt be pertakers with him. I know there be many
euasions made by men, yt judge a man may with sauegard of conscience be at ye
mass. But forasmuch as M, Calvin, M. Bullynger and other have throughlye
aunsweared them: such as be in doubt, may read their books. This is my
conscience after Gods word.

John Hoper.

An epistle of the famous learned man M. Henry Bullinger, written to M. Hoper
in the time of his trouble: which for the worthiness of the matter, we thought
not impartinent here to place emonges his letters. Reuerendissimo VVigorniae
and Glocestriae Episcopo D. Ioanni Hopero nunc vincto Jesus Christi, Compatri
and Domino meo colendiss. fratrique chariss, in Anglia.
GRatiam and pacem per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum, cum sapientia, patientia
and fortitudine spiritus sancti, concedat tibi and omnibus propter nomen suu^
vinctis, pater caelestis.
Binas a tua humanitate literas accepi, frater chariss. priores me^se September.
anni praeteriti, posteriores mense Maio anni presentis, vtrasque ex carcere.
Ego vero quum timerem ne frustra responderem quum tibi meas literas reddi non
posse vererer, vel malum aliquod tibi conciliare^ and conduplicarem: a munere
scribendi abstinui. Qua quidem in re, me habes excusatum haud dubie, maxim
quum rebus adhuc pacatis and integris, ad libellos nedum epistolas meas, ne
semel quidem per annum integrum respondere dignatus sis, perseuerante me
nihilominus in scribe^di munere: sicuti ne nunc quidem, posteaquam in vincula
coniectum audiebam, vnquam a precibus abstinui, rogans patrem nostrum coelestem
per vnicum intercessorem nostrum Christum Iesum, vt tibi and concaptiuis tuis
omnibus concedat patientiam, fidem, and constantiam in finem vsque, Euenit nunc
tibi, (mi frater,) quod euenturum nobis, quum apud nos esses, coepissime nobis
ipsis praesagiebamus, maxim quum de rebus antichristi, pote^tia, faelicitate
and vistoriis loqueremur. Scis enim illud Danielis: roborabitur fortitudo eius
and non in viribus suis, and supra quam credi potest, Dani. 8
vastabit vniuersa and prosperabitur and faciet, and interficiet robustos ac
populum sanctorum secundum voluntate^ suam etc. Scis quid praedixerit nobis
dominus apud Math. cap. 10. and. Ioa^. 15. and. 16. Quid item electum Christi
organum Paulus scripserit in.2. ad Timoth. Capi. 3. Vnde nihil dubito de tua,
per gratiam dei, fide and patientia, quum scias te nihil inexpectatum aut
fortuitum pati, and ea quae sustines propter causam optimam, verissimam, and
sanctissimam sustinere. Quid enim verius and sanctius est doctrina nostra quam
persequuntur Papistae Antichristicolae? Omnia salutis tribuimus vni Christo and
instituti^ eius, sicuti and ab ipso and discipulis eius accepimus: illi vero
illa ipsa and Antichristo suo Romano and institutis eius communicari volunt.
His ergo non minus obsistendum est, quam Heliam Baalitis obstitisse legimus. Si
enim Jesus est Christus, agnoscant illum esse co^plementum suae ecclesiae, and
quidem plene: si autem Antichristus est Rex and Sacerdos, deferant illi hunc
honorem. Quousque claudicant in vtrumque latus? An dabunt illi nobis meliore^
Christo? Aut quis erit aequalis Christo qui cum ipso componatur, nisi quem
Apostolus vocat (...)? Si autem Christus sufficit suae Ecclesiae, quid oro opus
est illis sutelis and additamentis? Caeteru^ his disputationibus nihil opus
apud te esse scio, qui sincere Doctus and radicatus es in Christo, haud
ignorans te habere in ipso omnia and nos in illo esse completos. Perge ergo
constanter confiteri Christum and execrari Antichristum, memor sanctissimi and
verissimi illius sermonis Domini nostri Jesus Christi: qui vicerit posside bit
omnia, Apoc. 21.
and ero illi deus and ipse erit mihi filius. Timidis autem and incredulis, and
execratis, and homicidis, and scortatoribus, and veneficis, and Idololatris,
and omnibus mendacibus, pars illoru^ erit in stagno ardenti igne and sulphur,
quod est mors secunda. Facile superatur mors prima etiamsi ardendum sit pro
domino: recte enim dicunt ignem hunc nostrum vix vmbram esse eius qui
increduli^ and defectoribus paratus est. Concedit praeterea dominus, vt mox
superare eius virtute possimus mortem primam, qua^ and ipse gustauit and
superauit, promittens interim gaudia nunquam finienda and amplitudine
ineffabilia, quae and percepturi sumus, simul atque hinc migrauerimus. Sic enim
iterum dicit angelus domini: Si quis adorauerit Bestiam and imaginem eius, Apo.
21.
and acceperit characterem in front sua aut in manu sua, and hic bibet de vino
irae dei quod mixtu^ est mero in calice irae ipsius, and cruciabitur igne and
sulphur in conspectu angelorum sanctorum and in conspestu agni, and fumus
tormenti eorum ascendit in saecula saeculorum, nec habent requiem die and nocte
qui adorant Bestiam and imaginem eius, and si quis acceperit charactere^
nominis eius. Hic patientia sanctoru^ est. Hic qui custodiunt mandata dei and
fidem Jesus. His addit mox, Et audiui vocem de coelo dicentem mihi, scribe:
beati mortui qui in domino moriuntur amodo (vel protinus scilicet beati sunt)
etiam dicit spiritus, vt requiescant a laboribus suis, sed opera illorum
sequuntur illos: non enim erit labor noster frustraneus and inanis. Amplissimam
ergo promissionem quum habeas, 1. Timo. 6.
sis fortis in domino: certa bonum certamen, serua fidem domino in finem vsque.
Cogita te ducem and propugnatorem habere Christum dei filium: omnes autem
Prophetas, Apostolos and Martyrs, esse tuos commilitones. Qui nos persequuntur
and tribulant, homines sunt, peccatores, and mortales, quorum gratiam prudens
non emerit terun^io. Sed and vita nostra alias breuis est et caduca, foelices
nos si in Christo obdormiamus: hic concedat tibi et omnibus concaptiuis, fidem
et constantiam. Commenda me reuerendiss. et sanctiss. Christi co^fessoribus D.
Cranmero episcopo Ca^tuar. D. Rydlaeo episcopo Land. et D. Latymero seni. Hos
et alios omnes captiuos salutabis ex me et ex omnibus Symmistis, qui omnes
imprecantur vobis gratiam Dei et constantiam in veritate. Oramus sedulo cum
tota Ecclesia pro vobis.

Quod attinet ad statum nostrae Ecclesiae, is omnino manet adhuc qualis erat
quum a nobis recederes in patriam. Vtinam Deo simus grati, and fidem non tantum
verbis confiteamur, sed exprimamus vere bonis operibus ad gloriam Dei nostri.
Alioqui crescit valde sermo Domini per Italiam vicinam and per Galliam. Interim
pij graves sustinent persequutiones, and magna constantia and gloria per
tormenta, concedunt ad dominum.

Ego and tota domus mea cu^ generis and affinibus, recte in domino valemus.
Saluta^t te sigillatim omnes and preca^tur tibi consta^tia^, co^dolentes tibi
and concaptiuis reliquis. Veneru^t ad nos Angli studiosi, pij, and docti viri,
recepti sunt a magistratu nostro. Cohabitant december, reliqui agunt hinc inde
apud viros bonos. Inter alios mihi charus and familiaris est. D. Thomas
Leuerus. Si quid est quod in gratiam vxoris tuae and liberorum potuero, me
totum libenter illis impendam: qua de re ad vxorem tuam scribo, audio enim
illam as gere Francofordiae. Sis fortis and laetus in Christo,, expectans eius
liberationem vt and quando ipsi fuerit visum. Dominus Jesus misereatur Angliae,
and illuminet illam spiritu suo, ad gloriam nominis sui and animarum salutem.
Dominus Jesus seruet te and liberet ab omni malo, cum omnibus qui inuocant
nomen eius.

Vale and Vale aeternum. 10. Octobris. 1554. Tiguri. Nosti manum. H. B.

The same in English.
THe heavenly father grant unto you, and to all those which are in bands and
captivity for his names sake, grace, and peace through Jesus Christ our lord,
with wisdom, patience and fortitude of the holy ghost.
I have received from you two letters (my most dear brother) the former in the
month of September. of the year past, the later in the month of May of this
present year, both written out of prison. But I doubtyng least I should make
answer to you in vayn, whilst I feared that my letters should never come unto
your hands, or else increase and double your sorrow: did refrain from the duty
of writing. In the which thing I doubt not but you will have me excused,
especially seeing you did not vouchsafe, no not once in a whole year to
asunwere to my whole libelles rather then letters, whereas I continued still
notwithstanding in writing unto you: as also at this present, after I heard
that you were cast in prison, I did not refrain from continual prayer,
besechyng our heavenly father through our only mediator Jesus Christ, to
grant unto you and to your fellow prisoners, faith and constancy unto the
end. Now is that thing happened unto you (my brother) the which we did often
times prophecy unto our selves, at your being with us, should come to pass,
especially when we did talk of the power of Antichrist and of his felicity and
victories. Daniel. 8.
For you know the saying of Daniel: his power shall be mighty, but not in his
strength, and he shall wonderfully destroy and make havoc of all things,
and shall prosper and practice, and he shall destroy the mighty and the holy
people after his own will. You know what the Lord warned us of before hand
by Matthew in the tenth chapter, by John in the 15. chapter and the 16. and
also what that chosen vessel Saint Paul has written in the second to Timothy
and the third Chapter. Wherefore I do nothing doubt (by Gods grace) of your
faith and patience, whilst you know that those things which you suffer are
not unlooked for or come by chance, but yt you suffer them in the best, truest
and most holy quarrel: for what can be more true and holy then our doctrine
which the papists, those worshippers of Antichrist do persecute? All things
touching salvation, we attribute unto christ alone and to his holy
institutions, as we have been taught of him and of his disciples, but they would
have even the same things to be communicated as well to their Antichrist, and to
his institutions. Such we ought no less to withstand then we read that
Helias withstoode the Baalites. For if Jesus be Christ then let them know that
he is the fulness of his church and that perfectly? but and if Antichrist be
King and Priest, Ephe. 1.
the^ let them exhibit unto him that honor. How long do they halte on both
sides? Can they give unto us any one that is better then Christ? or who shall be
equal with Christ, that may be compared with him, except it be he whom the
Apostle calls the Adversary? 2 Thessalonians. 2.
But if Christ be sufficient for his church, what needs this patchyng and
peecyng? But I know well enoughe I need not to use these disputations with you
which are syncerely taught and have taken root in Christ, being persuaded that
you have all things in him and that we in him are made perfect. Go forwards
therefore constantly to confess Christ and to defye Antichrist, being
myndfull of this most holy and most true saying of our lord Jesus Christ: Apo.
21
he that overcomes shall possess all things, and I will be his God, and he
shall be my son: but the fearful, and the unbelieving, and the abominable,
and the murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all
liars, shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death. The first death is soon overcome
although a man must burn for the Lords sake: for they say well that do
affirm this our fire to be scarcely a shadow of that which is prepared for
the unbelievers and them that fall from the truth. Moreover the lord grants
unto us that we may easily overcome by his power the first death, the which
he himself did taste and overcome, promisyng wythal, such joys as never
shall have end, unspeakable and passing all understanding, the which we shall
possess so soon as ever we depart hence. Apoc. i4
For so again says the Angel of the lord, if any man worship the beast and
his image and receive his mark in his forehead or on his hand, the same shall
drink of the wrath of god, yea of the wine which is powered into the cup of
his wrath, and he shall be tormented in fire and brymstone before the holy
Aungelles and before the Lamb: and the smoke of their torments shall ascend
evermore, and they shall have no rest day nor night, which worship the beast
and his image, and whosoever receives the printe of his name. Here is the
patience of saints: here are they that keep the commandments of God and
the faith of Jesus. In this time of Antichrist is the patience and faith of
gods children (...) tried, whereby they shall overcome all is tyranny. read
Math. 24.
To this he adds by and by: I heard a voice saying to me, write, blessed be
the dead that dye in the lord from henceforth (or spedely they be blessed. Io.
5) even so says the spirit, for they rest from their labors, but their
works follow them: for our labor shall not be frustrate or in vain.
Therefore, seeing you have such a large promise, be strong in the lord, fight a
good fight, be faithful to the Lord unto the end: consider that Christ the
son of god is your capitayn and fyghteth for you, and that all the prophets,
Apostles and Martyrs, are your fellow soldiers. They that persecute and
trouble us, are men, sinful, and mortal, whose favor a wise man would not
bye with the value of a farthyng, and besides that, our life is short, frail
and transitorye. Happy are we if we depart in the Lord: who grant unto you
and to all your fellow prisoners faith and constancy. Commend me to the most
reverend fathers and holy confessors of Christ. D. Cranmer Bishop of
Caunterburye. D. Rydley bishop of London, and the good old father D. Latymer.
Them and all the rest of the prisoners with you for the Lords cause salute in my
name, and in the name of all my fellow Ministers, the which do wyshe unto you
the grace of god and constancye in the truth.

Concerning the state of our church, it remains even as it was when you
departed from us into your country. God grant we may be thankful to him,
and that we do not only profess the faith with words, but also express the
same effectually with good works to the praise of our Lord. The word of god
increases daily in that part of Italye that is nere unto us, and in France.
In the mean while the godly sustain grievous persecutions, and with great
constancy and glory, through torments they go unto the Lord. I and all my
household, with my sons in law and kynsmen, are in good health in the Lord:
They do all salute you, and pray for your constancye, being sorrowful for you
and the rest of the prisoners. There came unto us English men students, both
godly and learned: they be received of our Magistrate. Ten of them dwell
together, the reast remain here and there with good men. Emonges the rest M.
Thomas Lever is dear unto me and familiar. If there be any thing wherein I may
do any pleasure to your wife and children, they shall have me wholly at
commandment: Whereof I will write also to your wife, for I understand she
abides at Franckford. Be strong and merry in Christ, waytyng for his
deliverance when and in what sort it shall seem good unto him. The Lord
Jesus show pity upon the realm of England, and illuminate the same with his
holy spirit to the glory of his name and the salvation of souls. The Lord
Jesus preserve you and deliver you from all evil, with all them that call upon
his name.

Farewell, and farewell eternally. The 10. of October. 1554. From Zurich. You
know the hand. H. B.

Certain letters of Doctor Tailor parson of Hadley in Suffolk: who by his
death and martyrdom, there witnessed and confyrmed that doctrine, which he had
before most painfully and faithfullye taught. The 9. of February, in the year
of our Lord. 1555.
To my dear fathers and brethren. D. Cranmer, D. Rydley, and D. Latymer
prisoners in Oxforde for the faithful testimonye of gods holy Gospel.
Right reverend fathers in the lord, I wysh you to enjoy continually gods
grace and peace through Jesus Christ, and God be praised again and again,
for this your most excellent promotio^ which ye are called unto at this
present, yt is, that ye are counted worthy to be allowed amongst the number of
Christ's records and witnesses. Many profess god ad ignem exclusive, that is,
in words and outward profession, but few stick to him ad ignem inclusiue, that
is, in deed, and in suffering for his sake.
England has had but a few learned bishops that would stick to Christ ad
ignem inclusiue. Once again I thank God heartily in Christ for your most happy
onset, most valiant proceeding, most constant suffryng of al such infamyes,
hyssynges, clappyngs, tau^tes, open rebukes, loss of living and liberty for
the defense of gods cause, truth and glory. I can not utter with pen how I
rejoice in my heart for you iij. such captains in the foreward under Christ's
cross, banner, or standerd in such a cause and skyrmishe, when not only one
or ij. of our dear redemers strong holds are besieged, but all his chief
castles ordained for our safeguard, are traitorously impugned. This your
enterprise in the sight of all that he in heaven, and of all gods people in
earth, is most pleasant to behold. This is an other manner of nobility, then
to be in the forefronte in worldly warrefares. For gods sake pray for us, for
we fail not daily to pray for you. We are stronger and stronger in the lord,
his name be praised, and we doubt not but ye be so in Christ own sweet
schole. Heaven is all and wholly of our side: therefore Gaudete in domino
semper, et iterum gaudete et exultate.

Your assured in Christ Rowland Tailor.

To a friend of his which was desirous to know the talk that was betwixt him
and the Queen's commissioners at the time of his examination.
Whereas you would have me to write the talk, between the king and Queen's most
honorable council and me on Tuesday, the xxij. of Ianuar. this so far as I
remember, was ye effect thereof. First my lord Chau^cellor said, you among other
are at this time sent for, to enjoy ye Kings and Queen's majesty's favor and
mercy, if you will now rise again with us from the fall, which we generally
have received in this Realm, from the which (god be praised) we are now
clearly delivered miraculously. If you will not rise with us now, and receive
mercy now offered, you shall have judgment according to your demerites. To
this I answered, that so to rise, should be the greatest fall that ever I
could receive, for I should so fall from my dear savior Christ to
Antichriste. For I do believe that the Religion set forth in King Edwardes
days, was according to the vein of the holy Scripture, which contains
fully all the rules of our christian religion, from the which I do not intend
to decline so long as I live, by gods grace. Then master Secretary Bourne
said, which of the religions mean you of in king Edwardes dais? for you know
there were diverse books of religion set forth in his days. There was a
religion set forth in a Cathechisme by my Lord of Caunterburye, do you mean,
that you will stick to that? I answered, my lord of Caunterbury made a
Catechism to be translated into English, which book was not of his own
making, yet he set it forth in his own name, and truly that book for the time
did much good: but there was after that set forth by the most innocent king
Edward (for who^ god be praised everlastingly) the whole church Service, set
forth with great deliberation and the advice of the best learned men of the
realm, and authorized by the whole Parliament, and received and published
gladly by the whole realm, which book was never reformed but once, and yet by
that one reformation it was so fully perfited, according to the rules of our
religion in every behalf, that no christian conscience could be offended
with any thing therein contained: I mean of that book reformed. Then my lord
Chancellor said, did thou never read the book that I set forth of the
Sacrament? I aunaunswered that I had read it. Then he said, how likest thou
that book? With that one of the Council (whose name I know not) said, my Lord
that is a good question, for I am sure that book stops all their mouths.
Then said I, my Lord I think many things be far wide from the truth of
Gods word in that book. Then my lord said, thou art a very varlet. To that I
answered, that is as ill as Racha or Fatue. Then my Lord said, thou art an
ignorant betyll browe. To that I answered, I have read over and over again
the holy Scriptures, and Saint Austines works through, and Saynct Cyprian,
Eusebius, Origene, Gregory Nazianzen, with diverse other books through out:
therefore I thank God I am not utterly ignorant. Besides these my lord, I
professed the Civil law, as your Lordship did, and I have read over the
Cannon law also. Then my lord said, with a corrupt judgment thou read
all things. Touching my profession, it is Divinity, in which I have written
diverse books. Then I said, my Lord ye did write one book De vera
obedientia: I would you had been constant in that, for in deed you never did
declare a good conscience that I heard of, but in that one book. Then my Lord
said, tut, tut, tut: I wrote against Bucer in priests marriages, but such
books please not such wretches as thou art, which have been married many years.
To that I answered, I am married in deed, and I have had.ix, chidre^ in holy
matrimony, I thank god: and this I am sure of, yt your procedings now at this
present in this realm against priests marriages, is ye mainteinau^ce of ye
doctrine of devils, against natural law, Civil law, Cano^ law, general
Councils, Canons of ye apostles, au^cie^t doctors, and gods laws. The^ spoke
my lord of Duresme saying, you professed ye Civil law, as you say: then you
know that Justinian writes, that priests at their taking of Orders should
swear, that they were never married, and he brings in to prove that, Canones
Apostolorum. To that I answered that I did not remember any such law of
Justinian: but I am sure that Justinian writes in Titulo de indicta viduitate,
in cod. that if one would bequeath to his wife in his testament al^egacie under
a condition that she should never marye again, and take an oath of her for the
accomplyshyng of the same, yet she shall marye again if he dye,
notwithstanding the aforesaid condition and oath taken and made against
marriage: and an oath is an other manner of obligation to God, then is a
papisticall vow. Moreover in the Pandectes, it is contained, that if a man do
manumit his handmayd under a condition that she shall never marye: yet she may
mary, and her Patron shall loose ius patronatus for his adding of the unnatural
and unlawful condition against matrimony.

Then my Lord Chauncelour said, thou say that priests may be married by
gods law, how prouest thou that? I answered by the plain words and
sentences of S. Paul both to Timothy and to Titus, where S. Paul does speak
most evidently of the marriage of priests, Deacons, and bishops. And S.
Chrysostom writing upon the Epistle to Timothy, says: it is an heresy to say
that a Bishop may not be married. Then my lord Chancellor said thou lie of
Chrysostom, but thou do as all thy companions do, belie ever without al
shame, both the scriptures and the doctors. Did thou not also say, that by
the Cannon law priests may be married? which is most untrue and the contrary is
most true. I answered, we read in the decrees, that the four general
counsels, Nicene, Constantinopolitane, Ephesme and Calcedon, have the same
autoritye that the four Evangelists have. And we read in the same decrees,
which is one of the chief books of the Canon law, that the Council of Nice,
by the means of one Paphnutius, did allow Priests and bishops marriages:
therefore by the best part of the Canon law, priests may be married. Then my
Lord Chauncellor said, thou falsifiest the general council: for there is
express mention in the said decree that priests should be divorced from their
wives which be married. The^ said I, if those words be there as you say, the^ am
I content to lose this great head of mine: let ye book be fetched. Then said
my lord of Duresme, though they be not there, yet they may be in
Ecclesiastica historia, which Eusebius wrote, out of which book the decree was
taken. Then said I, it is not like that the pope would leave out any such
sentence, having such authority. and making so much for his purpose. Then my
lord Chauncelor said, Gracian was but a patcher, and thou art glad to snatch up
such a patch as makes for thy purpose. I answered, my Lord I can not but
marvel that you do call one of the chief papists that ever was, but a
patcher. Then my lord Chauncelor said, Nay I call thee a snatcher and a
patcher. To make an end, will thou not return again with us to the Catholic
church? and with that he rose. And I said, By gods grace I will never depart from
Christ's church. Then I required yt I might have some of my friends to come to
me in prison. And my lord Chau^celor said, thou shall have judgment within
this weke. My lord of Durreme would that I should believe as my father, and my
mother. I alleged S. Augustine, that we ought to prefer gods word before al
men. And so I was delivered again unto my keeper.

R. T.

The copy of a writing that D. Taylour sent to a friend of his concerning the
causes wherefore he was condemned.
IT is heresy to defend any doctrine against the holy scripture: therefore the
Lord Chauncelor and bishops consenting to his sentence against me, be
heretics, for they have given sentence against the marriage of priests, knowing
that S. Paul to Timothe and Titus writes plainly, that Bishops, priests, and
Deacons may be married, knowing also that by S. Paul's doctrine; it is the
doctrine of deuilles to inhibite matrimony, and S. Paul wills every
faithful minister to teach the people so, least they be deceived by the marked
merchants. 1. Tim. 4. These bishops are not ignorant, yt it is not only S.
Paul's counsel and lawful, but gods commandment also to marry, for such as
can not other wise live chaste, neither avoid fornication. 1. Cor. 7 Gene. 2.
They know that such as do marry, do not sin. They know that god, before
sin was, ordained matrimony, and ye in paradise between two of his principal
creatures, Man and Woman. They know what spirit they have, which say it is
evil to marrye, seeing God said: Gene. 2.
it is not good for man to be alone without a wife, having no special gift
contrary to the general commandment and ordinance diverse times repeted in
the book of Genesis, Gene. 1.
which is to increase and multiply. They know that Abraham carried into the land
of Chanaan his old and yet barraine wife the virtuous woman Sara with him,
Gene. 12.
leaving father and mother and country, being otherwise at gods commandment.
For though father and mother and other friends are dear and nere, yet none are
so derely and nerely joined together, Ephe. 5. Heb. 13.
as man and wife in matrimony, which must needs be holy for that it is a figure
and similitude of Christ and his church. They know that S. Paul gives a great
praise to matrimony, calling it honorable, and that not to and among many, but
to and among al men without exception, whosoever have need of that Gods remedy
for man's and womans infirmity. They know that if there were any sin in
matrimony, it were chiefly to be thought to be in the bedcompanye: but S. Paul
says that the bed company is undefiled. Gene. 18. Exodus 18. Genes. 25. Gene.
31. 2. Reg. 7. Math 1.
They know that the having of a wife was not an impediment for Abraham, Moses,
Isaac, Jacob, David, etc. to talk with God, neither to the Levites; bishops
and priests office in the time of the old Testamente or the new. They know
that Christ would not be conceived or borne of the blessed mother the Virgin
Mary, before she was espoused in marriage his own ordinance. They know by S.
Ciprian, and S. Austine, that a vow is not an impediment sufficient to let
matrimony, or to divorce the same. They know that S. Chrysostom says: it is
heresy to affirm that a Bishop may not have a wife. They know that S. Ambrose
will have no commandment but counsel only to be given, touching the observing
of virginity. They know that Christ with his blessed mother and Apostles were
at a marriage, John. 2.
and beautifyed and honored the same with his presence and first miracle. To
be short, they know yt all that I have here written touching ye marriage of
priests, is true, and they know yt the papists themselves do not observe
touching yt matter, their own laws and canons, and yet they continue marked in
conscience with an hot iron as detestable heretics in this behalf. The lord
give the^ grace to repent, if it be his good will, Ame^.

My second cause why I was condemned as an heretic, is yt I denied ye
transubstantiation and concomitation, two iugling words of the papists, by the
which they do believe and will co^pel al other to believe yt Christ's natural body
is made of bread, and that the godheade by and by is joined thereunto: so that
immediately after the words called the words of consecration, there is no more
bread and wine in the sacrament, but the substance only of the body and blood
of Christ together with his godhead: so that the same being now Christ both god
and man, ought to be worshipped with godly honor, and to be offered to god,
both for the quick and the dead, as a sacrifice propitiatory and satisfactory
for the same. This matter was not long debated in words, but because I denied
the foresaid papistical doctrine, yea rather plainly most wicked Idolatry,
blasphemy and heresye, I was judged an heretic. I did also affirm the pope to
be Antichrist, and poperye Antichristianitie: and I confessed the doctrine of
the Bible to be a sufficient doctrine touching al and singular matters of
Christian religion and of salvation. I also alleged that the oath against the
Supremacy of ye bishop of Rome, was a lawful oath, and so was the oath made by
us all touching ye kings or Queens preeminence. For Chrysostom says that
Apostles, Evangelists, and all men in every Realm were ever and ought to be
ever, touching both body and goods, in subjection to the Kingly authority, who
has ye sweard in his hand as gods principal officer and governor in every
Realm. I desired the Bishops to repent for bringing the Realm from Christ to
Antichrist, from light to darkness, from verity to vanity. Thus you know a
su^me of my last examination and condemnation. Pray for me, and I will pray for
you.

God be praised, since my condemnation I was never afraid to die: Gods will be
done. If I shrink from gods truth, I am sure of an other manner of death the^
had judge Hales. But God be praised, even from the bottom of my heart, I am
immovably settled upon the rock, nothing douting, but that my dear god will
perform and finish the work, that he has begone in me and other. To him be al
honor both now and ever through Christ our only and whole Savior. Amen.

R. T.

A letter which he sent to his wife and children and other of his friends in
Hadley as his farewell and last testament.
I Say to my wife, and to my children, the Lord gave you unto me, and the Lord
has taken me from you, and you from me: blessed be the name of the Lord. I
believe that they are blessed which die in the Lord. Apoc. i4 Luke. 12.
God cares for sparowes, and for the hears of our heads. I have ever found
him more faithful and favorable, then any father or husband. Trust ye
therefore in him by ye means of our dear Savior Christ's merits, believe,
love, fear, and obey him: pray to him for he has promised to help: Count me
not dead, for I shall certainly live, and never die. I go before, and ye shall
follow after to our long home. I go to ye rest of my children, Susan, George,
Elle^, Robert, and Zachary: I have bequethed you to the only omnipotent.

I say to you my dear friends of Hadley, and to al other which have heard me
preach, that I depart hence with a quiet conscience as touching my doctrine,
for the which I pray you, thank god with me, for I have after my little talent
declared to other, those lessons that I gathered out of gods book the blessed
Bible. Therefore if I or any Angel from heaven, should preach to you any other
gospel, Gala. 1
then that ye have received, Gods great curse upon that preacher. Beware for
Gods sake, that ye deny not God neither decline from the word of faith, least
god decline from you, and so ye do everlastingly perish. For gods sake beware
of popery, for though it appear to have in it unity, yet the same is in
vanity and Antichristianitie and not in Christ's faith and verity. Beware of
the sin against ye holy ghost now after such a light opened so plainly, and
simply, truly, thoroughly, and generally to al England. The Lord grant all men
his good and holy spirit, increase of his wisdom, increase of contempning the
wicked world, increase of desiring heartily to be with God and the heavenly
company, through Jesus Christ our only mediator, advocate, righteousness,
life, sanctification, and hope, Amen Amen. Pray. Pray.

Rowland Taylour departing hence in sure hope, without all doubting, of eternal
salvation, I thank god my heavenly father through Jesus Christ my certain
savior. Amen.
5. Februarye. Anno. 1555.
Letters of Master Laurence Saunders parson of Alhollowes in Bredstrete in
London: who, after faithful testimonye of his doctrine by long imprisonment,
was condemned to the fire, and at Couentrie (by gods providence, no doubt, to
confirm that he had in that country also fruitfully taught) suffered with most
valiant and chereful courage, as ye may read in the book of marters, Fol. 1048.
The.8. day of Febr. In the year of our Lord. 1555.
To my most dear and reverend fathers in Christ. D. Cranmer. D. Rydley and D.
Latimer prisoners in Oxforde.
IN my most humble wise I salute you most reverend Fathers in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

Immortal thanks and everlasting praises be given unto that our father of
mercies, Collo. 1.
which has made us mete to be pertakers of ye inheritance of saints in
light, which has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated
us into the kingdom of his beloved son, by whom we have redemption through
his blood, etc. Oh most happy estate, Collo. 3.
that in an unspeakable wise, our life is hid with Christ in God: but
whenever Christ which is our life, shall show himself, then shall we also
appear with him in glory. 1. Cor. i3. 2. Cor. 5.
In the mean season, as our sight is but in a glass, eue^ in a dark
speaking, so we walk in faith, not after outward appearaunce. The which
faith, although for want of outward appearaunce, reason reputeth but as vain:
yet the chosen of God do know the effect thereof to bring a more substantial
cast and lively fruition of very felicity and perfect blessedness, then reason
can reach, or senses conceive. By this faith, we have in our profession all
good things: yea even those which the eye has not seen and the ear has not
heard, 1. Cor. 2.
neither have entered into the heart of man. etc. Then if hereby we do enjoy al
good things, it follows yt we must needs possess, have and enjoy you most
reverend fathers, who be no small part of our joy and good things given us of
God. We heretofore have had ye fruitio^ of you by bodily presence to our
inexplicable benefit (praised be that our gracious God therefore) and now in
spirit we have the experience of unspeakable comfort by your reverend
fatherhodes, Math. 5.
for that in this so glorious sort, ye become a town set upon a hill, a candle
upon a Candlestick, 1. Cor. 4. Phi. 1.
a spectacle unto the world, and to the Angels, and unto men. So that, as we to
our great comfort do feel, ye also may assuredly say with S. Paul, that the
things which happen unto us, do chance unto the great furtherance of the
Gospel: so that our bonds in Christ are manifest, not only throughout all the
judgment hal, but in all whole Europa, in so much that many of the brethren in
ye Lord being encouraged through our bonds, dare more boldlye speak the word
without fear. And herein as you have with S. Paul greatly to rejoice: so we
do rejoice with you, and we do in deed with you give thanks for this excellent
worthy favor of our God toward you, that Christ is thus magnifyed in you, yea
and hereafter shall be magnifyed in your bodies, whether it be through life or
death. Of which thing truly we are assured in our prayers for you, and
ministering of the spirit. And although for your own parts Christ is unto you
life, and death advantage, and that your desire is (as in deed it were better
for you) to be loosed, Phil. 1.
and to be with Christ, yet for the church of Christ were it much more
necessary, that ye should abide in the flesh: Yea yt merciful god even for his
Christ's sake, grant that ye may abide and continue for the furtheraunce of the
church and reioysyng of faith, that the rejoicing thereof may be the more
aboundau^t through Jesus Christ by your restoring again, Amen, Amen. But if it
seem better otherwise unto the divine wisdom, that by spedy death he has
appointed you to gloryfye him, the Lords will be done. Yea even as we do
rejoice both on your behalfes, and also on our own, that god is magnifyed by
life, and should be more aboundauntlye glad for the continuance thereof: so we
shall no less rejoice to have the same wrought by death. We shall give thanks
for this honor given unto you, phi. 1.
rejoicing that ye are accounted worthy to suffer for ye name of Christ, and
that it is given to you of god not only yt ye should believe in him, but also yt
ye should suffer for his sake. And herein we shall have to rejoice in ye be
half of ye church of Christ, whose faith may be ye faster fixed upon gods
verity, being co^fyrmed with three such worthy witnesses. Oh thanks be to god
for this his unspeakable gift.

And now most reverend fathers, that ye may understand the truth of us and
our estate how we stand in the Lord, I do assure your reuerences, partlye by
that I perceive by such of our brethren as be here in bonds with me, partly
by that I hear of them which be in other places, and partly by that inward
experience which I most unworthy wretch have of Gods good comfort, more
abundaunce whereof I know there is in others: ye may be assured I say (by gods
grace) that ye shall not be frustrate of your hope of our constant
continuance in the chereful confession of Gods everlasting verity. Ephe. i.
For even as we have received the word of truth, even the Gospel of our
salvation, wherein we believing, are sealed with the holy spirit of promise,
which is the earnest of our enheritaunce, Romans 8
the which spirit certifyeth our spirit that we are the children of God, and
therefore God has sent the spirit of his Son into our hearts crying, Abba
father: Gal. 4.
so after such portion as God measures unto us, we with the whole church of
Christ, and with you reverend Fathers, receiving the same spirit of faith,
according as it is written, I believed and therefore I have spoken, we also
believe, and therefore speak. 2. Cor. 4. Psa. 116.
For the which we in this dangerous bondage and other afflictions, having even
such a fight as we have seen in you and have heard of you, phil. 1.
we are in no wise affrayde of our adversaries. And forasmuch as we have such
an office, even as God has had mercy on us, we go not out of kind, but eue^
with you, after our little power, we labor to mainteyne the faith of ye gospel,
knowing most certainly, 2. Cor. 4.
yt though we have this treasure in earthe^ vessels, yt the excellency of the
power might be gods and not ours, yet shall we not be dashed in pieces, for ye
lord will put his hand under us. When we are troubled on every side, yet are we
not without shift: when we are in poverty, we are not utterly without something:
when we suffer persecution, we are not forsaken therein: when we are cast down,
yet we shall not perish: but to communicate with our sweet Savior Christ in
bearing ye cross, it is appointed unto us, that even with him also we shall
be glorified. For it is a true saying: 2. Timo. 2
If we be dead with him, we shall also live with him: If we be patient, we shall
also reygne with him: 2. Cor. 4.
If we deny him, he shall also deny us. Wherefore we be of good cheer
always, bearyng about in our body the dying of the Lord Jesus, yt the life of
Jesus might appear also in our body. For we know that he which raised up the
Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by the means of Jesus, and shall join us
to himself together with you. Wherefore we are not weryed, but though our
outward man peryshe, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. For our
tribulation, which is momentane and light, prepares an exceeding and an eternal
weight of glory unto us, whiles we look not on the things which are seen, but
on the things which are not seen. For the things which are seen, are
temporal: but things which are not seen, are eternal. We testify unto you
reverend fathers, Esaias. 12.
that we draw these waters with joy out of the wells of the Savior. And I
trust we shall continually with you bless the Lord, and give thanks to the
lord, out of these wells of Israel: Apoca. 19.
we trust to be merye together at the great Supper of the Lamb, whose Spouse
we are by faith, and there to sing that song of everlasting Haleluyah. Amen.
Yea come Lord Jesus. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.

To the professors of the Gospel and true doctrine of our Savior Jesus
Christ, in the town of Litchefelde
GRace and peace with continuance in unfeigned faith and a good conscience, be
unto you in Christ Jesus. Amen.

At what time it pleased that gracious god of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
wonderfullye to work the deliverance of their offspring the Israelites, even
as he brought to pass the same by his mighty arm: so did he thereunto
admit man's ministry as his ordinary instrumente, and therefore instructed
first Moses that faythefull servant of his, what was to be done, as also
with what chereful courage he should do the same. These people by the hand of
this Moses, were brought by no small perils, Deuteronomy. 34.
the mydde way toward their promised patrimonye, when as it pleased God to take
unto him self his servant Moses from this miserable vale. In whose place he
appointed Joshua that worthy leader of the Lords people, who not alonely for
his part did boldelye take in hand so dangerous an enterprise, Joshua. 1.
but also with earnest study styrred up his said people with lusty courage
to go forward in the appointed passage of their ieoperdous journey. Yea he
was hable abou^dantly to comfort the^ with such co^fortes as he himself
received of his god, who at sundry times assured him thereof, saying unto him
thus: even as I was with Moses, so will I be with thee, I will not forsake thee,
neither leave thee, be thou therefore of good courage and strong: fear not,
neither be dismayde, for I am with thee in all that thou take in hand. What
soever things be written are written for our doctrine etc.

Dearly beloved, albeit that in these dais it may be said truly that ye have
very few such captains to be compared with Moses or Joshua gods synguler
iewelles, yet that same lord which is no chaungelyng, but even the same
merciful and almightye defendour of all his people at all times: does and
shall in some degree direct you his chosen children in the high way toward
your heavenly inheritance by the hand of a Moses, in some part resembling
these two principal paternes. For though we your brethren, who heretofore by
our vocation have sit in the chair of Moses, and be gostly captains as Moses
and Joshua unto you: though I say we well know and acknowledge how little we
have to boast of, as of our selves, yet this we have to rejoice of in the lord
our god, that as we have been of him appointed unto such a place and function:
so we do not altogether degenerate. For first unto our own strengthening, even
that gracious god which byddeth us to be strong by the operation of his
spirit, performs ye same in some part in us, al glory be unto him therefore.
Also in the word of the lord we testify unto you, to be strong in the lord,
and shrynke not back because of the sundry temptations assaultynge you in the
passage unto your country through the wilderness of this world. Be content to
be proved as those people were. Do not addict your selves unto the fantasing
of the flesh pottes of Egypt, Exo. 16.
most unthankfully relinquishyng the promised possession. We give you to know
what warrantise we have of prosperous success in such our procedinges: no
less (be ye assured) then those former captains Moses and Joshua had. For
besides that all the same most comfortable promises which made them and their
people to be bold to proceed in their enterprise, do belong unto us: we have to
rejoice in our god for his unmeasurable mercies more plentifully powered upon us
by that abou^da^t grace in his dear son our christ, in whom he offreth us
al fulness of favor and beneuole^ce, all readiness of deliverance, appoyntyng
all credit without care to be given unto such a governor. Yea and that same
his Christ, who is made of him our anointed savior, is now become our graunde
captain, yea what is he not unto us to do us good? He is our shepeheard, we be
his people and the sheep of his pasture: he is our husband, we be his spouse.
John. 10 Math. 28.
He has promised to keep his sheep that none shall snatch them out of his
hands. He has promised to be with his church always, yea and that
effectually to be with it, even as the head to give life unto the members and
parts of the body, even as the vine stock to quicken the vine branches, and
even as the most loving husband to tender, cherish, defend, and keep his
well-beloved spouse. Let us be bold to commit our selves unto such a safe
conductor, castyng our care upon him: for were it not that he many times more
cares for us, then we can for our selves, it would not be well with us. Full
little did Peter perceive any cause of greuance for that perilous fall which
after befell. Luke. 24.
But that suffraigne shepeheard before hand espied the spyteful desire of that
woluish Satan to syft his Peter that sely poor sheep: and therefore prayed
unto his father that Peter's faith might not faint. Such a shepehard shall he be
always unto his people, humbly complaining unto him in extreme dangers. And
great cause have we so to do, considering not only the greedy desire of this
Satan most tyrannously ragyng like a roaryng Lion seeking whom he may
devour: but also the imbecillitye in our selves, 1. Pet. 5.
being such as is not hable to withstand the least of his assaults: but on
the contrary being overwhelmed with the waves which be styrred up by these
tempests of his temptations, Math. 8.
we are compelled to cry with these Dysciples, who in their extremity cried,
save us Lord or else we peryshe.

The times be perylous: we must therefore be circumspect and not solace our
selves in carnal security, but being content to enter into the sheep of
Christ's cross and obiecting our selves to al ieoperdous passages in the
adue^turous iorneying to our heavenly country, let us for this present usage
account it comfort enough to have the fellowship of such a fellow venterer.
He once being in the Ship with his Disciples, did with his word aswage the
swellyng of the Sea so dangerous. He has not left us alone in the Ship of
this frail flesh, but joins with us in this dangerous journey, as well by his
once being subject unto all bodily infirmities as we be (sin only except) as
also by his assuryng us of his gracious assistance, now that he is become before
his heavenly father our Prince, our Priest, and our Prophet, always pressed and
ready to help by his power, propitiation, and inspiration of his holy spirit.
And what though he for a season do sleep and do so suffer us (unto our
seemynges) to synke? He will be awaked being pulled by prayer: and therefore
does he delay our spedy deliverance, even to fortifye our faith by importune
prayer. Let us then with instance apply this business, and the rather in
respect of the dangerous do^ing of this old age of the world. For it is with
the men of this latter age of the world as it is with a very aged man, who for
impotency of the powers both of ye mind and the body, is brought to much
imbecillitye. Then do the wits by weakness wander out of the way. The body
by feablenes and defaulte of the former strength does stagger and full weakly
does any lymme or part of that wretched body execute the function unto it
belongyng. In like manner is it with the church of Christ in this do^yng old
age of the world. There is nothing such fulness in gods graces as heretofore
has been in the primative church and the times immediately ensuyng. There is
less perfection in the faith, fear, and love toward god, and charity
toward the brethren. There is less zeal to confess god, and less
constancy to continue in gods truth, then was heretofore. And this is not
strange unto them which do observe the fore-speakings of the scriptures, as well
of the prophets of our savior Christ, as also of his apostles, by whom it
has been signified before hand what dangerous days should come in the latter
times, as Math. 24, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. Timoth. 2. Timo. 3.2. Peter. 2.

Wherefore let us which are come into these latter dangerous times, first
consider how that the holy ghost has given us warnyng thereof, and also that we
by proof have experience of the verifying of the same: let us now (I say) the
more earnestly apply our humble petition unto that mercyful father and his
son our sweet savior, who is the head of his church, even this his body
(weak though it be) that he will vouchsafe not so much to observe the
backeslidyng and shrinkyng of this his feeble body: as to respect the
forspeakynges of these perilous times, and let us with and in the name of the
whole church, remember often the prayer of David Psalm. 71. Lord cast me not
away in ye time of mine old age when my strength does decay. That time of the
church is even now present: and truly if we be instance in prayer, we be not
without warrantise of gods promises to obtain that we pray for. Psalm. 40.
Math. 24. 1. Cor. 10
Yea call upon me (says he) in the day of thy trouble and I will deliver thee.
For the electes sake it is said the dangerous days shall be shortened. Yea
faithful is he that will not suffer us to be tempted above that we be able to
abide. We may be bold to put our gracious god in remembrance of his old
mercies, Psalm. 44.
and with Deuid say, oh god we have heard with our ears and our fathers have
declared unto us the noble works that thou dyddest in their days and in the
old time before the^. The testimonies of his word do teach us how he has from
the beginning always gathered unto himself a congregation and church, unto the
which his chose^ church he has bound him self by his covenant of mercy to be
their god and savior, and besides that has powered upon them his sundry
blessings and benefits. But again it is to be seen in the scriptures, how
that even these peculier gods people, did at sundry times fall from that their
heavenly profession, as well to Idolatrye and false Gods service, as also unto
dissolute living, thereby prouokyng gods wrathful plagues and punishments, the
which in deed oftentimes, as they were often deserved, so they fell upon them.
But even as ye god of Israel did visit the offenses of his people with his
rod of chastisement: so did he not at any time take away his mercies from
them, Psalm. 89.
and that for that covenant of mercy made unto them in Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob their forefathers. And therefore when at any time through his grace they
did by repentance turn unto him, he most fatherly embraced the^ with the
arms of his mercy.

These things be written for us, that we in semblable wise should consider
first the dignitye whereunto we have been called, that is even to be his church
and people. Yea in comparyng our profession with either the heathenish Turks and
infidels, or unto the people which are professed unto this hypotriticall
papistrye: we have to advance our selves as the true children of Christ, for
that we bear the right badges of gods true people, and that is the earnest
desire toward the propagation of gods most holy word, and the right use of the
sacraments agreeable to the same, having joined there with a readiness of heart and
mind to suffer affliction and persecution for the confession of our faith, or
at the least rather then we will deny or put away faith and a good conscience.
And besides these outward notes and tokens declaryng ye we be the true church
there is a nearer token in gods elect, which is the inward testimony of gods
spirit, which bears witness unto our spirit that we be gods children, Romans
8
causyng us to cry Abba father, and being in deed the earneste penny of our
salvation.

But notwithstanding that we be thus promoted by our god, and dignifyed by his
graces, yet must we consider how unworthily we have used in sundry wise, these
gods graces and blessyngs: yea so unthankfully we have received the^, that no
less plagues by gods just judgment, belong unto us, then was at that time
due unto those his people. Wherefore let us faithfully confess that we have
offended with our forefathers. The which being done in our conversion unto the
Lord our God with our whole heart, Psalm. 89.
let us assure our selves that even as he has and does visit our sins with
this captivity of body and conscience and such other plagues being his rod of
chastisement, so has he not taken away his mercy from us: but will plentifully
visit us with the same, even for that covenant of mercy made unto us, not in
Abraham, Isaac, and David, but in that promised sede of Abraham, in that
spiritual David eue^ Jesus Christ, who is that peaceable Solomon, making peace
between us and his Father by the offering of his body and sheedyng of his
blood, by whose means we must look for the gilt of our sins to be
forgeuen and the plagues thereby purchased to be taken away. And now (dearly
beloved) we be taught by that heavenly spirit which our god has given unto us,
to seek comfort in these times of affliction, not in hope of rebellion or
fulfillyng unprofitable, yea pestilent welshe prophecies, but in the most
comfortable and glad tidings of ye heavenly promises assured in his dear
Christ.

And touching this most miserable estate of the ghostly captivity of conscience
and bodily bondage, wherein for our sins presently we be holden: let us first
most obediently kiss this rod of our father by obedience submission, to
abide al extremity that man may do unto us, rather then to forgo faith and a
good conscience. Let us also beseech our heavenly father for his christ's
sake, to leave of beating us and to take away the rod, either by conuertyng
the hearts of those which afflicte and persecute us (for so did he sometime
take away the rod, as namely by conuertyng of Nabuchodonozer, and Manasses)
or else if such wicked scourges be not to be converted, but be reprobates,
vessels of gods wrath, children of perdition, such upon whom it pleases god
to show his iudgementees, and in whom he will show his power: If I say they
be such, let us wyshe most earnestly that our God will spedely arise that his
and our enemies may shortelye be scattered. Yea he knows what these execrable
erecters of the Romyshe religion are. They be the proud builders of the
Babilonicall Tower. They will clyme up into Gods kingdom by their own
attempts, not expectyng and waiting for Gods help. Yea that lord be judge
betwixt them and us. He knows that as their buildinges tend unto the
destruction of that true and only foundation Christ: so our buildyng by Gods
word has and does tend to the substantial laying of that only
foundation, and to the establyshyng of Christ's chosen church upon that same
rock, with an unfeigned faith and pure conscience, and also unto the building
upon the same faith al fruitful works of the Spirit, to serve GOD in holiness
and ryghteousnes, etc. Tit. 2.
Yea that ever living Lord knows the earneste desire of our hearts, is even
the greedy expectation of the glorious coming of that great judge, unto whose
judgment, (lo heaven and earth be witness and ye Gods Saynctes) we do
appeal: in the mean season abidyng our Gods good pleasure to do with us that
may most redounde unto his glory whether to live or dye, nothing doubtyng in
him to be strengthened merely, and chearefully to make a sacrifyce and burnte
offering for the confirmation of this infallible veritye taught by us, and
once received of you. And join with us dear fellow heirs as we join with you
in humble prayer, that even as all we be by says handfasted unto our husband
and knytte unto our head Jesus Christ, and also be kyndled by love one to an
other, as mutual members in this mystical body: so we may persevere and
continue unto the end, and that by and in our Christ we may increase more and
abound in the spirit of grace and prayer, whereby to fetch all heavenly
influence from that our head Christ one for an other, even as in the body
one member mynistreth unto an other, Amen, Amen.

In the Marshalsee. 17. October. 1554. A prisoner in the Lord trustyng shortly to
be with the Lord. L. Saunders

To maystres Lucye Harryngton a godly gentlewoman, and friendly in his trouble
to him and his.
YOur most gentle commendations, whereof this messenger made remembrance unto
me, was for two causes very comfortable. First for that thereby I understood
of the stare of your health and bodily welfare, for the which I give thanks
unto GOD, who grant the long continuance thereof to his honor and fatherly
good will, whereunto I will daily say, Ame^. And father I was refreshed by the
expressing of your myndful friendship toward me far unworthy thereof. Wherein I
take occasion of much rejoicing in our so gracious a god and merciful
father, who as he has in his unmeasurable mercy by faith handfasted us his
chosen children unto his dear son our Christ, as the spiritual spouse of
such an heavenly husband: so he lynketh us by love one unto another, being by
that bond compacte together with charitable readiness to do good one unto an
other: so that first to the glory of our god and his christ, then to our own
ioying in the testimony of a good conscience, and last of all to the stoppyng
of the mouths and confusion of our adversaries, we bear the badge as the
right spouse of our Christ, which he himself notes in this his saying: John.
13.
herein shall all men know that ye be my disciples, if ye love one an other.
Then farther by this bond of mutual love, is set forth the fatherly providence
of god toward us his children: that though it be he which cares for us, in
whom we live, move and be, who feeds all flesh with bodily sustenaunce, yet
has he appointed us in these present necessities, to stand in his stead one
unto an other. Wherein is not only set forth our dignitye, but also that
unspeakable accord and unity among us the many members in this mystical body.
And though that either for lack of hability, or else through distaunce of
place, power and opportunity of helpyng one another do fail: yet wonderful
is ye workyng of gods children through the spirit of prayer, as whereby they
fetch all heavenly influence from Christ their celestial head by his
spirit, John. 15
to be measured severally as may serve to the mayntenance of the whole body.
Thus does our faithful prayer which we make one for an other, distribute and
scatter gods bountiful blessings both ghostly and bodily when ordinarye
habilitye lacks, and when the arm may not reach such gods riches. According
hereunto I well perceive and understand your readynesse to do good unto all,
and especially I have experience of your ready good will toward me in your
hearty desire to stretch out your helpyng hand to releue my lack, and of your
help to be extended to me in the other spiritual sort by your good prayer, I
doubt not: as I also therein assure you of my help, being all that I may do,
and yet the same not so much as I would do. My need concerning bodily
necessaryes, is as yet furnyshed by Gods provision, so that I am not driven to
any extremity wherefore to be burdenous to you, as your gentle benevolence
provoke me, the Lord reward you therefore. If god make me worthy to be his
witness at this present in giving this corruptible body to burn for the
testimonye of his truth, it is enough for me to say unto you that I have a pore
wife and child who^ I love in the Lord, and whom I know for my sake you will
tender when I am departed hence. To be short, I say unto you as I say unto my
self, rejoice in the Lord, cast your care on him, for he cares for us etc.
and according to the time present, let us with our Christ and all his dear
Disciples weep, let us with him (I say) weep a while that we may laugh with
him everlastingly. Apoc. 7.
Let us consider of what sort of people they were whom Saint John by
Revelation did behold in the heavenly bliss and everlasting joy. These are
they (said the Angel unto him) which came out of great tribulation and made
their garments white in the blood of ye lamb, and therefore are they in the
presence of the seat of God and serve him day and night in his temple, and
he that sits in the seat will dwell among them, they shall hunger no more,
neither thurst, neither shall the Sun light on them, neither any heat, for ye
Lamb which is in the midst of the seat shall feed them and shall lead them
unto fountaynes of living water, and God shall wype away all tears from their
eyes. Though we sow in sorrow, we shall reap in great joy, and for this
hopes sake we seek the things above and forsake the things present. I beseech
you give most hearty salutations unto my good Lady Fitzwilliams, unto whom I
wyshe as to you and to my self in all good things. The grace of God be always
with you and that good family, Amen.

L. S.

An other letter to Maistres Lucie Harrington.
GRace and mercy etc. It happens oftentimes ye abundaunce of matter bringing
with it much vehemency of friendly affection, makes men dumme: and even then
chiefly when there is most eger pupose of speaking, silence does suppress, and
causes the party so affected, imperfectly to express that he goes about to
utter. Such impediment by much matter myngled with feruencie of affection,
feel I sometimes in my self lettyng the vtteraunce either by tongue or writing
of the abundance of the heart. The love of our most gracious God and
heavenly Father bestowed upon us in the merits of his Christ our Savior,
who may by concepte of mind comprehend, passing in deed all understanding?
much less may the same by any means be expressedly uttered. And as such
heavenly blessings which by faith we fetch from above, be inexplicable: so is
it hard to utter, when the faithful are set on fire by love, their readynesse
to reach forth and to give by charity, as by faith they have received. But
(alas) we carye this treasure in earthen vessels: many times faith is feeble
and then love loses her fervor. Pray we therefore, Lord increase our faith,
and love forthwith will be on fire. And immortal thanks be given unto our
God, who in our Christ has bestowed upon us the first fruits of his
spirit, who cries in our hearts Abba Father. Romans 8.
And (as S. Paul says) seeing we have the same spirit of faith, according as
it is written I believed and therefore have I spoken: we also believe and
therefore we speak: yea God knows this spirit puts in us a mind to
speak, 1. Cor. 4
but in attempting thereof, we are driven with Moses to say, O Lord, I am
slow mouthed and of uncircumcised lips, and with Ieromye, O Lord I can not
speak. Albeit that this infancye restrayneth the openyng of such abundance
of heart in my tender Christian duty to be declared toward you, yet I
beseech you let this be settled in your understanding, that as S. Paul
expresses unto his Corinthians that they were in his heart either to live or to
dye, with many other such sayings uttered unto them and the Galathians,
expressing his vehement affection toward them: so in some part I would be
like affected toward all Gods children, and especially toward you whom I
know in Christ, and to whom I will not say, how much I am indebted. I thank
you for your great friendship and tender good will toward my wife: yea that
good gracious God recompense you, which may worthily with the more
countreuaile the same and fulfill that which lacks of thankful duty in us.
And because of that which heretofore I have conceived of you and of your love
more then natural toward me and mine: I make my self thus bold to lay this
burden upon you, even the care and charge of my said poor wife, I mean, to
be unto her a mother and a mystres to rule and direct her by your discrete
Counsel. I know she conceaueth of you the same that I do, and is thankeful
unto God with me for such a friend, and therefore I beseech you even for Christ's
sake, put never from you this friendly charge over her whether I live longer or
shortly depart. But to charge you otherwise, thanks be to God, neither I
neither she have any such extreme need: if we had, I would be as bold with
you as mine own mother. I beseech you give my hearty salutations unto Master
Fitzwilliams and my good Lady, with thanks also for my poor wife and child,
the Lord recompense them.

L. S.

To his godly and faithful wife and to his dear friends Master Robert
Harrington and Master Hurland.
GRace and comfort etc. Dear wife rejoice in our gracious God and his our
Christ, and give thanks most humblye and heartily to him for this days
work, that in any part I most unworthy wretch should be made worthy to bear
witness unto his everlasting verity, which Antichrist with his, by main
force (I perceive) and by most impudent pride and boasting, will go about to
suppress. Remember God always my, dear wife, and so shall Gods blessyng light
upon you and our Samuel. O remember always my words for Christ's sake: be merry
and grudge not against God and pray, pray. We be al merry here thanks be unto
god who in his Christ has given us great cause to be merry, by who^ he has
prepared for us such a kingdom, and does and will give unto us some little taste
thereof even in this life, and to al such as are desirous to take it. Blessed
(says our Christ) be they which hunger and thirst after righteousness, for
such shall be satisfied. Let us go, yea let us run to seek such treasure, and
that with whole purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord, to find such riches
in his heavenly word through his spirit obtained by prayer. My dear friends
and brethren Master Harrington and Master Hurlande, Pray, pray. Math. 26.
Spiritus quidem promptus est caro autem infirma. When I look upon my self,
quid ego stupidus and attonitus habeo quod dicam, Luke. 5. Psa. 119.
nisi illud Petri, exi a me domine quia homo peccator sum. But then feel I that
sweet comfort, lucerna pedibus meis verbum domini and lumen semitis meis, and
hec mea est consolatio in humilitate mea. John. 6.
Then wax I bold with the same Peter to say, domine ad quem ibimus, verba
vitae eternae habes. This comfort have I when the geuer thereof does give it.
But I look for battles which the rote of unfaithfulness, the which I feel in
me, will most egerlye give unto my conscience when we come once to the
combat. We be (I ween) within the sound of the trompe of our enemies, play
ye that be abroad the part of Moses orantes in omni loco, sustollentes puras
manus, and Gods people shall prevail, yea our blood shall be their perdition
who does most triumphantly spil it, and we the^ being in the hands of our god,
Sapien. 5.
shall shine in his kingdom and shall stand in great stedfastnes against them
which have dealt extremely with us. And when these our enemies shall thus see
us, they shall be vexed with horrible fear, and shall wonder at the hastines of ye
sudden health, and shall say with themselves having inward sorrow and mourning
for very anguish of mind: these are they who^ we sometime had in derisio^ and
iested upon: we fools thought their lives to be very madness and their end to
be without honor; but lo how they are accounted among the children of God.
The blessyng of God be with you al. Salute I pray you my sister B. S. with other
our friends in the same house, gods grace keep the^ with all the reast of our
godly acquaintance, lovers of the truth and furtherers of the true confession
of the same: who^ al I bid most heartily to be merry in the lord rejoicing in
hope, preparing them selves to be pacient in tribulation with co^tinuaunce in
prayer. Let some body bye for me a pensill of lead to write with all, for I
shall hardly have pen and Ink here since al liberty of writing is taken away
from us.

L. S.

An other letter to his wife and to Master Harrington and Master Hurland.
GRace and comfort, etc. Wife you shall do best not to come often unto the grate
where the porter may see you. Put not your self in danger where it needs not:
you shall I think, shortly come far enough into danger by keeping faith and a
good conscience, which (dear wife) I trust you do not slack to make rekoning
and account upon by exercising your inward man in meditation of Gods most holy
word, being the sustenaunce of the soul, and also by giving your self to
humble prayer: for these two things be the very means how to be made members
of our Christ mete to inherit his kingdom. Do this (dear wife) in earnest,
and not leaving of, and so we two shall with our Christ and all his chosen
children, enjoy the merry world in ye everlasting immortality, where as here
will nothing else be found but extreme misery, eue^ of the^ which most greedely
seek this worldly wealth: and so, if we two continue Gods children graffed in
our Christ, the same Gods blessing which we receive, shall also settle upon our
Samuel. Though we do shortly depart hence and leave the poor Infant (to our
seeming) at al adventures, yet shall he have our gracious God to be his God, for
so has he said and he can not lie: I will be thy God says he and the God of
thy sede. Yea if you leave him in the wild wilderness destitute of all help,
being called of God to do his will either to dye for the confession of Christ,
either any work of obedyence: that God which heard the cry of the little
poor infant of Agar Saraes handmaiden and did succor it, will do the like to
the child of you or any other fearyng him and putting your trust in him. And
if we lack faith, as we do indeed many times, let us call for it and we
shall have the increase both of it and also of any other good grace needful
for us, and be merye in GOD, in whom also I am very merye and joyful. O Lord
what great cause of reioysyng have we, to think upon that Kingdom which he
voucheth safe for his Christ's sake, frelye to give us, forsakyng our selves
and following him? Dear wife this is truly to follow him, even to take up
our cross and follow him, and then as we suffer with him, so shall we reygne
with him everlastingly, Amen. Shortly, shortly. Amen.

My dear friends Master Harrington, and Master Hurland, Pray pray, and be
merye in God, and I beseech you as you may, let the good brethren abroad be
put in mind of our dear tried brethren and sisters who have (the Lord be
praised) made known their constancye in confessyng the truth to the glory of
GOD and comfort (I doubt not) of his Church abroad. Thus have they sown
spiritual things confessing Christ. I trust they will not be forgetful that
they may reap of them which are of ability and at liberty their carnal
things. Hereof I speak now, because of my tender desire toward these dear
brethren here now in bonds and in other places, and also for that I doubt
whether I may have wherewith to write hereafter. The keeper says he must
needs see that we write not at al. The devil roreth but be of good cheer, he
will shortly be trodden under foot and the rather by the blood of Martyrs.
Salute in my most hartye manner good Masters Harrington and my good Lady. F.
I am theyrs as long as I live and pray for them: desire them to do likewise
for me and for all us sheep appointed to the slaughter.

A prisoner in the Lord, Laurence Saunders.

An aunsweare to a friend of his who sent to know what Doctor Weston did at
the Marshalse.
Master Weston came to confer with M. Grymbold and what he has with him
concluded I know not: pray that it may be to Gods glory. Amen. Master Weston
of his gentleness visited me and offered me friendship in his worldly wilye sort
etc. I had not so much manner to take it at his hands, saying that I was well
enough and ready chearefully to abide the extremity to keep thereby a good
conscience. You be a sleep in sin said he. I would awake (qoth I) and do not
forget vigilate and orate, and. what church was there (qoth he).xxx years past?
What church was there in Helias time quoth I etc. Ioane of Rent (quoth he) was
of your Church. No (qoth I) we did condemn her as an heritike. Who was of
your church (quoth he) xxx. years paste? Such (quoth I) as that Romyshe
Antichrist andhis rabble had reputed and condemned as heretics. Wicliffe,
Thorpe, old castle (quoth he) etc. Yea (quoth I) with many mo as stories do tell.
The bishop of Rome has (quoth he) long time played aparte in your railing
sermons, but now be ye sure he must play an other manner of part. More pity
(quoth I) and yet some comfort it is to see how that the best learned, wisest,
and holiest of you al, have heretofore had him to play a part likewise in
your sermons and writings, though now to please the world, ye turn with the
wethercocke. Did you ever (quoth he) hear me preach against ye bishop of Rome?
No (quoth I) for I never heard you preach, but I trow you have been no wiser
then other etc. Pray, pray. God keep that familye and bless it.

Laurence Saunders.

To his wife and other of his dear friends and lovers in the Lord.
GRace and comfort in Christ Jesus our only comfort in all extreme assaults
be with you, Amen.

Feign would this flesh make strange of that which ye spirit does embrace,
Oh Lord how loathe is this loytryng sluggard to pass forth in Gods pathe? It
fantasieth forsooth much fear of fraybugges, and were it not for ye force of
faith pulling it forward by the bridell of Gods most sweet promises, and of
hope pricking on behind, great adventure there were of faynting by the way.
But blessed and everlastingly blessed be that heavenly father of ours, who in
his Christ our sufficient Savior, has vouched safe so to shine in our hearts,
that he gives us the light of the knowledge of the glory of god in the face of
Jesus Christ, and having this treasure in our earthen vessels that the
excellency of the power might be Gods, 2. Cor. 4
and not ours: we are, according to his good will, troubled on every side, yet
are we not without shifte, we are in pouertye, but yet not without that is
sufficient, we suffer persecution, but are not forsaken therein, we are cast
down, nevertheless we peryshe not, we bear in our body the dying of the
Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus might appear also in our bodies.
Wherefore by the grace of our Christ we shall not be weryed nor be dismayed by
this our probation through the fire of affliction, as though some strange
thing had happened unto us: but by his power we shall rejoice, in as much as we
are pertakers of Christ's passions, that when he does appear, we may be merry
and glad, knowing that our tribulation which is momentane and light, prepares
an exceeding and eternal weight of glory unto us, not looking on the things
which are seen, but on the things which are not seen. They that sow in tears
shall reap in joy: Psa. 126.
he that goes on his way now weping and scatters his good sede, shall
doutlesse come again with joy and bring his sheaues with him. Then then shall
the Lord wipe away al tears from our eyes. Then then shall be brought to pass
the saying that is written, 1 Cor. 15
Death is swalowed up in victory, Death where is thy sting? hell where is thy
victory? Yea thanks be to god who has given us the victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ, Amen. Now then in the mean season it remains for us to follow
s. Peter's biddyng. 1. Peter. 4.
Let them says he, that are troubled according to the will of god, commit
their souls to him with well doing as unto a faithful creator and maker. He is
our maker, we be his handyworke and creatures, who^ now when he has made, he
does not so leave and forsake as ye carpenter does the ship, leauyng it at al
adventures to be tossed in the tempest, but he comfort us his creatures,
Acts. 17
and in him we live, move, and have our being. Yea not only that, but now that
he has in his dear Christ repaired us being before utterly decayed, and
redeemed us, purging us unto himself as a peculier people by the blood of his
son, he has put on a most tender good will and fatherly affection toward us,
never to forget us unto who^ by such sure promises he has plyghted such
faith, that though it were possible that the mother could forgette her infant
and not be tender hearted to ye child of her womb, Esaias. 49.
yet may it not be yt his faithful beleuers should with him fall into
forgetfulness. He byddeth us to cast our care on him, and tells us that he
assuredly cares for us. 1. Pet. 5.
And what though for a season he suffers us to be tormoyled in ye troublous
tempests of temptation, and seems in much anger to have given us over and
forgotten us? Let not us for all that leave of to put our trust in him, but let
us with godly Job conclude in our selves and say: yea though he kyl me, Job. 13
yet will I put my trust in him. Let us with the blessed Abraham in hope even
contrary to hope, by belief, leave unto that our loving Lord, who though for
our probatio^ he suffers us to be afflicted and proved for a season, yet will
he not be always chiding, neither keeps he his anger for ever: for he knows
whereof we are made, he reme^breth that we are but dust. Psa. 103.
Wherefore look how high ye heaven is in comparison of ye earth, so great is his
mercy toward the^ which fear him. Look how wide ye East is from the West, so
far has he set our sins from us. Yea, like as a father pitieth his own
children, even so is the lord mercyful unto the^ that fear him. Oh what great
cause of rejoicing have wetherfore in our most gracious god? We cannot but
burst out into the praising of such a bou^tifull benefactor, and say with the
Psalmist: Praise the lord O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy
name. Praise the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.

My dear wife, riches I have none to leave behind me wherwyth to endow you
after the worldly manner, but that treasure of tastyng how sweet Christ is unto
hungrye consciences (whereof, I thank my Christ I do feel part, and would
feel more) I bequeath unto you, and to the rest of my friends, to al you I say
yt love me in ye Lord, to retayn ye same insense of heart always. Pray, pray.
I am merye, and I I trust shall be merry in the fpyght of all the Devils in hell.
I utterly refuse my self and I resign my self wholly unto my christ, in whom I
know I shall be strong as he sees nedeful. Pray, pray, pray.

L. Saunders.

To his Wife.
GRace mercy and peace in Jesus Christ our lord.

Entierly beloved wife, even as unto mine own soul and body, so do I daily in
my hearty prayer wyshe unto you, for I do dailye twyse at the least in this
sort remember you. And I do not doubt (dear wife) but that both I and you,
as we be written in ye book of life, so we shall together enjoy ye same
everlastingly through the grace and mercy of god our dear father in his son
our Christ. And for this present life, let us wholly apoynte our selves to the
will of our good god to glorify him either by life or by death, and even that
same merciful Lord make us worthy to honor him either way, as pleases him,
Amen. I am merry I thank my god and my Christ, in whom and through whom I
shall (I know) be hable to fight a good fight and fynyshe a good course and
then receive the crown which is laid up in store for me and all the true
soldiers of Christ. 1. Timo. 4.
Wherefore wife let us in the name of our God, fight lustely to overcome the
flesh, the devil and the world. What our harness and weapons be in this kind
of fight, look the vi. unto the Ephesians, and pray, pray, pray. I would
that you make no suit for me in any wise. Thank, you know whom, for her most
sweet and comfortable puttyng me in remembrance of my journey whether I am
passing. God send us al good speed and a joyful meetyng. I have to few such
friends to further me in that journey, which is in deed the greatest frendeship.
The blessyng of god be with you all. Amen.

A prisoner in the Lord. Laurence Saunders.

To his Wife.
GRace mercy and peace. etc. Dear wife even that our merciful God and most
loving father, whom we call upon daily and of whose mercies we daily taste, and
who will be a most tender father unto all the^ which heartily turn unto him,
believe in him and cast their care upon him, that our good god (I say) even for
his son our sweet Christ's sake be your helper and keeper, Amen, Amen. And now
you see his goodness toward you by many ways, prouokyng you to embrace him
as your only god and only comfort. He is more ready mercifully to receive you
the^ you can be ready to run unto him for help. He says by his prophet, I
will favor them even as a father does favor his child that offends. Esaias.
49.
And in an other place is it possible that a mother can forget her child which
she has borne? If she be forgetful, yet will not I forget thee. Thus says he
unto al such as unfeignedly seek him. You be in the Lords bonds and in his
blessed tuition, I do not doubt. Commend your self and that which he has
given you unto his merciful and blessed will, and so do I and shall do by his
goodness. Exercise your self in the comfortable remembrance of gods manyfold
and merciful promises. Put him in remembrance of the same by often prayer,
and put your whole trust in him who for his names sake, his promise sake, and
for his Christ's sake, will do that is best for you. Commend me to all the godly
there. Send me word in any wife if you lack. Take heed that you be no more
chargeable unto them at whose house you be, then you shall fully content them,
in any wise. God keep you.

A letter written to Steven Gardener Bishop of VVynchester and then Lord
Chancellor, as an answer to some things wherewith he had before charged him.
TOuching the cause of mine imprisonment, I doubt whether I have broken any law
either proclamation. In my doctrine I did not, forasmuch as at ye time it was
permitted by the proclamation to use according unto our co^scie^ces such
service as was the^ established. My doctrine was the^ agreeable unto my
conscience and the service then used. He means the public preaching of gods
word in his own paryshe.

This proclamation was to inhibite the preaching of gods holy word.


The act which I did was such as being indifferently weighed, sounded to no
breaking of the proclamation, or at least to no wylful breakyng of it, for as
much as I caused no bell to be ronge, neither occupied I any place in the
pulpit after the order of Sermons or lectures. But be it that I did break the
proclamation: this long time of continuance in pryso^ may be thought to be more
then sufficient punishmente for such a fault. Touching the chargyng of me with
my religion, I say with S. Paul: Confiteor hoc, quod iuxta viani qua^ voca^t
haeresim, Acts. 24
sic colo patriu^ deu^, credens omnibus quae in lege et prophetis scripta sunt,
spem habe^s in deu^, etc. Quin in hoc et ipse studeo sine offendiculo
conscientiam habere erga deum et erga homines semper. That is to say: this I
confess, that after the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of
my forefathers, beleuyng all things which are written in the law and
prophets, and have hope toward God. etc. And herein I endeavor my self to
have always a clear conscience toward God and toward men: So that GOD I
call to witness I have a conscience. And this my conscience is not grounded
upon vain fantasye, but upon the infallible veritye of Gods word, with the
witnessyng of his chosen church agreeable unto the same. It is an easy thing
for them which take Christ for their true pastor, to discern the voice of
their true shepeheard, from the voice of wolves, hirelynges and strangers,
forasmuch as Christ says: John. 10
Oues meae vocem meam audiunt. That is, my sheep hear my voice. Yea and thereby
they shall have the gift to know the right voice of the true shepehard, and so
to follow him and to avoid the contrary, as he also says: Oues pastorem
sequuntur quia nouerunt vocem eius: altenum vero non sequuntur, sed aufugiunt
ab eo, quia non noueruut vocem alienorum. That is, the sheep follow the
shepeheard, for they know his voice: a stranger will they not follow but fly
from him, for they know not the voice of a stranger. Such inward inspiratio^
does the holy ghost put into the children of God, being in deed taught of god,
but otherwise unable to understand the true way of their salvation. And albeit
that the wolf, as Christ says, comes in shepes clothyng, yet he says, ex
fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos. That is, by their fruits ye shall know them.
For there be certain fruits whereby the wolf is bewraied, notwithstanding
that otherwise in sundry sorts of devout holiness in outward show, he seems
never so simple a sheep. That the Romish religion is rauenyng and woluishe, it
is apparent in three pryncipal points. First it robs god of his due and
only honor. Secondly it takes away the true comfort of conscience in
obscuring or rather burieng of Christ and his office of salvation. Thirdly it
spoyleth god of his true worship and service in spirit and truth appointed in
his prescript co^maundeme^ts, and dryueth men unto ye inconvenience against the
which Christ with the prophet Esaias does speak sharplye: Populus hic labijs me
honorat, cor autem eorum long a me est, sed frustra me colunt docentes
doctrinas and praecepta hominu^. Esaias. 26. Math. 25.
That is, this people honors me with their lyppes but their heart is far
from me: they worship me in vain teaching the doctrine and precepts of men.
And in an other place: Reijcitis mandatum Dei vt traditionem vestram statuatis.
That is, ye cast away the commandments of god, to maynteyne your own
traditions Wherefore I in conscience wayeng the Romyshe religion, and by
indifferent discussyng thereof, fyndyng the foundation unsteadfast, and the
buildyng thereupon but vain: and on the other side having my conscience framed
after the right and vncorrupt religion, ratified and fully established by the
word of god and the consent of his true church: neither may nor do intend by
gods gracious assistance, to be pulled one jot from the same, no though an
angel from heaven should preach any other doctrine. Explicita fide^ is called
of the scholemen that faith whereof a reason may be given, and implicita fides
is called that simple faith which leans only to the church although there
can no reason be given thereof.
And although either for lack of so learned knowledge and profound judgment,
or of so expedite utterance of that I do know and judge as shall be required, I
shall not be able sufficiently to answer for the conuincing, of the again sayer:
and albeit I cannot explicita fide (as they call it) conceive all that is to be
conceived, discuss all that is to be discussed, effectually express all that
is to be expressed: Nevertheless, I do bynd my self, as by humble simplicity,
so by my fidem implicitam (as it is called) to wrappe my belief in the credit
thereof, that no aucthority of that Romysh religion repugnaunte thereunto, shall
by any means remove me from the same,

A prisoner in the Lord L. Saunders

To his wife and other of his friends after his condemnation to the fire and a
little before his death.
GRace in Christ, with the consolation of the holy ghost, to the keeping of
faith and a good conscience, confyrme and keep you for ever vessels to gods
glory. Amen.

Oh what worthy thanks can be given to our gracious god for his unmeasurable
mercies plentifully powered upon us? And I most unworthy wretch cannot but at
this present from the bottom of my heart power out the bewaylyng of my great
ingratitude and unkindness toward so gracious a god and loving a lord. I beseech
you al, as for my other many sins, so especially for this sin of mine
unthankfulness against god, crave for me in your commendyng me unto gods mercy
in Christ by your hartye prayers, pardon and forgeuenes. To stand to number
these mercies in perticulars, were to number the drops of the sea, ye sand on
the shore, and the stars in the sky. Oh my dear wife and ye the rest of my
friends that love me in the lord, rejoice, rejoice with me, rejoice (I say)
with tha^kesgeuing for this my present promotion to be made worthy to magnify
my god, not only in my life by my slow mouth and uncircumcised lips to hear
testimony unto his truth, but also by my blood to seal the same to the glory
of GOD and confyrming of his church. And as yet, I testify unto you the comfort
in my sweet christ does drive from my phantasy the fear of death. But if my
dear husband do for my trial leave me alone to my self, I know in what case I
shall then be: but if for proof he do so, I am sure he will not be far from
me. Though he stand behynd the wall and hyde himself (as Solomon says in his
mystical ballade) yet will he peep in by a crest to see how I do. Cant. 2.
He is so tender hearted a Joseph that though he speak roughlye to his brethren
and handle them hardly, yea and put his best beloved brother Be^iamin in
prison, yet can he not conteyne himself from weepynge with us and upon us,
with clipping us about the neck and kyssing us: such a brother is our Christ
unto us all. Wherefore hasten to go unto him as Jacob did and his sons and
family, leauyng their own country and acquaintance. Yea this Joseph of ours
has obtained for us his brethren, that Pharao the infidele shall minister unto
us charetres wherein to be carried to come unto him: as we have experience how
our very adversaries help us unto our everlasting bliss by their speedy
dispatche, yea how all things have been holpynges unto us blessed be our God.
And be not afraid of fray bugges by the way: fear rather the everlasting fire,
fear the serpent that has a stynge, and that is this bodily death to them
which are not graffed in Christ, being without faith and a good conscience,
and so not acquainted with Christ the kyller of death. But (O my dear friends
and brethern) we we, whom God has delivered from the power of darkness and
has translated in to the kingdom of his dear son by puttyng of the old
man and by faith puttyng on the new, even our Lord Jesus Christ, his
wisdom, holiness, righteousness and redemption: we I say have to triumph against
that terrible and spiteful serpent the devil, sin, death, hell, and
damnation, for Christ our brazen serpent has pulled away the stinge thereof,
1 Cor. 15
so that now we may boldly in beholding the serpente this bodily death spoiled
of her stinge, triumph and with our Christ and all his elett say, O death
where is thy sting? O hell where where is thy victory? Thanks be unto god who
has given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Wherefore be merry my dear friends and brethren, always remember the Lord my
fellow heirs of the everlasting kingdom: rejoice in hope, be patient in
tribulation, continue in prayer, and for us pray now already appointed to ye
slaughter, yt we may be unto our heavenly father a fat of ^ring and an accepted
sacrifice. I may hardly write unto you, To this his flock he Wrote also a
fruitful lette^ exhorting and chargyng the^ to beware of the Romish religion,
which is not yet come to light
wherefore let these few words be a witness of co^mendations to you and all the^
which love us in the faith, and namely unto my flock, emo^gs who^ I am now
reside^t by gods providence, but as a prisoner. And although I am not emo^ges
the^ as I have been to preach to the^ out of a pulpit, yet does god now preach
unto the^ by me and by this mine impriso^me^t and captivity which now I suffer
emo^ges the^ for christ's gospels sake byddyng them to beware of the Romish
Antichristian religion and kingdom, requiring and charging them to abide in
the truth of Christ, which is shortly to be sealed with the blood of their
pastor, who though he be unworthy of such a ministry, yet Christ their high
pastor is to be regarded, whose truth has been taught them by me, is
witnessed by my chains, and by his power shall be by my death also. Be not
careful good wife, cast your care on the Lord and commend me unto him in
repentaunt prayer, as I do you and our Samuel, whom even at the stake I will
offer, as my self unto God. Fare ye well all in Christ, in hope to be joined
with you in joy everlasting. This hope is laid up in my bosom, Amen, Amen.
pray, pray.

Out of the Counter in Breadstreate L. Saunders

To his Wife and other of his friends.
GRace and comfort in Christ, Amen. Dear wife be merry in the mercies of our
Christ, and ye also my dear friends. Pray, pray for us every body. We be
shortly to be dispatched hence unto our good Christ, Amen, Amen. Wife I would
you sent me my shirte which you know whereunto it is consecrated. Let it be
sowed down on both the sides and not open. Oh my heavenly father look upon me
in the face of thy Christ, or else I shall not be hable to abide thy countenance,
such is my fylthines. He will do so, and therefore I will not be afraid what
sin, death, hell, and damnation can do against me. O wife always remember the
Lord. God bless you, yea he will bless thee good wife and thy poor boy
also: only cleave thou unto him and he will give thee all things. Pray,
pray, pray.

To master Robert Glouer and John Glouer two worthy brethren, as in the
flesh, so in the Lord, the one afterward a Martyr, the other a faithful
confessor.
MY dearly beloved and mine own hearts in the lord. M. Glouers, with all yours
and ye rest which with you unfeignedly fear god and comfort your selves in his
swear Christ: I beseech you be thankeful unto that merciful Lord always for
his unspeakable goodness and among other, for me his most unworthy minister. I
thank my God Christ, I was never better acquainted with him in all my life, and
I perceive he is no less loving then his word warranteth him to be. Be
thankful I say, and pray, pray: multum valet deprecatio iusti. I was at this
present much occupied, else I would have enlarged in some matter needful
etc. The devil roreth because he can not have his foul will he must be at
length (I ween) eased by the blood of Gods Saints, and yet that shall be
his bane be he sure, and that shortly by gods goodness. Be merry and fear not
little flock, says our sweet comforter, Luki. 12.
for it pleases your father to provide a kingdom for you. Etiam Amen. Veni
domine Jesus veni cito. The heavenly blessing of god be with you all.

In the Marshalse. 28. October. 1553. A prisoner of the Lord, the Lords name be
blessed forever, Laurence Saunders.

An other letter to. M. Glouers, written the same morning that he was burnte.
GRace and consolation in our sweet savior Christ.

Oh my dear brethren whom I love in the Lord, being loved of you also in the
Lord, be merye and rejoice for me now ready to go up to that mine
inheritance, which I my self in deed am most unworthy of, but my dear Christ
is worthy, who has purchased ye same for me with so dear a price. Make haste
my dear brethren to come unto me that we may be merry, eo gaudio quod nemo
tollet a nobis. Oh wretched sinner that I am, not thankful unto this my Father,
who has vouched me worthy to be a vessel unto his honor. But O Lord,
now accept my thanks, though they proceed out of a not enough circumcised
heart. Salute my good sisters your wives: and good sisters fear the Lord.
Salute all other that love us in the truth. Gods blessing be with you always.
Amen. Eue^ now toward the offering of a burnte sacrifice. Oh my Christ help
or else I peryshe.

Laurence Saunders.

A letter written to a certain backeslyder from the truth of Gods word,
which he had both professed and taught: the which, because it is thought of
some, albeit not certainly known, to be written by. M. Saunders, we have here
annexed unto his letters.
IN mine own name and in the name of many other your old familiars and
acquaintance, I do write unto you in heuines of heart, for that we have heard of
your fall. Oh how much better had it been for you never to have set your hand
to the plough then negligently to look back, yea and folishly to follow that
plough that tilleth not gods field, but turns up the roots of that seed
which in times past you your self have sowe^. Alas how folish a builder were
you that would enterprise to build upon the rock Christ, seeing in your
self not only the lack of those things which be required to the finishyng
of that work, but also the lack of a will to have them, as appears by that
that you go about to overthrow that little which you seemed to have
myghtely builded upon that rock. How folyshe a virgin have you declared
your self to be which have gone forth to meet the bridegroom and tarried so
long for his coming not having oil in stoore, Math. 25.
but are now driven when you hear the voice of the forerunner, to seek at
them that sell? You bancketed with the children of the bridegroom so long as he
was with us, but now he is gone, you leave us alone to fast. You were
contented to be fed at Christ's hand with five thousand, but when he wills
you not to seek the meat that perysheth, you depart. The children of Israel
were much to be blamed, for that they desired to be in Egypt again, and yet
was their lack and labor then more in deserte then yours in London. Alas
wretched man what has caused thee thus to cast away thy self once knowing
the truth, and to take in hand to be a minister in Antichrists Church? Art
thou so sone weary of the heavenly Manna and so ready to return to thy old
vomit again? we thought thou had been so clean escaped through the
word of grace, that thou had been a worthy man, to be a comfort to them
that stand, a succor to the weak, and an help to them that fall: and art
thou now roled in thy filthye pudle again, and art become an helper to put
other into the same? Oh more then damnable doings, the forgeuenes whereof far
passes the hope of man. And were it not that things impossible to man are
possible with God, we should utterly despair of thy return. But knowing that
with God there is no impossibility, we will not only aduertyse thee to remember
from whence thou art fallen, that thou may seek to rise again, but we
will also pray that he to whom thy return is possible, will vouchsafe of his
infinite mercyes to work it in thee. Thou haste with Judas sold thy most
loving and gentle Master: repent thee Peter and no doubt thou shall find
mercy. To fall is a thing annexed to the corrupt nature of man, but to lie
still in the filthye puddle of perdition, is to despise God the author and
first maker of nature. To fall into the darkness of error is a point of man's
ignorance: but to walk on still in darkness, is to love darkness more then
light. To wyncke at the bryghtnesse of the Sun, is a weakness of the eyes,
but to fly the light is to be of the night. To leave the rough way that
leads unto life, and walk in the pleasant way that leads unto perdition,
is to love this life: but not to leave ye way when we are warned, is to
despise the life to come. Breefely to leave the good things undone that god
commands, and to do that evil which he forbyddeth, is to deserve
everlasting damnation at his hand that rewards every man according to his
works: but not to repent of that evil when God calls by his means, is to
kindle ye wrath of God against the impenitent and obstinate sinner. Least you
therefore should be found a despiser of God the author of nature, a lover of
darkness more then light, not of the day but altogether of the night, a lover
of this life and an hater of ye life to come, and finally such a one as would
kindle the wrath of God against you: repent and come again to Christ.
Remember what joy there is in heaven among the Angels at the conversion of a
sinner. Forget not thy merciful spouse which would not cast of the adulterous
Israel when she had committed whoredom with stocks and stones notwithstanding
that he had purged her from her filth and married her to him self. Be mindful
of that loving Lord, which has said, I will not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he convert and live, Ezechi. 18.
and in what day so ever the sinner does repent him of his sin from the
bottom of his heart, I will remember his iniquity no more. No werynesse should
dyscourage us to bear the Lords armor or to fight under his banner, nor lack
cause us to shrink from him.
What should separate us from the love of this Lord? What should make us to
fly from this our captain? Should the werynesse of an arm? should the lack
of such things as the fantasy would have? Better it were for us to enter into
life with werye arms and thynne chekes, then with lovely countenaunces and
lustye limbs to be cast into hell fire. Make not provision for the flesh with
the loss of your soul. Believe him that has promised all things necessary to
them that seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof. He has not at
any time deceived you: why then should you seek such shameful shifts to make
provision for the flesh? Have not you your self had experience of the care
that he takes for them that put their trust in him? And now why are you
fallen from him for the bellyes sake? This have I written to call you back
again, if you be not clean gone out of the way, but and if you be so
given over to error that you think light to be darkness and darkness to be
light, good to be evil and evil to be good, Christ to be Beliall and
Beliall to be Christ, the temple of God to be the Sinagoge of Satan, and the
Sinagoge of Satan to be the temple of God: then have I nothing to say unto
you, but the Lord confound both you and all such. But with Gods grace we
trust to hear better of you.

The.20. of September. 1555.
A letter sent to Master Farrer B. of S. David's. Doctor Taylour. M. Bradford,
and. M. Philpot: which, albeit it was written before his condemnation, we
thought good here to place as it came unto our hands.
GRace mercy and peace in Jesus Christ our Lord etc.

Good Fathers and dear brethren, be thankful unto our most gracious God,
which has preserved us, and shall (I doubt not) from blasphemyng his blessed
name: yea not only that, but also, ex ore infantium and lactentium perficiet
laudem etc. They offer us (on Gods name) our liberty and pardon, so that we
will rise with them unto that faith which we with them were fallen from. Yea
or no, must be answered in haste. They will not admit any needful
circumstances, but al (as heretofore) most detestable and abominable. Rise
with them we must unto the unity. A pardon (say I) of me must not be so
dearly purchased. A pardon I desire, for to live with an vnclogged conscience.
The Donatistes say they, sought for such singularity, but they were not mete
to live in a common wealth, no more be you, as you shall shortly understand.
Wherefore away with him, yea the time was named with in this seven night. There
be.12. hours in the day. John. 1^
Death shall be welcome (say I) as being looked for long since, and yet do
justice ye were best, for Abels blood cried you wot what. The spirit of God
be upon you and God save your honors. Thus departed I from them. Pray pray.
Ah, Ah, Puer sum, nescio loqui. My brother P. shall show you more herein. By him
send me word what you have done. Fare ye well and pray pray. I would gladlye
mete with my good brother Bradford on the back side about a.xi. of the
clock. Before that time I can not start out, we have such out walkers, but
then will they be at dynner.

Yours as you know, Laurence Saunders.

An other letter written also before his condemnation to Maistres Harrington:
which, as it is here last in order, coming last unto our hands, so it seems
to be the first he wrote unto her.
GRace, mercy, and peace in Jesus Christ, Amen.

Such is the knot wherewith true Christians are compacte and joined together as
members in the mystical body of Christ, that no man can express the
commodityes so well as they which thereof have experience, and yet neither can
they by words be able to utter that which therein the conscience conceaueth,
passing (in deed) al understanding. And hereof ca^ I unworthy wretch somewhat
speak of experience, for that by exercise of the inward man and practice of
conscience, I have some acquaintance with my good God and his sweet Christ,
and namely now in this my present estate it pleases that merciful Lord to
give me some taste of his mercyes by the assurance and the sealing up of his
gracious promyses in my conscience by his holy spirit, whereby I do feel
the incomparable benefit of his heavenly blessing powered upon us his chosen
congregation. 2. Timot. 1. John. 15
We be called in Christ with an holy vocation: we be graffed in him as
branches in that so heavenly a vine: we be knit unto him as the sundry
members of that body whereof he only is the head, in whom all the body is
coupled together in every ioynte, Ephesians. 4.
wherewith one ministers unto another according to the operation, as every part
has his measure, and increases the body unto the edifying of it self in
love, and we be handfasted unto him as the spiritual spouse of so heavenly an
husband, Ephe. 5.
even flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone: so that to the faithful
beleuer what can be lacking unto perfect felicity in such a communion and
precious pertaking with Christ in all heavenly treasures? For from him we may
fetch aboundaunt fulness to supply our extreme emptines: we be quick in him as
lively branches in the vinestocke: We be made a live unto god in him, as
members of the body do live by the head, and we be by faith in him accepted as
his dear spouse, and in this matrimonial bond and covenant he has made with
us a most happy exchange. He has taken unto him what we brought, and gives
us all that is his be it never so precious: so entierlye he loved us. Thus be we
made rich in him, as many as thus know him and thus do believe him to be ours.
And blessed be that heavenly father who has hid these things from the wise
and prudent, Luke. 10.
and has reveled the same unto his chose^ little ones, Phillip. 3.
who with holy Paul do count al things but loss, and do judge the^ but dong
for the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus the Lord, to win him and to be
found in him not having righteousness of themselves, but ye ryghteousnes which
comes of God through faith in Christ, in knowing him and the virtue of his
resurrection and the fellowship of his passions, to be comfortable unto his
death whereby to attain the resurrection from death. This, this, is that
treasure hid in the field, whereof is spoken Math. 13. Math. 13.
the which a man finds and hides and for joy thereof goes and sells all that he has and byeth that field. This is that precious pearl etc.

Now even as the conceyuing of this communion and fellowship which we have with
Christ, brings such peace as passes all understanding: so (as I said) the
Christian knittyng of faithful beleuers in this Christ's mystical body, is
unto the understanders a joyful joining and enjoying, and a profitable
fruition one of an other: as in the body one member thereof ministers unto an
other, thereby taking comfort one in an other, Ephe. 4.
whereof Saint Paul most liuelye and comfortablye speaks in the.4 Chapter
to the Ephesians. which words be above mentioned. The bond of this compactyng
and knittyng of us together, is love. For even as our head Christ by his
unmeasurable mercy and unspeakable love toward us does assure him self
unto us to be one with us, we being in him and he in us: so this love is by
his spirit powered into our hearts, whereby we be taught, that the faithful
beleuers as they are in number many, so are they in Christ many members
making be but one body. And hereof ensues the careful compassion and
chereful rejoicing of one for an other, as occasion requires. Hereof proceeds
not only a thankefulnes unto God for his graces received, but also a
continual perseueraunce in praying one for an other, thereby to purchase the
mutual pertaking of his manifold blessings nedeful for us. And finally hereby
is wrought in us a lively feling of a spiritual welfare, even as in the body
one member is the better forth welfare of the other: and thus much hereof.
Which as I do not amplify as an idle speculatio^ without some practyse of ye
same: so must I confess that I am far from that feling which I ought and
also would have thereof. Notwithstanding I yield most humble thanks unto my
God, who has practiced me insome comfortable unfeigned experience of the same,
and as I somewhat have felt, so I somewhat have spoken. And yet the rather do I
rejoice to enlarge herein unto you (my dear Christian friend good Maistres
Harrington) for that I do well know, 2. Cor. 4.
that you have drunk of the holy spirit with other, unto who^ the knowledge
hereof seems not folyshnes (as it does unto worlynges) but is in deed, ye
wisdom of God, and the high power of God to save all them that believe it. And
for because I do esteem you as one of the members belonging unto that mystical
body, I do with no small comfort many times remember you, giving god thanks for
you, and daily do I by name remember you in my prayers, yea and also your
family, that you may in the fear of god consider your great charge, and that
the rather by your abiding in the true reverend fear of God, they whom you
have charge of, may be vertuouslye transformed into the same, Amen, Amen.

I doubt not but yt you have learned the losson of. s. Paul unto his Timothy:
1. Timot. 1.
have faith and a good conscience, the which while some have put from them,
they have made shipwreck of their faith. I know I shall not need to bid you
fly from Idolatry, yea yt most detestable idol of ye mass. The Lord minister
unto you right understanding in all things, and pray, pray, and for me also, for
I know I both have and shall fare the better for your prayer. I can tell you by
expeerience that our Christ is even that sweet savior that we have taken him
to be, and he will be the helper at an extreme pinch. Oh how sweet is he unto
them that will be the simple sheep of his pasture? They can say with the faith
of David: Psa. 23.
the lord is my shepehard, and I shall lack nothing. etc. I can be merry in him
I thank him therefore, and I thank you for your remembrance of me, whereof I
understand by your letters unto master James Haddon. I would not refuse the
blessyng of your benevolence, in ministryng unto my necessity, if my case so
required: but I thank god I am not as yet in any need, therefore be not you
therein careful. And for this time no more but pray pray, and I pray that good
god, even our own god to keep you always, Amen. In have the 21. of
November.1553. a prisoner in in the Lord.

Yours as you know L. Saunders.

Certain godly verses not here to be omitted, which he wrote to his prison
fellows of the Marshalsee.
THe grace of God declared is in Christ his son most dear,
And teaches us in holiness, to live in his true fear.
Whosoever then in that heavenly birth, a child is rightly borne,
His fathers will he follows, and thereunto is sworn.
Children of love their fathers will do lovingly embrace,
Servants of fear their masters will to do, do somewhat pass.
To children and to servants both the rod does often times reach
The children and the servants both, the rod does penance teach.
All ye therefore which here remain in strait captiuitee.
Be servants unto righteousness, from sin be lose and free.
Be myndefull of all duty due unto the Lord above,
Be thankful for his benefits, the pledges of his love.
Consider with your selves (I say) to sanctifye the Lord,
In every place continually by thought, deed, and by word.
L. Saunders.

Letters of that hearty and zealous man of God Master John Philpot Archdeaco^
of Winchester: who, besides the great tyranny and torments which he suffered
in Boners blind colehouse, and other his paynfull imprisonments, was also most
cruelly martyred for the testimony of the Lord Jesus. The.18. day of December
in the year of our Lord.1557.
A letter which he sent to the Christian congregation, exhortyng them to
refrain themselves from the Idolatrous service of the papists, and to serve
god with a pure and undefiled conscience after his word.
IT is a lamentable thing to behold at this present in England, the faithles
departing both of men and women from the true knowledge and use of christ's
sincere religion, which so plentifully they have been taught and do know, their
own consciences bearyng witness to the verity thereof. Hebr. 6.
If that earth be cursed of god, which eftsoues receiving moisture and
pleasant dewes from heaven, does not bring forth fruit accordyngly, how much
more grievous judgment shall such persons receive, which having received from
the father of heaven the perfitte knowledge of his word by the mynistery
thereof, do not show forth gods worship after the same: If the lord will
require in the day of judgment a godly usury of all manner of talentes
which he lends unto men and women, Math. 25.
how much more will he require the same of his pure religion reveled unto us
(which is of all other talentes the chiefest and most perteynyng to our
exercise in this life) if we hid the same in a napkyn and set it not forth to
the usury of gods glory, and edifieng of his church by true confession? God
has kindled the bright light of his gospel, which in times paste was
suppressed and hyd under the vile ashes of man's traditions, and has caused the
bryghtnes thereof to shine in our hearts, to the end yt the same might shine
before men to the honor of his name. It is not only given us to believe, Math
5. Romans x Math. 12. Luke. 12. Math. 7
but also to confess and declare what we believe, in our outward conversation.
For as S. Paul writes to the Romans, the belief of the heart iustifyeth, and
to knowledge with the mouth makes a man safe. It is all one before god not to
believe at al, and not to show forth the lively works of our belief. For
Christ says, either make the tree good and his fruits good, or else make the
tree evil and the fruits evil, because a good tree brings forth good
fruits: so that the person which knows his masters will and does it not,
shall be beaten with many strypes. And not all they which say lord lord, shall
enter into the kingdom of God, but he that does the will of the father. Luke. 9
And whosoever in the time of trial is ashamed of me (says Christ) and of my
words, of him the son of man will be ashamed before his father. After that we
have built our selves in to the true church of god, it has pleased him by
geuyng us over into the hands of the wicked Sinagoges to prove our buildyng,
Math. 7.
and to have it known as well to the world as to our selves, that we have been
wise builders into the true church of god upon the rock, and not on the sand,
and therefore now the tempest is risen and the storms do mightily blow against
us, that we might notwythstandyng stand vpryghte and be firm in the Lord, to
his honor and glory and to our eternal felicitye. There is no new thing
happened unto us, for with such tempests and dangerous weathers the church
of GOD has continuallye been exercised. Now once again as the Prophet
Aggey tells us, the Lord shakes the earth, Aggeus. 2.
that those might abide for ever which be not overthrown.

Therefore my dearly beloved be stable and immovable in the word of god, and
in the faithful observation thereof, and let no man deceive you with vain
words saying, that you may keep your faith to your selves, and disse^ble with
Antichriste, and so live at rest and quietness in the world, as most men do,
yeldyng to necessity. This is the wisdom of the flesh, Romans 8 1 Cor. 6.
Math. 16.
but the wisdom of the flesh is death and enmitye to god, as our savior for
ensample aptely did declare in Peter, who exhorted christ not to go to
Jerusalem to celebrate the passover and there to be slain, but councelled him
to look better to himself. Likewise the world would not have us to forsake
him, neither to associate our selves to the true church, which is the body of
Christ, whereof we are lively members, and to use the sacraments after gods
word, with the danger of our lives. But we must learn to answer the world as
Christ did Peter and say: go behynd me Satan, thou sauourest not the things of
god. Heb. 11. Psa. 116.
Shall I not drink of the cup which the father gives me? For it is better to
be afflicted and to be slain in the church of god, then to be counted ye son
of the king in the Sinagoge of false religion. Death for righteousness is not to
be abhorred but rather to be desired, which assuredly brings with it ye crown
of everlasting glory. These bloodye executioners do not persecute Christ's
Martyrs, but crown them with everlasting felicitye. We were borne into this
world to be witnesses unto the truth, both learned and unlearned. Now since
the time is come that we must show our faith, and declare whether we will be
gods servants in righteousness and holiness, as we have been taught and are
bound to follow, or else with hypocrisy serve unrighteousness: let us take good
heed that we be found faithful in the lords covenant and true members of
his church, in the which through knowledge we are ingraffed, from the which if
we fall by transgression with the comme^ sort of people, it will more
straightly be required of us tha^ many yet do make account thereof. We cannot
serve two masters. Luke. 18. 3. Reg. 18 Apoc. 3.
we may not halte on both sides, and think to please god: we must be fervent
in gods cause, or else he will cast us out from him. For by the first
commandment we are commanded to love God with all our heart, with al our
mind, with all our power and strength: but they are manifest tra^sgressours of
this commandment, which with their heart, mind, or bodily power do
communicate with a strange religion contrary to the word of god in the
papistical Synagoge, which calls it self the church and is not. As greatly do
they offend god now which so do, as the Israelites did in times past by
forsakyng Jerusalem the true church of God, 3. Reg 13.
and by going to Bethell to serve God in a congregation of their own setting
up and after their own imaginations and traditions, for the which doing god
utterly destroide all Israel, as all the prophets almost do testifye. This
happened unto the^ for our ensample, that we might beware to have any fellowship
with any like congregation to our destruction. God has one catholic church
dispersed throughout the world, and therefore we are taught in our creed to
believe one catholic church, and to have communion therewith, which catholic
church is grounded upon the foundation of the prophets and of the apostles and
upon none other, as S. Paul witnesses to the Ephesians. Ephe. 2.
Therefore where so ever we perceive any people to worship god truly after that
word, there we may be certain the church of christ to be, unto ye which we
ought to associate our selves, and to desire with the Prophet Dauyd, Psalm. 2.
to praise god in the midst of this church. But if we behold through ye
iniquity of time, segregations to be made with cou^terfayt religion, otherwise
then the word of god does teach, we ought than if we be required, to be
companions thereof, Psalm. 26 Apoc. 2
to say again with Dauyd I have hated the Sinagoge of the malignant and will
not sit with the wicked. In the Apocalips the church of Ephesus is hyghly
commended, because she tried such as said they were apostles and were not in
deed, and therefore would not abide the company of them. Further, god commanded
his people that they should not seek Bethell, neither enter into Balgala where
idolatry was used, by the mouth of his prophet Amos. Also we must conside,
Amos. 5 1. Cor. 3.
that our bodies be the temple of god, and whosoever (as S. Paul teaches)
does profane the temple of God, him the Lord will destroy: may we than take
the temple of Christ and make it the member of an herlotte? Al strange
religion and idolatry is counted whoredom with the prophets, and that more
detestable in the sight of God, the^ the aduoutrous abuse of the body. Therefore
the princes of the earth in the revelation of saint John, Apo. 17
be said to go a whorynge when they are in lone with false religion and follow
the same. How then by any means may a christian man think it tolerable to be
present at the popyshe private mass, which is the very profanation of the
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, and at other Idolatrous
worshiypynges and rites, which be not after the word of god, but rather the
derogation thereof, in setting man's traditions above gods precepts, since god
by his word judges all strange religion, which is not according to his
institution, for whoredom and aduoutry?

Some fondely think that the presence of the body is not material, so that
the heart do not consent to their wicked doyngs. But such persons little
consider what S. Paul writes to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 6.
commaundyng them to glorify God as well in body as in soul. Moreover we can
do no greater iniurye to the true church of Christ, then to seem to have
forsaken her or disalowe her by cleaning to her aduersarye, whereby it
appears to others which be weak, that we allow the same, and so contrary to
the word, do give a greet offense to the church of God, and do outwardly
slander (as much as men may) the truth of Christ. But woe be unto him by whom
any such offense comes. Better it were for him to have a mylstone tied about
his neck and to be cast into the bottom of the sea. Such be traitors to the
truth like unto Judas, who with a kiss betrayed Christ. Our God is a gelous
god, and cannot be content that we should be of any other body then of that
unspotted church whereof he is the head only, and wherein he has planted us by
baptism. This gelousy which god has toward us, will cry for vengeance in
the day of vengeance, against al such as now have so large consciences to do
that which is contrary to gods glory and the syncerity of his word, except they
do in time repent and cleave unseparably to the gospel of Christ, Mar. 8.
how much soever at this present both men and women otherwise in their own
corrupt judgment, do flatter themselves. God wylleth us to judge uprightly,
and to allow and follow that which is holy and acceptoble in his sight, and to
abstain from all manner of evil, and therefore Christ commands us in ye
gospel to beware of the leaven of ye Phariseis which is hypocrisy. Heb. 10
S. Paul to the Hebrews says, that if any person withdraw himself from
faith, he shall not be approved in his judgment, and therefore he says also,
that we are none such as do withdraw our selves unto perdition, but we belong
unto faith for the attayneme^t of life. Apoc. 13
S. John in the Apocalips tells us plainly that none of those who are written
in the book of life, do receive the mark of the beast, Ephe. 5. phil. 2
which is of the papystical Synagoge, either in their foreheades or else in
their hands, that is apparauntly or obediently. S. Paul to the Philippians
affyrmeth that we may not have any fellowship with the works of darkness, but
in the myddest of this wicked and froward generation, 2. Cor. 6.
we ought to shine like lights up holdyng the word of truth. Further he says
that we may not touch any unclean thing, which sygnifyeth, that our outward
conversation in forreyne things, ought to be pure and undefiled as well as
the inward, that with a clean spirit and rectifyed body, we might serve god
justly in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. Apoc. 18
Finallye in the 18. of the Apocalips god byddeth us plainly to depart from
this Babilonical Synagoge, These. 3
and not to be pertakers of her trespass. S. Paul to the Thessalonia^s
commands us in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, to wythdrawe ourselves
from every brother yt walks inordinatelye and not according to the
institution which he has received of him.

Ponder therefore well good brethern and systers these Scriptures which be
written for your erudition and reformation, whereof one jot is not written in
vain, which be utterly against all counterfaite collusion to be used of us
with the papists in their fantastical religion, and be adversaries to al
them that have so light consciences in so doing, and if they do not agree with
this adversary (I mean the word of God) which is contrary to their
attemptes, Math. 5
he will as it is signified in the gospel, deliver them to the judge which is
Christ, and the judge will deliver them to the executioner, that is the devil,
and the devil shall commit the^ to the horrible prison of hell fire, Math. 24.
where is the portion of all hypocrites with sulphur and brimstone, with
wailing and gnashing of teeth world without end. But yet many will say for their
vain excuse, god is merciful and his mercy is over al. But The scripture
teaches us, that cursed is he that synneth upon hope of forgeuenes. Truth it
is, that the mercy of God is above al his works, and yet but upon such as
fear him, for so is it written in the psalms: Psa. 102.146.
the mercy of GOD is on them that fear him, and on such as put their trust in
him. Where we may learn that they only put their trust in god that fear him,
and to fear god, is to turn from evil and to do that is good. So that such
as do look to be pertakers of gods mercy, may not abide in that which is known
to be manifest evil and detestable in the sight of god.

An other sort of persons do make them a cloak for the rayn under the pretense
of obedience to the magistrates, whom we ought to obey although they be
wicked. But such must learn of Christ to give to Caesar yt is Cesars, and to
god that is due to god, Luke. 20. 1. Peter. 2.
and with S. Peter to obey the higher powers in the Lord albeit they be evil,
if they command nothing contrary to gods word, otherwise we ought not to
obey their commandments although we should suffer death therefore: as we have
the apostles for our example herein to follow, who answered ye magistrates as
we ought to do in this case, not obeying their wicked precepts, saying: judge
you whether it be more ryghteous that we should obey men rather then GOD.
Acts. 4. Daniel. 6. Math. 15
Also Daniell chose rather to be cast into the den of Lions to be devoured,
the^ to obey the kings wicked commandments. If the blind lead the blind,
both fall into the ditche. There is no excuse for the transgression of gods
word, whether a man do it voluntarily or at commandment, although great
damnation is to them, by whom the offense comes. Some other there be that for
an extreme refuge in their evil doyngs, do run to gods predestination and
election, saying: that if I be elected of god to salvation, I shall be saved
whatsoever I do. But such be great temptours of God and abominable
blasphemours of gods holy election, and cast themselves down from the pynacle
of the temple in presumption, that god may preserve them by his angels through
predestination. Such verily may reckon themselves to be none of gods elect
children, that will do evil that good may ensue, whose damnation is just as S,
Paul faith. Gods predestination and election ought to be with a simple eye
considered, Romans 3.
to make us more warely to walk in good and godly conversation according to
Gods word, and not to set cock in the hoope and put all on Gods back to do
wickedly at large, for the elect children of God must walk in ryghteousnes
and holiness after that they be once called to true knowledge: for so says
Saint Paul to the Ephesians, Ephe. 1.
that God has chosen us before the foundations of the world were laid that
we should be holy and blameles in his sight. 2. Peter. 1.
Therefore Saint Peter wills us through good works to make our vocation and
election certain to our selves, which we know not but by the good workyng
of Gods spirit in us, according to the rule of the Gospel, and he that
transformeth not him self to the same in Godly conversation, may iustlye
tremble and doubt that he is none of the elect children of God, but of the
viperous generation, and a child of darkness. For the children of light, will
walk in the works of light and not of darkness: though they fall, Prove. ^4
John. 12
they do not lie still. Let all vain excusations be set a part, and whiles ye
have light, as Christ commands, believe the light and abide in the same,
John. 3.
least eternal darkness overtake you unawares. The light is come into the
world, but alas men love darkness more then the light. God give us his pure
eyesalue to heal our blyndnes in this behalf. O that men and women would be
healed, and not seek to be wilfully blinded. The Lord open their eyes, Heb.
6.10*
that they may see how dangerous a thing it is to declyne from the
knowledge of truth contrary to their conscience. But what said I conscience?
many affirm their conscience will bear them well enoughe to do all that
they do, and to go to the Idolatrous Church to service, whose conscience is
very large to satisfye man more than God. And although their conscience can
bear them so to do, yet I am sure that a good conscience will not permit
them so to do, which can not be good unless it be directed after ye
knowledge of Gods word, and therefore in Latin this feelyng of mind is called
Conscientia, which sounds by interpretation, with knowledge. And therefore
if our conscience be led of her self, and not after true knowledge, yet we
are not so to be excused, as Saint Paul bears witness saying, 1. Cor. 4. 1.
Timo, 1.
although my conscience accuses me not, yet in this I am not justified. And
he joins a good conscience with these three sisters, charity, a pure heart,
and unfeigned faith. Charity keeps Gods commandments, a pure heart loves
and fears God above all, and unfeigned faith is never ashamed of the
profession of the Gospel, what soever damage she shall suffer in body
thereby. The Lord which has revealed his holy will unto us by his word,
grant us never to be ashamed of it, and give us grace so earnestlye to
cleave to his holy word and true Church, that for no manner of worldly
respect we become partakers of the works of hipocrisye, which God does
abhor, so that we may be found faithful in the Lords Testamente to the
end both in heart, word, and deed, to the glory of God, and our everlasting
salvation, Amen.

John Philpot prisoner in the Kings Benche for the testimonye of the truth.
1555.

To his dear friend in the Lord John Careless prisoner in the kings Bench.
MY dearly beloved brother Careless, I have received your loving letters full of
love and co^passio^, in so much yt they made my hard heart to weep, to see you
so careful for one that has been so unprofitable a member as I have been and
am in Christ's Church. God make me worthy of that I am called unto, and I pray
you cease not to pray for me, but cease to weep for him who has not deserved
such gentle tears, and praise God with me, for that I now approach to the
company of them, whose want you may worthily lament: god give your pitiful heart
his inward consolation. In deed my dear Careless, I am in this world in hell
and in the shadow of death: but he that has brought me for my deserts down
unto hell, shall shortly lift me up to heaven, where I shall look continually
for your coming and others my faithful brethren in the kings Bench. And
though I tell you that I am in hell in the judgment of this world, yet assuredly
I feel in ye same, the consolation of heaven praise god. And this loathsome and
horrible prison, is as pleasant to me as the walk in the garden of the kings
Bench. You know brother Careless, that the way to heaven out of this life, is
very narrow, and we must strive to enter in at a narrow gate. If God do
mitigate the ouglenes of mine imprisonment, what will he do in the rage of the
fire whereunto I am appointed? And this has happened unto me yt I might be
hereafter an ensample of comfort, if the like happen unto you or to any other
of my dear brethren with you in these cruel days, in ye which the devil so
rages at ye faithful flock of Christ, but in vain (I trust) against any of
us, who be persuaded that neither life neither death is hable to separate us
from the love of Christ's Gospel, which is gods high treasure committed to our
brittle vessels to glorify us by the same. God of his mercy make us faithful
stewardes to the end, and give us grace to fear nothing whatsoever in his good
pleasure we shall suffer for the same. That I have not written unto you erste,
the cause is our strait keeping and the want of light by night, for the day
serves us but a while in our dark closet. This is the first letter that I
have written since I came to prison, besides the report of mine examinatio^s,
and I am feign to scrible it out in haste. Comend me to al our faithful
brethren and bid them with a good courage look for their redemption and frame
themselves to be hearty soldiers in Christ. They have taken his pressed money a
great while, and now let the^ show the^ selves ready to serve him faithfully
and not to fly out of the lords camp into ye world, as many do. Let them
remember that in the Apocalips the fearful be excluded ye kingdom. Let us
be of good cheer for our lord overcame the world, that we should do the like.
Blessed is the servant who^ when the Lord comes, he fyndeth watching. O let
us watch and pray earnestly one for an other yt we be not led into temptation.
Be joyful under the cross and praise the Lord continually, for this is the
whole burnt sacrifice which ye lord chiefly delyghteth in. Commend me to my
father Hunt and desire him to love and continue in ye unity of Christ's true
church which he has begone, and then shall he make me more and more to joy
under my cross with him. Tell my brother Clements that he has comforted me
much by his loving token in signification of an unfeigned unity with us: let
him encreace my joy unto the end perfectly. The Lord of peace be with you all.
Salute all my loving friends, Master Meryng, Master Crooth, with the rest,
and specially Master Marshall and his wife, with great thanks for his kyndnes
showed unto me. Fare well my dear Careless. I have dalied with the devil a
while, but now I am over the shoes, God send me well out.

Out of the Colehouse by your brother John Philpot.

An other letter written to John Careless out of the Colehouse of darkness,
whereby he gives light and heavenly comfort to his heavy and troubled mind.
THe God of all comfort, and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, send unto
thee my dear brother Careless the inward consolation of his holy spirit, in all the malicious assaults and troublous temptations of our common aduersarye
the Devil, Amen.

That god gives you so contrite a heart for your sins, I can not but rejoice
to behold the lively mark of the children of god, whose propertye is to think
more lowlye and vily of themselves, then of any other, and often times do set
their sins before them, that they might the more be styrred to bring forth
the fruits of repentance, and learn to mourn in this world that in an
other they might be glad and rejoice. Such a broken heart is a pleasant
sacryfyce unto God: O that I had the like contrite heart. God mollifye my
stonye heart, which lamenteth not in such wise my former detestable iniquities.
Praised be god that he has given you this sorrowful heart in respect of
righteousness, and I pray you let me be pertaker of these Godly sorrows for
sin, which be ye testimony of the presence of ye holy ghost. Did not ye
sword of sorrow pearce the heart of the elect and blessed mother of our Lord?
Did not Peter weep bitterly for his sins which was so beloved of Christ? Did
not Mary Magdalene was the feet of our Savior with her tears, and received
therwithall remission of her seuenfold sins? Be of good comfort therefore mine
own dear heart, in this thy sorrow, for it is the earnest penny of eternal
consolation. In thy sorrow laughe, for the spirit of God is with thee.
Blessed be they (says Christ) that mourn: Math. 15. Psa. 125. psalm. 51 Luke. 7
for they shall be comforted. They went forth and wept, faith the Prophet:
such shall come again having their gripes full of gladness. And although a
sorrowful heart in consideration of his sin, be an acceptable sacrifice
before God, whereby we are stirred up to more thankefulnes unto God, knowing
that much is forgeuen us that we might love the more: yet ye man of god must
keep a measure in the same, least he be swallowed up by to much sorrow.
Saint Paul would not the Thessalonians to be sorry as other men which have
no hope. Such a sorrow is not commendable, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 2. Cor. 7.
but works damnation, and is far from the children of God, who are
continually sorrowful in god, when they look upon their own unworthiness with
hope of forgeuenes. For God to this end by his spirit sets the sins of
his elect still before them, that where they perceive sin to abound, Romans 5.
there they might be assured that grace shall superabounde, and brings them
down unto hell, that he might lift the^ up with greater joy unto heaven.
Wherefore mine own bowels in Christ, as long as you are not void altogether of
hope, be not dismayde through your pensive heart for your sins how huge so
ever they have been, for God is hable to forgive more then you are able to
sin, yea, and he will forgive him which with hope is sorry for his sins.

But know brother, that as often as we do go about by the help of Gods spirit,
to do that is good, the evil spirit Satan lays hard wait to turn the good
unto evil, and goes about to mix the detestable darnell of desperation with
the godly sorrow of a pure penitent heart. You be not ignorant of his
malicious subtelty, and how that continually he assaulteth that good which the
grace of god planteth. I see the battle betwixt you and him, but ye victory is
yours, yea and that daily. For you have laid hold upon the anchor of salvation,
which is hope in Christ, the which will not suffer you to be made ashamed. Be
not disco^forted yt you have this conflict, but be glad that god has given you
ye same to try your faith, and that you might appear daily worthy of the
kingdom of God, for ye which you strive. God beholds your striving faith
against Satan, and is pleased with your mighty resistaunce. The spirit which
is in you is myghtyer the^ all the adversaries power. Tempt he may, and lying
awayte at your heels, give you a fall unawares: but overcome he shall not, yea
he can not, for you are sealed up already with a lively faith to be the child
of God for ever, and whom God has once sealed for his own, him he never
utterly forsakes. The just falls seven times, but he rises again. It is
man's frailty to fall, but it is the property of the devils child to lie still.
This strife against sin is a sufficient testimony that you are the child of
god, for if you were not you should feel no such malice as he now troubles you
withal. Luke. 11
When this strong Goliath has the hold, al things be in peace which he
posseseth, and because he has you not, he will not suffer you unassaulted. But
stand fast, and hold out the buckler of faith, and with the sweard of gods
promises smite him on the scalpe that he may receive a deadly wou^d and never
be able to stand against you any more. James. 4.
S. James tells you that he is but a coward, saying: resist the devil and he
will fly away. It is the will of god that he should thus long tempt you and not
go away as yet, or else he had done with you long ere this. He knows already
that he shall receive the foil at your hands, and increase the crown of your
glory, for he that overcomes shall be trowned. Therefore glory in your
temptations since they shall turn to your felicity. Be not afraid of your
continual assaults, Ezechi. 33.
which be occasions of your daily victory. The word of god abides for ever: in
what hour soever a sinner repents him of his sins they be forgiven. Who
ca^ lay anything to ye charge of gods elect? Do you not perceive the manifest
tokens of your election? First your vocation to the gospel, and after your
vocation ye manifest gifts of the spirit of god given unto you above many
other of your condition, with godliness which believes and yeldeth to the
authority of the scriptures, and is zealous for the same? Seeing you are gods own
dearling, who can hurt you? Be not of a deiect mind for these temptations,
neither make your unfeigned friends to be more sorrowful for you then need does
require. Since God has willed you at your Baptism in Christ to be Carles, why
do you make your self careful? Cast all your care on him: set the Lord
before your eyes always, for he is on your right side that you shall not be
moved. Behold the goodness of god toward me. I am careless, being fast closed in
a pair of stocks, which pinch me for very straitnes, and will you be careful?
I will not have ye unseemly addition to your name. Be as your name pretends,
for doubtless you have none other cause but so to be. Pray I beseech you yt I may
be still careless in my careful estate, as you have cause to be careless in your
easier co^ditio^. Be thankful and put away al care, and the^ I shall be joyful
in my strayt present care. Commend me to al our brethren, and desire them to
pray for me that I may overcome my temptations, for the devil rages against
me. I am put in the stocks in a place alone because I would not answer to
such articles, as they would charge me with all in a corner at the bishops
appointment, and because I did not come to mass when the bishop sent for me. I
will lie all the days of my life in the stocks (by gods grace) rather then I
will consent to the wicked generation. Pray^e god and be joyful that it has
pleased him to make us worthy to suffer somewhat for his names sake. The devil
must rage for.x. days. Come^d me to master Fokes and thank him for his law
books, but law neither equity will take any place among these blood thirsty. I
would for your sake their unjust dealing were noted unto the Parliamente house,
if it might avail. God shorten these evil days. I have answered ye bishop
metely plain already, and I said to him if he will call me in open judgment, I
will answer him as plainly as he will require: otherwise I have refused because
I fear they will condemn me in hugger mugger. The peace of god be with you my
dear brother. I ca^ write no more for lack of light, and that I have written
I can not read my self, and god knows it is written far vneasely: I pray
god you may pytke out some understanding of my mind toward you. Written in a
Colehouse of darkness out of a pair of paynful stocks by thine own in Christ.

John Philpot.

A letter of John Careless written to Master Philpot, which we thought best here
to place a part from his other letters hereafter followyng, because it is an
answer to the former letter.
A faithful friend is a strong defense, who so finds such a one, finds a
treasure.

A faithful friend has no peer, the weight of gold and silver is not to be
compared to the goodness of his faith.

A faithful friend is a medicine of life, and they that fear the Lord shall
find him. Ecclesiast. 6.


THe Father of mercy and God of all consolation, comfort you with his
eternal spirit (my most dear and faithful loving friend, good Master
Philpot) as you have comforted me by the mighty operation of the same, the
everlasting God be praised therefore for ever, Amen.

Ah my dear heart, and most loving brother, if I should do nothing else day
and night so long as the days of heaven do endure, but knele on my knees and
read psalms, I can never be able to render unto God condign thanks for his
great mercy, fatherly kindness, and most loving compassion extended unto me
most vile, sinful, wicked and unworthy wretch. Oh that the lord would open
my mouth and give me a thankful heart, that from the bottom of the same might
flow his continual praise. Oh that my sinful flesh (which is the cause of my
sorrow) were clean separated from me, that I might sing psalms of
thankesgeuing unto the Lords name for ever: that with good Samuells mother I
might continually record this noble verse following, the which by good
experience I have found most true, praised be my good god therefore. 1 Reg 2
The Lord (says the good woman) kills and makes alive: he brings down to
hell and fetches up again. Praised be that Lord for ever, yea, and praised be
his name, for that he has given me true experience and lively feling of the
same. Blessed be the lord god, whose mercy endures for ever, which has not
dealt with me according to my deep deserts, nor destroyed me in his
dyspleasure, when I had justly deserved it. Oh what reward shall I give again
unto the Lord, for all the great benefits that he has done for my soul? I
will gladlye receive the cup of salvation at his hand, and will worship his
name with prayer and with praise.

Ah my dear heart, yea most dear unto me in the lord, think not this sudden
change in me to be some fickle pha^tasy of my folish head (as in deed some
other would surely suspect it to be) for doutles it is the marvelous doing of
the Lord, most merciful unto me his unworthy creature. God for his great
mercy sake give me grace to be more than full unto him then I heretofore have been, and keep me that I never fall forth of his favor again. And now my dear
brother and most blessed messenger of ye lord, whose beautiful feet have
brought much glad tidings unto my soul, what shall I do or say unto you in the
least part, to recompense your fatherly affection and godly care that you
continually keep for me. Oh that god would give me the spirit of fervent
prayer that I might yet that way supplye some little part of my duty toward
you. Ah my true loving friend, how sone did you lay aside all other business to
make a sweet plaster for my wounded conscience, yea and that out of a painful
pair of stocks, which place must needs be uneasy to write in. But god has
brought you into a strait place, that you might set my soul at liberty. Out
of your pynchyng and payneful seat you have plentifully powered upon me your
precious narde, the sweet savor whereof has greatly refreshed my tired soul.
The lord likewise refresh you both body and soul by pouring the oil of his
gracious Spirit into yours sweet heart. Ah good Jeremy, Jeremy. 20
has Phasure put thee in the stocks? Why now thou have the right reward of
a prophet. Thy glory never began to appear until now. I dout not but shortly
instead of Ahikam the son of Saphan, Jeremy. 26
Jesus the son of the living god will come and deliver thee forth of the
hands of all thine enemies, and will also make good against the^ and the
Antichristian Sinagoge, all the words that thou have spoken in his name.
Jeremy. 1.
The lord has made thee this day a strong defended Tower, an iron pyller and a
brazen wall against the whole rabble of Antichrist, and though they fight
against thee never so fiercely, Jeremy. 15.
yet shall they not overcome thee, for the Lord himself is with thee to help
and deliver thee, and he will rid thee out of the hands of the wicked, and
will deliver thee out of the hands of ye tyra^nes. And in that you are not busy
in casting pearls before swine, Math. 7
nor in giving holy things unto dogs, you are much to be commended in my simple
judgment. And sure I am that your circumspect and modest behavior hitherto
has been as much to gods glory and confusion of your enemies, as any man's
doings that are gone before you. Wherefore mine advise and most earnest desire
is, with all other of your loving friends, that you still keep that order with
those bloodthursty bishops that you have begone. For though in conclusion
they will surely have your blood: yet shall they come by it with shame enough,
and to their perpetual infamy whiles the world does endure. They would in deed
condemn you in hugger mugger to darken gods glory if it might be: but Satan's
thoughts are not unknown to you and the depthe of his subtiliy is by you well
foreseen. Therefore let them do whatsoever god shall suffer them to do, for I
know al things shall turn to your best. Though you lie in the dark, storryed
with the bishops black cole dust: yet shall you shortly be restored to the
heavenly light, psalm. 68
and made as white as snow in Salmon, and as the wyngs of a Dove that is
covered with silver wings and her feathers like gold. You know the vessel,
before it is made bright, is soyled with oil and other things that it may
scour the better. Oh happy be you that you be now in the scouryng house, for
shortly you shall be set upon the celestial shelfe as bright as angels.

Therefore my dear heart, I will now according to your loving request, cast
away all care, and rejoice with you and praise GOD for you and pray for you
day and night. Yea I will now with Gods grace, sing psalms of praise and
thankesgeuyng with you, for now my soul is turned into her old rest again,
and has taken a sweet nappe in Christ's lap. I have cast my care upon the
Lord which cares for me, and will be Careless according to my name in that
respect which you would have me. I will leave out my unseemly addition as
long as I live, for it can take no place where true faith and hope is
residente. So soon as I had red your most godly and comfortable letter, my
sorrows vanished away as smoke in the wind, my spirit revived, and comfort
came again whereby I am sure the spirit of god was author of it. Oh good
master Philpot, which art a pryncipall pot in deed, sylled with most
precious lycour, as it apeareth by the prenceous powryng forth of the fame: oh
pot most happy, of the high potter ordained to honor, which do contain
such heavenly treasure in thy earthen vessel: oh pot chryse happy, in whom
Christ has wrought a great miracle, altering thy nature and turnyng water into
wine and that of the best, whereout the master of the feast has filled my cup
so full, that I am become dronken in joy of the spirit through the same: when
Martyrdom shall break thee (O vessel of honor) I know the fragraunce
sauoure of thy precious narde will much rejoice the heavy hearts of Christ's
true members, although the Indasses will grudge and murmr at the same, yea
and burst out into words of slander, saping: it is but lost and waste. Be not
offended dear heart, at my Metaphorical speech, for I am disposed to be
merye and with David to dance before the Ark of the Lord, and though you play
upon a pair of Organes not very comely or easy to the flesh, yet the sweet
sound yt came from the same causes me thus to do. O that I were with you in
body, as presently I am in spirit, that I might sing all care away in
Christ, for now the time of comfort is come. I hope to be with you shortly,
if all things happen arighte, for my old friends of Couentrye have put the
Counsel in remembrance of me not six dais ago, saying that I am more worthy
to be burnt then any yt was burned yet. Gods blessyng on their hearts for their
good report, GOD make me worthy of that dignity and hasten the time that I
might set forth his glory. Pray for me dear heart I bese^h you and will all
your company to do the same, and I will pray GOD for you all so long as I
live. And now farewell in Christ thou blessed of gods own mouth, I will for a
time take my leave, but not my last farewell. Blessed be the time that ever I
came into the kings Benche to be joined in love and fellowship with such
dear children of the lord. My good brother Bradford shall not be dead whiles
you be alive, for verelye the spirit of him does test on you in most ample
wise. Your letters of comfort unto me in each point do agree, as though the
one were a copy of the other. He has planted in me, and you do water, the
Lord give good increase. My dear brethren and fellow prisoners here, have
them humbly and heartily commended unto you and your company, mournyng for your
miserye, but yet rejoicing for your plenteous consolation and comfort in
Christ. We are all cherefull and merry under our cross, and do lack no
necessaries, praised be god for his providence, and great mercyes toward us
for evermore. Amen.

John Careless

To certain godly women forsakyng their own country and going beyond the
seas in the time of persecution, for the testimony of the Gospel.
THe spirit of truth reveled unto you my derely beloved, by the gospel of our
savior Jesus Christ, be continually abidyng with you, and augmented into a
perfect buildynge of you into the lively temple of God, through the mighty
operation of his power, Amen.

I read in the Evangelists of certain godly women that ministered unto Christ,
followyng him in the days of his passion and never forsook him, but being
dead in his grave, brought oil to annoint him, until yt he had showed himself
unto them after his resurrection, and hydden them show unto his disciples,
which at his passion were dispersed, and tell them that he was risen, and that
they should see him in Galile. To whom I may justly compare you (my loving
systers in Christ) who of late have seen him suffer in his members, and have
ministered to their necessity anointing them with the comfortable oil of your
charitable assistance, even to the death: and now since ye have seen Christ to
live in the ashes of them whom the tyrannes have slain, he wylleth you to go
away upon just occasion offered you, and to declare to our dispersed brethren
and systers, that he is risen and lives in his elect members in England, and
by death does overcome infidelitye, and that they shall see him in Galile,
which is by forsakyng this world, and by a faithful desire to pass out of
this world by those ways which he with his holy martyrs has gone on before.
God therefore (entier systers) direct your way, as he did Abraham and Tobias
unto a strange land. God give you health both of body and soul, that ye may go
from virtue to virtue, and grow from strength to strength, until ye may see
face to face the god of Sion in his holy hyl, with the innumerable company of
his blessed Martyrs and Saints. Let there be continual ascensions unto
heaven in your hearts. Let there be no decrease of any vetue, which is already
planted in you. Be as the light of the just, such as Solomon says increases
to the perfect day of the Lord. Let the strength of god be commended in your
weak vessels, as it is. Be examples of faith and sobriety to all that ye
shall come in company withal. Let your godly conversation speak where your
tongue may not in the congregation. Be swift to hear and slow to speak after
the counsel of S. James. Be not curious about other men's doings but be
occupied in prayer and continual meditation, with reverent talkyng of the
word of God without contention amongst the saints. Let your faith shine in
a strange country, as it has done in your own, that your father which is
in heaven may be glorified by you to the end, This farewell I send you, not as
a thing needful, which know already what your duty is, and be desirous to
perform the same, but as one that would have you understand that he is
myndefull of your godly conversation, whereof he has had good experience, and
therefore writes this to be as a perpetual memorial betwixt you and him
until our metyng together before god, where we shall joy that we have here
louyngly put one another in memory of our duetye to perform it. Farewell
again mine own bowels in christ, and take me with you wheresoever you go,
and leave your selves with me, that in spirit we may be present one with
another. Commend me to the whole congregation of christ, wyllyng them not to
leave their country without witness of the Gospel, after that we all be
slain, which already be stauled up and appointed to the slaughter, and in the
mean season to pray earnestly for our constancy, that Christ may be glorified
in us and in them both by life and death. Farewell in the Lord.

Yours for ever, John Philpot.

An exhortation to a Sister of his, constantlye and cherefully to stick to the
truth, and to abide the trial of that doctrine which she had fruitefullye
professed.
GOd the eternal father, who has justified you by the blood of his son
Jesus Christ, and calls you to hallowe his name thoroughe a good
conversation and profession of life, he sanctifye you with daily increase of
virtue and faith by his holy spirit, that you may appear a vessel of
sanctification in the myddest of this wicked and perverse generation, to the
land and praise of the Gospel, Amen.

I have occasion (mine own dear sister) to praise God in you for two causes:
the one, that to your ability you are ready to show your self a natural
loving sister unto me your poor afflicted brother, as by your gentle tokens
you have eftsoon testified being absent, as also presently visityng me: which
well declares that you be a very natural sister in deed, and to be praised
in this behalf. But in the other, that you be also a sister to me in faith
after Christ's gospel, I am occasioned to thank god so much the more, how
much the one excels the other, and the spiritual consa^guinity is more
perdurable then that which is of flesh and blood, and is a worker of that
which is by nature, for commonly such as be ungodly be unnatural and only
lovers of themselves, as daily experience teaches us. The living lord, which
through the incorruptible seed of his word has begotten you to be my liege
sister, give you grace so to grow in that generation, that you may increase to
a perperfecte age in the lord to be my sister with Christ for ever. Look
therefore that you continue a faithful sister as you are called and are godly
entered, not only to me but to all the church of Christ, yea to Christ
himself, who voucheth you in this your unfeigned faith, worthy to be his sister.
Consider this dygnitye to surmounte all the vain dignitye of the world, and
let it accordynglye prevail more with you, then all earthely delyghtes, for
thereby you are called to an equal portion of the everlasting inheritance of
Christ, if now in no wife you do show your self an unnatural sister to
him in forsakyng him in trouble, which I trust you will never for no kind of
worldly respect do. You are under dangerous temptations to be turned from
that natural love you owe unto Christ, and you shall be tried with gods people
through a sieue of great affliction, for so Satan desires us to be sifted,
Luke. 22
that through fear of sharp troubles we might fall from the stablenes of our
faith, and so be depryued of that honor, joy, and reward, which is prepared
for such as continue faithful brothers and systers in the Lords couenaunte
to the end. Therefore the wise man in the book of Ecclesiasticus, byddeth
them that come to the service of the Lord, to prepare them selves to suffer
temptations. Since then that for the glory of God and our faith, we are called
now to abide the bronte of them, and that when our aduersarye has done all
that he can, yet we may be stable and stand: this Christ our first begotten
brother looks for at our hands, and all our brethren and systers in heaven
desire to see our faith through afflictions to be perfect, that we might
fulfill their number, and the universal church here militaunte reioyseth at
our constancye, whom all by the contrary we should make sorye, to the
danger of the loss both of body and soul. Fear not therefore what so ever
be threatened of the wicked world: prepare your back and see it be ready to
carye Christ's cross. And if you see any untowardness in you (as the flesh is
continuallye repugnaunte to the will of GOD) ask with faithful prayer that
the good spirit of GOD may lead your synnefull flesh whether it would
not, John. 21
for if we will dwell in the flesh and follow the counsel thereof, we shall
never do the will of God, neither work that tends to our salvation. You are
at this present in the confynes and of Babylon, where you are in danger to
drink of the whores cup, unless you be vigila^t in prayer. Take heed the
serpent seduce you not from the symplicity of your faith, as he did our first
mother Eve. Let no worldly fellowship make you pertaker of iniquity. He that
touches tar cannot but be defiled thereby, and with such as be perverse, a
man shall soon be perverted, with the holy you shall be holy. Psa. 15.
Therefore say continually with the prophet David: unto the saints which be on
the earth, all my will is on them. You have been sanctified and made pure
through the truth, take heed you be not vnholied and defiled, least the last
be worse then the first. I write not this because I stand in any doubt of your
sincere continuance, of the which I have had so good experience: but because
the days be evil, and in the same it is ye duty of every one of us to exhort
another. I am bold to put you my good sister, in remembrance of that which
does not a little comfort me to remember in my troubles and daily temptations.
Wherefore I doubt not, you will take that in good part which comes from your
brother both in spirit and body, who tendreth your salvation as earnestlye as
his own, that we might joy together eternally with such joy as the world
shall never be able to take from us. Thanks be unto god, you have begun to
run a good and great time well in the ways of the lord: run out the race
to the end which you have begun, and then shall you receive the crown of
glory. None shall be crowned but such as law fully stryueth. 2. Tim. 2.
Be not overcome of evil, but overcome tuill with good, and the Lord shall make
you one of those faithful virgins that shall follow the Lamb wheresoever he
goes, Apo. 4.
the which Christ grant both you and me, Amen.

This was for the first fruits of his Archdeaconry, whereof all the time of his
imprisonment he had no commodity, and yet his sureties were compelled to pay
the same.
Commend me to all the^ that love me in the Lord unfeignedly. God increase our
faith and give us grace never to be ashamed of his gospel. That same request
which I have made to my brother Thomas I make also to you, desiring you by all
means you can co accomplish my request that my sureties might be satiifyed
with that is mine own to the contentation of my mind, which cannot be quiet
until they be discharged: therefore I pray you help to purchase quietness
that I might depart out of this world in peace. My dissolution I look for
daily, but the Lord knows how unworthy I am of so high an honor, as to dye
for the testimony of his truth. Pray yt God would vouchsafe to make me worthy,
as he has done of long imprisonmente, for the which his name be praised for
ever. Pray and look for the coming of the Lord, whose wrath is great over
us, and I will pray for you as long as I live. The.ix. of Iulye in the Kings
Benche.

Your own loving brother as well in Faith as in body. John Philpot.

To my dear friend and brother in the Lord. M. Robert Harrington.
GEntle master Harrington, I can not tell what condign thanks I may give
unto God for you, in respect of that great gentleness and pain which you have
taken for the relief of me and of other our afflicted brethren in Christ. God
be praised for his mercy, whose loving providence we have seen toward us by
such faithful stewards as you have been toward a great many. Blessed be you of
god for ye loving care which you have taken for his pore flock. God has
reserved your reward of thanks in heaven, and therefore I do not go about to
render you any, lest I might seem to judge that you looked for yt here, which is
reserved to a better place. I thank god for yt I have found by your faithful
and diligent industry, and god forgive me my unworthiness of so great benefits:
god give me grace to serve him faithfully, and to ru^ne out my race with joy.
Glorious is ye course of the martyrs of Christ at this day. Never had ye elects
of god a better time for their glory the^ this is: now may they be assured
under ye cross, yt they are Christ's disciples for ever. Me think I see you
desiring to be under ye same: the flesh draws back, John. 2^
but the spirit says it must be brought whether it would not. Here is the
victory of the world, here is true faith and everlasting glory. Who is he which
desires not to be found faithful to his master? And now is ye time yt every
faithful servant of Christ has just opportunity to show himself a glorious
soldiour in the Lords sight. Now do the Amalachites invade the true Israelites,
that the Israelites might with speed be glorified. I need not, for want of
understanding, to admonish you here of, but as a willing soldier in Christ,
to exhort you so to run as you may get the victory, and that spedely with
us. A man that is bydde to a glorious feast, wysheth his friend to go with him
and to be partaker thereof. God does call me most unworthy among other, to
drink of the bridecup of his son, whereby we shall be made worthy, as many of
our brethren have been before us, to sit at the right hand and at ye left hand
of Christ. O what unspeakable condition is that? may any worldly thing stay us
from the desire thereof? Since we seek the kingdom of God, why do we not
apprehende it being so nere offered unto us? Let us approach nere unto God and
god will draw nere unto us. God draw us after him that we may all run after
the sauoure of his sweet oyntmentes. Christ annoint us, that we may be suppled
in these evil days to run lightly, unto the glory of the lord. Shame,
imprisonment, loss of goods, and sheeding of our blood, be the just price
which we must willingly bestow for the same. Wherefore dearly beloved in the
Lord, let not the great charges keep you back from bying this glory, for the
reward is ten thousand told greater tha^ the price. That you have married a
wife, whom God bless, I can not excuse you from this mart, but you must bring
your wife for a vsurye to the Lord, whose pleasure is in godly yokefellowes. I
wish you to be as I am, except these horrible bands, but yet most
comfortable to the spirit, assuring us that we are made worthy through Christ,
of the kingdom for the which we suffer. Praised be the Lord for the affliction
which we suffer, and he give us strength to continue to the end. Commend me
to.M. Heath, and tell him that I would wish him with me to prove how apt he is
to carry the cross of Christ. I pray for his continuance in Christ as for mine
own. Commend me to his wife and to Maistres Hall, certefiyng them that I am
brought to the gates of hell, that I might never enter into the same, but be
raised up from hell to heaven, through the word that sanctifyeth us. Commend
me to.M. Elsinge and his wife, and thank them that they remembered to provide
me some ease in prison, and tell them that though my Lords Colehouse be but very
black, yet it is more to be desired of the faithful, then the Queens palace.
God make her a joyful mother, and preserve them both to the comfort of Gods
people. Thus for this time, farewell dear brother. Written in post have because
of strait keeping.

This day I look to be called before the commissioners again. Pray dear
brother for the spirit of wisdom to remain with me. Commend me to your
wife, and I thank you both for your tokens. Your token I have sent to your
wife, and my toke^ unto you, is my faithful heart with this letter. Commend me
to al my friends, and tell them. I thank God, I am chereful in Christ, wishing
them to fear god more then man, and to learn to despise earnestly the
vanities of this world, desiring you al to pray for me that I may end my
journey with fidelity, Amen.

John Philpot.

To Master Robert Glouer prisoner in Couentrye for the mayntenaunce of Gods
Gospel.
THe knowledge of god which has illightned your mind with the true religion
of Christ, and now does in the beginning of darkness shine in you to the
commendation of your true faith, and to the stre^gthning of many weak
brethren, remain with you to the end through the mighty operation of the holy
ghost, Ame^. It is a singular comfort to the afflicted flock of Christ, to
behold such as have been ministers and professors of his truth in religion, to
stand in ye same, and that in the time of persecution, when as the same may not
be abidden by before the face of the rich and mighty in this world, to be
preached without present danger. So Paul wills Timothe both in season and
out of season to be earnest in sowing the word. And praised be God that we
here in prison for the testimony thereof, do hear of your diligence in this
behalf, which cease not to do ye office of an Euangeliste, although it be with
danger of affliction. Such faithful ministers be to be honored that do
submit their own heads to peril for the love of the gospel. Such Christ will
acknowledge and confess before his father in heaven, yt they are those which
have bidde^ with him in temptations* and therefore shall eat and drink with
him at his table in the kingdom of heaven. I thought it therefore my duty at
the motion of this bearer, albeit I have no bodily acquaintance with you, to
exhort you, as. s. Paul wills us to exhort one an other as long as we are in
this life, boldly to continue in this good and necessary work of the Lord,
specially in these evil days, in the which Satan rages against the church of
Christ, and daily imprisoneth and robs the members thereof for their
faithful testimonye, and be you assured he will not leave you untouched, for
above all other he seeks to suppress the good ministers of the word, for
they be such as have destroyed his kingdom: but you must not for fear of
his odious and tedious assaults, withdraw your self from your vocation, but
rather provoke him by your constant profession to do his worst, knowing that
the same shall turn unto you to the best, even to the crown of your glory.
There is none crowned but such as hold out to the gole end, and therefore our
savior Christ says in ye gospel: Beatus qui perseuerat vsque in finem. You
ru^ne well, god is praised therein, and the afflicted church much comforted by so
faithful a captain: run out therefore (as I doubt not you will) and fear
nothing of that you shall suffer for your labor, for if you be faithful unto
death, you shall assuredly have the reward of eternal life. Many go on well til
they come to the pikes and then they turn their backs and give over in the
plain field, to the shame of Christ and his church that has so faynte hearted
soldiers in his host at the time of need, in yt which his glory ought most
ma^fully to be showed. I done not but you have already cast the price of this
your building of the house of god, that it is like to be no less tha^ your
life: for I believe (as Paul says) that god has appointed us in these latter
days like sheep to the slaughter. Romans 8
Antichrist is come again, and he must make a feast to Beelzebub his father of
many Christian bodies for the restoring again of his kingdom: let us watch
and pray that the same day may not find us unready. The peace of god be with
you and remain with you for ever. Your loving brother in Christ, and in spirit
your familier friend, captive in the Kings Benche.

John Philpot.

To my dearly beloved Sister in the Lord Maistres Heath.
THe light of the Gospel of Christ which has illigthned you with the true
understanding of faith, be daily increased in you my dearly beloved sister,
unto the perfyte day of the Lord, through the mighty operation of his spirit,
Amen. Where as you have required of me a token at your departing, that might
be a remembrance with you of my brotherly love toward you, I mused of diverse
things what I might commend unto you best, and among al other, I found none so
certain a token either of the love of God toward us, or else of ye love of us
one to an other, as to bear the cross together with Christ. To bear the
cross, is to be partaker of the afflictions of Christ which now he suffers in
his members for the accomplishmente of his body ye church, which are we that
believe in him sincerely, which is the surest token of Gods love toward us that
we can have in this world: for whom god loves he chasteneth, and as it is
written, Heb. 12
he chasteneth every son who^ he receaueth. Wherefore above all things love ye
cross of Christ under the which all the church of Christ in England now is,
and be content to have your faith tried every day by some cross or other as
it pleases God to put on you, and if God puts no grievous cross upon you,
let your brethrens cross be your cross, which is a certain token of true
brotherly love. If the church in England had learned with the Gospel to have
borne the cross of Christ, as all that be professors of the Gospel be called
thereunto, they would not so lightly at the commandment of man, have turned
from the ways of salvation, to their old vomit again contrary to their
conscience, and al to avoid the cross, the merciful sign of Gods love
toward us. If the cross were not, the faithful could not be known. If the
cross were not, God should not so manifestly appear to be our deliverer and
co^forter as he does show himself in ye midst thereof unto al the^ that put
their trust in him. Therefore believe them verily to be in most happy estate yt
be under ye cross,: and such as do utterly abhor the same, are cowards and
not fytte soldiers for the lord. We have al received the credit of faith from
god in Christ, that we should beautify the same or rather god in the same. 1.
Cor. 4.
We have this treasure in brittel vessels, let us take heed that the britelnes
of the vessels sheede not out our precious treasure on the earth, as it is
lamentable to see at this day many have most unfaithfully done. Are they worthy
of the heavenly kingdom which here esteem more earth then heaven? O palpable
infidelity. Will not god require the credit of faith which he has committed
unto us? Yea verily. Is this the usury of faith to love the world more then the
Gospel, and to fear man more then god? If men which count themselves stronger
and worthyer vessels have thus unfaithfully dealt in the things of god, let
the weakness of women be more fyrme in their faith to ye glory of God, whose
might appears in weakness. There is no exception of person before god both
man and woman be on in god: and that person in all sorts of people is
acceptable to him that strives to do his will. Wherefore contend in these
cross days, which be the love days of god toward us, to show your self
faithful to him that calls you, and to be ready to do his will according to
true knowledge, and that under the cross. God has given you a faithful guide,
whom see you love with all humility, patience, and obedience, as it becomes a
holy woman to be subject to her faithful head in the Lord, and comfort him in
our common cross, and bid him cherefully take up the one end and you will
bear the other, a double string knit together. As you in your godly matrimonye
do represent the mysterye of Christ and his church: so continue you lively
members of faith in the same, and learn daily more and more to bear the
cross of Christ, that other seeing your strength may be comforted and be
ashamed of their weakness in their masters cause. The faithful servant the
Lord loves which brings his talent to his table with increase. Now is the
time to increase to the lord and not to decrease to multiply our faith under
the cross and not to diminysh it. Ose. 6 Gene. 9.
The ways of the just do increase as the dauning of the day: Embrace therefore
the cross as the raynebow of gods merciful covenant: pray that we may
together end our course therein with joy. Take my token in good worth until we
be made partakers of the glory of the cross. Out of my Lord of Londons
Colehouse. The.xi. of November.

Yours John Philpot.

To my brother John Careless prisoner in the Kings Benche.
THe grace of God ye father through his dear son Christ our Savior, with
perseverance in all godly verity, be with thee my dear brother Careless, and
with all my prison fellows, Amen.

Ah my own love in Christ, These were certain free will me^, arrogant, frowerd
and unquiet spirits.
I am sorry to hear of thy great trouble which these shismatiks do daily put
thee to: I would I were with thee, in part to releue thy grief, but since that
it has pleased God otherwise, take my advice in this your conflict, and be
pacient what soever your adversaries can say or do against you. Know that you
are appointed for the defense of the gospel, for the which you (god be praised)
do suffer: yet you must understand that you are but a voice in the wilderness
and a planter, and that it is god which must give the encease. And therefore if
there come not such fruit of your good labors as you would wyshe, be content
and know that a stony ground can not fructifye: yet shall not god forget your
labor, but you shall reap as ple^tiously in ye day of reward, as though it had
increased after your expectation. Have patience therefore in your labor, and
let not care eat out your heart. Commit the success to God, and cease not
with charity to be earnest in the defense of the truth against these arrogant
and self will blinded scatterers. These sects are necessary for ye trial of
our faith and for the beautifying thereof. Be not perverted with them that be
perverse and intractable: they resist not you, they resist Christ, and be
workers against their own salvation. Show as much modestye and humility as you
may possible: so shall your labor please God best, and your adversaries
receive the more shame, and others seeing your modest conversation amongst
these contentious bablers, shall glorifye god in his truth by you, and the more
abhor them, as you see it has come to pass in times paste. Be content that
Semei do rail at David and cast stones a while, 2. Reg. 16.
be sure his raylyng judgment will fall upon his own pate. Have alwais that
notable rule of Christ's church before your eyes, 1. Cor. 11.
which Saint Paul writes, that if any body be contentious, neither we
neither the church of god has any such custom, Desire all our brethren in
the bowels of Jesus Christ, to keep the bond of peace, which is the unity
of Christ's church where, be all the treasures of spiritual consolation in
heavenly things. Hebr. 12
Let no root of bytternes spring up, which the devil with all diligence
seeks to thruste in amongst the children of god. Kiss one another with the
kiss of unfeigned brotherlye love, and take one another by the hand cherefully
and say, let us take up our cross together and go to the mount of Caluary, and
there be willing to suffer what soever it pleases god we shall. Hitherto we
have not resisted to blodshedding. Our blood must not be to dear for ye lord,
and then his kingdom shall not be to dear for us. Thus exhort one an other
to offer your selves a joyful sacrifice unto God, for this is that pleasant
sacrifyce wherewt his wrath shall be pacifyed, which is now kindled most
justly against us. Be thankful unto God that it has pleased him to make you
worthy of this glrious affliction, yea and I pray you give thanks unto god
for me, yt it has been his good will to take me most filthy and unthankful
sinner to be one of this number. My joy of ye love of God toward me in this
behalf is such, that it makes al my strait imprisonment to seem pleasure:
god be praised I ca^ not be sorry though I would. O how great is ye love of God
toward us? Be merry brethren and rejoice continually in ye lord, for the
victory is ours, yea heaven is ours and all the glory thereof. Faynte not but
run out, for we are even at an end. Be glad of nothing so much as in the
mortification of the old Adam: murmr not in no case what soever necessity
you be in. Communicate your necessities to me, and to others of his people, and
God will make us to divide stakes. Be always praysyng God, talking,
co^forting, teaching, and exhorting in God, and he will not see you utterly
destitute. I commend me to your faithful prayers all. And you Careless see that
you be in my doungeon with me, as I am in spirit with you in the Kings Bench,
and with you al.

Thine own brother John Philpot

To Maistres Anne Hartipole, who was fallen from the syncerity of the gospel
which she had before long known and professed, to the Pope and his Idolatrous
religion.
THe grace of God and true light wherewith he lighteneth the hearts of all the
true and faithful beleuers, lovers, and followers of his holy Gospel, lyghten
your heart by the mighty operation of his holy spirit, Amen.

I have not hitherto been accustomed to write unto you in the matters of our
common faith, which is now dau^gerously assaulted, especially for that
otherwise by corporal presence and mutual conference, we have had consolation
in the same, as the time present did require. In the which I perceived your
judgment and constancy to be so much, that I received by your good and godly
example, strength in the same, as I have done even from the beginning, before I
was called unto the light of the gospel, in the which you went before me and
ministered occasion to me to follow, at such time as that blessed woman Anne
Askewe (now a glorious Martyr in the syghte of Jesus christ) was harbored in
your house: so that I thought it superfluous and not needful to write thereof
unto you, that of so long time have been instructed, and by so many learned
books confyrmed. But now hearing that the old serpente our ancient enemy,
which lies in continual wait of our steps, has bytten you by the heel and
given you a foul fall, I cannot but be heartily sorry, and as brotherly charity
moves me, testifye the same unto you by writing, for that I may not presently
otherwise open my self in this behalf. Alas sister that so sincere
profession, should receive so gross an infection, to the dishonor of god
and of his church. What means it that you are so sodeinly departed from
Jerusalem unto Hierico, Luk 10
to be a companion of thieves and idolaters, to the utter ouerthrowyng of that
good which you have professed: for as saint James teaches us, he that
offends in one, is gyltye in all, and to come to Idolatrye and strange
worshyppyng of god forbidden by his word, is of all transgressions the most
detestable. Therefore I cannot cease to wonder how you could so soon be
allured or drawn thereto. I had thought the love of the truth had been so
graffed in your heart, that neither persecution, sword, fire, nor gallows
might have brought this to pass, that at the voice of a handemayde in the
first temptation, you should have denied Christ. For not to walk after the
synceritye of his Gospel in deed, is to deny him, and none can be pertakers
of the Lords table and of the table of deuylles, which is the popyshe Mass,
and the malignaunte synagoge vsyng the same. Me think I hear your excuse,
pretending your conscience to be sound before GOD notwythstandyng, and that
your conscience will give you leave thus to do with the common sort of
dissemblers both with God and man: but I must tell you plain (Sister) in Gods
cause, that your conscience so affected, is a syckelye and unsound conscience
and craftily blinded, for before GOD there is no such conscience allowed,
which allows your body to do that which it condemns. We shall receive
all according to that which we do in our bodies, whether it be good or
evil, and it is commanded us as well to glorifye GOD in our bodies as in our
souls. We must show our faith by our outward conversation, that men seeing
our good works, might glorifye our father which is in heaven. Will ye now
with your presence go about to beautifye that which hitherto you have
justly destroyed? What do you else in so doing, but notifye your self to
be an infydell to the church of Christ, that will be content to associate
your self with her enemy, for the contentation of man? Has ever any
person of God so done, that was allowed therein? Be not deceived good Sister,
with the perswasible words of man, neither be afraid of his threats. Follow
the Gospel of Christ according to true knowledge, and fear to do that
which by the same is straightlye forbidden you. Tempte not GOD any longer by
this evil doing, for you can do nothing more heinous in his syghte. Let
this haltyng be healed up, and turn not from the right ways of the Lord.
Be not ashamed of his gospel, neither of the cross, which is ye badge of the
true and unfeigned professons thereof, which you see now his faythefull (praised
be his name therefore) are so well content and wyllyng to bear: but rather as
you are called, take up your cross, and be assured thereby to enter into
Christ's glory: for unless we suffer with him, we shall not raygne with him,
and if we dye not with Christ, we shall not live with Christ. The cross now
is the redye way to heaven, therefore I wish you should choose to be afflitted
with the people of god, rather then to live in the tabernacles of the wicked.
Do not any more that which of all things ye have now most cause to repent,
neither lay daily the foundation of repentance, but let this fall be a teaching
unto you of the want of faith which is in you, and so become more feruente
in prayer, and godly exercises, that with this new year, ye may become a
new woman in a godly and new perfection, the which GOD for his mercies sake
in Christ, work both in you and me to the end. Amen.

Written in have by your brother in captivity. John Philpot.

To a faithful woman and late wife to one of the bishops which gave their lives
in the Lords quarrel.
REmember dear Sister that your life in this world is a continual warfare, to
fight against the world, the flesh, and the devil, in the which you are
appointed for the trial of your faith and love to godt to fight manfully to
ouercom: for ye spirit of god which is in you, is stronger the^ he which is in
ye world, and by this you may know yt you are ye child of god, even by ye
spirit which strives in you against the flesh and sin, and will not suffer
sin to reign in you. This spirit is obtained by often and daily reading
and hearing the word of GOD, joined with faithful and hartye prayer: for
diligent readyng of Gods word planteth the holy spyryte in you, and earneste
prayer increases the same. Read therefore the word studiouslye and pray
hartelye that the same good gift of faith which you have learned of your
faythefull husband and good bishop in the Lord, who has gloriouslye yielded
his life for the same, may be confyrmed in you even unto death, that you may
receive the same crown of glory, which he now has, for precious is the
death of the faithful in the Lords syghte, therefore desire still to dye to
the Lord, and be glad to be poor both in body and spirit, and thus assure
your self the kingdom of heaven is yours.

Your own in the Lord John Philpot.

Letters of Master John Bradforde, a faithful Minister and a synguler pyller
of Christ's church: by whose great travails and diligence in preaching and
pla^ting the syncerity of the gospel, by whose most godly and innocent life,
and by whose long and payneful imprisonments for the maintenance of the truth,
the kingdom of god was not a little aduau^ced: who also at last most valia^tly
and cherefully gave his blood for the same. The.4. day of July. In the year of
our Lord. 1553.
To all that profess the gospel and true doctrine of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ in the City of London, John Bradford a most unworthy servant of
the Lord, now not only in prison but also excommunicated and condemned to be
burned for the same true doctrine, wysheth mercy, grace and peace, with
increase of all godly knowledge, from God the father of mercy, through the
merits of our alone and omnisufficient redemer Jesus Christ, by the operation
of his holy spirit for ever. Amen.
MY dearly beloved brethren in our savior Christ, although the time I have
to live is very little (for hourly I look when I should be had hence to be
conveyed into Lankeshyre there to be burned, and to render my life by the
providence of God, where I first received it by the same providence) and
although the charge is great to keep me from all things whereby I might sygnify
any thing to the world of my state: yet having as now I have pen and ynke,
through gods workyng, manger the head of Satan and his soldiers, I thought
good to write a short confession of my faith, and thereto join a little
exhortation unto you all, to live according to your profession.

This my faith I would gladly particularly declare and expound to the
confirmation and comfort of the simple: but alas, by startes and stelth I write
in manner that that I write, and therefore I shall desire you al to take this
breuitye in good part.
First for my faith, I do confess and pray all the whole congregation of
Christ to bear witness with me of the same, that I do believe constantly through
the gift and goodness of god (for faith is gods only gift) all the xij. articles
of the symbol or creed, commenly attributed to the collection of the Apostles,
not because of the creed it self, but because of the word of god, the which
teaches and confyrmeth every article accordyngly. This word of god written by
the prophets and Apostles, left and contained in the canonical books of the
holy Bible, I do believe to conteyne ple^tifully al things necessary to
salvation: so that nothing, as necessary to salvation, ought to be added
thereto, and therefore the church of Christ nor none of his congregation ought to
be burdened with any other doctrine then which here out has her foundation and
ground. In testimony of which faith, I render and give my life, being
condemned as well for not acknowledging the Antichrist of Rome to be christ's
Vicar general and supreme head of his catholic and universal church here and
else where upon earth: as for denying the horrible and idolatrous doctrine of
transubstantiation and christ's real, corporal and carnal presence in his
supper, under the forms and accidents of bread and wine. To believe Christ our
sauiout to be the head of his church, and kings in their realms to be the
supreme powers, to whom every soul owes obedience, and to believe that in
the supper of Christ (which the sacrament of the altar as the papists call it
and use it, does utterly overthrow) is a true and a very presence of whole
Christ god and man to the faith of the receauer (but not to the stander by
and loker upon) as it is a true and a very presence of bread and wine to the
senses of men: to believe this (I say) will not serve, and therefore as an
heretyke I am condemned and shall be burned, whereof I ask god heartily mercy
that I do no more rejoice then I do, having so great cause as to be an
instrument wherein it may please my dear lord and Savior to suffer. For
albeit my manyfolde sins, even sythen I came into prison, have deserved at
the hands of God, not only this temporal but also eternal fire in hell,
much more then my former synful life, which the lord pardon for his christ's
sake, as I know he of his mercy has done and never will lay my iniquities to my
charge to condemnation, so great is his goodness, praised therefore be his holy
name: although (I say) my manyfold and grievous late sins have deserved most
justly all the tyranny yt man or devil can do unto me (and therefore I confess
that the lord is just and that his judgments be true and deserved on my
behalf) yet the bishops and prelates do not persecute them in me but Christ
himself, his word, his truth and religion. And therefore I have great cause yea
most great cause, to rejoice that ever I was borne and hitherto kept of the
lord, that by my death, which is deserved for my sins, it pleases the
heavenly father to glorify his name, to testify his truth, to co^firm his
verity, to oppugn his adversaries. Oh good god and merciful father, forgive me
my great unthankfulness, especially herein. And you my derely beloved for ye
lord Jesus christ's sake, I humbly and heartily in his bowels and blood, do now
for my last Yale and farewell in this present life, beseech you and every of you,
yt you will consider this work of the lord accordingly. First by me to be
admonished to beware of hypocrisy and carnal security. Profess not ye gospel
with tongue and lips only, but in heart and veritye: frame and fashion your lives
accordingly. Be ware gods name be not evil spoken of, and the gospel less
regarded by your co^uersatio^. God forgive me yt I have not so heartily
professed it as I should have done, but have sought much my self therein, The
gospel is a new doctrine to the old man: it is new wine, and therefore cannot be
put in old bottels, without greater hurt then good to the botlels. If we will
talk with the lord, we must put of our shoes and carnal affections: if we will
hear ye voice of the lord, we must wash our garments and be holy: if we will be
christ's disciples, we must deny our selves, take up our cross and follow
christ. We cannot serve ij. masters: if we seek christ's kingdom, we must also
seek for the righteousness thereof. To the petition of, let thy kingdom come, we
must join, thy will be done, done, done on earth as it is in heaven. If we
will not be doers of ye word, but hearers of it, we sore deceive our selves. If
we hear ye gospel and love it not, we declare our selves to be but fools and
builders upon ye sand. The lords spirit hates faining: disceitfulnes ye lord
abhorteth. If we come to him, we must beware we come not with a double heart, for
the^ it may chance yt god will answer us according to ye block which is in our
heart, and so we shall deceive our selves and others. To faith see that we
couple a good conscience, lest we make a shipwreck. To the Lord we must come
with fear and reverence. If we will be gospellers we must be Christ's, if we
be Christ's we must crucify our flesh, with the lust and concupiscences
thereof. If we will be under grace, sin must not bear rule in us. We may not
come to the lord and draw nigh to him with our lips, and leave our hearts
elsewhere, lest the lords wrath wax whotte, and he take from us the good
remaynyng: in no case can the kingdom of Christ approach to them that repent
not.

Therefore my dearly beloved, let us repent and be heartily sorry that we have
so carnally, so hypocritically, so couetously, so vain gloriously professed
the gospel. For all these I confess of my self to the glory of God and mine
own confusion here, that he may cover mine offenses in the day of judgment.
Let the anger and plagues of god most justly fallen upon us, be applied to
every one of our deserts, that from the bottom of our hearts, every of us may
say: it is I Lord that have sinned against thee, it is mine hypocrisy, my vayn
glory, my covetousness, uncleanness, carnality, security, idleness, unthankfulness,
self love and such like, which have deserved the taking away of our good king,
of thy word and true religion, of thy good ministers by exile, prisonme^t and
death: it is my wickedness, that causes success and increase of auctoritye and
peace to thine enemies. Oh be merciful, be merciful unto us. Turn to us
again, (oh lord of hosts) and turn us unto thee. Correct us, but not in thy
furye, least we be consumed. In thy wrathful displeasure reprove us not, but
in the mids of thine anger remember thy mercy: for if thou will mark what
is done amysse, who shall be able to abide it? But with thee is mercifulnes,
that thou might be worshypped: oh then be merciful unto us that we might
truly worship thee. Help us, for the glory of thy name be merciful unto
our sins for they are great: oh heal us and help us for thine honor, let
not the wicked people say, where is their god. etc. On this sort my right
dearly beloved, let us heartily bewail our sins, repent us of our former
evil life, heartily and earnestly purpose to amend our lives in all things,
continually watch in prayer, diligently and reverently attend, hear, and read
the holy scriptures, labor after our vocation to amend our brethren. Let us
reprove the works of darkness: let us fly from all Idolatrye: let us abhor
the Antichristian and romish rotten service, detest the popyshe mass, forsake
their Romish God, prepare our selves to the cross, be obediente to all that
be in authority in all things that be not against God and his word: for
then answer with the Apostles, it is more meet to obey God then man.
Howbeit, never for any thing resist, or rise against the Magistrates: avenge
not your selves, but commit your cause to the lord to whom vengeance
pertayneth, and he in his time will reward it. If ye feel in your selves an
hope and trust in god, yt he will never tempte you above that he will make you
able to bear, be assured ye lord will be true to you, and ye shall be able to
bear al bruntes. But if ye want this hope, fly and get you hence, rather then
by your tarying, gods name should be dishonored. In su^me, cast your care on
the Lord, knowing for most certain that he is careful for you: with him are
all yt hears of your head numbered, so yt not one of the^ shall perish without
his good pleasure and will, much more then nothing shall happen to your bodies
which shall not be profitable, how soever for a time it seem otherwise to your
senses. Hang on the providence of god, not only when you have means to help
you, but also when you have no means, yea when al means be against you. Give
him this honor, which of all other things he most chieflye requires at your
hands, namely believe yt ye are his children through Christ: that he is your
father and God through him: that he loves you, pardons you al your offenses:
that he is with you in trouble, and will be with you for ever. When ye fall he
will put under his hand, ye shall not lie still. Before ye call upon him he
hears you: out of evil he will finally bring you, and deliver you to his
eternal kingdom. Doubt not my dearly beloved hereof, doubt not I say: this
will god your father do for you in respect, not of your selves, but in respect
of Christ your captain, your pastor, your keeper, out of whose hands none
shall be able to catch you. In him be quiet, and often consider your dignity:
namely how that ye be gods children, the saints of God, citizens of heaven,
temples of the holy ghost, the thrones of God, members of Christ, and Lords
over all.

Therefore be ashamed to think, speak, or do any thing that should be
unseemly for Gods children, Gods saints, Christ's member etc. Marueil not
though the devil and the world hate you: though ye be persecuted here, for ye
servant is not above his master. Covet not earthly riches, fear not the
power of man, love not this world nor things that be in this world: but long
for the Lord Jesus his coming, at which time your bodies shall be made like
unto his glorious body. When he appears ye shall be like unto him: when your
life thus shall be revealed, then shall ye appear with him in glory: in the mean
season live in hope hereof. Let ye life you lead be in the faith of the son
of god, for yt just does live by faith, which faith flies from all evil and
follows the word of god as a lantern to her feet, and a light to her steps:
her eyes be above where Christ is: she beholds not the things present, but
rather things to come: she glories in afflictions, she knows that the
afflictions of this life are not to be compared to the glory which god will
reveal to us and in us. Of this glory god grant us here a lively taste: the^
shall we run after the sent it sends forth. It will make us valiant me^ to
take to us the kingdom of god: whether the lord of mercy bring us in his good
time through Christ our lord, to whom with the father and the holy ghost, three
persons and one God, be al honor and glory world without end, Amen.

My dearly beloved, I would gladly have given here my body to have been burned
for the confirmation of the true doctrine I have taught here unto you, but that
my country must have: therefore I pray you take in good part this
signification of my good will toward every of you. Impute the want herein to
time and trouble. Pardon me mine offe^siue and negligent behavior, when I was
among you. With me repent and labor to amend: continue in the truth which I
have truly taught unto you by preaching in all places where I have come, Gods
name therefore be praised: confess Christ when ye are called, what soever
comes thereof, and the God of peace be with us al. Amen.

Your brother in bonds for the Lords sake, John Bradford.

To all that love the lord Jesus, and his true doctrine being in the university
and town of Cambridge, John Bradforde, a most unworthy servant of the lord,
now not only prisoned but also condemned for the same true doctrine,
vvysheth grace, peace, and mercy with increase of all godliness, from god the
father of al mercy, through the bloody passion of our alonely Savior Jesus
Christ, by the lively workyng of the holy spirit, for ever, Amen.
Although I look hourly when I should be had to the stake (my right
dearelye beloved in the Lord) and although the charge over me is great and
strait: yet having by the providence of GOD secretlye pen and ink, I could
not but something signifye unto you my solicitude which I have for you and
every of you in the Lord, though not as I would, yet as I may. Ye have often
and openly heard the truth (especially in this matter wherein I am condemned)
disputed and preached, that it is nedeles to do any more, but only to put you
in remembrance of the same: but hitherto ye have not heard it confirmed, and
(as it were) sealed up, as now ye do, and shall do here by me, that is, by my
death and burning. For Albeit I have deserved (through my uncleanness,
hypocrisy, avarice, vayneglory, idleness, unthankfulness, and carnalitye,
whereof I accuse my self to my confusion before the world, that before God
through Christ I might, as my assured hope is I shall, find mercy) eternal
death and hell fire, much more then this affliction and fire prepared for me:
yet my dearelye beloved, it is not these or any of these things, wherefore the
Prelates do persecute me, but gods veretye and truth: yea even Christ him
self is the only cause and thing wherefore I now am condemned, and shall
be burned as an heretyque, because I will not grant the Anttchrist of Rome to
be Christ's Vicar general and supreme head of his church here, and every where
upon earth, by gods ordinance, and because I will not grant such corporal,
real, and carnal presence of Christ's body and blood in the sacrament, as does
transubstantiate ye substance of bread and wine, and is received of the wicked,
yea of dogs and mice. Also I am excommunicated, and counted as a dead member of
Christ's church, as a rotten branch, and therefore shall be cast into ye fire.
Therefore ye ought heartily to rejoice with me, and to give thanks for me, that
god the eternal father has vouched safe our mother to bring up any child, in
whom it would please him to magnifye his holy name as he does and I hope for
his mercy and truths sake, will do in me and by me. Oh what such benefit upon
earth ca^ there be, as that that which deserved death by reason of my sins,
should be diuerted to a demonstration, a testification, and confirmation of
gods verity and truth.

Thou my mother the University, haste not only had the truth of gods word
plainly manifested unto thee by reading, disputing, and preaching publicly and
privately, but now (to make thee altogether excuseles and as it were almost to
sin against the holy ghost, if thou put to thy helping hand with the Romyshe
route to suppress the verity and set out the contrary) you have my life and
blood as a seal to confyrme thee if thou will be confirmed, or else to confound
thee and bear witness against thee, if thou will take part with the prelates
and clergy, which now fill up the measure of their fathers, which flew the
prophets and Apostles, yt al righteous blood from Abell to Bradford shed upon
the earth may be required at their hands. Of this therefore I thought good
before my death, as time and liberty would suffer me, for ye love and duty I
bear unto thee, to admonish thee good mother, and my sister the town, that
ye would call to mind from whence ye are fallen, and study to do the first
works. Ye know (if you will) these matters of the Romysh supremacye, and the
Antichristian transubstantiation, whereby Christ's Supper is overthrown, his
priesthood euacuate, his sacrifyce frustrate, the ministry of his word
vnplaced, repentance repelled, faith fainted, godliness extinguished, the mass
maintained, Idolatrye supported, and all impietye chearyshed: you know (I say)
if you will, that these opinions are not only besides Gods word, but even
directly against it, and therefore to take part with them, is to take part
against god, against whom you can not prevail.

Therefore for the tender mercy of Christ, in his bowels and blood I beseech
you to take Christ's collyrium and eye salve to annoynte your eyes, that ye
may see what ye do and have done in admittinge (as I hear ye have admitted,
yea alas authorized, and by consent confirmed) the romyshe rotten rags,
which once ye utterly expelled. Oh be not canis reuersus ad vomitum, be not
sus lota reuersa ad volutabru^ coeni. Beware least old Satan enter in with
seven other spirits, and so the last shall be worse then the first. It had
been better ye had never known the truth, then after knowledge to run from
it. Ah woe to this world and the things therein which has now so wrought with
you. Oh that ever this dirt of the devil should daube up the eye of the
realm: for thou (O mother) art as it were the eye of the realm. If thou be
light and give shine, all the body shalfare the better: but if thou the light be
darkness, alas, how great will the darkness be? What is man whose breath is in
his nose-threls, that you should thus be affrayd of him? Oh what is honor
and life here but plain bubbels? What is glory in this world but shame? Why
art thou affrayde to carye Christ's ccosse? Will thou come into his kingdom
and not drink of his cup? Do thou not know Rome to be Babylon? Doste thou
not know that as the old Babylon had the children of Judah in captiuitye, so
has this, true Judah, that is the confessors of Christ? Do thou not know
that as destruction happened unto it, so shall it do unto this? And trowest
thou that God will not deliver his people now, when the time is come, as he did
then? Has not God commanded his people to come out from her, and will thou
give ensample to the whole realm to run into her? Have thou forgotten the
woe that Christ threatens to offense geuers? Will thou not remember that it
were beter a mylstone were hanged about thy neck, and thou thrown into the
sea, then yt thou should offend the little ones? And alas, how have thou
offended? Yea how do thou still offend? Will thou consider things according to
the outward show? Was not the Sinagoge more seemly and like to the true
church, then the simple flock of Christ's Disciples? Has not the whore of
Babylon more costly array and rich apparel externally to set forth her self,
then the homely housewife of Christ? Where is the beautye of the Kings
daughter the Church of Christ? Without or within? Does not David say within?
Oh remember that as they are happy which are not offended at Christ, so are
they happy which are not offended at his poor church. Can the pope and his
prelates mean honestly which make so much of the wife, and so little of the
husband? The church they magnify, but Christ they contemn. If this church
were an honest woman (that is Christ's wife) except they would make much of
her husband Christ and his word, she would not be made much of, of the^. When
Christ and his Apostles were upon earth, who was more like to be the true
church? They, or the prelates, bishops and Sinagoge? If a man should have
followed custom, unity, antiquity or the more part, should not Christ and
his company have been cast out of the doors? Therefore badde Christ: search ye
scriptures. And good Mother, shall the servant be above his master? shall we
look for other intertainemente at the hands of the world, then Christ and his
dear Disciples found? Who was taken in Noes time for the church? Poor Noe
and his family, or others? Who was taken for gods church in Sodom? Lot, or
others? And does not Christ say: as it went then so shall it go now toward
the coming of the son of man? What means Christ when he says, iniquity
shall have the upper hand, does he not tell that charity shall wax cold? And
who sees not a wonderful great lack of charity in those which would now be
taken for Christ's church? All that fear god in this Realm truly, can tell
more of this, then I can write.

Therefore dear Mother, receive some admonition of one of thy poor children now
going to be burned for the testimony of Jesus. Come again to Gods truth: come
out of Babylon: confess Christ and his true doctrine: repent yt which is
past: make amends by declaring thy repentance by the fruits. Remember the
readinges and preachings of Gods Prophet and true preacher Martyne Bucer. Call
to mind the threatninges of God, now some thing seen by thy children
Leauer, and others. Let the exile of Leauer, Pilkinton, Gryndall, Haddon,
Horn, Scorye, Pouet etc, some thing awake thee. Let the imprisonmente of thy
dear sons, Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer move thee. Consider the Martyrdom
of thy Chickens, Rogers, Saunders, Taylour. And now cast not away the poor
admonition of me going to be burned also, and to receive the like crown of
glory with my fellows. Take to heart Gods calling by us. Be not as Pharao
was, for then will it happen unto thee as it did unto him. What is that?
Hardenesse of heart. And what then? Destruction eternally both of body and
soul. Ah therefore good Mother awake, awake, repent, repent, bustell thy self
and make haste to turn to the Lord, for else it shall be more easy for Sodom
and Gomorre in the day of judgment, then for thee. Oh harden not your hearts:
Oh stop not your ears to day in hearing gods voice, though it be by me a most
unworthy messenger. Oh fear the Lord, for his anger is begone to kindle.
Even now the are is laid to the root of the tree. Ye know I prophesied truly
to you before the swet came, what would come if ye repented not you carnal
gospelling, and now I tell you before I depart hence, that the ears of me^ will
tingle to hear of the vengeance of God that will fall upon you all, both
town and university, if ye repent not, if ye leave not your Idolatry, if ye
turn not spedely to the Lord, if ye still be ashamed of Christ's truth which
ye know. Oh Perne repent, Oh Thomson repent, Oh ye Doctors, Bachelors and
Masters repent, Oh Mayor Aldermen, and town dwellers repent, repent,
repent that ye may escape the nere vengeance of the Lord. Rent your hearts,
and come apace calling on the Lord. Let us al say, Peccauimus, we have sinned,
we have done wickedlye, we have not harkened to thy voice O Lord. Deal not
with us after our deserts, but be merciful to our iniquities, for they are
great. Oh pardon us our offenses: In thine anger remember thy mercy. Turn us
unto thee O Lord God of hosts, for the glory of thy names sake: spare us,
and be merciful unto us. Let not the wicked people say: where is now their god?
Oh for thine own sake, for thy names sake deal mercifully with us. Turn thy
self unto us, and us unto thee, and we shall praise thy name for ever.

If in this sort (my dearly beloved) in heart and mouth we come unto our
father, and prostrate our selves before the throne of his grace, then surely
surely we shall find mercy: then shall the Lord look merely upon us for his
mercy sake in Christ: then shall we hear him speak peace unto his people, for
he is gracious and merciful, of great pitye and compassion: he ca^ not be
chiding for ever, his anger can not last long to the penitent. Though we weep
in the morning, yet at night we shall have our sorrow to cease, for he is
exorable, and has no pleasure in ye death of a sinner: he rather would our
conversion and turning. Oh turn you now and convert, yet once again I humbly
beseech you, and then the kingdom of heaven shall draw nygh. The eye has not
seen, the ear has not heard, nor the heart of man is able to conceive the
joys prepared for us if we repent, amend our lives, and heartily turn to
the Lord. But if ye repent not, but be as ye were, and go on forwards with
the wicked, following the fashion of the world, the Lord will lead you on with
wicked doers, ye shall peryshe in your wickedness, your blood will be upon
your own heads, your part shall be with hipocrites, where shall be weeping and
gnashyng of teeth, ye shall be cast from the face of the Lord for ever and
ever, eternal shame, sorrow, woe, and misery shall be both in body and soul
to you world without end. Oh therefore, right dear to me in the Lord, turn
you, turn you, repent you, repent you, amend, amend your lives, depart from
evil, do good, follow peace and pursue it. Come out from Babylon, cast of the
works of darkness, put on Christ, confess his truth, be not ashamed of his
Gospel, prepare your selves to the cross, drink of Gods cup before it come
to the dregs, and then shall I with you and for you, rejoice in the day of
judgment, which is at hand, and therefore prepare your selves thereto I
heartily beseech you. And thus I take my Vale in aeternum with you in this
present life, mine own dear hearts in the Lord. The Lord of mercy be with
us all, and give us a joyful, and sure meetyng in his kingdom. Amen, Amen.
Out of prison the.11. of February. Anno. 1555.

Your own in the Lord for ever. John Bradford.

To all those that profess the name and true religion of our Savior Jesus
Christ, in Lankeshyre and Chesshire, and specially abiding in Manchester and
theraboutes, John Bradford a most unworthy servant of the Lord, now not only
in bonds but also condemned for the same true religion, wishes mercy and
grace, peace and increase of all godliness, from god the father of all piety,
through the deserts of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the workyng of the most
mighty and lively spirit the comforter for ever. Amen.
I Hear it reported credibly (my derely beloved in ye lord) that my heavenly
father has thought it good to provide that, The enemies had appointed to burn
him at Ma^chester, but the lord altered their purpose.
as I have preached his true gospel and doctrine among you by word, so I
shall testify and confyrme the same by deed: that is, I shall with you leave my
life, which by his providence I first received there (for in Manchester was I
borne) for a seal to the doctrine I have taught with you and emonges you: so
that if from henceforth you waver in the same you have none excuse at all. I
know the enemies of Christ, which exercise this crueltye upon me (I speak it
in respect of mine offense, which is none to the^ wards) think by killyng of
me amongs you, to affray you and others lest they should attempt to teach
Christ truly or believe his doctrine hereafter: but I doubt not but that
heavenly father will by my death more confyrme you in his truth for ever. And
therefore I greatly rejoice to see Satan and his soldiers supplanted in their
own sapience, which is plain folishnes emonges the wise in deed, that is,
emonges such as have heard gods word, and do follow it, for they only are
accounted wise of the wisdom of God our savior. In deed, if I should
simplye consider my life, with that which it ought to have been, and as God in
his law requires, then could I not but cry as I do. Iustus es domine and
omnia iudicia tua vera: Righteous art thou O lord and all thy judgments are
true. For I have much grieved thee and transgressed thy holy precepts, not
only before my professing the gospel, but sythen also, yea even sithe^ my
coming into prison. I do not excuse but accuse my self before god and all his
church, that I have greuouslye offended my Lord god, I have not lived his
gospel as I should have done. I have sought my self and not symply and only
his glory and my brethernes commodity, I have been to unthankful, secure,
carnal, hypocritical, vayn glorious. etc. Al which my evils the lord of mercy
pardon me for his christ's sake, as I hope and certainly believe he has done
for his great mercy in Christ our redemer. But when I consider the cause of my
condemnation I can not but lament ye I do no more rejoice the^ I do, for it is
gods verity and truth: so that the comdemnation is not a condemnation of
Bradford simply, but rather a condemnation of Christ and his truth: Bradford is
nothing else but an instrument, in whom Christ and his doctrine is condemned.
And therefore (my dearly beloved) rejoice, rejoice and give thanks with me and
for me, that ever god did vouchsafe so great a benefit to our country, as to
choose the most unworthy (I mean my self) to be one, in whom it would please
him to suffer any kind of affliction, much more this violent kind of death
which I perceive is prepared for me emongs you for his sake. Al glory and
praise be given unto god our father for his exceeding great mercy toward me
through Jesus Christ our lord.

But perchance ye will say unto me, what is the cause for the which you are
condemned? we hear say that you deny al prefe^ce of Christ in his holy supper,
and so make it a bare sign and common bread and nothing else. My derely
beloved, what is said of me and will be, I cannot tell. It is told me that M.
Pendleton is gone down to preach with you, not as he has reca^ted (for ye al
know how he has preached contrary to yt he was wont to preach before I came
amongs you) but to reca^t that which he has reca^ted. How he will speak of me
and report before I come, when I am come, and when I am burned, I much pass
not: for he ye is so uncertain and will speak so often against him self, I
cannot think he will speak well of me, except it make for his purpose and
profit. But of this enough. In deed the chief thing which I am condemned for
as an heretyke is, because I deny the sacrament of the altar (which is not
christ's supper, but a plain peruertyng of it, being used as the papists now
use it) to be a real, natural, and corporal presence of christ's body and
blood under the forms and accidents of bread and wine: that is, because I deny
transubstantiation, which is the derling of the devil and daughter and heir to
Antichrists religion, whereby the Mass is mainteyned, christ's supper
perverted, his sacrifice and cross imperfected, his priesthode destroyed, the
ministry taken away, repentance repelled, and al true godliness abandoned. In
the supper of our lord or sacrament of christ's body and blood, I confess and
believe, that there is a true and very presence of whole Christ god and man, to
the faith of ye receauer (but not of the sta^der by or loker on) as there is a
very true presence of bread and wine to the senses of him that is pertaker
thereof. This faith, this doctrine, which co^fenteth with the word of god and
with the true testimony of christ's Church (which the popyshe church does
persecute) will I not forsake, and therefore am I condemned as an heretic and
shall be burned. But my derely beloutd, this truth which I have taught, ye have
received, I believed and do believe, and therein give my life: I hope in god shall
never be burned, bound, nor overcome, but shall tryumphe, have victory and be at
liberty, manger the head of all gods adversaries. For there is no counsel
against the lord, nor no devise of man can be hable to defeat the verity in
any other, then in such as be children of unbelief, which have no love to the
truth, and therefore are given up to believe lies. From which plague the lord
of mercies deliver you and all this realm, my dear hearts in the Lord, I
humblye beeseche his mercy, Amen. And to the end ye might be delivered from
this plague (right dear to me in the Lord) I shall for my farewell with you
for ever in this present life, heartily desire you all in the bowels and blood
of our most merciful Savior Jesus Christ, to attend unto these things,
which now I shall shortly write unto you out of the Holy scriptures of the
Lord. Ye know an he ^aye plague or (rather plagues) of God is fallen upon us,
in taking away our good king, gods true religion, Gods true prophets and
ministers etc. and setting over us such as seek not the Lord after
knowledge, whose endeuoures GOD prospers wonderfully^ to the trial of many,
that his people may both better know themselves, and be known. Now the
cause hereof is our iniquities and grievous sins. We did not know the time of
our visitation, we were unthankful unto god, we contemned the gospel and
carnally abused it to serve our hypocrisy, our vain glory, our viciousnes,
avarice, ydlenes, security. etc. Long did the lord linger and tarry to have
showed mercy upon us, but we were ever the longer, the worse. Therefore most
justly has God dealt with us, and deals with us. Yea, yet we may see, yt
his justice is tempered with much mercy: whereto let us attribute that we are
not utterly consumed: for if the lord should deal with us after our deserts
(alas) how could we abide it? In his anger therefore, seeing he does remember his
mercy undeserved, yea vndesyred on our behalf, let us take occasion the more
spedelye to go out to mete him, not with force and arms, for we are not so
able to withstand him, much less to prevail against him: but to beseech him
to be merciful unto us, and according to his wa^ted mercy to deal with us.
Let us arise with Dauyd and say: Ne intres in iudicium cum seruo tuo. etc.
Enter not into judgment (oh Lord) with thy servant, for in thy sight no flesh
living shall be justified. Let us send ambassadors with the Centurion and say,
Lord we are not worthy to come our selves unto thee, speak the word and we
shall have peace. Let us penite^tly with the Publicane look down on the earth,
knock our hard hearts to burst them, and cry out: oh god be merciful unto us
wretched sinners. Let us with the lost son return and say, O father we have
sinned against heaven and earth and before thee, we are unworthy to be called
thy children. Let us (I say) do on this sort, that is, heartily repent us of
our former evil life and unthankful gospelling past, convert and turn to
god with our whole hearts, hopyng in his great mercy through Christ, and
hartelye calling upon his holy name, and then undoubtedly we shall find and
feel otherwise then yet we feel, both inwardly and outwardly. Inwardly we shall
feel peace of conscience between god and us, which peace passes al
understanding, and outwardly we shall feel much mitigation of these miseries,
if not an outward taking of the^ away.

Therefore my derely beloved in the lord, I your poorest brother now departing
to the Lord, for my vale in aeternum, for this present life, pray you, beseech
you, and even from the very bottom of my heart, for all the mercies of god in
Christ showed unto you, most earnestly beg and crave of you out of prison, as
often out of your pulpittes I have done, that ye will repent you, leave your
wicked and evil life, be sorry for your offenses and turn to the lord, whose
arms are wide open to receive and embrace you, whose stretched out hand to
strike to death, stays that he might show mercy upon you: for he is the lord
of mercy and god of all comfort, he will not the death of a sinner, but rather
that he should return, convert and amend, he has no pleasure in the
destruction of men, his long suffryng draws to repentance before the time of
vengeance and the day of wrath which is at hand, does come. Now is the axe
laid to the root of the tree, utterly to destroy the impenitent. Now is the
fire gone out before the face of the Lord, and who is able to quench it? Oh
therefore repent you, repent you. It is enough to have lived as we have done.
It is enough to have played the wanton gospellers, the proud protestants,
hypocritical and false Christians, as (alas) we have done. Now the lord
speaks unto us in mercy and grace: oh turn before he speak in wrath. Yet is
there mercy with the lord and plenteous redemption: yet has he not forgotten
to show mercy to them that call upon him: oh then call upon him while he may be
found, for he is rich in mercy and plentiful to al them that call upon him: so
that he that calls upon the name of the lord shall be saved. If your sins be
as red as skarlet, the Lord says he will make them as white as snow. He has
sworn and never will repent him thereof, that he will never remember our
iniquities, but as he is god faithful and true: so will he be our God, and we
shall be his people. His law will he write in our hearts, and engraft it in our
minds, and never will he have in mind our unrighteous.

Therefore my dear hearts in the Lord, turn you, turn you to the lord your
father, to the lord your Savior, to the Lord your comforter. Oh why do you
stop your ears and harden your hearts to day, when you hear his voice by me
your porest brother? Oh forget not how that the lord has showed him self
true, and me his true preacher by brynging to pass these plagues which at my
mouth and by my preaching ye often heard before they came: specially when I
entreated of Noes flood, and when I preached of the 23. chap. of. S. Math.
gospel on S. Steue^s day the last yt I was with you. And now by me the same
Lord sends you word (dear country men) that if ye will go on forewardes in
your impenitencie, carnality, hypocrisy, idolatry, couetuousnes, swearing,
gluttony, dronkennes, whoredom, etc. wherewith (alas, alas) our country
flows: if (I say) ye will not turn and leave of, seeing me now burned emongs
you, to assure you on all sides how god seeks you and is sorry to do you hurt,
to plague you, to destroy you, to take vengeance upon you: oh your blood will
be upon your own heads. Ye have been warned and warned again, by me in
preaching, by me in burning. As I said therefore I say again (my dear hearts
and derlinges in the Lord) turn you, turn you, repent you repent you, cease
from doing evil, study to do well, away with idolatry, fly the Romish god
and service, leave of from swearing, cut of carnality, abandon avarice, drive
away dro^kennes, fly from fornication and flattery, from murder and malice,
destroy disceitfulnes and cast away all the works of darkness, put on piety and
godliness, serve god after his word and not after custom, use your tongues to
glorify god by prayer, thanks giving and confession of his truth etc. Be
spiritual, and by ye spirit mortify carnal affections, be sober, holy, true,
loving, gentle, merciful, and then shall the lords wrath cease, not for this
your doyngs sake, but for his mercies sake. Go to therefore (good cuntreyme^)
take this counsel of the lord by me now sent unto you, take it as ye lords
counsel (I say) and not as mine, yt in ye day of judgment I may rejoice with
you and for you: the which thing I heartily desire, and not to be a witness
against you. My blood will cry for vengeance, as against the papists gods
enemies (whom I beseech god if it be his good will, hartelye to forgive, yea even
them which put me to death and are the causers thereof, for they know not what
they do) so will my blood cry for vengeance against you (my dearly beloved in
the lord) if ye repent not, amend not, and turn not unto the Lord. Turn unto
the Lord, yet once more I hertely beseech thee, thou Manchester, thou Bolton,
Burye, Wigyn, Lierpole, Ashton vnderlyne, Mottrine, Stepport, Winsley Eccles,
Priest, Middleton, Radcliefe, and thou City of Westchester, where I have
truly taught and preached the word of god. Turn I say unto you all, and to
all the inhabitauntes thereaboutes, unto the Lord our god, and he will turn unto
you. He will say unto his aungel: it is enough, put up thy sword. The which
thing that he will do, I humbly beseech his goodness for the precious bloodes sake
of his dear son our savior Jesus Christ. Ah good brethren, take in good
part these my last words unto every one of you. Pardon me mine offenses and
negligence in behavior among you. The Lord of mercy pardon us all our
offenses for our savior Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Out of prison, ready to come to you. The.11. of Februarye Anno. 1555. John
Bradford.

To the faithful and such as profess the true doctrine of our Savior Jesus
Christ, dwelling at Walden and thereaboutes, John Bradford a most unworthy
servant of the Lord, now in bands and condemned for the same true doctrine,
wishes grace, mercy and peace, with the increase of all godliness, in
knowledge and living, from God the father of all comfort, through the deserts
of our alone and full redemer Jesus Christ, by the mighty workyng of the most
holy spirit, the comforter for ever. Amen.
WHen I remember how that by the providence and grace of god, I have been a man
by who^ it has pleased him, through my ministry to call you to repentance
and amendment of life somethyng effectually (as it seemed) and to so we emo^gs
you his true doctrine and religion, left that by my affliction and the storms
now risen to try the faithful, and to conform them like to the Image of the
son of GOD, into whose company we are called, ye might be faynte hearted: I
could not but out of prison secretly (for my kepers may not know that I have
pen and ynke) to write unto you a signification of the desire I have that you
should not only be more confirmed in the doctrine I have taught emonges you,
which I take on my death as I shall answer at the day of dome, I am persuaded
to be gods assured, infallible and plain truth: but also should after your
vocation avouch the same by confession, profession, and living. I have not
taught you (my dearly beloved in the lord) fables, tales, or untruth, but I
have taught you the verity, as now by my blood gladly (praised therefore be
god) I shall seal up the same. In deed to confess the truth unto you and to
all the church of Christ, I do not think of my self but that I have most
iustlye deserved not only this kind, but also all kinds of death and that
eternallye, for mine hypocrisye, vain glory, uncleanness, self love,
covetousness, ydlenes, unthankfulness, and carnal professing of gods holy
gospel, living therein not so purely, louynglye, and painfully as I should
have done: the lord of mercy for the blood of Christ pardon me as I hope, yea I
certainelye believe he has done for his holy names sake through christ. But my
dearly beloved, ye and all the whole world may see and easily perceive, that
the prelates persecute in me another thing then mine iniquities: eue^ christ
himself, christ's verity and truth, because I can not, dare not, nor will not
confess transubstantiation, and how that wicked men, yea myce and dogs,
eating the sacrament (which they term of the altar, thereby ouerthrowyng
christ's holy supper utterly) do eat christ's natural and real body borne
of the Virgin Mary. To believe and confess as gods word teaches, the
primative church believed, and all the catholyke and good holy fathers taught
for 500. years at ye least after christ, that in the supper of the Lord (which
the mass overthrows, as it does Christ's priesthode, sacrifyce, death and
passion, the ministry of his word, true faith, repentance and all godliness)
whole Christ god and man is present by grace to the faith of the receyuers, but
not of the standers by and lokers on, as bread and wine is to their senses: will
not serve, and therefore I am condemned and shall be burned out of hand as an
heretyke. Wherefore I thank my lord god heartily, that will and does vouch me
worthy to be an instrument, in who^ he him self would suffer. For ye see my
affliction and death is not simplye because I have deserved no less, but much
more at his hands and justice: but rather because I confess his veritye and
truth, and am not affrayd through his gift, so to do, that ye also might be
confirmed in his truth.

Therefore my dearly beloved, I heartily do pray you and so many as unfeignedly
love me in god, to give with me and for me most hartye thanks to our heavenly
father through our Savior Jesus Christ, for this his exceeding great mercy
toward me and you also, yt your faith should not waver from the doctrine I have
taught and ye have received. For what can ye desire more to assure your
consciences of the veritye taught by your Preachers, then their own lives?
Go to therefore (my dear hearts in ye lord) waver not in Christ's religion
truly taught you and set forth in King Edwards days. Never shall the enemies
be able to burn it, to prison it and keep it in bonds. Us they may prison,
they may bind and burn, as they do and will do so long as shall please the
lord, but our cause, religion and doctrine which we confess, they shall never
be able to vanquishe and put away. Their Idolatry and popyshe religion, shall
never be builte in the consciences of men that love the truth. As for those
that love not gods truth, that have no pleasure to walk in ye ways of the
Lord, in those (I say) the devil shall prevail, for god will give them strong
illusio^, to believe lies. Therefore (dear brethren and sisters in the Lord) I
humbly beseech you and pray you in the bowels and blood of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, now going to the death for the testimony of Jesus, as often times
I have done before this present out of the pulpit, that ye would love the
Lords truth: love it (I say) to live it, and frame your lives thereafter. Alas
ye know the cause of all these plagues fallen upon us, and of ye success
which Gods adversaries have daily, is for our not living gods word^: ye know
how that we are Gospellers in lips and not in life: we are carnal, full of
concupiscene, idle, unthankful, unclean, covetous, a^^^gant, dissemblers,
craftye, subtle, malicious, false, backebiters etc.

And even glutted with gods word, yea we lothed it, as did the Israelites the
Manna in the wilderness: and therefore as to them the Lords wrath waxed whotte,
so does it unto us: so that there is no remedy but that (for it is better late
to turn then never to turn) we confess our faults even from the bottom of
our hearts, and with hearty repentance, (which god work in us al for his
mercyes sake) we run unto the Lord our God, which is exorable, merciful and
sorry for the evil poured out upon us, and cry out unto him with Daniell saying:
we have sinned, we have sinned, greuouslye (Oh lord god) against thy majesty,
we have heaped iniquity upon iniquity, the measure of our transgressio^s
flows over, so yt just is thy wrath and vengeance fallen upon us: for we are
very miserable, we have co^te^pned thy long suffering, we have not harkened to
thy voice when thou haste called us by thy preaches, we hardened our hearts,
and therefore now deserve that thou send thy curse hereupon to harden our
hearts also, that we should henceforth have eyes and see not, ears and hear
not, hearts and understand not, lest we should be converted and saved. Oh be
merciful unto us, space us good Lord and al thy people who^ thou have dearly
bought. Let not thine enemies triumph altogether and always against thee, for
then will they be puffed up. Look down and behold the pitiful complaints of the
poor: let the sorrowful sighinges of the simple come in thy sight, and be not
angry with us for ever. Turn us (Oh Lord god of hosts) unto thee and turn
thee unto us, that thou may be justified in thy sweet se^tences, and
overcome when you art iudg^d, as now thou art of our adversaries: for they say
where is their god? Can God deliver them now? Can their gospel serve them? Oh
Lord how long? For the glory of thy name, and for thy honors sake, in the
bowels and blood of Jesus Christ, we humbly beseech thee, come and help us, for
we are very miserable. On this sort, I say, dearelye beloved, let us publikelye
and privately bewail our sins: but so that hereto we join ceasing from
wilfulnes and sin of purpose, for else the Lord hears not our prayers, as
David says. And o^ Saint John it is written, the impenitent sinners god
hears not. Now impenitent are they which purpose not to amend their lives: as
for example, not only those which follow still their pleasures in covetousness,
uncleanness, carnalitie: but those also which for fear or favor of man, do
against their conscience, consent to the romish rags, and resort to the rotten
religion, communicating in service and ceremonies with the papists, thereby
declaring themselves to love more the world then God, to fear more man then
Christ, to dread more the loss of temporal things, then of eternal: in whom
it is evident, the love of God abides not: for he that loves the world, has
not Gods love abidyng in him, says the Evangelist.

Therefore (my dear hearts, and dear again in the lord) remember what ye have
professed, Christ's religion and name, and the renouncing of the devil, sin
and the world. Remember yt before ye learned A. B. C. your lesson was Christ's
cross. Forget not that Christ will have no disciples, but such as will promise
to deny them selves, to take up their cross (mark, they must take it up) and
follow him, and not the multitude, custom and use. Consider for gods sake, yt
if we gather not with Christ, we scatter abroad. What should it profit a man
to win the whole world, and lose his own soul? We must not forget that this
life is a wilderness and not a paradyse, here is not our home, we are now in
warfare: we must needs fight, or else be taken prisoners. Of al things we have
in this life, we shall carry nothing with us. If Christ be our captain, we must
follow hi^ as good soldiers. If we keep company with him in afflittion, we shall
be sure of his society in glory. If we forsake not him, he will never for sake
us. If we confess him he will confess us: but if we deny him, he will deny us.
If we be ashamed of him, he will be ashamed of us. Wherefore as he forsook
father, heaven, and al things to come to us: so let us forsake all things to
come to him, being sure and most certain yt we shall not lose thereby. Your
children shall find and feel it double, yea treble, what soever ye lose for ye
Lords sake, and ye shall find and feel peace of conscience and frendeship with
god, which is more worth then all the goods of the world.

My dearly beloved, therefore for the Lords sake consider these things, which
I now write unto you of love, for my Vale and last farewell for ever in this
present life. Turn to the Lord, repent ye your evil and unthankful life,
declare repentance by the fruits, take time whiles you have it, come to the
Lord whiles he calls you, run into his lap whiles his arms be open to
embrase you, seek him whiles he may be found, call upon him whiles time is
conueniente, forsake and fly from all evil both in religion and in the rest
of your life and conversation, let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works and praise god in the day of his visitation. Oh come
again, come again ye strange children and I will receive you, says the Lord.
Convert and turn to me and I will turn unto you. Why will ye needs perish? As
sure as I live (swereth the Lord) I will not your death, turn therefore unto
me. Can a woman forget the child of her womb? If she should, yet will not I
forget you, says the lord your god. I am he, I am he which puts away your
sins for mine own sake. Oh then (dear friends) turn, I say, unto your
dearest father: Cast not these his sweet and loving words to the ground and
at your tail, for the Lord watches on his word to perform it, which is in
two sorts: to them that lay it up in their hearts and believe it, will he pay
all and eternal joy and comfort. But to them that cast it at their backs
and wilfully forget it, to them (I say) will he pour out indignation and
eternal shame. Wherefore I heartily yet once more beseech and pray you and every
of you, not to contemn this poor and simple exhortation which now out of
prison I make unto you, or rather the Lord by me. Loath would I be to be a
witness against you in the last day, as of truth I must be if ye repent not, if
ye love not gods gospel, yea if ye live it not. Therefore to conclude, repent,
love gods gospel, live it in all your conversation: so shall gods name be
praised, his plagues mitigated, his people comforted, and his enemies ashamed.
Grant all this thou gracious Lord god to every of us, for thy dear sons
sake our Savior Jesus Christ: To whom with thee and the holy ghost be
eternal glory for ever and ever, Amen. The 12. of Febr. 1555.

By the bondsman of the Lord your afflicted poor brother. John Bradford.

To the honorable lord Russell, now Earl of Bedford, being then in trouble
for the veritye of gods Gospel.
THe everlasting and most gracious god and father of our savior Jesus Christ,
bless your good Lordship with all manner of heavenly blessings in the same
Christ our only comfort and hope, Amen.

Praised be god our father which has vouched you worthy, as of faith in his
Christ, so of his cross for the same. Magnified be his holy name, who as he
has delivered you from one cross, so he has made you willinge (I trust) and
ready to bear an other when he shall see his time to lay it upon you: for these
are the most singular gifts of God given as to few, so to none else but to
those few which are most dear in his sight. Faith is reckened and worthily,
among the greatest gifts of god, yea it is the greatest it self yt we enjoy,
for by it, as we be justified and made gods children, so are we temples and
possessours of ye holy spirit, yea of Christ also, Ephesians. 4. and of the father
him self, John. 14. By faith we drive the devil away. 1. Pet. 5. We overcome ye
world. 1. Ioh. and are already citizens of heaven and fellows with gods dear
saints. But who is able to reckon the riches that this faith brings with her
unto the soul she sits upon? No man nor Angel. And therefore (as I said)
of al gods gifts, she may be set in the top and have the uppermost fear.
The which thing if men considered (in that she comes alonely from gods own
mercy seat, by the hearing, not of Mass or Mattyns, Diriges or such draffe,
but of the word of God in such a tongue as we can and do understand) as they
would be diligent and take great heed for doing or seeing any thing which might
cast her down (for the^ they fall also) so would they with no less care, read
and hear Gods holy word, joining thereto most earnest and often prayer,
as well for the more and better understanding, as for the loving, living and
confessing of the same, maugre the head of the devil, ye world, our flesh,
reason, goods possessions, carnal friends, wife, children, and very life here,
if they should pulle us bark to harken to their voice and counsel, for more
quiet, sure, and longer use of them.

Now, notwithstanding this excellency of faith, in that we read the Apostle to
match therewith, yea (as it were) to prefer suffering persecution for
Christ's sake, Philip. 1. I trow no man will be so fond as to think
otherwise, but that I and all gods children have cause to glorify and praise
god, which has vouched you worthy so great a blessing. For though ye reason or
wisdom of the world think of ye cross according to their reach and
according to their present sense, and therefore flies from it as from a most
great ignominy and shame: yet Gods scholars have learned otherwise to think
of the cross, that it is the frame house in the which god frames his children
like to his son Christ: the furnace that fyneth gods gold: the high way
to heaven: the Suit and Liuerey that gods servants are served withal: the
Earnest and beginning of al consolation and glory. For they (I mean gods
scholars, as your Lordship is I trust) do enter into gods Sanctuary, Psalm. 72
lest their fete slip. They look not as beasts do, on things present only but
on things to come, and so have they as present to faith, the judgment and
glorious coming of Christ, like as ye wicked have now their worldly welthe
wherein they wallow and will wallow til they tu^ble headlong into hell, where are
torments too terrible and endless. Now they follow the Feende as the Bear does
ye train of honey and the Sow the swillinges, till they be brought into the
slaughterhouse, and then they know that their prosperity has brought them to
perdition. Then cry they woe, woe, we went the wrong way: we counted these men
(I mean such as you be ye suffer for gods sake loss of goods, friends and
life, who^ they shall see endued with rych robes of righteousness, crowns of
most pure precious gold, and palms of conquest in the goodly glorious palace
of ye Lamb, where is eternalioye, felicity etc.) we counted (will they then
say) these men but fools and mad men, we took their conditions to be but
curiosity, etc. But then will it be to late, then the time will be turned,
laughing shall be turned into weeping, and weeping into rejoicing. Read Sapien.
2. 3. 4. 5.

Therefore (as before I have said) great cause have I to thank God which has
vouched you worthy of this most bountiful blessing: much more then you have
cause (my good Lord) so so be, I mean thankful. For look upon your
vocation I pray you, and tell me how many noble men, Earls sons, Lords,
Knights and men of estimation has God in this Realm of England dealte thus
with all? I dare say you think not that you have deserved this. Only Gods
mercy in his Christ has wroughte this on you, as he did in Ieremyes time on
Abimeleche, in Achabs time on Abdias, in Christ's time on Joseph of Arimathia,
in the Apostles time on Sergius Paulus and the Queen of Candaces chamberleyne.
Only now be thankful and continue, continue, continue (my good Lord) continue
to confess Christ. Be not ashamed of him before men, for then will not he be
ashamed of you. Now will he try you: stick fast unto him and he will stick
fast by you: he will be with you in trouble and deliver you. But the^ must you
cry unto him, for so it precedeth: Psa. 9^.
he cried unto me and I heard: I was with him in trouble etc. Remember Lothes
wife which looked back. Remember Fraunces Spira. Remember that none is crowned
but he that strives lawfullye. Remember that all you have, is at Christ's
commandment. Remember he lost more for you then you can lose for him.
Remember you lose not that which is lost for his sake, for you shall find much
more here and else where. Remember you shall dye, and when where, and how, you
can not tell. Remember the death of sinners is most terrible. Remember the
death of Gods Saints is precious in his sight. Remember ye multitude goes the
wideway, which windeth to woe. Remember yt the strait gate which leads to
glory has but few travelers. Remember Christ bids you strive to enter in
thereat. Remember he that trusts in the lord shall receive strength to stand
against all the assaults of his enemies. Be certain all the hears of your head
are numbered. Be certain your good father has poynted bounds over the which ye
devil dare not look. Commit your self to him: he is, has been, and will be
your keeper: cast your care on him and he will care for you. Let Christ be your
scope and mark to prick at: let hi^ be your patro^ to work by: let hi^ be
your ensample to follow: give hi^ as your heart so your hand, as your mind so
your tou^g, as your faith so your fete, and let his word be your candle to go
before you in all matters of religion. Blessed is he that walks not to these
popysh prayers, nor stands at the^ nor sits at them: Psa. 1 2. Cor. 6.
glorifye God in both soul and body. He that gathers not with Christ
scatters abroad. Use prayer, look for gods help, which is at hand to them
yt ask and hope thereafter assuredly. In which prayer I hartelye desire your
Lordship to remember us, who as we are going with you right gladly (God
therefore be praised) so we look to go before you, hoping that you will follow,
if God so will, according to your dailye prayer: thy will be done on earth
etc. The good spirit of God always guide your Lordship unto the end, Amen.

Your Lordships own for ever, John Bradford.

An other letter to the Lord Russell
THe eternal mercyes of God in his dear son our savior Jesus Christ, be
more and more felt and heartily perceived of you, my good Lord, to your endless
joy and comfort, Ame^.

Because your Lordshippe looks not for thanks of me for Gods benefits
ministered by you, and in few words I can not dulye declare that I would do,
I will omit the same, praying God our dear father in the day of his
retribution to remember it, and in the mean season to assist, counsel, and
comfort you as his child for ever in all things. I doubt not but that you have
that childly opinion. Yea persuasion of his goodness in Christ toward you: the^
which blessing (my good lord) none is greater given to man upon earth. For
assuredly he that has it, is the very child of God, elect before al time in
Christ Jesus our lord, and therefore shall enjoy everlasting felicity, although
he be here afflicted and tossed in trouble and temptation to his trial, that
when he is found faithful he may receive the crown of glory. The only thing
that discerns the child of God from the wicked, is this faith, trust and hope
in gods goodness through Christ, the which I trust you have, God increase it in
you and make you thankful. Certainly such as enjoy it be happy: if they be
happy, and that happiness is not where any thing is to be desired, they can
not but for ever be most assured of perseueraunce to salvation, for if they
fall the lord puts under his hand that they shall not perish: they are
beloved of Christ which loves them to the very end. God for his mercy sake in
Christ open more and more your eyes to see this his swetenes in Christ, to
make you secure in him, and awake the flesh from her securitye, to be vigilant
and heedeful how you may most behave your self in thankful obedience to God
and careful help and service to his people, that all your whole life may
tend to this, how by example and otherwise you may do good to others, and
still confirm his true service and religion by your constancy. Wherein if you
continue to the end you shall receive an incorruptible crown of immmortal and
unspeakable glory: but if for because of gods tarying, which is only to prove
you, you relent (which god forbid) thinking it enough in heart to serve god, and
in body to do as may make most to your commodity temporally, as many do: then
undoubtedly your standing hitherto (wherefore gods holy name be praised) shall
make much more for the papisticall kingdom and glory thereof, then if you had
never done as you have done. Whereof (my good lord) be not wearye nor
unthankful, for with the godly and in the church of god you are and shall be had
as a worthy member of christ, worthy of double honor, because god of his
goodness has vouched you worthy with out your deserts. In the one, that is for
lands and possessions, you have companions many: but in the other (my good
lord) you are A per se A with us to our comfort and joy unspeakable, so long
as you continue (as I trust you will do to the end) and to our most heavy
sorrow (which god forbid) if you should relente in any point.

Therefore I beseech your lordshippe in the bowels and blood of our savior Jesus
Christ, to persevere and continue to the end. He that has not tempted you
hitherto above your strength, will continue so to the end. If for a time he
hyde his face from you, yet he does it but for a momente to make you the more
heartily to cry to him, and surely he will hear you, not only when you are in
cryeng, but also whilst you are in thynkyng how to cry: he is with you in
trouble and will in deed deliver you. The longer he taryeth, the more
pleasantly and comfortably will he appear. Only believe and look for his help
and you shall have peace, such peace as the world knows not nor can know, the
which god give us a true feelyng of, and then we shall not be grieved with
afflictions, but rather rejoice in the^, because they are but exercises and
trials of faith, to the increase of faith and patience, with many godly
virtues. etc.

As concerning the number and charges of us hear (which this day I heard your
lordship desired to understand) this is so much as I know, that we are iiij.
in number together, whose names this bearer shall tell you. The charges of the
least is xij. s. a weak. There are.v. others whose charges be not so great,
but as they will themselves, I mean they pay daily as they take, and that to
the uttermost: these were never ministers. I trust there is no urgent need in
any of us al, and (I think) least in my self, through god my fathers
providence, the which I have and do daily wonderfullye feel, his name
therefore be praised. Other things I would write, but because they may be more
safely told by this bringer, I have omytted the same for that purpose. God of
his goodness ever be with you and keep your lordship to the very end as his
dear child, Ame^, Amen.

Your humble to command. John Bradford.

To. M. VVarcuppe and his wife, Maistres Wilkinson, and other of his godly
friends with their families.
THe same peace our savior Christ left with his people, which is not without
war with the world, almighty god work plentifullye in your hearts now and
for ever, Amen.

The time I perceive is come wherein the lords ground will be known, I mean
it will now shortly appear, who have received gods gospel into their hearts in
deed, to the taking of good root therein, for such will not for a little heat
or sun burning, wyther, but stiffely will stand and grow on, mangre the
malice of al burning showers and tempests. And for as much as (my be loved in
the Lord) I am persuaded of you, that ye be in deed the children of god,
gods good ground, which grows and will grow on (by gods grace) bringing forth
fruit to gods glory after your vocatio^s, as occasion shall be offered, burn ye
sun never so whote: therefore I cannot but so signify unto you, and heartily
pray you and every one of you, accordingly to go on forewardes after your
master Christ, not sticking at the foul way and stormye wether which you are
come into and are like so to do, of this being most certain, yt the end of
your journey shall be pleasant and joyful, in such a perpetual rest and
blissefulnes, as cannot but swalowe up the showers that ye now feel and are
soused in, if ye often set it before your eyes after Paul's counsel in the
later end of the 4. and beginning of the 5. of the 2. epist. to ye Cor. Read
it I pray you and remember it often, as a restoratiue to refreshe you, least ye
fainte in the way. And besides this, set before you also, that though ye
weather be foul and storms grow apace, yet go not ye alone, but other your
brothers and sisters pad the same path, as S. Peter tells us, and therefore
company should cause you to be ye more courageous and chereful. But if ye had
no company at al to go presently with you, I pray you tell me if even from the
beginning, the best of gods friends have found any fairer weather and way to the
place whether ye are going I mean heaven) then ye now find and are like to do:
except ye will with the worldlings, which have their portion in this life,
tarry still by the way till ye storms be ouerpaste, and then either night will so
approach that ye cannot travail, either the doors will he sparred before ye
come, and so you shall lodge without in wonderful evil lodgings. Read Apo. 22.
Begin at Abel and come from him to Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph the
Patriarckes, Moses, David, Daniel, and all the Saints in ye old testament, and
tell me whether uer any of them found any fairer way then ye now find. If the
old Testament will not serve, I pray you come to the new, and begin with Mary
and Joseph, and come from the^ to Zachary, Elizabeth, John Baptist, and every
one of the Apostles and Evangelists, and search whether they al found any other
way into the City, we travel toward, then by many tribulacions. Besides
these, if ye should call to remembrance the primative church, lord god ye
should see so many to have given cherefully their bodies to most grievous
torments rather then they would be stopped in their journey, yt there is no day
in the year, but (I dare say) a M. was the fewest that with great joy lost
their homes here, but in the City they went unto, have found other manner of
homes then man's mind is able to conceive. But if none of al these were, if ye
had no company now to go with you, as ye have me your poor brother and bondsman
of the lord, with many other I trust in god if ye had none other of the
fathers, Patriarckes, good Kings, Prophets, Apostels, Evangelists, Martyrs and
other holy saints and children of God that in their journey to heaven ward
found as ye now find and are like to find if ye go on forward as I trust
ye will: yet ye have your master and your captain Jesus Christ, the dear
derlyng and only begotten and beloved son of God, in whom was all the
fathers pleasure, joy and delectation, ye have him to go before you, no fayrer
way but much fouler, into this our city of Jerusalem. I need not (I trust) to
rehearse what manner of way he found. Begin at his birth and till ye come to
his burial, ye shall find that every foot and stryde of his journey, was no
better, but much worse then yours now is.

Wherefore (my derely beloved in the Lord) be not so deinty as to look for that
at gods hands your dear father, which the fathers Patriarckes, Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, Saints, and his own son Jesus Christ did not
find. Hitherto we have had fair way (I trow) and fair weather also: now
because we have loitered by the way and not made the speed we should have
done, our loving lord and sweet father has ouercast the weather and styrred up
storms and tempests that we might with more have ru^ne out our race before
night come, and the doors be sparred. The devil stands now at every Inn door
in his city and country of this world, cryeng unto us to tarry and lodge in
this or that place, till the storms be ouerpast: not that he would not have us
wette to the skin, but that the time might ouerpasse us to our utter
destruction. Therefore beware of his entiseme^ts: cast not your eyes on things
that be present, phi. 3.
how this man does and how that man does: but cast your eyes on the gleue ye
run at, or else ye will loose the game. Ye know that he which runs at the
gleue, does not look on other that stand by and go this way or that way,
but altogether he looks on the gleue, and on them that run with him that
those which be behind overtake him not, and that he may overtake them which
be before: even so should we do, leave of lookyng on those which will not run
the race to heavens bliss by the pathe of persecution with us, and cast our
eyes on the end of our race and on them that go before us that we may
overtake them, and on them which come after us, that we may provoke them to
come the faster after. He that shoots will not cast his eyes in his shooting
on them that stand by or ride by the ways (I trow) but rather on the mark he
shoots at, for else he were like to win the wrong way: Even so my derely
beloved, let your eyes be set on the mark ye shoot at, even Christ Jesus,
who for the joy he set before him, did joyfully carry his cross, conte^ning
the shame, and therefore he now sits on the right hand of the throne of god.
Let us follow him, for this did he that we should not be faint hearted. For we
may be most assured, Hebr. 12 Romans 8 2. Tim. 3 Math. 12
that if we suffer with him, we shall undoubtedly reign with him, but if we
deny him, surely he will deny us: for he that is ashamed of me (says
Christ) and of my gospel in this faithles generation, I will be ashamed of him
before the Angels of God in heaven. Oh how heavy a sentence is this to al
such as know the Mass to be an abominable idol, full of idolatry, blasphemy
and sacrilege against god and his Christ (as undoubtedly it is) and yet for
fear of men, for loss of life or goods, yea some for advantage and gain,
will honest it with their presence, dissemblyng both with God and man, as their
own heart and conscience does accuse them? Better it were that such had never
known the truth, then thus wittinglye, and for the fear or favor of man,
whose breath is in his nosethrelles, Esaias. 2 2. Pet. 2 Heb. 6.10.
to dissemble it or rather (as in deed it is) to deny it. The end of such is
like to be worse then their beginning. Such had need to take heed of the two
terrible places to the Hebrews in the vi. and x. Chapters, least by so doing
they fall therein. Let them beware they play not wily beguile themselves, as
some do I fear me which go to Mass, and because they worship not, nor knele
not, nor knock not as others do, but sit still in their pues, therefore they
think they rather do good to others the^ hurt. But (alas) if these men would
look into their own consciences, there should they se that they are very
dissemblers and in seking to deceive others (for by this means the magistrates
think them of their sort) they deceive themselves. They think at the
elevation time, al men's eyes are set upon the^ to mark how they do. They
think others hearing of such me^ going to mass, do see or inquire of their
behavior there. Oh if there were in those men that are so present at ye
mass, either love to god, or to their brethern, the^ would they for the one or
both, openly take gods part and admonish the people of their idolatry: Math.
10 3. Reg. 8 Apoc. 3
they fear man more then him which has power to cast both soul and body into
hell fire, they halte on both knees: they serve.ij. masters. God have mercy
upon such and open their eyes with his eye salve that they may see, that they
which take not part with god, are against God, and that they which gather not
with Christ, do scatter abroad. Oh that they would read what Saint John
says will be done to the fearful. Apoc. 21 Apo. 3.
The counsel given to the church of Laodicea is good counsel for such.

2. Tim 1 Romans 1
But to return to you again (derely beloved) be no tie ashamed of gods gospel.
It is the power of god to salvation, to al those that do believe it. Be therefore
pertakers of the afflictions, as God shall make you hable, knowing for
certain, that he will never tempte you farther then he will make you able to
bear: 1. Cor. 10. phi. 1. 1. pet. 3. Math. 5
And think it no small grace of god to suffer persecution for gods truth, for
the spirit of god rests upon you, and ye are happy as one day ye shall see.
Read 2 Thessalonians. 1. and Hebr. 12. As the fire hurts not gold but makes it
fyner, so shall ye be more pure by suffering with Christ. 1. Pet. 1. The
flaile and wind hurts not the wheat but cleanses it from the chaste. And ye
(dearly beloved) are gods wheat, fear not therefore the flayle, fear not the
fannyng wind, fear not the millstone, fear not the oven, for all these make
you more meet for the lords own toothe. Soap, though it be black, soileth
not the clothe, but rather at the length makes it more clean: so does the
black cross help us to more whitenes, if God strike with his batteldore.
Romans 8
Because ye are gods sheep, prepare your selves to the slaughter, always
knowing that in the syghte of the lord, our death shall be precious. The souls
under the altar, look for us to fill up their number: happy are we if god
have so appointed us. 1. pet. 5 Math. 10.
How soever it be (derely beloved) cast your selves wholye upon the Lord,
with whom all the hears of your heads are numbered, so that not one of them
shall perish. Will we, nyll we, we must drink gods cup if he have appointed
it for us. Drink it wyllyngly then, and at the first when it is full, lest
peradventure if we linger, we shall drink at the length of the dregs with the
wicked, Psalm. 75 1. pet 4
if at the beginning we drink not with his children: for with them his
judgment begins, and when he has wrought his will on mount Syon, then will
he visit the nations round about.

Submit your selves therefore under the mighty hand of the Lord. 1. pet. 7 Romans
8
No man shall touch you without his knowledge. When they touch you
therefore, know it is to your weal: GOD thereby will work to make you like
unto Christ here, that ye may be also like unto him elsewhere. Acknowledge
your unthankfulness and sin, and bless god yt corrects you in ye world, 1.
Cor. 11.
because ye shall not be damned with ye world. Otherwise might he correct us,
then in making us to suffer for ryghteousnes sake: but this he does because we
are not of the world. Call upon his name through Christ for his help, as he
commands us. Believe that he is merciful to you, hears you, and helps
you: Psa. 50. Psalm. 92
I am with him in trouble, and will deliver him says he. Know that god has
appointed bounds over the which the devil, and all the world shall, not
pass. If all things seem to be against you, yet say with Job. If he kill me I
will hope in him. Read the 91. psalm, and pray for me your poor brother and
fellow suff^er for gods gospels sake, his name therefore be praised, and of of
his mercy he make me and you worthy to suffer with good conscience for his names
sake. Die once we must, and when, we know not: happy are they who^ god gives
to pay natures det: I mean to dye for his sake. Here is not our home, therefore
let us accordingly consider things, alwais having before our eyes heavenly
Jerusalem, Heb. 12. Apo. 21.22. ye way thither to be by persecutions: the dear
friends of God, how they have gone it after ye example of our savior Jesus
christ, whose footesteps let us follow eue^ to the very Gallows, if god so
will, not doubtyng but that as he within three days rose again immortal: even
so we shall do in our time: that is when the trumpe shall blow, and the aungel
shall shoots, and the son of man shall apeare in the clouds with innumerable
saints and angels in majesty and great glory, then shall the dead arise,
and we shall be caught up into the clouds to mete the lord, and so be always
with him. Comfort your selves with these words and pray for me for gods sake.
Ecarcere. 19. Nouemb. 1553.

John Bradford.

To Sir James Hales knight, then prisoner in the Counter in Bredestrete.
THe god of mercy, and father of all comfort, plentifully power out upon you,
and in you his mercy, and with his consolations comfort and strengthen you to
the end, for his and our Christ's sake, Amen.

Although, right worshhpfull Sir, many causes might move me to be content,
with cryeng for you to your god and my god, that he would give you grace to
persevere well, as he has right notably begone to the great glory of his
name, and comfort of all such as fear him, as lack of learning, of
familiarity, yea acquaintance (for I think I am unknown to you both by face
and name) and other such like things: yet I cannot content my self, but
presume somethyng to scrible unto you, not that I think my scriblyng can do
you good but that I might hereby declare my (...) and compassion, love, and
affection I bear toward your mastership, which is contented, yea desirous
with us poor mysers, to confess Christ's gospel in these perilous times and
days of trial. Oh Lord god how good art thou, which do thus gleane out
grapes, I mean children for thy self, and brethren for Christ? Look good.
M. Hales on your vocation, not many judges, not many knights, not many landed
men, not many rich me^ and welthy to live as you are, has god chose^ to suffer
for his sake, as he has now done you. Certainly I dare say, you think not so
of your self, as though God were bound to prefer you, or had need of you:
but rather attribute this, as all good things, unto his free mercy in Christ.
Again I dare say, you being a wise man, judge of things wisely, that is
concerning this your cross, you judge of it not after the world and people,
which is magnus erroris magister, nor after the judgment of reason and
worldly wisdom, which is folyshnes to faith, nor after the present sense,
to yt which non videtur gaudij sed molestioe, as Paul writes: Heb. 1^
but after the word of god, which teaches your cross to be, in respect of
your self between god and you, gods chastising and your fathers correction,
nurtour, schole, trial, pathway to heaven, glory and felicity, and the furnace
to consume the dross and mortifye the relics of old Adam which yet remain:
yea even the frame house to fashion you like to the dearest Saints of god here,
yea to Christ the son of God, that else whence you might be like unto him.

Now concerning your cross in respect of the world between the world and you,
gods word teaches it to be a testimonial of Gods truth, of his providence, of
his power, of his justice, of his wisdom, of his anger against sin, of his
goodness, of his judgment, of your faith and religion: so that by it you are to
the world a witness of God, one of his testes, that he is true, he rules all
things, he is just, wise, and at the length will judge the world and cast the
wicked into perdition, but the godly he will take and receive into his
eternal habitation. I know you judge of things after faythes fetch and the
effects or ends of things, and so you see aeternum pondus gloriae, 2. Cor. 4.
which this cross shall bring unto you, dum non spectas ea quae videntur, sed
ea quae non videntur. Let the worldlings way things and look upon ye affairs
of men with their worldly and corporal eyes, as did many in subscription of
the kings last will, and therefore they did that for the which they beshrewd
themselves: but let us look on things with other manner of eyes, as god be
praised you did in not doing that which you were desired, and driven at to have
done. You then beheld things not as a man, but as a man of god, and so you do
now in religion, at the least hitherto you have done, and that you might do so
still, I humbly beseech and pray you, say with David: Psa. 117.
Defeceru^t oculi mei in eloquium tuu^, qua^do consolaberis me? Though you be
as vter in fumo (for I hear you want health) yet ne obliuiscaris
iustificationes dei: but cry out, quot sunt dies serui tui, qua^do facies de
persequentibus me iudicium? Aba. 2. psa. 30.
And be certain quod dominus veniens veniet and non tardabit. Si moram
fecerit, expecta illum: for he is but ad moment um in ira sua and vita in
voluntate eius. Esaye. 26.
Ad vesperam demorabitur fletus, and ad matutinum letitia. Follow therefore
Esayes Counsel: Abscondere ad modicum, ad momentum, donec pertranseat
indignatio eius, which is not indignatio in deed, but to our sense, and
therefore in the 27. Esaye. 27.
Chapter of Esaye God says of his church and people, that as he keeps night
and day, so non est indignatio mihi, says he. The mother sometime beats the
child, but yet her heart melts upon it even in the very beating, and therefore
she casts the rod into the fire, and colleth the child, gives it an apple
and dandleth it most motherly. And to say the truth, the love of mothers to
their children is but a trace to train us to behold the love of God toward
us, and therefore says he: can a mother forget the child of her womb? As who
say, Esaye. 49.
no: but if she should so do, yet will not I forget thee, says the Lord of
hosts. Ah comfortable saying: I will not forget thee says the Lord. In deed
the children of God think oftentimes that God has forgotten them, Psalm. 26
Psa. 70.1^8 37.26. Psa. 31.
and therefore they cry: Ne abscondas faciem tuam a me etc. Ne derelinquas me
domine etc. Whereas in very truth it is not so, but to their present sense, and
therefore David said: ego dixi in excessu meo, proiectus su^ a facie tua. But
was it so? Nay verily. Read his psalm and you shall see. So writes he also in
other places very often, especially in the person of Christ, as when he says:
Deus meus, deus meus vt quid dereliquisti me? he says not vt quid derelinquis
or derelinques me, but vt quid dereliquisti me? Where in deed God had not
left him, but that it was so to his sense, and that this psalm tells full
well, which psalm I pray you now and then read, it is the 22. and thereto join
the.30. and the.116. with diverse other. The same we read in the Prophet Esaias
in his.40. chapter, where he reproves Israel for saying god had forgotten
the^. Nunquid nescis, says he? An non audisti? etc. Qui sperant in domino
mutabunt fortitudinem. And in his.54. Chapter: Noli timere etc. Ad punctum
enimin modico dereliqui te, and in miserationibus magnis congregabo te. In
momento indignationis abscondi faciem meam parumper a te, and in misericordia
sempiterna misertus sum tui, dixit redeptor tuus dominus. Nam istud erit mihi
sicut aquae Noe. Vt enim iuraui ne porro aquae Noe pertransirent terram, sic
iuraui vt non irascar tibi and non increpemte. Montes enim comouebuntur and
colles co^tremiscent, misericordia autem mea non recedet a te, and foedus pacis
meae non mouebitur, dixit miserator tuus dominus.

But the scriptures are full of such sweet places to them that will portare
iram domini and expectare salutem and auxilium eius. As of al temptations this
is the greatest, Mich. 7^
that god has forgotten or will not help us through the pykes, as they say:
so of all services of God, this likes he best, to hope assuredly on him and
for his help always, which is adiutor in tribulationibus, 1. Cor. 11.
and does more gloriouslye show his power by such as be weak and feel them
selves so. For quo infirmiores sumus, eo sumus in illo robustiores. Psalm. 144
Sic oculi domini be on them that tremble and fear. Voluntatem eorum faciet:
he is with them in their trouble, he will deliver them: antequa^ clamauerint
exaudit eos, as all the scriptures teach us: to the reading whereof and hearty
prayer, I heartily commend you, beseching almightye God, that of his eternal
mercies he would make perfect the good he has begone in you and strengthen you
to the end, that you might have no less hope, but much more, of his help to
your comfort now against your enemies, then already he has given you
against. N. for not subscribing to the Kings will. Be certain, be certain
good Master Hales, that all the hears of your head your dear father has
numbered, so that one of them shall not peryshe: your name is written in the
book of life. Therefore upon god cast all your care, which will comfort you
with his eternal consolations, and make you able to go through the fire (if
need be) which is nothing to be compared to the fire whereinto our enemies
shall fall and lie for ever: from the which the Lord deliver us though it be
through temporal fire, which must be construed according to the end and
profit that comes after it: so shall it then not much dear us to suffer it,
for our master Christ's cause, the which the Lord grant for his mercies
sake, Ame^. From the Kings Bench.

Your humble John Bradford

To his Mother, a godly matrone dwelling in Manchester, and to his brethren and
sisters and other of his friends there.
Our dear and sweet Savior Jesus Christ, whose prisoner at this present
(praised be his name therefore) I am, preserve and keep you my good Mother,
with my brothers and sisters, my father John Traues, Thomas Sorrocolde,
Laurence and James Bradshaw with their wines and families etc. now and for
ever, Amen.

I am at this present in prison sure enough for startyng, to confirm that I
have preached unto you: as I am ready (I thank God) with my life and blood to
seal the same, if god vouch me worthy of that honor. For good Mother and
brethren, it is a most special benefit of god to suffer for his names sake
and gospel, as now I do: I heartily thank him for it, ^. Timo. 2.
and am sure that with him I shall be partaker of his glory, as Paul says:
if we suffer with him we shall reygne with him. Therefore be not faint hearted,
but rather rejoice, at the least for my sake which now am in the right and high
way to heaven: for by many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Acts. 14.
Now will god make known his children. When the wind does not blow, the^
can not a man know the wheat from the chafe: but when the blaste comes,
then flies away the chafe, but ye wheat remains and is so far from being
hurt, that by the wind it is more cleansed from the chafe and known to be
wheat. Gold when it is cast into the fire, is the more precious: so are gods
children by the cross of affliction. Always God begins his judgment at
his house. Christ and the Apostles were in most miserye in the land of Iewry,
but yet the whole land smarted for it after: so now Gods children are first
chastised in this world, yt they should not be dampened with the world, for
surely great plagues of god hang over this realm. Ye all know there was never
more knowledge of god and less godly living and true serui^g of god. It was
counted a folishe thing to serve god truly, and earnest prayer not past upon.
Preaching was but a pastime. The communion was counted to common. Fasting to
subdue the flesh, was far out of use. Alms was almost nothing. Malice,
covetousness and uncleanness was common every where, with swearing, dronkennes
and idleness. God therefore now is come as you have heard me preach, and because
he will not da^pne us with the world, he begins to punyshe us: as me for my
carnal living. For as for my preaching, I am most certain it is and was gods
truth, and I trust to give my life for it by gods grace, but because I lived
not the gospel truly but outwardly, therefore does he thus punyshe me: nay
rather in punishing bless me. And in deed I thank him more of this prison,
then of any parler, yea then of any pleasure that ever I had: for in it I find
God my most sweet good god always. The flesh is punished, first to admonish
us now hartilye to live as we profess, secondlye to certifye the wicked of
their just dampnation, if they repent not.

Perchance you are infirmed and weakened of that which I have preached,
because god does not defend it (as you think) but suffers the old popish
doctrine to come again and prevail: but you must know good Mother, that God
by this does prove and try his children and people whether they will unfeignedly
and simply hang on him and his word. So did he with the Israelites, bringing
them into a deserte, after their coming out of Egypt, where (I mean the
wilderness) was want of al things in comparison of that which they had in Egypt.
Christ when he came into this world, brought no worldly wealth nor quietness
with him, but rather war: the world (says he) shall rejoice, John. 16.
but ye shall mourn and weep, but your weping shall be turned into joy: and
therefore happy are they that mourn and weep, for they shall be comforted. They
are marked then with gods mark in their foreheades and not with ye beasts
mark, I mean the Popes shaven crown, who now with his shauelinges rejoice,
but woe unto them, for they shall be cast down, they shall weep and mourn.
The rich Glutton had here his joy, and Lazarus sorrow, but afterward the time
was changed. The end of carnal joy is sorrow. Now let the whoremonger joy,
with the dronckard, swearer, covetous, malicious, and blind bussard Sir John:
for ye Mass will not bite them, neither make them to blushe as preaching
would. Now may they do what they will, come devils to the Church and go
devils home, for no man must find fault. And they are glad of this: now have
they their hearts desire, as the Sodomites had when Loath was gone, but what
followed? Forsooth when they cried peace all shall be well, then came Gods
vengeance, fire and brymstone from heaven and burnte up every mothers
child: even so dear Mother will it do to our papists. Wherefore fear God:
stick to his word though all the world would swerve from it. Dye you must
once, and when or how, you can not tell. Dye therefore with Christ, suffer
for serving him truly and after his word: for sure may we be yt of al deaths
it is most to be desired to dye for gods sake. This is the most safe kind of
dying: we can not doubt but that we shall go to heaven if we dye for his names
sake. And that you shall dye for his names sake, Gods word will warrant you,
if you stick to that which GOD by me has taught you. You shall see that I
speak as I think: for by Gods grace I will drink before you of this cup if
I be put to it. I doubt not but God will give me his grace, and strengthen me
thereunto: pray that he would, and that I refuse it not. I am at a point even
when my Lord God will, to come to him. Death nor life, prison nor pleasure (I
trust in God) shall be able to separate me from my Lord God and his Gospel. In
peace when no persecution was, then were you content and glad to hear me: then
did you believe me, and will you not do so now, seeing I speak that which I
trust by gods grace if need be, to verefye with my life? Good Mother I write
before God to you, as I have preached before him. It is gods truth I have
taught: It is that same infallible word whereof he has said: heaven and earth
shall pass, but my word shall not pass. The mass and such baggage as the false
worshippers of god and enemies of Christ's cross (the papists I say) have
brought in again to poison the church of God withal, dyspleaseth God highly
and is abominable in his syghte. Happy may he be which of conscience
suffers loss of life or goods in disalowing it. Come not at it. If God be
God follow him: If the mass be God, let them that will see it, hear or be
present at it, go to the devil with it. What is there as God ordained? His
supper was ordained to be received of us in the memorial of his death, for the
confyrmation of our faith that his body was broken for us and his bloodshed for
pardon of our sins: but in the Mass there is no receauyng, but the priest
keeps all to him self alone. Christ says, take eat: no says the
Priest gape pepe. There is a sacrificyng, yea killing of Christ again as
much as they may. There is Idolatry in worshipping the outward sign of
bread and wine: there is all in Latten, you can not tell what he says. To
conclude, there is nothing as God ordained: Wherefore my good Mother come not
at it.

Oh will some say, it will hinder you if you refuse to come to mass and to do as
other do. But God will further you, (be you assured) as you shall one day find:
who has promised to the^ that suffer hinderance or loss of any thing in this
world, his great blessing here, Mathe. 19
and in the world to come life everlasting. You shall be counted an heritike: but
not of others the^ of heretykes, whose praise is a disprayse. You are not able
to reason against the priests: but God will, that al they shall not be able to
withstand you. No body will do so but you only: In deed no matter, for few
enter into the narow gate which brings to salvation. How be it, you shall
have with you (I doubt not) Father Traues and others my brothers and systers to
go with you therein: but if they will not, I your son in GOD, (I trust)
shall not leave you an inche, but go before you: pray that I may, and give
thanks for me. Rejoice in my suffetyng, for it is for your sakes to confyrme
the truth I have taught. How soever you do, beware this letter come not
abroad but into Father Traues his hands: for if it should be known that I
have pen and Ink in the prison, then would it be worse with me. Therefore to
your selves keep this letter, commending me to God and his mercy in Christ
Jesus, who make me worthy for his names sake, to give my life for his gospel
and church sake. Out of the Tower of London the.6. day of October. 1553.

My name I write not for causes, you know it well enough: like the letter never
the worse. Commend me to all our good brethren and sisters in the Lord. How
soever you do be obedient to the higher powers, that is in no point either in
hand or tongue rebel, but rather if they command that, which with good
conscience you can not obey, lay your head on the block and suffer what soever
they shall do or say. By patience possess your souls.

To my very friend in the Lord Doctor Hill Physician.
THe God of mercy and father of al comfort, at this present and for ever,
engraffe in your heart the sense of his mercy in Christ, and the continuance of
his consolation, which can not but enable you to carry with joy, what soever
cross he shall lay upon you, Amen.

Hitherto I could have no such liberty as to write unto you, as I think you
know: but now in that through gods providence I have no such restraint, I can
not but something write, as well to purge me of the suspicion of unthankfulness
toward you, as also to signify my carefulnes for you in these perilous
days, least you should wax cold in Gods cause (which god forbid) or suffer
the light of the Lord once kindled in your heart, to be quenched, and so become
as you were before, after the example of the world and of many others, which
would have been accounted otherwise in our days, and yet still beguile them
selves, still would be so accounted, although by their outward life they
declare the contrary, in that they think it enough to keep the heart pure,
notwithstanding that the outward man does currye favor. In which doing, as
they deny God to be Ielous, and therefore requires he the whole man as well
body as soul, being both create, as to immortality and society with him, so
redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ, and now sanctified by the holy spirit
to be the temple of God, and member of his Son: as (I say) by their partyng
stake to give God the heart, and the world the body, they deny god to be Ielous
(for else they would give him both, as the wife will do to her husband whether
he be Ielous or no if she be honest) so they play the dissemblers with the
church of God, by their fact offending the godly, whom either they provoke
to fall with them, or make more careless and conscienceles if they be fallen, and
occasioning the wicked and obstinate to triumph against god, and the more
vehemently to prosecute their malice against such as will not defyle themselves
in body or soul with the Romish rags now revived emonges us. Because of
this, I mean lest you my dear Master and brother in ye lord, should do as many
of our gospellers or rather gospel spillers do for fear of man, Esaias. 2
whose breath is in his nostrelles, and hash power but of the body, not fearing
the Lord which has power both of soul and body, and that not only
temporally but also eternally: I could not but write somethyng unto you,
as well because duty deserves it (for many benefits I have received of God by
your hands. for the which he reward you, for I cannot) as also because
charity and love compels me: not that I think you have any need (for as I
may rather learn of you, so I doubt not but you have hitherto kept your
self upright from halting) but that I might both quiet my conscience calling
upon me hereabout, and signify unto you by some thing my carefulnes for your
soul, as painfullye and often you have done for my body.

Therefore I pray you call to mind that there be but two masters, two kinds
of people, two ways, and two mansion places. The masters be Christ and Satan:
the people be seruitures to either of these: the ways be strait and wide: the
mansions be heaven and hell. Again: consider that this world is the place of
trial of gods people and the devils servants: for as the one will follow his
master whatsoever comes of it, so will the other. For a time it is hard to
discern who perteyneth to god and who to the devil: as in the calm and
peace, who is a good shipman and wariour, and who is not. But as when the
storm aryseth the expert mariner is known, as in war the good soldier is
seen, so in affliction and the cross, easelye gods children are known from
Satan's servants: ^or then as the good servant will follow his master, so will
the godly follow their Captain, come what come will, where as the wicked and
hyyocrites will bid adieu, and desire less of Christ's acquaintance. For
which cause the cross is called a probation and trial, because it tries who
will go with GOD and who will forsake him. As now in England we see how
small a company Christ has in comparison of Satan's soldiers. Let no man
deceive himself, for he that gathers not with Christ, scatters abroad.
No man can serve two masters: the Lord abhors double hearts: the luke
warm, that is such as are both whote and cold, he spitteth out of his
mouth. None that halte on both knees, does god take for his servant. The way
of Christ is the strayte way, and so strayte, that as few find it, and few
walk in it, so no man can halte in it, but needs must go vpryghte: for as
the straitenesse will suffer no reelyng to this side or that side, so if any
man halte, he is like to fall of the bridge into the pit of eternal perdition.
Strive therefore good master Doctor, now you have found it, to enter into it:
and if you should be called or pulled back, look not on this side or that
side, or behynd you as Lothes wife did: but straight forewardes on the end,
which set before you (though it be to come) as even now present: like as you do
and will your patientes to do in purgations and other your ministrations, to
consider the effect that will ensue, where through the bitterness and
lothesomnes of the purgatio^, is so overcome, and the painfulnes in abydyng the
workyng of that is mynistred, is so eased, that it makes the patient willyngly
and joyfully to receive that is to be received, although it be never so
vnpleasau^t: so (I say) set before you the end of this strait way, and the^
doutles, as Paul says, aeternu^ po^dus gloriae pariet, whiles you look not on
the thing seen, for that is temporal, but on the thing which is not seen which
is eternal. So does the husbandman in plowing and tilling set before him the
harvest time: so does the fisher consider the draught of his net rather the^
the casting in: so does the merchaunt the return of his merchau^dise: and so
should we in these stormy days set before us not the loss of our goods,
liberty, and very life, but the reaping time, the coming of our savior Christ
to judgment, the fire yt shall burn the wicked and disobedient to gods
gospel, the blast of the Trumpe, the exceeding glory prepared for us in heaven
eternally, such as the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, nor the
heart of man can conceive. The more we lose here, the greater joy shall we
have there. The more we suffer the greater tryumphe. For corruptible dross, we
shall find incorruptible treasures: for gold glory: for silver, solace
without end: for riches, robes royal: for earthely houses, eternal Palaces,
myrthe without measure, pleasure without pain, felicitye endeles: Summa, we
shall have God the father, the son and the holy Ghost. Oh happy place, oh
that this day would come. Then shall the end of the wicked be lamentable,
then shall they receive the just reward of thy vengeance, then shall they
cry woe, woe, that ever they did as they have done. Read Sapien 2.3.4.5.
Read Matthew. 25. Read 1. Corrinthians. 15. 2. Corrinthians. 5. and by faith
(which GOD increase in us) consider the things there set forth. And for your
comfort, read Hebrews. 11. to see what faith has done, always consyderyng
the way to heaven to be by many tribulations, and that all they which will live
godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. You know this is our
Alphabet: he that will be my Disciple, says Christ, must deny himself, and
take up his cross and follow me: not this Bishop, nor that Doctor, not
this Emperor, nor that King, but me says Christ: for he that loves
father, mother, wife, children, or very life better then me, is not worthy of
me. Remember that the same Lord says: Math. 8.
he that will save his life shall loose it. Comfort your self with this, that
as the Deuyls had no power over the Porkettes, or over Iobes goods without
Gods leave, so shall they have none over you. Remember also that all the hears
of your head are numbered with GOD. The Devil may make one beeleue he will
drown him, as the Sea in his surges threateneth to the land: but as the Lord
has appointed bounds for the one, over the which he cannot pass, so has
he done for the other.

On god therefore cast your care, love him, serve him after his word, fear
him, trust in him, hope at his hand for all help, and always pray, lookyng
for the cross, and when soever it comes, be assured the Lord, as he is
faithful, so he will never tempte you further then he will make you able to
bear, but in the myddest of the temptation, will make such an evasion as shall be
most to his glory, and your eternal comfort. God for his mercy in Christ
with his holy spirit endue you, comfort you, under the wings of his mercy
shadow you, and as his dear child guide you for evermore. To whose merciful
tuition, as I do with my hartye prayer commit you: so I doubt not but you
pray for me also, and so I beseech you to do still. My brother. P. tells me
you would have the last part of saint Hieromes works, to have the use thereof
for a fortenighte. I cannot for these.iij. dais well forbear it, but yet on
thursday next I will send it you if god let me not, and use me and that I have
as your own. The lord for his mercy in Christ direct our ways to his
glory. Amen.

Out of prison by yours to command. John Bradford.

To Maystres M. H. a godly gentlewoman, comfortyng her in that common heaviness
and godly sorrow, which the feeling and sense of sin works in gods children.
I Humblye and hartelye pray the euerlyuyng good god and father of mercy, to
bless and keep your heart and mind in the knowledge and love of his truth, and
of his Christ through the inspiration and workyng of the holy spyryte, Amen.

Although I have no doubt but that you prosper and go forwards daily in the
way of godliness, more and more drawyng toward perfection, and have no need
of anyethyng yt I can write, yet because my desire is yt you might be more
fervent and persevere to the end. I could not but write somethyng unto you,
besechyng you both often and diligently to call unto your mind as a mean to
stir you hereunto, yea as a thing which god most straightly requires you to
believe, that you are beloved of god, and that he is your dear father in,
through and for Christ and his deaths sake: This love and tender kyndnes of
god toward us in Christ is abounda^tly herein declared, in yt he has to ye
godly worst of creation of this world, made us after his image, redeemed us
being lost, called us into his church, sealed us with his mark and sign
manuel of Baptism, kept and conserved us all the dais of our life, fed,
nourished, defended and most fatherlye chastised us, and now has kindled in
our hearts the sparcles of his fear, faith, love, and knowledge of his Christ
and truth, and therefore we lament because we lament no more our unthankfulness,
our frailenes, our diffidence and waueryng in things wherein we should be most
certain. Al these things we should use as means to co^fyrme our faith of this,
that god is our god and father, and to assure us that he loves us as our
father in Christ: to this end (I say) we should use the things before touched,
especially in that of all things god requires this faith and persuasion of
his fatherly goodness, as his chiefest service. For before he ask any thing of
us, he says: I am the Lord thy god, geuyng himself, and then all he has to
us, to be our own. And this he does in respect of himself, of his own mercy
and truth, and not in respect of us, for then were grace no grace. In
consideration whereof, when he says, Thou shalt have none other gods but me,
thou shall love me with all thy heart etc: though of duetye we are bound to
accomplish all that he requires, and are culpable and gilty if we do not ye
same, yet he requires not these things further of us, the^ to make us more in
love and more certain of this his covenant, that he is our lord and god. In
certainty whereof, as he has given this whole world to serve to our need and
commodity, so has he geued his son Christ Jesus, and in Christ, himself
to be a pledge and gage, whereof the holy Ghost does now and then give us
some taste and sweet smell to our eternal joy.

Therefore (as I said) because God is your father in Christ, and requires of
you straightly to believe it, give your self to obedience, although you do it
not with such feelyng as you desire. First must faith go before, and then
feelyng will follow. If our imperfection, frailty, and many evils should be
occasions whereby Satan would have us to doubt, as much as we can let us
abhor that suggestion as of all others most pernicious: for so in deed it is.
For when we stand in a doubt whether God be our father, we cannot be
thankful to GOD, we cannot hartelye pray or think any thing we do,
acceptable to God, we cannot love our neighbors and give over our selves to
care for them and do for them as we should do, and therefore Satan is most
subtle hereaboutes, knowing full well that if we doubt of Gods fatherlye
eternal mercies toward us through Christ, we cannot please god, or do any
thing as we should do to man. Continually casts he into our memories our
imperfection, frailtye, falls and offenses, that we should doubt of gods
mercy and favor toward us. Therefore my good Sister, we must not be sluggish
herein, but as Satan labors to losen our faith, so must we labor to
fasten it by thynkyng on the promises and covenant of God in Christ's blood,
namely that god is our god with all that ever he has: which covenant
depends and hangs upon gods own goodness, mercy and truth only, and not on
our obedience or worthiness in any point, for then should we never be certain.
In deed God requires of us obedience and worthiness, but not that thereby we
might be his children and he our father, but because he is our father and we
his children through his own goodness in Christ, therefore requires he faith
and obedience. Now if we want this obedience and worthynes which he
requires, should we doubt whether he be our father? Nay, that were to make
our obedience and worthynes the cause, and so to put christ out of place, for
whose sake god is our father. But rather because he is our father and we feel
our selves to want such things as he requires, we should be styrred up to a
shamefastnes and blushyng, because we are not as we should be: and thereupon
should we take occasion to go to our father in prayer on this manner: Dear
father thou of thine own mercy in Christ have chosen me to be thy child, and
therefore thou would I should be brought into thy church, and faith full
company of thy children, wherein thou have kept me hitherto, thy name therefore
be praised. Now I see my self to want faith, hope, love, etc. which thy
children have and thou requirest of me, where through the devil would have me
to doubt, yea utterly to despair of thy fatherly goodness, favor, and mercy.
Therefore I come to thee as to my merciful father through thy dear son Jesus
Christ, and pray thee to help me good Lord, help me, and give me faith,
hope, love, etc. and grant that thy holy spirit may be with me for ever, and
more and more to assure me that thou art my father: that this merciful
covenant thou made with me in respect of thy grace in Christ and for
Christ, and not in respect of any my worthiness, is always true to me, etc.

On this sort (I say) you must pray and use your cogitations when Satan
would have you to doubt of salvation. He does all he can to prevail herein.
Do you al you can to prevail herein against him. Though you feel not as you
would, yet doubt not, but hope beyond all hope, as Abraham did. Faith always
(as I said) goes before feeling. As certain as god is almighty, as certain as
god is merciful, as certain as god is true, as certain as Christ was
crucified, is risen, and sytteth on the right hand of the father: as certain
as this is gods commandment, I am the Lord thy god: so certain ought you to
be that God is your father. As you are bound to have none other gods but him,
so are you no less bound to believe that god is your God. What profit should
it be to you to believe this to be true: I am the Lord thy god, to others, if
you should not believe that this is true to your self? The Devil believes on
this sort. And whatsoever it be that would move you to doubt of this,
whether god be your god through Christ, that same comes undoubtedly of the
Devil. Wherefore did GOD make you, but because he loved you? Might not he have
made you blind, dumme, deaf, lame, frantyke etc? Might not he have made you
a Jew, a Turk, a Papiste etc? And why has he not done so? Verelye because
he loved you. And why did he love you? What was there in you to move him to
love you? Surely nothing moved him to love you, and therefore to make you, and
so hitherto to keep you, but his own goodness in Christ. Now then in that his
goodness in Christ still remains as much as it was: Eccle. 2.
that is, even as great as him self, for it cannot be lessoned, how should it
be but that he is your god and father? Believe this, believe this my good Sister,
for god is no chaungeling: them whom he loves, he he loves to the end.

Cast therefore your self wholye upon him, and think without al waueryng
that you are gods child, that you are a citizen of heaven, that you are the
daughter of god, the temple of the holy Ghost etc. If hereof you be assured,
as you ought to be, then shall your conscience be quieted, then shall you
lament more and more that you want many things which god loves, then shall
you labor to be holy in soul and body, then shall you go about that Gods
glory may shine in you in all your words and works, then shall you not be
afraid what man can do unto you, then shall you have such wisdom to answer
your adversaries, as shall serve to their shame and your comfort, then shall you
be certain that no man can touch one hear of your head further then shall
please your good father to your everlasting joy, then shall you be most
certain that god as your good father, will be more careful for your children
and make better provision for them, if all you have were gone, then you can,
then shall you (being assured I say of gods favor toward you) give over your
self wholye to help and care for others that be in need, then shall you
contempne this life, and desire to be at home with your good and sweet father,
then shall you labor to mortify all things that would spot either soul or
body. All these things spryng out of this certain persuasion and faith that
god is our father, and we are his children by Christ Jesus. All things should
help our faith herein: but Satan goes about in all things to hinder us.
Therefore let us use earnest and hearty prayer. Let us often remember this
covenant, I am the Lord thy god: let us look upon Christ and his precious
blood shed for the obsignation and confyrmation of this covenant. Let us
remember all the free promises of the gospel: let us set before us gods
benefits generally in making this world, in ruling it, in gouernyng it, in
calling and keeping his church etc. Let us set before us gods benefits
perticulerly, how he has made us creatures after his image: how he has made
us of perfect limbs, form, beauty, memory etc: how he has made us
Christians, and given us a right judgment in his religion: how he has ever
sithen we were borne, blessed, kept, nouryshed and defended us: how he has
often beaten, chastised and fatherly corrected us: how he has spared us and
does now spare us, giving us time, space, place, grace. This if you do and use
earnest prayer, and so fly from all things which might wound your
conscience, giving your self to diligence in your vocation: you shall find at
the length that (which god grant to me with you) a sure certaintye of
salvation, without all such doubt as may trouble the peace of conscience, to
your eternal joy and comfort, Amen, Amen.

Yours to use in Christ. John Bradford.

An other letter full of Godly comfort written to the same person.
THe good spirit of God which guides his children, be with you my good
sister in the Lord for ever, Amen.

Although, as I to you, so you unto me in person are unknown, yet to him whom
we desire to please, we are not only in persons, but also in hearts known and
thoroughly seen. And therefore as for his sake you would by yt you sent, of me be
perceived how that in God you bear to me a good will: so, that I to you might
be seen in God to bear you the like, I send to you these few words in
writing, wyshing that in all your doings and speech, yea even in your very
thoughts, you would labor to feel that they are all present and open
before the syghte of GOD, be they good or badde This cogitation often had in
mind, and prayer made to god for the working of his spirit, thereby (as a
mean) you shall at the length feel more comfort and commodity, the^ any man
can know but such as be exercised therein. Howbeit this is to be added, that in
thinking your self and all that you have, and do, to be in ye sight of god:
this (I say) is to be added that you think his sihht is the sight, not only of
a Lord, but rather of a father, which te^dreth more your infirmaties the^ you
can tender the infirmities of any your children. Yea when in your self you see
a motherly affection to your little one that is weak: let the same be unto you
a trace to traint you to see ye unspeakable kind affection of god your father
toward you. And therefore upon ye consideration of your infirmities and natural
evils, which continually cleave unto us, take occasion to go to god as your
father through Christ, and before his merciful heart lay open your infirmities
and evils, with desire of pardon and help after his good will and pleasure, but
in his time and not when you will, and by what means he will, not that way yt
you would: in the mean season ha^ge on hope of his fatherly goodness, and
surely you shall never be ashamed. For if a woman that is natural can not
finally forget ye child of her womb, be sure god which is a father
supernatural, can not, nor will not forget you. Yea if a woman could be so
forgetful, Esaye. 4^.
yet god him self says, he will not be so. This opinion, yea rather certain
persuasion of god your father through christ, see yt you cherish, and by all
means, as well by diligente consideration of his benefits, as of his loving
corrections, whether they be inward or outward, see that you nourishe,
knowing for certain that as the devil goes about nothing so much as to bring
you in a doubt whether you be gods child or no: so whatsoever shall move you to
admit that dubitation, be assured the same to come from the devil. If you feel
in your self not only the want of good things, but also ple^tie of evil, do not
therefore doubt whether you be gods child in christ or no. For if for your
goodness, or illness sake, which you feel or feel not, you should believe or
doubt, the^ should you make Christ Jesus, for whose sake only god is your
father, either nothing, or else but a half Christ. But rather take occasion of
your wantes in good, and of your plenty in evil, to go to god as to your
Father, and to pray him that in as much as he commands you to believe yt he
is your God and Father: so he would give you his good spirit, yt you might
feel ye same, and live as his child to his glory: and cease not upon such
prayers to look for comfort in Gods good time, still hopyng ye best and
reiectyng al dubitatio^, and so al evil works words and cogitations, as ye
Lord shall enable you by his good spirit and grace, which I beseech him to give
unto you, my goodsister for ever. And further I pray you that as he has made
you to be a helper unto your husband, so you would endeavor your self therein to
show ye same as well in soul as body: and beg grace of god, that your
endeavors may be effectual to both your co^fortes in Christ, Ame^.

John Bradforde.

To my beloved in the Lord. VV. P.
GRrace and peace from God the Father through our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

Dear brother, god most justly has cast me now into a dungeon but much
better then I deserve: wherein I see no man but my keeper, nor can see any except
they come to me. Something in ye earth my lodging is: which is an example and
memorial of my earthly affections (which god I trust will mortify) and of my
sepulcher whereunto I trust my Lord God will bring me in peace in his good time.
In the mean season, he give me patience, lively hope and his good spirit.
This disease was a Rewme with a feebleness of stomach, wherewith he was much
troubled whiles he was at liberty.
I pray you pray for me, for ye prayer of the godly, if it be effectual,
works much with God. I thank God my common disease does less trouble me
now, then when I was abroad, which does teach me the merciful providence of god
toward me. Commend me to Maistres Wilkinson, whom we pray god to strengthen in
his truth and grace unto the end. Use true and hearty prayer and you shall
perceive god at length will declare him self to see where now many think he
sleeps,

Out of the Tower by the Lords prisoner. John Bradford

To Maistres I. H. a faithful woman and fearyng God, whom he exhorts to be
pacient under the cross and not to fear death.
MY dearly beloved, I beseech our merciful father to comfort your heavy and
pensive heart with his own co^solations in Christ, as I am assured he will in
his good time: which with patience look for (good sister) after the example of
Job, James. 5.
Helias, Abraham, and all the dear Saints of God, which are set forth unto
us for patrons of patience: god grant us well to cut our clothe after
them, for God is the same God now, and the end will show that he is a
merciful Lord and full of compassion. My dear sister you shall unfeignedly
feel it at the length, though presently it seems otherwise unto your sense:
you shall, after you be a little exercised herein, Heb. 12
find a quiet fruit of righteousness, the God of grace which has called you
unto his eternal glory, confirming and strengthening you, being some deal
afflicted with your brethren and sisters that be in the world, 1. pet. 5
for alone you suffer not as I trust you know. It comforted me to read in
your letters that no displeasure of father, mother, husband, children etc. does
move you to be ruled after the counsel of the world, and therefore you will
me not to be afearde for you. Oh my beloved what thanks should I give to our
god and dear father for this his excedyng kindenes toward you? His name be
magnified for you for ever: his mercy be more and more multiplied unto you, in
you and upon you for ever and ever, Amen. God make me thankful herefore. But
you add that ye fear of death does now and then move you a little. Howbeit
you say, that as I have counseyled you, you will strive there against. My
good Joyce I take you at your word, keep promise I pray you, that is,
strive against it, and I promise you in the name of the Lord, that you shall
have the victory, which I would wish you to set before your eyes also, and
so shall the terror of death trouble you the less. Soldiers goinge to war,
set not before their eyes simplye the stripe, but rather the victory: and my
good sister will not you herein follow them? In your travail with child does
not the hope of the babe to be delivered, mitigate the maladye? Does not the
sick in taking bitter and loathsome Physic set before him the commodity
which will ensue? And my dear sister, will not you by these be something
informed? Consider what this life is: consider what death is: consider what is
prepared for you after death. Concerning this life, you know that it is full
of miserye, vanity and woe: it is a plain exile and has nothing in it
permanente. It is therefore compared to a vapor, to a smoke, to a shadow, yea
to a warrefare, a wilderness, a vale of wretchedness, wherein we are compafed on
every side with most fearce and fearful enemies: and should we desire to
dwell here? Should we lust to live in this loathsome and laborious life? Should
we wyshe to tarry in this wretchedness? Should we have pleasure to remain in
this perilous state? Daniells den is not so dreadful as is this dongeon we
dwell in.

Concerning death to them that be (as I know you are) Gods dear children, my
tenderlye beloved sister, what other thing is it then the dispatcher of all
displeasure, the end of al travail, the door of desires, the gate of
gladness, the port of paradyse, the haven of heaven, the rail of rest and
quietness, the entrance to felicity, the beginning of all blisfulnes. It is
the very bed of down (and therefore well compared to a sleep) for the
doulefull bodies of Gods people to rest in, out of the which they shall rise
and awake most fresh and lustye to life everlasting. It is a passage to the
Father, a chariot to heaven, the Lords messenger, a leader unto Christ, a
going to our home, a deliverance from bondage and prison, a dimission from
war, a security from all sorrows, and a manumission from all miserye. So
that the very heathen did in some places cause the day of their death to be
celebrated with mirth, melody and minstrelsie, and should we be dismayde at it?
Should we be afraid of it? Should we tremble to hear of it? Should such a
friend as it is, be unwelcome? Should the foulnes of his face fear us from his
good conditions? Should the hardenes of his husk hinder us from his sweet
cornell? Should the roughnes of ye tide tie us to the bancke and shore, there
to be drowned, rather then the desire of our home drive us to go aburde?
Should the hardness of the saddle set us on our feet to perish by the way,
rather then to leap up and endure the same a little, and so to be where we
would be?

Concerning that which is prepared for you after death, if I should go about
to express it, the more I should so do, the further I should be from it. For
the eye has not seen, neither the ear has heard, nor the heart of man is
able to conceive in any point, the joy, mirth, melodye, pleasure, power,
wealth, riches, honor, beauty, fellowshippe, deynties, odours, glory,
wisdom, knowledge, threasures, security, peace, quietness and eternal
felicity, which you shall have and enjoy world without end, with God ye
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, with the Angels, Archangels, with the
Patriarckes and Prophets, with the Apostles and Evangelists, with the Martyrs
and Confessors, and with all the Saints of God in the Palace of the Lord in
heaven, the kingdom of God, the glory of the Father. Oh woe to the blyndnes
of our eyes that see not this: Woe to the hardness of our hearts that feel not
this: Woe to the deafnes of our ears that hear not this in such sort as we
should do: wherthrough we might be so far from fearyng death, that rather we
should wish it, crying with Simeon: Now let thy servant depart in peace: With
Paul, I desire to be desoulued and to be with Christ: With David, when shall I
come and appear before thee? And again: Oh woe is me that my habitation is
thus prolonged etc. Psa. 119.
But halas dear sister, great is our unbelief. Full faynte is our faith, or
else night and day tears should be our bread and drink, Psalm. 41.
whilst it is said unto us, where is your GOD? It is a token of little love
to God, to be loath to go unto him when he calls. If my dearest friend, of a
special favor and tender good will, should send a horse for me to come
unto him, should I be displeased thereat? yea should I not be willing and
glad to come unto him? And halas, yet if death the Lords palfreye, the
Lords messenger should come, I think I should not be so ready, but be
fearful as you foresee your self to be. Wherethroughe I doubt not but you
take occasion to lament the weakness of your faith, and seeing your need, to
prepare for remedy against the time of need, and to beg of GOD his aid,
strength and comfort against that pintche, which undoubtedly you shall have,
and find his promise true, that in an acceptable time he heard your prayer.
Such as I am, have no such foresighte of death, and therefore are less
presentlye dismayde, which will turn to our greater grief in the plunge, save
that for my part, I hope he will never tempte me further then he will make me
hable to bear. Into his hands I offer my self, besechyng him for his
Christ's sake to keep me soul and body to his kingdom and glory, and to
lead me, order me, and dispose me as he will in all things, in all places and
for ever, that at the length I may come whether I will, that is into his own
blessed presence and fruition of immortality with you and his Saints, Amen.
Thus much I thought good to write unto you for this present, to occasion you
the less to fear death, which either needs not or boteth not: and therefore
even reasonable men, much more spiritual me^, labor to strive against the
fear of that which they can by no means avoid. But of this hereafter I trust
mouth to mouth to speak with you. Now as to my soul, I pray and wyshe unto
you my most dear sister in ye Lord, whose grace guide you, and his mercy
embrace you on every side for ever, Amen.

Yours John Bradford

To my good friend in God Master Humphrey Hales.
AS to my dear friend, I wish unto you gentle master Hales, health of soul
and body to Gods glory and your everlasting comfort, Amen.

Although it be commonly spoken and as commonly verifyed, that seldom seen is
soon forgotten: yet it is not so commonly seen or experienced among them,
whose friendship is in God the Father through Christ, as ours is, but in those
whose friendship is begone in respect of some earthly commodity. And therefore
lest I should incur this suspicion at your hands, which have so many ways
deserved the contrary, I thought it my duty to refresh (if it need refreshing)
the amity in God begone betwixt us, which I doubt not shall continue so long
as we live, or else I would be sorry. In consideration whereof, both mindful
of my promise made unto you, and careful for your safetye, I have caused a
place to be provided for your wives deliverance, where she may so quietly and
safely remain, that for the avoiding of the perilles and dangers of these
days. I see none more conueniente: I mean it in Hadley at D. Taylours house,
where I trust there is no peril to you ward nor to any that fears or
regards any peril that thereby may happen. And herein of very love and good
will I am the more familiar and bold to admonish you, not as distrusting you
(god forbid, for I think of you as of a very child of god) but as one
careful for you, lest you should at length through the common infirmity of
our frail flesh and the manifold offenses given of the world, do exteriourly
as the world does, to save your sleue and maime your arm for ever: as those do
which for the saving of their goods, ieoperde goods of body and soul in the
peril of eternal dampnation. If I suspected any such thing in you (gentle
master Hales) I then would go about to tell you what this life is: a smoke,
a shadow, a vapoure etc. what the glory of this life is: grass, hay: yea how
full of misery it is, and has more allows then honye Job. 9. If I suspected
any thing your conscience, I would the^ set before you on ye one part ye
judgment of Christ which shall be most assuredly, ye terrible sentence to the^
which are ashamed to confess his gospel: the eternal woe and myserye which
they shall be cast into that will not obey his gospel here: and on the other
part, the most pleasant shoute of the Angel to summon all men to come before
our captain and brother Christ, the collectio^ and catchyng of us up in the
clouds to mete our master, the eternal joy and felicity which we shall
receive that here confess him, here suffer with him, here lose any thing for
his sake. If I did in any point so much as think that you would defyle your
body in the Antichristian service now used, then would I go about to set forth
these things briefly, spoken more at large. But as I said before I say again,
because I am as well persuaded of you (my derely beloved brother) as of any in
your profession and state: I cannot but pray god to make perfect ye good which
he has begun in you, and desire you, as you have begone in god, so to go
forward. As your example has done good to many, so cast not al down with a type.
Terrible is that woe which Christ threatens to them by whom offenses do come.
You know yt the way to salvation is straiter then men make it. You know the
soul is to be considered above all things. Happy is the loss of that bodily
life, liberty and goods, by the which a spiritual life, fredome and felicity is
purchased. What should it profit a man to win the whole world and to lose his
own soul? Who would desire a two years merry life for an eternal sorrow? as
these mass gospellers do, which yet are uncertain of two years life, and god
knows what wounds their consciences have. Hard is it to recover health to
the conscience: and because I am careful for it to you wards, as to mine own
brother and dear friend, therefore I write thus. We are in gods power and not in
the power of our enemies: he it is that has all our hears numbered: before he
say Amen, no man shall once touch you. Into his hands commit your self:
cast your care on him, have a care to please him, and then he will care to keep
you. You know the oath the Athenienses did make: pugnabo pro sacris, and solus
and cum alijs. I will fight for the defense of religion both alone and with
others. Which saying of the heathen will be to our condemnation, if for his holy
word and gospels sake we dare not adventure the loss of that he has lent us,
keeps for us, and can when he will take away from us, or us from it. If
worldly men dare ieopard a iointe with god, rather then they would lose
worldly things (as experience teaches) certainly it should be much to our
shame, which in Baptism have vowed and solempnely sworn to forsake the world,
if we dare not ieoperd a iointe with man, rather then we would lose a good
conscience and spiritual treasures. He that will not have gods blessyng, it
shall be taken from him, says Dauyd.

Therefore (my derely beloved) beware: you are now the temple of the holy ghost,
defile it not for the lords sake, but keep it pure, not only from all
uncleanness of the spirit, but also of the flesh. 2. Cor. 7. as I trust you will:
and cry upon your father for his strength and aid, which I beseech him of
his mercy alwais to give unto you, my own good friend, even as I desire to my
self. If in any thing I could help you, you may be as assured thereof as of
your brother. My prayer to god night and day you shall have, that for his holy
names sake he would bless you in all things and keep you, with my good sister
your wife, unto the very end, as his dear elect children, Amen, Amen. From
my lodging you know where this v. of August.

By your own to use in the Lord for ever. John Bradford.

An other letter to Master Humfrey Hales and his Wife.
THe everliving and merciful god our dear father through Christ, be with you
both my most dearly and entierly beloved in the Lord, now and for ever.

I cannot forbear but signify unto you both, that my heart is careful and
heavy for the cross which is come upon you by the heavy and fearful judgment
of god fallen upon your father justly for his denying of god for fear of men
and love of these things, which he has left behind him unto you and others.
God grant his fact be so imprinted in the hearts of al men, especially of you
both, that his fall may be unto you, I will not say arising (for yet I trust ye
are not fallen) but an establishing in the verity of god, whereof who so is
ashamed, shall at length feel such shame as I beseech God keep us all from.
Happy are they that mark the judgments of god upon other to come and increase
in repentance, Luke 13. to fear gods wrath and judgments, which is always
like hymsefe, if we follow the steps of them on whom he takes punishment. I
need not to tell you the cause of this that has happened unto your father, if
it be as I with sorrow have heard. For you know well enough that till he forsook
god, gave ear to the Serpents counsel, began to mamber of the truth, and to
frame himself outwardly to do that which his conscience reproved inwardly
(for that which he myngled with the love of god, I mean the love of ye world,
cannot be in any man without the expulsion of gods love) til then. I say, god
did not depart and leave him to himself to the example of you and me and al
others, that we should fear even our selves and our own hands more then man
and all the powers of the world, if we therefore should do any thing which
should wou^d our conscience. The conscience (I tell you) is sone wounded, yea
sooner the^ we beware of. The devil uses al kind of desceite to blind us from
seeing that which might wound it: but when the stripe is given, then either
shuts he still up our eyes with contempt to our hardening, or else opens the^
to bring us to utter dispairing. In your father, as ye may see ye later, so in
many worldly gospellers you may (if you will) see the other. God might deal
with all such, as he has done now with your father: but because ye time of his
judgment is not yet come, his wisdom has thought good to set your father
forth as an example to al me^: as he did in the first world Cain, in the.2.
world Cham, in the.3. age Chore etc. in christ's time Judas, in the Apostels
time Ananias etc. although none will heartily consider it, but such as be gods
children in deed.

But hear in comparyng your father thus (my derelye and unfeignedly beloved in
the Lord) I must pray you not to be offended, or think that I do
de^ermynatelye judge (to God I leave all judgment) but because the fruit to
us declares no less, to the admonishment of us all, I trust ye will
accordyngly consider my collation. For your parts as I think godly of you
both, yt in deed ye are both the the children of god: so I pray you comfort
yourselues as Dauyd did, though his son Absolon perished so desperately, and
though his father in law Achitophell* father to Bethsabe as the Hebrews
write, peryshed so miserablye. Ye know Ionathas was not the worse because his
father slew himself, nor Bethsabe because of her father Achitophel: they both
were the children of god, and so I am assured (as man can be) that ye are. As
they used gods judgments upon their parents, so do ye, to fear god and
love god the more and to fly from those things which in your father ye did see
displeased God. Oh that I were with you but one half hour, not only with you
to lament, but also as god should lend me his grace, to comfort you, who by
this judgment does tempt your patience and faith to ye comfort of you both, as
you shall find, I am assured. My dear hearts in the lord, if I could by any
means comfort you, certainly if my life lay on it, I think you should
forthwith perceive it: but because I can do no more then I can, therefore as I
can I do, that is, as to write, so to send this messe^ger my good friend and
brother with the same, to learn certainly the truth herein and the condition
of your estate. My other letter was made before I knew of this matter. I pray
god this which by report I understand, be otherwise, but gods good will be
done, who give us patience and comfort in him. To whom I commend you both
even as hartelye as any friends I have in this life of your estate. From my
lodging you know where, this eight of August. Anno Domini. 1554.

By your own to use in the Lord for ever. John Bradford.

To certain of his faithful friends in God, exhortyng them to be joyful
under the cross as a token of gods synguler favor toward them.
GOd our dear and most merciful father through Christ, be with you my good
brother and Sister, as with his children for e^uer, and in all things so guide
you with his holy spirit the leader of his people, as may be to his glory and
your own everlasting joy and comfort in him, Amen.

Because I have often times received from either of you comfort corporally (for
the which I beseech the Lord, as to make me thankful, so to recompense you
both now and eternally) I cannot but go about (lord help hereto for thy
mercies sake) to write somthyng for your comfort spirituly. My dearly beloved,
look not upon these days and the afflictions of the same here with us simply
as they seem unto you: that is, as dismal days, and days of gods vengeance,
but rather as lucky days, and days of gods fatherlye kindness toward you,
and such as ye be, that is, toward such as repent their sins and evil life
past, and earnestly purpose to amend, walking not after the will of the world,
as ye most part of men do for the preservation of their pelf, which will they,
nyll they, they shall leave sooner or later, and to whom, or how it shall be
used they know not. In deed to such as walk in their wickedness and wind on
with the world, this time is a time of wrath and vengeance and their beginning
of sorrow is but now, because they contempne the phisike of their father,
which by these purging time and cleansing days would work their weal, which
they will not: and because they will not have gods blessing which both ways he
has offered unto them, by prosperity and adversity: therefore it shall be kept
far enoughe from them: as when the sick man will no kind of phisike at the
hands of the physician, he is left alone and so the malady increases and
destroieth him at the length. To such men in deed these days are and should
be doleful days, days of woe and weepyng, because their damnation draws
nigh. But unto such as be penitent, and are desirous to live after the Lords
will, (amongs whom I do not only compte you, but as far as man may judge I
know ye are) unto such, I say, this time is and should be comfortable. For
first now your father chastises you and me for our sins, for the which if
he would have destroyed us, then would he have letten us alone, and left us to
our selves in nothing to take to heart his fatherly visitation, which here it
pleases him to work presentlye, because elsewhere he will not remember our
transgressions, as Paul writes: he chastises us in the world, least with the
world we should perish.

Therefore my dear hearts, call to mind your sins to lamente them and to
ask mercy for them in his syghte, and wythall undoubtedly beeleue to obtain
pardon and assured forgeuenes of the same, for twice the Lord punishes not
for one thing. So that I say, first we have cause to rejoice for these days
because our father suffers us not to lie in Iesabels bed slepyng in our
sins and securitye, but as myndefull on us does correct us as his children:
whereby we may be certain that we be no bastardes but children, for he
chastises every child whom he receives. So that they which are not
pertakers of his chastising or that contempne it, declare themselves to be
bastardes and not children, as I know ye are, which as ye are chastised, so
do ye take it to heart accordingly: and therefore be glad my dear hearts,
as folks knowing certainlye even by this visitation of the Lord, that ye are
his dear elect children, whose faults your father does visit with the
rod of correction, but his mercy will he never take away from you, Psalm. 89.
Amen.

Secondlye ye have cause to rejoice for these days, because they are days of
trial, wherein not only ye your selves shall better know your selves, but
also the world shall know that ye be none of his but the Lords derlynges.
Before these days came (Lord GOD) how many thought of themselves they had
been in Gods bosom, and so were taken and would be taken of the world, but
now we see whose they are: for to whom we obey his servants we are. If we
obey the world (which god forbid and hitherto ye have not done it) then are
we the worlds: but if we obey GOD, then are we gods. Which thing (I mean
that ye are Gods) these days have declared both to you, to me, and to all
other that know you, better then ever we knew it. Therefore ye have no cause
to sorrow, but rather to sing, in seeing your selves to be Gods babes, and in
seeing that all Gods children do so count you. What though the world repyne
thereat: What though he kycke? what though he seek to trouble and moleste
you? My dear hearts he does but his kind: he cannot love the Lord which live
not the Lord: he cannot brook the child that hates the father: he cannot
mind the servant that cares not for the ma^^er. If ye were of the world,
the world would love you, ye should dwell quietlye, there would be no grief,
no molestation. If the devil dwelte in you (which the lord forbydde) he
would not stir up his knights to besiege your house, to snatche at your
goods, or suffer his friends to enter into your hogs. But because Christ
dwells in you (as he does by faith) therefore styrreth he up his first
begotten son the world, to seek how to disquiet you, to rob you, to
spoil you, to destroy you. And perchance your dear father to try and to
make known unto you and to the world that ye are destinate to an other
dwelling then here on earth, to an other city then man's eyes has seen at
any time: has given or will give power to Satan and to the world, to take
from you the things which he has lent you, and by taking them away, to
try your fidelity, obedience and love toward him (for ye may not love them
above him) as by geuynge that ye have and keepyng it, he has declared his
love toward you. Satan perchance tells GOD (as he did of Job) that ye
love GOD for your goods sake. What now then, if the Lord to try you with
Job, shall give him power on your goods and body accordynglye, should ye
be dismayed? Should ye despair? Should ye be faynte hearted? Should ye not
rather rejoice as did the Apostels that they were compted worthy to suffer
any thing for the Lords sake? Oh forgette not the end that happened to Job:
for as it happened to him, so shall it happen unto you: for god is the same god
and can not long forgette to show mercy to them that look and long for it,
as I know ye do, and I pray you so to do still, for the Lord loves you, and
never can nor will forgette to show and power out his mercy upon you. After
a little while that he has afflycted and tried you (says Peter) he will
visit, comfort, and confyrme you. As to Jacob wrestlyng with the aungel, at
the length morning came and the son arose: so dear hearts, doutles it will
happen unto you. Howbeit do ye as Job and Jacob did, that is, order and
dispose your things that god has lent you as ye may and whiles ye have time.
Who knows whether god has given you power this long even to that end?

Go to therefore, dispose your goods, prepare your selves to trial, that either
ye may stand to it like gods champions, or else if ye feel such infirmity in
your selves that ye be not hable, give place to violence, and go where ye may
with free and safe conscience serve the lord. Think not this counsel to come
by chance or fortune, but to come from the Lord: other oracles we may not
look for now. As God told Joseph in a dream by an aungel that he should
fly: so if ye feel such infirmity in your selves as should turn to gods
dishonor and your own destruction wythal: know that at this present I am as
gods aungel to admonish you to take time whiles ye have it, and to see yt in no
case Gods name by you might be dishonored. Joseph might have objected the
omission of his vocation, as perchance ye will do: but dear hearts, let
vocations and all things else give place to gods name and the sanctifyeng
thereof. This I speak not as though I wuld not have you rather to tarry and to
stand to it, but I speak it in respect of your infirmity, which if ye feel to
be so great in you that ye are not certain of this hope that god will never
tempt you above you hability: fly and get you hence, and know that thereby god
will have you tried to your selves and to others. For by this you shall know how
to take this world, and your home here as no home, but that ye look for an
other, and so give occasion to others, less to love this world, and perchance
to some to doubt of their religion, Wherein though they be earnest, yet would
not they loose so much as ye do for your religion, which ye confyrme to me and
others by your geuyng place to violence.

Last of all, ye have cause to rejoice over these days because they be days
of conformation, in the which and by the which god our father makes us like to
christ's image here, that we may be like to him elsewhere. For if we suffer with
him, we shall reign with him: if we be buried with him, we shall rise with him:
if we company with him in afflictions, we shall rejoice with him in glory: if
we sow with him in tears, we shall reap with him in gladness: if we confess
him before men, he will confess us before his Father in heaven: if we take his
part, he will take ours: if we lose ought for his names sake, he will give us
all things for his truths sake: So yt we ought to rejoice and be glad, for
it is not given to every one to suffer loss of country, life, goods, house,
etc. for ye Lords sake. What can god the father do more unto us then to call us
into camp with his son? What may Christ our Savior do more for us then to
make us his warriors? What can the holy ghost do to us above this, to mark
us with the cognisaunce of the Lord of hosts? This cognizance of the Lord
stands not in forket cappes tippettes, shaven crowns or such other baggage
and antichristian pelf, but in suffering for the Lords sake. The world shall
hate you says Christ. Lo there is the cognizance and badge of gods children,
the world shall hate you. Rejoice therefore my dearly beloved, rejoice that god
does thus vouchsafe to begin to conform you and make you like to Christ. By
the trial of these days ye are accasioned more to repent, more to pray, more
to contempne this world, more to desire life everlasting, more to be holy (for
holy is the end wherefore GOD does afflict us) and so come to gods company.
Which thing, because we can not do as long as this body is as it is, therefore
by the door of death we must enter with Christ into eternal life and
immortality of soul and body: which God of his mercy send shortly, for our
Savior Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

John Bradford

To mine own dear brother Master Laurence Saunders prisoner in the
Marshalsee.
GOds sweet peace in Christ be with you, my good brother in ye Lord Jesus,
and with all your concaptiues, Ame^.

I was let this morning from musing on that which I was purposed to have
thought on, by reason of you, against who^ I saw my self guilty of negligence
even in this point that I would not write, I should say, that I had not written
unto you as yet: therefore out of hand in manner I prepared my self to purge my
self hereof, not that I will go about to excuse my fault (for that were more to
load me) but by asking both god and you pardon, to get it no more laid to my
charge. Now then as I was thus purposing and partly doing, comes there one
with a letter from you, for ye which as I have cause to thank god and you
(howbeit not so that you should think I give not the whole to god) so I see my
self more blame worthy for thus long holding my peace. Howbeit good brother,
in this I have given a demonstration to you, to behold my negligence in all
other things, and especially in praying for you and for ye church of god,
which for my sins and hypocrisy (hypocrisy in deed even in this writing,
god deliver me from it) have deserved to be punished. Just is god, for we have
deserved all kinds of plaggues at his hands: but yet merciful is he yt will on
this wise chastise us with this world ne cu^ mu^do conde^nemur. He might
otherwise have punished us, I mean, he might have for other causes cast us in
prison, me especially, then for his gospel and words sake: Praised therefore
be his name which voucheth us worthy this honor. Ah good god, forgive us our
sins, and work by this thy fatherly correction on us, on me especially,
effectually to love thee and thy Christ: and with ioyfulnes unto ye end to carry
thy cross through thick and thin. Always set before our eyes not this
gallows on earth if we still stick to thee, but the gallows in hell if we
deny thee or swarne from that we have professed. Ah good brother, if I could
always have GOD, his majesty, mercy, heaven, hell, etc. before mine eyes,
then should I obdurare as Paul writes of Moses. Heb. 11. obdurauit in quit,
perinde quasi vidisset eum qui est inuisibilis, Pray for me, as I know you
do, and give thanks also for in domino spero non nutabo. Psalm. 22.
Si ambulauero per valle^n vmbrae mortis, non timebo quia tu domine mecum es,
Amen. I think we shall be shortly called forth: for now lege^ habent, and
secu^du^ legem etc. otherwise will they not reason with us: and I think their
shootanker will be, to have us to subscribe. The which thing if we do, though with
this condition, so far as ye thing subscribed to, repugneth not against Gods
word, yet this will be offensive. Therefore let us vadere plane and so sane, I
mean, let us all confess that we are no chaungelinges, but reipsa are the
same we were in religion, and therefore can not subscribe except we will
dissemble both with God, our selves, and the world. Haec tibi scribo frater mi
charisime in domino. I am legam tua^ epiflolam. Ah brother that I had
practicam tecum scientiam in vite illa qua^ pingis: John. 15
roga dominum vt ita vere sentiam, Amen. God make me thankeful for you.
Salutant te omnes co^captiui and gratias domino pro te agunt: ide^ tu facies
pro nobis and ores vt etc.

Your brother in the Lord Jesus to live and dye with you. John Bradford

An other letter to Master Laurence Saunders.
MY good brother, I beseech our good god and gracious father, always to
continue his gracious favor and love toward us, and by us as by
instruments of his grace, to work his glory and confusion of his adversaries.
This friend moved them to subscribe to the papists articles with this
condition, so far as they were not against Gods word, being in deed clean
contrary to it: and yet shortly after he valiantly suffered death for refusing
the same,
Ex ore infantium and lactentium fundet laudem ad destruendum inimicu^ etc,
Ame^.

I have perused your letters to my self and have read them to others. For
answer whereof, if I should write what D. Taylour and Master Philpotte do
think, then must I say that they think the salt sent unto us by your
friend is unseasonable. And in deed I think they both will declare it
hartelye if they should come before them. As for me, if you would know what
I think (my good and most dear brother Laurence) because I am so synnefull
and so conspurcate (the Lord knows I lie not) with many grievous sins
(which yet I hope are washed away sanguine Christi nostri) I neither can nor
would be co^sulted withal but as a sipher in Agrime. Howbeit to tell you how and
what I mind, take this for a sum: I pray God in no case I may seek my self.
And in deed (I thank God therefore) I purpose it not. Quod reliquum est domino
Deo meo committo, and spero in illum, quod ipse faciet iuxta hoc: iacta in
dominum curam, Psa. 54 Psa. 36 Psalm. 31.
etc. Omni cura vestra coniecta in illum etc. Reuela domino viam tuam and spera
etc. Sperantem in domino misericordia circumdabit. I did not nor do not know
but by your letters quod cras, we shall come, cora^ nobis. Mine own heart,
stick still to dabitur vobis: Math. 10. 1. Cor. 10 3. pet 2
fidelis enim est dominus, dabit in tentatione euentum quo possimus sufferre.
Nouit dominus pios e tentatione etc. O vtinam pius ego essem. Nouit dominus in
die tribulationis spera^tes in se etc. Nahu^. 1. I can not think that they
will offer any kind of indifferent or mean conditions. For if we will not
adorare bestiam, we never shall be delivered but against their will, think I.
God our Father and gracious Lord make perfect the good he has begone in us.
Faciet mi frater, charisime frater, quem in intimis visceribus habeo ad
conuinendum and commoriendum. O si tecum essem. Pray for me mine own heart
root in the Lord.

For ever your own. John Bradforde.

A letter which he wrote to a faithful woman in her heaviness and trouble: most
comfortable for all those that are afflicted and broken hearted for their sins.
AH my dearly beloved, and most dearly beloved in the Lord, how pensive is
my heart presently for you by reason of ye fearful judgment of our god, which
eue^ now I heard for truth by Richard Proud? God our good father for his
great mercies sake in christ, have mercy upon us, and so with his eternal
consolation, comfort you (my dear heart) as I desire in my most need to be
of him comforted, Amen.

The cause why since the recept of your letter I have not sent unto you, this
bringer ca^ tell you: yea if I had not heard for truth of this heuie chance, as
yet you had not thus sone heard from me. For I began of late a piece of
work for your comfort, whereof I send you now but a part, because my heart is
heavy for your sake, and I can not be quiet til I hear how you do in this
cross. Wherein (my dear sister) I beseech you to be of good comfort, and to
be no more discouraged then was David of Absolons death, the good Ionathas of
his father Saules fearful end, Adam of Cain, Noe of Cham, Jacob of Ruben,
and the Godly Bethsabee of the terrible end of her father or at the least her
Graundfathers death Achitophell. Not that I utterly condemn and judge your
father (for I leave it to God) but because the fact of it self declares Gods
secrets and fearful judgment and justice toward him and all men, and his
great mercy toward us, admonishynge all the world how that he is to be
dred and feared, and Satan not to sleep, and us his children especially,
how weak and miserable we be of our selves, and how happy we are in him,
which have him to be our father, protector and keeper and shall have for
ever more, so that no evil shall touch us, further then shall make to our
fathers glory and to our everlasting commodity. And therefore let this
judgment of God be an occasion to stir us up more carefully to walk before
GOD, and unfeignedly to cast our whole care upon our dear father, which
never can nor will leave us: for his calling and gifts be such that he can
never repent him of them. Roma. 11. whom he loves, he loves to the end:
none of his chosen can perish. Of which number I know you are my dearly
beloved sister: God increase the faith thereof daily more and more in you: he
give unto you to hang wholye on him and on his providence and protection. For
who so dwells under that secret thing, and help of the Lord, Psa. 90.31
he shall be cock sure for ever more: he that dwells I say, for if we be
flitters and not dwellers (as was Loath a flitter from Segor, where GOD promised
him protection if he had dwelled there still) we shall remove to our loss as
he did into the Mountains, Genesis. 19. Dwell therefore, that is trust and
that finallye unto the end in the Lord (my dear sister) and you shall be as
Mount Sion. As Mountains compass Jerusalem, so does the Lord all his
people. How then can he forgette you which are as the apple of his eye, for
his dear sons sake? Ah dear heart, that I were now but one half hour
with you, to be a Simon to help to carye your cross with you. GOD send you
some good Simon to be with you and help you. I will be a Simon absente to
carye, as I can learn, your cross, which you have promised not to hyde from
me. Oh that GOD would hartelye touch your husbands heart, so that he would
get him beyond the Seas, although by that means I should never more,
corporallye see you (as in deed I fear it, I fear it) but Gods good will be
done. I have written to him: God for his mercyes sake turn it to your and
his good, Amen.

But to come again to that from whence I am digressed, whereunto you occasion
me also by your letters, complaining to me of the blyndnesse of your mind
and of the trouble you feel through talk with some: my dearlye beloved, GOD
make you thankful for that which he has given unto you: he open your eyes
to see what and how great benefytes you have received, that you may be less
covetous or rather impaciente, for so (I fear me) it should be called, and
more thankful. Have not you received at his hands syghte to see your
blyndnesse, and thereto a desirous and seeking heart to see where he lies in
the mydde day, as his dear spouse speaks of her self in the Canticles? Oh
Joyce, my good Joyce, what a gift is this? Many have some syghte, but none
this sobbing and sighinge, none this seekynge which you have I know, but
such as he has married unto him in his mercyes. You are not content to kiss
his feet with the Magdalen, but you would be kissed even with the kiss of
his mouth. Canti. 1. You would see his face with Moses, forgettyng how he
bids us seek his face, Psalm. 27. yea and that for ever, Psalm. 105.
Which sygnifyeth no such syghte as you desire, to be in this present life,
which would see GOD now face to face, where as he can not be seen but
covered under somethynge: yea some time in that which is (as you would say)
clean contrary to God: as to see his mercy in his anger: in bringyng us to
hell, faith sees him bring us to heaven: in darkness it beholds bryghtnes:
in hydyng his face from us, it beholds his merye countenance. How did Job
see God, but (as you would say) under Satan's cloak? For who cast the fire
from heaven upon his goods? Who ouerthrewe his house and styrred up men to
take away his cattle but Satan? And yet Job pierced through all these and
saw Gods work, saying: the Lord has given, the Lord has taken away etc.
In reading of the psalms, how often do you see that David in the shadow of
death, saw Gods sweet love? And so (my dearelye beloved) I see that you in
your darkness and dymnesse, by faith do see claritie and bryghtnesse: by
faith (I say) because faith is of things absente, of things hoped for, of
things which I appeal to your conscience whether you desire not. And can you
desire any thing which you know not? And is there of heavenly things any
other true knowlegde then by faith?

Therefore my dear heart, be thankful, for (before God I write it) you have
great cause. Ah my Joyce, how happy is the state wherein you are? Verelye
you are even in the blessed state of Gods children: for they mourn, and do not
you so? and that not for worldly weal, but for spiritual riches, faith, hope,
charity, etc. Math. 5
Do you not hunger and thirste for righteousness? And I pray you says not
Christ, who can not lie, that happy are such? How should GOD wipe away the
tears from your eyes in heaven, if now on earth you shed no tears? How could
heaven be a place of rest, if on earth you did find it? How could you
desire to be at home, if in your iourneye you found no greffe? How could
you so often call upon god, and talk with him as I know you do, if your
enemy should sleep all day long? How should you elsewhere be made like
unto Christ, I mean in joy, if in sorrow you sobbed not with him? If you
will have joy and felicity, you must first needs feel sorrow and miserye.
If you will go to heaven, you must sail by hell. If you will embrace Christ
in his robes, you must not think scorn of him in his rags. If you will
sit at Christ's table in his kingdom you must first abide with him in his
temptations. If you will drink of his cup of glory, forsake not his cup
of ignominye. Can the head corner stone be rejected and the other more base
stones in Gods buildyng be in this world set by? You are one of his lively
stones: be content therefore to be hewn and snagged at, that you might be
made the more meet to be joined to your fellows which suffer with you
Satan's snatches, the worlds wounds, contempt of conscience, and frettes of
the flesh, where through they are enforced to cry: Oh wretches that we are,
Romans 6
who shall deliver us? You are of Gods corn, fear not therefore the flayle,
the fan, mylstone, nor oven. You are one of Christ's Lambs, look therefore
to be fleeced, hayled at, and even flayne. If you were a market sheep, you
should go in more fat and grasye pasture. If you were for the Fair, you
should be staulfed and want no weal: but because you are for Gods own
occupying, therefore you must pasture on the bare common, abiding the storms
and tempests that will fall. Happy and twyse happy are you (my dear sister)
that GOD now haileth you whether you would not, John. 21.
that you might come whether you would. Suffer a little and be still. Let
Satan rage against you, let the world cry out, let your conscience accuse
you, let the law load you and press you down: yet shall they not prevail,
for Christ is Emanuell that is god with us. If God be with us who can be
against us? The Lord is with you: your father ca^ not forget you: your spouse
loves you. Math. 8
If the waves and surges arise, cry with Peter Lord I perish, and he will put
out his hand and help you. Cast out your anchor of hope, and it will not cease
for all the stormy surges, till it take hold on the rock of gods truth and
mercy. Think not that he which has given you so many things corporallye as
inductions of spiritual and heavenly mercies, and that without your deserts
or desire, can deny you any spiritual comfort desiring it. phi. 2.
For if he give to desire, he will give you to have and enjoy the thing
desired. The desire to have and the going about to ask, ought to certifye
your conscience that they be his earnest of the thing which you askyng, he
will give you, yea before you ask and whilst you are about to ask he will
grant the same (as Esaias says) to his glory and your eternal consolation. He
that spared not his own son for you, Romans 8
will not nor cannot think any thing to good for you, my heartily beloved. If
he had not chosen you (as most certainlye he has) he would not have so called
you: he would never have justified you: he would never have so glorified you
with his gracious gifts, which I know, praised be his name therefore: he would
never have so exercised your faith with temptations as he has done and
does, if (I say) he had not chose^ you. If he have chosen you (as doutles
dear heart he has done in Christ, for in you I have seen his earnest, and
before me and to me you could not deny it, I know both where and when) if I
say, he have chosen you, then neither can you nor shall you ever perish. For
if you fall, he puts under his hand: you shall not lie still: so careful
is Christ your keeper over you. Never was mother so myndefull over her child,
as he is over you. And has not he always been so? Speak womon: when did he
finally forget you? And will he now trow you in your most need do otherwise,
you calling upon him and desiring to please him? Ah my Joyce, thynk you god to
be mutable? Is he a chaungeling? Romans 31
Does he not love to the end them whom he loves? Are not his gifts and
calling such that he cannot repent him of them? For else were he no GOD. If
you should perish, then wanted he power: for I am certain his will toward you
is not to be doubted of. Has not the spirit, which is the spirit of truth,
told you so? And will you now harken with Eve to the lying spirit which
would have you, not to despair (no he goes more craftelye to work, howbeit
to that end, if you should give ear unto it, which God forbid) but to doubt
and stand in a mammeryng, and so should you never truly love God, but serve
him of a servile fear, lest he should cast you of for your unworthiness and
unthankfulness: as though your thankefulnes or worthiness were any causes with
God, why he has chosen you, or will finally keep you. Ah mine own dear heart,
Christ only, Christ only, and his mercy and truth. In him and for him is the
cause of your election. This Christ, this mercy, this truth of God remains
for ever, is certain for ever, and so is your election certain for ever, for
ever, for ever, I say for ever. If an aungel from heaven should tell you
contrary, accursed be he, accursed be he. Your thankefulnes and worthynes are
fruits and effects of your election, they are no causes. These fruits and
effects shall be so much more fruitful and effectual, by how much you waver
not.

Therefore (my derely beloved) arise and remember from whence you are fallen.
Psalm. 120
You have a shepehard which neither slumbreth nor slepeth. No man nor devil
can pull you out of his hands. Night and day he commands his angels to
keep you. Have you forgoten what I read to you out of the psalm, the Lord is
my shepeharde, I can want nothing? Psalm. 23
Do you not know that god sparred Noe in the Arc on the outside, so that he
could not get out? So has he done to you my good Sister, so has he done
to you. Psa. 90.
Ten thousand shall fall on your right hand and twentye on your left
hand: yet no evil shall touch you. Say holdelye therefore: Psa. 123.
many a time from my youth up they have fought against me, but they have not
prevailed: no nor never shall prevail, for the Lord is round about his
people. And who are the people of GOD, but such as hope in him: Happy are
they that hope in the Lord: and you are one of those my dear heart, for I am
assured you have hoped in the Lord: I have your words to show most manifestly
and I know they were written unfeignedly. I need not to say that even before god
you have simply confessed to me, and that often times no less. And once if you
had this hope, as you doutles had it, though now you feel it not yet shall you
feel it again: for the anger of the Lord lasts but a moment, but his mercy
lasts for ever. Tell me my dear heart, who has so weakened you? Surely not a
persuasion which came from him that called you. Gal. 5.
For why should ye waver? Why should you waver and be so heavy hearted? Whom
look you on? On yourselfe? On your worthiness? On your thankefulnes? On that
which God requires of you, as faith, hope, love, fear, joy? etc. Then can
you not but waver in deed, for what have you as God requires? Believe you,
hope you, love you etc. as much as you should do? No no, nor never can in this
life. Ah my dearelye beloved, have you so soon forgotten that which ever
should be had in memory: namely that when you would and should be certain and
quiet in conscience, then should your faith burst throughout all things not
only that you have in you, or else are in heaven, earth or hell, until it come
to Christ crucified, and the eternal sweet mercies and goodness of god in
Christ? Here, here is the resting place, here is your spouses bed: creep into
it, and in your arms of faith embrace him: be wail your weakness, your
unworthiness, your diffidence etc. and you shalsee he will turn to you. What
said I, you shall see? Nay I should have said you shall feel he will turn to
you. You know that Moses, when he went into the Mount to talk with God, he
entered into a dark cloud, and Helias had his face covered when God passed by.
Both these dear friends of god heard God, but they saw him not: but you would
be preferred before them. See now my dear heart, how covetous you are. Ah be
thankful be thankful. But god be praised that your covetousness is Moses
covetousness. Well with him you shall be satisfied. But when? Forsooth when he
shall appear. Here is not the time of seeing, psa. 16.
but as it were, in a glass. Isaac was deceived because he was not content
with hearing only.

Therefore to make an end of these many words, wherewith I fear me I do but
trouble you from better exercises: in as much as you are in deed the child of
God elect in Christ before the beginning of all times: in as much as you are
given to the custody of Christ as one of gods most precious jewels: in as much
as Christ is faithful and there to has al power, so yt you shall never perysh,
no one hear of your head shall not be lost: I beseech you, I pray you, I
desire you, I crave at your hands with al my very heart, I ask of you with hand,
pen, tongue and mind, in Christ, through Christ, for Christ, for his name,
blood, mercies, power and truths sake (my most entierlye beloved Sister)
that you admit no doutyng of gods fynall mercies toward you, how soever you
feel your self: but complain to god and crave of him; as of your tender and
dear father, al things, and in that time which shall be most oportune, you shall
find and feel far above that your heart or the heart of any creature can
conceive, to your eternal joy. Ame^, Amen, Ame^. The good spirit of god
always keep us as his dear children, he comfort you, as I desire to be
comforted (my derely beloved) for evermore, Amen. I break up thus abruptly
because our common prayer time calls me. The peace of Christ dwell in both
our hearts for ever, Amen.

As for the report of W. P. if it be as you hear, you must prepare to bear
it. It is written on heavens door: do well, and hear evil. Be content therefore
to hear whatsoever the enemy shall imagine to blotte you withal. Gods holy
spirit always comfort and keep you, Amen, Amen. This 8. of August, by him
that in the Lord desires to you as well and as much felicity as to his own
heart.

John Bradford.

To my loving brethren.B. and.C. with their wives and whole families.
I Beseech ye everliving god to give to you al my good brethren and systers,
the comfort of his holy spirit and the continual feelyng of his mercy in
Christ our Lord, now and for ever, Amen.

The world my brethern at this present seems to have the vpperhande,
iniquity ouerfloweth, the truth and verity seems to be suppressed, and they
which take part therewith are unjustly entreated. The cause of all this is gods
anger, and mercy: his anger because we have grievously sinned against him: his
mercy, because he here punishes us and as a father nurtereth us. We have been
unthankful for his word, we have contemned his kindness, we have been negligent
in prayer, we have been to carnal, covetous, lice^tious, etc. we have not
hastened to heaue^ward, but rather to helward, we were fallen almost into an
open contempt of god and all his good ordinances: so that of his justice he
could not long forbear, but make us to feel his anger, as now he has done in
taking his word and true service from us, and permittyng Satan to serve us
with Antichristian religion, and that in such sort, that if we will not yield
to it and seem to allow it in deed and outward fact: our bodies are like to be
laid in prison and our goods given we cannot tell to whom. This should we
look upon as a sign of gods anger procured by our sins, which (my good
brethern) every one of us should now call to our memories often times so
perticulerly as we can, that we might heartily lament them, repent them, hare
them, ask earnestly mercy for them, and submit our selves to bear in this
life any kind of punishment which god will lay upon us for them. Thus should
we do in consideration of gods anger in this time. Now his mercy in this time
of wrath is seen and should be seen of us (my derely beloved) in this, ye god
does vouchsafe to punish us in this present life. If he should not have
punished us, do not ye think that we would have continuin ye evils we were in?
Yea verily, we would have been worse and have gone forwards in hardening our
hearts by impenitency, and negligence toward God and true godliness, and then
if death had come, should not we have perished both soul and body into
eternal fire and perdition? Alas, what misery should we have fallen into, if
god should have suffered us to have gone forward in our evils? No greater a
sign of damnation there is, then to lie in evil and sin unpunished of god:
as now the papists (my derely beloved) are cast into Iezabels bed of security,
Apoc. 3 Hebr. 12
which of all plagues is the most grievous plague that can be. They are
bastardes and not sons, for they are not under Gods rod of correction. A
great mercy it is therefore that god does punish us: for if he loved us not,
he wuld not punish us. Now does he chastise us that we should not be damned with
the world. 1. Cor. 2
Now does he nurture us, because he favors us. Now may we think our selves
to be Gods householde and children, 1. pet. 4
because he begins his chastising at us. Now calls he us to remember our
sins past. Wherefore? That we might repent and and ask mercy. And why? That
he might forgive us, pardon us, justify us, and make us his children, and so
begin to make us here like unto Christ, Romans 8
that we might be like unto him elsewhere, even in heaven, where already we
are set by faith with Christ, and at his coming in very deed shall enjoy
his presence, when our sinful and vile bodies shall be made like to christ's
glorious body, phil. 3.
according to the power whereby he is able to make al things subject to
himself.

Therefore my brethren, let us in respect hereof, not lament, but laud god: not
be sorry but be mercy: not weep but rejoice and be glad that god does vouchsafe
to offer us his cross, Romans 8 2. Timo. 3. Math. 10.
thereby to come to him to endless joys and comforts. For if we suffer, we shall
reign: If we confess him before men, he will confess us before his father in
heaven: If we be not ashamed of his Gospel now, he will not be ashamed of us
in the last day, Math. 5. 1. pet. 4 1. pet 5
but will be glorified in us, crownyng us with crowns of glory and endeles
felicity. For blessed are they yt suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for
their is the kingdom of heaven. Be glad says Peter, for the spirit of God
rests upon you. After that ye are a little while afflicted, god will comfort,
strengthen, and confyrme you. And therefore (my good brethren) be not
discouraged for cross, for prison or loss of goods, for the confession of
Christ's gospel and truth, which ye have believed and lively was taught emongs
you in the days of our late good and most holy prince King Edward. This is
most certain, if ye lose any thing for Christ's sake, Math. 19
and for contemnyng the Antichristian service set up again among us, as ye
for your parts even in prison shall find gods great and rich mercies far
passing all worldly wealth: so shall your wives and children in this present
life, find and feel gods providence more plentifully then tongue can tell: for
he will show merciful kindness on thousa^ds of them that love him: The good man's
sede shall not go a begging his bread. Ye are good me^ so many as suffer for
christ's sake. Psalm. 27
I trust ye all (my dearly beloved) will consider this gear with your selves,
and in the cross see gods mercy, which is more sweet and more to be set by
then life it self: much more the^, then any mucke or pelf of this world. Romans
8.
This mercy of god should make you merye and cheerful: for the afflictions of
this life are not to be compared to the joys of the life prepared for you. Ye
know the way to heaven is not the wide way of the world, which wyndeth to ye
devil, but it is a strayt way, Math. 7 2. Timot. 3 2. Cor. 5 Math. 14.
which few walk in: for few live godly in Christ Jesus, few regard the life to
come, few remember the day of judgment, few remember how Christ will deny
them beforh his father that do deny him here, few consider that Christ will be
ashamed of them in the last day, which are ashamed now of his truth and true
service, few cast their accomptes what will be laid to their charge in the day
of vengeance, few regard the condemnation of their own consciences in doing
that which inwardly they disalow, few love god better then their goods: Romans
14.
but I trust yet ye are of these few my derely beloved, I trust ye be of the
little flock which shall enherite the kingdom of heaven, I trust ye are of
the mourners and lame^ters which shall be comforted with comfortes which never
shall be taken from you, if ye now repent your former evils, Luke. 10
if now ye strive against the euyls that are in you, if now ye continue to
call upon God, if now ye defile not your bodies with any Idolatrous service
used in the Antichristian churches, Ephesi. 4.
if ye moleste not the good spirit of God which is given you as a gage of
eternal redemption, a cou^seller and master to lead you into all truth: which
good spirit I beseech ye father of mercy to give us all for his dear sons
sake Jesus Christ our lord, Acts. 20
to whom I commend you al and to the word of his grace, which is able to help
you all and save you all yt believe it, follow it, and serve god thereafter. And
of this I would ye were al certain, that al ye hears of your heads are
numbered, so that not one of the^ shall perish, Math. 8. Job. 1. Psa. 104 Psa.
13. 1. pet. 5
neither shall any man or devil be able to attempt any thing, much less to do
any thing to you or any of you, before your heavenly father which loves you
most te^derly, shall give the^ leave, and when he has given them leave, they
shall go no further then he will, nor keep you in trouble any longer then he
will. Therefore cast on him all your care, for he is careful for you: only
study to please him and to keep your consciences clean and your bodies pure
from the Idolatrous service, which now every where is used, and god will
meruelously and mercifully defend and comfort you: which thing he do for his
names sake in Christ our Lord. Amen.

John Bradforde.

To my good Lady Vane.
THe true sense and sweet feelyng of gods eternal mercies in Christ Jesus,
be ever more and more lively wrought in your heart by the holy ghost. Amen.

I most heartily thank you (good madame) for your comfortable letters, and
where as you would be advertised what were best to be done on your behalf
concerning your iij. questions: the truth is, that the questions are never
well seen nor answered, until the thing whereof they arise, be well
considered: I mean until it be seen how great an evil the thing is. If it be
once in deed in your heart perceived upon probable and pithy places gathered out
of gods book, that there was never thing upon ye earth so great and so much
an adversary to gods true service, to Christ's death, passion, priesthode,
sacrifice, and kingdom, to the ministry of gods word and sacraments, to the
church of God, These questions were concerning the mass wherein she desired his
judgment.
to repentance, faith and all true godliness of life, as that is whereof the
questions arise (as most assuredly it is in deed) then cannot a christian heart
but so much the more abhor it and al things that in any point might seem to
allow it or any thing pertainyng to the same, by how much it has the name of
gods service. Again, your Ladyship does know that as all is to be discommended
and avoided which is followed or fled from in respect of our selves, in
respect of avoiding Christ's cross: so the end of all our doings should be
to godwards, to his glory, to our neighbors, to edification and good example,
whereof none can be given in allowing any of the.iii. questions by you
propounded. But because this which I write now, is brief and needs the more
consideration or explication: as I doubt not of the one in you, so from me by
Gods grace you shall receive the other shortly. For I have already written a
little book of it which I will send unto you, He means his book which he
calls the hurt of heari^g mass.
in the which you shall have your questions fully answered and satisfied, and
therefore I omit to write any more hereaboutes presentlye: beseching God our
good father to guide you as his dear child with his spirit of wisdom,
power and comfort unto eternal life, that you may be strong and rejoice in
him and with his church, to carry Christ's cross if he shall so think it
need. 1. Pet. 1. which is a thing to be desired, wished, and embraced if we
looked on things after the judgment of Gods word, and tried them by that
touchstone. If you be accustomed to think on the brevity, vanity, and
misery of this life, and o^ the eternity, truth and felicity of everlasting
life: if you look on things after their ends and not after their present
appearaunce only: if you use your self to set gods presence, power and mercy
always before your eyes, to see the^ as god by every creature would you
should: I doubt not but you shall find such strength and comfort in the Lord,
as you shall not be shaken with all the power of Satan. Gods mercy in Christ
be with you and his good spirit guide you for ever, Amen.

An other letter to the Lady Vane.
AS to mine own soul, I wish to your Ladyship grace and mercy from God our
dear Father in Christ our Lord and Savior.

I thank God that something he has eased you, and mitigated his fatherly
correction in us both: I would to God he had done so much in the behalf of
the grief of ye body to you as he has done to me. For as for the soul I
trust you feel that which I pray god increase in you, I mean his fatherly
love, and grant that I may with you feel the same in such degree as may
please him: I will not say as you feel, least I should seem to ask to much
at one time. God does often much more plentifullye viset with the sense of his
mercy, them that humble them selves under his mighty hand, and are sore
exercised, as you long have been: then others, which to the face of the world
have a more show and appearaunce. Therefore I wysh as I do, and that not only
for mine own commoditye, but also that I might occasion you to the
consideration of the goodness of God, which I by your letters do well espy,
which is in deed the high way whereby as God increases his gifts, so
shows he more linelye his salvation, Psalm. 50.107. I have received Gods
blessing from you, the which I have partly distributed unto my three fellow
prisoners Master Farer, Master Taylour, Master Philpot, and the residue I
will bestow upon.iiii. poor souls which are imprisoned in the common Iayle
for religion also. As for mine own part, if I had had need, I would have served
my turn also. But because I had not, nor (I thank God) have not, I have been
and will he your Almner in such sort as I have already advertised you. God
reward you and give you to find it spiritually and corporally. Because
otherwise I can not talk with you, therefore on this sort, as occasion and
opportunity will serve, I am ready to show my good will and desire of your
healpe and furtheraunce in the Lord to everlasting life, whereunto GOD bring
us shortly for his mercyes sake, Amen. Good Madame be thankful to God, as I
hope you be, be earnest in prayer, continue in reading and hearing Gods
word, and if Gods further cross come, as therein God does serve his
providence (for else it shall not come unto you) so be certain the same
shall turn to your eternal joy and comfort, Amen.

John Bradford

To the Lady Vane.
THe everlasting and most merciful god, which is the father of our savior
Jesus Christ, increase in your ladyship ye knowledge and love of his truth,
with the gift of perseuera^ce to continue therein to ye end, Ame^. Albeit at
this present I have no convenient leisure to write is should be semely to send
to your personage, yet considering your gentle good will for gods cause toward
me, I thought I might be ye more bold to write something, although not in such
sort as I would and perchance on your behalf might be looked for. I doubt not
but that your ladyship considers often with your self, ye you are the child
of god and a citizen of heaven by Christ, in who^ God the father before the
world was made, has chosen you of his own mere mercy and not of your deserts
done or to be done. That you should with thankefulnes call this to mind often,
thereby to excite and stir up yourself to ye love of god in his sight, and to
al holiness of life in the sight of man, many things should move and occasion
you justly: as that you were borne of Christen parents, that ye name of god was
called upon you in baptism, which is a sacrament of regeneration and adoption
into the children of god, with all other benefits which hitherto you have
received. Among which surely, your ladyship should not think the least, even
the crosses that god has hitherto exercised you with all: as the loss of
your good husband, lands, and other worldly commodities etc. But above al,
next to Christ crucified, this is most thankefully to be considered, that god,
as he has given you patience (I trust) in your trouble: so in these dangerous
days he has given you a desire to know him, and to help them which for his
sake be in trouble: for this I gather and euidentlye see by your twice sending
to me, which am not otherwise known to you but by name. I pray god I may be
heartily thankeful to him for you, and so dispose your benefits as you desire.
My best I will do by gods grace: but enough of this.

My desire is, good Madame (although I have no doubt (as I said) but yt you be
dilligent herein) that you would often call to mind your state before god, I
mean how that you be his child through Christ: and this I would you did for
diverse causes. First that you might be quiet in conscience before him in this
troublesome world, as we never can be until this be something settled.
Secondly that you might be careful to appear in his syghte and in the
syghte of man, as one of Gods children. Thyrdly that you might in all troubles
boldelye by prayer through Christ, go to him and call him by the name of
father, with hope of his help always to your comfort. Fourthly that you
might not be dismayed if trouble come unto you, as it can not be but more or
less it must needs come: for the world loves none but such as be his: the
devil can never suffer the children of God to be quiet. I will not speak of
our mortal and familiar enemy the flesh, which cease not to fight against
the spirit. But God your father being heartily called upon, in and through
Christ, as he will with his holy spirit help you, so will he give you the
victory at ye length to your singular comfort: Which I pray God you may daily
more and more feel, Amen. From the Kings Benche in have as appears.

Your Ladyships own in Christ to command. John Bradforde.

To my dear friends and brethren. R. and E. with their wives and families.
THe comfort of Christ felt commonly of his children in their cross for his
sake, the everliving God work in both your hearts my good brethren, and in
the hearts of both your yokefellowes, especially of good Mary my good sister
in the Lord, Amen.

If I had not something heard of ye hazard which you are in for the gospels sake
if you continue the profession and confession thereof, as I trust you do and
will do and that unto the end God enabling you, as he will doubtless for his
mercyes sake if you hope in him (for this binds him as David in Christ's
person witnesses, our father keped in thee, and thou deliuerest them etc.
Psalm. 22) yet by conjectures I could not but suppose (though not so certainly)
the time of suffering and probation to be at hand. For now is the power of
darkness fullye come upon this Realm most iustlye for our sins and
abusing the light lent us of the Lord, to the setting forth of our
selves more then of Gods glory, that as well we might be brought into the
better knowledge of our euilles, and so heartily repent (which god grant us to
do) as also we might have more feling and sense of our sweet savior Jesus
Christ, by the humbling and deiecting of us, thereby to make us, as more
desirous of him, so him more sweet and pleasant unto us: the which thing the
good spirit of God work sensiblye in all our hearts for Gods holy names
sake. For this cause I thought it my duty, being now where I have some
liberty to write (the Lord be praised) and hearing of you as I hear: to do
that which I should have done if I had heard nothing at all: that is, to
desire you to be of good cheer and comfort in the Lord (although in the
world you see cause rather to the contrary) and to go on forwards in ye way
of God wherinto you are entered, considering that the same can not but so much
more and more wax streite to the outward man, by how much you draw nearer
the end of it. Eue^ as in ye traueil of a woman, the nearer she draws to her
deliuerye, the more her pains increase: so it goes with us in the Lords way,
the nerer we draw to our deliverance by death to eternal felicity. Example
whereof we have, I will not say in the holy Prophets and Apostles of god,
which when they were young girded themselves and went in manner whether they
would, but when they waxed old, they went girded of others, whether they
would not, John. 21.
concerning the outward man: but rather and most lively in our Savior Jesus
Christ, whose life and way was much more paynefull to him toward the end,
then it was at the beginning. And no marvel, for Satan can something abide a
man to begin well and set forewardes, but rather then he should go on to the
end, he will vomit his gorge and cast floudes to ouerflowe him, before he
will suffer that to come to pass. Therefore as we should not be dismayde,
now at this world as though some strange thing were happened unto us, in that
it is but as it was wont to be to the Godly, in that the devil declares
him self after his old wont, in that we have professed no less but to
forsake the world and the devil as gods very enemy, in that we learned no
less at the first when we came to Gods schole, then to deny our selves and
to take up our cross and follow our Master, which leads us none other
way then he him self has gone before us: as (I say) we should not be
dismayde, so we should with patience and joy go forwards, if we set
before us as present, the time to come, like as the wife in her travail does
the deliverance of her child, and as the Saints of God did, Hebr. 12
but especially our Savior and pattern Jesus Christ: for the Apostle
says, he set before him the joy and glory to come, and therefore contempned
the shame and sorrow of the cross: so if we did, we should find at the
length as they found. For whom would it grene which has a long journey to
go, to go through a piece of foul way, if he knew that after that, the
way should be most pleasant, yea the iourneye should be ended and he at
his restinge place most happy? Who will be afearde or loathe to leave a little
pelf for a little time, if he knew he should shortly after receive most
plentiful riches? Who will be unwilling for a little while to forsake his
wife, children, or friends etc. when he knows he shall shortly after be
associated unto them inseperablye, even after his own hearts desire? Who will
be sorye to forsake this life, which can not but be most certain of
eternal life? Who loves the shaddowe better then the body? Who can love this
life, but they that regard not the life to come? Who can desire the dross of
this world, but such as be ignorante of the treasures of the everlasting joy
in heaven? I mean, who is afearde to die, but such as hope not to live
eternallye? Christ has promised pleasure, Math. 19.
riches, joy, felicitye, and all good things to them that for his sake lose
any thing, or suffer any sorrow. 1. pet. 2.
And is he not true? How can he but be true, for guile was never found in his
mouth? Halas then why are we so slack and slow, yea hard of heart to believe
him promysing us thus plentifullye eternal blissfulness: and are so ready to
believe the world promysyng us many things and paying us nothing? If we will
currye favor now and halte on both knees, if so: then it promyseth us peace,
quietness, and many things else. But how does it pay this gear? or if it
pay it, with what quietness of conscience? Or if so: how long I pray you?
Do not we see before our eyes men to dye shamefullye, I mean as rebels and
other malefactors, which refuse to dye for Gods cause? What way is so sure a
way to heaven, as to suffer in Christ's cause? If there be any way on
horseback to heaven, surely this is the way. By many troubles says the
Apostle, Act 14. 2. Timo. 3.
we must enter into heaven. All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus must
suffer persecution. For the world can not love them that are of GOD: the
devil can not love his enemies: the world will love none but his own: but
you are Christ's, therefore look for no love here. Should we look for fire
to quench our thirst? And as soon shall Gods true servants find peace
and favor in Antichrists regimente. Therefore my dearlye beloved, be stonte
in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on you his armor: stand
in the liberty of Christ which you have learned: rejoice yt you may be counted
worthy to suffer any thing for Gods cause: to all men this is not given.
Your reward is great in heaven, though in earth you find nothing. The
journey is almost paste: you are almost in the haven, hale on a pace I
beseech you, and merely hoyse up your sails. Cast your self on Christ
who cares for you. Keep company with him now still to the end: he is
faithful and will never leave you, nor tempte you further then he will make
you able to bear: yea in the midst of the temptation he will make an
outskape. Now pray unto him hartelye, be thankful of his dignation, rejoice
in hope of the health you shall receive, and be myndefull of us which are in
the vowarde, and by Gods grace trust in Christ to be made able to break the
Ise before you, that you followynge may find the way more easy. God grant
it may so be, Amen, Amen.

Out of prison by your brother in Christ. John Bradford.

To Maystres VVylkinson.
Almighty God our most loving Father increase in your heart (my good mother
and dear Maistres in the Lord) his true knowledge and love in Christ, to the
encouraging and comforting of your faith in these stormy days: as necessary
unto us, so profitable if we persiste unto the end, which thing God grant to
us, Amen.

My right dearly beloved, I know not what other thing to write unto you, then
to desire you to be thankful unto the Lord, in that among the not many of
your calling and state, it pleases him to give you his rare blessing, I mean
to keep you from all the filth wherewith our country is horribly defiled. This
blessing assuredly is rare as you see. But now if he shall bless you with an
other blessing which is more rare, I mean to call you forth as a Martyr and as
a witness against this filth, I hope you will become double thankful. For a
greater toke^ commonly we have not to judge of our election and salvation, next
to Christ and faith in him, then the cross, especially when it is so glorious
as on this sort to suffer any thing, but chiefly loss of this life, which in
deed is never found til it be so lost: except the grain of wheat fall and
be dead, it remains fruitles. You know how that he which was rapte into the
third heaven and did know what he wrote, does say that as the corn lives not
except it be dead and cast into the earth, so truly our bodies. And therefore
the cross should so little fear us, that even death it self should altogether
be desired of us, as the taylour which puts of our rags and arayeth us
with the royal robes of immortality, incorruptio^, and glory. Great shame it
should be for us, that all the whole creatures of God should desire, yea groan
in their kind for our liberty, Romans 8.
and we our selves to loath it: as doubtless we do if for the cross, yea for
death it self we with joy swallow not up all sorrow that might let us from
followyng the Lords calling, and obeying the lords providence: whereby doubtless
all crosses and death it self does come and not by hap or chance. In
consideration whereof (right dear Mother) in yt this providence stretches it
self so unto us and for us, that even the hears of our heads are numbered with
GOD, not one of them to fall to our hurt: surely we declare our selves very
faint in faith, if we receive not such comfort, that we can willinglye offer
our selves to the Lord, and cast our whole care upon his back, honoring him
with this honor that he is and ever will be careful for us and all we have,
as for his dear children. Be therefore of good chere even in the myddest of
these miseries, be thankful to the Lord and prepare your self for a further
trial, which if god send you: as I hope, so do you believe, that god therein will
help and comfort you, and make you able to bear whatsoever shall happen. And
thus much having this opportunity. I thought good to write, praying god our
father to recompense into your bosom, all the good that ever you have done, to
me especially, and to many others both in this time of trouble and always
heretofore.

Your own in the Lord, John Bradford.

To Maystres VVylkinson.
THe Lord of mercy in Christ his son our Savior and only comforter, be
with you all now and for ever, Amen.

Although presently I have little time by reason of this bringers short
departing, and less occasion of necessary matter to write unto you: yet in yt
it has pleased god to offer me more liberty to write the^ before I had (as
this reader can report) I thought good to signifye unto you the same with the
acknowledging of the receipt of your tokens, for the which I neither can nor
will go about to flatter you with thanks, in that I know you look for none at
mine hands, god being the cause and his word the end wherefore you did so: to
him I know you would have me thankful, and I beseech you pray that I may so
be, and not only thankful for my self and his benefits toward me, but
also thankful for you to whom God has given to fear his name and love his
truth. The which gifts far pass the riches of the world, for they shall
perish and be left we know not unto who^: but these gifts of god as they last
for ever, so they make happy ye possessours of the same. Go to therefore, and
pray god to increase them of his goodness, as of his mercy he has begu^ne the^
in you, and in deed so he will. For to whom he gives the earnest of wyllyng,
to the same he will give the grace of continuyng, if we reject not the same: as
we do when we be double harred, ^4 Reg. 17.
and part our fear and love, as did the Samaritanes, which feared god, and
their Adramelech, loved gods religion and their old country customs etc. If
this doublenes come on us, that we fear more the world and couple it with the
fear of God: if we love the mucke of this molde and couple it with the love of
Gods religion, then part we stake, then mar we the markette, then the
spirit of GOD will depart, Act. 5.
then play we as Ananias and Saphyra did, and so sooner or later shall fall
to perdition with them. But (as I said) I think no such thing of you: I
think of you as of Gods dear children, whose hearts are whole with the Lord.
And therefore I write not this as though you were such, but because it is
Gods goodness you be not such, because Satan would have you such, and
because many that were as you now be, are such. Therefore to make you, as
thankeful, so careful to continue (but yet so that your care be cast all on
the Lord) is the only cause I write this, and would write more, but that
the brynger can not carye. And therefore hastily and abruptlye I make an end,
besechynge almighty GOD in our redemer Jesus Christ, to be with you, and with
his holy spirit comfort you all, and help my good Sister Maistres W. to be
an happy and a good mother of the child of which as yet, I hear God has
not delivered her.

By your own to use in the Lord for ever. John Bradford.

To my dear Brother in the Lord Master Rychard Hopkyns and his wife dwelling
in Couentrye, and other my faithful brethren and Systers, professors of gods
holy Gospel there and theraboutes.
THe peace which Christ left to his church and to every true member of the
same, John. 14. Romans 8
the holy spirit the guide of Gods children, so engrafte in your heart and
in the heart of your good wife, and of all my good brethren and systers
about you, that unfeignedly ye may in respect thereof, contempne all
worldly peace, which is contrary to that peace that I speak of, and dryueth
it utterly out of the hearts of all those, which would patche them both
together. For we cannot serve two masters: Math. 6
no man can serve GOD and mammon: Christ's peace cannot be kept with this
worlds peace. God therefore of his mercy do I beseech, to give unto you his
peace which passes all understanding, and so keep your hearts and mynds,
phil. 4.
that they may be pure habitacles and mansions for the holy spirit, yea for
the blessed trinity, John. 14
who has promised to come and dwell in all them that love Christ and keep
his sayenges.

My dearly beloved, the time is now come wherein trial is made of men that
have professed to love Christ, and would have been counted kepers of his
testimonies. But weal away, the tenthe person perseuereth not: the more part
do part stakes with the papists and protestants, so that they are become
maungye Mongrelles, to the infectynge of all that company with them, and to
their no small peril. For they pretend outwardly popery, The Mongrels excuse,
going to Mass with the papists and tarying with them personallye at their
Antichristian and idolatrous service: but with their ha^^s (say they) and with
their spirits they serve the lord. Math. 8.
And so by this means as they save their pigs which they would not lose, I
mean their worldly pelf, so they would please the protestants and be
counted with them for gospellers, Company not with Mo^grels
yea mary would they. But mine own beloved in the Lord, flee from such
persons as from men most perilous and pernicious both before God and man:
Mongrels are false both to god and man.
for they are false to both, and true to neither. To the magistrates they are
false, pretending one thing and meaning clean contrary. God will have the whole
service of soul and body. He made both He keeps both. He redeemed both.
To god they are most untrue giving him but a peese, which should have the
whole. I would they would tell me who made their bodies. Did not GOD, as well
as their sprites and souls? And who keeps both? Does not be still? And
alas, shall not he have the service of the body, but it must be given to serve
the new found god of Antichrists invention? Did not Christ bye both our
souls and bodies? And wherewith? with any less price then with his precious
blood? Ah wretches the^ that we be, if we will defyle either part with the
rose colored whore of Babylons filthy Mass abomination. Apoc. 18 2. pet. 2
Hebr. 6.10 Math. 12 Luke. 11 Mongress sin against their own consciences.
It had been better for us never to have been washed, then so to wallow our
selves in the fylthy puddle of popery. It had been better never to have known
the truth, then thus to betray it. Surely, surely, let such men fear that
their later end be not worse then the beginning. Their own conscience now
accuses them before god (if so be they have any conscience) that they are but
dissemblers and hypocrites to God and man. For all the clokes they make, they
cannot avoid this, but that their going to church and to Mass, is of self
love: The only cause why Mongrels go to Mass, is to avoid the cross. 1
Cor. 10. Acts. 5 Deuteronomy. 12.
that is, they go thither because they would avoid the cross. They go thither
because they would be out of trouble. They seek neither the Queen's highness nor
her laws, which in this point cannot bind the conscience to obey, because
they are contrary to gods laws, which bid us often to flee Idolatrye and
worshipping him after men's devises: they seek neither (I say) the laws (if
there were any) neither their brethernes commodity (for none comes thereby)
neither godliness or good example (for there can be none found in going to Mass
etc. but horrible offenses and woe to them that give them) but they seek their
own selves, their own ease, their escapyng the cross etc. Math. 15.
when they have made all the excuses they can, their own conscience will
accuse them of this, that their going to church is only because they seek
themselves. For if there would no trouble ensue for taryeng away, I appeal
to their conscience, would they come thither? Never I dare say.

Therefore (as I said) they seek themselves, they would not carry the cross. And
hereof their own conscience (if they have any conscience) does accuse them. Now
if their conscience accuse them at this present, what will it do before the
judgment seat of Christ? who will then excuse it, when Christ shall appear
in judgment, Luke. 9.12 Mark 8.
and shall begin to be ashamed of them then, which now here are ashamed of
him. who then (I say) will excuse these Mass gospellers consciences? will the
queen's hyghnes? She shall then have more to do for her self, then without hearty
and spedye repe^tau^ce she can ever be able to answer, though Peter, Paul,
Marye, James, John the Pope and all his Prelates take her part, with all the
syngyng Sir John's that ever were, are, and shall be? Will the Lord
Chancellor and prelates of the realm excuse them there? Nay, nay, they are
like then to smarte for it so sore as I would not be in their places for all
the whole world. Will the laws of the realm, the nobility, gentlemen,
Justices of peace etc. excuse our gospel Massemongers conscience then? Nay,
God knows they can do little there but quake and fear for the heavy
vengeance of God like to fall upon them. Will their goods, lands and
possessions, the which they by their dissemblyng have saved, will these serve to
excuse them? No no, god is no merchaunte, as our Mass priests be. Will Masses
or tre^tals and such trash serve? No verily ye haunters of this gear then
shall be horribly ashamed. Will the Catholic church excuse them? Nay it will
most of all accuse them, as will all the good fathers, Patriarchs, Apostles,
Prophets, Martyrs co^fessors and saints, with all the good Doctors, and good
general counsels, The most abhominatio^ o^ ^aeth is the Mass.
al these already condemn the Mass and all that ever uses it as it is now,
being of all idols that ever was, the most abominable and blasphemous to
Christ and his priestehode, manhood and sacrifice: for it makes the priest
that says Mass, the Mass priest is Christ's fellow.
gods fellow and better then Christ, for the offerer is always better or
equivalent to the thing offered. If therefore the priest take upon him there to
offer up Christ, as they boldly affirm they do, the^ must he needs be better,
or equal with Christ. Hebr. 5.
Oh that they would show but one jot of ye scripture of god calling the^ to
this dignity, or of their authority to offer up Christ for the quick and
dead, and to apply the benefyt and virtue of his death and passion to whom they
will. The Mass priests friendship is better-then christ's.
Surely if this were true, as it is most false and blasphemous, prate they at
their pleasure to the contrary, then it made no matter at all, whether Christ
were our friend or no, if so be the Mass priest were our friend: for he can
apply us Christ's merits by his Mass if he will, and when he will, The Mass
priest is above god, for he can make god. Math. 24.
and therefore we need little to care for Christ's friendship. They can make him
when they will and where they will. Lo hear he is, there he is say they, but
believe them not says Christ, believe them not, believe them not says he. For in
his humane nature and body, which was made of ye substance of the virgins body
and not of bread, in this body (I say) he is and sits on ye right hand of
God the father almighty in heaven, from whence and not from the pixe, shall he
come to judge both ye quick and dead. Act. 3. Romans 8 Hebr. 7 Hebr. 9. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
In the mean season heaven says S. Peter must receive him. And as Paul
says, he prays for us. and now is not seen elsewhere or otherwise seen then
by faith there, until he shall be seen as he is, to the salvation of them that
look for his coming, which I trust be not far of. For if the day of the lord
drew nere in the Apostles time, Luke. 21.
which is now above xv.C. years past, it cannot be (I trust) long hence now: I
trust our redemers coming is at hand. Apo. 6
Then these Mass sayers and seers shall shake and cry to the hills hyde us
from the fearce wrath of the Lamb, if they repent not in time. Then will
neither gold nor goods, frendeshippe: nor fellowship, lordeship nor
authority, power nor pleasure, unity nor antiquity, custom nor counsel, John.
12.
Doctors, decrees nor any man's devise serve. The word which the Lord has
spoken, in that day shall judge, The word of god shall be our judge. 1. Cor. x.
i. Cor. 6.
the word (I say) of god in that day shall judge. And what says it of
Idolatrye and idolaters? Says it not flee from it? And further, that they
shall be dampened? Oh terrible sentence to all Massemongers, and worshippers of
things made with the hands of Bakers, Carpenters etc. Heb. 7.9.10.
This word of God knows no more oblations or sacrifices for sin, but one
only which Christ himself offered never more to be reoffered, but in
remembrance thereof his supper to be eaten sacramentallye and spiritually
according to Christ's institution: which is so perverted now that there is
nothing in it symply according to the judge, I mean the word of God. Math. 5.
It were good for men to agree with their adversary the word of god now
whyleste they be in the way with it, lest if they linger, it will deliver
them to the judge Christ, in all things harken to the word of god as did the
These. Act. 17.
who will commytte them to the Tailor, and so they shall be cast into prison,
and never come our thence til they have paid the uttermost far thing, that is
never.

My dearly beloved, therefore mark the word harken to the word: it allows
no Massyng, no such sacrificyng nor worshyppyng of Christ with tapers,
candels, copes, canapies, etc. It allowed no Latyne service no images in the
Temples, no prayeng to Saints dead, no pray judge for the dead. It allows
no such disssmulation as a great many use now outwardelye. Hebr. 20.
If any wythdrawe him self my soul, says the holy Ghost, shall have no
pleasure in him. It allows not the love of this world, i. John. 2.
which makes meant to do many times against their consciences: for in them
that love the world, Math. 12 Apo. 3 3. Reg. 18. Romans ^ Math. 16. Mark. 8. Luke
9.14 phil. 2. math. 7.20 Romans 16. Acts. 4.5, Ephesi. 5. John. 10
the love of God abides not. It allows not gatherers elsewhere then with
Christ, but says they scatter abroad. It allows no luke warm gentlemen:
but if God be God, then follow him, if Baal and a piece of bread be GOD, then
follow it. It allows not faith in the heart that has not confession in the
mouth. It allows no Disciples that will not deny themselves, that will not
take up their cross and follow Christ. It allows not the seeking of our
selves or of our own ease and commodity. It allows not the more part but
the better part. It allows not unity except it be in verity. It allows no
obedience to any which cannot be done without disobedience to GOD. It allows
no church that is not the spouse of Christ and harkeneth not to his voice
only. It allows no doctor that speaks against it. It allows no general
counsel that follows not in all things. Galat. 1
Summa, it allows no aungel, much more tha^, any such as should teach any
other thing the^ Moses, the Prophets, Christ Jesus and his Apostles have taught
and left us to look upon in the written word of god the holy books of the
Bible, 1. Timot. 6 Math. 7 Jeremy. 8. Romans 16.
but curses all that teach not only contrary, but also any other doctrine. It
says they are fools, unwise proud, that will not consent to the sound word
and doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and byddeth and commands us to flee
from such.

Therefore obey this commandment, company not with the^ specially in their
church service, but flee from the^: for in what thing consent they to Christ's
doctrine? He bids us pray in a tongue to edify: 1. Cor. 14. Math. 6. ^oan:
14.15 Math. 26. Luke. 22 1. Cor. 12
they command contrary. He bids us call upon his father in his name when we
pray: they bid us run to Mary, Peter etc. He byddeth us use his supper in
the remembrance of his death and passion, preaching it out till it come,
whereby he does us to wit, that corporally he is not there in ye form of
bread: therefore says Paul till he come. He wills us to eat of ye bread,
calling it bread after consecration, and drink of that cup all, making no
exception so that we do it worthily: that is take it as ye sacrament of his
body and blood broken and shed for our sins, and not as the body it self and
blood it self without bread, without wine, but as the sacrament of his body
and blood, The fruits that follow the worthy receiuyng of the Lords supper.
whereby he does represent and unto our faith give and obsigne unto us,
himself wholly with all the merits and glory of his body and blood. But they
forbid utterly the use of the supper to all but to their shauelinges, except it
be once in the year, and then also the cup they take from us: they never
preach forth the lords death but in mockes and moes. Transubstantiation takes
away the Sacrament.
They take away all the Sacrament by their transubstantion, for they take away
the element and so the Sacrament. To be short they most horribly abuse this
holy ordinance of the Lord, by adoration, reservation, Apoc. 22 John. 5.
oblation, ostentation etc. In nothing they are contented with the symplicity
of gods word. They add to and take fro at their pleasure, and therefore the
plagues o^ God will fall upon them at the length, and upon all that will take
their part, They seek not Christ nor his glory for you see they utterly have
cast away his word, Jeremy. 8. Deuteronomy. 4 Apoc. 18.
and therefore (as the prophet says) there is no wisdom in the^. They follow
the strompet church and baudie spouse of Antichrist, which they call the
catholic church, whose foundation and pillars is the devil and his daughter
the mass, with his children ye pope and his prelates. Their laws are craft
and cruelty: their weapons are lying and murder: their end and study is
their own glory, fame, wealth, rest and possessions. For if a man speak nor do
nothing against these, though he be a Sodomite, an adulterer, an vserer etc.
it forces not, he shall be quiet enough, no man shall trouble him. But if any
one speak any thing to gods glory, which cannot stand without the overthrow of
man's glory: the^ shall he be disquieted, imprisoned and troubled, except he
will play mu^me and put his finger upon his mouth, although the same be a most
quiet and godly man. Job. 31.
So that easily a man may see how yt they be Antichrists church, and sworn
soldiers to the pope and his spouse, and not to Christ and his church, for
the^ would they not cast away gods word, the^ would they be no more adversaries
to his glory, which chiefly consists in obedience to his word. Therefore my
dear hearts in the Lord, seem not to allow this or any part of the pelf of
this Romish church and Sinagoge of Satan. Halt not on both knees, 3. Reg.
18. Hebr. 12 Mat. 10.16 Mark. 8. Luke 9.14. 2. Timo. 3. Romans 10 1. pet. 3.
for halting will bring you out of the way: but like valiaunte champions of the
Lord confess, confess I say, with your mouth as occasion serves, and as
your vocation requires, the hope and faith you have and feel in your heart.

But you will say that so to do is perilous, you shall by that means lose your
liberty, your lands, your goods, your friends, your name, your life etc. and
so shall your children be left in miserable state etc. To this I answer my
good brethren, that you have professed in baptism to fight under the standerd
of your captain Christ, and will you now for perils sake leave your lord? You
made a solemn vow that you would forsake the world, and will you be forsworn
and run to embrace it now? Mat. 16.19 Mat. 10. Mark. 8. Luke. 9.
You swear and promised to leave al and follow Christ, and will you now leave him
for your father, your mother, your children, your lands, your life? etc. He
that hates not these says Christ, is not worthy of me. He that forsakes not
these and him self also, and withal takes not up his cross and follows him,
the same shall be none of his Disciples. Therefore either by a Christ adew^ be
forsworn, and run to the devil quick, Aect. 20.
or else say as a Christian should say, that wife, Psalm. 119. Psalm. 49. Heb.
11.12 psa. 1^9 39
children, goods life, etc. are not to dear unto you in respect of Christ, who
is your portion and enheritaunce. Let the worldlynges which have no hope of
eternal life, fear perilles of loss of lands goods, life etc. Here is not
our home we are here but pilygrymes and strangers: this life is but the
deserte and wilderness to the land of rest. We look for a city whose
woorkeman is GOD him self. Hebr. 11. psalm. 120 Job. 9. psalm. 90 Job. 5. 2.
Cor. 5. Romans 8 Phil. 1. math. 7. Luke. 13. 2. Cor. 4. John. 16. math. 25. Romans 8
We now dwellers in the tents of Cedar. We are now in warrefare, in travail
and labor whereto we were borne as the bird to fly. We sorrow and syghe
desiryng the dissolution of our bodies, and the putting of of corruption that
we might put on incorruption. The way we walk in is strait and narrow and
therefore not easy to our enemy the corrupt flesh: but yet we must walk
on, for if we harken to our enemy, we shall be served not friendly. Let them
walk the wide way that are ruled by their enemies: let us be ruled by our
friends and walk the strait way whose end is weal, as the other is woe. The
time of our suffering is but short, as ye time of their ease is not long: but
the time of our rejoicing shall be endless, as the time of their torments shall
be ever and intolerable. Our breakfaste is sharp, but our supper is sweet.
The afflictions of this life may not be compared in any part to the glory that
shall be reueyled unto us. 2. Timot. 3
This is certain, if we suffer with Christ, mat. 10.
we shall reygne with him: if we confess him, he will confess us, and that
before his father in heaven and al his Aungells and Saints saying, math. 25.
come ye blessed of my Father possess the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning. Apo. 7.14.19.20.21. 3. Cor. 2. Esaias. 64. Hebr. 12
There shall be joy, myrthe, pleasure, solace, melodye, and all kind of
beatitude and felicity, such as the eye has not seen, the ear has not
heard, nor the heart of man is able in any point to conceive it as it is. In
respect of this and of the joy set before us, should not we run our race
though it be somthyng roughe? Did not Moses so, ye Prophets so, Christ so, the
Apostles so, ye Martyrs so, and the confessors so? Psalm. 36
They were dronke^ with the swetenes of this gear, and therefore they conte^pned
al ye man and devils could do to the^. Their souls thirsted after ye lord and
his tabernacles, psa. 84.41 63.
and therefore their lives and goods were not to dear to them. Read the 11. to
ye Hebrews, and the.2. of the Machabees. the.7. Act. 14. 2. Timo. 3.
Chapt. and let us go ye same way, that is by many tribulations. Let us labor
to enter into the kingdom of heaven* for all that will live godly in Christ Jesus
must suffer persecution.

Think therefore the cross, 1. pet. 4.
if it come for confession of Christ, no strange thing to gods children: but
rather take it as the Lords medicine by ye which he helps our imfirmities
and sets forth his glory. Our sins have deserved cross upon cross:
Psalm. 8. Romans 8. 2. Cor. 1 1. Cor. 15
now if god give us his cross to suffer for his truth and confessing him, as
he does by it bury our sins: so does he glorifye us, making us like to
Christ here, that we may be like unto him elsewhere: for it we be pertakers of
the affliction, we shall be partakers of the consolation: if we be like in
ignominye, we shall be like in glory. Great cause we have to give thanks to
god for le^ding us liberty, lands, goodness, wife, children, life etc. thus
long: so that we shall be guilty of ingratitude, if he now shall come and take
the same away, except we be cheerful and content. Job. 1.
God has given and God has taken away, says Job, as it pleases the lord so
be it done. And should not we do this, Deuteronomy. 13.
especially when the Lord takes these away of love to try us, and prove us
whether we be faithful lovers or strompets, that is whether we love hi^ better
the^ his gifts or otherwise? This is a truth of all truths to be laid up in
our hearts, read the historye of the widow. 4. reg. 4. Psalm. 37, Psalm. ^47.
that yt is not lost which seems so to be for ye confession of christ. In
this life your children shall find gods plentiful blessyng upon the^ when you
are gone and all your goods taken away. God is so good yt he helps the young
Ravens before they can fly, and feeds them when their dammes have most
unkindly left them: and trow ye that God which is the God of the wydowes and
fatherless children, Psa. 68 2. Cor. 4. John. 21. 1. Pet. 5. Psa. 55. math. 6.
Luke. 12.
will not specially have a care for the babes of his dear Saints which dye
or lose any thing for conscience to him? Oh my dearly beloved, therefore look
up with ye eyes of faith. Consider not things present but rather things to
come. Be content now to go whether God shall girde and lead us. Let us now
cast our selves wholly into his hands with our wives, children and al yt ever we
have. Let us be sure the hears of our head are nu^bred, so that one hear
shall not peryshe without the good will of our dear father, Math. 10 Psalm. 91.
who has commanded his Angels to pitche their tents about us, and in their
hands to take and hold us up, that we shall not hurt as much as our foot
against a stone. Let us use earnest prayer: Ephesi. 6. Luke. 13. Deuteronomy. 6. 3.
Cor. 7. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Math. 25. 1. Timo. 5. Romans 12 Romans 16.
let us heartily repent: let us harken diligently to gods word: let us keep our
selves pure from all uncleanness both of spirit and body: let us flee from al
evil and al appearance of evil: let us be diligent in our vocation and in
doing good to al men, especially to them that be of the household of faith: let
us live in peace with all men as much as is in us. And the Lord of peace give
us his peace and that for ever more, Amen. I pray you remember me your poor
afflicted brother in your hartye prayers to god. This.2. of September.

John Brdford.

An other letter to Master Richard Hopkins then Shriefe of Couentrye and
prisoner in the Fleet for the faithful and constant confessing of gods holy
Gospel.
DEarelye beloved in the Lord, I wyshe unto you, as unto mine own brother,
yea as to mine own heart root, Gods mercy and the feeling of the same
plentifullye in Christ our sweet Savior, who gave him self a ransom for
our sins, and price for our redemption, praised therefore be his holy name
for ever and ever. Amen.

I will not go about to excuse my self for not sending unto you hitherto
sufferynge for the Lords sake as you do, to the comfort of me and of all
that love you in the truth: but rather accuse my self both before GOD and you,
desirynge you of forgiveness, and with me to pray to GOD for pardon of this
my unkind forgettinge you, and all other my sins, which I beseech the Lord
in his mercy to do away for his Christ's sake, Amen. Now to make amends to
your ward, I would be glad if I could, but because I cannot, I shall heartily
desire you to accept the will, and this which I shall now write unto you,
thereafter: I mean, after my will and not after the deed, to accept and take
it. At this present my dear heart in the lord you are in a blessed state,
although it seem otherwise to you, or rather unto your old Adam, the which I
dare now be so bold as to discern from you, because you would have him not
only discerned, but also utterly destroyed. For if god be true, then is his
word true. Now his word pronounces of your state that it is happy, therefore
it must needs be so. To prove this I think it need not: for you know that the
holy ghost says, that they are happy which suffer for righteousness sake,
and that Gods glory and spirit rests on them which suffer for conscience to
God. Now this you can not but know, that this your suffering is for
righteousness sake and for conscience to god wards, for else you might be out of
trouble eue^ out of hand. I know in very deed that you have and feel your
unthankfulness to god and other sins, to witness to you that you have deserved
this prisonment, and lack of liberty betwixt god and your self, and I would
you so would confess unto god in your prayers, with peticion for pardon and
thankesgeuing for his correcting you here. But you know yt the Magistrates do
not persecute in you your sins, your unthankfulness etc. but they persecute
in you Christ himself, his righteousness, his verity, and therefore happy be
you that have found such favor with God your father as to account you worthy
to suffer for his sake in the sight of man: surely you shall rejoice therefore
one day with a joy unspeakable in the sight of man also.

You may think your self borne in a blessed time, that have found this grace
with God, to be a vessel of honor to suffer with his Saints, yea with his
son. My beloved, god has not done so with many. The Apostle says not many
noble, 1. Cor. 8
not many rich, not many wise in the world has the Lord god chosen. Oh then
what cause have you to rejoice, that amongst ye not many he has chosen you to
be one. For this cause has God placed you in your office, that therefore you
might ye more see his special dignation and love toward you. It had not been
so great a thing for Master Hopkins to have suffered as Master Hopkins, as it
is for M. Hopkins also to suffer as Master Shrefe. Oh happy day yt you were
made Shrefe, by the which, as God in this world would promote you to a more
honorable degree, so by suffering in this room he has exalted you in heaven
and in the sight of his church and children, to a much more excellent glory.
When was it read, that a Shrefe of a city has suffered for ye Lords sake?
Where read we of any shrefe that has been cast in prison for conscience to
godwardes? How could god have dealt more lovingly with you then herein he has
done? To the end of the world it shall be written for a memorial to your
praise that Richard Hopkins Shrefe of Couentry for conscience to do his office
before god, was cast in ye Flete and there kept prisoner a long time. Happy,
and twyse happy are you, if herefore you may give your life. Never could you
have attained to this promotio^ on this sort out of that office. How do you
preach now, not only to all men, but specially to Magestrates in this
realm? Who would ever have thought that you should have been ye first
Magestrate yt so: Christ's sake should have lost any thing? As I said before
therefore I say again, that your state is happy. Good brother before god I
write the truth unto you, may conscience hearing me witness, that you are in a
most happy state with the lord and before his sight.

Be thankful therefore, rejoice in your trouble, pray for patience, Jacob. i.
persevere to the end, let patience have her perfect work. If you want this
wisdom and power, ask it of god, who will give it to you in his good time.
Hope still in him, yea if he should slay you, yet trust in him with Job, and
you shall perceive that ye end will be to find him merciful and full of
compassion: for he will not break promise with you, which hitherto did never
so with any. He is with you in trouble: he hears you calling upon him, yea
before you call your desires are not only known, but accepted through Christ.
If now and then he hide his face from you, it is but to provoke your appetite,
to make you the more to long for him. This is most true, he is a coming and
will come, he will not be long. But if for a time he seem to tarry, yet stand
you still and you shall see the wonderful works of the Lord. Oh my beloved,
wherefore should you be heuie? Is not Christ Emanuel god with us? shall you not
find yt as he is true in saying, in the world you shall have trouble: so is he
in saying, in me you shall have comfort? He does not swear only that trouble
will come, but withal he swears that comfort shall ensue. 1. Cor. 2
And what comfort? such a comfort as ye eye has not seen, the ear has not
heard, nor the heart of man can conceive. Oh great comfort: who shall have this?
Forsooth they that suffer for ye lord. And are not you one of the^? Yea verily
are you. Then as I said, happy, happy, and happy again are you my dearly
beloved in the Lord. You now suffer with the lord, surely you shall be glorified
with him. Call upon God therefore now in your trouble and he will hear you, yea
deliver you in such sort as most shall make both to his and your glory also.
And in this calling I heartily pray you to pray for me your fellow in
affliction. Now we be both going in ye high way to heaven, for by many
afflictions must we enter in thither: whether god bring us for his mercies
sake, Ame^, Ame^.

Your fellow in affliction. John Bradforde.

To my dear fathers D. Cranmer D. Ridley D. Latymer, prisoners in Oxforde for
the testimonye of the Lord Jesus and his holy Gospel.
Almighty god our heavenly father more and more kendle our hearts and
affections with his love, that our greatest cross may be to be absent from him
and strangers from our home, and that we may godly contend more and more to
please him, Amen.

As always I have had great cause to praise our dear father through christ: so
me thinks I have more and more, in seeing more likely ye end of my life which
is due for my sin, to be through ye exceeding grace of Christ a testimonye of
Gods truth. Thus ye lord deals not with every body: not ye every body has not
more deserved at gods hands the^ I, which have deserved more vengeance the^ any
other (I know) of my time and state: but that by me I hope the Lord will make
the riches of his grace to his glory, to be seen more excellent. With me
therefore I humbly beseech you al (my most dear) fathers in God, to give thanks
for me, and as you do still to pray for me that the Lord, as for his loves
sake in Christ he has begone his good work in me, eue^ so of and for the
same his loves sake in Christ, he would make it perfect, and make me to
continue to the end, as I hope he will: for his mercy and truth endures for
ever. As for your parts, in that it is commonly thought your staff stands
next to the door, ye have the more cause to rejoice and be glad, as they which
shall come to your fellows under the alter: to the which society god with you,
bring me also in his mercy when it shall be his good pleasure. I have received
many good things from you my good Lord, Master, and dear father. N. Ridley,
fruits I mean of your godly labors. Al which I se^d unto you again by this
bringer: one thing except which he ca^ tell, I do keep upon your further
pleasure to be known therein. And here withal I send unto you a little
treatise which I have made, that you might peruse the same, and not only you,
but also ye my other most dear and reverent fathers in the lord for ever, to
give to it your approbatio^ as ye may think good. All the prisoners
hereaboutes, in manner, have seen it and red it, and as therein they agree with
me, nay rather with the truth: so they are ready and will be to signify it as
they shall see you give them example. The matter may be thought not so
necessary as I seem to make it. But yet if ye knew the great evil that is like
hereafter to come to the posterity by these men, as partly this bringer can
signify unto you: surely then could ye not but be most willing to put hereto
your helping hands. The which thing that I might more occasion you to
perceive, I have sent you here a writing of Harry Hearts own hand, This was the
chefest mayntayner of ma^s frewil, and enemy to Gods free grace.
whereby ye may see how Christ's glory and grace is like to lose much light if
yt your sheep quondam be not something helped by them which love God, and are
hable to prove that all good is to be attributed only and wholye to Gods
grace and mercy in Christ wtoute other respect of worthiness the^ Christ's
merits. The effects of salvation they so mingle and confou^de with ye cause,
that if it be not seen to, more hurt will come by the^, then ever came by the
papists, in as much as their life commends the^ to the world more the^ ye
papists. God is my witness yt I write not this but because I would gods glory
and the good of his people. In freewyl they are plain papists, yea Pelagia^s:
This is well known to all those which have had to do with them in disputations
or otherwise: for the wrytyngs and authority of the learned, they have utterly
rejected and despised
and ye know ye modicu^ fermenti tota^ massam corrumpit. They utterly contemn
all learning. But hereof shall this brynger show your more. As to the chief
captains therefore of Christ's church here, I complain of it unto you: as
truly I must do of you even unto GOD in the last day, if ye will not as
ye can, help somthyng vt veritas doctrinae maneat apud posteros in this
behalf, Upon this occasion. M^ Rydley wrote a learned and godly treatise of
gods election and predestination.
as ye have done on the behalf of matters expugned by the papists. God for
his mercy in Christ, ^uide you (my most dearly beloved fathers) with his
holy spirit here and in all other things, as most may make to his glory and
the commodity of his chruch. Amen.

All here (god therefore be praised) prepare themselves wyllyngly to pledge our
captayn Christ, even when he will and how he will. By your good prayers we shall
al fare the better, and therefore we al pray you to continue to cry to god for
us, as we god willing, do and will remember you. My brethren here with me have
thought it their duty to signify this need to be no less then I make it, to
preuente the plantations which may take root by these men.

Yours in the Lord. Robert Ferrar. Rowlande Tailor. John Bradford. Ihon
Philpot.


To Master Shalcrosse and his wife dwelling in Lankeshyre.
THe peace of conscience in Christ, and through faith in his blood, which as it
passes and is far better then any worldly riches or joy, so is it to be
redeemed with the loss of the derest treasures we have, rather then we should
lose it: this peace I wish unto you good M. Shalcrosse and unto your good
yokefellow, my good sister in the Lord, now and for ever, Amen.

Hertherto although I could not write unto you, yet as I trust you pray for me,
so I have not been forgetful of you in my poor prayers to almyghtye GOD my
dear father through Christ, to whom I give humble praises that he has
given you grace as yet (for so I hear) to keep your self undefiled in his
service, which far differs from the Romyshe rags revived of late and
iustlye for our sins and unthankful using his true religion and holy
ceremonies, once again in place and use amongst us. In token whereof (I mean
that I have not been forgetful of you) I thought good now when I may write, to
sygnifye the same, as well to renew our mutual love in GOD and care one for an
other by hartye prayer, as to excite and provoke you both, to thankefulnes for
gods graces hitherto, especially in the point before spoken of, and to be
diligent and wary that you unto the end continue in the same: for you know
that perseueraunce in godliness and purity, is required of us, 2. Timot. 2
and that none other shall be crowned but such as fight lawfully.

Go to therefore and fight on a good fight floutly and manfullye: that is, as
you know God is not to be worshipped and served but after his word written, and
not after unwritten verities, or the devise, fantasy and pleasures of men or
women, in what state soever they be, accordynglye behave your self, as
inwardlye in gods syghte, so outwardlye before your brethren. Seem not to
approve by your outewarde man, that which the inward man detesteth. It is not
enoughe to beeleue with the heart, except the mouth and fact confess the
same. Nor it is not enoughe with the mouth to acknowledge a veritye, and by
our fact and deed to destroy the same. Paul speaks sometimes of denyers
of god not only with their lyppes and tongue but also with their deed and life.
Let not the world or the more part of men be an example to you to follow them
or do as they do in the service of God. Christ says follow me, speaking of
himself, which is the patron and sampler we should set before us, and not
the world or more part, which wyndeth the wide and broad way, whose end
does lead to perdition and everlasting woe: but rather let the example of
such as walk in the narrow and strait way which brings to life endless,
encourage you to walk with them, although the number of them be but s^we, and
the personages of the^ be vttyrly contemned with the world and in the world,
which world cannot love, no not know in deed the children of god, because it
cannot receive the sprite of God: and therefore, as the Ape her young ones, so
it (the world I mean) does think her own birds the fairest, conte^ning with
deadly hate al others that will not follow her judgment. But what says christ?
Be of good there: although ye world will persecute you, yet I have overcome ye
world. Oh comfortable sentence, I have overcome ye world. This undoubtedly he
means for you and me and all other his children, that he has overcome ye
world for us. But by what means? Surely by suffering contempt, wrong, false
reports, and even very shameful and most bitter death. If he went this way,
and wan the victory this way, as I trust we know: let us as his servants
(whose state ought not to be above our masters) not be dismayed of contempt,
of wrong, of loss of goods or life it self: but rather joyfully suffer ye
same, as me^ knowing we have better portions in heaven, and that this is ye
sure way to victory most victorious: for by many tribulations must we enter
into ye kingdom of heaven, if we will come thither, except for tribulation sake
we will with ease and worldly quietness go to hell. You know that Paul says,
all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution. Wherefore in
that you are in Christ Jesus, I dare say you will continue though persecution
come to you, being assured that it cannot come except god have so decreed: and
if he have so decreed, then can not you but receive it, or else a cross which
will be much worse. Willingly therefore take what cross ye lord shaloffer, and
then the lord will make you able to bear it, and never tempte you further the^
he will make you strong enough: yea all the hears of your head he will number
and keep, so yt one of the^ shall not perish: but if you should refuse gods
cross, especially in suffering the loss of any thing for his sake, which
gives you all the good yt ever you have and keeps it: if I say you refuse, be
certain the plagues of God will be poured down, first on your soul and
conscience in hardening your heart and blinding your mind, either by bringing
you into despair or into a contempt and carnal security: whereafter will ensue
loss of ye derest things you have, if god love you, or else he will conserve the
same to your eternal destruction. I write not this as distrusting your
constancy in gods cause: God forbid (for me think I am assured of your godly
zeal) but I do it as I said, that you may be the more heedye, ware,
diligent, and earnestly given to call upon the name of god for his help and
grace of perseverance, which is more ready to give, then we to ask.

I know this kind of writing is madness to the world, folishnes to reason, and
sower to the flesh: but to you which are a man of God, and by profession in
baptism have forsaken the world, and do consider things after the reach of
faith, and have tasted of the good spirit of God and of the life to come,
unto such a one I say, (as I trus you be) this kind of writing is otherwise
esteemed. For hear you are but a pilgrim your home is in heaven, your
treasures are their hurded where thieves cannot come to steal them, there is
your heart: and therefore you can and will say as the philosopher said when he
was robbed of al he had, Omnia mea mecum porto, I carry al with me. If he an
heathen took his riches to be the worlds rather then his, how much more
should we so do?

Therefore my dear brother, accordyngly prepare your self, as you have done
and do I hope Read the.2. of Ecclesiasticus, how he counsaileth them that will
serve god, to prepare themselves to temptation. Often set before your eyes the
judgment of Christ, his coming in the clouds, and the resurrection, which is
now our comfort, especially in afflictions. I write to you none otherwise then
I am persuaded (I thank god) and purpose to go before you. I know there is an
eternal life, I hope to be pertaker of it through christ. I know this is the
way thither, I mean by suffering. I know if we suffer with him, we shall reign
with him. I know that by the cross, he makes us like to Christ here that we
mayghte be like to him elsewhere: therefore I write to you not words only. And
hereupon I am the more earnest: as to admonish, so to pray you to cleave still
to the lord and his true religion which you have received, and I for my part am
sure that I have preached unto you. For the confirmation whereof, as I am in
bonds, so I trust in the goodness of God and his power, to give my life in and
for the same, that you and others might be certain, and follow as god shall call
you and vouche you worthy. Remember yt die you must, but when, as you know not,
so where and how, it is uncertain to you. Again al yt you have you must leave
behind you, for nothing shall go with you but a good or an evil conscience.
Moreover to who^ you shall leave your goods it is hyd from you, for you may
purpose, but god will dyspose. Therefore if god will have you to dye, or to lose
your goods for his cause, how much are you bound then to bless God? sure you
may be that you can not perish, for of all ways to heaven it is the most sure
way. Your goods God will preserve, so that your children shall find them,
although the wyckeh spoil every piece of them: for the rightuous man's seed I
have not seen (says Dauyd) beg their bread, but god will bless them into a
thousand generations: the which thing I pray god to remember toward your
chylderne for his name sake, Amen.

Thus will I betake you to god, and to his holy word, which is able, as to
teach you which way to serve god, so to save you if you believe and love it. If
I thought it might do you any good, I would send you a book which James
Bradshaw already has, to teach you how you should behave your selves,
especially concerning the Mass. I wrote it sithe^ my trouble. Commend me to T.
Riddleston, although I fear me he have defiled himself in this false service.
That book I would wish he wuld read: as you shall advertise me, I will do in
sending to him. I shall pray god to illuminate his eyes with his grace. Commend
me to Sir W. Charelton, who I trust has kept himself pure from idolatry: god
grant he so continue. Written in haste as it appears from the Counter in the
Poultre.

By yours in Christ. John Bradford

To his godly friends. G. and N. encouragyng the^ to prepare themselves to the
cross, and patie^tly to endure afflictions for god cause and his hohys Gospel.
THe God of all mercies and the father of al consolations, show unto you more
and more ye riches of his mercies in christ Jesus our lord, and grant you a
lively faith to apprehend and pull unto your selves ye same, to your everlasting
comfort, Amen.

Because my mind will not let me rest to think upon, and as it were to see
sore storms like to fall more felly the^ any yet we have felt (I should rather
say ye have felt and are like to feel, if ye continue to confess christianly
as ye have begun) I thought it my duty to admonish you that therefore ye
should not be dismayde nor think it any strange thing. For undoubtedly you
co^fessyng Christ according to ye truth taught you, yea received of you, though
trouble come, the same shall be so far from hurting you, yt it shall profit you
excedingly, making you thereby like to him which for your sakes suffered much
greater sorrow then al men can sustain: as well that your sorrows and
afflictions whatsoever they be that shall come unto you, should be sanctified in
his cross, and that which he suffered: as also that in him ye might have both
example how to order your selves in the cross, and how sone, shortly, and
gloriously the end of your cross will be. Therefore I say, be not dismayde in
that the cross cannot but conform and make us like unto Christ, not symply of
it self, but by gods spirit which makes it his chief mean thereto: first in
putting us in mind of our corruption received of Adam, ye cause of al care:
then by occasioning us to remember as well our priuye hid sins, as also our
more manifest evils, that we there through might be provoked to repentance and
asking of mercy, ye which undoubtedly god will give us for his christ's sake,
and thereto also his holy sprite to sa^ctify us if we ask the same. Now this
sprite will not cease more and more both to mortify ye old man with his
desires, and also to renew and repair the new man dailye with augme^tation and
increase: so that at the length we shall be made so like to Christ yt we cannot
but be coupled unto him, I mean not by faith as now we be, but eue^ in deed,
leaving here behind us with Hely our cloak ye flesh, which one day god will call
and quicke^ again to be like unto ye glorious and immortal body of his son
Jesus Christ out lord, after ye it has suffered and slepte as his has done, ye
afflictions and time which god has already apoi^ted. My dear brethern and
sisters, this is most certain that the afflictions and crosses which ye shall
suffer, god has already appointed for you, so that they are not in the power,
choice, and will of your and his enemies. If ye would fly the^ ye cannot, but
will ye, nil ye, needs must ye have them. If ye will not carry them in the love
of god, ye shall carry them in his displeasure. Therefore cast your care on him
which cares for you, and has counted all the hears of your heads, so that one
shall not perish if that ye commit your selves to his ordering, where else your
heads and bodies, yea souls too shall perish if yt ye with draw your selves as
unwilling to take his cup and to drink of it: not that I would have you to
thrust your selves hedlong and rashly to take or pull unto you trouble, or that
I wuld not have you to use such honest and lauful means as ye may in ye fear
of god and with good conscience, to avoid the cross and give place to evil:
but that I would have you willing to put fort your hand to take it when god
offreth it in such sort as with good conscience ye cannot escape. Then take it,
kiss it, and thank god for it: for it is eue^ a very sacrament that god
loves you, as he says, whom I love the^ do I chastise: and if ye be not
pertakers of correction, surely ye are no children: but if he once chastise
you, if yt ye kiss the rod, verily he will case ye rod into ye fire, and colle
you and kiss you as ye mother does her child when she perceives ye child to
take in good part the correction. But why do I compare god your fathers love to
a mother, in yt it far passes it? For says he, though it be possible that a
natural mother should forget ye child of her womb: yet will not I forget thee,
says ye lord our good god and father through Christ. Though he seem angry
toward euenyng, yet in the morning we shall find him well pleased, if in Christ
we come to him and cry Abba dear father, help us and (as thou have promised)
tempt us not further then thou will make us able to bear.

Therefore (my dear hearts in the lord) be of good comfort, be of good comfort
in the lord. Confess him and his truth and fear not prison, loss of goods
or life. Fear rather that prison, out of the which there is no deliverance:
fear rather the loss of those goods which last for ever: fear rather the
loss of the life which is eternal, whereunto ye are called, and the way by
which god will bring you to it, in that ye certainly know not whether it will
be by prison, fire, halter, etc. whenever these come (as I said before) let
them not dismay you nor seem strange to you. For no small number, of gods
children are gone that way, and we are a good company here together, which are
ready to follow the same way through gods grace, if god so will. I beseech you
make you ready and go with us, or rather be ready that when we come we may go
with you. The journey is but short, though it be unpleasant to the flesh.
Perchance if we should die in our beds on a corporal malady, it would be
much longer and also more painful, at the least in gods syghte it cannot be so
precious and gayneful, as I know this kind of death is: whereto I exhort you
to prepare your selves mine own dear hearts in the bowels and blood of our
savior Jesus Christ, to whose tuition grace, governance, and protection, I
heartily commend you all, and beseech you that ye would do the like unto me in
your hearty prayers.

Out of the tower of London. 1554. By your own to use in the Lord for ever.
John Bradford.

An other letter written to certain godly persons to the same effect.
Gracious god and most merciful father for Jesus Christ's sake thy dearly
beloved son, grant us thy mercy, grace, wisdom and holy spirit, to
counsel, comfort and guide us in all our cogitations, words and works, to
thy glory and our everlasting joy and peace for ever, Amen.

In my last letter ye might perceive my coniecturyng to be no less toward
you, then now I have partly learned. But (my derely beloved) I have learned
none other thing, then before I have told you would come to pass, if ye cast
not away that which I am sure ye have learned. I do appeal to both your
consciences, whether herein I speak truth as well of my tellyng (though not so
often as I might and should, god forgive me) as also of your learning. Now God
will try you, to make others to learn by you yt which ye have learned by
others, The lady lasts and her husband were beheaded that day*
and by them which suffered this day ye might learn (if already ye had not
learned) that life and honor is not to be set by more then gods commandment.
They in no point for all yt ever their ghostly fathers could do, having Doctor
Death to take their part, would consent of seem to consent to the popysh Mass
and papistical God, otherwise then in the days of our late King they had
received. And this their faith they have confessed with their deaths, to their
great glory and all our comfortes, if we follow the^: but to our confusion if
we starte back from the same. Wherefore I beseech you both to consider it, as well
to praise god for them, as to go the same way with them if god so will.
Consider not the things of this life, which is a very prison to all gods
children: but the things of everlasting life which is our very home. But to the
beholding of this gear ye must open the eyes of your mind, of faith I should
have said, as Moses did, which set more by trouble with Gods people then by
the riches of Egypt and Pharaos court. Your house, home, and goods, yea life
and all that ever ye have, god has given you as love tokens, to admonish you
of his love and to win your love to him again. Now will he try your love,
whether ye set more by him then by his tokens or no. If ye for his tokens sake,
that is, for your home, house, goods, yea life, will go with the world least ye
should lose them, then be assured, your love, as he can not but epsy it to be
a strompettes love, so will he cast it away with the world. Remember that he
which will save his life, shall lose it, if Christ be true: but he which
aduentureth yea loses his life for ye gospels sake, the same shall be sure to
find it eternally. Do not ye both know that the way to salvation is not the
broad way which many run in, but the strait way which few now walk in?

Before persecution came, men might partly have stand in a dout by the outward
state of ye world with us (although by gods word it was plain) whether was the
high way (for their was as many pretended the gospel as poperye) but now the
son is risen, and the wind blows, so that the corn which has not taken
fast root cannot nor will not abide: and therefore easlye ye may see the strait
way by the small number that passes throught it. Who will now adventure
their goods and lift for Christ's sake, which yet gave his life for oursakes?
Math. 8.
We now are Gergesites, yt would rather lose Christ then our porkets. A
faithful wife is never tried so to be, but when she rejects and with
stands woers. A faithful Christian is then found so to be, when his faith is
assaulted. If we be not able, I mean if we will not forsake this world for
gods glory and gospells sake, trow ye that god will make us able or give us a
will to forsake it for natures sake? Die ye must once, and leave al ye have (God
knows how soon and when) will ye or will ye not. And seeing perforce ye must
do this, will ye not willinglye now do it for gods sake? If ye go to Mass
and do as the most part does, then may ye live at rest and quietly: but if ye
deny to go to it, then shall ye go to prison, lose your goods, leave your
children comfortles, yea lose your life also. But my dearly beloved, open the
eyes of your faith, and see how short a thing this life is, even a very
shadow and smoke. Again, see how intolerable the punishment of hell fire is,
and that endless. Last of al look on the joys incomprehensible, which God has
prepared for all them world without end, which lose either lands or goods for
his names sake. And then do ye reason thus: if we go to Mass the greatest
enemy that Christ has, though for a little time we shall live in quiet, and
leave to our children that they may live hereafter, yet shall we displease
god, fall into his hands, which is horrible to hypocrites, and be in wonderful
hazard of falling from eternal joy into eternal misery, first of soul and
then of body, with the devil and all Idolaters. Again, we shall want peace of
conscience, which surmounteth all the riches of the world, and for our children,
who knows whether god will viset our Idolatrye on them in this life: yea our
house and goods are in danger of losing, as our lives be, through many
casualties, and when God is angrye with us, he can send always when he will,
one mean or an other to take all from us for our sins, and to cast us into
care for our own sakes, which will not come into some little trouble for his
sake.

On this sort reason with your selves, and the^ doutles god will work otherwise
with you and in you, then ye are ware of. Where now ye think your selves unable
to abide persecution, be most assured, if so be ye purpose not to forsake God,
that God will make you so able to bear his cross, yt therein ye shall rejoice.
1. Cor. 1^
Faithful is god (says Paul) which will not tempt you further then he will
make you able to bear, yea he will give you an outscape in the cross which
shall be to your comfort. Think how great a benefit it is, if God will vouche
you worthy this honor to suffer loss of any thing for his sake. He might
justly cast most grievous plages upon you, and now he will correct you with that
rod whereby you shall be made like to his Christ, that for ever ye may reygne
with him. Suffer your selves therefore now to be made like to Christ, for else ye
shall never be made like unto him. The devil would gladly have you now to
overthrow that which godly ye have of long time professed. Oh how would he
triumph if he could win his purpose? Oh how would the papists triumph
against gods gospel in you? Oh how would you confirm them in their wicked
popery? Oh how would the poor children of god be discomforted if now ye
should go to Mass and other Idolatrous service, and do as the world does?
Has God delivered you from ye Sweat to serve him so? Has GOD miraculouslye
restored you to health from your grievous Agewes for such a purpose? Has God
given you such blessings in this world and good things all the days of your
life hitherto, and now of equity will ye not receive at his hands and for his
sake, some evil? God forbid. I hope better of you. Use prayer, and cast your
care upon God: commit your children into his hands: give to god your goods,
bodies and lives as he has given them, or rather lent them unto you. Say with
Job, God has given and God has taken away, his name be praised for ever.
Cast your care upon him (I say) for he is careful for you: and take it among
the greatest blessings of God to suffer for his sake. I trust he has kept you
hitherto to that end. And I beseech thee O merciful father for Jesus Christ's
sake, that you would be merciful unto us, comfort us with thy grace, and
strengthen us in thy truth, that in heart we may believe and in tongue boldly
confess thy gospel, to thy glory and our eternal salvation, Amen. Pray for me
and I by Gods grace will do the same for you.

John Bradforde.

An other letter to the same persons.
GOds mercy in Christ I wish you to feel, my dear brother, with my faithful
sister your wife now and for ever, Amen.

Having this occasion, I could not but write something, as well to put my self
in remembrance of my duty to godwardes for you both, in thankfulness and
prayer, as to put you in remembrance of me and your duty toward god for me,
in praying for me: for I dare not say in thankfulness for me: not that I would
have you to give no thanks to God for his wonderful great and sweet mercies
toward me and upon me in Christ his son: but because I have not deserved it
at either of your hands. For ye both know right well, at least my conscience
does accuse me, how yt I have not only not exhorted and taught you (as both my
vocation and your deserts required) to walk worthy of that vocation which god
has made you worthy of, and with trembling and fear to work out your
salvation, that is in ye fear of god to give your selves to great vigila^cie
in prayer for ye increase of faith, and to a wary circu^spection in all your
co^uersatio^, not only in works and words but also in thoughts, because god is
a sercher of ye heart, and out of ye heart it comes that defiles us in gods
sight: I have (I say) not only not done this but also have given you example of
negligence in prayer, watching, fasting, talking and doing, so that woe to me
for giving you such offense. Partly for this cause dear brother and sister
god has cast me and keeps me here that I might repent me and turn to him,
and that ye might also by this correction upon me, be more diligence to
redress these things and others, if they in your conscience do accuse you.

My dearly beloved, heuie is gods anger fallen upon us al: doulefull is this
day. Now has Antichrist all his power again, now is Christ's gospel trode^
under foot, now is gods people a derision and a pray for ye wicked. Now is ye
greatest plague of al plagues fallen, ye want of gods word: and al these we
have, yea I alone have justly deserved. Oh yt as I write (I alone) I could with
David, 1. Par. 21. and with Jonas in heart say so. But I do not, I do not, I se
not how greuouslye I have sinned, and how great a misery is fallen for mine
unthankfulness for gods word, for mine hypocrisy in professing, preaching,
hearing and speaking of gods word, for my not praying to God for ye continuance
of it, for my not living of it thoroughly as it requires etc. I will speak
nothing of my manyfeste evils, for they are known to you well enough. Dear
brother and sister, with me say ye the like for your own parts, and with me
join your hearts, and let us go to our heavenly father and for his Christ's
sake beseech him to be merciful unto us and to pardon us: Oh good father it is
we that have deserved the taking away of thy word, it is we that have deserved
these thy just plagues fallen upon us, we have done a mysse, we have dealt
unjustly with thy Gospel, we have procured thy wrath, and therefore just art
thou in punishing us, just art thou in plaging us, for we are very miserable.
But good Lord and dear father of mercy, whose justice is such that you will
not punish the poor souls of this realm, which yet have not thus sinned
against thee as we have done (for many yet never heard thy word) for our
trespasses, and whose mercy is so great that thou will put our iniquities out
of thy remembrance for thy Christ's sake, if we repent and believe: grant us
we beseech thee true repentance and faith, that we having obtained pardon for
our sins, may through thy Christ get deliverance from the tyranny of
Antichrist now oppressing us. Oh good father which haste said that the Scepter
of the wicked should not long lie upon and over the just, lest they put forth
their hands to iniquity also: make us just, we pray thee in Christ's name, and
cut a sunder the cords of the^ that hate Sion: let not ye wicked people say
where is their god? Thou our god art in heaven and do what soever it
pleases thee upon earth. Oh that you would in the mean whiles, before you do
deliver us, that (I say) thou would open our eyes to see al these plagues
to come from thee, and al other that shall come whatsoever they be public or
private, that they come not by chance nor by fortune, but that they come eue^
from thy hand, and that justly and mercifully: iustlye because we have and do
deserve them, not only by our birthpoyson still sticking and working in us, but
also by our former evil life past, which by this punishment and al other
punishments yt would have us to call to our remembrance and to set before us,
that ye might put the^ from before thee, where as they stand so long as they
are not in our remembrance to put the^ away by repentance. Mercifully oh lord
god do thou punish, in that thou do not correct to kill, but to amend,
that we might repent our sins, ask mercy, obtain it freely in Christ, and
to begin to suffer for righteousness sake: to be part of thy house, whereat thy
judgment begins: to be pertakers of ye afflictions of thy church and thy
Christ, yt we might be pertakers of the glory of ye same: to weep here, yt we
might rejoice elsewhere: to be judged in this world yt we might with thy Saints
judge hereafter the world: to suffer with Christ yt we might reign with him:
to be like to Christ in shame, that we might be like to him in glory: to
receive our euelles here, that we might with poor Lazarus find rest elsewhere:
rest (I say) and such a rest as ye eye has not seen, the ear has not heard
nor the heart of man is able to conceive. Oh yt our eyes were open to see this,
that ye cross comes from thee to declare thy justice and thy mercy, and
hereto, yt we might see how short a time ye time of suffering is: how long a
time the time of rejoicing is to the^ that suffer here: but to the^ that will
not, how long and miserable a time is appointed and prepared, a time without
time in eternal woe and perdition too horrible to be thought upon. From the
which keep us dear father and give more sight in soul to see this gear, and
how that al thy dearest children have carried the cross of grievous affliction
in this life, in whose company do thou place us, and such a cross lay upon us
as thou will make us able to bear, to thy glory and our salvation in Christ,
for whose sake we pray thee to shorten the days of this our great misery
fallen upon us most iustlye, and in the mean season give us patience,
repentance, faith, and thy eternal consolation, Amen, Amen, Amen.

And thus dear hearts I have talked (me thinks) a little while with you, or
rather we have all talked with god. Oh that god would give us his spirit of
grace and prayer. My dearly beloved pray for it, as for your selves, so for me,
and that god would vouchsafe to make me worthy to suffer with a good conscience
for his names sake. Pray for me, and I shall do the like for you. This.20. of
December, by him whom by this bringer ye shall learn. I pray you give my
commendations to all that love me in the Lord. Be merry in Christ, for one day
in heaven we shall mete and rejoice together for ever more, Amen.

John Bradford

To my good brother John Careless prisoner in the King Bench.
THe father of mercy and god of all comfort, viset us with his eternal
consolation, according to his great mercies in Jesus Christ our Savior, Amen.

My very dear brother, if I shall report ye truth unto you, I can not but
signify that sithe^ I came into prison, I never received so much consolation as
I did by your last letter, the name of god be most heartily praised therefore.
But if I shall report the truth unto you, and as I have begone, speak still the
verity, I must confess that for mine unthankfulness to you wards and to god
especially, I have more need of gods merciful tidings, the^ I had ever
heretofore. Ah that Satan enuieth us so greatly. Ah that our Lord would tread
his head under our feet shortly. Ah that I might for ever, both my self
beware, and be a godly example to you and others to beware of unthankfulness.
Good brother Careless, we had more need to take heed after a lightning, of a
foil the^ before. God therefore is to be praised even when he hides and that
of long, a cheerful countenance from us, lest we being not expert how to use
it as we should do, do hurt more our selves thereby: so great is our ignorance
and corruption. This my good brother and right dear to my very heart, I write
unto you as to one who^ in the Lord I embrace, and I thank god yt you do me
in like manner. God our father more and more give us both his good spirit, that
as by faith we may feel our selves united unto him in Christ, so by love we may
feel our selves linked in the same Christ one to an other, I to you and you
to me, we to all the children of God and all the children of God to us, Amen,
Amen.

Commend me to our good brother Skelthrop, for whom I heartily praise my God
which has given him to see his truth at ye length, and to give place to it. I
dout not but yt he will be so heedye in all his co^uersatio^ yt his old
acquaintance may ever thereby think themselves astray. Woe and woe again should
be unto us, if we by our example should make me^ to stu^ble at ye truth. Forget
not salutatio^s in Christ, as you shall think good to True and his fellows.
The Lord has his time (I hope) for them also, although we perchance think
otherwise. A drop makes the stone hollow, not with once but with often
dropping: so if with hearty prayer for them and good example, you still and
drop upon them as you can, you shall see gods work at the length. I beseech
God to make perfect all the good he has begone in us all, Amen. I desire you
all to pray for me the most unworthy prisoner of the Lord.

Your brother John Bradforde.

To Master John Hall and his wife prisoners in Newgate for the testimonye of
the Gospel.
Almighty god our heavenly father throught Jesus Christ, be with you both my
dearlye beloved, as with his dear children for ever, and he so bless you with
his holy spirit that you may in this your cross (for his cause doubtless)
rejoice, and gladlye take it up to bear it so long as he shall think good. I
have heard (my good brother and sister) how that God has brought you both into
his Scholehouse, where as you were both purposed by his leave to have played the
Trewands, that thereby you might see his carefulnes and love toward you. For if
it be a token of a louinge and careful father for his children, to prevent the
purpose and disapoynte the intent of his children purposing to depart a while
from the schole for fear of beating, which thing they would not do if they did
as much consider the comoditie of learning which there they might get: how
should you take this work of the Lord preuentyng your purpose, but as an
euidente sign of love and fatherly carefulnes that he bears toward you? If
he should have wincked at your wills, then would you have escaped beating, I
mean the cross: but then should you have lost the comoditie of learning,
which your father will now have you to learn and feel, and therefore has he
sent to you his cross. He I say, has brought you where you be: and though
your reason and wit will tell you it is by chance or fortune or or otherwise,
yet (my derelye beloved) know for certain that whatsoever was the mean, GOD
your father was the worker hereof; and that for your weal, although otherwise
your old Adam does tell you, and you feel: yet I say, of truth that your
duetye is to think of this cross, that as it is of gods sendyng and comes
from him: so although your deserts be otherwise, it is of love and fatherly
affection for your weal and commodities sake.

What commodity is hereby, you will perchance object? You are now kept in
close prison you will say: your family and children be without good overseers:
your substance deminisheth by these means: pouertye will approach, and
perchance more perils also, as loss of life etc. these are no commodities but
discommodities, and that no small ones: so yt justly you would be glad to know
what commodity can come to you by this cross, whereby comes so great
discommodities.

To these things I answer, that in deed it is true you say of your bodies,
families, children, substance, pouertye, life etc. Which things, if you would
consider a while with inward eyes as you behold them with outward, then
perhaps you should find more ease. Do not you now by the inward sense
perceive that you must part from al these, and all other commodities in the
world? Tell me then, have not you this commoditye by your cross, to learn to
loathe and leave the world and to long for and desire an other world where is
perpetuity? You ought of your own head and freewyll to have (according to
your profession in baptism) forsaken the world and al earthly things, using
the world as though you used it not, your heart only set upon your hourde in
heaven, or else you could never be Christ's true disciples, that is be saved
and be where he is. And trow you (my good hearts in the lord) trow you I say,
that this is no commoditye, by this cross to be compelled hereto, that you
might assuredly enjoy with ye lord endless glory? How now does god (as it were)
fatherly pull you by the ears to remember your former offenses concerning these
things and all other things, that repentance and remission might ensue? How
does god now compel you to call upon him and to be earnest in prayer? Are these
no commodities? Does not the fcripture say that God does correct us in the
world because we shall not be dampened with the world? that god chasteneth
every one whom he loves? that the end of this correction shall be joy and
holiness? Does not the scripture say that they are happy that suffer for
righteousness sake, as you now do? that the glory and sprite of God is upon
them? that as you are now made like unto Christ in sufferyng, so you shall be
made like to him in reigning? Does not the scripture say that you are now going
the high and right way to heaven? that your suffryng is Christ's sufferyng?
My dearly beloved what greater commodities then these can a godly heart
desire? Therefore ye are commanded to rejoice and be glad when ye suffer, as
now ye do: for through the goodness of god, great shall be your reward. Where?
Forfoth on earth, first for your children: for now they are in gods mere and
immediate protection. Never was father so careful for his chylderne as God is
for yours presently. Gods blessyng which is more worth then all the world, you
leave in deed to your chyldern. Though all your providence for them should be
pulled away: yet god is not poor, he has promised to provide for them most
fatherly. Psalm. 55
Cast thy burden upon me (says he) and I will bear it. Do you therefore cast
them and commend them unto god your father, and doubt not that he will dye in
your dec. He never yet was found unfaithful, and he will not now begin with
you. The good man's sede shall not go a beggyng his bread: Psalm. 37,
for he will show mercy upon thousands of the posterity of them that fear
him. Therefore as I said, gods reward first upon earth shall be felt by your
children even corporally, and so also upon you if God see it more for your
commodity, at the least inwardly you shall feel it by quietness and comfort of
conscience: and secondly after this life you shall find it so plentifullye, as
the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, the heart cannot conceive how
great and glorious gods reward will be upon your bodies, much more upon your
souls. God open our eyes to see and feel this in deed. Then shall we think ye
cross which is a mean herto, to be commodious. Then shall we thank god yt he
would chastise us. The^ shall we say with David, happy am I that thou have
punished me, for before I went astray, but now I keep thy laws. This that we
may do in deed my derely beloved, let us first know that our cross comes
from god. Secondly that it comes from god as a father, yt is to our weal and
good. Therefore let us thirdly call to mind our sins and ask pardon. Whereto
let us fourthly look for help certainly at gods hand in his good time: help I
say, such as shall make most to gods glory, and to the comfort and commodity of
our souls and bodies eternally. This if we certainly conceive, the^ will there
issue out of us hearty thanks geui^g which god requires as a most precious
sacrifice. That we may al through Christ offer this, let us use earnest prayer
to our god and dear father, who bless us, keep us, and comfort us under his
sweet cross for ever, Amen, Amen.

My dear hearts, if I could any way comfort you, you should be sure thereof
though my life lay thereon, but now I must do as I may because I cannot as I
would. Oh that it would please our dear father shortly to bring us where we
should never depart, but enjoy continually the blessed fruicion of his
heavenly presence: pray, pray that it may spedely come to pass, pray. To morrow
I will send unto you to know your estate, send me word what are the chiefest
things they charge you wythall. From the Counter.

By your brother in the Lord. John Bradford.

To Mystres Hall prisoner in Newgate and ready to make answer before her
adversaries.
Our most merciful god and father through Christ Jesus our lord and savior,
be merciful unto us, and make perfect the good he has begone in us unto the
end, Amen.

My dear Sister, rejoice in the lord, rejoice, be glad (I say) be merry and
thankful, Math. 5
not only because Christ so commands us, but also because our state wherein
we are presently, requires no less, for we are ye lords witnesses. God ye
father has vouched saffe to choose us emonges many, to witness and testify,
that christ his son is King and that his word is true. Christ our savior for
his loves sake toward us, will have us to bear record that he is no usurper
nor deceyuer of ye people, but Gods Ambassador, Prophet, and Messiah: so that
of al dignities upon earth this is the highest. Greater honor had not his
Prophets, Apostles nor dearest friends, then to bear witness with Christ, as
we now do. The world following the counsel of their Syer Satan, would gladly
condemn Christ and his verity: but lo the lord has chosen us to be his
champions, to let this. As stout soldiers therefore let us stand to our
master, who is with us and stands on our right hand that we shall not be
much moved, if we hope and hang on his mercy: he is so faithful and true,
that he will never tempt us further then he will make us hable to bear.
Therefore be not careful (for I hear say this day you shall be called forth)
what you shall answer. The lord which is true and cannot lie, has promised and
will never fail nor forget it, that you shall have both what and how to
answer, so as shall make his shameless adversaries ashamed. Hang therefore on
this promise of God, who is an helper at a pinch and a most present remedy to
them that hope in him. Never was it heard of or shall be, that any hopyng in the
lord was put to foil.

Therefore as I said, I say again, Dear Sister be not only not careful for
your answeryng, but also be joyful for your cause. Confess Christ and be not
ashamed, and he will confess you and never be ashamed of you. Though loss of
goods and life be like here to ensue: yet if Christ be true (as he is most
true) it is otherwise in deed: for he that loses his life says he, wynneth
it, but he that saves it, loses it. Our sins have deserved many deaths.
Now if god deal so with us, that he will make our deserved death a
demonstration of his grace, a testimonyall of his veritye, a confirmation of
his people, and an overthrow of his adversaries: what great cause have we to
be thankful? Be thankeful therefore good Sister, be thankful, rejoice and be
merye in the Lord, be stout in his cause and quarrel, be not faynte hearted,
but run out your race, and set your captain Christ before your eyes.
Behold how great your reward is: See the great glory and the eternity of
felicity prepared for you. Strive and fight lawfully, that you may get the
crown. Run to get ye game, you are almost at your iorneyes end. I dout not,
but our father will with us send to you also, 4, Reg. 2.
as he did to Hely a fiery charette, to convey us into his kingdom. Let us
therefore not be dismayde to leave our cloak behind us, that is our bodies to
ashes. God will one day restore them to us like to the body of our lord and
savior Jesus christ, whose coming is now at hand: let us look for it and
lift up our heads, for our redemption draws nigh, Amen, Amen. The Lord of
mercy grant us his mercy, Ame^. I pray you pray for me, and so desire my
brethren which be with you. Gods peace be with us all Amen. Blessed be the
dead that dye in the Lord: then how much more they that dye for the Lord.

Your brother in bonds. John Bradford

An admonition to certain professors and lovers of the gospel, to beware
they fall not from it in consentyng to the Romyshe religion by the example of
the shrinkyng, haltyng, and double faced Gospellers.
THe peace of Christ which is the true effect of gods gospel believed (my
derely beloved) be more and more plentifully perceived of you, through the
grace of our dear father, by the mighty workyng of the holy spirit our
comforter, Amen.

Though I have many lettes presently to hinder me from writing unto you, yet
being desired, I could not but somethyng signifye my ready good will in this
behalf so much as I may, when I cannot so much as I would. You hear and see
how Satan bestirreth him, ragyng as a roryng Lion to devour us. You see and
feel partlye what storms he has raised up to drown the poor boot of
Christ, I mean his church. You see how terribly he trayneth his soldiers to
give a fierce onset on the voward of gods battle. You see how he has received
power of god to molest gods children, and to begin at his house. By reason
whereof consider two things: one the cause on our behalf: the other what will
be the sequel on strangers. For the first, if we be not blind, we cannot but
well see that our sins are the cause of all this misery: our sins I say,
which I would that every one of us would apply to our selves after the
example of Jonas and David, turnyng over the wallet that other men's offenses
might lie behind and our own before. Not that I would excuse other men, which
exteriorly have walked much more grossly then many of you have done: but that
I would provoke you all as my self, to more hearty repentance and prayer. Let
us more and more increase to know and lament our doubtyng of God, of his
presence, power, anger, mercy etc. Let us better feel and hate our self love,
security, negligence, unthankfulness, unbelief, impatience etc. and then
doubteles the cross shall be less careful, yea it shall be comfortable, and
Christ most dear and pleasant: death then shall be desired as the dispatcher
of us out of all misery, and entrance into eternal felicity and joy
unspeakable: the which is so much ye more longed for, by how much we feel in
deed the Serpents byttes wherwyth he wounds our heels, that is our outward
Adam and senses. If we had I say, a lively and true feelyng of his poison, we
could not but, as rejoice over our Captayn that has bruised his head, so be
desirous to follow his example, that is to give our lives with him and for
him, Coloss. 1
and so to fill up his passions, that he might conquer and overcome in us, and
by us, to his glory and comfort of his children.

Now the second (I mean the sequel, or that which will follow on the
strangers) my derely beloved, let us well look upon. For if so be that god
justly do thus give to Satan and his sede, to vex and molest Christ and his
penitente people: oh what and how justly may he and will he give to Satan to
entreat the rechlesse and impenitent sinners? If judgment begin thus at
gods house, what will follow on them that be without, if they repent not?
Certainly for them is reserved the dregs of gods cup, that is, Brymstone,
fire, and tempest intolerable. Now are they unwilling to drink of gods cup
of afflictions which he offreth common with his son Christ our Lord, lest
they should lose their pigs with the Gergesites. Math. 8.
They are unwilling to come into the way that brings to heaven, even
afflictions: they in their hearts cry, let us cast his yoke from us: they
walk two ways that is, they seek to serve god and Mammon, which is
impossible. They will not come nighe the strait way that brings to life:
they open their eyes to behold present things only: they judge of religion
after reason, and not after gods word? they follow the more part and not the
better: they profess God with their mouths, but in their hearts they deny
him, or else they would sanctifye him by serving him more then men: they part
stake with GGD which would have al, giving part to the world, to the Romish
route, and Antichristian Idolatry now set abroad amongst us publicly: they
will have Christ, but none of his cross, which will not be: they will be
counted to live godly in Christ, but yet they will suffer no persecution: they
love this world where through ye love of god is driven forth of them: they sauer
those things that be of men, and not that be of god. Summa, they love god in
their lips* but in their hearts, yea and in their deeds deny him, as well by not
repenting their evils past, as by continuing in evil still, by doing as the
world the flesh, and the devil wills, and yet still perchance they will pray
or rather prate: thy will be done in earth, which is generally that every one
should take up his cross and follow christ. But this is a hard sermon, who is
able to abide it? Therefore Christ must be prayed to depart, lest al their
pigges be drowned. The devil shall have his dwelling again in themselves, rather
the^ in their pigges, and therefore to ye devil shall they go and dwell with him
in eternal perdicio^ and damnation, eue^ in hell fire a torment endless, and
above al cogitations incomprehensible, if they repent not.

Wherefore by the^ (my derely beloved) be admonished to remember your
profession, how that in Baptism you made a sole^pne vow to renounce ye devil,
ye world, etc. You promised to fight under christ's sta^derd. You learned
christ's cross, before you begun with A. B. C. Go to the^, pay your vow to ye
lord: fight like men and valiant men under Christ's standerde: take up your
cross and follow your master, as your brethern M. Hoper, Rogers, Tailor, and
Sau^ders have done: and as now your brethren M. Cranmer, Latymer, Rydley,
Farror, Bradforde, Hawks etc. be ready to do. The Ise is broken before you,
therefore be not afraid, but be content to dye for the lord. You have no cause
to waver or doubt of the doctrine thus declared by the blood of the pastors.
Remember that Christ says, he that will save his life shall lose it. And
what should it profit you to win the whole world, much less a little
quietness, your goods etc. and to lose your own souls? Render to the Lord
that he has lent you, by such means as he would have you render it, and not
as you would. Forgette not Christ's disciples must deny themselves, as well
concerning their will, as concerning their wisdom. Have in mind that as it is
no small mercy to believe in the Lord, so it is no small kindness of God toward
you to suffer any thing, much more death for the Lord. If they be blessed that
dye in the Lord, how shall they be that dye for the Lord? Oh what a blessyng
is it to have death due for our sins, diuerted into a demonstration and
testification of the lords truth? Oh that we had a little of Moses faith to
look upon the end of the cross, to look upon the reward, to see continuallye
with Christ and his people greater riches, then the riches of Egypt. Oh let us
pray that god would open our eyes to see his hyd Manna, heavenly Jerusalem,
the congregation of the first borne, the melodye of the saints, the
tabernacle of God dwelling with men: then should we run and become violent
men, and so take the kingdom of heaven as it were by force. God our father
give us for his Christ's sake, to see a little what and how great joy he has
prepared for us, he has called us unto, and most assuredlye gives us for his
own goodness and truths sake, Amen.

My derely beloved, repent, be sober and watch in prayer, be obedient and
after your vocations show your obedience to the higher powers in all things
that are not against gods word, therein acknowledge the sovereign power of
the Lord: howbeit so that ye be no rebels or rebellers for no cause: but
because with good conscience you can not obey, be pacient sufferers, and the
glory and good spirit of God shall dwell upon us. I pray you remember us
your afflicted brethren being in the Lords bonds for the testimony of
Christ, and abiding the gracious hour of our dear and most merciful father.
The Lord for Christ's sake, give us merye hearts to drink lustelye of his
sweet cup, which daily we groan and sigh for, lamenting that the time is thus
prolonged. The Lord Jesus give us grace to be thankeful, and to abide patiently
the prouidente hour of his most gracious good will, Amen, Amen.

From the Counter in the Poultrye. Yours in Christ. John Bradford.

To my good friends in the Lord Master R. and his wife.
MY dearly beloved, I heartily co^me^d me unto you in our common Christ, whom I
so call, not that I would make him as common things be, that is nothing set by,
but because by him we are brought into a communion, and that as with him, so
with his father, and as with his father, so with all gods people, if we be his
people, as I trust we are: and therefore write I unto you as one careful (but
not so much as I should be) for you, as for them whose well doing comfort me
and is profitable to me, and whose evil doing makes me heuie, and wounds me.

The days are come in the which we can not but declare what we be, if we be in
deed as we should be, as I trust we are, that is, if we be Christ's
Disciples. I mean we can not now do as the world does, or say as it says,
but as Gods Church does and says. The world seeks it self, and speaks
thereafter. The Church of God seeks Christ's glory, and speaks accordyngly.
The worldlinges follow the world: the church children follow their Captain
Christ, and therefore, as of the world they are not known to be as they be,
so are they hated, and if God permytte it, are persecuted and slain: the which
persecution is the true touchstone which tries the true Church children from
hypocrites, as the wind does the wheat from the chafe. And of this gear
this our time and age sets very many forth for example, doctrine and
fear, which once were hartye and very zealous, and now are so cold, that
they smell nothing of the spirit, for they are not only afearde to seem to
speak with a Church child, but also ashamed, and not only ashamed of them
and so of that they profess: but also frame and fashion them selves in all
outward behavior, as in coming to Church and hearing Mass, so as no man can
accuse them for not allowyng it or not honourynge it, as well as the papists:
where in their hearts they disallowe it, and know the same to be naught, at
the least they have known it, but halting out of the way may perchance
have brought them so far, that now they can not see the way, they are so
far and so long gone astraye: for the further and longer a man goes wide,
the harder shall it be to recover and see the way: and therefore the Apostle
gives warnyng thereof Hebrews. 12. as does Moses. Deutrono. 29. speakinge of
men that bless them selves, inwardlye cursynge them selves. Read both the
Chapiters I pray you. And mark the example of Master Hales, which after
that he consented to seem to allow in outward fact, that which he knew
once was evil, was fearefullye left of GOD to our admonition. For albeit God
has not done thus to all that have in deed done that he purposed to do, yet
in this example he teaches us how fearful a thing it is to wound our
conscience, and do any thing there against, to the offense of the Godly, and
comfort of the obstinate.

I write not this as thereof to accuse you or either of you, for as I can not
lyghtlye be persuaded of any such thing of you, so I am assured you
hitherto. Would not do any such thing, for I ween there be yet no great
penalty to punyshe you for not so doing, if thereof you should have been
accused. For he that will do a thing unforced, I can not hope any thing of
the same, but that he will run apace when he is forced. But of this enough to
you, which are to be comforted and exhorted to continue in that pureness of
religion which you have (as I think) hitherto received and by your open
conversation protested. Howbeit, considering how you have heard and red as
much as in manner can be spoken herein (for the Scriptures which of them
selves are most perfect herein, you have red and red again) I think it good
to exhort you to use earnest and hartye prayer (as I trust you do) and then
doubtless God will so write that you have read, in your hearts, as shall be
both comfortable and profitable unto you and others plentifullye. Math. 7.
You shall rejoice in the strayte way which few find, and fewer walk in,
but most few continue therein to the end. Heb. 10
You shall suffer with joy the direption of your goods, because the best part
of your substance is in heaven. You will set before you the example of Christ
the beginner and ender of your faith, Heb. 12.
who suffered much more then we can suffer, that we should not be faynte
hearted. You will rejoice and greatly, Math. 5 Act. 4.
because great is your reward in heaven. You will be glad that GOD
accompteth you worthy to suffer any thing for his sake. 2. Cor. 4. 2 Thessalonians.
1.
You will set before you the end of this your short cross, and the great
glory which will ensue the same. You will know that it is no small benefyte
of God to suffer for his sake. Phi. 1.
You will know that your sorrowynge shall be turned to ioying. John. 14.16
Romans 8
You will know that as God does make you now like to Christ in sufferyng, so
shall you be in reygning: and if you be pertakers of affliction you shall be
also of glory etc. Summa, you will know yt this is the surest and sauest way
to heaven, which is called the kingdom of patience. Apocal. 1. But because I
have written a little treatise hereof, and of the harm of halting with the
world in coming to Mass, I send them both unto you to peruse and read
them, and then at your leisure to rediliuer them to this brynger, or my man
when I shall send to you for the same. In the mean season, I shall as heartily
as I can, pray to God for you both, my most dear members in the lord. What
said I as heartily as I can? God forgive me, for I do nothing so well as I
might, in that I flatter my self to much: God lay it not to my charge. In deed
I have most cause to pray night and day, and to give thanks night and day
for you both. The Lord of mercy in Christ bless you both, keep you both, and
send you both as well to do as I wish to my dearest and best beloved friends
and brethren in the Lord. I pray you continue to pray for me, as I doubt
not you do, and so give thanks to God for me, for he is good and his mercy
endures forever. The day will come when we shall mere together and never
depart. God send it shortly, Amen.

John Bradforde.

To the worshipful Sir William Fitzwilliams then being Knight Marshall of
the Kings Benche.
THe peace of god proper to his people, the holy ghost work daily and depely
in your heart through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

I thank my Lord and God through his Son our mediator and savior, for
his mercyes and graces given to your Mastership, the which I beseech his
goodness to increase in you continuallye to your everlasting comfort in him.
By his mercyes toward you, I mean not in your lands, possessions, offices,
natural wisdom, rychts, health, form etc. which in deed be gifts of God
given to you of his mercy without your deserts, and therefore should he be
daily of you praised for the same, as I doubt not but he is, for else your
ingratitude would provoke him to punyshe you in them and by them, if he love
you: but I mean his mercyes toward you in the knowledge and love of his
truth in religion. The which benefit in that you amongst the not many of
your estate and condition, 1. Co. 1
as Saint Paul witnesses, have received as a very testimonial of your
election in Christ, I would be sorye that you should need any such as. I
am to move you to thankfulness: for I am not in a mammerynge whether you be
thankful to god for this great mercy, which is much more to be esteemed the^ all that ever you have: I humbly beseech God in his Christ to increase the same in
you to the very end. And that by me he might do the same in some part, I
thought it good and also my bounden duty deeply deserved on your behalf
toward me (for the which I beseech the Lord to reward you) to send to you
this treatise of the doings of Master Ridley at Oxford concerning his
disputation about the Sacrament. This treatise of M. Ridleyes disputation which
he sent to him, you shall read in the book of Martyrs. Fol. 963.
I know that there has gone diverse copies abroad, but none of them were as I
know this is: for I have translated it out of that copye in Latten which was
corrected with his own hand, which came unto me not without his own consent,
and therefore dare I be bold to say that this has not before been seen on
this sort. In readyng whereof you shall well see this I speak to be most
true: and also that, which causes me to suppress commendations of the thing
(the excellencye and worthiness thereof I mean) because I think I cannot speak
any thing so worthily as undoubtedly these his doings do deserve. Unto your
Maistership I send them as a token of my duty toward you, thereby to
declare that as you deserve much of me, so I would show my self willing to
recompense the same if I could: but in that I can not, and also your doing
is simplye in respect of GOD and his cause, I will according to your
expectation leave the recompense unto him, in the mean season prayinge him
that of his goodness he would, as increase the knowledge and love of his truth
in you, so strenghen you after your vocation, both purelye to walk and
manfullye to confess his Gospel, if he shall think it needeful to call you to
that honor, for surely of all honors it is the greatest to suffer any thing
for Christ's sake. Most happy may that man think himself that has any
thing for his cause to lose. As he shall be sure to find for his own part
eternal felicity and honor endless: so shall his posteritye even temporallye
prove this to be most true. For gods sake therefore right worshipful Sir,
consider well this gear, and way it not as the world and your mother wit
will move you to do, but as ye word of God does teach you: there shall you see
this I speak of, to be matter of much mirth, joy and glory, though to the
world it seem clean contrary. Gods good spirit always guide you to his
glory, and give you the spirit of prayer, continually to pray that God never
further tempt you then he will make you able to bear, Amen. In that this copy
is not so fair written as I wish and would have had it, I shall desire you
to consider where I am, and how I can not have things so done as I would, and
therefore you have it as may be, when it may not be as I would it were and
should be. From the Kings Benche.

Your humble. John Bradforde.

To my good brother Master Coker at Maldon in Essex.
Although I have presentlye both little time and less opportunity otherwise to
write as I would, yet as I may I thought better to write somethynge the^
utterly to be silente. For if I should not so do having so convenient a
messenger, as I might toward you incur the suspision of ingratitude and
forgetfulness: so might I not satisfye the desire of this my poor brother and
friend John Searchfield, which comes unto you for help and comfort in this
troublesome time. This dare I say that the man fears God, and for Gods sake
and conscience toward him, susteyneth both loss and labor. For our common
fathers sake therefore in Christ, help him to some hole to hyde him self in
for a little time, if conveniently you may, and remember yt he that receaueth
one of Christ's little ones, receaueth Christ, as he him self in the last day
will acknowledge: Which last day let us often look on and set before us as ye
thing which most makes to our comfort. Now we sorrow and sighe to see the
sea swell and rage on this sort as it does. And to confess the truth, we have
double cause: as well because we have deserved this sower sauce by reason of our
unthankfulness and many sins (which the Lord pardon) as because gods glory is
trodden under foot. But this comfort we have, that as God our good father will
not the death of a sinner, so will he order this gear most to his glory and
our joy and comfort, if we repent now and heartily lament our euilles, use
earnest, humble, and often, yea continual prayer, and cast our selves wholly
on him and his goodness, still laboring to loathe this life and longing for the
life to come, for the which we should account this as it is, a very vale of
miserye, much to be mourned in, because the time of our habitation herein and
exile is prolonged. God grant us his holy spirit to strengthen us in his
truth professed, that we may persevere to the end in the joyful and courageous
confessing of his Christ, Amen.

I pray you continue as I trust you do, to keep both soul and body pure in
gods service. Strive to enter in at yt narrow gate, though you leave your
lands and goods behind you. It is not lost which for Christ's sake we
leave, but lent to a great vsurye. Remember that this time is come but to try
us. God make us faithful to the end, God keep us always as his children,
Amen. I pray you commend me to Master Osburne, and to al our good brethren in
the Lord. The peace of Christ be with us all, Amen, Amen.

Yours in Christ John Bradford.

To a friend of his, instructyng him how he should aunsweare his adversaries.
MY good brother, our merciful God and dear father through Christ, open your
eyes effectually to see, and your heart ardentlye to desire the everlasting joy
which he has prepared for his slaughter sheep, that is for such as shrink
not from his truth for any storms sake, Amen.

When you shall come before the Magestrates to give an answer of the hope
which is in you, do it with al reverence and simplicitye. And because you may be
somthyng afraid by ye power of ye Magestrates and cruelty which they will
threaten against you, I would you set before you ye good father Moses to follow
his example: for he set the invisible God before his eyes of faith, and with
them looked upon God and his glorious majesty and power, as with his corporal
eyes he saw Pharao and al his fearful terrors. So do you my dearly beloved:
let your inward eyes give such light unto you, that as you know you are before
ye magistrates, so and much more, you and they also are present before the
face of god, which will give such wisdom to you fearing him and sekyng his
praise, as the enemies shall wonder at, and further he will so order their hearts
and doings, that they shall, will they nyll they, serve gods providence toward
you (which you ca^ not avoid though you would) as shall be most to his glory
and your everlasting comfort. Therefore my good brother, let your whole study
be only to please God, put him always before your eyes, for he is on your
right hand least you should be moved: he is faithful and never will suffer
you to be tempted above yt he will make you able to bear. Yea every hear of
your head he has numbered, so that one of them shall not perish without his
good will: which can not be but good unto you, in that he is become your
father through Christ, and therefore as he has given you to believe in him (God
increase this be liefe in us all) so does he now graciously give unto you to
suffer for his names sake, the which you ought with all thankefulnes to
receive, in that you are made worthy to drink of the self same cup which not
only the very sons of god have drunk of before you, but even the very
natural son of God him self has brought you good luck: Oh he of his mercy
make us thankeful to pledge him again Amen.

Because the chiefest matter they will trouble you and go about to deceive you
withal, is ye Sacrament, not of Christ's body and blod but of the alter (as they
call it) thereby destroying the sacrament which Christ instituted: I would you
noted these. 2. things. First that the sacrament of ye alter which the priest
offreth in the Mass and eats privately with him self, is not the Sacrament
of Christ's body and blood instituted by him, as Christ's institution plainly
written and setforth in the Scriptures, being compared to their using of it,
plainly does declare.

Again if they talk with you of Christ's sacrament instituted by him, whether
it be christ's body or no, answer them, that as to the eyes of your reason, to
your taste and corporal senses it is bread and wine, and therefore the
scripture calls it after the consecration so: eue^ so to the eyes, taste and
senses of your faith, which ascends to the right hand of God in heaven where
Christ sits, it is in very deed Christ's body and blood, which spritually
your soul fedeth on to everlasting life in faith and by faith, eue^ as your
body presently feeds on the sacramental bread and sacramental wine.

By this means, as you shall not allow transubstantiation, nor none of their
popish opinions: so shall you declare the sacrament to be a matter of faith and
not of reason, as the papists make it. For they deny gods omnipotencye in that
they say Christ is not there if bread be there: but faith looks on the
omnipotency of god joined with his promise, and doubts not but that Christ is
able to give that he promyseth us spiritually by faith, the bread still
remaynyng in substance, as well as if the substance of bread were taken away:
for Christ says not in any place this is no bread. But of this gear god shall
instruct you, if you hang on his promise, and pray for the power and wisdom
of his spyryt, which undoubtedly as you are bound to look for, prayeng for it,
so he has bound himself by his promise to give it, the which thing he grant
unto us both, and to al his people, for his names sake through Christ our lord,
Amen.

John Bradford

A letter written to a dear friend of his, wherein he entreats, as briefly,
so most perfectlye, godly, soundly and pithely, of gods holy election, free
grace and mercy in Jesus Christ.
Faith of gods election, I mean to believe that we be in very deed the
children of god through Christ, and shall be for ever inheritours of everlasting
life through the only grace of God our father in the same Christ, is of all
things which god requires of us* not only most principal, but also ye whole
sum: Rom 14 Heb. 11. Exodus 20
so that without this faith, there is nothing we do that can please god. And
therefore as god first requires it in saying, I am the Lord thy God etc. that
is, I remit thee thy sins and give thee my holy spirit, and for ever will I
keep thee: Math. 6.
so our Savior would have us to be persuaded when we come to pray, and
therefore teaches yea he commands us to call God our father: whose power
were not infinite, as we profess in the first article of our belief, where we
call him expressly our almighty father, if we shall doubt of his final
favor. And therefore I cannot but much meruell at some men which seem godly,
and yet are in this behalf too malicious both to God and man. For what is more
seemly to God then mercy, which is most magnifyed of the elect children of
God? And what is more seemelye to man then humilitye, the which is not nor
cannot be in deed but in the elect of god, for they alone attribute nothing
at all to themselves continuallye but dampnation, Jeremy. 9.
that in God only and for ever may be their whole glory? But this
notwythstanding, there is that have gone about together, yea to set abroad
enormities out of the doctrine of gods most holy and comfortable election and
predestination: where the same doctrine has more commodities then all the whole
world can be hable to conceive, much less to express. For what destroys
enormities so much as it does? It overthrows the most pestilent papisticall
poison of doutyng of gods favor, which is the very dungeon of despair and of
the contempt of god. It destroithe Ethnicke opinion of fortune. It comfort
most comfortablye in the cross, and casts down all cogitations that would
else cover us with sorrow and dolor, in tellyng that all things shall turn
to the best. Romans 8
It makes us modest and puts away pride in prosperity by pulling from men
merityng or deserving. It enforces men to love and carefully to trauail for
their brethren, utterly impugning the contempt of any. 1 Cor. 1. 1. John. 1 ^.
Cor. 6.3.
It provoke to piety, and is the greatest enemy to ungodliness yt can be, by
teaching us of what dignity we be, of what price even our bodies be, temples of
the holy ghost, and members of Christ, It engenders a true desire of our home
in heaven, and so to despise this world and the things yt this world has in
estimation. It makes man wholly and continually to give over himself to be
careful not for himself, but for others, and for those things that make to gods
glory. It helps very much to ye true understanding of ye scriptures, and
preserves from errors, by knowing what is to be attributed to the law, to ye
gospel, to the ministry, to ye vocal word, to ye old testament, to the new
testament, to the sacraments, to faith, to works, to prayer, to penance, to
god, to man etc. For by the spirit of election we see and know Christ, Colloss.
1
in who^ dwells al ye riches and treasures of knowledge. It sets up
Christ's kingdom, and utterly overthrows the wisdom, power, choice, and
hahlenes of man, yt al glory may be given only unto god. But what go I about
to reckon ye co^mydities coming out of ye doctrine of gods election, in yt
they be innumerable? This is a su^me, Tit. 2.
that where a christian ma^s life has respect to god, to man and to himself,
to live godly, justly, and soberly: al is grounded in predestination in Christ.
For who lives godly, but he yt believes? Act. 13.
And who believes but such as ar ordained to eternal life? who lives justly,
but such as love their neighbors? And whence spri^geth this love; but of gods
election before ye beginning of ye world, yt we might be blameles by love? Who
lives soberly but such as be holy? and who are those, Ephesi. 1 2 Cor. 1
but only they that be endued with the spirit of sa^crificatio^, which is ye
seal of our election which by election do believe?

Wherefore (my derely deloued in ye lord) I have taken in hand at this present
something to write to you and for your sake in this matter, which herewtal I
have sent unto you, as well to be a help to you herein, as also to be a pledge of
my careful love and hearty desire I have for your continuance in ye truth, (where
in I trust you stand presently) when I am dead and burned, as I look for none
other, so sone as god shall give leave to his enemies for my weal and endless
joy in Christ: to who^ as to a most faithful pastor, from the bottom of my
heart, I do commend and bequeth you, beseching him to watch over you night and
day as over one of his poor la^bes, to keep you out of the claws of the Lion
and mouth of the wolves, to his glory and your eternal joy and comfort in him.
Amen. Al things must be esteemed after gods wy^


THere is neither virtue nor vice to be considered according to any outward
action nor according ye will and wisdom of man, but according to the will of
god. Whatsoever is conformable thereto, the same is virtue, and the action that
spryngeth thereof is laudable and good, howsoever it apeare otherwise to the
eyes and reason of man: as was the liftyng up of Abraham's hand to have slain
his son. Gene. 22.
Whatsoever is not conformable to the will of god, that same is vice, and the
action sprynginge thereof is to be disalowed and taken for evil, and that so
much the more and greater evil, by how much it is not consonant and agreeyng
to gods will, although it seem fair otherwise to man's wisdom: as was Peter's
wyshe of making three tabernacles, Math. 17. Mark 9.
and the request of some which would have had fire to come down from heaven
upon a zeal to god etc.

Gods will must be sought for in his word.
Now, the will of god is not so known as in his word: therefore according to it
must vice and virtue, good and evil be judged, and not according to the
judgment, wisdom, reason and collection of any man or of all the whole world,
if all the angels in heaven should take their part.

Gods word is written in the Bible.
But this word of God which is written in the canonical books of the Bible, does
plainly set forth unto us, that god has of his own mercy and good will,
and to the praise of his grace and glory, In the Bible is predestination
published.
in christ elected some and not all, whom he has predestinate unto
everlasting life in the same Christ, and in his time calls them, iustifyeth
them, and glorifieth them, so that they shall never perish and err to
damnation finally.

Therefore to affirm, teach, and preach this doctrine, has in it no hurt, No
enormitye is therefore in it.
no vice, no evil, much less then has it any enormities (as some do affirm)
to the eyes and spirit of them which are guided and will be by the word of
god.

The proposition that shows what is meant by election and predestination,
Which he after proves by the parts out of the text of S. Paul immediately
followyng.
That god the eternal father of mercies before the beginning of the world, has
of his own mercy and good will, and to the praise of his grace and glory,
elected in Christ some and not al of the posterity of Adam, whom he has
predestinate unto eternal life, and calls them in his time, justifies them,
and glorifyeth them, so that they shall never perysh or err to dampnation
finally: that this proposition is true and according to gods plain and
manifest word, by the help of his holy spirit (which in the name of Jesus
Jesus Christ, I humbly beseech him of his mercy, ple^teously to give to me at
this present and for ever, to the sanctification of his holy name: by the help
(I say) of his holy spirit, I trust so evidently to declare, that no man of
God shall be able by the word of God, ever to impugn it, much less to
confute it.

In the first chapter of the epistle to the Ephesians, Ephesi. 1.
the Apostle says thus: Blessed be god the father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which has blessed us with all manner of blessings in heavenly things by
Christ, according as he has elect or chosen us in him before the foundation of
the world was laid that we should be holy and without blame before him through
love: and has predestinate us (or ordained us) thorough Jesus Christ, to be
heirs unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise
of the glory of his grace, wherwyth he has made us accepted in the beloved, by
whom we have received redemption thorough his blood, and the forgeuenes of our
sins, according to the riches of his grace, which grace he has shed on us
aboundauntly in all wisdom and understanding, and has opened unto us the
mysterye of his will according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in
himself, to have it declared when the time was full come, that he might gather
together all things by (or in) Christ, as well the things that be in heaven,
as the things that be in earth, even in (or by) him: by (or in) whom we are
made heirs, being thereto predestinate according to the purpose of him which
works all things according to the decree (or counsel) of his own will,
that we which hoped before (you) in Christ, should be unto the praise of his
glory: in whom ye also hoped, after that ye heard the word of truth, the
gospel of your salvation, wherein ye also beleuyng, were sealed with the holy
spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the
redemption (or full fruition) of the purchased possession, unto the praise of
his glory.

These be the words of Paul, which I have faithfullye translated according to
the very text in the Greek, as by the judgment of all that be learned I
desire herein to be tried. Out of the which words of Paul we may well
perceive every thing affirmed in my proposition, as I will give occasion
plainly to them that will, to see it.

The cause of gods election is his grace and good will.
First, that the cause of gods election is of his good will, the Apostle shows
in saying that it is through his love, whereby we are holy and without blame:
also, according to the good pleasure of his will: according to his good
pleasure purposed in himself: according to his purpose which works all
things after the counsel of his own will.

The time of gods election was from the beginning.
Secondly, that election was before the beginning of the world, the apostle
plainly shows in saying, that we were chosen before the foundation of the
world was laid: and afterward, in calling it the mysterye of his will
purposed with himself, in time to be declared.

Election is in Christ.
Thirdly, that election is in Christ, the Apostle does so flatly and plainly set
it forth, that I need not here to repete it. We (says he) are chosen in him:
we are heirs by him: with are accepted by him: we are gathered together in him
etc.

Electionis not of all men.
Fourthly, that election is of some of Adams posteritye and not of al, we may
plainly see it, if we consider that he makes the true demonstration of it,
believing, hoping, and having the earnest of the spirit. In whom yea hoped
(says he) after ye heard the word. etc. In whom ye believed, were sealed up etc.
Again, in attributyng to the elect, forgeuenes of sins, holiness, blameles
living, being in Christ etc. That we should be holy says he etc. we have
received forgeuenes of sins etc. Who sees not that these are not common to
al men? 2 Thessalonians. 3 Act. 13. 1 John. 1 Math. 13
Al men have not faith, says Paul elsewhere. None believed (says Luke) but
such as were ordained to eternal life. None believe but such as be borne of
god. None believe truly but such as have good hearts, and keep gods seed to
bring forth fruit by patience. Faith is a demonstration of election to such as
be of years of discretion. Psalm. 125.
So that it is plain (faith being a demonstration of gods election to them that
be of years of discretion) that all men are not elect: because all men believe
not. For he that believes in the lord, shall be as mount Sion, that is, he shall
never be removed: for if he be removed, that is finally perish, surely he
never truly believed. But what go I about to lighten a ca^dell in the clear
son light, when our savior plainly says that all be not chosen, but few?
Many be called (says he) but few be chosen. Mat. 20.
And in the 2. chap. to the Ephesians. the Apostle plainly says that the great
riches of gods mercy through his exceeding great love, has saved the^ before
their parents and many other Gentiles, which were excluded from Christ and
strangers from the promise, hopeles, godles etc. Romans 11. Psalm. 144.
Wherthrough we may be occasioned to cry: oh the depth of the judgments of
god, which is just in all his doings, and holy in all his works, extendyng
his mercy after his good pleasure and will, above al his works.

Fyftly, that god has predestinate these, Election is to eternal life
thus elect unto everlasting life in Christ, the apostle does also in the
words before written declare, in saying: and has predestinate us through Jesus
Christ to be heirs unto himself. Again, by him (says he) year made heirs
and predestinate to the praise of his glory. Romans 8
So says the Apostle elsewhere: whom he has predestinate, them has he
predestinate to be like fashioned unto the shape of his son. Luke. 10
And therefore Christ says, rejoice in this, that your names are written in
heaven.

Syxtlye, The end of election is to the praise and glory of god,
that the end of election is to the praise of gods glory and grace, the
Apostle shows here, in saying: we are predestinate to be holy and without
blame before god etc. In saying we are predestinate to the glory of his grace.
And in saying also, unto the praise of his glory: so that nothing can be more
manifest.

Seventhly, Election is not without vocation and justification in time
that predestination is not without vocation in gods time, and justification,
the Apostle here does teach in bringyng us to the consideration of hearing ye
word of truth, believing, receiving the holy spirit, remission of sins etc.
In whom (says he ye have hoped, after that ye heard ye word of truth etc.
Again, by whom ye have redemption, that is, remission of sins thorough ye
sheding of his blood etc. Also, he has in his full time declared the mystery
of his will etc. Unto the Romans the apostle shows it most manifestly in
saying: who^ he has predestinate, the^ he calls; who^ he calls the^ he
justifies. Whereby we may se ye predestination or election is not universal of
al, for all be not justified.

Eighthly and last of all, that election is so certain that the elect and
predestinate to eternal life shall never peryshe or err to dampnation
finallye, Election is certain for ever.
the Apostle does here also very plainly show, in saying: that they are
predestiinate to the praise of gods grace. He says not to ye praise of his
justice, to the praise of his wisdom, to the praise of his power (although he
might most truly say so) but he says, Romans 12
to the praise of his grace: which were not grace if there were any respect at
al of works on our behalf, for the^ were grace not grace. If there should be
any condemnation of the elect and predestinate to eternal life, it must
needs be because of their sins: but where were ye praise of gods grace then,
which is the end of gods election? Shall we not by this means make gods
election without an end, and so without a head, and so no election at all, as
some would have, further then they elect themselves* Let such fear they shall
not find the benefit of gods election, because they seek it as the Israelites
did, Romans 11. Psalm. 69
and not as the elect, which not only find it, but also obtain it. The other
are blinded, as it is written: God has given them the spyryte of unquietness,
eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should hear, eue^ to this
day etc. Secondly, he shows the certaintye of salvation to them that be
elected, in saying that they be accepted in the beloved. Once accepted and
beloved in Christ, John. 13 Romans 11 John. 13
and ever beloved: for whom he loves, he loves to the end: and gods gifts
are such that he cannot repent him of them. And therefore says Christ, I know
whom I have chosen, attributyng to election the cause of final perseverance.
By which thing Judas was seen not to be elected to eternal life, although he
was elected to the office of an Apostle, as Saul was elected to the office of
a king. Which kind of election is to be discerned in readyng the scriptures,
from this kind of election the which I speak of now, that is, from election to
eternal life in Christ. Thirdly he shows the certaintye of salvation of the
elect, by calling them heirs. For if we be heirs of god, the^ are we fellow
heirs with Christ, Romans 8
to be afflicted and glorified with Christ: and therefore says he, according
to the decree of his own will. Lo he calls it a decree or counsel which
shall stand, as Esaias says: Esaias. 46
the counsel of the Lord shall stand. Fourthlye, he shows this certainty,
by saying that they are elect and predestinate to the praise of gods glory,
which we should more care for, then for the salvation of all the world. This
glory of the lord is set forth as well in them that perish and are reprobates,
as in the elect, and therefore. John. 12
S. John bringing in the place of Esaias speaking of ye reprobate, says yt Esaias
spoke that when he saw the glory of the lord. This glory of ye Lord to be set
forth by us, is a great mercy and benefit of God. I am assured that if the
very deuilles and reprobates did not repine hereat, but were thankful yt they
might be ministers in any point to set forth Gods glory: I am assured (I say)
that they should find no hell nor torments. Their hell and torments comes
of the love they have to them selves, and of the malice, envy and hatred they
have against God and his glory. Let them tremble and fear yt may not away
with the glory of the Lord in election and reprobation. Let not their eyes be
evil because god is good and does good to whom it pleases him: wrong he does
to no man, Romans 9
nor can do, for then he were not righteous, and so no God. He can not condemn
the just, for the^ were he untrue, because his word is contrary. He can not
condemn the penitent and beleuer, for that were against his promise. Let us
therefore labor, study, cry and pray for repentance and faith, Math. 25.
and then can not we be damned, because we are the blessed of the father
before all worlds, and therefore we believe, therefore we repent. 1 Cor. 2
And for as much as it pertayneth to us which be within, to see and to speak of
those things which are given unto us of God in Christ: let us labor
hereaboutes, 1. Cor. 5. Ephesi. 1.
and leave them that be without to the Lord, which will judge them in his
time. The Apostle prays for the Ephesians, for none other wisdom and
revelation from God, Coloss. 2
then whereby they might know god, and have their minds illumined, to see what
they should hope for by their vocation, and how rych the glory of his
enheritaunce is upon his Saints. Further then this, I think is unseemly for
us to search, until we have sought out, how rych Gods goodness is and will be
to us his children. The which we can never do, but the more we go theraboutes,
and the more we taste his goodness, the more we shall love him and loath all
things yt displease him. This (I say) let us do, and not be too busy bodies
in searching the majesty and glory of god, or in nourishyng in any wise ye
doubting of our salvation, whereto we are ready enough, and the devil goes
about nothing else so much as that: for by it we are dull to do good to other, we
are so careful for our selves. By it we are more dulle to do good to our
selves, because we stand in doubt whether it profits us or no. By it we
dishonor god, either in making him as though he were not true, or else as
though our salvation came not only and altogether from him, but hanged partly
on our selves. By it ye devil will bring me^ at length to despair and hatred of
god. Doubt once of thy salvation and continue therein, and surely he then will
ask no more. It was the first thing wherewith he tempted Christ: Math. 4.
if thou be the son of god etc. It is the first and principallest darte he
casts at gods elect. But as he prevailed not against Christ, no more shall
he do against any of his members, Ephesi. 6 Luke. 18. Psalm. 34. Psalm. 92,
for they have ye shield of faith which quenches his fiery darts. They praise
god night and day, how then should they perish? The Angels of ye Lord pitch
their tents round about the^, how the^ should Satan prevail? They are borne
in the hands of ye Angels least they should hurt their feet at any stone. God
has given commandment to his Angels over them. Heb. 1. Luke 10 phil. 4. Romans
8
The Angels are ministers unto them. Their names are written in ye book of
life, and therefore Christ bad them rejoice: as Paul does the Philippians, for
nothing shall separate them from the love wherewith god loves them in Christ
Jesus, who says that it is impossible for them to err finally to damnation:
Mat. 24 Psalm. 18. John. 6.10 Heb. 3. John. 5.6. John. 17 Heb. 5. Romans 8 Ioh.
10. 1. Cor. 6 1. Cor. 1. 1. Ioh 4 Psalm. 67. Ose. 6.
for he is their light to illumine their darkness. They are given to him to
keep, and he is faithful over al gods children. He says he will keep them so
that they shall never peryshe. After they believe, they are entered already into
everlasting life. Christ has set the^ there already: he has committed them
into his fathers hands by prayer, which we know is sure, and therefore death,
hell, devils, nor all power, sins nor mischief, shall never pull us out of
our heads hands, whose members we are, and therefore receiving of his spirit
as we do, we cannot but bring forth the fruits thereof, though now and then ye
flesh fail us. But the Lord, even our Lord be praised, which is more strong
in us then he which is in ye world. He always puts under his hand yt we lie
not still nor shall do as the reprobate, whose piety is as the morning dew,
sone come and sone gone, and therefore they can not continue to the end.
Cannot? No they will not if they could, because they hate god and his glory, and
therefore al the^ that seek it or set it forth: whereas the elect love all men
and seek to do al men good in God, suspending their judgments of others, Romans
14
that they may stand or fall to the Lord and not to them.

Hitherto out of this one place of Paul to the Ephesia^s, if the matter of
election and predestination be so fully set forth to gods glory and to the
comfort of his church: how may we suppose is this matter set forth in the whole
body and books of the canonical scripture? Whereto I had rather send you with
this ca^dell light which I have now given you, then in a matter so manifest to
make more a do then needs.

John Bradforde.

To a woman that desired to know his mind whether she, refrayning from the
Mass, might be present at the popyshe Mattyns or no.
I Beseech almightye God our heavenly father to be merciful unto us, and to
increase in you, my good sister, the knowledge and love of his truth, and at
this present give me grace so to write to you somthyng of ye same, as may make
to his glory, and our own comfort and confyrmation in him through Christ our
Lord, Amen.

Whether you may come with safe conscience to the church now, that is, to the
service used commonly, in part, as at Mattins or at Eue^song or not, is your
desire to have me to write something for your further stay. My derely beloved,
although your benefits toward me might perchance make you to think, that in
respect thereof I would bear with that which else were not to be borne withal, yet
by gods grace I am purposed simply and without al such respect in this matter,
to speak to you the truth according to my conscience, as I may be able to
stand unto, when I shall come before the Lord. First therefore go about to
learn perfectly the first lesson to be learned of all that profess Christ,
that is to deny your self, and in nothing to seek your self. Secondly learn
after this, to begin at the next lesson to it, which is to seek God in all
things you do and leave undone. Thirdly, know yt then you seek God, when in
his service you follow his word and not man's fantasies, custom, multitude
etc. and when with your brother, you follow the rule of charity, that is, to
do as you would be done by. In these is a su^me of all the counsel I can give
you: if that hereto I admonyshe you of ye service now used, which is not
according to gods word, but rather against gods word directly and in manner
wholly. So yt you going to ye service is a declaration that you have not learned
ye first lesson, nor never can learn it so long as you go thither: therefore ye
second lesson you shall utterly lose, if you cease not ye seeking your self,
that is, if for company, custom, father or friend, life or goods, you seem to
allow yt which god disalloweth. And this that you ye better may perceive, I
purpose by gods grace, brieflye to show. First ye Mattens and Euensong is in a
tou^g forbidden publicly to be used in the congregation that perceaueth not ye
tongue. Read how Paul affirms it, 1. Cor. 14.
to pray in an unknown tongue to be against gods commandment. This one (I
trow) were enough, if nothing else were. For how ca^ gods glory be sought where
his word and co^mau^demente is wilfullye broken? How ca^ charity to man
stand, when charity to god, which is obedience to his word, is overthrown?
Again, both in Mattins and in Euensong is idolatrye maintained for gods
service: for there is invocation and prayer made to Saints departed this
life, which robs god of that glory which he will give to none other.

Esaias. 5.
Moreover, this service and the setters forth of it, condempneth ye Englysh
service as heresy, thereby falling into Gods curse, which is threatened to al
such as call good evil, and evil good, whereof they shall be pertakers yt do
communicate with the^. Besides this, this latten service is a plain mark of
Antichrists catholic Sinagoge, so that ye Co^munica^tes and approuers of it,
thereby declare the^ selves to be members of ye same Sinagoge, and so cut of
from christ and his church: whose exterior mark is ye true administration of
gods word and sacraments. Furthermore, ye example of your going thither to
allow ye religion of Antichrist (as doubtless you do in deed, howsoever in heart
you think) occasioneth ye obstinate to be utterly intractable, the weak
papists to be more obstinate, the strong Gospellers to be sore weakened, and
the weak gospellers to be utterly overthrown: which things how great
offenses they be, no pen is able to utter by letters. All these euilles you
shall he giltye of, that company with these in religion exteriourly, from
whom you are admonyshed to fly. If Christ be Christ follow him: gather with him,
least you scatter abroad. Serve God not only in spirit but also in body. Make
not your body now a member of Christ, a member of Antichrist. Come out from
amongst the^ says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing. Confess Christ and
his truth, not only in heart but also in tongue, yea in very deed which few
gospellers do. In deed they deny him, and therefore had need to tremble, least
yt Christ will deny the^ in ye last day: the which day if it were set before
our eyes often, then would ye pleasures and treasures of this world be but
trifilles. Therefore good sister, often have it before your eyes, daily set your
self and your doings as before the judgment seat of Christ now, that
hereafter you be not called into judgment. Think yt it will little profit you
to win the whole world, and to lose your own soul. Mark Christ's lessons
well: he that will save his life shall lose it. The father from heaven
commands you to hear Christ, and he says follow me: this can you not do and
follow Idolatrye or Idolaters. Fly from such says the Scripture. This god
grant to you, to me, and to al gods children, Amen. Thus in have I have
accomplished your request, god grant that as you have done me much good
bodily, so this may be a little mean to do you some good spiritually, Amen.
If time would serve, I would have written more at large, The.2. of March.
Anno. 1556.

To the worshipful, and in God my most dear friend, the Lady Vane.
THe good spirit of God our father be more and more ple^tifully perceived of
your good Ladyship, through ye mediation and merits of our dear Savior Jesus
Christ, Ame^.

Although your benefits toward me have deserved at my hands the service I
can do for you, yet (right worshipful and dearly beloved in the Lord) the true
fear of god and the love of his truth, which I perceive to be in you,
especially and above al other things does bind me hereunto. This bearer has
told me yt your desire is, to have something sent to you concerning the usurped
authority of the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, which is undoubtedly ye
great Antichrist of whom the Apostles do so much admonyshe us, that you may
have as well somethyng the more to stay you on, as also wherewith to answer the
adversaries, because you may perchance therein be something aposed. To satisfye
this your desire I will brieflye go about, and so, that I will by gods grace,
fully set forth the same to enarme you to withstand the assaults of the
papists herein, if you mark well and read over again that which I now write.

The papists do place in preeminence over the whole church the Pope, thereby
vnplacing Christ which is the head of the church that gives life to the whole
body, and by his spirit does make lively every member of the same. This they
do without al scriptures. For where they bring in this spoken to Peter, feed
my sheep, I would gladly know whether this was not commanded unto others also.
As for that (which perchance they will urge) that he spoke to Peter by name, if
they had any learning, they would easelye perceive how that it was not for any
such cause as they pretend, but rather by a threfolde commandment to restore
to him the honor of an Apostle, which he had lost by his threfold denial. And
how dare they interpretate this word, my sheep, my La^be^, to be the universal
Church of Christ? I trow a man might easily by the like reason prove that
Peter himself had resigned that which Christ had given to him, in exhortyng his
fellow pastoures to feed the flock of Christ. Is not this pretye stuff?
Because Christ says to Peter, feed my sheep, therefore he ought to rule the
universal and whole church of Christ. If Peter do truly write unto others yt
they should do the like, that is feed Christ's flock, either he translateth his
right and authority committed to him upon them, or else he does participate and
communicate it with them. So that folyshly they go about to establishe that
which has no ground. Peter in deed was a shepeheard of the sheep, but such a
one as bestowed his labor on them so far as he could stretch out him self
by his ministerye. But the papists prate that he had full power over all
Churches: Wherein they may see Paul to improve them, for else he had done
unjustly in denying them the superior place. Howbeit, who ever yet read that
Peter did take any thing upon him over Churches committed unto other men? Was
not he sent of the church, and sent as one not having rule over the reaile I
grant that he was an excellent instrument of God, and for the excellencye of
his gifts, when soever they meet together, place therefore was commonly given
unto him. But what is this to the purpose, to make him ruler and head over all
the whole Church because he was so over a small congregation?

But be it so that Peter had as much given to him as they do affirm: who yet
will grant that Peter had a patrimony given for his heirs* He has left (say
the papists) to his successors, the self same right which he received. Oh
Lord God, then must his successor be a Satan: Math. 4.
for he received that title of Christ him self. I would gladly have the
papists to show me one place of succession mentioned in the Scriptures. I am
sure that when Paul purposely paynteth out the whole administration of the
Church, he neither makes one head, nor any enheritable Primacye, and yet he
is altogether in commendation of unity. After he has made mention of one God
the father, of one Christ, of one spirit, of one body of the Church, of one
faith, and of one baptism, then he describes the mean and manner how
unity is to be kept: namelye because unto every pastor is grace given after
the measure wherewyth Christ has endowed them. Where I pray you is now any
title of Plenitudinis potestatis, of fulness, of power? When he calls home
every one unto a certain measure, why did he not forthwith say, one Pope?
Which thing he could not have forgotten, if the thing had been as the
papists make it.

But let us grant that perpetuity of the Primacye in the Church, was
establyshed in Peter: I would gladlye learn why the Seat of the Primacye
should be rather at Rome, then elsewhere. Marye say they, because Peter's
chair was at Rome. This is even like to this, that because Moses the greatest
Prophette, And Aaron the first Priest exercised their offices unto their
death in the deserte, therefore the principallest place of the Iewyshe Church
should be in the wilderness. But grant them their reason, that it is good.
What should Antioche claim? For Peter's chair was there also: wherein Paul
gave him a check, which was unseemly and vnmanerlye done of Paul, that would
not give place to his president and better. No say the papists, Rome must
have this authority because Peter died there. But what and if a man should by
probable conjectures show, that it is but a fable, which is feigned of Peter's
Bishoprike at Rome? Read how Paul does salute very many private persons when
he writes to the Romans. Three years after his Epistle made, he was brought
to Rome prisoner. Luke tells, that he was received of the brethren, and yet
in all these, no mention at all of Peter, which then by their Stories was at
Rome. Belike he was proud, as the Pope and Prelates be, or else he would
have visited Paul. Paul being in prison in Rome, did write diverse Epistles,
in which he expresses the names of many which were in comparison of Peter
but rascal personages, but of Peter he speaks never a word. Surely if
Peter had been there, this silence of him had been suspicious. In the second
Epistle to Timothye, 2. Timo. 4.
Paul complayneth that no man was with him in his defense, but all had left
him. If Peter had been then at Rome, as they write, then either Paul had
belyed him, or Peter had played his Peter's part. Luke. 23. In an other place,
how does he blame all that were with him, Phi. 2.
only Timothy excepted? Therefore we may well doubt whether Peter was at Rome
Bishop as they prate: for all this time and long before, they say that
Peter was Bishop there. But I will not stir up coals in this matter. If
Rome be the chief Seat because Peter dyed there, why should not Antioche
be the second? Why should not James and John which were taken with Peter to
be as pillars, Why (I say) should not their Seats have honor next to
Peter's Seat? Is not this gear prepostorous, that Alexandria where Mark which
was but one of the Disciples, was Bishop, should be preferred before Ephesus
where John the Evangelist taught and was bishop, and before Jerusalem where not
only James taught and dyed bishop, but also Christ Jesus our lord and high
priest for ever? By whom being Master (I hope) honor should be given to his
chair, more then to the chair of his chaplains. I need to speak nothing
how that Paul tells Peter's Apostleship to concern rather circumcision or
the Jews, and therefore properly perteyneth not to us. Neither do I need to
bring in Gregorius the sixth bishop of Rome, which was about the year of our
Lord.600. Who plainly in his works does write, that this title of Primacy, and
to be head over al churches under Christ, is a title mete and agreeing only to
Antichrist, and therefore he calls it a profane, a myschieuous, and an
horrible title. Who should we believe now, if we will neither believe Apostle nor
Pope?

If I should go about to tell how this name was first gotten by Phocas, I
should be to long. I purpose god willing to set it forth at large in a work
which I have begun of Antichrist, if god for his mercies sake give me life to
finishe it. For this present therefore I shall desire your Ladyship to take this
in good part. If they will needs have the Bishop of Rome to be acknowledged
for the head of the church, then will I urge them that they shall give us a
bishop. But they obtrude unto us a butcher rather, or a biteshepe, then a
bishop. They brag of Peter's succession, of Christ's Vycar, this is always in
their mouth. But alas, how can we call him Christ's Vicar that resists
Christ, oppugneth his veritye, persecuteth his people, and like a Prelate
prefers himself above God and man? How, or wherein does the Pope and
Christ agree? How supplyeth he Peter's ministry that boasts of his
succession? Therefore to begin withal, which I will use presently for a
conclusion, if the papists will have the bishop of Rome Supreme head of the
church of Christ in earth, they must before they attain this, give us a bishop
in deed and not in name. For whosoever he be that will make this the bond of
unity, what soever the bishop of Rome be, surely this must needs follow,
that they do nothing else but teach a most wicked defection and departing from
Christ. But of this, if God lend me life, I purpose to speak more at large
hereafter. Now will I betake your Ladyship, unto the tuition of god our father
and Christ our only head pastor and keeper, to whom see that you clean by
true faith which depends only upon the word of god, which if you do follow
as a lantern to your feet and a light to your steps, you shall then avoid
darkness, and the dangerous depts wherinto the Papists are fallen by the just
judgment of god, and seek to bring us into the same dungeon with the^, that
the blind followyng the blind, they both may fall into the dysche: out of the
which god deliver them according to his good will, and preserve us for his names
sake, that we being in his light may continue therein and walk in it whilst it
is day: so shall the night never oppress us, we going tro^ light to light,
from virtue to virtue, from faith to faith, from glory to glory by the
governance of gods good spirit, which God our father give unto us all for
ever and ever. Amen. From the kings Benche.

Your brother in bonds for the testimonye of Jesus Christ. John Bradforde.

To mine own good brother Master John Phylpot, prisoner in the Kings Benche.
MY dear brother, God our father be praised for the good he does work in you
and by you. Even now I have received your loving letters, wherein I see cause
to bless God for the wisdom, love, and efficacy he has and does work in
you and by you. Go on for gods sake to seek unity in christ. If any will go to
work dissemblingly, refuse it not: either shall it increase his dampnation, or
occasion him the sooner to conversion. Judas dissembling turned to the hurt of
him self only. If once we come into an unity and love, then shall we not
respect one an other, neither take things in to the wourse part. Nothing
hyndreth them more, then for that now they hear all that ever we speak Cum
preiudicio, He means here certain freewyl men.
Where if an unity be had, this preiudicium will be taken away, and so then
shall they see the truth the sooner. Therefore mine own dearest brother, go on
and bring it to a good end. God our father be with thee for ever, Amen.

Pray my good brother, and desire mine own fellow and beloved brother. I.
Careless to do the like. I shall pray for you, both in my prayers with
others, and with my self alonely, as for my most dear brother upon earth. I
will not forget by gods grace, to write in the behalf of our brethern in
necessity. Jesus Christ our sweet Savior be with us all Emanuell for ever.
Amen.

Your own in the Lord. John Bradford.

To my friends and brethren in the Lord R. Cole, and N. Sheterden.
I Wish to you my good brethren, ye same grace of God in Christ, which I wysh
and pray the father of mercies to give to me for his holy names sake, Amen.

Your letter though I have not read my self, because I would not alienate my
mind from conceived things to write to others, yet I have heard the sum of
it, that it is of gods election: where in I will briefly write to you my faith,
and how I think it good and mete for a christian man to wade in it. I believe
that man made after the image of god, did fall from that blessed state to the
comdemnation of himself and al his posterity. I believe that Christ for man
being thus fallen, did appose himself to the justice of god a mediator, paying
the ransom and price of redemption for Ada^ and his whole posterity that
refuse it not finally. I believe that all that believe in Christ (I speak of such
as be of years of discressio^ (are pertakers of christ and al his merits. I
believe that faith, and to believe in Christ (I speak not now of faith yt me^
have by reason of miracles Io. 2.12. Act. 8. or by reason of earthly commodity
Mat. 13. custom and authority of me which is commonly seen, the hearts of them
that so believe being not right and simple before god: Exodus 14
but I speak of that faith which in deed is the true faith, the iustifyeng
and regeneratyng faith) I believe I say that this faith and belief in Christ,
is the work and gift of God, given to none other then to those which be the
children of God, that is, to those whom GOD the father before the beginning
of the world has predestinate in Christ unto eternal life. Thus do I wade in
predestination, For the certeyntie of this faith search your hearts. If you
have it, praise the Lord, for you are happy, and therefore cannot finally
peryshe: for then happynes were not happynes, if it could be lost. when you
fall, the Lord will put under his hand that you shall not lie still. But if ye
feel not this faith, then know that predestination is to high a matter for you
to be disputers of, until ye have been better scholars in the scholehouse of
repentance and justification, which is the Grammar schole wherein we must be
conversant and learned, before we go to the university of gods most holy
predestination and providence.
in such sort as god has pacifyed and opened it. Though in god it be the
first, yet to us it is last opened. And therefore I begin with creation, from
thence I come to redemption, so to justification, and so to election. On this
sort I am sure that warelye and wisely a man may walk in it easily by the light
of gods spirit, in and by his word, seeing this faith not to be given to al
men, 2 Thessalonians. 3. but to such as are borne of god, predestinate before the
world was made, after the purpose and good will of God: which will we may not
call into disputation, but in tremblyng and fear submit our selves to it as to
that which can will none otherwise then that which is holy right and good, how
far so ever otherwise it seem to ye judgment of reason, which must needs be
beaten down to be more careful for gods glory then for man's salvation, which
depends only thereon, as all gods children full well see, for they seek
not the glory which comes of men: but the glory which comes of GOD.
Ieremye. 9. Joan. 5. They know God to be a God which does on earth not
only mercy but also judgment, which is justice and most justice, although our
folishe reason cannot see it. And in this knowledge they glory and rejoice,
though others through vain curiosity, grudch and murmr there against. Thus
briefly I have sent you my mind and meaning concerning this matter. Hereafter
you shall have (I think) your letter particulerlye answered by M. Philpotte:
as also if I have time and you so require it, I will do,

John Bradford

To my good brother R. Cole.
Mine own good brother, our good and most merciful father more and more
embrace us in the arms of his mercy as his loving and own natural children,
and give us one to embrace an other in the arms of love as true brethren,
that with one heart and mind we may praise his holy name in Christ our
Savior, and through the grace of his spirit may mightily every one fight
against sin and all that is against the kingdom of Christ: whereunto (my
beloved) we are called effectually to our everlasting felicity (I dout not)
praised be the name of our good god therefore for ever and ever, Amen.

Mine own heart in the lord, desire our brethren that every one would bend
himself to bow: let us never break. Love suffers long and seeks not her
self. We have al one father, we are all brethern, God keep us from dissension.
If we cannot agree in all points, either the points perchance be not so
necessary, or else by love we shall hereafter he brought to see that which
yet is hid. If love may appear in all our doings, and that we seek one an
other with a simple and a syngle eye in gods sight, doubtless all prejudice
whereby we are let to see manifest things, will be had away, and we will
take things spoken and done in the best part: and so doutles the name of our
father shall be sanctified in us and by us, as by instruments of grace, and gods
kingdom shall increase apace in us and by us also, which thing he grant for
his mercies sake, Amen.

Commend me heartily I pray you to both those good women. Good I call them,
because I am persuaded that god will deliver them, especial my good Mary. I
will not cease but even as for my self to pray to god for them, and for you, my
right dear brother in the Lord. If you were acquainted with M. Robert
Harrington, you should find a plain Nathanael, you should see the worst at the
first: I dare say for him his only desire is to please God, and he is afraid
to offend him. Pray for him, and for my good Sister I. H. as I know she does
for you. The peace of God be with you mine own in the Lord.

John Bradford

To my good Sister Mystres Elizabeth Brown.
GOod Sister, god our father make perfect the good he has begun in you unto
the end.

I am afraid to write unto you because you so ouercharge your self at al times,
eue^ whensoever I do but send to you co^mendatio^s. I would be more bold on you
then on many others, and therefore you might suspend so great tokens till I
should write unto you of my need, which thing doutles I would do, if it urged
me. Dear Sister, I see your unfeigned love to me wards in god, and have done
of long time, the which I do recompense with the like and will do by gods grace
so long as I live, and therefore I hope not to forget you, but in my poor
prayers to have you in remembrance, as I hope you have me. Otherwise I can do
you no service, except it be now and then by my writing to let you from better
exercise, where yet the end of my writing is to excite and stir up your
heart more earnestlye to go on forwards in your well begun enterprise. 2.
Timo. 2.
For you know none shall be crowned but such as strive lawfully, and none
receives the gleue but those that run to the appointed mark. None shall be
saved but such as persiste and continue to the very end. Therefore (dear
Sister) remember that we have need of patience, Hebr. 20
that when we have done the good will of God we may receive the promise.
Patience and perseueraunce be the proper notes whereby gods children are known
from counterfaites. They that persevere not, were always but hypocrites. Many
make godly beginnings, yea their progress seems marvelous, but yet after the
end they fail. These were never of us, says S. John: for if they had been of
us, they would have continued unto the very end. Go to therefore mine own
beloved in the Lord: as you have well begun and well gone forward, so well
persyst and happily end, and then all is yours. Though this be sharp and
sower, yet it is not tedious or long. Do all that ever you do, symplye for
GOD and as to God, so shall never unkindness nor any other thing make you to
leave of from well doing, so long as you may do well. Accustom yourselfe now
to set GOD continuallye, that he may be all in all unto you. In good things
behold his mercy and apply it unto your self. In evil things and plagues
behold his judgments, wherthorough learn to fear him. Beware of sin as
the Serpente of the soul, which spoyleth us of all our or nature and seemelye
apparel in Gods syghte. Let Christ crucified be your book to study on, and
that both night and day. Mark your vocation, and be diligente in the
works thereof: use hartye and earneste prayer and that in spyryte. In all
things give thanks to GOD our father through Christ. Labor to have here
life everlasting begone in you: for else it will not be elsewhere enjoyed.
Set Gods judgment often before your eyes that now examinyng your self, you
may make diligent suit and obtain never to come into judgment. Uncover your
euyls to God, that he may cover them. Beware of this Antichristian trashe:
defyle not your self in soul or body therewyth, but accomplish holiness in
the fear rf GOD, and bear no yoke with unbelievers. Look for the coming of
the Lord, which is at hand: by earnest prayer and godly life, hasten it. GOD
our father accomplish his good work in you. Amen.

Commend me to my good Mother Mystres Wylkynson, and to my very dear Sister
Mystres Warcuppe. I shall daily commend you all to GGD, and I pray you do the
like for me.

John Bradforde.

To Mystres Brown.
GOod Sister I beseech god to make perfect the good he has begone in you
unto, the very end, Amen.

This life more and more waxes unto us as it should be, that is a miserable
life, a weeping life, a woeful life, and therefore let us long for our happy
life, our laughing life, our joyful life, which we shall enjoy and then have
in very deed, when we depart by death out of this dangerous state, wherein we
now are by reason of this synful flesh which we carry about us. Therefore let us
prepare our selves accordyngly, and in misery and sorrow, be glad through hope.
Now we are dispersed, but we shall be gathered together again there, where we
shall never part, but always be together in joy eternal. In hope hereof let
us bear with better will, our bitter burdens which we feel and shall feel in
this miserable world. We have cause to thank god that makes this world unto
us a wyldernes. If so be therein we be patient, kiss gods todde, and humble
our selves before God: assuredly we shall come into the most pleasant land of
rest. Wherefore (good Sister) as I said I say again, be merry with sorrow,
rejoice in hope, be pacient in trouble, pray in affliction, and amongst other,
I pray you heartily pray for me, that god would forgive me my unthankfulness,
not only against you which is great in deed, but also against all his
people, but specially against his majesty. As I can, I shall commend you unto
the tuition of our shepeharde Christ, who always keep us as his Lambs, for
his holy names sake, Amen.

Your afflicted brother. John Bradford.

To a faithful friend of his, whom for his godly symplicity and synglenes of
heart in the ways of the Lord, he called Nathanaell, as he does also here in
this letter.
THe merciful God, and father of our Savior Jesus Christ, which loves us as a
most dear father, and has put upon him toward us the affection of a most
tender mother toward her children, so that he can no less think upon us
(although of our selves we be most unworthy and deserve nothing less)
then she can think on her only begotten child in his distress, yea if she
should forget her child as some unnatural mother will do, yet will he never
forgette us, although for a time he seem to sleep, that we might be
occasioned to call loud and awake him: this good GOD keep you my dear
brother Nathanaell, and your good yokefellowe, my hartelye beloved Sister in
the Lord, in all things now and for ever, to his glory and your eternal
comfort, and also of his goodness he grant you both the feeling of that
hope, which undoubtedly he has laid up in stoore for you both, far
passing the store and provision, not only which you had made, but all the
world is hable to make, as I trust already he has wroughte it in you, but I
beseech him to increase it more and more, and kindle in you a hartye longing
for the enjoying of the same: the which once felt and had indeed, then the
means by the which we come thereto, can not be so greatly dredde, as most me^
do dread the^, because either they want this feling (I mean it of altogether)
or else because the sense of this present time and things therein, are as a
myste to the hyding of those things from our syghte, least we should run
and embrace them by hartye prayer: the spirit whereof God grant us, and in
deed we should attain enough in this behalf, if we continued therein.

For auriculer confession, wherein you desire my advice for your good
yokefellowe and familye (my most dear brother) I am as ready to give it, as
you to desire it, yea more glad, forasmuch as half a suspision was in me (at
the least touching my dear sister your wife) of a lothing of my advice, that
too much had been given, where in deed I should lamente my to little
feeding you spirituallye, as both you out of prison and in prison have fed
me corporallye. But as I always thought of her, so I yet think, that she is
the child of GOD, whom God dearly loves, and will in his good time, to her
eternal comfort, give her her hearts desire in sure feelyng and sensible
beleuyng of this, which I would she had often in her mind: namely that he is
her God and father through Christ Jesus our dear Lord and Savior. A
greater service to God, she can not give then to believe this. If Satan say
she believes not, to answer, not him but the Lord, and to say, yea Lord
help my unbelief and increase my poor faith, which Satan says is no
faith: make him a liar Lord as always he has been, is, and shall be.
Undoubtedly sooner or later, God will graciouslye here her groves, and keep
all her tears in his bottell yea write them in his counting book: for he is a
ryghteous God and has no pleasure in the death of his creature: he loves
mercy, he will return and show her his mercy: he will cast all her sins
and iniquities into the bottom of the sea: and the longer that he taryeth (as
he does it but to prove her) so the more liberallye will he recompense her
long lookyng, which no less pleases him, then it greueth now her outward
Adam. For the mortification whereof, God uses this cross, and therefore if
she desire to bear the same, doubtless God will make her able to bear it: and
in presumption of his goodness and strength, let her cast her self wholye
upon him: for he is faithful and will assuredlye confyrme and bring to a
happy end that good which graciouslye he has begone in her. The which
thing I desire him to do for his own glory and names sake, Amen, Amen.

And now to the matter. Confession auriculer, as it was first used and
instituted (which was by the way of a counsel asking) I take to be among
those traditions which are indifferent, that is, neither unlawful, nor
necessarilye binding us, except the offense of the weak could not be avoided.
But to consider it as it is now used) I write to you but as I think and what
my mind is, the which follow no further then good men by Gods word do
allow it) to consider it I say, as it is now used, me thynkes it is
plainelye unlawful and wicked, and that for these causes. First because they
make it a service of God and a thing which pleases God of it self, I will
not say meritorious. This brynger my brother can tell you at large how great
an evil this is. Secondlye because they make it of necessitye, so that he or
she that uses it not, is not taken for a good Christian. Thyrdlye because it
requires of it self an impossibility, that is, the numbering and tellyng of
all our sins, which no man perceaueth, much less can utter. Fourthlye
because it establishes and confyrmeth, at the least allows praying to
Saints: precor Sanctam Mariam you must say or the priest for you. Fyfthly
because it is very injurious to the liberty of the Gospel, the which to
affirm in example and fact, I take to be a good work and a dear in Gods
sight. Sixtlye because (as it is used) it is a note, yea a very synowe of the
popyshe Church, and therefore we should be so far from allowing the same,
that we should think our selves happy to lose any thing in bearyng
witness there against. Seventhly, because in stead of counsel, thereat you
should receive poison, or if you refuse it under Sir John's benedicite, you
should no less there be wound in the briars. Eyghtlye because the end and
purpose why we go thither, is for the avoiding of the cross, that is; for
our own cause and not for Christ's cause or for our brethrens commoditye.
For in yt they make it so necessary a thing and a worshipping of God, it can
not but be against Christ and the freedom of his Gospel: and the same thing
teaches us that it is against the commodity of our brethren, which either
be weak, either be strong, either be ignorant, either be obstinate. If they
be weak, by your resorting to it they be made more weak. If they be strong,
you do what you can to infyrme their strength, if they be ignoraunte, therein
you help to keep them by your fact. If they be obstinate, your resortyng to
it, can not but rock them a sleep in their obstinate error of the necessitye
of this rite and ceremony. These causes recited do show you what I think in
this: but my thinking must no further bind you then a man's thought should
do, except the same be grounded upon gods word which binds in deed, as I
think they do. I dout not but you waying these causes, and especially.ii. of
the first and the last, if you pray to God for his spirit to direct you,
and thereto ask the advice of this my good brother and other godly learned
me^, I doubt not (I say) but you should be guided to do that which is
best in Gods sight, although in the syghte of the world, perhaps you
should be counted folyshe and precyse. But be at a point with your selves, as
the Disciples of Christ which had forsaken themselves, to follow, not your
will but Gods will, as you daily pray in the Lords prayer. The cross of
Christ, be willing to carye, least you carye the cross of the world, the
flesh, or the devil. One of these.iiii. crosses you must carry. Three of them
brings to hell, why the more part go that way that leads to perdition.
and therefore the more part goes that way, which is a broad way. Only the
fourth brings to heaven, but few go that way, as well because the way is
strayte, as also because few walk in it. Howbeit, though it be strait it is
but short, and the few are many if you consider the godly, as the
Patriarchs, Prophettes, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and Christ Jesus, with
all his Guard and train. Think not scorn to come after them which are gone
before you, and after them which now go before you, in whose number I trust
I am appointed to be one, and I beseech you pray for me that god would vouche
me worthy that honor. Our sins deserve plagues, prison, and the loss of all that ever we have: therefore if god remove our sins out of sight, and send us
prison, or loss of goods and living for his names sake, Oh how happy are we?
My dear hearts in the Lord, consider this gear, and be assured yt he which
loses any thing for Christ's sake, the same in his posterity shall find it
here, and in heaven elsewhere. As for unableness to answer for your faith: it
shall be enough to will the^ to dispute with your teachers. Faith stands not
in disputing. I think few, if it came to disputing, could defend the Godhead
of Christ, and many other articles: I speak it for the simple sort. Pray for
me. Lack of paper makes this end. Commend me to my good brother Richard
Bleacher, and my good sister his wife: I pray them to pray for me. I trust by
this bearer to hear how you do.

John Bradforde.

To certain Godly men, whom he exhorts to be patient under the cross and
constant in the true doctrine which they had professed.
MY dearly beloved in the Lord, as in him I wyshe you well to fare, so I pray
God I and you may continue in his true service, that perpetually we may
enjoy the same welfare, as here in hope, so in heaven in deed and eternallye.

You know this world is not your home, but a pilgrimage and place wherein God
tries his children, and therefore as it knows you not, nor can know you: so I
trust you know not it, that is, you allow it not, nor in any point will seem
so to do, although by many you be occasioned thereto. For this whote sun
which now shines, burns so sore, that the corn which is sown upon sand and
stonye ground, begins to wyther: that is, many which before times we took
for hartye Gospellers, begin now for the fear of afflictions to relente,
yea to turn to their vomytte again, thereby declaring that though they go
from amongst us, yet were they never of us: for else they would have still
tarried with us, 1. Ioh. 2
and neither for gain nor loss, have left us either in word or deed. As for
their heart (which undoubtedly is double, and therefore in danger to Gods
curse) we have as much with us, as the papists have with them, and more too
by their own iudgenente. For they playing wily begile themselves, think it
enough inwardlye to favor the truth, though outwardly they currye favor. What
though with my body (say they) I do this or that, GOD knows my heart is whole
with him. Ah brother, if thy heart be whole with GOD, why do not thou
confess and declare thy self accordynglye by word and fact? Either that
which thou say thou beleuest in thy heart, is good or no. If it be good,
why art thou ashamed of it? If it be evil, why do thou keep it in thy
heart? Is not GOD hable to defend thee, aduenturing thy self for his cause?
Or will not he defend his worshippers? Does not the Scripture say that the
eyes of the Lord are on them that fear him, and trust in his mercy? Psalm. 33
And whereto? Forsooth to deliver their souls from death, and to feed them in
the time of hunger. If this be true, as it is most true, why are we afraid
of death, as though GOD could not comfort or deliver us, or would not,
contrary to his promise? Why are we afraid of the loss of our goods, as
though GOD would leave them that fear him, destitute of all good things,
and so do against his most ample promyses? Ah faith faith, how few feel
thee now a days? Luke. 18.
Full truly said Christ that he should scarcelye find faith when he came
on earth. For if men believed these promyses, they would never do any thing
outwardlye, which inwardlye they dysallowe. No example of men, how many so
ever they be, or how learned so ever they be, can prevail in this behalf:
for ye pattern which we must follow, is Christ him self, and not the more
company, or custom. His word is the lantern to lyghten our steps,
Psalm. 118
and not learned men. Company and custom are to be considered according to
the thing they allow. Learned men are to be listened to, and followed
according to Gods lore and law, for else the more part goes to the devil.
As custom causes error and blyndnesse, so learning, if it be not
according to the light of Gods word, is poison, and learned men most
pernicious. The devil is called Demon for his cunning, and the children of
this world are much wyser then the children of light in their generation:
Luke 16.
and I know the devil and his dearelynges have always for the most part,
more helps in this life then Christ's Church and her children. They (the
Devil and his Sinagoge I mean) have custom, multitude, unity, antiquitye,
learning, power, riches, honor, dignity, and promotions plentye, as always
they have had, and shall have commonly and for the most part, until
Christ's coming, much more then the true Church have presentlye, heretofore
have had, or hereafter shall have. For her glory, riches and honor is not
here: her trial, cross, and warrefare is here. And therefore (my dear hearts
in the Lord) consider these things accordinglye. Consider what you be, not
worldlynges but Gods children. Consider where you be, not at home but in a
strange countreye. Consider among whom you are conuersante, even in the
midst of your ennemies, and of a wicked generation, and then I trust you
will not much muse at affliction, which you can not be without, being as you
be, Gods children, in a strange countreye, and in the midst of your
ennemies, except you would leave your Captain Christ, and follow Satan
for the mucke of this moulde, rest and quietness, which he may promise you,
and you in deed think you shall receive it by doing as he would have you to
do, but (my sweet hearts) he is not hable to pay that he promises. Peace
and war come from GOD, riches and pouertye, wealth and woe. The devil has
no power but by Gods permission. If then GOD permit him a little on your
goods, body or life, I pray you tell me, what can much hurt you (as Peter
says) you being followers of godliness? 1. Pet. 3.
Think you that GOD will not remember you in his time as most shall be to
your comfort? Can a woman forgette the child of her womb? Esaias. 49.
And if she should, yet will not I forgette thee, says the Lord. Look
upon Abraham in his exile and miserye, look upon Jacob, Iosephe, Moses,
David, the Prophettes, Apostles, and all the Godly from the beginning: and my
good brethren, is not GOD the same God? Is he a chaungeling? You have heard of
the patience of Job (says Saint James) and you have seen the end how that
God is merciful, Jacob. 5
patiente and long suffering: even so say I unto you, that you shall find
accordinglye, if so be you be patiente, that is, if so be you feate him,
set his word before you, serve him thereafter, and if he lay his cross on
you, you bear it with patience: the which you shall do, when you consider it
not according to the present sense, but according to the end. Hebru. 12.2,
Corin. 4.

Therefore I heartily beseech you, and out of my bonds which I suffer for your
sake, pray you (mine own sweet hearts in the Lord) that you would cleave in
heart and humble obedience, to the doctrine taught you by me and many other my
brethren. For we have taught you no fables nor tales of me^, or our own
fantasies, but the very word of god, which we are ready with our lives (God
so enhabling us, as we trust he will) to confirm, and by the sheding of our
bloodes, in all patience and humble obedience to the superior powers, to
testifye and seal up, as well that you might be more certain of the doctrine,
as that you might be ready to confess the same before this wicked world,
knowing that if we confess Christ and his truth before men, he will confess
us before his father in heaven: if so be we be ashamed hereof for loss of
life, friends or goods, he will be ashamed of us before his father and his holy
Angels in heaven.

Therefore take heed, for ye Lords sake take heed, take heed, and defile not
your bodies or souls with this Romish and Antichristian religion set up amongst
us again: but come away, come away as the Angel cries, Apoca. 18.
from amongst them in their Idolatrous service, least you be partakers of
their iniquitye. Harke^ to your preachers as the Thessalonia^s did to Paul:
that is, confer their sayings with the Scriptures, and if they sound not
thereafter, Esaias. 8.
ye morning light shall not shine upon them. Use much and hearty prayer for the
spirit of wisdom, knowledge, humbleness, meekness sobrietye and
repentance: which we have great need of, because our sins have thus provoked
the Lords anger against us: but let us bear his anger, and acknowledge our
faults with bitter tears, and sorrowful sighs, and doubtless he will be merciful
to us after his wonted mercy. The which thing he vouchsafe to do for his holy
names sake in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom with the father and the holy ghost
be all honor, glory, praise, and everlasting thanks from this time forth
for evermore, Amen.

Out of prison by yours in the Lord to command. John Bradford.

To my dearly beloved in the lord Mystres VV. and Mystres VV.
ALmighty God our dear and most merciful father, be always with you both (my
entierly beloved mother and Sister in the Lord) and as his babes, he for ever
keep you unto his eternal kingdom through Christ our Savior, Amen.

I purpose not to go about to render thanks to you for gods great goodness
toward me by you, because I can not. Either of you has so heaped upon me
benefits, that it were hard for me to reckon ye tithes. He for whose sake you
have done it, and all the good you do, one day recompense you after your
hearts desire in him. In the mean season, I beseech him to reveal unto you
more and more the riches of his grace and love in Christ, by whom ye are
beloved and were, before the world was, and shall be doutles world without
end. According to the revelation, and your sense or faith herein, so will you
contend to all piety and godliness, as S. John says: he that has this hope
will purify himself as Christ is pure. 1. John. 3
For how should it otherwise be, but if we be certainlye persuaded that
heaven is ours and we citizens thereof, but (I say) we should desire the
dissolution of our bodies, and death to dispatche us, and to do his office upon
us? If we did certainly believe we were members of Christ and gods temples, how
should we but fly from all impuritie and corruption of the world which
comes by concupiscence? If we did certainly believe that god in deed of his
mercy in Christ, is become our father, in that his good will is infinite, and
his power according thereto, how could we be afraid of man or Devil? How
could we doubt of salvation, or any good thing which might make to Gods
glory and our own weal? Now that we should be certain and sure of this,
that we are Gods children in Christ, mark whether all things teach us not?
Behold the creation of this world, and the gubernation of the same: do not
these teach us that God loves us? And is gods love out of Christ the beloved?
If not his love as he is unchangeable? John. 13.
Does not S. John say, that he loves to the end whom he loves? Therefore I
say, the very creatures of god, concerning both their creation and
conservation, tell us that god loves us: that is, that we in Christ be his
children and dearlinges, although in our selves and of our selves we be
otherwise: namelye children of wrath. Again look upon the law of god, and
tell me whether it do not require this certainty of you, namely that you be
gods dear children in Christ? Does not god plainly affirm and say: I am the
Lord thy God? Does he not charge you to have none other gods but him? How then
can you perish if god be your god? psalm. 143
Does not that make god no god? Does not David say that those people be happy
which have the Lord for their God?

Besides this, look on your belief: do you not profess that you believe in God
your father almighty, which wants no power to help you, as he wanted no
good will in Christ to choose you? Do you not say that you do believe remission
of sins, resurrection of the body, life everlasting, fellowship with the
saints? etc. But how do you say you believe this gear, and be not certain
thereof? Is not faith a certainty? Is not doubtyng against faith, as S. James
says? Pray in faith and doubt not, for he that doubts obteyneth nothing.
Math. 8
When Peter began to doubt, he had like to have been drowned: beware of it
therefore.

Moreover, for to certifye your consciences that you be gods childerne, and
shall never finally perish, through gods goodness in Christ, behold your head,
your Captain, I mean Christ Jesus. Wherefore came he into this world, but
to redeem you? to marry you unto himself? to destroy the works of Satan? to
save and seek that which was lost? Wherefore suffered he so great and bitter
passions? Did he it not to take away your sins? Wherefore did he rise
from death? Did he it not to iustifye you? Wherefore did he ascend into
heaven? Did he it not to take possession there for you? to lead your
captiuitye captive? to prepare and make ready all things for you? to appear
before the father, always praying for you? If these be true, as they be most
true, why the^ stand you in a doubt? Do you not thereby deny Christ? Wherefore
were you borne of Christian parents and in gods church, but because you were
Gods chylderne by Christ before you were borne? For this cause you were
baptized, and hitherto the Lord has thus delte with you, sparyng you,
correctyng you, and blessyng you. but why? Verily because you be his children,
and shall be for ever through Christ. Tell me, why has God kept you till this
time, but that he will for his sake have you even here made like unto Christ,
that elsewhere you may so be? Why has he opened your eyes from Popery, but
because you be his childerne in deed? When you do pray, do you not call him
father? Why do you doubt of it then? Why will you believe the Devil more the^
God your father, the Son, and the holy ghost? more then the holy word of
GOD, both in the law and in Gospel? more then all the blessings and
castigations of God? Do not all these preach to you and tell you that you are
gods babes through Christ? Therefore my derely beloved, believe it and give not
place to the Devil, but withstand him strong in faith. Mark. 9 Luke 19
Say with the poor man: I believe Lord, help my unbelief. Say with the
Apostels, Lord increase our faith.

This mine own hearts in the Lord, I write not that you should live more
securely and carnally, doing as the Spiders do, which gather poison where
bees gather honye: but that as the elect of god, you might live in all
purity, godliness and peace, which god increase in us all for his Christ's
sake, Amen.

I pray you hartelie pray for us, that to the very end we may (as I hope we
shall) go lustily and cherefullie whether soever our heavenly father shall
bring and lead us. His will which is always good, be done in earth as it is
in heaven, Amen.

Your brother in bonds for the testimonye of Jesus Christ. John Bradforde.

To my good Sister M. H.
THe peace of God, with increase of faith and feeling of his mercy to your
comfort in Christ, the holy ghost work in your heart now and for ever, Amen.

As it is much to my comfort that God has given you such a love and zeal to
his truth: so I exhort you (my good Sister) diligently to labor, as by
continual readyng and meditation of gods holy word, so by earnest prayer and
other godly exercises, to maintain and increase the same: that by the feelyng
of gods gracious spirit workyng in you such good fruits as witnesses of your
faith, you may grow in strength thereof, and certayntie of gods favor and good
will toward you. For above all things, of this I would have you to be most
assured, that you are beloved of god: that you are his dear child, and shall
be for evermore through Christ, in whom you are by faith, and he in you.
Out of this certeintie (the cause whereof is gods own goodness, grace, and
truth) spryngeth true love, and loving fear, and obedience to god continually
and in all things. Where it is (I mean this faith, certainty and persuasion
of gods eternal goodness to you in Christ) there no sins are imputed to you,
or laid to your charge to comdemnation nor shall be: though for correction sake,
now and the^ your heavenly father visit them fatherly, or rather you for them.
Where it is not, there is nothing be it never so well done, that pleases God.
Labor therefore for this certainty of faith, through Christ. Whensoever you
dout, you heap sin upon sin. If Satan, your conscience, or gods law do
accuse you, confess your fault, and hide it not before the lord. But when they
would infer yt because of your sin you are condemned, you are cast away:
then answer them that it is but their office to accuse and witness, not to give
sentence and judge: it only apperteyneth to god to give judgment. Paul
says, it is god that absolueth, who then shall condemn us? God himself
promises, before he demand any thing of us, that he is our Lord and our god:
and are not they happy which have the lord for their god? Is he god to any
whose sins he remitteth not? Through Christ he is our father, and therefore we
are commanded so to call him: and can there want any fatherly kyndnes in him
toward us, which be his children? No verily. Therefore be sure, and waver not
of gods love and favor toward you in Christ. The cause of his love is his
own goodness and mercy: this lasting for ever, his love loses for ever. How
can you then but be quiet and happy? Use this gear to comfort the weak
conscience, and not to unbridle the mighty affections of the flesh or old
Adam, which must have other meat.

Your own in the Lord. John Bradford.

An exhortation to the patient sufferyng of trouble and afflictions for
Christ's cause, written to all the unfeigned professors of the gospel
thoroughout the realm of England, at the beginning of his imprisonmente, and
here placed as it came to our hands.
THe holy spirit of God, which is the earnest and pledge of God, given to his
people for their comfort and consolation, be powered into our hearts by ye
mighty power and merits of our alone Savior Jesus Christ, now and for ever,
Amen.

Because I perceive plainly, that to the evils fallen upon us which profess
Christ's gospel, greater are most like to ensue, and after them greater, Gene.
15. Luke. 9. Genes. 19
till the measure of iniquity be up heaped (except we shrynke, and having put
our hands to the plough do look back, and so with Lothes wife and the
Israelits, desiryng to return into Egypt, fall into gods heavy displeasure
vncurably, al which god forbid) and because I am persuaded of you, my derely
beloved brethern and Systers through out the realm of England, which have
professed unfeignedly the gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (for unto
such do I write this epistle) that as ye have begone to take part with gods
gospel and truth, so through his grace ye will persevere and go on forwards
notwithstanding the storms risen and to arise: I cannot but write something
unto you, lustely to go on forwards in the way of the Lord, and not to become
faynte hearted or fearful, Apoca. 25.
whose place S. John appoints with the unbelievers, murderers, and Idolaters
in eternal perdicion, but cherefully to take the Lords cup and drink of it
before it draw toward the dregs and bottom, Psalm. 75,
whereof at the length they shall drink with the wicked to eternal destruction,
1. pet. 4
which will not receive it at the first with gods children: with whom god
begins his judgment, that as the wicked world rejoices when they lament,
John. 16.
so they may rejoice when the wicked world shall mourn, and without end find
woe intolerable.

First therefore my dearly beloved in the Lord, I beseech you to consider, John.
14 Psalm. 17 2. Cor. 4. Apoc. 12 Heb. 11 1. pet. 2 Heb. 13 Psalm. 119 Heb. 12
Mat. 28 Romans 9 1. Ioh. 5 Apo. 13 Luke. 6. EZech. 9. Math. 5. Esaias. 22 1. Cor. 15
that though ye be in the world yet ye are not of the world. Ye are not of
them which look for their porcio^ in this life, whose Captain is the god of
this world, even Satan, who now ruffleth it apace as he were wood because his
time on earth is not long. But ye are of them that look for a City of gods
own blessing. Ye are of them that know your selves to be here but pylgrimes
and strangers: for here ye have no dwelling place. Ye are of them whose
portion is the lord, and which have their hope in heaven: whose captayn is
Christ Jesus the Son of God and governor of heaven and earth. Unto him is
given all power, yea he is god almighty with the father and the holy ghost,
praise worthy for ever. Ye are not of them which receive the beasts mark,
which here rejoice, laugh and have their hearts ease joy, paradise and
pleasure: but ye are of them which have received the Angels mark, yea Gods
mark, which here lament, mourn, syghe, sobbe, weep, and have your wyldernes
to wander in, your purgatory and even hell to purge and burn up your sins.
Ye are not of them which cry, let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall
die. Ye are not of that number which say they have made a covenant with death
and hell for hurting of them. Esaias. 28 Mal. 3. Apo. 3. Ezech. 8. Psa. 73. Math.
4. Dani. 3.
Ye are not of the^ which take it for a vain thing to serve the lord. Ye are
not of the^ which are lulled and rocked a sleep in Iesabels bed, a bed of
security. Ye are not of the number of the^ which say, tushe god is in heaven
and sees us not nor much passes what we do. Ye are not of the number of the^
which will fall down for the mucke of the world to worship the Feende, or for
displeasing of men to worship the golden mage. Math. 8. 1 Match. 1.2 Exodus 13
3. Reg. 22. Romans 6.7. Coloss. 3
Finallye year not of the number of them which set more by your pigs then by
Christ, which for ease and rest in this life will say and do as Antiochus
byddeth you do or say, and will follow the multitude to do evil with Zedechias
and the 300. false Prophets, yea Achab, Iesabel, and ye whole court and
country. But ye are of the number of the^ which are dead already or at least be
in dyeng daily to your selves and to this world. Ye are of them which have made
a covenant with god to forsake your selves in this world and Satan also. Ye
are of the^ which say, Luke 12. Mala. 3.
nay the lord has al things written in his memorial book for such as fear
him and remember his name. Luke. 12. psa. 33.14.101.
Ye are of the^ which have their loins girded about and their lyghtes burning
in their hands like unto men that wait for their lords coming. Ye are in the
number of them that say, the lord looks down from heaven and beholds the
children of men from the habitation of his dwelling: he considers al them
that dwell upon the earth. Luke. 3. Dan. 3. 1. pet. 2. Psalm. i20. i. Mac. 2
Math. 7 3. Reg. 22.
Ye are of the number of them which will worship the only lord god and will not
worship the works of man's hands, though the oven burn never so hot. Ye are
in the number of them to whom Christ is precious and dear, which cry out
rather because your habitation is prolonged here, as Dauyd did. Ye are of them
which follow Mathathias and the godly Jews: which know the way to life to be
a strait way and few to go through it: which will not stycke to follow poor
Micheas although he be racked and cast into prison, having the Sun, Moon,
seven Stars and all against him.

Thus therefore (dearly beloved) remember first that (as I said) ye are not
of this world: that Satan is not your Captain: your joy and Paradyse is not
here: your companions are not the multitude of worldlings and such as seek to
please men and live here at ease in the service of Satan. phil. 3. Heb. 13
But ye are of an other world: Christ is your Captain: your joy is in heaven,
where your conversation is: your companions are the fathers, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Virgins, confessors, and the dear saints of
God, Apo. 7 Job. 78.14. Psalm. 9. James. 4
which follow the Lamb whether soever he goes, dippyng their garments in his
blood, knowing this life and world to be full of evil, a warfare, a smoke, a
shadow, a vapor, and as replenished, so environed with all kind of myseries.
This is the first thing which I would have you often and diligently with your
selves to consider and to muse well upon, namely what ye be and where ye be.

Now secondlye forgette not to call to mind that ye ought not to think it
any strange thing if miserye, trouble, adversity, persecution, and
displeasure come upon you. 1. pet. 4 John. 14. 1. pet 5
For how can it otherwyst be, but that trouble and persecution must come
upon you? Can the world love you which are none of his? Can worldly men
regard you, which are your chief enemies soldiers? Can Satan suffer you to
be in rest, Math. 7.
which will do no homage unto him? Can this way be chosen of any that make it so
narrow and strait as they do? Will ye look to travail and to have no foul
way or rain? Will shypmen shrynke or sailors on the sea give over if storms
arise? Do they not look for such? And (dearly beloved) did not we enter into
gods ship and Arc of Baptssme at the first? 1. pet. 4
Will ye the^ count it strange if perilles come or tempests blow? Are not
ye travailing to your heavenly City of Jerusalem, where is all joy and
felicity: and wsll ye now tarry by the way for storms or showers? John. 9 Mat.
25
The Mart and faier will then be past: the night will so come upon you that ye
cannot travail: the door will be sparde, and the bryde will be at supper.
Therefore away with daintye niceness. Will ye think the father of heaven will
deal more gently with you in this age, the^ he has done with others his
dearest friends in other ages? What way, Genesis 4 6.7.8.9. etc.
yea what storms and tempests, what troubles and disquietnes found Abell,
Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and good Joseph? Which of these had so fair a life
and resteful times as we have had? Exodus 2.3.4.5. etc
Moses, Aaron, Samuel, Dauyd the king, and all the good kings, Priests,
Prophets in the old testament at one time or other (if not through out their
life) did feel a thousand parts more misery then we have felt hitherto.

As for the new Testament, Lord god how great was ye affliction, of Marye, of
Iosephe, of Zacharye, of Elizabeth, of John Baptiste, of all the Apostles and
Euaungelistes, Math. ii
yea of Jesus Christ our Lord, the dear son and dearlyng of God? And since
the time of the Apostles, Eusebius. eccl hist. Tripart. hist.
how many and great are the number of Martyrs, Confessors and such as have
suffered the sheeding of their blood in this life, rather then they would be
stayed in their journey, or lodge in any of Satan's Innes, lest the storms
or winds which fell in their trauailinges, might have touched them? And
dearelye beloved, let us think what we are, and how far unmeet to be
matched with these, with whom yet we look to be placed in heaven. Psa. 49
But with what face can we look for this, that are so fearful, unwilling and
arsward to leave that, which will we nyll we, we must leave, and that so
shortly, as we know not the time when? Where is our abrenouncing and forsaking
of the world and the flesh, which we solemnly took upon us in baptism? Ah
shameless cowardes that we be, 1. pet. 5.
which will not follow the trace of so many Fathers, Patriarckes, Kings,
Priests, Prophettes, Apostles, Euaungelistes and Saints of God, yea even of
the very Son of God. How many now go with you lustelye, as I and all your
brethren in bonds and exile for the Gospel? Pray for us, for God willing we
will not leave you now: we will go before you. Ye shall see in us by Gods
grace, 1. Pet. 2
that we preached no lies nor tales of tubbes, but even the very true word
of God: for the confyrmation whereof, we by Gods grace, and the help of your
prayers, will willinglye and joyfully give our blood to be shed, as already
we have given our livings, goods, friends and natural country: for now be
we certain that we be in the high way to heavens bliss, as Saint Paul
says, Act. 14.
by many tribulations and persecutions we must enter into Gods kingdom. And
because we would go thither our selves and bring you thither also, therefore
the devil stirs up the coals. And forasmuch as we all loytered in the
way, Math. 8. Math. 14.
he has therefore received power of god to ouercast the whether and to stir
up storms, yt we gods children, might more spedely go on forwards, and make
more have: as the counterfaites and hipocrites will tarry and linger till the
storms be paste, and so when they come, the market will be done and ye doors
sparde, as it is to be feared. Read Math. 25. This wind will blow gods
children forwards and the devils dearlinges backward. Therefore like Gods
children, let us go on forward apace: the wind is on our backs: Thren. 3
Heb. 6.
hoyse up the sails: lift up your hearts and hands unto god in prayer, and
keep your anchor of faith to cast out in time of trouble on the rock of Gods
word and mercy in Christ, by the gable of gods veritye, and I warrant you.
And thus much for you secondly to consider: that affliction, persecution and
trouble is no strange thing to Gods children, and therefore it should not
dismaye, discourage, or dyscomforte us: for it is none other thing then all
Gods dear friends have tasted in their journey to heaven wards.

As I would in this troublesome time that ye would consider what ye be by the
goodness of God in Christ, even Citizens of heaven, though ye be presently in
the flesh, even in a strange region, on every side full of fierce enemies: and
what wether and way the dearest friends of god have found: even so would I have
you thyrdly to consider for your further comfort, Phil. 3.
that if ye shrink not, but go on forwards preassyng to ye mark appointed,
all the power of your enemies shall not overcome you, nor in any point hurt you.
But this must not you consider according to the judgment of reason, and the
sense of old Adam, but according to ye judgment of gods word, and the
experience of faith and the new man, for else you mar all. For to reason, and
to the experience of our sense or of the outward man, we poor souls which
flicke to Gods word, to serve him as he requires only, are counted to be
vanquished and to be overcome, in that we are cast into prison, lose our
livings, friends, goods, countreye and life also at the length concerning
this world. But dearly beloved, Gods word teaches otherwise, and faith
feels accordingly. Is it not written: who shall separate us from the love of
God? Romans 8
Shall tribulation, or anguishe, or persecution, either hunger, either
nakedness, either peril, either sword? As it is written: Psalm. 44.
for thy sake are we killed all day long, and are counted as sheep appointed to
be slain. Nevertheless in all these things we overcome through him that loved
us. For I am sure that neither death, neither life, neither angels nor rule,
neither power, neither things present, neither things to come, neither high nor
low, neither any creature shall be hable to part us from that love wherewith
god loves us in Christ Jesus our Lord. Thus spoke one which was in affliction
as I am, for the Lords gospelles sake, his holy name be praised therefore: and
he grant me grace with the same to continue in like suffering unto the end.
This (I say) one spoke which was in affliction for the gospel: but yet so far
from being overcome, yt he rejoiced rather of the victory which the gospel
had. For though he was bound, 2. Timo. 2.
yet the gospel was not bound. And therefore gives he thanks unto god which
always gives the victory in Christ, 2 Cor. 2
and opens the savor of his knowledge by us, and such as suffer for his
truth, although they shut us up never so much, and drive us never so far out
of our own natural country in every place,

The world for a time may deceive it self, thinking it has the victory, but
yet ye end will try ye contrary. Genesis 4.
Did not Caine think he had the victory when Abel was slain? But how say you
now, is it not found otherwise? Thought not ye old world and men the^ living,
that they were wise and well, and Noe a sole, Genesis 7.8.
which would crepe into an Arc, leaving his house, lands possessions? for I
think he was in an honest state for the world: but I pray you, who was wise
when ye flood came: Abraham (I trow) was counted a fool to leave his own
country and friends, kyth and kin, because of gods word: Genesis i2.
but dearly beloved, we know it proved otherwise. I will leave al ye Patriarchs
and come to Moses, and the children of Israel. Tell me, were not they thought to
be overcome and stark mad when for fear of Pharao at gods word, they ran into
the red sea? Exodus 14.
Did not Pharao and the Egiptians think them selves sure of the victory? But
I trow, it proved clean contrary. Saul was thought well, and David in an
evil case, 1. Regu^. 16 17.18.19.
and most miserable, because he had no hole to hyde him in: but yet at the
length Saules myserye was seen, and David's felicitye began to appear. The
Prophette Mycheas being cast into prison for telling Achab the truth, 3. Reg.
22.
was thought to be overcome of Zedechias and the other false Prophettes: but
my god brethren and sisters, the holy historye tells otherwise. Who did not
think the Prophettes unhappy in their time? Jeremy. 20 Esaias. 8. 4. Regu^, 2.
1 Cor. 4
For they were slain prysoned, laughed to scorn and iested at of every man.
And so were all the Apostles, yea the dearelye beloved friend of God: then whom
among the children of women none arose greater, I mean John Baptiste, who was
beheaded and that in prison, even for a daunsing Damosells desire. As all these
to the judgment of reason, were then counted heretics, runagates, unlearned,
fools, fishers, Publicanes etc: so now unhappy and overcome in deed, if gods
word and faith did not show the contrary.

Romans 8.
But what speak I of these? Look upon Jesus Christ to whom we must be like
fashioned here, if we will be like him elsewhere. How say ye, was not he taken
for a most fool, a sedicious person, a new fellow, an heretic, and one
overcome, of every body? yea even forsaken both of god and men? But the end
told them and tells us an other tale: for now is he in majesty and glory
unspeakable. When he was led to Pilate or Herod, or when he was in prison in
Cayphas house, did not there reason think, that he was overcome? When he was
beaten, buffeted, scourged, crowned with thorn, hanged upon the cross, and
utterly left of all his Disciples, taunted of the high priests and holy
fathers, cursed of ye commons, rayled on of the Magistrates, and laughed to
scorn of the leude heathen: would not a man then have thought that he had
been out of the way, and his Dysciples fools to follow him and believe him?
Think ye that whyllest he did lie in his grave men did not point with their
fyngers, when they saw any that had followed and loved him, or believed in him
and his doctrine, saying: where is their Master and teacher now? What? is he
gone? Forsooth if they had not been fools they might well have known, yt this
learning he taught, cold not long continue. Our Doctors and Pharesees are no
fools now, they may see. On this sort either me^ spoke, or might have spoken
against al such as loved Christ or his doctrine: but yet at the length, they
and al such were proved fools and wicked wretches. For our Savior arose
maugre their beardes, and published his gospel plentifullye spite of their
heads, and the heads of all the wicked world, with the great powers of the
same, always ouerco^ming, and then most of all, when he and his doctrine was
thought to have the greatest fall. As now (dearly beloved) the wicked world
reioyseth: the papists are puffed up against poor Christ and his people after
their old kind: now cry they out where are these new found preachers? Are
they not in the Tower, Marshalsee, Fleet, and beyond the Seas? Who would have
thought, that our old Bishops, Doctors, and Deanes, were fools as they would
have made us to believe, and in deed have persuaded some already which are not
of the wisest, especially if they come not home again to the holy Church?

These and such like words they have, to cast in our teeth, as tryumphers and
conquerers. But dearly beloved, short is their joy, they begile them selves.
This is but a lightnyng before their death. Euse. eccl. hist. Lib. 3 cap.
5.6.7.8.9.
As God after he had given the Jews a time to repent, visited them by
Vespasian and Titus most horriblye to their utter subversion, delivering first
all his people from among them: even so (my dear brethren) will he do with
this age. When he has tried his children from amongst them (as now he
begins) and by suffering has made us like to his Christ, and by being
overcome, to overcome in deed to our eternal comfort: then will he, if not
otherwise, come him self in the clouds, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
I mean our dear Lord whom we confess, preach and believe on: he will come
(I say) with the blaste of a Trumpe and shoute of an Archaungell, and so shall
we be caughte up in the clouds to meet him in the air, Math. ^3.
the Angels gathering together the wicked wretches, which now walter and
wallowe as the world and wind blows, to be tide in boundells and cast into
the fire, which burns for ever most paynefullye. There and then shall they
see who has the victory, they, or we. Luke 16 Sapie. 3.
When they shall see us a far of in Abraham's bosom, the^ will they say, oh,
we thought these folks fools and had them in decision, we thought their life
madness and their end to be without honor: but look how they are counted
among the children of god, and their portion is with ye Saints: Oh we have gone
amysse and would not harken. Such words as these, shall the wicked say one day
in hell: whereas now they triumph as conquerers. And thus much for you thirdly
to look often upon: namely that whatsoever is done unto you (yea even very
death it self) shall not dashe or hurt you, no more then it did Abell, David,
Daniel, John Baptist, Jesus Christ our Lord, with other the dear Saints of God
which suffered for his names sake. Let not reason therefore be judge in this
matter, nor present sense, but faith and Gods word, as I have showed. In ye
which, if we set before our eyes the shortness of this present time wherein we
suffer, and consider the eternite to come: as our enemies and persecutours
shall be in intolerable pains helpelesse, 1. Cor. 2 Esaye. 64.
and we if we persevere to the end, in such felicity and joys daungerlesse,
as the very heart of man in no point is able to conceive: if we consider this
(I say) we can not but eue^ contemn and set nothing by ye sorrows and greffes
of the cross, and lustely go through thick and thi^ne with good courage.

Thus have I declared unto you.iii things necessary to be mused on of every
one which will abide by Christ and his Gospel in this troublesome time, as I
trust you all will: namely first to consider that we are not of this world,
nor of ye number of the worldlings, or retainers to Satan: that we are not at
home in our own country, but of an other world, of ye congregation of ye
Saints, and retainers to Christ, although in a region replete and full of
intractable enemies. Secondly that we may not think it a strange thing to be
persecuted for gods gospel, Heb. 2.
from ye which the dearest friends of god were in no age free, as in deed it is
impossible yt they should any long time be, their enemies being always about
them to destroy the^ if they could. And thirdly that the assaults of our
enemies, be they never so many and fearce, in no point shall be able to prevail
against our faith, albeit to reason it seems otherwise. Wherthroughe we
ought to conceive a good courage and comfort: for who will be affeard when he
knows the ennemies can not prevail? Now will I for the more encouraginge
you to the cross, give you a further memorandum: namelye of the commodities
and profits which come by the trouble and afflictions now risen and to arise
to us which be gods children elect through Jesus Christ. But here look not to
have a rehearsal of all ye commodities which come by the cross, to such as
are exercised well therein: for that were more then I can do. I will only speak
of a few, thereby to occasion you to gather, and at the length to feel and
perceive more.

First, in that there is no cross which comes upon any of us without the
counsel of our heavenly father (for as for the fancy of fortune, it is wicked,
Amos. 3 Thren. 3 Math. 10 Esaye. 45.
as many places of the scripture do teach) we must needs, to the commendation
of gods justice (for in all his doings he is just) ackdowledge in our selves
that we have deserved at the hands of our heavenly father, this his cross or
rod fallen upon us. We have deserved it, if not by our unthankfulness,
slothfulness, negligence, intemperancie, uncleanness, and other sins
committed often by us (whereof our consciences can and will accuse us, if we call
the^ to counsel, with the examination of our former life) yet at least by our
original and birth sin, as by doubting of the greatness of gods anger and
mercy, by self love, concupiscence, Psalm. 51 Heb. 12 Gala. 5.
and such like sins, which as we brought with us into this world, so do the
same always abide in us, and even as a spring do always bring somthyng forth
in act with us, notwithstanding the continual fight of Gods spirit in us
against it.

The first commodity therefore that the cross brings, is knowledge, and that
double: of God and of our selves. Psalm. 51. Genesi. 8. Ierem. 17. Ephesi. 17.
1. Regu^. 8. Genes. 42.
Of God, that he is just, pure and hates sin. Of our selves, that we are
borne in sin, and are from top to toe defiled with concupiscence and
corruption: out of the which has spronge all ye evils yt ever at any time we
have spoken and done. The greatest and most special whereof, by the cross we
are occasioned to call to mind (as did the brethren of Joseph) their evil
fact against him, when the cross once came upon the^. And so by it we come to
the first step to get health for our souls, that is, we are driven to know
our sins original and actual by Gods justice declared in the cross.

Secondly the end wherefore God declares his justice against our sin
original and actual, and would by his cross have us to consider the same and
to call to mind our former evil deeds: the end hereof (I say) is this, that
we might lament, be sorry, sygh and pray for pardon, that so doing we might
obtain the same by the means of faith in the merits of Jesus Christ his
dear Son: and further that we being humbled because of ye evil that
dwells in us, might become thankful for Gods goodness and love in continual
watchyng and warynes to suppress the evil which lies in us, Jacob. 1.
that it bring not forth fruits to death at any time. This second commodity
of the cross therefore, must we not count to be a simple knowledge only, but a
great gain of Gods mercy, with wonderful rich and precious virtues of faith,
repentance, remission of sins, humility, thankfulness, mortification, and
diligence in doing good. Not that properly the cross works these things of
it self, but because the cross is the mean and way by the which God works
the knowledge and felyng of these things in his children: as many, both
testimonies and examples in Scriptures are easily found of them, that
diligently way what therein they read.

To these too commodities of the cross, join the third of Gods singular
wisdom, that it may be coupled with his justice and mercy. On this sort
therefore let us conceive when we see the Gospel of God and his Church
persecuted and troubled, as now with us it is, that because ye great learned
and wise men of the world use not their wisdom to love and ferue God, as to
natural wisdom and reason he opens him self manifestlye by his visible
creatures: Romans 1.
therefore does God iustlye infatuate and make them folysh, geuyng them up to
vnsensiblenes, especially herein. For on this manner reason they concerning the
affliction which comes for the Gospel: If (say they) this were Gods
word, if these people were Gods children, surely God would then bless and
prosper them and their doctrine. But now in that there is no doctrine so much
hated, no people so much persecuted as they be: therefore it can not be of
GOD. Rather this is of God which our Queen and old Bishops have professed.
For how has God preserved the^ and kept them? what a notable victory has GOD
given unto her, where it was impossible that things should so have come to
pass as they have done? And did not the great Captain confess his fault
that he was out of the way, and not of the faith which these gospellers
profess? How many are come again, from that which they professed to be gods
word? The most part of this realm (notwithstanding the diligence of preachers
to persuade them concerning this new learning, which now is persecuted) never
consented to it in heart, as experience teaches. And what plagues have come
upon this realm sythen this gospel (as they call it) came in amongst us?
Before, we had plentye but now there is nothing like as it was. Moreover all the
houses of the Parliamente have overthrown the laws made for the stablishyng
of this gospel and religion, and new laws are erected for the continuance of
the contrary. How miraculously does God confound their doctrine and confyrme
ours? For how was wyat overthrown? How prosperously came in our King? How
has God blessed our Queen with fruit of womb? How is the Popes holiness
restored again to his right? All these do teach plainelye that this their
doctrine is not gods word. Thus reason the worldly wise which see not gods
wisdom. For else if they considered that there was with us unthankfulness for
the gospel, no amendment of life, but all kind of contempt of God, all kind
of shameless sinnyng ensued the preaching of the Gospel: they must needs see
that God could not but chastise and correct: and as he let Satan loose, Apoc.
20.
after he had bound him a certain time, for unthankfulness of men: so to let
these Champions of Satan run abroad, by them to plague us for our
unthankfulness. Great was gods anger against Achab because he saved Benadad
king of Siria, after he had given him into his hands, 3. Reg. 20.
and afterward it turned to his own destruction. God would that double sorrow
should have been repayde to them by cause of the sorrow they did to the saints
of God. Read the.18. of the revelation.

As for the victory given to the Queen's hyghnes, if men had any godly wit,
they might see many things in it. First god has done it to win her heart to
the Gospel. Again, he has done it, as well because they that went against
her, put their trust in horses and power of men, and not in God, as because in
their doing they sought not the propagation of gods gospel: which thing is
now plainlye seen. Therefore no maruayle why god fought against them: would they
were hypocrites, and under the cloak of the Gospel, would have debarred the
Queen's highness of her right, but god would not so cloak them.

Now for the relentyng, returning, and recantyng of some from that which they
once professed or preached: alas, who would wonder at it? for they never came
to the gospel but for commodity and gains sake, and now for gain they leave
it. The multitude is no good argument to move a wise man. For who knows not
more to love this world, better then heaven: themselves better then their
neighbors. Wide is the gate (says Christ) and broad is the way that leads
to destruction, Math. 7
and many there be that go in thereat. But strait is the gate and narrow is the
way which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. All the whole
multitude cry out upon Jesus, crucify him trusse him up: but (I trow) not
because they were the bygger part, Gene. 12.
therefore they were to be believed. All Caldee followed still their false gods:
only Abraham followed the true god. And where they say ye greater plagues are
fallen upon the realm in poverty and such other things then before, is no
argument to move others then such as love their swine better then Christ. Math.
8.
For the Devil chiefly desires his seat to be in religion. If it be there,
the^ he will meddle with nothing we have: al shall be quiet enough. But if he be
raised thence, the^ will he beg leave to have at our pigs. Read Math. 8. of
the Gergesites. As long as with us he had the ruling of religion, which now he
has gotten again: then was he Robin good fellow: he would do no hurt. But
when he was tumbled out of his throne by preaching of the gospel, then raunged
he about as he has done, but secretly. Ephesi. 2
Finally, effectual he has not ben, but in ye children of unbelief. The^ in
deed has he styrred up to be covetous, oppressors, blasphemours, vseres,
whoremongers, thieves, murderers, tyrannes, and yet perchance he suffered them
to profess the Gospel, the more thereby to hinder it, and cause it to be
slau^dred. How many now do apeare to have been true gospellers? As for the
parliament and statutes thereof, no man of wisdom can think otherwise, but that
look what the rulers will, the same must there be enacted. For it goes not in
those houses by the better part, but by ye bigger pare. And it is a common
saying, and no less true: mayor pars vincit me liore^, the greater part
overcomes the better. 7 John.
So they did in conde^ning Christ, not regarding the counsel of Nicodemus. So
they did also in many general Councils. But al wise men know ye acts of
parliament are not for gods law in respect of gods law, but in respect of the
people. Now what we are god knows, and all the world sees: more meet a
great deal, to have the devils decrees then gods religion: so great is our
contempt of it: and therefore justly for our sins (as Job says) God has set
hypocrites to reign over us, Ioh. 34
which can no more abide gods true religion, then ye Owl ye light, or bleared
eyes the bright Sun: for it will have the^ to do their duties and walk in
diligent doing of ye works of their vocation. If gods word (I mean) had
place, bishops could not play Chau^celors and idle prelates as they do.
Priests should be otherwise known then by their shaven crowns and typets.
But enoughe of this. As for miracles of success against Wyat and other: of the
Kings coming in, etc: I would to god men would consider.ij. kinds of miracles:
one to prepare and confirm men in the doctrine which they have received, and
an other to prove and try men how they have received it, and how they will
stycke unto it. Of the former, these myrabe not, but of the second. Now by this
success given to the Queen. God tries whether we will stick to his truth
symply for his truth sake, or no. This is a mighty elusion which god sends to
prove his people, and to deceive the hypocrites which receive not gods truth
simply but in respect of gain, praise, estimation. Read how Achab was
deceived. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Deuteronomy. 13.

But I will now return to the third commoditye coming by the cross. Here
let us see the wisdom of God in making the wisdom of the world folish, which
knows little of man's corruption how foul it is in the sight of god, and
displeases him: which knows little the portion of gods people to be in an
other world* which knows little the patron of Christians Christ Jesus: which
knows little the general judgment of GOD: the great malice of Satan to
Gods people: Luke 12.
the price and estimation of the Gospel: and therefore in the cross sees not,
as gods wisdom would we should see, namely that god in punishyng them which
sin least, would have his anger against sin seen most and to be better
considered and feared. In punishyng his people here he kyndleth their desire
toward their restfull home. In punishing his servants in this life, he
does conform and make them like to Christ, Phi. 1.
that as they be like in sufferyng, so shall they be in reigning. In punishyng
his church in the world, he does give a demonstration of his judgment which
shall come on all men, when the godly shall there find rest, though now they be
afflicted: and the wicked now wallowing in wealth shall be wrapped in woe and
smarte. In punishyng the proprofessers of his gospel in earth, he sets forth
the malice of Satan against the gospel and his people, Acts. 16
for the more confyrmyng of their faith and the gospel to be gods word in
deed, and they be gods people: for else the Devil would let them alone. In
punishyng the lovers of his truth more then others which care not for it, he
puts them in mind how they have not had in price as they should have had,
the iuell of his word and gospel. Psalm. 119
Before such trial and experience came, perchance they thought they had
believed and had had faith, which now they see was but a lyp faith, a mock
faith, or an opinion. Al which things we see are occasions for us to take
better head, by mean of the cross. Therefore third lie let us consider the
cross to be commodious for us, to learn gods wisdom, and what is man's
folishnes: gods displeasure at sin: a desire to be with god: the conformity
with Christ: the general judgment: the malice of Satan: hatred of sin: the
gospel to be gods word, and how it is to be esteemed, etc. Thus much for this.

Now will I fourthly briefly show you, the cross or trouble to be profitable
for us to learn and behold better, the providence, presence, and power of god,
that all these may be coupled together as in a chain to hang about our necks:
I mean gods justice, mercy, wisdom power, presence, and providence. When
all things be in rest, and men be not in trouble, then they are forgetful of
god commonly, and attribute to much to their own wisdom, polices, providence
diligence, as though they were the procurers of their own fortune and workers
of their own weal. But when the cross comes, and that in such sort as
their wits policies and friends cannot help, though the wicked despair,
run from god to Saints, and such other unlawful means: yet do the godly
therein behold the presence, the providence and power of God. For the Scripture
teaches al things to come from God, weal, and woe: Amos. 3
and that the same should be looked upon as gods work, although Satan the
Devil be often an instrument by whom god works iustlye and mercifully.
Justly to the wicked, and mercifully to the godly: Thren. 3 Esaias 45 Math. 10.
as by the examples of wicked Saul and godly Job, easily we may see gods work
by Satan, his instrument in them both. The children of god therefore, which
before forgatte god in prosperity, now in adversity are awaked to see God in
his work, and no more to hang on their own forecastes, power, friends,
wisdom, riches, etc: but learn to cast them selves on gods providence and
power, whereby they are so preserved and governed, and very often
miraculouslye delivered, that the very wicked cannot but see gods providence,
presence, and power in the cross and affliction of his children, as they (his
children I mean) to their joy do feel it, Esaias. 45. Ose. 1. 1 Reg. 2 Luke. 1.
Psalm. 139 1. pet 5
thereby learning to know GOD to be the gouerner of al things. He it is that
gives peace: he it is that sends war: he gives plenty and poverty: he
sets up and casts down: he brings to death and after gives life: his
presence is every where: his providence is within and without: his power is the
pyller whereby the godly stand, and to it they lean, as to the thing no less
able to set up, then to cast down. Which thing full well the apostle saw in his
afflictions, and therefore rejoiced greatly in the^, 2. Cor. 4
that eminentia virtutis Dei, gods power might singulerly be seen therein.
Concerning this thing I might bring forth innumerable examples, of the
affliction of gods children, both in ye old and new testament: wherein we may
see how they felt gods presence, providence, and power plentifully. But I will
omit examples, because every one of us that have been or be in trouble, cannot
but by the same remember gods presence which we feel by his hand upon us: his
providence which leaves us not unprovided for, without any of our own
provision: and his power which both preserves us from many other evils which
else would come upon us, and also makes us able to bear more then we thought
we could have done. So very often does he deliver us by such means, as have
been thought most folish, and little to have been regarded, and therefore we
shake of our sleep of security, and forgetting of god: our trust and shift in
our own policies: out hanging on men, or on our own power. So yt the cross
you see is commodious fourthly, for to see gods presence, providence and power,
and our negligence, forgetfulness of god, security, self love, trust, and
confidence in our selves, and things in this life to be cast of, as the other
are to be taken hold on. And this shall suffice for the commodities which come
by the cross, wherethrough we may be in love with it for the commodities sake:
which at length we shall find, though presently in sense we feel the^ not. Heb.
12
No castigatio^ or punishment is sweet for ye present instant says the
apostle, but afterward the end and work of ye thing, is otherwise. As we see
in medicines, ye more wholesome yt they be, the more unpleasant is the taste
thereof: as in pills, potions, and such like bitter stuff: yet we will on the
Phisitio^s word drink them gladly for the profit which comes of them. And
derely beloved, although to lose life and goods or fre^des for gods gospel
sake, it seem a bitter and sower thing, yet in yt our physician which cannot
lie, Jesus Christ I mean, does tell us that it is very wholso^, howsoever it be
tothsome, let us with good chere take the cup at his hand and drink it merrily.
If the cup seem vnpleasau^t and the drink to bitter, Exodus 15
let us put some sugar therein even a piece of that which Moises cast into the
bitter water and made the same pleasant. I mean an ounce, yea a dra^me of
christ's afflictions and cross, 1. pet. 4
which he suffered for us. If we call this to mind, and cast of them into our cup
(considering what he was, what he suffered, of whom, for who^, to what end, and
what came thereof) surely we cannot loath our medicine but wink and drink it
lustely. Lustely therefore drink the cup which christ gives and will give
unto you my good brethern and Sisters: I mean prepare your selves to suffer,
whatsoever god will lay upon you for the confessing of his holy name. If not
because of these.iij. things, that ye are not of ye world: ye suffer not alone,
your trouble shall not hurt you: yet for ye commodities which come of ye cross.
I beseech you heartily to embrace it. The fight is but short, the joy is
exceeding great. Oportet semper orare, Luke. 18
we must pray always. Then shall we undoubted lie be directed in all things by
gods holy spirit which christ has promised to be our doctor, teacher and
comforter, and therefore we need not to fear what man or devil can do unto us
either by false teaching or cruel persecution: John. 14 15, 16.
for our pastor is such a one, that none can take his sheep out of his hands.

Thus much, Psalm. 27, Heb. 13 1. pet 2 Ioh. 10 1. pet. 5. Act. 2. Exo. 20
my dear brethern and sisters in our dear lord and savior Jesus Christ, I
thought good to write unto you for your comfort. From the which, if ye for
fear of man loss of goods, friends or life, do swerve or depart, the^ ye
depart, and swerve from Christ, and so snarle your selves in Sata^s sophistry
to your utter subuersio^. Therefore as S. Peter says, watch and be sober, for
as a roaring Lion he seeks to devour you. Be strong in faith, yt is, ma^mer
not nor waver not in gods promises but believe certainly, yt they pertain to
you: yt god is with you in trouble: yt he will deliver you, and glorifye you.
Psalm. 93. Math. 26.
But yet see that ye call upon him, specially, that ye enter not into
temptation, as he taught his Disciples even at such time as he saw Satan
desire to sifte them, Luke. 22.
as now he has done to syfte us. O dear savior prevent him now as thou
dydst then with thy prayer, I beseech thee, and grant that our faith faint
not, but strengthen us to confirm the weak, that they deny not thee and thy
Gospel, 2. Pet. 2 Math. 10. Heb. 6.10. Mar. 8. Luke. i1
that they return not to their vomyte, stumblyng on those sins from the
which there is no recovery, causing thee to deny the^ before thy father, making
their later end worse the^ the beginning: as it chanced to Lothes wife, Judas
Iscariot, Frau^ces Spira, and to many others. But rather strengthen them and us
all in thy grace, and in those things which thy word teaches, that we may
here hazard our life for thy sake, and so shall we be sure to save it: as if we
seek to save it, Math. 6
we cannot but loose it, and that being lost, what profit can we have, if we
win the whole world. Oh set thou always before our eyes, not as reason
does, this life, the pleasure of the same, death of the body, and prysonment,
etc: but everlasting life, and those unspeakable joys which undoubtedly they
shall have, which take up the cross and follow thee, and eternal hell fire and
destruction of soul and body for evermore which they must needs at length fall
into, the which are afraid for the hoare froste of aduersitye that man or the
Devil styrreth up to stop or hinder us for going forward our journey to
heavens bliss, to the which do thou bring us for thy names sake, Amen.

Your own in the Lord, John Bradford.

To my dear friend and brother in the Lord Master George Eaton.
ALmightye God our dear father give to you dailye more and more, the knowledge
of his truth, and a love and life to the same for ever in all things, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

I should begin with thanks geuyng to god, and to you as his steward, for
the great benefits I have oftentimes received from you, and specially in this
time of of my most need, far above my expectation: but because thankfulness
lies not in words or letters, and because you look not to hear of your well
doing of man, I am purposed to pass it over with silence and to give my self
presentlye to that which is more profitable unto you: that is, as god shall
lend me his grace, briefly to labor, or at least to show my good will, to help
you in gods gift to me, as you by your doing the like in gods gift unto you,
have, as already done, so occasioned me greatly hereto. I would gladlye have
done it heretofore, but I have been discouraged to write unto you, least hurt
thereby might come unto you: which is the only cause I have not hitherto
writted, nor now would not have done, but that I stand in adout whether ever
herafter I shall have liberty to write unto you. And therefore whilst I something
may, I thought good to do thus much, to declare unto you, how that, as I
think my self much bound to God for you: so I desire to gratifye the same
as God should enable me.

The days are come and more and more do approach, in the which trial will be of
such as have unfeignedly read and heard the gospel: for all others will abide
no trial but as the world will. But of you because I have better hope, I
cannot but, as pray to god, in him to confyrme you: so to beseech you of the
same. I know it will be a dangerous thing in deed to declare that which in
word you have confessed, and in heart have believed, specially concerning the
papisticall Mass: but notwithstanding, we must not for dangers depart from
the truth, except we will depart from God. For in as much as GOD is the
truth, and the truth is God, he that departs from the one departs from the
other. Now what a thing it is to depart from God, I need not to tell you,
because you know it is no less then a departing from all that good is, and not
only so, but also a coupling of your self to all that evil is: for there is
no mean, either we depart from god and stick to the devil, or depart from
the devil and stick to God. Some men there be, which for fear of danger
and lo^le of that they must leave, when, where, and to whom, they know not,
do deceive them selves after the just judgment of God, to believe the devil,
because they have no lust to believe God, in harkenyng to Satan's counsel of
partynge stake with God: as to be persuaded that it is not evil, or else no
great evil, inwardlye in heart to conceal the truth, and outwardly in fact
to betraye it. And therefore, though they know the Mass to be abomination,
yet they make it but a straw in going to it as the world does: in which
thing the Lord knows they deceive them selves to dampnation, dream they as
they lust. For surely the body departing from the veritye, and so from god,
will draw and drown in dampnation, the soul also. For we shall receive
according to that we do in the body, good or badde. And therefore the matter
is more to be considered then men make of it: the more it is to be lamented.
But I trust (my right dearly beloved) you will consider this with your self,
and call your conscience to account, as gods word makes the charge. Beware of
false Auditors, which making a false charge, can get no quietness of the
conscience after gods word. Therefore cast your charge, and there shall you
see, that no belief of the heart iustifyeth, which has not confession of the
mouth to declare the same. No man can serve.ii. Masters. He that gathers not
with Christ (as no mass seer vnreprouyng it does) scatters abroad. Gods
chosen are such as not only have good hearts, but also kiss not their hands,
nor bow their knee to Baal. Christ's Disciples are none but such as deny
themselves, take up their cross and follow him. He that is ashamed of Christ
his truth in this generation, must look that Christ will be ashamed of him in
the day of judgment. He that denies Christ before men, shall be denied before
God. Now, two kinds of denial there be, yea three kinds: one in heart, an
other in word, and the third in deed. In the which kinds, al mass
gospellers be so bitten, that all the Surgeons in the world can lay no healing
plaster thereto till repentance appear and draw out the matte^ of using the
evil and resorting to the Mass. For pure should we be from all spots, not
only of the flesh, but also of the spirit. And our duty is to depart, not
only from evil, that is, from the Mass. But also from the appearaunce of
evil, that is, from coming at it. Woe unto the^ that give offense to the
children of God: that is, which occasion by any means, any to tarry in ye
church at Mass time, much more then, they which occasion any to come thereto:
most of all they which enforce any thereto. Assuredly a most heuie vengeance of
go^ hangs upon such. Such as decline to their crokednes, God will lead on with
wicked workers, whose portion shall be snares, Psa. 11.
fire, brimstone, and stormye tempests: Whose Palace and home shall be hell
fire and darkness: Whose cheer shall be weping and gnashing of teeth: Whose
song shall be woe, woe, woe, from the which the lord of mercy deliver us.

My dearly beloved, I write not this, as one that thinks not well of you, but
as one that would you did well, and therefore to help you thereto, I write as I
write. Beseching God to open your eyes to see the dangers men be in that
dissemble with God and man, to the end you do not the like: and also to open
your eyes to see the high service you do to God, in aduenturing your self and
that you have for his sake. Oh that men's eyes were opened to see that ye glory
of God rests upon them, that suffer any thing for his sake. Oh that we
considered that it is happiness to suffer any thing for Christ's sake, which
have deserved to suffer so much for our sins and iniquities. Oh that our eyes
were opened to see the great reward they shall have in heaven, which suffer the
loss of any thing for Gods sake. If we knew the cross to be as a purgation
most profitable to the soul, as a purifying fire to burn the dross away of
our dyrtinesse and sins, as an oven to bake us in, to be the Lords bread,
as soope to make us white, as a stewe to mundifie and cleanse us, as Gods
framehouse to make us like to Christ here in sufferyng, that we may be so in
reygning: then should we not so much care for this little short sorrow
which the flesh suffers in it: but rather in consideration of the excedyng
endless joy and comfort which will ensue, we should run fowards in our
race, after ye example of our Captain Christ: who comfort us all in our
distress, and give us the spirit of prayer, therein to watch and pray, that
we be not led into temptation: which God grant to us for ever, Amen.

And thus much I thought good to write to you at this present, to declare my
carfulness for the well doing of you, and all your familye, whom I commend
with you into the hands and tuition of God our Father, So be it.

Your own in the Lord. John Bradford.

An other letter to Master George Eaton.
ALmyghtye God our heavenly father, recompense aboundauntlye into your
bosom (my dearelye-beloued) here and eternallye, the good which from him by
you I have continuallye received, sythen my coming into prison. Otherwise can
I never be able to requite your loving kindness here, then by praying for you,
and after this life, by witnessyng your faith declared to me by your fruits,
when we shall come and appear together before ye throne of our savior Jesus
Christ: whether (I thank god) I am eue^ now a going, ever loking when ye
officers will come and satisfy ye precept of ye Prelates, whereof, though I ca^
not co^plain, because I have justly deserved an hundredth. M. deaths at gods
hands by reason of my sines, yet I may and must rejoice, because ye Prelates do
not persecute in me mine iniquities, but Christ Jesus and his verity: so yt
they persecute not me, they hate not me, but they persecute Christ, they hate
Christ. And because they ca^ do him no hurt (for he sits in heaven and
laugheth the^ and their devises to scorn, as one day they shall feel)
therefore they turn their rage upon his pore sheep, as Herod their father did
upon the infantes. Math. 2. Great cause therefore have I to rejoice, yt my dear
Savior Christ will vouchsafe amongst many, to choose me to be a vessel of
grace to suffer in me (which have deserved so often and justly to suffer for my
sins) that I might be most assured I shall be a vessel of honor, in whom he
will be glorified.

Therefore (my right dear brother in ye lord) rejoice with me, give thanks for me,
and cease not to pray, ye god for his mercies sake would make perfect ye good
he has begone in me. And as for the doctrine which I have professed and
preached, I unto you do confess in writing, as to the whole world I shortly
shall by gods grace in suffering, yt it is the very true doctrine of Jesus
Christ, of his Church, of his Prophets, Apostles, and al good men: so that if
an Aungel should come from heaven and preach otherwise, the same were
accursed. Therefore waver not (dear heart in the Lord) but be confyrmed in it,
and as your vocation requires, when God so will, confess it, though it be
perilous so to do. The end shall euidenlye show an other manner of pleasure
for so doing, then tongue can tell. Be diligence in prayer, and watch therein.
Use reuerente reading of Gods word. Set the shortness of this time before your
eyes, and let not the eternity yt is to come depart out of your memory.
Practyse in doing that you learn, by reading and hearing. Decline from evil
and pursue good. Remember the^ that be in bonds, especially for the Lords
cause, as members of your body and fellow heirs of grace. Forget not the
afflictions of Sion, and the oppression of Jerusalem: and god our father shall
give you his continual blessing, through Christ our Lord, who guide us as
his dear children for ever, Amen. And thus I take my Vale and farewell with
you (dear brother) for ever in this present life, till we shall meet in
eternal bliss: whether our good God and father bring us shortly, Amen. God
bless all your babes for ever, Amen. Out of prison this.8. of Februarye.

Your afflicted brother for the Lords cause. John Bradford

A letter written to his Mother, as a farewell, when he thought he should have
suffered shortly after.
TThe Lord of life and Savior of the world Jesus Christ, bless you and
comfort you, my good and dear Mother, with his heavenly comfort, consolation,
grace and spirit now and for ever Amen.

If I thought that daily, yea almost hourlye you did not cry upon God the
father through Jesus Christ, that he would give me his blessing, even the
blessing of his children: then would I write more hereaboutes. But for as much
as herein I am certain you are diligente, and so I beseech you good Mother to
continue: I think it good to write somethyng whereby this your crying might
be furthered. Furthered it will be, if those things which hinder it be taken
away. Among the which, in that I think my imprisonmente is the greatest and
chiefest, I will there about spend this letter, and that brieflye, least it
might increase the let, as my good brother this brynger can tell you. You
shall know therefore good Mother, He means the danger of more streat
imprisonment that might hereby follow
that for my body, though it be in an house out of the which I can not
come when I will, yet in that I have conformed my will to Gods will, I find
herein lybertye enoughe I thank God. And for my lodging, beddyng, meat,
drink, Godly and learned company, books and all other necessaryes for mine
ease, comfort, and commoditye, I am in much better case then I could wyshe,
and Gods merciful providence here is far above my worthiness. Worthiness quoth
I? Alas I am worthy of nothing but dampnation. But besides all this, for my
soul I find much more commodity. For god is my father, I now perceive,
through Christ: therefore in prisonyng me for his Gospel, he makes me like to
the image of his Son Jesus Christ here, that when he comes to judgment, I
might then belike unto him, as my trust and hope is I shall be. Now makes
he me like to his friends the Prophets, Apostles, the holy Martyrs and
Confessors. Which of them did not suffer, at the least, imprisonmente or
bannyshment for his Gospel and word? Now Mother, how far am I unmeet to
be compared to them? I (I say) which always have been and am so vile an
hypocrite and grievous a sinner? God might have caused me long before this
time to have been cast into prison as a thief, a blasphemer, an unclean
liver, and an heinous offender of the laws of the Realm, but dear Mother,
his mercy is so great upon both you and me and all that love me, that I
should be cast into prison as none of these, or for any such vices: but
only for his Christ's sake, for his Gospelles sake, for his Churches sake:
that hereby, as I might learn to lamente and bewail my ingratitude and
sins: so I might rejoice in his mercy, be thankful, look for eternal
joy with Christ, for whose sake (praised be his name for it) I now suffer,
and therefore should be merye and glad. And in deed good Mother, so I am, as
ever I was, yea never so merye and glad was I, as I now should be, if I
could get you to be merye with me, to thank God for me, and to pray on this
sort. Ah good father which do vouchsafe that my son being a grievous
sinner in thy fight, should find this favor with thee, to be one of thy
Sons captains, and men of war to fight and suffer for his Gospelles sake.
I thank thee and pray thee in Christ's name that thou would forgive him
his sins and unthankfulness, and make perfect in him that good which thou
haste begone: yea Lord I pray thee make him worthy to suffer not only
imprisonmente, but even very death for thy truth, religion and Gospells sake.
As Anna did apply and give her first child Samuel unto thee: so do I dear
father, besechyng thee for Christ's sake to accept this my gift, and give my
son John Bradford grace always truly to serve thee and thy people as
Samuel did, Amen, Amen.

If on this sort Mother, from your heart you would pray, as I should be the
most meryest man that ever was, so am I certain the lettes of your prayer for
my imprisonment, would be taken away. Good Mother therefore mark what I have
written, and learn this prayer by heart, to say it daily, and then I shall be
merye, and you shall rejoice: if that you continue as I trust you do, in Gods
true religion, even the same I have taught you, and my father Traues (I trust)
will put you in remembrance of: my brother Roger also I trust does so daily.
Go to therefore and learn apace. Although the devil cast diverse lettes in the
way, God, in whom you trust, will cast them away for his Christ's sake, if
you will call upon him, and never will he suffer you to be tempted above that
he will make you able to bear. But how you should do herein, the other
letter I have written herewith, shall teach you, This letter comes not to
our hands.
which I would none should read til my father Traues have red it, and he will
give you by Gods grace, some instructions. Now therefore will I make an end,
praying you good Mother, to look for no more letters: for if it were known
that I have pen and ink and did write, then should I want all the
foresaid commodies I have spoken of concerning my body, and be cast into some
dungeon in fetters of iron: which thing I know would grieve you, and therefore
for gods sake, see that these be burned when this little prayer in it, is copyed
out by my brother Roger: for perchance your house may be searched for such
gear, when you think little of it, and look for no more sweet Mother, till
either God shall deliver me and send me out, either you and I shall mere
together in heaven, where we shall never part a sunder, Amen.

I require you Elizabeth and Margeret my sisters, yt you will fear God, use
prayer, love your husbands, be obedient unto them, as God wylleth you: bring
up your children in Gods fear: and be good houswifes. God bless you both,
with both your husbands my good brethren, whom to do good, because I now can
not, I will pray for them and you. Commend me to my sister Anne, Mother Pike,
T. Sorrocold and his wife, R. Shalcrosse and his wife, R. Bolton, I. wild, M.
Vicar, the person of Mottrom, Sir Laurence Hall, with all that love, and I
trust live the Gospel: and God turn Sir Thomas his heart, Amen. I will
daily pray for him. I nedee not to set my name, you know it well enoughe.

Because you should give my letters to father Traues to be burned, I have
written here a prayer for you to learn to pray for me good Mother, and an
other for all your house in your euenyng prayer to pray with my brother. These
prayers are written with mine own hand: Keep them still, but the letters give
to father Traues to burn, and give father Traues a copye of the latter pray.

Another letter to his Mother, as his last farewell unto her in this world a
little before he was burned.
GOds mercy and peace in Christ, be more and more perceived of us, Amen,

My most dear Mother in the bowels of Christ, I heartily pray and beseech you
to be tha^kful for me unto God, which thus now takes me unto him self. I die
not, my good Mother, as a thief, a murderer, an adulterer etc: but I die as a
witness of Christ his gospel and veritye, which hitherto I have confessed (I
thank god) as well by preaching, as by prisonment, and now even presently I
shall most willingly confyrme the same hy fire. I knowledge that god most
iustlye might take me hence symply for my sins (which are many, great and
grievous, but the Lord for his mercy in Christ, has pardoned them all I hope)
but now dear Mother, he takes me hence by this death, as a confessor and
witness that the religion taught by Christ Jesus, the Prophets and the
Apostles, is gods truth. The prelates do persecute in me Christ whom they
hate, and his truth which they may not abide, because their works are evil and
may not abide the truth and light, lest men should see their darkness. Therefore
my good and most dear Mother, give thanks for me to god, that he has made
the fruit of your womb to be a wytnes of his glory, and attend to the truth
which (I thank god for it) I have truly taught out of the pulpit of
Manchester. Use often and continual prayer to God the father through Christ.
Harken, as you may, to the scriptures: serve God after his word and not after
custom: beware of the Romyshe religion in England, defyle not your self with
it: carry Christ's cross as he shall say it upon your back: forgive them
that kill me: pray for the^, for they know not what they do: commit my cause
to god our father: be myndeful of both your daughters to help them as you can.
I send all my writings to you by my brother Roger: do with them as you will,
because I cannot as I would: he can tell you more of my mind. I have nothing to
give you or to leave behind me for you: only I pray God my father for his
christ's sake, to bless you and keep you from evil. He give your patience, he
make you thankeful, as for me so so for your self, that will take the fruit
of your womb to witness his verity: wherein I confess to the whole world I
dye, and depart this life in hope of a much better: which I look for at the
hands of god my father through the merytes of his dear son Jesus Christ.
Thus my dear Mother I take my last farewell of you in this life, besechyng
the almighty and eternal father by Christ, to grant us to mete in the life
to come, where we shall give him continual thanks and praise for ever and
ever, Amen.

Out of prison the.24. of June, 1555. Your son in the Lord, John Bradforde.

To one by whom he had received much comfort and relief in his trouble and
imprisonment.
THe mercy of god in Christ, peculier to his children, be ever more felt of
you, my derely beloved in the lord, Ame^.

When I consider with my self the benefits which God has showed unto me by
your means, if I had so good and thankful a heart as I would I had, I could
not with dry eyes give him thanks: for certainly they are very many and
great. And now being yet still the lords prisoner. I perceive from him more
benefits by you. For the which I think my self so much bound to you, my good
brother (although you were but ye instrument by who^ god wrought and blessed
me) that I look not to come out of your debt by any pleasure or service that
I shall ever be able to do you in this life. I shall heartily pray unto god
therefore to requite you ye good you have done to me for his sake: for I know
yt which you have done, you have done it simply in respect of god and his word.
He therefore give you dailye more and more to be tonfirmed in his truth and
word, and so ple^tifully pour upon you ye riches of his holy spirit and
heavenly treasures laid up in store for you, yt your corporal and earthly
riches may be used of you as sacraments and significations thereof: the more to
desire the one, that is the heavenly, and the less to esteem the other, that
is the earthly. For Satan's sollitation is, so to set before you the earthly,
that therein and thereby you should not have access to the consideration of the
heavenly, but as one bewitched should utterly forgette them, and altogether
become a lover and worshipper of ye erthly Ma^mon, and so to fall to covetousness
and a desire to be rich, by ye means to bring you into many noisome and hurtful
lusts: as now adais I hear of many which have utterly forsaken god and al his
heavenly riches, for Antichrists pleasure and the preserving of their worldly
pelf, which they imagine to leave to their posterity: whereof they are
uncertain, as they may be most certain they leave to the^ gods wrath and
ve^geau^ce, in his time to be sent by visitation, if they in time, heartily
repent not, and prevent not ye same, by earnest prayer. Wherein my good brother,
if you be dilligent, hearty, and persevere, I am sure god will preserve you from
evil and from yelding your self to do as ye world now does, by allowing in
bodily fact in the Romish service, that which the inward cogitatio^ and mind
does disalowe. But if you be cold in prayer and come into consideration of
earthly and present things simply, tha^ shall you fall into faithles folies, and
woundyng of your conscse^ce: from which god evermore preserve you with your
good wife and your babe Leonard and al your family, to yt which I wish the
blessing of God now and for ever, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

I pray you give thanks for me to your old bedfellow, for his great friendship
for your sake showed to me, when I was in the Tower.

John Bradford.

To my dearly beloved Sister Mystres A. VV.
THe everlasting peace of Christ be more and more lively felt in our hearts, by
the operation of the holy ghost, now and for ever, Amen.

Although I know it to be more then needs, to write any thing unto you, good
Sister, being (as I don't not you be) diligently exercised in reading of ye
scriptures, meditating ye same, and hearty prayer to god for the help of his
holy spirit, to have the sense and feelyng especially of the comfortes you
read in gods sweet book: yet having such opportunity, and knowing not whether
hereafter I shall have the like (as this bringer can declare) I thought good in
few words to take my farewell in writing, because otherwise I can not. And now
me thinks I have done it. For what else can I, or should I say unto you (my
derely beloved in the lord) but farewell: Farewell dear Sister, farewell. How be
it in the lord, our lord (I say) farewell. In him shall you farewell, and so much
the better, by how much in your self you fare evil, and shall fare evil. When I
speak of your self, I mean also this world, this life, and al things properly
perteining to this life. In the^ as you look not for your welfare, so be not
dismaide when accordinglye; you shall not feel it. To the lord our god, to the
Lamb our Christ, which has borne our sins on his back, and is our mediator
for ever, do I send you. In him look for welfare, and that without all wavering,
because of his own goodness and truth, which our euilnes and untruth cannot
take away. Not that therefore I would have you to flatter your self in any
evil or unbelief, but that I would comfort you, that they should not dismay
you. Yours is our Christ wholye: Yours I say he is, with all that ever he
has. Is not this welfare trow you? Mountains shall move and the earth shall
fall, before you find it otherwise: say the liar Satan what he list.
Therefore good Sister farewell, and be merye in the Lord: be merry I say, for you
have good cause. If your welfare, joy, and salvation hanged upon any other
thing, then only gods mercy and truth, then might you well be sad, heavy, and
stand in a doubt. But in that it hangs only upon these two, tell Satan he
lies, when he would have you to stand in a ma^meryng, by causyng you to cast
your eyes, which only in this case should be set on Christ your sweet savior,
on your self in some part. In deed look on your self, on your faith, on
your love, obedience etc. to awake you up from security, to stir you up to
diligence in doing the things apperteyning to your vocation: but when you would
be at peace with god, and have true consolation in your conscience, altogether
look upon the goodness of god in Christ. Think on this commandment, which
precedeth all others, that you must have no other gods but the Lord Jehovah,
which is your Lord and god: the which he could not be, if that he did not
pardon your sins in very deed. Remember that Christ commands you to call
him father for the same entente. And hereto call to mind all the benefits of
god hitherto showed upon you: and so shall you feel in very deed, that which I
wyshe unto you now, and pray you to wyshe unto me, farewell or welfare in the
Lord Jesus: with whom he grant us shortly to meet as his children, for his
name and mercyes sake, to our eternal welfare, Amen, Amen,

Your own in the Lord. John Bradford.

An other letter to Mystres A.VV.
ALmighty god our heavenly father for his christ's sake, increase in us faith,
by which we may more and more see what glory and honor is reposed, and safely
kept in heaven, for all them that believe with the heart, and confess Christ
and his truth with the mouth, Amen.

My derely beloved, I remember that once heretofore I wrote unto you a Vale or
a farewell upon conjecture: but now I write my farewell to you in this life in
deed, upon certain knowledge. My staff stands at the door: I continually
look for the Shiriffe to come for me, and I thank God, I am ready for him. Now
go I to practice that which I have preached. Now am I climing up the hill: it
will cause me to puff and blow before I come to the cliffe. The hill is stepe
and high: my breath is short, and my strength is feeble: pray therefore to ye
lord for me, that as I have now through his goodness, even almost come to the
top, I may by his grace, be strengthened, not to rest til I come where I
should be. Oh loving Lord, put out thy hand and draw me unto thee: for no man
comes, but he whom the father draws. Se (my derely beloved) gods loving
mercy: he knows my short breath and great weakness. As he sent for Helias a
f^ry chariote, so sends he for me: for by fire my dross must be purifyed,
that I may be fine gold in his syghte. Oh unthankful wretch that I am: Lord
do thou forgive me mine unthankfulness. In deed I confess (right dear to me
in the lord) that my sins have deserved hell fire: much more then, this fire.
But lo, so loving is my Lord, that he conuerteth the remedy for my sins,
the punishmente for my transgressions, into a testimonial of his truth, and a
testification of his verity, which the Prelates do persecute in me, and not my
sins: therefore they persecute not me but Christ in me, which I doubt not will
take my part unto the very end, Amen.

Oh that I had so open an heart, as could so receive as I should do, this
great benefit and unspeakable dignitye, which God my father offreth to me. Now
pray for me (my derely beloved) pray for me yt I never shrink. I shall never
shrynke I hope, I trust in the Lord, I shall never shrink: for he that always
has taken my part, I am assured will not leave me when I have most need, for
his truth and merties sake. Oh Lord help me: into thy hands I commend me
wholly. In the Lord is my my trust, I care not what man can do unto me, Amen.
My derely beloved say you Amen also, and come after if so god call you. Be not
ashamed of the gospel of Christ, but keep company with him still. He will never
leave you: but in the myddest of temptation will give you an outscape, to make
you able to bear the brunte. Use hearty prayer: reverently read and hear gods
word: put it in practice: look forth cross: lift up your heads, for your
redemption draws nigh: know that the death of gods saints is precious in his
sight: be merry in the Lord: pray for the mitigation of gods heavy displeasure
upon our country. God keep us for ever: God bless us with his spiritual
blessings in Christ. And thus I bydde you farewell for ever in this present
life. Pray for me, pray for me, for gods sake, pray for me. God make perfect
his good work begone in me, Amen. Out of prison this 7. of February.

Yours in the Lord. John Bradford.

To certain godly men relieuers and helpers of him and others in their
imprisonmente.
THe peace of Christ which passes all pleasure and worldly felicity, be daily
more and more felt in your hearts (my right derely beloved in the Lord) by the
inward workyng of the holy spirit, the earnest of our inheritance, and
guider of gods elect: with the which god our dear father more and more endue
us al unto the end, for his beloved sons sake our lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

Praised be god the father of our lord Jesus Christ, which is a father of mercy
and a god of al consolation, that has blessed you with the knowledge and love of
his truth, not only to your own co^fortes, but also the great ease and comfort
of many, which without the help of god by you hitherto, had been in much more
misery. By your releuing the lords prisoners, I am brought to see the rote
whereof the work does spring, even ye knowledge and love of gods truth, wherefore
we are in hands. The which knowledge and love, in that it is a blessyng of all
blessings the greatest (for it is even eternal life. Ioh. 17) I cannot but
praise god for you on this behalf, that it has pleased him to much you worthy
so excellent and singular a benefit: which is more to be esteemed, desired and
cared for, the^ any thing else. The world, for all that ever it has, cannot
attain by any means to this blessing, which God our father has given you
freely of his own good will through christ, eue^ before ye were purposed to
desire it. Therefore I beseech you al to be thankful with me and to rejoice in ye
lord. For if he have given us such a gift unasked, undesired, yea unthought
upon: how can it be ye he will deny us any good thing now, which may be
necessary for us? Will he (trow ye) sow his sede in the ground of your hearts,
and not keep away the fowls from picking it up? would he so bestow his sede in
you as he has, if that he would not hedge in your hearts his field, from
common paths and from breaking in of beasts to destroy it? Will he be more
careless the^ a good husbandma^ to wede out ye wedes which are in us, lest they
should ouergrow the corn of his word? Will not he bestow mucke and marle upon
us, that we may bring forth more fruit? If in a good husbandman this be not
lacking, alas how should we think then but yt ye lord god, a good husbandman
and nothing but good, and only good: how (I say) should it be, but that he is
most careful to keep his sede already sowe^ in your hearts by ye ministry of
us and other his preachers, and that to ye bringing forth of just and full
fruits? He that has bego^ne with you doubt not (my derely beloved) but that he
will happily make an end with you. He has begone to sow his sede in you, as I
dare say ye feel it: be sure the^ that all this will follow: First he will have
Skarecrowes in your hearts: I mean, such sparkcles of his fear will he drop,
yea already he has dropped into you, that ye birds of ye air, vain and evil
cogitatio^s shall not be cherished of you, but expelled, by crieng to ye lord
for his help. Secondly he will make such hedges, as shall keep you as well from by
paths of al evil customs and vsages, as also preserve you from ye power of
evil, and dominion of sin, which would have ye upper hand on you. Thirdly he
will doutles pour such showers upon you to supple you, so ^ede you, so mucke
and marle you by temptation and other exercises, yt the Sunshine of persecution
shall make more to the ripenyng of his seed in you, then to the witheryng of
it away.

These things (my dearly beloved) the Lord god, which has begone them in
you and for you, will continue with you: that in the end you may be brought
into his barn, there to rest with him in eternal felicity. For Gods sake
therefore wait and look for no less then I have told you, at his hands: a
greater service can you not give him. If god keep not ye order I have told you,
but perchance begin to mucke and marle you: to pour his showers upon you:
to nippe you with his weeding tongues, etc: rejoice and be glad that God will
do that in you and with you at once, which a long time he has been a workyng
in and for others. Now undoubtedly great showers are fallen, to supple our
hearts that gods word might enter therein and take root. Now the Lord goes a
weedyng, to weed out of us our carnality, securirye, covetousness, self love,
forgetfulness of God, love of this world. Now the lord does mucke and mar^e us,
loading us with heaps and burdens of crosses, that our hearts might be made
good ground to bring forth fruit to gods glory by patience, as well in
suffryng inward temptations and griefs, whereof we must complayn to the Lord
for his Skarecrowes to drive them forth of us, ^s also in sufferyng outward
assaults: for the which we must cry to our Master for his hedges and defense.
Which has ij. parts: the one concerning us, to help and deliver us: and the
other concerning our, or rather his obstinate adversaries, to take vengeance
upon them: which he will do in his time.

Therefore let us by patience possess our souls, knowing that they which
persevere to the end shall be saved. Let us not be werye of well doing: for in
our time we shall reap the fruits thereof. But rather whiles we have time, let
us redeem it in doing well to al men, but specially to the household of faith.
which thing hither to you have done (the lord therefore be praised, and in the
day of his coming, he recompense you) and in the rest I hope well: I mean,
that you have declared no less in co^fessyng the truth planted in your hearts,
by your words and works after your uocation, to the glory of God. I hope you
have godly behaved your selves, not being as too many be now a days, even
mungrels, giving half to God and half to the world, halting on both knees,
going two ways: I mean it of ye Mass gospellers, which are worse the^ any
papists. In this point I hope well of you (my dearly beloved) that you have not
contaminated your selves, that you have both confessed the truth as often as
need has required, and also have refrayned from coming to church now, where
is nothing but idolatrous service. ^ hope you have glorified god both in soul
and body. I hope you have gathered with Christ and not scattered abroad. I hope
you have drawn no yoke with unbelievers, nor communicated with other men's
sins, but have abstayned from all appearaunce of evil, confessing in heart,
confessing in tongue, confessing in deed and act the true knowledge of God,
which he has of his great mercy given unto you, not to be as a candle under
a bushel, but upon the candlestick, to give light that men may see your good
works and glorify your father which is in heaven. All this I hope of you (my
beloved) and also of al purity of life and godly conversation, not doubting
but in this behalf also, you have declared gods veritye in your heart, and for
the Lords sake do so still in all points: that is, in your vocations be
diligent and ryghteous, toward your selves be sober and pure, toward your
neighbors be charitable and just, toward god be faithful and thankful,
loving and obedient. Use earnest and often hartye prayer. Meditate much upon,
and often hearken to ye word of god. If you be called, give with modestye an
account of the hope which is in you. Be not ashamed of Gods true service:
allow not that with your presence which is contrary to Gods will. Make not the
members of Christ's Church, that is, your selves, members of Antichrists
church. Be not ashamed of ye gospel, or of such as be bound therefore: but
rather be partakers thereof, first inwardly by compassion, prayer, etc: then
outwardlye by giving according to that the Lord has lent you to that end: and
last of all, by suffering with us if God so will, and if it be nedeful for
you. For my dearly beloved, be certain that no man can touch you or lay hands
upon you, but by the will of God, which is all good toward you, even as the
will of a most dear father, which an not always be angrye, or otherwise use
his rod, then only to chastise and correct, not to destroy his children.
Again, be certain that no cross shall come unto you before you need it. For
God is our Physician, and when he sees our souls in peril, he preuenteth
the peril by purgation and ministering Physic, which is the cross. As
therefore for the body, we follow the advice of the Phisicions for ye health
thereof, thankefully using their counsel and obeying their precepts: so for
gods sake, let us for our souls being sick, thankefullye receive the
heavenly Phisicions physic and diet: so shall we wax strong men in GOD and
in his Christ. Which thing I beseech thee O holy spirit to work in us all,
Amen.

My dearly beloved, this have I brieflye written unto you, Phil. 4.
not as one that seeks any gifts, as Paul says, but as one that seeks
aboundaunt fruits on your behalf, and to your commoditye. For it is better to
give then to receive, sayteh Christ by his Apostle S. Paul: who testifyeth
that according to that we sow, so shall we reap. He that sows little, 2.
Cor. 9.
shall reap little: he that sows much shall reap much. Never should we
forgette, how that the Lord Jesus being rich, for our sakes became poor,
that we might be made rich by him. Again, never should we forget that we are
dead to sin, and alive to righteousness. Therefore should we live wholly unto
god and for god, and not for our selves. In all things therefore we must avoid
the sekyng of our selves, as well in doing, as in leuing things undone. If ye
cross come upon us therefore, then are we happy, for the spirit of God and the
glory of God, rests upon us. Therefore rejoice (says christ) for your
reward is great in heaven. Math. 5
In this we are made like to Christ here: therefore we shall be so else where,
eue^ in eternal joy and endless glory. The high way to heaven, you know is
affliccio^: so that all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
persecution. If we were of ye world, the world would love us: John. 15
but we are not of ye world, but bear witness against ye world, and therefore
the world does hate us. But let us rejoice, our lord has overcome ye world.
He suffered out of ye City, beari^g our rebuke, says ye Apostle. Let us then
go out of our tents and bear his rebuke: that is, let us deny our selves,
Heb. 13
take up our cross, which is his also, and follow him. Let us know and esteem
this more riches, the^ all the treasures of ye world, as Moses did. Let us know,
yt he that saves his life, shall lose it. Let us know yt the way to salvation
is a strait way, and a way wherein we can not carye our bags and chestes
with us. Let us know yt no excuse of wife, farm, house or children, will excuse
us. Let us know yt in this case we must be so far from loving father, mother,
Luke. 14*
wife and children, that we must hate the^ and our own selves also. Though this
be a hard saying, yet we must not leave our loades man for a little foul way.
Yea rather we should know in deed, that it is but hard to ye flesh, which, if
she be handled deintely, will be imperious: under must she be kept, that ye
spirit, which is a precious thing in gods sight, may have her commodities. If
we should follow ye fansye of the flesh, we could not please god. Against it
we have made a solemn profession, as also against the devil and the world in
our baptism. And shall we now look for easy things of our enemies? Shall we
not look rather to be hardly entreated of the^? O yt we considered often and in
deed what we have professed in baptism: then ye cross and we should be well
acquainted together. For we are baptized into Christ's death: that is, as to be
pertakers of the benefit of his death, which is remission of sins: so to be
made like thereunto continually by dying to sin. O that we considered what we
be: where we be: whether we are going: who calls us: how he calls us: to
what felicity he calls us: whereby he calls us: then my dear hearts in the
Lord, we should say to al worldly persuasions and persuaders, follow me Satan,
thou seuerest not those things yt be of god, but the things that be of men.
Shall we not drink ye cup which our heavenly father has appointed for us? O
Lord god open you our eyes yt we may see the hope whereunto you haste called us.
Give us eyes of seeing, ears of hearing, and hearts of understanding. In the
favor you bear to thy people, remember us: visit us with thy saving health,
that we may see the good things thou have prepared for thy elect children:
that we may have some sight of thy heavenly Jerusalem, and have some taste of
the swetenes of thy house. O dear father, kindle in us an earneste desire to
be with thee in soul and body, to praise thy name for ever withal thy
saints in thy eternal glory, Amen.

John Bradford

To my dear fathers. D. Cranmer. D. Ridley and. D. Latimer.
Jesus Emanuell. My dear fathers in the Lord, I beseech God our sweet
father, through Christ, to make perfect the good he has begone in us all,
Amen.

I had thought that every of your staves had stand next the door, but now
it is otherwise perceived. Our dear brother Rogers has broken the Ise
valiauntlye, and as this day (I think) or to morrow at the vttermoste,
hartye Hoper, sincere Saunders, and trustye Taylour end their course and
receive their crown. The next am I, which hourly look for the porter to
open me the gates after them, to enter into the desired rest. God forgive me
mine unthankfulness for this exceedyng great mercy, that among so many
thousands, it pleases his mercy to choose me to be one in whom he will
suffer. For although it be most true, that lust patior (for I have been a
great hypocrite and a grievous sinner, the Lord pardon me, yea he has done
it, he has done it in deed) yet, hic autem quid mali fecit? Christ whom the
Prelates persecute, his veritye which they hate in me, This is a singular
mercy of God, to have death which is a due punyshmente for sin, turned into
a demonstration and ^es^fication of the Lords truth.
has done no evil, nor desermeth death. Therefore ought I most hartelye to
rejoice of this dignation, and tender kindness of the Lord toward me,
which uses the remedy for my sin, as a testimonial of his testament, to
his glory, to my everlasting comfort, to the edifying of his Church, and to
the overthrowing of Antichriste and his kingdom. O what am I Lord, that thou
should thus magnifye me so vile a man and myser, as always I have been? Is
this thy wont to send for such a wretch and an hypocrite as I have been, in
a fierye chariot, 4. Regu^. 2
as thou did for Helias? Oh dear fathers, be thankful for me, and pray
for me, that I still may be found worthy, in whom the Lord would sanctifye
his holy name. And for your parts, make you ready, for we are but your
gentlemen hushers. Nuptiae agni paratae sunt, venite ad nuptias. I now go to
leave my flesh there, where I received it. He means that he should be conveyed
by the Queens Guard into Lankeshire to be burnt, as the adversaries had one^
determined: like as ignatius was by a company of soldiers conveyed to Rome,
and cas^ to the Leoperdes. Eccle. hist. Libr. 3. Cap. 36.
I shall be conveyed thither, as Ignatius was to Rome, Leopardis: by whose evil
I hope to be made better. God grant, if it be his will that I ask, it may
make them better by me, Amen. For my farewell therefore, I write and send this
unto you, trusting shortly to see you, where we shall never be separated. In
the mean season I will not cease, as I have done to commend you to our father
of heaven. And that ye would so do by me, I most heartily pray every one of you:
You know now I have most need. But fidelis deus, qui nunquam finet nos tentari
supra id quod possumus. He never did it hitherto, nor now, I am assured, he
will never do, Amen. A dextris est mihi, non mouebor. Propter hoc laetabitur
cor meum, quia non derelinquet animam meam in inferno, nec dabit me sanctum
suum, per gratiam in Christo, videre corruptionem. E carcere raptim, expectans
omni momento carnificem. The. 8. of febr. Anno. 1555.

John Bradford

To the Lady Vane.
Our dear and most meek father, always be with us for his Christ's sake,
and as his children guide us for ever, Amen

Your comfortable and necessary letters last sent to me, right worshipful
and dearly beloved, do deserve at my hands, as other your benefits have
done, that which I can not give. The Lord my God recompense you, as he can and
will undoubtedly. Now am I going to my good father and your father: now am I
going to my Christ and your Christ: now am I going to my home and your home.
I go before but you shall follow: howbeit when or which way, I know not, the
Lord knows. Unto his providence and will, commend your self. For as it can
not but come to pass, so is there nothing so good to us as it is. Happy were
we that ever we were borne, that God might set forth his glory by us, how
soever he do it. Though I am led (as to Peter was said) whether I would not,
yet with me and for me give thanks yt it pleases my father thus to lead me. I
have deserved, yea eue^ since I came into this prison, many a shameful death:
such and so great is my ingratitude and sins. But lo, the tender kindness
of my father does correct me as a child and son, making the remedy for my
sins an occasion of his glory, a witnessing of his verity, a confirmation of
his true religion, heretofore set forth and preached by me. Wherein (good
Madame) persiste and you shall be safe. Be not now ashamed of it, for though it
seem to be overcome, yet by suffering it overcomes: that Gods wisdom, which
is folishnesse to ye world, gods power, which is weakness to the reason of man,
may triumph and confound that which with the world is wise and mighty. Now do
I begin to be Christ's disciple: now I begin to be fashioned like to my
Master in suffering, that so I may be in reygning: now do I for ever take
my farewell of you for this life: now commend I my self into the hands of my
father, by whose providence I came into this world, by whose providence I have
been kept in this world, and by whose providence I do depart hence. And as
his providence is toward me, so doubt you nothing but it is toward you:
though not in such sort exteriourlye, yet in such love, solicitude, and
carfulness for you interiourlye. God, our God, and father of mercy, for the
blood of his Christ, wash away al our sins, comfort his Church, strengthen
the weak, convert or confou^d, as may make most to his glory, his ennemies,
and he with us Emanuell for ever, Amen, Amen.

In haste out of prison the.5. of Febru. 1555. John Bradforde.

To my good brother Augustine Berneber.
Mine own good Augustine, the Lord of mercy bless thee my dear brother for
ever. I have good hope that if you come late at night, I shall speak with you,
but come as secretly as you can. Howbeit, in the mean season if you can, and
as you can, learn what Master G. has spoken to Doctor Story and others. The
cause of all this trouble both to my keeper and me, is thought to come by him. It
is said that I shall be burned in Smithfield and that shortly. Domini voluntas
fiat. Ecce ego domine, mitte me. Ah mine own sweet friend, I am now alone,
lest I should make you and others worse. If I should live, I would more
warely use the company of gods children then ever I have done. Iram domini
portabo, quon^am peccaui ei. Mich. 6.
Commend me to my most dear Sister, for whom my heart bledeth, the Lord comfort
her and strengthen her unto the end. I think I have taken my leave of her for
ever in this life, but in eternal life we shall most surely meet and praise the
Lord continually. I have now taken a more certain answer of death, then ever
I did: and yet not so certain as I think I should do. I am now as a sheep
appointed to the slaughter. Ah my God the hour is come, glorifye thy most
unworthy child. I have glorified thee, says this my sweet father, and I will
glorify thee, Amen. Ah mine own bowels, praise God for me, and pray for me: for
I am his I hope: I hope he will never forsake me, though I have above all other
most deserved it. I am the most singular example of his mercy: praised be hs
name therefore for ever. Cause Mystres Perpoynte to learn of the Shriefe M.
Chester, what they purpose to do with me, and know if you can, whether there
be any writ forth for me. Factus sum sicut nicticorax in domicilio, Psa. 101.
^ passer solitarius in tecto. Ah my Augustine, how long shall Gods enemies
thus triumph? I have sent you this of the baptism of children to write out,
when this is done, you shall have other things. Pray, pray mine own dear
heart, on whom I am bold. The keeper tells me that it is death for any to
speak with me, but yet I trust that I shall speak with you.

John Bradford.

To mine own good Augustine.
Dear brother Augustine, I can not but be bold of you in my need, and
therefore I write as I do. Come hither betimes, I pray you, in the morning, and
use so to do: for then I think you shall speak with me. Also use to come late
in the euenyng, and let me know whether, in the day time I may send for you.
Pray Walshe to steal you in, as I hope he will do. If he do bring you in,
then shall this which follows not need: but doubtyng the worst, this do I
write. First will my man William to make all things ready for me, for I am
persuaded I shall into Lankeshire there to be burnt: howbeit first they say I
must to the Fleet. Then will him to harken earelye in the morning, whether I
be not conveyed away before men beware. Also I pray you, will Robert
Harrington, who I hope will go with me, to look for that journey. Visit often
my dear sister, and although I can not now write unto her, as I would (for all
things are more strange here, and cases more and more perelous) yet tell her
that I am careful for her: desire her to be of good comfort: God shall give
us to meet in his kingdom. In the mean season I will pray for her as my
dearest sister. Of truth I never did love her half so well as I now do, and
yet I love her not half so well as I would do: she is the very daughter of
Abraham. I pray thee hartelye be merye my good brother, and desire all my
friends so to be: for I thank god, I feel a greater benefit then all the
Bishops in England can take from me. Praise God and pray for me, mine own
dear heart in the Lord, whom I hope I shall never forget.

Your poor brother in the Lord. John Bradford.

To certain men, not ryghtly persuaded in the most true, comfortable, and
necessary doctrine of Gods holy election and predestination.
GRace, mercy, and peace, with encreace of all godly knowledge and living, from
god the eternal father of al consolation, through the bloody death of our alone
and full redemer Jesus Christ, by the mighty and lively workyng and power of
the holy spirit the comforter. I wish unto you now and for ever, Amen.

Although I look hourly for officers to come and have me to execution, yet can
I not but attempt to write something unto you, my dearly beloved (as always
you have been, how soever you have taken me) to occasion you the more to wey
the things wherein some controversy has been amongst us, especially the
article and doctrine of predestination. Whereof I have written a little treatise:
therein, as briefly showing my faith, so answering ye enormities gathered of
some, to slander the same necessary and comfortable doctrine. That little piece
of work I commend unto you, as a thing whereof I doubt not to answer to my
comfort before the trubual seat of Jesus Christ: and therefore I heartily pray
you and every of you, for the tender mercies of God in Christ, that you would
not be rash to condemn things unknown, lest gods woe should fall upon you
for calling good evil and evil good. For the great love of god in Christ,
cauil not at things that be well spoken, nor construe not things to the evil
part, when ye have occasion otherwise. Do not suppose that any man, by
affirmyng predestination (as in that book I have truly set it forth according
to gods word, and the consent of christ's church) either to seek carnalitie,
or to set forth matter of desperation. Only by the doctrine of it, I have
taught, as to my self, so to others, a certainty of salvation: a setting up
of Christ only: an exaltatio^ of gods grace, mercy, righteousness, truth,
wisdom, power and glory, and a casting down of man and al his power, that he
that glories may glory only and altogether, and continuallye in the Lord.

Man consists on.ij. parts, the soul and the body, and every man of god
has (as a man would say) ij. men, an outward or old man, and an inward or new
man. The Devils drifte is, to bring the one into a carnalitie, and the other
into a doubt, and so to despair, and hatred of god: but god for remedy hereof,
has ordained his word: which is divided into ij. parts: the one is a doctrine
which demands of us our duty, but gives no power thereto, the other is a
doctrine which not so much demands as gives. The former is called the law,
which has his promises, co^ditionals and comminations, or threats
accordinglye. The other is called the gospel, or rather the free promises
hanging not on conditions on our behalf, but simply on gods verity and mercy,
although they require conditions, but not as hangyng thereon: of which promyses
the gospel may well be called a puplication. The former, that is, the law with
her promyses and comminations, tell man what he is, and show him what he can
do. The later, that is the gospel and free promises, tell and set forth
Christ, and what mercy at Gods hand through Christ, we have offered and given
unto us. The former part serves to keep the old man from carnalitie and
security, and to stir him up to diligence and solicitude. The later part
serves how to keep the new and inward man from doubtyng and despair, and
to bring us in to an assured certayntye and quietenes with God, through
Christ. The old man and the field he rests in, may not be sown with any
other seed then is agreeable to the former doctrine. The new man and the
field he rests in, may not be sown with any other, then is agreeynge to
the later doctrine. By this means man shall be kept from carnalitie, and from
desperation also, and brought into diligence and godly peace of conscience.
It is forbidden in the old law, Deuteronomy. 22.
to sow.ij. kinds of seeds in one field, to wear lynsey wolsey perticotes,
or to eat beasts that did not cleave the hofes. Deuteronomy. 14.
God grant us to be wise husbandmen, to sow according as I have said. God
grant us to be wise tayloures to cut our coats for two men of one whole
clothe, as is declared. GOD grant us to be clean beasts, to cleave the hofes
accordinglye, that is to give the old man meat, meet for the mowers, that is
the law with his appurtenaunces, conditionals, promises, and comminations, and
to give to the new man the gospel and sweet free promises, as appertains:
and then doutles we shall walk in the right high way unto eternal life,
that is in Christ Jesus the end of the law and the fulfyllyng of the
promises, in whom they be yea and, Amen.

If this my poor advise be observed (my dear brethren in the Lord) I
doubt not but all controversies, for predestination, original sin,
freewyll, etc: shall so cease, that there shall be no breach of love, nor
suspicion emonges us: which GOD grant for his mercies sake. I am persuaded of
you, that you fear the Lord, and therefore I love you, and have loved you in
him, (my dear hearts) though otherwise you have taken it without cause on my
part given, so far as I know. For hitherto I have not suffered any copye of
the treatise above specified to go abroad, because I would suppress all
occasions so far as might be. Now am I going before you to my God and your
God, to my father and your father, to my Christ and your Christ, to my home
and your home. I go before, but you shall come after, sooner or later.
Howebeit I could not but before I go, sygnify thus much unto you, as I have
done, that you might see my love, and thereby be occasioned to increase in
love, and learn rather to bear then break. My poor and most dear Sister to
me that ever I had, with who^ I leave this lettter, I commend unto you all and
to every of you, beseechyng you, and hartelye praying you in the bowels and
blood of Jesus Christ, to care for her, as for one which is dear in Gods
syghte, and one which loves you all in GOD, and has done, as I can and do
bear her wytnes: although in the point of predestination, it has pleased
God by my ministerye, to open unto her his truth. Wherein as she is settled,
and I trust in God, confyrmed: so if you cannot think with her therein as she
does, I hartelye pray you, and as I can, in Gods behalf charge you, that you
molest her not, nor dysquiete her, but let love abound, and therein contend
who can go most before. I commend also unto you my good Sister M. C. making
for her the like sure unto you all.

Ah dear hearts, be not faint hearted for these evil dais, which are come to
try us and purify us, yt we may the more be parteners of gods holiness: as to
our selves, so to ye world we shall be beter known. Continue to walk in the
fear of the Lord, as ye have well begone. Keep your selves pure, as I hope you
do, from this rotten Romish, yea Antichristian religion. Reverently read gods
word, thereto joining prayer: that as you hear in readyng god speak unto you,
so in praying you may speak unto him. Labor after your callyngs to help
other. As you have done, do still, and I pray god give you grace to continue,
as I dout not but he will, for his goodness sake. At ye length we shall mete
together in Christ's kingdom, and there never part a sunder, but praise the
name of our good god and father, with the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostels,
Angels, Archaungels, and all the Saints of God. Oh joyful place, oh place of
all places desired. My brethren, I think my self more happy then you, by how
much I am now more nere unto it. Helias chariote I hourly look for, 4 Reg. 2
to come and catch me up. My cloak that is, my carcas, I shall leave behind
me in ashes, which I doubt not, my Lord will raise up and restore to me again in
the last day, glorified even like unto his own most glorious body. The portion
of the good spirit, which my father has lent me, I wyshe, yea double and
treble unto you al. God the father of mercy in the blood of his christ, give to
every of you (my dear hearts) in him, his blessyng, and pour plentifullye upon
you his holy spirit, that you may increase in all godly knowledge and
godliness, to your own comfort and ye edification of many others, Amen. Yet
once more I commend unto you my foresaid most dear and beloved Sister in the
lord: who alwais be unto her a most loving father, spouse and pastor, Amen,
Amen. Out of prison the 16. of February. 1554.

Your own heart John Bradforde.

To True, and Abyngton, with other of their company, teachers and maynteiners
of the error of man's freewyll.
YEt once more beloved in the Lord, before pen and yuke be utterly taken from
me (as I look it to be this after noone) I thought good to write unto you,
because I stand in a doubt, whether at any time hereafter, I shall see or
speak with you: for within this seven night my lord Chau^celour bade look for
judgment. God knows I lie not, I never did bear you malice, nor sought the
hynderance of any one of you, but your good both in soul and body, Read the
1. Cor. 13. chap. and compare these spirits with the spirit of humblenes,
unity and love, which here you se in this man of God, doing good even to his
adversaries, and then judge of them and their doctrine.
as when we shall all appear together before God, I am certain you shall then
know, though now you doubt it, and that causes, I am right well assured. For
mine own conscience can and does bear witness with me, that I never defrauded
you or any of you, of the valewe of one penny or penny worth of any thing, but
have sought with that which has been given, not only in common, but also
unto me and to mine own use, discretion, and distribution: to do you good.
Therefore disdain not the good will of your lover in god. And in hope that you
will not, I have eftsoon eue^ now sent unto you.xiij.s. iiij d. If you need as
much more, you shall have it, or any thing olles I have, or can do for you.
Though in some things we agree not, yet let love bear the bell away, and let
us one pray for another, He means concerning freewyl, original sum,
predestination, etc. wherein they are plain Pelagians and papists.
and be careful one for another: for I hope we be all Christ's. As you hope
your selves to perteyne to him, so think of me: and as you be his, so am I
yours.

John Bradford.

At this letter, these men were so sore offended, because he said he had
hyndered himself to further them, as though be had thereby vpbrayded them: that
in dyspleasure they sent it to him again. Whereupon he wrote unto them as
follows.
HE that seeks not to hinder him self temporally, that he may further his
brother in more need, the same wants true love. I have done, do, and will
(except you refuse it) hinder my self this way that I may further you, and in
deed my self also that way, Though he distributed to them, emo^ges other
prisoners there, not only that which was given in common but also to his own
use: yet they suspected him of evil dealyng. Thus do not they, in whom the love
of God dwells
wherein I desire to be furthered. If I would seek mine own gaynes
temporallye, then could I have taken and used many portio^s of money, which
have been given to me mine own use. I never minded to vpbraide you: but that
which I did write of mine own hynderance, was that you might see I loved you,
and sought your weal, as I do, and will be glad to do it continually. The
lord of mercy has forgeuen us all, wherefore henceforth let us rather bear
then break.

Yours in the Lord. John Bradford.

A letter which he set as a preface before a supplication sent to Queen
Marye, her counsel, and the whole Parliamente: which supplication comes not
yet to our hands.
IN most humble wise complains unto your Majesty and honors, a poor subject
persecuted for the confession of Christ's verity: the which verity deserves at
your hands to be maintained and defended, as the thing, by the which you
reign and have your honor and authorities. Although we that be
professors, and through the grace of GOD, the constaunte confessoures of the
same, are (as it were) the out swepynges of the world: yet (I say) the veritye
it self is a thing not unworthy for your ears to hear, for your eyes to
see, and for your hands to handle, help, and succor, according to that the
Lord has made you able, and placed you where you are, for the same purpose.
Your hyghnes and honors ought to know, that there is no innocence in words or
deeds, where it is enoughe and suffiseth, only to accuse. It behooves kings,
Queen's, and all that be in authority, to know that in the administration of
their kingdoms, they are gods Ministers. It behooves them to know, that they
are no Kings but plain tyrannes, which reign not to this end, that they
may serve and set forth gods glory after true knowledge. And therefore it is
required of the^, that they would be wise, and suffer themselueh to be taught,
to submit them selves to the lords discipline, and to kiss their Soueraign,
lest they perish: as al those Potentates with their pryncipalities and
dominions, cannot long prosper but peryshe in deed, if they and their kingdoms
be not ruled with the scepter of God, that is with his word: which, who so
honors not, honors not GOD, and they that honor not the Lord, the Lord
will not honor them, but bring them into contempt, and at the length take
his own cause, which he has most chieflye committed unto them to care for,
into his own hands, and so overthrow them, and set up his truth gloriously:
the people also perishing with the Princes, where the word of prophecy is
wantyng, much more is suppressed, as it is now in this Realm of England:
over which the eyes of the Lord are set to destroy it, your hyghnes and all
your honors, if in time you look not better to your office and duties herein,
and not suffer your selves to be slaves and hangemen to Antichriste and his
prelates, which have brought your highness and honors already to let
Barrabas lose, and to hang up Christ. As by the grace and help of God I
shall make apparante, if first it would please your excellent majesty, and all
your honors, to take to heart gods doctrine, which rather through the malice
of the Pharisees, I mean the Bishops and prelates, then your consciences, is
oppressed, and not for our contemptible and execrable state in the syghte of
the world, to pass the less of it. For it (the doctrine I mean) is higher
and of more honor and majesty, then all the whole world, It stands
invincible above all power, being not our doctrine, but the doctrine of the
euerlyuynge GOD and of his Christ, whom the father has ordained King, psalm.
72,
to have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the
world. And truly so does he and will the reign, that he will shake all the
whole earth with his iron and brazen power, with his golden and siluery
brightness, only by the rod of his mouth, to shyuers in such sort, as though
they were pottes of clay, according to that which the Prophets do write of
the magnificence of his kingdom. And thus much for the thing, I mean the
doctrine, and your duties to harke^, to propagate, and defend the same.

But now will our adversaries mainly cry out against us, because no man may be
admitted once to whist against them, that we pretend falsely the doctrine and
word of god, calling us the most wicked contemners of it, and heretics,
schysmatikes, traitors, etc. Al which their sayings, how malicious and false
they are, though I might make report to that, which is written by those men
whose works they have condemned, and all that reteyne any of them, publikelye
by proclamation: yet here will I occasion your majesty and honors by this my
writing, to see yt it is far otherwise the^ they report of us. God our
father, for his holy names sake direct my pen to be his instrument to put
into your eyes, ears, and hearts, that which most may make to his glory, to
the sauegard of your souls and bodies, and preservation of the whole realm,
Amen.

John Bradford.

To a faythefull and dear friend of his, entreatyng of this place of S. Paul
to the Romans: The feruente desire of the creature wayteth, when the children
of God shall be delivered.
GRace and peace, with increase of all godlynes in Christ, I wyshe unto you my
dearly beloved.

Because this morning I had some knowledge, more then before I had, how that
my life stood in great danger, and that even this weke, so far as men might
both by the doings and sayings of such as be in authority attempted and
spoken concerning me, judge and perceive: I thought good (my right dearly
beloved in the Lord) to go about somthyng which might be on my behalf, as it
were, Cygnea cantio, That is, which might be a special comfort to him being
the^ ready to be burnt: as the Swannes soung is swetest a little before his
death.
a Swa^nes song, and toward you, both a monumente of the kind of my love,
and also a help or at the least, an occasion for you to profit in that,
which I bear you record you most desire, I mean everlasting life and ye
state thereof. And this will I attempt upon the last talk we had betwixt us,
when you were here with me. I know you have not forgotten yt we talked together
of ye place of. S. Paul to the Romans cap. 8. concerning the groninges of the
Creature and his desire of the revelation of ye children of god. You demand
whether this word Creature was to be understand of man or no: and I told you
that, though some did take Creature there for man, because there is no kind of
creature which may not be acknowledged in man: yet (said I) the text it self
considered with that which the Apostle writes of Christ Ephesians. 1. Col. 1. the
restorer and reformer of all things that be both in heaven and in earth, and
with the argument which. S Paul presentlye has in hand there, does enforce a
Godly mind to take every creature there (as also. S. Chrysostom and. S.
Ambrose do) for the whole world, and every creature both heavenly and
earthly. All things I told you, were made for man, and according to man's state,
so are they. When man was without sin and in gods favor, there was no
malediction, curse or corruption. But when man by sin was cast out of
favor, then was ye earth curse. For ye wickedness of the inhabitauntes,
fruitful lands are turned into salt ground: as for their piety, barreine
countries are made fruitful. Psae. 107. The Angels them selves do rejoice
over one sinner that repents, thereby giving us notice that in their kind
they lament over the impenitent. In readyng the Prophets, you may see how that
all things do depend of man. When they Prophecye any great blessing or plague
to come to gods people, they do communicate the same both to heaven and earth
and to every thing else. As for example, when ye Prophets do foreshowe ye
overthrows of realms and peoples, how do they say yt the whole shape of the
world shall be moved thereat? Look upon Esaias, how he, when he prophecieth the
fall of Babylon, does say yt the stars shall not shine from heaven: the sun
shall be darkened in his rising: the moon shall not give her light. And
afterward he says: I will shake ye heavens and the earth shall be moved out of
his place. Esaias. 13. But the historyes do witness that there are wonderful
chaunges of al creatures both heavenly and earthly in ye overthrows and
destructions of realms and people.

Again, when Esaias does Prophecye of the kingdom of Christ, he does promise
new heavens and new earth, and that so excellent and new, that he shows the
former heavens and earth to be utterly forgotten. Esaias. 63. Whereto the Apostle
agrees, making Christ the repairer of al things in heaven and in earth.
Ephesi. 1. Col. 1. How did both heaven and earth give their service to the
Israelites coming forth of Egipte, as well in preserving them, as in destroying
their enemies: How did the sun shine longer the^ it was wont to do, for Iosue
to overcome his enemies? How did eue^ the very Angels fight for Ezechias
against the Assirians? Read the.30. chap. of Esaias. And behold the history of
Christ: consider how the Angels rejoiced: how the star brought the wise men
to Christ: how the Aungells were ministers unto him in the wilderness: how
the deuilles confessed him. In his death, how did all the whole world show
compassion? The sun was darkened: the earth did quake: the rocks claue a
sunder: the veil of the temple rent a sunder. When he arose, both heaven (for
the Angels with great heavenly brightness appeared) and earth which was moved,
did rejoice: the Angels were preachers of it. In his ascension also: did not a
bryghte cloud receive him and take him up? Did not the Angels testifye of his
return? When he sent the holy ghost and made his new couenaunte of grace, did
not all ye whole world serve thereto by thunder, smoke, fire, earthquake? Now,
how wonderfully they will do their service to Christ, coming to judgment, it
is more plain then I need to rehearse. And in as much as we are the members of
Christ, he being our head, we may sone see how that all things have a certain
compassion with man, and do after their kind, as the Apostle writes, look for
a deliverance from vanitye, which they shall obtain in their restoration. I
therefore told you how yt I do take ye Apostle to mean by every creature
simply, eue^ all the whole shape and creatures in the world. He does attribute
unto them, how that they look for the perfection of our salvation: how that
they are subject to vanity: how that they are subject in hope: how yt they
groan and travel, attributing these things unto the senseles creature, by
translation from man, to signifye the society, cognation, and consent, which
all and every creature has with man: that as every and all things were made
for man: so by the man Christ, al and every thing both earthly and heavenly
shall be restored.

These things you know in effect I spoke unto you, to stir up both my self
and you to a deper consideration of our blessed state, which now we enjoy in
hope, which will never deceive us: the more to occasion us to desire the full
fruition of the same. But I do remember yt you were something troubled with
some doutfulnes hereabout. Therefore I purpose now to write of this matter more
at large, thereby to occasion us both to see better, through ye help of gods
spirit, that which we desire, and I pray God grant unto us both for his
mercies sake: I mean the felicity of his children, and the happy state which
one day in very deed (my dear heart) we shall fully possess, and both together
praise the Lord with all his Saints, world without end, Amen, Amen.

This was your doubt: If so be that.S. Paul did mean by all creatures simply
(as I have spoken) that they shall be delivered from corruption into such a
state as shall adorn the fredome of Gods children: whether that plants,
beasts and other things having life, shall be restored. If yea: then you would
know whether al things that have been, shall be restored also. And after this
you will perchance ask in what place they shall be: what they shall do, and so
forth. As I think upon this matter, and as I am accustomed to answer such
questions coming to me, I will here write for an answer unto you also: not
douting but yt therewith you will be satisfied, because I know your heart is
satisfied with godly and sufficient answers. Thus I think: All and every
creature groneth and traueleth as yet, hoping and loking for my restoration:
for they be subject to corruption for my sins sake: but they al shall be
delivered by my Christ, from the bondage of corruption, the^ when he shall
restore us his members. This will I muse on, and way with my self, yt I may
dulye know, both in me and in all other things, the atrocitie and bitterness
of sin whieh dwells in me, and so may the more heartily give over my self
wholly to ye lord Christ my Savior, yt he may, with what cross soever shall
please him, sley sin in me, and bring me after his own will and way, to
newness of life. Whereunto, that I for my part, may faithfully and withal my
whole heart, do my diligence in mortifying the desires of my flesh, and in
laboring to obey the desires of the spirit, to live a life acceptable to him,
I beseech him of his grace. And yt I may do this cherefully, and continue in
this purpose and diligence, I will fasten my mind, as much as the Lord shall
enable me, to consider this my so great happiness whereunto I shall be restored
in the resurrection: the which resurrection doutles shall be adourned by the
whole shape of the world delivered from corruption. These things will I think
on, these things will I pause on: herein will I, as it were, drown my self,
being careless of this: I mean, what parts of the world ye Lord Christ will
restore with me, or how he will do it, or what state or condition he will give it.
It is enough and enough for me, that I and all the whole world with me, shall be
much more happy the^ now I can by any means conceive. By reason hereof I will
praise and glorifye my Lord, and by his grace I will study to please him with all my heart, with all my soul, with all my strength, singing unto him, that he
both does well and has done and made al things well: to him be eternal glory
for ever. This is my cogitation in this matter, and not mine only, He means
that most godly and learned father M. Martyne Bu^er.
but the cogitation of one which was my father in the Lord, and now, I am
assured, with the Lord at home, where we yet are from home by reason of this
our corruptible habitacles wherein we abide the Lords leisure.

If you would know the reason that moves me to aunsweare as I have done to
the foresaid doubts or questions, it is this. You see yt the Apostle in this
place to the Romans, speaks of the deliverance of every creature from the
bondage of corruption, and yt to the beautifying of the glory of Gods
children. This is so manifest, that no man can well deny it. It is but a
simple shyfte to say that the Apostle does mean in this place by every
creature, man only. He is not wont to speak on that fort. Neither dare I
say that the Apostle speaks here hyperbotically or excessiuely: although
some think so. But as I said, I say again, that the Apostle does here simply
affirm, that there shall be a renouacion and a deliverance from corruption,
not only of man, but also of al and of every part of ye whole world: of every
part (I say) meaning parts in deed, and not such as be rather vices and added
for plagues, then for parts. For by reason of sin* many spots and
corruptions are come into the world, as is all that is hurtful and filthy in
the creatures. Also, all that comes of corruption, as perchance flees,
vermyne, and such like.

This renouation of all things, the Prophets do seem to promise, when they
promise new heavens and new earth: For a new earth seems to require no less
renouation of earthly things, then new heavens do of heavenly things. But
these things the Apostle does plainly affirm ye Christ will restore, even
whatsoever be in heaven and in earth. Col. 1. Therefore me thinks it is the
duty of a Godly mind, simply to acknowledge, and thereof to brag in the
Lord, that in our resurrection al things shall be so repaired to eternity, as
for our sin they were made subject to corruption.

The ancient writers our of Peter, have, as it were, 2. pet. 3
agreed to this sentence, that the shape of this world shall pass a way
through the burning of earthly fire, as it was drowned with ye flowing of
earthly waters. August. de ciuitate dei lib. cap. 6
These be S. Augustines words. Whereto I will add these which he there
writes: the qualities (says he) of the corruptible elements which agreed
with our corruptible bodies, shall utterly be burned with that same worldly
conflagration and burning, as I said: but ye substance it self, shall have
those qualities, which do agree by a marvelous change, to our bodies, that
the world changing into the better, may openly be made mete to man returned
even in the flesh into the better. These be his words. Whereby it is plain,
that this good man did believe that ye elements should be renewed: but of other
things he medleth not, except it be of the sea, by the occasion of that which
is in the Apocalips: howbeit, so he speaks that he can not well tell whether it
also shall be changed into the better, adding these words: but we read yt
there shall be a new heaven and a new earth. For he did understand the place of
Esaias concerning the new heaven and new earth, simply: of other things he
expresses nothing.

But Thomas Aquinas entreats this question more exactly or rather curiouslye,
affyrming the celestial bodies, the elements and mankind to be renewed: but
in no wise beasts plants etc. to be so: and this is his principal reason.
The renouation of the world shall be for man: therefore such shall be the
renouation as shall be conformable to the renouation of man. But the renouation,
of man shall be from corruption to incorruption: from moving to rest: the things
therefore that shall be renewed with man, must be brought also to incorruption.
Now, ye celestial bodies and the elements were made to incorruptio^: the one
wholly and in every part, the other, that is the elements, though in part they
are corruptible, yet concerning ye whole, they are incorruptible, as man is
incorruptible concerning part, that is the soul. But beasts, pla^tes etc. are
corruptible both wholly and in every part: therefore they were not made to
incorruption, and so are they not conformable to the renewing, that is, they
are not receaueable of incorruption, and therefore they shall not be restored.

This reason is true in this part, that it affirms things shall be restored
with man, and with him shall be brought to perpetuity, and as ye Apostle says,
to be delivered from ye bondage of corruption. Again, his reason is true
herein also, that man's reason may sooner be persuaded ye things now partly
incorruptible, shall be restored altogether to incorruptio^. But now to say that
by no reason those things may be brought to perpetuity, which now both wholly
and partly be te^porall and momentane, how can he prove it? in that the nature
and being of all things, depends on ye omnipotency of God, which after his
own pleasure does give to things which he has made, their being, and al is one
to him, to make a thing temporal and to make it eternal. For he made all
things of nothing: and therefore heaven and the celestial bodies have no more
of them selves that they be perpetual, then have those things that last but
a day. Wherefore, this reason which Thomas makes, is not fyrme, in that it
wholye leaves to yt which now seems and appears in things. In deed (as I
said) it has some show or probability, that these things shall be renewed to
eternity for ye glory of gods children, which now somthyng are pertakers of ye
same. But now, seeing that both it which they now have, and also shall have,
depends upon ye beck and pleasure of God, who^ has God made of counsel
with him concerning the renouation of ye world and of al things, yt he can tell
what parts of things and what kinds of things he will renew? Yea even
Aristotle did acknowledge that Physice or natural knowledge, because it brings
his reasons from ye disposition and nature of things, has not full necessity
of his reasons. For nature is nothing else the^ ye ordinary and wo^ted will of
god, as a miracle, porte^t, or monster, is the rare and unwonted will of God. We
say that the nature of stones and al heuie things, is to sink dounward: which
is nothing else but the pleasure of God so depelling them and puttinge them
down, for else of them selves nothing is either heuye or light: all is a
like to be carried downewardes or vpwardes. Who may make God subject to his
work? Can not he that made all things of nothing, give hereafter to the
things that he has made, that whereof now in them selves they have no
capacity?

These things I do therefore rehearse, to ye end I might declare, that when we
dispute what god will do concerning his works, how that it is not seemly for
us to conclude according to that which seems and appears to us in things,
but rather as godliness requires, to refer all things to the will of God.
This will, if it be expressed in holy scripture, then may we simplye determine
yt which we read expressed there. But if it be not so, then ought we freely to
confess our ignorance, and not prescribe to God what he ought to do of his
works, by that which already he has done. God is of power infinite and of
nothing did he not only make al things, but also will do what pleases him
both in heaven and in earth, says David.

The foresaid Thomas brings forth also other reasons, but which he him self
counts not for invincible. One is, if beasts and plants shall be restored,
either all or some shall be restored. If al shall be restored, then must ye
resurrection be communicate unto them, that ye same in number be restored:
which is not convenient. If some shall be restored, there appears no reason
why these should be restored more then other: therefore says he, they shall
not be restored. But here, what would he answer, if one should ask him how
he knows it is not convenient that either al in number be restored, as man
shall arise, either only some, in ye this thing wholye rests in the hand and
will of God? An other reason he makes out of Aristotle, and out of a ground
which is uncertain. Aristotle affyrmeth the perpetuity of things to hang on
the continual moving of heaven. Thomas now hereto gathers thus: but the
moving of heaven shall cease: therefore he concludes that in these inferior
things no perpetuity may be looked for. But here, what answer will he make,
if a man shall say that all things hang at the beck and pleasure of God, who
now for the conservation of his creatures, which now arise and spring, and
now dye and fall down: uses the mouyng of heaven, and can afterward not
use it for this purpose? This is a truth, that all things of them selves are
nothing: much more then can they not do any thing. Now, men may conjecture
that the mouyng of heaven shall cease, but yet by ye certain word of God, they
can not prove it. In like manner is his last reason which he makes of the
end of beasts and plants, but which end he knows not. Beasts and plants
says he, were made for the sustentation of the mutual life of man, but this
life shall cease, therefore shall they also. But here has he no aunsweare if a
man should demand, who knows whether GOD have made them to none other end
or use?

Seeing therefore these things be as you see, I suppose it not to pertayne to a
godly man, to deny the beasts and pla^tes to be restored, in that the Apostle
does here expressly say, that every creature which is now subject to vanity,
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of
the children of god. In that ye holy ghost does affirm this of every creature,
by what reason dare a godly mind exempt any part from this deliverance to come?
Howbeit, neither will ye Godly mind contend whether every creature shall be
renewed. For the holy ghost spoke of the creature generally, and not
perticulerly, and therefore we may not otherwise affirm, because we must not
speak but gods word. Therefore it is the part of a godly man, and of one
that hangs in all things upon the word of god, to learn out of this
place, that whatsoever corruption, death, or grief he sees in any thing,
wheresoever it be, that (I say) he ascribe that wholye unto his sins, and
thereby provoke himself to true repentance. Now as soon as that repentance
compels him to go to Christ, let him think thus: but this my Savior,
and my head Jesus Christ did for my sins, and therewith, as he took away
death, so has he taken away all the corruption and labor of all things, and
will restore them in his time, whether so ever they be in heaven or in earth.
Now every creature trauayleth and groneth with us, but we being restored, they
also shall be restored. There shall be new heavens, new earth, and all things
new,

Thus I wyshe that our minds might stay in this generalitye of the renouation
of the world, and not curiously to search what parts of the world shall be
restored, and what shall not, or how al things shall be restored: much more then
I would not have us curious nor inquisitiue of their place where they shall be,
of their action what they shall do, or of their properties and such like. For
if, to have fore known these things, would have made much to godliness,
surely the holy ghost would most plainly have told them. For according to
christ's promise he brings us into all truth, all truth (I say) such as the
knowledge of it would profit us. All the scripture is given to us for this
purpose that ye man of god might be made perfect, and enstructed to al good
works: and truly that can be no good work, which we do, except god teach us
the same. He has prepared the good works wherein we walk. Ephesi. 2 But the
certain and bottomless fountain of these good works is, in all things to
hang on the beck and pleasure of god, and through our Lord Jesus Christ, to
look for, with remission of sins, life everlasting, and the glory of the
resurrection. To the end therefore that we may more fully know our sins,
and more make of our redemption from them by Christ: let us set before our
eyes, death the hyre of sin, and that not only in our selves, but also in
every creature of the world. Howbeit, this let us do with a hope of so ample a
restoration, and never enough to be merueled at, which shall be even in all
things for our renouation by the Lord Jesus Christ the renewer of all things
whatsoever be in heaven or in earth.

He that with true faith wayeth and co^sidereth these things, will be (as it were)
swallowed up in the admiration of so excedyng great benevolence and love of God
our heavenly father, that he can never admit to yield to this curiosity of
searchyng what kind of things shall be renewed, and how they shall be renewed,
or what state or condition they shall be in when they are renewed. These be
things of the life to come, whereof this foreknowledge is sufficient that all
these things shall be more perfect and happy, the^ the reach of reason is
hable to look upon the glory of them. For the eye has not seen, nor the ear
has heard, nor it cannot ascend into man's heart, that God has prepared for
them that love him. For concerning our resurrection, what other thing do we
know before hand, but that we shall be most happy? even so therefore let us not
doubt but that there shall be a deliverance of the creature from the servitude
of corruption. And let us consider these things so, that we wholly may bend
our selves to put away all the oldenes of our flesh, whence in deed corruption
and death does come, and that we may provoke our selves to the newnes of the
spirit and the life of Christ, wherein is all incorruption and the true taste
of the resurrection: for to this end the holy ghost did write this by the
Apostle. That therefore this spirit might lead us hereunto, let us pray, and
then we shall understand this place of Paul with profit.

If perchance it will move you that the Apostle speaks not of this
delyueraunce of the creature from corruption, in any other place but here,
neither any other holy writer: I would you would think that the misery of
the restoration of Israel, also of Antichrist, is not expounded but in the
Apostels writyngs, and that but in one place: yea the manner of our
resurrection is not written but in.ij. places. We ought to know that they are
the words of the Lord, what soever the Apostle has left to us written.
Again, ye simplicity of this place Romans 8 is plain. And thus (my dearly
beloved) I have written to you so much as I think is sufficient about this
matter, and therefore need not to tarry herein any longer, or to spend any more
time about the answeryng of that which is but curiositye. God our father give
us now his holy spirit to lead us into this and all other necessary truth,
in such sort that we may have a lively feelyng of eternal life begone in us:
that we may become first new, and so look for new heaven and earth, wherein
ryghteousnes dwells: which God impute to us and begin in us for his
Christ's sake, Amen, Amen.

Your own for ever in the Lord. John Bradford.

Certain letters of master Thomas Whyttel, a godly and a faythefull Minyster
and preacher of gods word, who after he had relented by the tyranny and cruel
dealyng of Bonner, returned again with great constancye, and stood to the
defense of the truth unto the fire. The.12. of January. In the year of our
Lord. 1556.
To my beloved friend and faithful Brother in Christ, John Careless prisoner
in the Kings Benche.
THe peace of god in Christ be with you continually, dearly beloved brother in
Christ, with the assistaunce of gods grace and holy spirit, to the workyng
and performyng of those things, which may comfort and edifye his church (as
ye daily do) to the glory of his name, and the increase of your joy, and
comfort of soul in this life, and also your reward in heaven with Christ our
captayn, whose faithful soldier you are, in the life to come, Amen.

I have greatly rejoiced (my dear heart) with thanks to god for you, since I
have heard of your faith and love toward god and his saints, with a most
godly ardent zeal to the verity of Christ's doctrine and religion, which I
have heard by the report of many, but specially by the declaryng of that
valiant captain in Christ's church, that stout cha^pion in gods cause, that
spectacle to the world, I mean our good brother Philpot, who now lies under
the aultare, and swetely enjoys the promised reward. And specially I and my
condemned fellows give thanks to God for your loving and comfortable letter
in the depenes of our trouble after the flesh, sent unto us to the
consolation of us al, but most specially to me most sinful myser on mine own
behalf, but happy (I hope) through godslouing kindness in Christ showed unto
me: who suffered me to fainte and fail through humayne infirmity, by the
workyng of the Archenemye in his sworn soldiers the bishops and priests. In
whom so lively appears the very visage and shape of Satan, that a man (if
it were not prejudice to gods word) might well affirm them to be Devils
incarnate, as I by experience do speak. Wherefore, who so shall for conscience
matters, come into their hands, had need of ye wilines of ye Serpent to save
his head, though it be with the woundyng of his body: and to take diligent head
how he consents to their wicked writyngs, or sets his hand to their
couenau^tes. Sore did they assault me, and craftelye tempte me to their wicked
ways, or at least to a denegation of my faith and true opinions, though it
were but by color and dissimulation: and (alas) somethyng they did prevail.
Not that I any thing at all lyked their opinions and false papisticall
religion, or else doubted of the truth wherein I stand, but only the infirmity of
the flesh begyled me, desiryng lyberty by an unlawful means. God lay it not
to my charge at that day, and so I desire you heartily to pray. How be it,
uncertain I am whether more profit or disprofite came thereby: profit to me, in
that god suffered Satan to buffit me by his foresaid ministers of myschiefe,
showing me mine infirmitye, that I should not boste nor rejoice in my self,
but only in the Lord. Who when he had led me to hell in my conscience, through
the respect of his fearful judgments against me for my fearefulnes,
mistrust, and crafty clokyng in such spiritual and weighty matters (in the
which mine agony and distress, I found this old verse true, Non patitur ludum
fama, fides, oculus) yet he left me not there, but brought me from thence
again, to the magnifieng of his name, suspectyng of flesh and blood, and
consolation of mine own soul, and also that I might feel the disprofite in
offending the congregation of god, which peradventure will rather adiudge my
fall to come of doutfulnes in my doctrine and religion, the^ of humain
imbecility. Well, of ye importune burden of a troubled conscience for denying
or dissembling the known verity, I by experience could say very much more,
which perhaps I will declare by writing to the warnyng of other, if god grant
time: for now am I and my fellows ready to go hence, even for Christ's cause:
Gods name be praised, who has hitherto called us. Pray, I pray you, that we
may end our course with joy, and at your appointed time, you shall come after.
But as the Lord has kept you so will he preserve your life still, to the
intent you should labor (as you do) to appease and convince these ungodly
contentions and controversies which now do to much reign, brauwlyng about
terms to no edification. GOD is dishonored, the church disquieted, and
occasion to speak evil of the Gospel ministered to our adversaries. But such
is the subtilty of Satan, that whom he cannot win with gross idolatrye in
open religion, them he seeks to corrupt and deceive in opinions, in a private
profession.

But here I will abrutply leave, least with my rudenes and symplicity, I should
be tedious to you, desiring you (my loving brother) if it shall not seem grievous
unto you, to write unto me and my fellows yet once again, if you may have
leisure, and we time to the same, and send me word if you can hastily.
Provide me Master Philpots.ix. examinations for a friend of mine, and I shall
pay you therefore, by the leave of almighty GOD our heavenly father, who
corrects all his dear children in this world, that they should not be
damned with the world, and tries the faith of his saints through many
tribulations, that being found constant to the end, he may crown his own
gifts in them, and in heaven highly reward the^. Whether I trust to go before,
loking for you to follow (my faithful friend) yt we may sing perpetual praise
to our loving Lord god, for victory over Satan and sin, won for us by
Jesus christ God and man, our only sufficient savior and advocate, Amen.
Farewell, and pray in faith.

Yours Thomas Whittell Minister, and now condemned to dye for the Gospels sake.
Anno 1555. January. 21.
To my dear friend and brother Thomas Went and other his prison fellows in
Lollardes Tower.
HE that preserved Joseph prisoner in Egypt, Act. 16
fed Daniel in the Lions den, and delivered Paul, Peter, and the other
Apostels out of prison: vouchsafe of his goodness to keep, feed, and deliver you
my good brother Went, with the other our fellow soldiers, your prison
fellows, as may be most to his glory, to your consolation and the edification
of his church.

I cannot but praise god most earnestly, when I hear of your constancy in the
faith and joy in the cross of christ, which you now bear and suffer together,
with many other good members of Christ: 2 Thessalonians. ^
which is a token that by Christ ye are counted worthy the kingdom of God, as
Paul says. And though the world counts the yoke and cross of Christ as a
most pernicious and hurtful thing, yet we which have tasted how friendly the
Lord is, cannot but rejoice in this persecution as touching our selves, 1. pet.
2
in as much as the cause for the which we suffer is the lords cause, and not
altogether ours: at whose hand, if we endure to the end, we shall receive
through his liberal promise in Christ, not only a great reward in heaven,
but also the kingdom of heaven it self, and also in the mean season be sure to
be defended and cared for, so that we shall lack no necessary things, Math. 10
neither a hear of our heads shall perysh without his knowledge. O what is he
that would mystrust, or not gladlye serve so loving a father? O how unhappy
are they that forsake him and put their trust in man? But how blessed are
they that for his love and for his holy words sake, in these troublesome
days, 1. pet. 4
do commit their souls and bodies into his hands with well doing, counting
it greater happiness and riches to suffer rebuke with Christ and his church,
Heb. 11
then to enjoy ye pleasures of this life for a little short season? This cross
yt we now bear, has been common to all the faithful from Abel hitherto, and
shall be to ye end, for because ye devil having great wrath against god and his
Christ, Apo. 12
cannot abide that he should for his manifold mercies be lauded and magnified,
and Christ to be taken and believed upon for our only and sufficient redemer,
Savior, and advocate. And therefore, because will not deny Christ, nor
dissemble with our faith, but openly proteste and profess the same before the
world: he seeks by all means to stir up his wicked members, to persecute
and kyl the bodies of the true christians: Apo. 2. psalm. 115,
as John says, the devil shall cast some of you into prison. And David
says, I believed, and therefore have I spoken, but I was sore troubled. This
notwythstandyng, go forward dear brethren, as ye have begone, to fight the
lords battle, considering Christ the captain of your war, who will both fight
for you, give you victory, and also highly reward your pains. Consider to your
comfort, the notable and chief shepehards and soldiers of Christ, which are
gone before us in these days, I mean those learned and godlo bishops,
doctors, and other ministers of gods word: whose faith and examples we that
be inferiors ought, to follow, Heb. 13
as Paul says. Remember them that have declared unto you the word of god, the
end of whose conversation see that ye look upon, and follow their faith. The
grace and blessyng of God, with the ministry of his holy Angels, be with you
for ever, Ame^. All my prison fellows great you.

From the Colebouse this this.4. of December. By your poor brother Thomas
Whittell, an unworthy minyster of Christ, now his prisoner for the gospels
sake, Amen.

To all the true professors and lovers of Gods holy Gospel within the City
of London.
Romans 4. Luke. 1.
THe same faith for the which Abraham was counted rightuous, and Mary blessed,
ye Lord god increase and make stable in your hearts, my dear and faithful
brethren and Sisters of London, for ever and ever, Amen.

Dearly beloved, be not troubled in this heat which is now come amongs you to
try you, 1. Pet. 4.
as though some strange thing had happened unto you, but rejoice in as much as
ye are pertakers of Christ's passions, yt when his glory appears, ye may be
merye and glad etc. Out of these words of S. Peter, I gather most specially
these.4. notes. First ye persecution happens to Christ's church for their
trial, that is, for ye probation and prose of their faith. Which faith, like
as it is known with god in the depth of our hearts, so will he have it made
manifest to ye whole world through persecution, that so it may evidently appear
yt he has such a church and people upon earth, which so trusts in him and
fears his holy name, yt no kind of persecution, pains, Romans 8. Gene. 22.
Job. 1
nor death shall be able to separate the^ from ye love of him. And thus was
Abraham tried and Job tempted, yt their faith which before lay hyd almost in
their hearts, might be made known to ye whole world to be so steadfast and
strong, that ye devil, natural love, nor no other enemy could be able to
bereue the^ thereof: whereby also god was to be magnifyed, who both tries his
people by many tribulatio^s, and also stands by the^ in ye midst of their
troubles to deliver the^ by life or death, as he sees best: like as he
assisted Loath and delivered him out of his enemies hands, Romans 9. 2 Cor. 11.
Aect. 16. Genesis. 4. 2. Macb. 6. Aect. 7. Matthew. 27. James. 4.
Joseph out of the hands of his brethren and out of prison, Paul from his
enemies in Damasco, and the Apostles out of ye stocks and prison. These with
many mo he delivered to life: and also he delivered Abel, Eleazar, Steue^, and
John Baptist, with other many by death, and has also by ye trial of their
faith made them good presidents and examples to us and all that come after, to
suffer affliction in ye like cause, as s. James says. Take, my brethren, says
he, the Prophets for an ensample of suffering adversity and of long patience,
which spoke unto you in ye name of the Lord: behold we count the^ happy which
endure. Y e have heard of the patience of Job, and have known what end the
lord made with him, for the lord is very pitiful and merciful. Also ye lord
tries us, to let us see our own hearts and thoughts, yt no hypocrisy nor
ambition deceive us, and that ye strong in Christ may pray that he fall not but
endure to ye end, and that those that fall through fearful infirmity, might
spedely repent and rise again with Peter, and also yt the weak ones might
bewail their weakness, and cry with David: have mercy upon me O lord, Psalm.
6.
for I am weak, O lord heal me for all my bones are vexed. Of this opening
of ye heart by persecution, spoke holy Simeo^ to Marye Christ's Mother when he
said, Luke. 2.
the sword, that is, the cross of persecution shall pearse thy soul that the
thoughts of many hearts may be opened. For like as a King that should go
to battle, is compelled to look in his cofers what treasure he has, and also
what number and puisaunce of men and weapons, so that if he see himself
vnreadye and unarmed to bycker with his enemy, he surceaseth and takes truce
for a time: even so we by persecutions have our hearts opened that we may
look therein to see what faith in Christ we have, and what strength to
wythstande the enemies and to bear the cross, that if we be rich in these
treasures, we might rejoice and valiauntlye go to battle, or if we want
these things, with all speed to call and cry upon him, which gives all
good gifts to those that ask them. Item the cross tries the good people
from the badde, the faithful from the worldlings and hypocrites, and also
cle^seth and scoureth the faithful hearts from al corruption and filthynesse
both of the flesh and the spirit. And eue^ as an iron, except it be often
scoured, will sone wax rustye: so except our sinful hearts and flesh be often
scoured with the whetstone of the cross, they will sone corrupt and ouergrow
with the rust of al filthynesse and sin. And therefore it is mete and good for
us (as the wisma^ says) yt as gold and silver are tried in the fire, Sirach. 2.
so should the hearts of acceptable men be tried in the furnace of adversity.
Abide the trial (dear friends) that ye may obtain ye crown of life. Fight
manfully in this the Lords cause, yt ye may obtain a glorious victory here,
and receive a great reward in heaven hereafter. As ye are called Christians,
and would be angrye to be called Jews or Turks, so declare your christianitye
by followyng the steps of Christ, whose name ye bear: suffer with him and
for his Gospelles sake, rather then to deny him or to defyle your faith and
conscience with false worshippyng or Romyshe religion. Take up your cross
(my dear hearts) now when it is offered you, and go up with Christ to
Jerusalem amongst the Bishops, Priests, and rulers (if GOD call you
thereto) and they will anon send you to Caluarye: from whence (dying in the
cause of the Gospel, wherein our good preachers and brethren have given their
lives) your souls, I warrant you, through Christ Jesus, Eccle. 12.
shall ascend to GOD that gave them, and the body shall come after at the
last day, and so shall ye dwell with the Lord for ever in unspeakable joy
and bliss. O blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake,
as Christ's people in this Iewyshe England now does, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. O my beloved, set your minds on this kingdom where
Christ our head and King is, considering that as the brute beast looks
downewardes with the face toward the earth, so is man made contrary wise
with his face looking vpwardes toward the heavens, because his conversation
should be in heaven and heavenly things, and not upon the earth and earthlye
chynges, Col. 3
as Saint Paul says: set your minds on things which are are above where
Christ is. And again he says, phil. 3.
our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for our Savior, who will
change our vile bodies and make them like to his glorious body. Oh the
glorious estate that we be called unto: the Lord preserve us blameless to
his eternal kingdom through Christ Jesus our Lord, Amen.

The second thing that I note in the foresaid words of Peter, is, that he
calls persecution no strange thing. And truth it is: for which of the
Prophettes were not persecuted with Christ and his Apostles, and some of them
in the end cruellye killed for the truths sake? Caine killed Abell, Isaac was
persecuted of Ismaell, 3. Regum. 4. Regum.
Jacob was hated of Esau, Iosephe was prysoned and set in the stocks, The
Prophette Esaye was cut in two with a saw, Ieremye was stoned, Micheas was
buffeted and fed with bread and water, Helias was sore persecuted, Eleazer,
and the woman with her seven sons were cruellye killed. 2. mac. 6.7
What Christ and the Apostles suffered, it is well known: so that by many
tribulations (as Paul says) we must enter into the kingdom of heaven. Act.
14,
All the holy Prophettes, Christ and his Apostles suffered such afflictions,
not for euel doing, but for preachinge Gods word, for rebukyng the world of
sin, and for their faith in Jesus Christ. This is the ordinance of GOD (my
friends) this is the high way to heaven, by corporal death to eternal life:
John. 5.
as Christ says, he that hears my words and believes in him that sent me,
has eternal life, and shall not come into judgment, but is escaped from death
to life. Let us never fear death, which is killed by christ, but believe in him
and live for ever, Roman. 8.
as Paul says: there is no damnation to them yt are in christ Jesus, which
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. 1. Corin. 15.
And again, Paul says: Death where is thy sting? Hell where is thy victory?
Thanks be to god which has given us victory through Jesus Christ. Besides
this, ye have seen and daily do see the blood of your good preachers, and
brethren which has been shed in the gospels cause in this sinful Sodom, this
bloody Jerusalem, this unhappy city of London. Let not their blood be
forgotten, nor ye blood of your good bishop Ridley, who like a good shepeherd,
to your comfort and example, has given his life for his sheep. S. Paul says,
remember them yt have spoken to you the word of god, John. 10. Heb. 13
and look upon ye end of their conversation, and follow their faith. The devil
ever stirs up false teachers, as he has done now over al England, 2. peter.
2. 1. Timot 4. 2. Timo. 3. Jude. 1.
as Peter, Paul, and Jude prophesied it should be, to poison and kill our souls
with false doctrine. And where he fails his purpose that way, then moves he
his members to persecute ye sely carcases of the Saints, because they will not
deny nor dissemble their pure faith in our living Christ, and confess a dead
bready christ, and honor the same as Christ god and man, Exodus 20. 1. John. 5.
2. Corin. 10
contrary to gods commandments. This is the working of Satan, who knowing
his own just da^pnation, would al mankind to be pertakers with him of the same:
such a mortal hatred bears he against god and his people. Matthew. 4.
And therefore when this wicked tempter could not kill Christ with suttel
temtation to fall down and worship him, the^ he stirred up his servants the
bishops and Pharisees to kill his body, whereby notwithstanding the devil lost
his title and enterest which he had to man's soul, and man by his precious
passion and death was raunsomed from ye devil, death and hell, to immortality
and life everlasting: and so when Satan thought to have won all in kylling
of Christ he lost all, and so shall he do in us if we abide constant and strong
in the faith of our lord and Savior Jesus Christ unto the end. God grant it,
for his mercyes sake in Christ: blessed are al they that put their trust in
him, Amen.

Wherefore (my heartily beloved brethren and sisters) be of good comfort through
Jesus Christ, for he yt is in us, is stronger the^ he that is in the world.
Therefore draw ye nere to god, James. 2
and he will draw nere to you. Resist the devil and he will (as James says) flee
from you. Beware of the leue^ of the Pharisees. Math. 16.
Touch not pitche, least ye be defiled therewith. Eat no swynes flesh, for it
is against ye law: I mean defyle not your selves neither inwardly nor
outwardly with this false and wicked religion of Antichrist: for it is nothing
else but pitch, Apo. 13.14. Apo. 18 2. Cor. 6.
and swynes flesh. Beware of ye beasts mark, lest ye drink of the cup of
gods wrath. If god have given you knowledge and faith, disse^ble not therewith.
Deny not the known verity before men, lest Christ deny you before his father.
Come away from Babylon, as John bids you, and touch no unclean thing, but
separate your selves from the company of the ungodly, as Paul commands you.
What soever ye have done amysse heretofore, now repent and amend, psalm. 129.
for with the lord there is mercy and plenteous redemption.

The third thing and note which I gather out of ye foresaid words of Peter, is
this, yt he says rejoice because ye are pertakers of Christ's passions. Our
sufferings (my well-beloved) are christ's sufferings: and that injury yt is done
to us for his sake, he rekoneth it to be done to himself: as he said to Paul,
Act. 9.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest you me? Col. 1.
Therefore we ought to rejoice in our sufferings, as Paul writes, which we
suffer with Christ and one with an other, as Peter says, and so to fulfill yt
which is behind of ye passions of Christ in our flesh: which Christ has by
his passion, fully redeemed and saved us in his own person: howbeit his elect
must suffer with him and for him unto the worlds end, Mat. 5.
that he may be glorified in the^ and they thereby corrected and cleansed from
sin in this world, and be made more mete temples for the holy ghost, and also
obtain a great reward in heaven for their suffering for righteousness sake,
according to his promise. And therefore I say (my brethren) rejoice in the lord
always, and again I say rejoice. Let us rejoice in the cross of our lord
Jesus Christ, Phil 3. Galat. 6.
whereby the word is crucified to us and we to it. And why should we so greatly
rejoice in the cross of Christ, which we now suffer? Because (says Peter)
when his glory appears, we may be merry and glad. And this is ye fourth note
yt I gather out of his words above written: Wherein is set out ye reward of
suffering, not to be had in this world, but at his coming to judgment when we
shall be raised again, and then shall they that have sown in tears, reap in
joy, as christ says: blessed are they that weep here, for they shall laughe.
Blessed are ye when me^ hate you, and thrust you out of their company, railing
on you, and abhorring your name as an euel thing for the son of ma^s sake,
Luke. 6
rejoice ye in that day and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven.

Wherefore (my dearly beloved) through hope of this heavenly joy and reward, 1.
Cor. 2. Heb. 12
which he that ca^ not lie has promised (which joy is so great yt no ear has
heard, no eye has seen, nor the heart ca^ think, where we shall dwell for ever
in ye heavenly city, the celestial Jerusalem, in the presence of God the
father, and Jesus Christ our mediator, as Paul says, and in the company of
innumerable Angels, and with the spirits and souls of al faithful and just men)
rejoice and be glad: and sei^g ye be called to so great glory, 2 pet. i.
see that ye make your election and vocation sure by good works, and specially
by suffering adversity for the Gospels sake: Phil. 1.
for it is given us of god, says Paul, not only to believe in Christ, but also
to suffer for his sake. Continue in prayer, and pray for me yt I may end my
course with joy. Have brotherly love amongst your selves, John. 14
which is a toke^ that ye be Christ's distiples. Edify and comfort one an other
in the word of the lord, and the god of peace and love be with you always.
Ame^. For your liberality and kindness showed upon the prisoners and
afflicted people of god in this time of persecution, the lord will reward you
when he comes to reward every man according to their deeds, and will not leave
a cup of cold water bestowed upon his faithful people, unrewarded. God make
you rich in all grace, Matthew. 10. 2. Cor. 8.
that ye always having sufficient, may be rich unto al manner of good works.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of god, and the fellowship of the
holy ghost be with you always, Amen.

Your brother now in bonds for the gospel, Thomas Whittell.

To my loving and faithful brother John Careless, prisoner in the Kings Benche.
THe same faith for the which Abraham was accounted just and Mary blessed,
whereby also al just men live, the lord god our loving father increase and
stablyshe in you and me, to the obteining of eternal life in our alone and
sweet Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

I ca^ not worthily and sufficiently praise god (my heartily be loved brother)
for the consolation and joy that I received by reason of your loving letters,
repe^ting me much that I being so long so nere you, did not enterprise to
stir up familiarity and comunicatio^ between us by writing, to our mutual
consolation in Christ. For what is there upon earth wherein to rejoice (where
al things are transitory and vain, yea man him self, respecting this life)
but, as David says, Psalm. 16
the Saints that dwell upon the earth, and such as excel in virtue? But here now
I consider, yt if the fellowship, love, and joy of faithful men and children of
god, being as we now be in double bondage, the body within clay walls, and the
soul wtin these frail earthly bodies, be so great and comfortable: how
unspeakable will those joys be, when we shall be delivered from al corruption
into ye glorious liberty of the sons of god, Where we shall be present
together continually in our glorified bodies, beholding ye face of our father
presently (who^ now we see but in the glass of faith) with his dear son
christ our redemer and brother, and the blessed company of Angels and al
faithful saved souls? Oh the incomparable good things and heavenly treasures
laid up for us in heaven by christ Jesus. For the obteyning whereof, we ought to
set light by all temporal grefes and transitory afflictions so much the more, in
that our good God is faithful and will not suffer us to be tempted above our
strength, and that namely in ye end of our life, Eccle. 11.
when ye tree where it falls, lies still, as the preacher says: when every
one, causa sua dormit and causa sua resurget: for else before ye end he
suffers his sometime to fall, but not finally to perysh: as Peter sincked upon
the sea, but yet was not drowned, and sinned grievously upon the land through
infirmity denying his Master, but yet found mercy: for the ryghteous falls
oftentimes. And Christ's holy Apostles are taught to say, remitte nobis debita
nostra: Yea though the righteous fall, says David, he shall not be cast away,
for the Lord vpholdeth him with his hand. Oh the bottomless mercy of God
toward us miserable sinners. He vouchsafe to plant in my heart true repentance
and faith, to the obteyning of remission of al my sins in the mercyes of God,
and merits of Christ his son, and thereto I pray you say, Amen. Oh my
heartily beloved, it greueth me to see ye spoil and havoc ye Saul makes
with the congregation of Christ, but what remedy? This is gods will and
ordinance, that his people shall here both be punished in the flesh, and tried
in their faith, as it is written: many are the troubles of the righteous, but
the lord delivers the^ out of al, for by a strait path and narowe door must
we enter. Whether? Into ye joyful kingdom of heaven. Therefore blessed are you,
and other that suffer persecution for christ's sake, for the possessing of ye
same. Pray for me and my fellows (good brother) that we may fight a good fight,
that we may keep the faith, and end our course with joyful gladness, for now the
time of our deliverance is at hand. The lord guide, defend, and keep us and
you, and al his people in our journey, yt we may safely through a short death,
pass to that long lasting life.

Farewell my dear and loving brother and fellow soldier in Christ, farewell I
say in him, who receive our souls in peace when they shall depart from these
tabernacles, and he grant us a joyful resurrection, and a merry metyng at the
last day, and continual dwelling together in his eternal and heavenly
kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Yours with my poor prayer, other pleasure can I do you none, Thomas Whittell
minister.

To my dear brethren.M. Filles and Cutbert.
MY dear and well-beloved brethren in Christ M. Filles and Cutbert, I wish you al
welfare of soul and body. Welfare to the soul, is repentance of sin,
faithful affiance in christ Jesus, and a godly life. Welfare to ye body, is the
health of the same, with al necessary things for this bodily life. The soul of
man is immortal, and therefore ought to be well kept, lest immortality to joy,
should turn to immortality of sorrow. As for the body, be it never so well kept
and much made of, yet shortly by nature will it perysh and decay. But those that
are engraffed and incorporated into Christ by true faith, feeling the motion of
Gods holy spirit, as a pledge of their electition and enheritaunce, excityng
and stirring them not only to seek heavenly things, but also to hate vice and
embrace virtue: will not only do those things, but also if need require, will
gladlye take up their cross and follow their Captain, Mat. 26. Mar. 14
their King, and their Savior Jesus Christ, as his poor afflicted Church
of England now does, against that false and Antichristian doctrine and
religion now used, and specially that blasphemous mass, wherein christ's
supper and holy ordinance is altogether perverted and abused contrary to his
institution, Luke. 22. 2. Cor. 1^
and to Paul's procedinges: so that, that which they have in their Mass is
neither sacrament of christ nor yet sacrifice for sin, as the priests
falsely pretend. It is a sacrament, that is as S. Augustine says, a visible
sign of invisible grace, when it is ministered to the communicantes according
to christ's example, and as it was of late years in this realm. And as for
sacrifice, there is none to be made now for sin: Heb. 9.10
for Christ with one sacrifice has perfited for ever those that are
sanctified. Beware of false religion and men's vain traditions, and serve god
with reverence and godly fear, according to the doctrine of his Gospel, Luke.
i1
whereto clean ye that ye may be blessed, though of wicked men ye be hated
and accursed. Rather drink of the cup of Christ with his church, Apo. 18.
then of the cup of that rose colored whore of Babylon. which is full of
abhominatio^s. Rather strive ye to go to heaven by that path which is strayte
to flesh and blood with the little flock, then to go the wide way, followyng
the enticements of the world and the flesh, which leads to damnation. Like
as Christ suffered in the flesh, says S. Peter, pet. 4.3
so arm ye yourselues with the same mind: for Christ suffered for us,
leauyng us example to follow his footesteppes. Blessed are they that suffer for
his sake, great is their reward in heaven. He that overcomes says S. John,
shall eat of the tree of life: he shall have a crown of life, Apoca. 2.3
and not be hurt of the second death: he shall be clothed with white array, and
not be put out of the book of life: yea I will confess his name, says Christ,
before my father, and before his angels, and he shall be a pillar in the house
of God, and sit with me on my seat. And thus I bydde you farewell, mine own
brethren and dear fellows in Christ, whose grace and peace be always with
you, Amen.

This world I do forsake
To Christ I me betake,
And for his gospel sake
Patiently death I take.
My body to the dust
Now to return it must:
My soul I know full well
With my god it shall dwell.
Thomas Whittell.

Letters of Master Robert Samuel, a godly and learned Minister and preacher
of Gods word, burnte at Ipsewiche for the faithful testimony of the same, the
18. of Auguste. 1555. of whose strange torments, and unmerciful handlyng
etc, read in the book of Martyrs. Fol. 1270.
An exhortation to the patient sufferyng of afflictions for Christ's cause, and
the verity of his Gospel.
Eccle. 9.
A Man knows not his time, but as the fish is taken with the angle, and as
the birds are caught with the snare: even so are men caughte and taken in the
perilous time, when it comes upon them. The time comes, the day draws
nere. Ezechi. 7. Better it were to dye, as the preacher says, Eccl. 4
then to live and see the miserable works which are done under the Sun: such
so dayne and strange mutations such woeful, heinous, and lamentable deuisions
so fast approaches, and none or very few thoroughly repents. Esaias. 1.
Alas for this synful nation a people of great iniquitye and seed of
ungraciousness, corruptyng their ways. They have forsaken the lord, they have
provoked ye holy one of Israel to anger, and are gone backward. Who now lives
not in such security and rest, as though al dangers were clean ouerpast? Who
now blyndeth and buffeteth not christ, with see me and see me not? Yea who
lives not now in such felicity, worldly pleasures, and ioies, wholly seeking
the world, prouidyng and craftily shyftyng for the earthly clodde and all
carnal appetites, as though sin were clean forgotten, overthrown, and
devoured? Like hoggyshe gaddernes now are we more afraid and ashamed of
Christ our Messiah, Math. 8
fearyng the loss of our fylthy pigs, I mean our transitory goods, and
disquieting of our sinful and mortal bodies in this short, uncertain, and
miserable life: the^ of a legion of Deuyls, seducyng and driuyng us from
hearing, reading, Mark. 5.
and believing Christ gods eternal son and his holy word, the power to save
our souls: unto vanities, lies and fables, Romans 10.
and to this bewitchyng world. Oh perilous abundance of goods, to much
saturity of meats, wealth and quietness, Genes. 19.
which destroyed with so many souls, those goodly Cities Sodom and Gomorre.
Jeroboam, so long as he was but a poor man, not yet auaunced to his dignity,
lived in the laws of god without reprehension: but brought once to wealth and
prosperous estate, he became a wicked and most shameful Idolatour. And what
made the covetous young man so loath to follow Christ, Math. 19.
when he was bydden to forsake but worldly wealth which he then enjoyed? Woe be
unto these false elusions of the world, baits of perdition, hokes of the
Devil, which have so shamefully deceived and seduced full many from the right
pathe unto the Lord, into the high wais of confusion and perpetual perdition.

We might now worthily (dear christians) lamente and bewail our heavy state,
miserable condition, and sorrowful chance: yea I say we might well accuse our
selves, and with Job curse these our troublous, wicked, Job. 3.
and bloody last days of this world, were it not that we both see and believe,
and find in gods sacred book, Esaias. 10
that a remnau^t god has in all ages reserved, I mean the faithful, as many
as have been from the beginning of the world, exercised, whetted and pullished
with diverse afflictions, troubles, and tossings, cast and dashed against all
perils and dangers, as the very dross and outcastes of the earth, and yet
will in no wise halte between god and Baal: 1. Cor. 4
for God utterly abhors two men in one: he cannot away with the^ that are
between both, but casts the^ away as a filthy vomit. Apoca. 3.
Christ will not part spoil with his mortal enemy the devil: he will have all or
lose all: he will not permit the Devil to have the service of the body, and he
to stand contented with the heart and mind: but he will be glorified both in
your bodies and in your spirits, which are his as S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 6
For he has made all, bought all and dearly paid for all, As S. Peter says:
1. pet. 1.
with his own immaculate body has he clean discharged your bodies from
sin, death, and hell, and with his most precious blood paid your ransom and
full price once for all and for ever. Now what harm I pray you, or what loss
sustain you by this? Why are you O vain men, more afraid of Jesus your
gentle Savior, and his gospel of salvation, then of a legion of cruel devils,
going about with false delusions utterly to destroy you both bodies and
souls? Think you to be more sure then under your captain Christ? Do you
promise your selves to be more quiet in Satan's service, then in Christ's
religion? Esteem you more these tra^sitory and pernicious pleasures, then god
and all his heavenly treasures? Oh palpable darkness, horrible madness, and
wilful blyndnes without comparison, to much to be suffered any longer. We see
and will not see: we know and will not know: yea we smarte and will not feel,
and that our own conscience well knows. Oh miserable and brayneles souls,
which would for folish pleaiures and slippery wealth, lose the royal kingdom
and permanent joys of god, with the everlasting glory which he has prepared
for them that truly love him, and renounce the world. 2. Cor. 4
The children of the world live in pleasure and wealth, and the Devil who is
their GOD and Prince of this world, keeps their wealth which is proper unto
them, and lets them enjoy it. But let us which be of Christ, Ioh. 12
seek and inquire for heavenly things, which by gods promise and mercy in
Christ, shall be peculier unto us. Let (I say) the Cretians, epicures and such
other beastly Belials and carnal people, pass for things that be pleasant
for the body, and do appertain to this transitory life: yet shall they once
(as the kinglye Prophet says) run about the City of god to and fro howlyng
like dogs, Psalm. 58.
desiring one scrappe of the joys of gods elect, Luke 16
but al to late, as the rich glutton. Let us therefore pass for those things
that do perteyne to the spirit, and be celestial. Coloss. 3 Heb. 13 Job. 7.
We must be here (says Paul) not as inhabitours and home dwellers but as
strangers: not as strangers only, but after the mind of Job, as paynefull
soldiers appointed of our governor to fight against the governor of darkness
of this world, against spiritual craftines in heavenly things. The time is
come: we must to it: Ephesi. 5 1. pet. 4
the judgment must begin first at the house of god. Began they not first with
the grene and sappie tree? and what followed then on the dry branches? Ieremye
speaking in the person of God says, in the City wherein my name is innocate,
Luke. 14.
will I begin to punish, but as for you (meaning the wicked) you shall be as
innocents and not once touched: Jeremy. 15.
for the dregs of gods wrath, the bottom of all sorrows, are reserved unto
them in the end: but gods householde shall drink the flower of the cup of
his mercy. 2. Para. 3.
And therefore let us say with Ezechias, play the men and shrynke not: let us
comfort our selves, for the lord is with us our helper, and fights for us.
The Lord is (says he) with you when you be with him, and when you seek him he
will be found of you, and again, when you forsake him he will forsake you.

Wherefore we ought not to be dismayde or discourage our selves, but rather to
be of good comfort: not to be sad but merry: not sorrowful, but joyful, in
that god of his goodness will vouchsafe to take us as his beloved children, to
subdue our sinful lusts, our wretched flesh and blood unto his glory, the
promoting of his holy word, and edifyeng of his church. 2. Cor. 5.
What if the earthly house of this our habitation (Paul meaning the body) be
destroyed? We know assuredlye we shall have a building of God not made with
hands, but everlasting in heaven, with such joys as faith takes not, hope
touches not, nor charity apprehends not. They pass all desires and wishes.
Gotten they may be by Christ, esteemed they cannot be. Wherefore the more
affliction and persecution ye word of God brings, ye more felicity and
greater joy abides in heaven. But the worldly peace, idle ease, wealthy
pleasure, and this present and pleasant transitory life and felicity, which
the ungodly folishly imagine to procure unto themselves by persecuting and
thrustyng away the gospel, shall turn unto their own trouble, and at last
unto horrible destruction and mutations of realms and countries, and after
this life (if they repent not) into their perpetual infelicity, perdition, and
damnation. 1. Regu^. 25
For they had rather with Nabal and his temporal pleasures, descend to the
Devil, then with poor Christ and his bodily troubles, ascend into the kingdom
of God his father. But an unwise man (says the psalmist) comprehends the^
not, negther does the folish understand them, that is, these bloody
persecutours grown up and flourishyng like the flower and grass in the
field. But unto this end do they so floryshe, that they might be cut down
and cast into the fire for ever. Job. 21.
For as Job says, their joy lasts but ye twinklyng of an eye, and death
shall lie knawyng upon them as does the flock upon the pasture: psalm. 4^. Mar.
9.
yea the cruel worm, late repentance as S. Mark says, shall lie gnawyng,
tormentyng, and accusing their wretched conscience for evermore.

Let us therefore (good christians) be constante in obeying God rather then men.
For although they slay our sinful bodies, yea rather our deadly enemies, for
gods verity: yet can they not do it but by gods sufferance and good will, to his
praise and honor, and to our eternal joy and felicity. For our blood shed
for the gospel, shall preach it with more fruit and greater furtheraunce,
then did our mouths, lives, and writings: as did the blood of Abell, Steven,
with many other more. What though they laughe Christ and his word to scorn,
which sytte in the chair of perverse pestilent scorners? To whom as to the
wise Gentiles of the world, the gospel of Christ is but folishnes, as it was
to the Jews a slander and a stumbling stone, whereat they now being fallen,
have provoked the wrath and ve^geaunce of god upon them. Luke. 2.
These are the days of vengeance (says Luke) that all things written may be
fulfilled. And surely it shall be no less then a huge storm of euylles that
shall come upon us, because that a long and a cursed obstinate maliciousnes of
us, has gone before crying in the ears of the Lord GOD of hosts, who so
many times and so many ways, have been provoked, with the unspeakable riches
of his goodness, his patience, and long sufferyng, to amendment, and have
nevertheless contemned the same, Esaias. 3
and proceeded forward to worse and worse, prouokyng and styrryng the presence
of gods majesty unto anger. EZech.
Now therefore says God by the mouth of his Prophet, I will come upon thee, and
I will send my wrath upon thee: upon thee (I say) O England, and punyshe thee
according to thy ways, and reward thee after al thine abominations. Thou have
kyndled the fire of gods wrath and have styrred up the coals. Esaias. 5.
For thou wast once lyghtned and had tasted of the heavenly gift, and wast
become pertaker of the holy Ghost, and had tasted of the good word of God:
Yea, it is yet in thy mouth says the Prophet. Alas, O England, you knew thy
Lord and masters will, but dydst nothing thereafter, thou must therefore (says
he) suffer many stripes and many sharp strokes, and walk on in the glittering
and whote flame of thine own fire, and in ye coals that thou have kindled.
This comes to thee from my hand, says the Lord: namely that you shall sleep
in sorrow, yea even so thou shall. The plain truth tells the tale, the
immutable justice of the everliving God, and the ordinary course of his plagues
from the beginning, confirms the same. The joy of our heart (says Jeremy) is
gone, our glory is fallen away, Jeremy. 5.
our merry singyng is turned into mournyng, the garland of our head is fallen.
Alas and weal away that ever we sinned so sore: Woe worth all abominations,
and wyckednes: woe worth cloked hypocrisy: woe worth our carnal liberty: woe
worth our most cursed Idolatry. For because of these things says the Lord,
ye shall perish with sword, hunger and pestilence.

Wherefore, let all the wicked enemies of Christ, and all the unbelievers, be
afraid to be tormented and vexed, with all hellish furies, and clean without
hope at gods accountyng day, which know not God in Christ to be their very
righteousness, their life, John. 8.
their only salvation and alone Savior, nor believe not in him. They must
says S. John, needs abide and perish with their sins in death and in
eternal damnation. But we be the children of saints, as the elder Toby did
answer, and look for an other life, which God shall give to all them which
change not their faith, nor shrynke not from him. Rejoice therefore ye
christian afflicted brethern, for they can not take our souls and bodies out
of the hands of the almighty, which be kept as in the bosom of our most sweet
and loving father, Matthew. i0.
and if we abide fast in Christ and turn not away like weathercockes, surely
we shall live for ever, Christ affirmyng the same saying: my sheep here my
voice, I know them, they harken, unto me and to no strangers, and I give them
everlasting life, John. 10
for they shall not be lost nor no man shall pluck them out of my hands: no
nor yet this flat ryng world with al his vain pleasures, nor any Tyranne
with his great threats and stout bragges can once move them out of the way of
eternal life. What consolation and comfort may we have more pleasant and
effectuous then this? God is on our side and fights for us: he suffers, he
smarteth, and is afflicted with us. As the world can do nothing against his
might, Esaias. 4
neither in taking away or diminishing of his glory, nor putting him from his
celestial throne: so can it not harm nor hurt any one of his children without
his good will: Ephesi. 5
for we are members of his body, out of his flesh and of his bones, and as
dear to him as the apple of his eye. Let us therefore with an earnest faith,
set fast hold and sure feeling upon the promises of God in the gospel, and let
us not be sundred from the same by any temptation, tribulation, or persecution.
Let us consider the verity of god to be invincible, inviolable, and immutable,
promising and giving us his faithful soldiers, life eternal. It is he only
that has deserved it for us: it is his only benefit, and of his only mere
mercy: unto him only must we render thanks. Let not therefore the vain
fantasies and dreams of me^, the folish gauds and toys of the world, nor the
crafty delusions of the devil, drive and separate us from our hope of the crown
of righteousness, that is laid up in store for us against the last day. Oh
that happy and merry last day, I mean to the faithful, when Christ by his
covenant shall grant and give unto them that overcome and keep his words to
the end, that they may ascend and sit in seat with him, as he has ascended
and sits on throne with his father. The same body and soul that is now with
Christ afflicted, shall then be with Christ glorified: now in the butchers
hands as sheep appointed to die, 2. Timo. 2.
then sitting at gods table with Christ in his kingdom, as gods honorable and
dear childerne: where we shall have for earthly poverty, heavenly riches, for
hunger and thirst, saturitye of the pleasant presence of the glory of God,
Psalm. 16.
for sorrows, troubles and cold irons, celestial joys, and the company of
Angels, and for a bodily death, life eternal. Oh happy souls, oh precious
death and evermore blessed: right dear in the eyes of god, to you the spring
of the Lord shall ever be florishyng. Then as says Esaias, the redeemed shall
return and come again into Sion praising the Lord, and eternal mercyes shall
be over their heads: they shall obtain myrthe and solace: sorrow and woe
shall be utterly vanquished: yea I am even he says the Lord, that in all
things gives you everlasting consolation. To whom with the Father, and the
holy ghost, be glory and praise for ever, Amen.

Robert Samuel.

An other letter written to the Christian congregation, called the faith of
Robert Samuel.
The belief of the heart iustifyeth, and to knowledge with the mouth makes a
man safe. Romans 10.

Fear not the curse of men, be not afraid of their blasphemies and
reuilinges, for worms and mothes shall eat them up like cloth and woll, but
my righteousness shall endure for ever, and my saving health from generation
to generation. Esaias. 51.


COnsidering with my self these perilous times, 2. Timo. 3.
perishing days, and the unconstant and miserable state of man, ye decay of
our faith, the sinister report and false slander of gods most holy word,
these urgent causes in conscience do constrayne me to confess and acknowledge
my faith and meaning in Christ's holy religion, as S. Peter teaches me,
saying: 1. pet. 3
be ready always to give an answer to every man yt asks you a reason of
the hope that is in you, and that with mekenes and fear, having a good
conscience, that when they backbite you as evil doers, they may be ashamed,
for as much as they have falselye accused your good conversation in Christ. As
touching my doctrine, for that little talent yt god has given me, god I take to
record, mine own conscience and mine auditorie knows, that I neither in
doctrine nor manners, willinglye taught any other thing then I received of the
holy Patriarckes, Prophets, Christ and his Apostles. For it were not only
sin, but also ye very part of a cursed miscreant, to deny, to belie, or
betray ye innoce^cie of that heavenly doctrine, or to be ashamed to confess
and stand to ye defense of ye same, Mar. 8.
seeing ye christ planted it with his most precious blood: and all good men have
more esteemed ye true and infallible word of god, then all this transitorye
world, or their own mortal lives. And I believe this doctrine of ye Patriarchs,
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles to be sufficient and absolutely perfect to
enstruct and teach me and al ye holy church of our duties toward god, ye
magistrates, and our neighbors.

First and principally I do assuredly believe, without any douting, yt there is
one deity or divine essence, and infinite substance, which is both called and
is in deed god everlasting, vnbodely, vnpartable, unmeasurable in power,
wisdom and goodness, ye maker and preserver of al things, as well visible as
invisible: and yet there be three distinct persons, al of one godhead or divine
being, and of al one power, coequal, co^substantial, and coeternall, the
father, ye son and the holy ghost. I believe in god the father almighty, etc.
As touching god ye father of heaven, I believe as much as holy scripture
teaches me to believe. The father is ye first person in trinity, Ephesi. ^.
first cause of our salvation, which has blessed us with al manner of blessings
in heavenly things by Christ: which has chose^ us before ye fou^dations of ye
world were laid, yt we should be holy and without blame before him: who has
predestinate us and ordained us to be his children of adoption through Christ
Jesus. Act. 17. Psalm. 176.
In him as it is said, we live, we move and have our being: he nourishes,
feeds, and gives meat to every creature. And in Jesus Christ his only
son our lord. I believe yt the word, that is, the son of god the second
person in trinity, did take man's nature in the womb of the most blessed
virgin Mary. Heb. 1.
So yt there be in him.ii. natures: a divine nature and an human nature in ye
unity of person inseparable, conjoined and knyt in one Christ, truly god and
truly man, the express and perfect image of the invisible god, wherein ye will
of god ye father shines apparently, and wherein man, as it were in a glass,
may behold what he ought to do that may please god ye father. Borne of the
virgin Mary ^^trulye sufferyng his passion, crucyfyed, dead and buried, to ye
intent to bring us again into favor with god the father almighty, and to be a
sacrifice, host and oblation, Esa. 48.43 Genesis 1.22. Esaias. 53. Act. 10. Math. 8.
not only for original sin, but also for all actual sins of the whole
generation of mankind. For all ye works, merits, deseruings, doings and
obedience of man toward god, although they be done by ye spirit of god in the
grace of god, yet being thus done, be of no validitye, worthynes, nor merit
before god except god for his mercy and grace, account the^ worthy for the
worthiness and merits of Christ Jesus. The same Christ went down to the hels
and truly rose again the third day and ascended into the heavens, yt he might
there still reign and have dominion over al creatures: and from thence shall
come etc.

I believe in the holy ghost, coequal with god the father and the son, and
proceeding from the^ both: by whose virtue, strength and operation, the true
catholic church, which is the comunio^ and society of Saints, is guyded in all
truth and verity, and kept from al errors and false doctrine, the devil, and
all power of sin. Which church is sanctified and hallowed with the precious
blood and spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ: John. 10.8. Galat. 1. 1. Timo. 3.
which has also her sign and mark, that she hears and follows the voice
of her only and true pastor christ and no strangers. This church also is the
house of god, the congregation of the living god, the pyller of truth, the
lively body of Christ, a church both in name and in deed. I believe the
remission of sins by the only means and merits of christ's death and
passion: who was made unto us of god that only sacrifice and oblation offered
once for all and for ever, for all the^ yt be sanctified. I believe the
resurrection of the body, whereby in the last day al me^ shall rise again from
death, the souls joined again to the bodies, the good to everlasting life,
the wicked to everlasting pain and punishment. And nothing may more certainly
stablysh and confyrme our faith that we shall rise again immortal both in body
and soul, the^ the resurrection of Christ our Savior and first fruits of ye
dead. Now, that Christ our head is risen, we being his body and members, must
follow our head. Death, hell and sin can not sunder nor pluck us from him.
For as the son can not be divided nor sundred from the father, nor the holy
ghost from them both, no more may we being the faithful members of Christ, be
separated from christ. And for a confyrmatio^ of our resurrection, christ would
be seen after his resurrection in his most glorious body, his wou^des being
handled and felt, speaking and teaching, eating and drinking etc. We look
says S. Paul, John. 10 John. 1. Phil. 3.
for Jesus Christ our Savior, which shall transfygure our vile bodies, and
conform the^ to his glorious body by ye same power and virtue, wherewith he is
able to subdue all things: even like as the grayn of wheat sowe^ in the
ground, John. 12.
is first putrifyed and brought as into a thing of naught, yet after that it
spri^geth up freshly with a goodlyer color, form and beautye then it had
before. The body is sown in corruption and ryseth in incorruptio^: 1. Cor. 15
it is so^en in dishonor and rises in honor. Thus I verily know and
assuredly believe the resurrection of our bodies, and to have life eternal by
Christ and for Christ's sake. Verily, verily I say unto you (says Christ) he
that hears my word and believes on him that sent me, John. 5.
has everlasting life, and shall not come into dampnation, but is escaped from
death to life. It is Christ that died once for our sins, Roma. 10, Ose. 13.
and is risen again, never more to dye: it is he that swallowed up death and
has cast it under his fete for ever. What now can death do unto us? Verily
nothing else but for a little time separate our precious souls from our
wretched bodies, that divine substance from a Mass of sin, that eternal
life from a body of death, and so send our souls out of this miserable,
wretched and sorrowful life cumbred with all calamities, unto that most
blessed felicity and joys eternal.

As concerning the holy and reuerente sacraments of Christ's Church, which
be in number.ii. the Sacrament of baptiseme and the Supper of the Lord, I
believe them to be as Saint Paul calls them, confyrmations or seals of Gods
promises, which have added to them a promise of grace, and therefore they are
called invisible signs of invisible grace. The Sacrament of baptism is a
mark of Christ's Church, a seal and confirmation of our acceptance into
the grace and favor of God, for Christ's sake. For his innocencye, his
righteousness, his holiness, his justice is ours, given us of God: and our
sins and unrighteousness, by his obedience and abasing of himself to the
death of the cross, are his, whereof baptism is ye sign, seal, and
confirmation. Baptism is also a sign of repentance, to testifye that we be
borne to the waves of perilles, and chaunges of life, to the intent that we
should dye continuallye, as long as we live, from sin, and rise again like
new men unto righteousness. Romans 6. The other sacrament, which is the Supper
and holy maundy of our Savior Christ, whereby ye church of Christ is known, I
believe it is a remembrance of Christ's death and passion, a seal and
confirmation of his most precious body given unto death, eue^ to ye vile death
of ye cross, wherewith we are redeemed and delivered from sin death, hell and
damnation. It is a visible word, because it works ye same thing in ye eyes,
which the word works in the ears. For like as the word is a mean to the
ears, whereby the holy ghost moves ye heart to believe. To. 10: so this
Sacrament, is a mean to the eyes, whereby the holy ghost moves the heart to
believe: it preaches peace between God and man, it exhorts to mutual love
and all godly life, and teaches to contemn the world for the life to come,
when as Christ shall appear, which now is in heaven and no where else as
concerning this human body. Act. 1.3*
Yet do I believe assuredly that his very body is present in his most holy
supper at the contemplatio^ of our spiritual eyes, and so verily eaten with
the mouth of our faith. For as soon as I hear these most comfortable and
heavenly words spoken and pronounced by the mouth of the minister: this is my
body which is given for you, when I hear (I say) this heavenly harmonye of
gods infallible promises and truth: I look not, upon, neither do I behold bread
and wine, for I take and believe ye words simply and plainly, even as Christ
spoke them. For hearing these words, my senses be rapte and utterly excluded:
for faith wholly takes place, and not flesh nor the carnal imaginatio^s of our
gross, fleshly and vnreuerent eating, after the manner of our bodily food
which profits nothing at all, as Christ witnesses. Joan. 6: but with a
sorrowful and wounded conscience, an hungrye and thirsty soul, a pure and
faithful mind, do fully embrace, behold, and feed and look upon that most
glorious body of Christ in heaven at the right hand of god the father, very
God and very man, which was crucified and slain, and his bloodshed for our
sins, there now making intercession, offering and giving his holy body for me,
Romans 8. Heb. 9
yea my body, my ransom, my full price and satisfaction, my Christ and and all that ever he has: and by this spiritual and faithful eating of this lively
and heavenly bread, I feel the most sweet sap and taste of ye fruits, Roma. 5.
benefits and unspeakable joys of Christ's death and passion, fully
disgested into ye bowels of my soul. For my mind is quieted from al wordly
adversities, tormoylinges and troubles: my conscience is pacified from sin,
death, hell and da^pnation: my soul is full and has even enough, and will no
more: for all things are but loss, vile, phil. 3
dunge, and dross, vain vanity, for ye excellent knowledge sake of Christ
Jesus my Lord and Savior. Thus now is Christ's flesh my very meat in deed,
John. 6. Ephesi. 5 Galat. 2.
and his blood my very drink in deed, and I am become flesh of his flesh,
and bone of his bones. Now I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: yea I
dwell in him and he in me: for through faith in Christ, and for Christ's sake,
we are one, that is, of one consent, mind, and fellowship with the father, the
son and the holy ghost. Joan. 17. Thus am I assured and fully persuaded, and
on this rock have I builded by Gods grace, my dwelling and resting place for
body and soul, life and death. And thus I commit my cause unto Christ the
righteous and just judge, who will an other day, judge these debates and
controuersyes: whom I humblye beseech, to cast his tender and merciful eyes
upon the afflicted and ruinous churches, and shortly to reduce them into a
godly and perpetual concord, Amen.

Thus do I believe, and this is my faith and my understanding in Christ my
Savior, and his true and holy religion. And this who so ever is ashamed to do,
Mar. 8.
among this adoulterous and sinful generation, of him shall the son of man
be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his father with the holy Angels.

Robert Samuel.

Letters of Master John Hullyer, a true pastor and a faithful minister in
Gods Church: who, for the confyrmation of that doctrine which he had most
faithfully professed and taught, gave his body to be burnte at Cambrige
the.16. day of April. Anno. 1556.
A letter written to the Christian congregation, exhorting them constantly and
faithfully to abide in the doctrine of the Lord.
IT stands now most in hand (O dear Christians) all them that look to be
accounted to be of Christ's flock at that great and terrible day, when a
separation shall be made of that sort that shall be received, from the other
which shall be refused, faithfully in this time of great afflictions, to hear
our Master Chris^es voice, the only true shepeheard of our souls, which
says: Matthew. 24.
whosoever shall endure to ye end, shall be safe. For eue^ now is that great
trouble in hand (as here in England we may well say) that our Savior Christ
spoke of so long before, which should follow the true and sincere preaching of
his Gospel. Therefore in this time, we must needs either make that we be his
faithful soldiers, and continue in his battle unto the end, puttyng on the
armor of GOD, Ephesi. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
the buckler of faith, the breast plate of love, the helmette of hope and
salvation, and the sword of his holy word (which we have heard
plentifullye) with all instance of supplication and prayer: or else if we do
not work and labor with these, we are Apostataes and false soldiers,
shrynkyng most vnthankefullye from our gracious and sovereign Lord and
Captain Christ, and leanyng to Beliall. For, Luke 14
as he says plainly, who soever bears not his cross and follow him, he
can not be his Dysciple. And no man can serve.ii. Math. 6.
Masters. for either he must hate the one and love the other, or else he
shall lean to the one and despise the other. The which thing the faithful
Prophette Helias signified, 3. Regu^. 18
when he came to the people and said: why halte ye between.ii. opinions? If
the Lord be GOD follow him, or if Baall be he, then follow him. Now let us
not think, but that the same was recorded in writing for our instruction,
whom the ends of the world are come upon, Roman. 15
as the Apostle Saint Paul says: what so ever things are written
aforehande, they are written for our learning. If Christ be that only good
and true shepeheard, that gave his life for us, then let us that bear his
mark, and have our consciences sprinkled with his blood, follow altogether
for our salvation, his heavenly voice and calling, according to our
profession and first promise. But if we shall not so do, certaynely (say what
we can) although we bear the name of Christ, yet we be none of his sheep in
deed: for he says very manifestly, my sheep hear my voice and follow me:
John. 10
a stranger they will not follow, but will flee from him, for they know not
ye voice of a stranger.

Therefore let every man take good head in these perilous days (whereof we
have had so much warnyng aforehand) that he be not begyled by the goodly
outward show and appearaunce, as Eve was of our old subtle enemy, whose
craft and wiliness is so manifold and diverse, and so full of close
wyndings, that if he can not bring him directly and the plain straight way to
consent to his suggestions, then he will allure him and wind him in by some
other false ways (as it were by a train) that he shall not perceive it, to
deceive him with all, and to steal from him that goodly victory of the
incorruptible and eternal crown of glory, 2. Timot. 2.
which no man else can have but he that fyghteth lawfullye: as at this
present day, if he can not induce him throughlye, as other do, to favor
his deuilyshe religion, and of good will and free heart to help to uphold the
same, yet he will enuegle him to resort to his wicked and whorysh Scholehouse,
and at tht least wise, to be co^uersant and keep company with his congregation
there, and to hold his peace and say nothing whatsoever he think, so that he
be not a diligent soldier and a good labourer on Christ's side to further his
kingdom, by that subtle means flatteryng him that he shall both save his
life, and also his goods, and live in quiet. But if we look well on Christ's
holy will and testament, we shall perceive that he came not to make any such
peace upon earth, Math. 10 John. 14.15.16.
nor yet that he gave any such peace to his Disciples. I leave peace with you
(says he) my peace I give you, not as the world gives it, give I unto you.
Let not your heart be troubled, nor fearful: these things have I spoken unto
you, that in me ye should have peace. In the world ye have affliction, but be
of good cheer. I have over come the world. The servant is not greater then
his lord and master: if they have persecueed me, they shall also persecute
you. If any man come to me and hates not his own father and Mother, wife,
children, Systers, yea and moreover his own life, Luke 6.14
it is not possible for him to be my disciple. Blessed be ye that now weep,
for ye shall laughe: and woe be unto you that now laugh, for ye shall mourn and
weep: he that will find his life, shall lose it. John. 12
Therefore the god of that true peace and comfort, preserve and keep us that we
never obey such false flatteryng, which at length will pay us home once for
all, bringyng for his temporal peace and quietness, everlasting trouble,
vexation, and disquietnes: for these vain and transitory goods, extreme loss
and utter damage of the eternal treasure and inhericaunce: for this mortal
life, deprivation of the most joyful life immortal: finally the entrance into
endless death most miserable, unmeasurable pain, and torment both of body and
soul.

Now, co^ferring these two Scholemaisters together, let us consider the thing
well, and determine with our selves which way we ought to take, and not to take
the common broad way which seems here most pleasant, and that the most part
of people take. Surely I judge it to be better to go to schole with our master
Christ, and to be under his ferula and rod (although it seem sharp and
grievous for a time) that at the length we may be coheritours with him of
everlasting joy, rather the^ to keep company with the Devils scholars, the
adulterous generation, in his Schole that is al full of pleasure for a while,
and at the end to be paid with the wages of continual burning in the most
horrible lake, which burns evermore with fire and brimstone without any end.
What shall then these vain goods and temporal pleasures avail? Who shall then
help when we cry incessantly, woe, woe, alas and weal away for, unmeasurable
pain, grief, and sorrow? O let us therefore take heed betime, and rather be
content to take pains in this world for a time, that we may please god. Our
savior Christ the true teacher says: every branch that brings not forth
fruit in me, John. 15 Eccl. 41.
my father will take away. It is also written not in vain: the children of the
ungodly are abominable children, and so are they that keep company with the
ungodly. What does he else I pray you, that resorteth to the ministration and
service that is most repugnaunt and contrary to christ's holy testament, there
keeping still silence and nothing reproving the same, but in the face of the
world by his very deed it self, declares himself to be of a false, fearful,
dissembling, feigned and unfaithful heart, and to have laid away from him the
armor of light, discouraging as much as lies in him, all the residue of
Christ's host, and geuyng a manifest offense to the weak, and also
confirmyng, encouraging, and rejoicing the hearts of the adversaries in all
their evil doing? By which example he does show himself, neither to love god,
whom he sees to be dishonored and blasphemed of an Antichristian minister,
nor yet his neighbor, before whom he should rebuke the evil, Leuit. 18.
as it is expressly commanded in gods holy law, where it is said: thou shall
in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, that thou bear not sin for his sake.
Wherefore let such a one never fantasy to deceive himself, yt his name is
registered in the book of life to have the stipend of christ's soldier, except
he do the duty and perform the part of a faithful, and right true soldier,
as other have done before. For such fearefulnes comes not from god, as
testifies S. Paul saysng: 2. Timot. 1.
God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power and of love. Be not
ashamed says he, to testify our lord, but suffer adversity also with ye gospel
through the power of god, which saved us, and called us with an holy calling.
To be now fearful, when most need is that we should be of strong hearts, is
utterly yt rejecting of the fear of god, and plain unfaithfulness and
disobedience to the express commau^deme^t of our Savior christ, which says
in his holy gospel: Mat. 10.
fear not them that kill the body, etc. For what faithfulness do we express
toward him, when he says thus to us, and yet we declare in our doings the
very contrary, being ever fearful, eue^ as the unbelieving Israrlites, which
unfaithfully feared gods enemies the heathen Cananites, where as he had
oftentimes given the^ commandment by his true prophet Moses to do the
contrary? For the which cause, Nume. 13.14.
all the whole number of that sect were destroyed in process of time in the
wilderness, and enjoyed not the pleasant land of promise. Which was a bodily
figure showed before, and now agreing to the promise of the heavenly
inheritance, which shall be given to none other, but only to all such as with
love unfeigned, be wholly bent, without any fear of man, to fulfill gods holy will
and pleasure. But all they that pertain to the lively faith to the winning of
the soul, will faithfully stick to the commandment, trusting most firmly
and faithfully, that he yt gave ye same, will also give strength plentifully to
perform it even in the weakest vessels of al as we have heard and seen by many
and diverse examples, he only be praised therefore. S. Peter says: fear not
though they seem terrible unto you, ^. pet. 3.
neither be troubled, but sanctify the lord god in your hearts. Only says S.
Paul, let your conversation be as it becomes ye gospel of christ. Continue
in one spirit, and in one soul; phil. 3
laboring as we do, to maintain the faith of the gospel, and in nothing
fearing your adversaries: which is to the^ a toke^ of damnation, and to you of
salvation, and that of god: for unto you it is given, ye not only ye should
believe in Christ, but also suffer for his sake. Wherefore let us be right well
assured that we shall yield a most straight reckening and account, if we
transgress the said most wholesome precepts given us of our master Christ and
of his apostles, and now in this troublesome time wherein the gospel is
persecuted, show ourselves fearful soldiers: as it is manifestly declared in
the Reuelacio^ of S. John, where it is written, Apo. 2.
that the fearful shall have their part with the unbelieving, and abominable,
in ye lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.
Apoc. 3
Again it is written in the same book for our warnyng: because thou art
betwixt both, and neither cold nor whote, I will spewe the out of my mouth.

Now therefore good christians, these true testimonies of gods lively word
depely considered and wayed, let us chiefly stand in awe of his most terrible
judgments, Esaias. 8. Prouer. 3.
and be not as they that presumptuously tempt him. Let him always be our fear
and dread. He now chasteneth, he now nurtereth us for our profit, delightyng
in us even as a loving father in his beloved child, Heb. 12 1. Cor. 11 2. Reg.
7.
to make us perfect, and to have us to be pertakers of his holiness. He now
judges us, not utterly taking away his everlasting love and mercy from us, as
he does from the malignaunt and wicked, that we should not be condemned with
the wicked world: but if we now refuse his most loving chastising and follow
ye world, we must needs have our portion with ye world. Wide is the gate and
broad is ye way which leads to destruction, Math. 7
and many there be which go in thereat. But strait is ye gate and narrow is the
way that leads unto life, and few there be that find it. Oh how much better
is it to go this narrow way with the people of god, then to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a time. In consideration whereof, let us without any more
slackyng and further delays in this great warnyng by gods loving visitation,
submit our selves betime under his mighty hand, 1. pet. 5
that he may exalte us when the time is come. And thus I wholly commit you to
him, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build further, beseching
you most heartily to pray for me, yt I may be strong through the power of his
might, and stand perfect in all things, being alwais prepared and ready,
lokyng for the mercy of our lord unto eternal rest, and I will pray for you as
I am most bound. So I trust he will graciously hear us for his promise sake
made unto all faithful in his dearly beloved son Christ our alone Savior,
whose grace be with your spirit, most dear Christians, for ever. So be it.

By your Christian brother John Hullyer a prisoner of the Lord.

John Hullyer being of long time prisoner, and now openly judged to dye for
the testimony of the lord Jesus, wysheth heartily to the whole congregation of
God, the strength of his holy spirit, to their everlasting health, both of
body and soul.
I Now (most dear christians) having the sweet comfort of gods saving health,
and being confirmed with his free spirit (be he only praised therefore) am
constrained in my conscience, thinkyng it my very duty, to admonish you, as ye
tender the salvation of your souls, by all manner of means to separate your
selves from the company of the Popes hirelinges, considering what is said in
the revelation of S. John, Apo. 14.
by the Aungel of god, touching al men. The words be these: If any man worship
the beast, and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his
hand, the same shall drink the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured into
ye cup of his wrath, and he shall be punished with fire and brimstone before
the holy angels and before the lamb, and the smoke of their torment ascends
up evermore. Mark well here good christians, who is this beast and
worshippers, that shall be pertakers of that unspeakable torment. This beast is
none other but the carnal and fleshly kingdom of Antichrist, the Pope with
his rabble of false Prophets and ministers, as it is most manifest: the which
to maintayn their high titles worldly promotions and dignities, do with much
crueltye daily more and more set forth and establish their own traditions,
decrees, and decretals, contrary to gods holy ordinances, statutes, laws and
commandments, and wholly repugnant to his sincere and pure religion and true
worshippyng. Now what do they else but worship this beast and his image,
which after they had once already escaped from the fylthines of the world, 2.
peter. 2.
through the knowledge of the lord and Savior Jesus Christ, are yet again
ta^gled therein, and overcome, using dissimulation unfaithfully, for fear of
their displeasure, doing one thing outwardlye, and thinkyng inwardlye an other:
so having them in reverence under a cloak and color, to whom they ought not so
much as to say god speed: John. 3.
and adioining themselves to the malignau^t congregation which they ought to
abhor as a de^ne of thieves and murderers, John. 10 EZe. 16
and as the brothel house of most blasphemous fornicators, whose voices being
contrary to christ's voice, if they were of his flock, they would not know,
but would fly from the^: as he himself being the good shepehard of our souls
does full well in his holy gospel testify. John. 10.
Again, what do they else I pray you, but receive ye beasts mark in their
foreheades and in their hands, which do bear a fair face and countenance
outwardly in supporting them as other do, being ashamed openly to confess
christ and his holy gospel. But this fainednes and dissimulatio^, Mar. 18.
christ and his gospel will in no wise allow: of who^ it is said, whosoever
shall be ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and synful generation,
Luke. 9.
of him also shall the son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in the glory
of his father with his holy angels. Therefore says almighty god by his prophet
Malachy: Mala. 1. Heb. 6
cursed be the disse^blers. Ye were once syghtned and tasted of the heavenly
gift, and were become partakers of the holy ghost, and tasted of the word of
god, and of the power of the world to come. Luke 6. 2. John, 2.
And our Savior Christ says: no man yt puts his hand to the plough and
looks back, is apt for the kingdom of god. Therefore S. John the Apostle uses
this for a manifest token, that ye backesliding from the true teachers of gods
word, declares evidently, yt they be not of the number of them. For says he,
they went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, no
dout, they would have continued with us. Surely, so long as we use
dissimulatio^, and to play on both hands, we are not in the light. For
whatsoever is manifest, Ephe. 4
the same is light, as the elect vessel of god S. Paul witnesses.

Wherefore (good christians) for gods most dear love, deceive not your selves
through your own wisdom, and through ye wisdom of ye world which is folishnes
before god, but certify and stay your own conscience with the sure truth and
faithful word of god, 1. Cor. 3
and with the infallible testimonies of holy scripture. For although gods mercy
is over al his works: Psalm. 3. Heb. 3.
yet it does not extend but only to them that hold fast the confydence and
reioicing of hope unto the end, not being weary in well doing, but rather wax
every day stronger and stronger in ye inward man. Therefore in the Revelation of
S. John, 2. Cor. 4.
where it is entreated of the beast and his image, it is also said: here is the
sufferau^ce of saints, and here are they that keep the commandments, and the
faith of Jesus Christ. Whereby almighty god does show plainly that he does use
those wicked men as instruments for a time, to try the patience and faith of
his peculiar people, without the performance whereof we can have no part among
the living, but as it is said in the same Revelation, the fearful shall have
their part in the lake yt burns with fire and brymstone, which is the second
death.

But peradventure ye will object and say unto me: what shall we do? Shall we
cast our selves hedlong to death? I say not so. But this I say, that we are
all bound (if ever we look to receive salvation at gods hand) in this case
wholly to be obedient to his determinate counsel and foreknowlege, 1. Corin. 12
expressed by the gift of the spiryt in holy Scripture, and then to cast all
our care upon him, who works al in all for the best unto them that love him:
Roma. 28.
and thus he gives commandment saying, come away from her my people, Apo. 18.
that ye be not partakers of her sins and that ye receive not of her
plagues. Now who hearing this terrible voice of god, which must needs be
fulfilled, will not with al speed and dylige^ce apply himself to do thereafter,
except such as will presu^pteously tempt him? And as touching such the wise
man says: Ecclesi. 3.
he that loves peril and danger shall peryshe therein: but they that be of the
faith of Abraham, even as he did, so will they in all assayes and trials be
obedient to the heavenly voice, howsoever it seems contrary to their own
natural will and carnal reason, Psalm. 36.
according to the sure word of faith which says: hope thou in the lord and
keep his way: hold thee still in the lord and abide patiently upon him. Let not
thy ielousy move thee also to do evil. 2 Cor. 6.
Come out from among the^, and join not your selves to their unlawful
assembles: yea do not once show your selves with ye least part of your body, to
favor their wicked doyngs, but glorify god (as most right is) so well in your
whole body outwardly, 1. Cor. 6.
as inwardly in your spirit, or else you can do neither of hothe well: for your
body does belong to god, so well as your spirit. At ye dreadful day of judgment
we shall al receive ye works of our bodies, according to that we have done, 2.
Cor. 5
whether it be good or bad. Therefore whatsoever we do, we may not bring the
spirit in bondage to the body, but contrariwise we must subdue the body and the
will of the flesh to the spirit, that the spirit may freely accomplish the
will of God in all things: for otherwise we shall never be partakers of his
promise, with the true children of Abraham. For as S. Paul says, they which
are the children of the flesh, are not the children of god: if we shall live
according to the flesh, we shall die. For to be carnally minded, is death: but to
be spiritually minded, is life and peace, because that the fleshly minded is
enmity of god: for it is not obedient to the law of God, neither can be. So
then they that are in the flesh cannot please God. Now chose you which way you
will take, either the narrow way that leads unto life, which christ himself
and his faithful folowers have gone through before: or else the broad path way
that leads to destruction, which the wicked worldlings take their pleasure in
for a while. I for my part have now written this short admonition unto you of
good will (as God be my witness) to exhort you to that way which at length you
your selves should prove and find to be best, yea and rejoice thereof. And I do
not only write this, but I will also (with the assistance of gods grace)
ratify, confirm, and seal the same with the effusion of my blood, when the
full time shall be expired that he has appointed: which (so farforth as I may
judge) must needs be within these few days. Therefore I now bid you al most
heartily farewell in the lord, whose grace be with your spirit, Amen. Watch and
pray, watch and pray, pray, pray. So be it.

John Hullyet.

Letters of Master Robert Glouer, a gentleman of much godly learning,
innocencye and vpryghtnes of life, and hartye zeal to the word of God, burnte
at Couentrie for the faithful testimonye of the same, the.14. day of
September, In the year of our Lord.1555.
To my most intyrelye beloved wife Marye Glouer.
THe peace of conscience which passes all understanding the sweet
consolation, comfort strength, and boldness of the holy ghost, be
continuallye increased in your heart, through a fervent, earnest, and steadfast
faith in our most dear and only Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

I thank you hartelye most loving wife, for your letters sent unto me in my
imprysonment. I read them with tears more then once or twyse, with tears (I
say) for joy and gladness, that God had wroughte in you so merciful a work:
first an unfeigned repentance, secondlye an humble and hearty reconciliation,
thyrdly a willing submission and obedience to the will of God in all things.
Which when I read in your letters, and judged them to proceed from the
bottom of your heart, I could not but be thankful to God, rejoicing with
tears for you and these his great mercyes poured upon you. These your
letters, and the hearing of your most Godly procedynges and constante doings
from time to time, have much releued and comforted me at all times, and shall
be a goodlye testimonye with you at the great day, against many worldly
and deintye daines, which set more by their own pleasure and pelf in this
world, then by Gods glory, little regarding, as it appears, the everlasting
health of their own souls or others. My prayer shall be whylest I am in this
world, that god, which of his great mercy has begone his good work in you,
will finishe it to the glory of his name and by the myghtie power and
inspiration of his holy spirit so strengthen, stablishe, and confyrme you in
all his ways to the end, that we may together show forth his praises in the
world to come to our unspeakable consolation everlastingly, Amen.

So long as God shall lend you continuance in this miserable world, above all
things give your self continuallye to prayer, 1. Timo. 2
lifting up, as Saint Paul says, clean or pure hands without anger, wrath,
or doubting, forgeuing (as he says also) if you have any thing against any
man, as Christ forgeueth us. And that we may be the better willing to forgive,
it is good often to call to remembrance the multitude and greatness of our own
sins, which Christ daily and hourly pardons and forgeueth us, and then we
shall, as Saint Peter affirms, 1. peter. 4.
be ready to cover and hide the offenses of our brethren, be they never so
many. And because gods word teaches us, not only the true manner of praying,
but also what we ought to do or not do in the whole discourse and practice of
this life: What pleases or displeases God: and that, as Christ says, the
word of god that he has spoken shall judge in the last day: let your prayer
be to this end specially, that god of his great mercy would open and reuele
more and more daily to your heart the true sense, knowledge, and vndersteanding
of his most holy word, and give you grace in your living, to express the
fruits thereof. And for as much as it is, as the holy ghost calls it, the
word of affliction, 1. Cor. 1.
that is, it is seldom without hatred, persecution, peril, danger of loss
of life and goods, and whatsoever seems pleasante in this world, as
experience teaches you in this time: call upon GOD continuallye for his
assistance always, as Christ teaches, casting your accomptes what it is like
to cost you, endeavoring your self, through the help of the holy ghost, by
continuance of prayer, to lay your foundation so sure, that no storm or
tempeste shall be able to overthrow or cast it down: remembryng always (as
Christ says) Lothes wife, Luke. 17.
that is to beware of lookinge back to that thing that displeases GOD. And
because nothing displeases GOD so much as Idolatrye, that is, false
worshippyng of God, otherwise then his word commands: look not back (I
say) nor turn not your face to their Idolatrous and blasphemous Massing,
manifestly against the word, practyse, and example of Christ: as it is most
manifest to all that have any taste of the true understanding of Gods word,
that there remains nothing in the church of England at this present,
profitable or edifying to ye church and congregation of the Lord, all things
being done in an unknown tongue, contrary to the express comaundemente of the
holy ghost.

They object that they be the Church, and therefore they must be believed. My
answer was, the Church of GOD knows and reknowledgeth no other head but
Jesus Christ the son of GOD, whom ye have refused, and chosen the man of
sin, the son of perdition, enemy to Christ, the deuilles deputye and
Lieuetenaunte the Pope. Christ's Church hears, John. 10
teaches and is ruled by his word, as he says: my sheep hear my voice.
If you abide in me and my word in you, you be my Disciples. Their church
repelleth gods word, and forces all men to follow their traditions. Christ's
Church dare not add or diminyshe, alter or change his blessed testament: but
they be not afraid to take away all that Christ instituted, and go a whoring
(as the Scripture says) with their own inventions, and letari super operibus
manuum suarum, to glory, Act. 7.
and rejoice in the works of their own hands. The Church of Christ is, has
been and shall be in all ages, under the cross, persecuted, molested and
afflicted, the world ever hating the^ because they be not of the world. But
these persecute, murder, slaye, and kill such as profess the true doctrine of
Christ, be they in learning, living, conversation, and other virtues, never so
excellent. Christ and his Church reserved the trial of their doctrine to the
word of god, John 5.
and gave the people leave to judge thereof by the same word search the
scriptures. But this Church takes away the word from the people, and
suffer neither learned, nor unlearned to examine or prove their doctrine by the
word of God. The true Church of God labors by all means to resyste and
withstand the lusts, desires, and motions of the world, the flesh and the
devil. These for the most part, give themselves to all voluptuousness, and
secretlye commit such things, which (as Saint Paul says) it is shame to
speak of. Ephe. 5.
By these and such like manifest probations, they do declare themselves to be
none of the Church of Christ, but rather of the Sinagoge of Satan. It shall
be good for you oftentimes to confer and compare their proceedings and
doings, with the practyse of those whom the word of God does teach to have
been true members of the Church of God, and it shall work in you both
knowledge, erudition, and boldness to withstand with sufferyng, their doings.
I likened them therefore to Nemrod, whom the Scripture calls a mighty hunter
or a stout champion, telling them that that which they could not have by the
word, they would have by the sword, and be the Church whether men will or no,
and called them with good conscience, as Christ called their forefathers, the
children of the devil: and as their father the devil is a liar and murderer,
so their kingdom and church (as they call it) stands by lying and murtheryng.

Have no fellowshyppe with them therefore, my dear wife, with their doctrine,
and traditions, least you be pertaker of their sins: for whom is reserved a
heuye dampnation, without spedye repentance. Beware of such as shall
aduertyse you somethyng to bear with the world as they do, for a season.
There is no dallying with Gods matters: it is a fearful thing (as Saint
Paul says) to fall into the hands of GOD. Remember the Prophet Helias: 3.
Regu^. 18 Luke 9.
why halte ye on both sides? Remember what Christ says: he that puts his
hands to the ploughe and looks back, is not worthy of me. And seeing god
has hitherto allowed you as a good soldier in the forewarde, play not the
coward, Apo. 2.
neither draw back to the rereward. Saint John numbreth among them that shall
dwell in the fierye lake, such as be fearful in gods cause. Set before your
eyes always the examples of such as have behaved themselves boldelye in Gods
cause: as Steven, Peter, Paul, Daniell, the three children, the wydowes sons,
and in your days Anne Askewe, Laurence Saunders, John Bradford, with many
other faithful witnesses of christ. Phil. 1.
Be not afraid in nothing, says S. Paul, of the adversaries of Christ's
doctrine: the which is to the^ the cause of perdition, but to you, of
everlasting salvation. Christ commands the same, saying: fear the^ not.
Let us not follow the example of him which asked time, first to take leave
of his friends. If we so do, we shall find few of them that will encourage
us to go forward in our business, please it god never so much. We read not
ye James and John, Andrew and Simon, when they were called, put of the time till
they had known their fathers and friends pleasure: but ye scripture says they
forsook all and by and by, followed Christ. Christ lykened the kingdom of GOD
to a precious pearl, Mat. 13.
the which whosoever fyndeth, sells all that he has for to bye it. Yea
whosoever has but a little taste or glimmeryng how precious a treasure the
kingdom of heaven is, will gladly forgo both life and goods for the
obtaynyng of it. But the most part now a days, be like to Aesopes cock,
which when he had found a precious stone, wyshed rather to have found a
barelye corn. So ignoraunte be they how precious a jewel the word of God
is, that they choose rather the things of this world, which being compared
to it, be less in value then a barlye corn.

If I would have given place to worldly reasons, these might have moved me.
First the forgoing of you and my children: the consideration of the state of
my children being yet tender of age and young, apt and inclinable to virtue
and learning, and so having the more need of my assistance, being not
altogether destitute of gifts to help them wythall: possessions above the
common sort of men: because I was never called to be a preacher or minister:
and (because of my sickness) fear of death in imprisonment before I should
come to my answer, and so my death to be unprofitable. But these and such
like, I thank my heavenly father (which of his infinite mercy inspyred me with
his holy ghost, for his sons sake my only Savior and redemer) prevailed
not in me: but when I had, by the wonderful permission of GOD, fallen into
their hands, at the first sight of the Sheriff, nature a little abashed: yet
or ever I came to ye prison, by the working of god and through his goodness
fear departed. I said to ye Sheriff at his coming unto me: what matter have
you Master Sheriff to charge me withal? He answered, you shall know when you
come before the Masters. And so taking me with him, I looked to have been brought
before ye Masters, and to have heard what they could have burdened me withal.
But contrary to my expectation, I was committed fortwith to the Iayle not being
called to my answer, little justice being showed therein. But ye less justice a
man finds at their hands, the more consolation in conscience shall he find
from God: for whosoever is of the world, the world will love him. After I came
into prison and had reposed my self there a while, I wept for joy and
gladness my belly full, musing much of the great mercies of god, and (as it
were) saying to my self after this sort: O Lord who am I, on whom thou
should bestow thus thy great mercy, to be numbered among the Saints that
suffer for thy Gospels sake? And so beholding and considering on the one side
my imperfection, unableness, sinful misery, and unworthiness, and on the
other side the greatness of Gods mercy, to be called to so high a promotion:
was as it were, amassed and overcome for a while with joy and gladness,
concluding thus with my self in my heart: O Lord you show power in weakness,
wisdom in folishenesse, mercy in sinnefulnesse, who shall let thee to choose
where and whom thou will? As I have zelouslye loved the confession of thy
word, so ever thought I my self to be most unworthy to be pertaker of the
affliction for the same,

Not long after, came unto me Master. W. Brasbryge, Master C. Phinees,
Master N. Hopkins, trauelynge with me to be dysmissed upon bonds: to whom
my answer was (to my remembrance) after this sort. For as much as the
Masters have imprysonned me, having nothing to burdeine me with all, if I
should enter into bonds, I should in so doing accuse my self. And seeing
they have no matter to lay to my charge, they may as well let me pass
without bonds, as with bonds. Secondarelye, if I shall enter bonds,
couenaunte, and promise to appear, I shall do nothing but excuse, color,
and cloak their wickedness, and endaunger my self nevertheless, being
bound by my promise to appear. They alleged many worldly persuasions unto
me to avoid the present peril, and also how to avoid the forfiture, if I
brake my promise. I said unto them I had cast my penyworthe, by Gods help.
They undertook also to make the bond easy. And when they were somewhat
importune, I said to Master Hopkins that liberty of conscience was a precious
thing, and took as it were a pause, lifting up my heart to God earnestlye
for his aid and help that I might do ye thing that might please him. And
so, when they had let their suit fall, my heart, me thought, was wonderfullye
comforted. Master Dudlye commoned with me in like manner: whom I aunsweared in
effect as I did before. Afterward debatinge the matter with my self, these
considerations came to my head: I have from time to time with good conscience
(God I take to record) moved all such as I had conference with all, to be
no daliers in Gods matters, but to show them selves after so great a light
and knowledge, hartye, earnest, constante, and stable in so manifest a truth,
and not to give place one jot contrary to the same. Now thought I, if I
shall withdraw my self, and make any shifts to pull my own neck out of the
collor, I shall give great offense to my weak brethren in Christ, and
advantage to the enemies to slander Gods word. It will be said, he has been
a great boldner of others to be earnest and fervent to fear no worldly
perils or dangers, but he him self will give no such example.

Wherefore I thought it my bounden duty both to God and man, being (as it
were) by the great goodness of GOD. maruelouslye called and appointed
hereunto, to set aside all fear, perilles, and dangers, all worldly
respects and considerations, and like as I had heretofore, according to the
measure of my small gift, within the compass of my vocation and calling, from
ye bottom of my heart unfeignedly moved, exhorted, and persuaded al yt professed
gods word, manfully to persiste in ye defense of the same, not with sword and
vyolence, but with sufferyng and loss of life, rather then to defyle
themselves again with the whoryshe abomination of the Romysh Antichrist: so
the hour being come, with my fact and example to ratifye, confyrme, and
proteste the same to the hearts of all true beleuers: and to this end (by the
mighty assistance of Gods holy spirit) I resolved my self with much peace of
conscience, willingly to sustain what soever the Romyshe Antichrist should do
against me, and the rather because I understood the Bishops coming to be
at hand, and considered that poor men's consciences should be then sharply
assaulted. So remained I prisoner in Couentrye by the space of.10. or.11.
days, being never called to my answer of the Masters, contrary to the laws
of the Realm, they having neither statute, law, proclamation, letter,
warrante, nor commandment for my apprehension. They would have laid all the
matter upon the Summer. Who being examined, denied it before their faces, as
one of my friends told me, saying: that he had no comaundemente concerning me,
but for my elder brother. God lay not their extreme doings against me, to
their charge at the great day.

The second day after ye bishops coming to Couentry, M. Warren came to the
Yeldhaule, and willed the chief Iayler to carry me to the Bishop. I laid to M.
Warrens charge the cruel seeking of my death: and when he would have excused
him self, I told him he could not wype his hands so: he was as giltye of my
blood before God, as though he had murdered me with his own hands. And so he
parted from me saying, I need not to fear, If I would be of his belief. God
open his eyes if it be his will, and give him grace to believe this, which he
and all of his inclination, shall find (I fear) to true for their parts:
that is, that all they which cruelly, maliciously, and spytefully persecute,
molest and afflict the members of Christ for their conscience sake, and for the
true testimonye of Christ's word, and cause them most unjustly to be slain and
murdered: without spedy repentance, shall dwell with the devil and his Angels in
the fiery lake everlastingly, where they shall wysh and desire, cry and call,
but in vain (as their right companion Epulo did) to be refreshed of them,
Luke 16
whom in this world they contemned, despised, disdayned, as slaves, misers, and
wretches.

When I came before the Bishop in one Dentons house, he began with this
protestation, that he was my bishop for for lack of a better, and willed me to
submit my self. I said to him, I am not come to accuse my self: what have you
to lay to my charge, He asked me whether I was learned? I answered, smally
learned. M. Chau^celor standing by said I was a master of Art. Then my Lord
laid to my charge my not coming to the curch. Here I might have dalyed with
him and put him to his proofs, for as much as I had not been for a long season
in his diocese, neither was any of ye Citizens hable to prove any such
matters against me. Notwythstandyng I answered him thorough gods merciful
help, yt I neither had nor would come at their church as long as their mass
was used there, to save (if I had the^) v. hundredth lives. I wylled him to show
me one jot or title in the scripture for the proof and defense of the mass.
He answered, he came to teach and not to be taught. I was co^te^t (I told him)
to learn of him, so far as he was able to teach me by the word of god. Who
shall judge the word said my Lord? I answered, Christ was content that the
people should judge his doctrine by searchyng the scriptures, and so was Paul:
me thinks ye should claim no further privilege or preeminence, then they
had. I offered him further, that I was content the primitive church next to
the Apostles time, should judge betwixt him and me. He refused also to be
judged by that. Then, he was my Bishop he said, and therefore I must believe him.
If you say black is white (my lord) must I also say as you say, and believe
the same because you say it is so? M. Chauncelour noted me to be arrogant,
because I would not give place to my bishop. I said to my lord, if you will be
believed because you be a bishop, why find you fault with the people that
believed M. Latymer, M. Rydley, M. Hoper, and the residue of them that were
bishops? He answered, because they were heretykes. And may not you err (quoth
I as well as they? I looked for learning at my lords hand to persuade me, and he
oppressed me only with his authority. He said I disse^ted from the church, and
asked me where my church was before king Edwardes time. I desired him to
show me where their church was in Helias time, and what outward show it had
in christ's time. My lord said, that Helias complaint was only of the ten
tribes that fell from David's house, whom he called heretykes. You be not able
to show (said I) any prophets that ye other ij. tribes had at the same time. My
lord making no answer to that, M. Rogers one of the masters of the City
comes in the mean season, taking upon him as though he would answer to the
text. But my lord forthwith commanded me to be committed to some toure if they
had any besides ye common Iaile, saying he would at ye end of his visitatio^ of
his diocese, wede out such wolves. M. Rogers wylled him to content himself
for that night till they had taken further order for me. Eue^ where it pleases
you said I to my lord I am content, and so I was returned at that time to the
common Iayle again from whence I came.

On the Friday morning being the next day after, I had warning by one of the
prisoners to prepare my self to ride with my fellow prisoners the same day to
Lychfield, there to be bestowed at the bishops pleasure. Which tidings at the
first, somethyng discouraged me, fearyng lest I should, by the means of my
great sickness through extreme handling, which I looked for, have died in the
prison before I should come to my answer. But I rebuked immediately with gods
word, this infidelity in my self, and by the same corrected mine own
mistrust and fantasy after this manner: What make I of God? Is not his power as
great in Lichfield as in Couentry? Does not his promise extend as well to
Lichfielde as to Couentry? was he not with Abacucke, Daniel, Misach, and Jeremy
in their most dangerous imprisonments? He knows what things we have need
of. He has numbered all the hears of our head. The sparow falls not on the
ground without our heavenly fathers will: much more will he care for us if we be
not faithless, who^ he has made worthy to be witnesses of his truth. So long
as we put our trust in him, we shall never be destitute of his help, neither
in prison, neither in sickness nor in health, neither in life nor in death,
neither before kings nor before bishops: nor the Devil himself, much less
one of his ministers, shall be able to prevail against us. with such like
meditations, I waxed chereful and of good consolation and comfort. So that
hearing one say that they could not provide horses enough for us, I said let
them carry us in a donge carte for lack of horses if they list: I am well
content for my part. Notwithstanding at the request of my friends, I wrote to
master Mayor and his brethren briefly requiring them yt I might make answer
here to such things as should be laid to my charge: but I received no
answer of my letters to nor fro. I coniectured that when the bishop and the
Chancellor had seen them, it moved them the rather to have me away, being
more desirous (as I suppose) to have had me dispatched privily in prison, the^
to come openly to my answer. The manner of entreating and using me at my first
coming to prison did partly declare the same. Certain sergeauntes and
Constables of Couentry, being appointed to have the conueying of us to
Lichfield to be delivered there to one Iephcot the Chau^cellours man sent from
Couentry with us for ye same purpose, we were commanded to horseback about
11. or.12. of the clock on Friday being market day that we might be the more
gased and wondered at. And to kindle the peoples hearts more against us, they
did proclayme a letter concerning a proclamation made for calling in and
disanulling of al such books as truly expound and interpret the scriptures. We
came to Lichfield about 4. of the clock at night, and had leave to repose our
selves our supper time. We Inned at the sign of the Swanne, where we were
enterteyned friendly and gently. After supper Iephcot repaired to us, whom we
entreated that upon sureties we might rest our selves that night, being
unprovided of any thing to help our selves withal in the prison at that
present. He was content at ye first, as he seemed: but afterward, whether it
was by persuasio^, or rather, as it seemed to me, he did but of policy put of
the time till he had gathered a multitude to stare and wonder upon us, and also
that we should provide nothing to ease our selves wythall, he revoked his
promise, and so by consent we were had to the prison, the the multitude
wonderyng at us. I wylled Iephcot before, to execute his office with mercy,
tellyng him that they should have judgment without mercy, that showed no
mercy. And this mercy I found at his hand. He put me into a prison the same
night, where I continued until I was condemned, a place next to the doungel,
narrow of roumes, strong of buildyng, and very cold, with small light: and
there allows he me a bundel of straw in stead of my bed, without chair,
form or any thing else to ease my self wythall. God of his mercy gave me great
patience through prayer that night, so that if it had been his pleasure, I
could have been contented to have ended my life. But Iephcot and one Persey the
bishops man, which afterward was my continual keeper for the most part, came
to me in the morning: to whom I said this is great extremity, god send us
patience, and no more. Then they were content that I should have a bed of
mine own procurement. But I was allowed no help, neither night nor day, nor
company of any man, notwythstanding my great sickness, nor yet paper, pen,
or ynke, or books saving my new testament in Latin, and a prayer book which I
privily stole in.

Within two days after. M. Chancellor and one Temsey a prebendary there,
came to me into my prison. M. Chauncellor exhorted me to conform my self to
my Lord and to the church. He wished to my soul no more hurt the^ to his own:
belike because I had laid to his charge at Couentry the sekyng of my blood
unjustly and wrongfully. Now thus the second time, I answered M. Chancellor
to his exhortation, that I refused not to be ruled by that church that was
content to be ordered and governed by the word of GOD. He asked me how I knew
the word of God, but by the church. The church shows which is the word of
god, therefore the church is above the word of God. This is no good reason in
learning, said I to Master Chau^cellor. For it is like unto this: John showed
the people who was Christ, Ergo John was above Christ. Or else, I have a man
that knows not the king, and I tell him who is the king, am I therefore above
the king? M. Chau^cellour said he came not to reason with me, and so departed.
So remained I without any further conference of any man by the space of.8.
days, and till the bishops coming: in in the which time I gave my self
continually to prayer, and meditation of the merciful promises of god, made
unto al without exception of person, that call upon the name of his dear son
Jesus Christ. I found in my self daily amendment of health of body: increase
of peace in conscience: and many consolatio^s from god, by the help of his holy
spirit, and sometimes as it were a taste and glymmering of the life to come: all
for his only son Jesus Christ's sake: to him be all praise for ever and ever,
Amen.

The enemy ceased not many times, sundry ways to assault me, oftentimes
obiectyng to my conscience mine own unworthiness, through the greatness of ye
benefit to be counted among the number of them that should suffer for christ,
or his gospels sake. Against him I replied with the word of God in this sort:
what were all those whom God had chosen from the beginning, to be his
witnesses, and carye his name before the world? Were they not men, Act. 14.
as Paul and Barnabas said, similiter obnoxii peccato, as well subject to
wickedness, sin, imperfections, as other men be? Even such were Noe, Abraham,
David and all the rest. Romans 11 Roma. 4.
Quis prior dedit illi, as S Paul says? Who gave first unto him? And also
speaking to every man: What have you that thou receiuedst not? Likewise John, al
have received of his fulness: John ^.
they were no bringers of any goodness to god, but altogether receyuers. They
chose not god first, but he chose them. They loved not god first, but he loved
the^ first. Yea he both loved and chose them when they were his enemies, Roma.
10.
full of sin and corruption, and void of all goodness. Est dominus omniu^,
dives in omnes and super omnes inuoca^tes eu^. He is and will be still ye same
god, as rich in mercy, as mighty, as hable, as ready, as wyllyng to forgive the
sins, without respect of person, to the worlds end, of all them that call
upon him. Prope est dominus omnibus inuocantibus eum. God is nere, he is at
hand, Psalm. 145.
he is with all, with al (I say) and refuses none, excepteth none, that
faithfully in true repentance call upon him, in what hour, what place or what
time soever it be. It is no arrogance nor presumption in any man, to burden
god (as it were) with his promise, and of duty to claim and challenge his aid,
help, and assistance in all our perils, dangers, and dystresse, calling upon
him, not in the confidence of our own godliness, but in the trust of his
promises made in Christ, in whom and by whom, and for whose sake, whosoever
boldly approaches to the mercy seat of the father, is sure to receive
whatsoever is expedient or necessary either for body or soul, in more ample
ways and large manner, then he can well wyshe, or dare desire. His word
cannot lie: call upon me in the day of trouble and I will hear thee, and thou
shall praise me. Psalm. 50.


I answered the enemy also on this manner: I am a sinner and therefore not
worthy to be a witness of his truth. What then? Must I deny his word because
I am not worthy to profess it? What bring I to pass in so doing, but add
sin to sin? What is greater sin then to deny the truth of Christ's
gospel? As Christ himself bears witness: he that is ashamed of me or of my
words, of him I will be also ashamed before my father and all his Angels. I
might also by like reason forbear to do any of gods commandments. When I am
provoked to pray, the enemy may say unto me I am not worthy to pray, therefore I
shall not pray. And so in like manner of all the commandments: I shall not
forbear swearyng, stealyng, murtheryng, because I am not worthy to do any
commandment of God. These be the delusions of the Devil, and Satan's
suggestions, which must be overcome by continuance of prayer, and with the
word of god applied according to the measure of every man's gift, against al
assaults of ye Devil.

At the bishops first coming to Lichefield after mine imprisonment. I was
called into a by chamber next to my prison, to my Lord. Before whom when I
came and saw none but his officers, chaplains, and servants, except it were
an old priest, I was partly amassed and lifted up my heart to god for his
merciful help and assistaunce. My lord asked me how I liked my imprisonment.
I gave him no answer touching that question. He proceeded to persuade me to be a
member of his church, which had continued so many years. As for our church (as
he called it) was not known be said, but lately in king Edwards time. I
profess myself to be a member of that church (said I) that is builded upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being ye head corner
stone: and so alleged ye place of.S. Paul to ye Ephesians. And this church has
been from the beginning (said I) though it bear no glorious show before the
world, being ever for the most part under the cross and affliction contemned,
despised, and persecuted. My lord on the other side, contended that they were
the church. So cried all ye clergy against the Prophets at Jerusalem saying,
templum Domini, templum Domini, ye church, ye church. And always when I was
about to speak any thing, my lord cried hold thy peace, hold thy peace: I
command thee by ye virtue of obedience to hold thy peace, calling me a proud
arrogant heretyke. I wylled my lord to burden me with some specialties, and the^
to convince me with some scriptures and good learning. Then my lord began to
move certain questions. I refused to answer him in corners, requiryng that I
might make my answer openly. He said I should answer him there. I stood with
him upon that point until he said I should to prison again, and there have
neither meat nor drink til I had answered him. Then I lyfted up my heart to
God, yt I might stand and agree with the doctrine of his most holy word.

The first question was this: how many sacraments Christ instituted to be used
in the church. The Sacrament of Baptism said I, and the sacrament that he
instituted at his last supper. No more said he? To all those that declare a
true and unfeigned repentance, a sure hope, trust and confidence in the death
of Christ, to such the ministers I grant yt have authority to pronounce by the
power of gods word, the rem^ssion of their sins: Here interrupting me he would
needs bear me in hand that I called this a Sacrament. I would not greatly
contend with him in that point, because ye matter was of no great wayght or
importance, although he in so doing, did me wrong, for I called it not a
sacrament. He asked me further whether I allowed their confession. I said no.
Then he would know my mind what I thought of the presence of Christ's body
in the sacrament. I answered that their mass was neither sacrifice nor
sacrament, because (said I) you have taken away ye true institution, which when
you restore again, I will tell you my judgment concerning christ's body in the
sacrament.

Here was he prevented yt he could not make an end of this which he most godly
had begone, by reason of the (...) which came from London concerning his
execution and martyrdom, which he suffered shortly after.

To the Mayor of Couentrye and his Brethren.
I Beseech you to understand that it is not unknown, as well to ye keeper of ye
Iaile, as to the inhabitours about me where I dwell, that I am a man subject to
very great sickness, and have been by the space of seven years and more, so
that it is not like that I shall be removed without peril and danger of my
life And because I was here committed toward by your appointement, I would
gladly here answer to such things as shall be laid to my charge. If I may
obtain this of you, I have cause tha^kfully to reknowlege your indiffe^ercy: if
otherwise, I pray god it be not laid to your charge at the great day, where
every man shall have just judgment without respect of person.

Your prisoner in the Lord always myndfull of you in my poor prayer. Robert
Glouer.

To his wife, children, and whole family, as his last farewell to them for ever
in this world.
THe mighty consolation of the holy spirit, from our most loving and merciful
father, for his dear sons sake Jesus Christ, continually dwell in your heart,
my dear, and to the end, most faithful and godly wife. His holy Angels
pitche their rentes about you, and your little ones, and suffer you not to be
tempted above your strength so to the end, that we may dwell altogether with
our loving and merciful god and father, and sing praises to his name with his
Angels and Archaungels for ever and ever, Amen.

I bid you all farewell in the Lord. Continue in prayer and rejoice in hope:
be pacient in your affliction: comfort your heart always with ye life to come.
For my departure, consider how often I have been going from you through my long
sickness, and yet god my most loving and merciful father, maruelousye has
reserved me to this high promotion, for the which you ought to give hearty
thanks, if you love his glory, and my eternal joy and felicitye. And if you
show your selves obedient children to your heavenly father, he will love you,
keep you, help you, so that you shall lack nothing expedient for soul or
body, and in the end, when his good will and pleasure is, you shall come to me
and perpetuallye enjoy me and I you, and we al shall have the fullness of that
joy yt shall never be taken from you.

Ye little ones, love your mother: yield reverent obedience unto her in all
godliness. Be not unkind nor unthankful. Pray for her preservation and
continuance amongst you. Pray yt she may be an ensample to you in all ye ways
of ye Lord. And how ye may be have your selves toward god, your mother, and al
other estates and degrees, let always gods word be your rule. Exercise your
selves therein night and day, joining always prayer therewith. God send you a
good guide and good passage if it be his will, out of this idolatrous and blody
realm. And as Christ committed his mother to John: so I commit you in this
world to ye Angel of God, Augustine Bernher. His advertisement if you will
follow, I trust you shall not decline from the fear of god. Be thankful for him,
and cease not to pray for his preservation. And thus I commit al, as well
servant as wife and children, to the merciful tuition of our most merciful
god and father, and to his dear son our only Savior Jesus Christ, with the
holy ghost the comforter: to him be al praise now and for ever, Amen. I
heartily forgive you al, and doubt not but that you do the same to me.

Robert Glouer,
Be faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life. Apoc. 2.



Letters of Robert Smyth, one of the Chapel at Wyndsor, who as a true and
constant witness of Gods word, which he most faythfullye had professed, was
cruellye Martyred at Vrbridge, the.14. day of Auguste, In the year of our
Lord. 1555.
To all them which love God unfeignedly, and entend to lead a Godly life
according to his gospel, and to persevere in his truth unto the end: grace and
peace from God the father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.
BE not afraid, most dearly beloved in our Savior Jesus Christ, at these most
perilous days, This letter is thought of some to be M. Hopers, partly for
that in one copy among diverse, it is entitled unto him: and also by the
phrase and manner of writing, it may be well coniectured so to be.
wherein by the sufferaunce of God, the prince of darkness is broken lose, and
rages in his members against the elect of god with all crueltye, to set up
again the kingdom of Antichrist: against whom, see that ye be strong in
faith, to resist his most deuelyshe doctrine with the pure Gospel of God,
armynge your selves with patience, to abide what soever shall be laid to your
charge for the truths sake, knowing that thereunto ye be called, not only to
believe in him, but also to suffer for him. Oh how happy are ye that in the
sight of God are counted worthy to suffer for the testimonye of Christ? Quiet
therefore your selves (Oh my loving brethren) and rejoice in him for whom ye
suffer: for unto you do remain the unspeakable joys, which neither ye eye
has seen, nor the ear has heard, neither the heart of man is hable to
comprehend in any wise. Be not afraid of ye bodily death, Apo. 17.
for your names are written in the book of life. And the Prophette does
record, Psalm. 115.
that in the fight of the Lord, precious is the death of his Saints. Watch
therefore and pray, that ye be not prevented in the day of temptation. Now
comes the day of your trial, wherein the waters rage, Matthew. 7.
and the stormye winds blow. Now shall it appear whether ye have builded
upon the fleting sand, Ephe. 2
or upon the vnmoueble rock Christ, which is the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets: whereon every house that is builded, grows into an holy temple
of the Lord, by the mighty woorking of the holy ghost, Now approaches the
day of your battle, wherein it is required that ye show your selves the
valiaunte soldiers of Jesus Christ, 2. Tim, 8, Ephe. 6 phil. 2, Heb. 12.
Col. ^
with the armoure of God, that ye may be hable to stand fast against all
the craftye assaults of the devil. Christ is your Captain, and ye be his
soldiers, whose cognizance is the cross, to the which he willingly humbled
him self even unto the death, and thereby spoiled his enemies, and now
triumphs he over them in the glory of his father, making intercession for
them that here do remain to suffer the afflictions that are to be fulfilled
in his mystical body. Pet. 5.
It behooves therefore every one that will be counted his scholar, to take up
his own cross and follow him, as ye have him for an ensample: and I assure
you that he being on your side, nothing shall be hable to prevail against
you. And that he will be with you even to the worlds end, ye have his promise
in the.28. of Mathewe. He will go forth with his host as a conqueror to make
a conquest. He is the man that sits on the white horse, Apoc. 6, 1. Cor. 1.
crowned with immortality, and ye, brethren, are his fellowship, whereof he
is the head. He has your heart in his hand as a bow bente after his godly
will: he shall direct ye same according to ye riches of his glory, into al
spiritual and heavenly cogitations. He is faithful, 1, Cor, i^
and will not suffer you to be further assaulted, the^ he will give you strength
to overcome, and in the most danger he will make a way, that ye may be hable
to bear it.

Shrynke not therefore dear hearts, when ye shall he called to aunsweare for
the hope that is in you: i. Pet. 3.
for we have the comforter, Luke 13. Act. 2. psalm. 52.
even the spirit of truth which was sent from the heavens to teach us. He
shall speak in us, he shall strengthen us: what is he then that shall be able
to confou^d us? Nay, what Tiranne is he that now boasts him self of his
strength to do mischief, whom the Lord shall not with the same spirit, by
the mouth of his servants, stryke down to hell fire? Yea, suddenly will the
Lord bring down the glory of the proud Philistians, by the hands of his
servant David. Their strength is in spear and shield, ^ Regu^ 17. psalm. 6.
2. Cor. 6 Heb. 8. Psalm. 32.
but our help is in the name of the Lord, which made both heaven and earth.
He is our buckler and our wall: a strong tower of defense. He is our God, and
we are his people. He shall bring the counsels of the ungodly to naught. He
shall take them in their own net. He shall destroy them in their own
inventions. The right hand of the Lord shall work this wonder. Psalm. 117.
Psalm. 52. psalm. 65.
His power is known among the children of men* Their fathers have felt it,
and are confounded. In like manner shall they know that there is no counsel
against the Lord, when their secrets are opened to the whole world, and are
found to be against the living God. Work they never so craftelye, Gene. 12.
build they never so stronglye: yet down shall their rabble fall, and the
builders them selves shall then be scatred upon the face of the earth, as
accursed of God. The just shall see this and be glad, psalm. 33.
and praise the name of the Lord, that so meruelouslye has delte with his
servants, as to bring their enemies under their feet. Then shall the
fearful sede of Caine tremble and quake. Gene. 4. Gene. 21. Genesis 11. phil. 3,
psalm. 2. 1. Corin. 3. psalm. 74. Job. 5. Apoc. 12.
Then shall the mocking Ismalites be cast out of the door. Then shall the
proud Nembrothe see his labor lost. Thou shall the beast of Babylon, be
trodden under foot. Then shall the Scribes and Pharisees for madness fret and
rage. Then shall their painted wisdom be known, for extreme folly. Then shall
the bloody Dragone be void of his pray. Then shall the whore of Babilo^,
receive double vengeance. Then shall they scratch their crowns for the fall of
their Maistres harlotte, whom they now serve for filthye lucre, when no man
will bye their wares any more, then shall the popyshe priesthode cry weal a
way with care, even when the Lord shall help his servants: Apo. 18
Psalm. 145.
which day is not far of, the day wherein the kingdom of Antichrist shall
have an end, and never arise any more. In the mean time, abide in certain
and sure hope, 1. Corin. 6. 1. Cor. 8. Heb. 9.
cleanyng-vnto the promyses of God, which in their own time shall be
fulfilled. Acquit your selves like men against the enemies of God in all
humbleness of mind, strong in spirit to acknowledge one God, one holy
Savior Jesus Christ, one only everlasting and sufficient sacrifice for the
remission of sins, even the precious body of the Lord Jesus once offered
for all and for ever. Which now sits on the right hand of God, Act. 3.
and from thence shall he come, to judge both the quick and the dead at the
last day: and until that time, Heb. i. i pet. 3. Ephesi. 1.
occupyeth that blessed body none other place to dwell in, to be kept in, to
be closed in, but only in the heavens, even in the glorious majesty of GOD,
personallye abiding there in the flesh, not coming down from thence till
the last hour. Ephess. 2.
And as he never cease to be man, so does he never lose the similitude of
man: his body there has his liniamentes, he leaves them not: so has that
body there his highness, and shrinketh not, and his manlye shape, he alters
not at any time. He is in that he took of the virgin Marye, a natural man in
all conditions except sin. Romans 1.
And what he took of his blessed Mother, by the woorking of the holy ghost,
he took it for ever, and will not exchange the same for any other. He took
the shape of a man with the substance of his manhood, in one sacred womb.
There were they coupled together by the holy ghost, never to be divided a
sunder. Ephe. 2.
He retayneth the one with the other, inseperablye. As he will not alter the
substance of his flesh, into the substance of bread: no more will he alter
the shape of his body, into the form of bread. There can not be a greater
absurdity against the truth, then to think that he would leave the shape
that he took in the virgins womb, being an accident unto his manhood, and
join unto the same a wafer take baken in an oven, or between a pair of yrons.
^. John. 1
As he is in heaven very man, one only mediator between God and man, even the
man Christ Jesus, he it is that is the propitiation for our sins. Be bold
therefore, to confess this most pure and Apostolical doctrine: Col. i.
and also that all favor, mercy, and forgiveness comes only by him. He
only of God the father was made for us, al wisdom, righteousness, 1. Cor. i.
Ephesians. 2.
sanctification and redemption. All these are the gifts of God the father,
freely given unto us by Christ Jesus God and man, through faith in his blood,
and not by the merits of men. Abacu. 2. Gala. 3. Act. 10.
Gifts they are (I say) frelye given unto us of favor, without our deserte:
by beleuyng, and not by deserving. To this do the law and the Prophettes bear
witness.

This doctrine have all the blessed Martyrs of Christ's Church, witnessed with
their blood to be true. To this truth, have all the consciences of al true
beleuers subscribed, ever since the Ascension of Christ. This witness is not
of man, but of God. What better quarrel can ye th^n have to give your lives
for, Luke 9.
then the truth it self? That man that gives his life for the truth, takes
the redyest way to life. He that has the Popes curse for the truth, is sure
of Christ's blessing. Well then my brethren, what shall now let, but that ye
go forward as ye have begone? Nay rather run with the runners that ye
may obtain the appointed glory. John. 14 Psalm. 15. Ephesians. 4. Col. 5. Math. 10
Mark. 8.
Hold on the right way, look not back, have the eye of your heart fyxed
upon god, and so run, that ye may get hold of it. Cast away al your worldly
pelf, and worldly respects, as the favor of friends, the fear of men,
sensual affection, respect of persons, honor, praise, shame, rebuke,
wealth, pouertye, riches, lands, possessions, carnal fathers and mothers,
wife and children, with the love of your own selves, and in respect of that
heavenly treasure ye look for, let all these be denied, and utterly
refused of you, so that in no condition they do abate your zeal, or quench
your love toward GOD. In this case make no account of them, but rather
repute them as vile, in comparison of everlasting life. Phil. 3.
A way with them as thorns that choke the heavenly seed of the Gospel,
where they be suffered to grow. Luke. 8.14
They are burdens of the flesh, which incomber the soul: Roman. 7.
exchange them therefore for advantage. Does not he gain that fyndeth
heavenly and immortal treasure, for earthlye and corruptible riches? Loses
that man any thing, which of his carnal father and mother is forsaken,
Ephe. i. Gala, 4. Phi. 3.
when therefore he is received of God the father to be his child and heir in
Christ? Heavenly, for earthlye: for mortal, immortal: for transitorye
things, permanente: is great gaynes to a Christian conscience.

Therefore as I began, I exhort you in the Lord, not to be afraid. Shrynke
not my brethren, mistrust not God, Heb. 6. 1. Cor. 2.
be of good comfort, rejoice in the Lord, hold fast your faith, and
continewe to the end. Deny the world and take up your cross and follow
him which is your loadesman, and is gone before. If you suffer with him, you
shall reign with him. What way can you glorifye the name of your heavenly
father better, then by sufferinge death for his sons sake? What a spectacle
shall it beto the world, to behold so godly a fellowshippe as you servants
of god, in so just a quarrel as the gospel of Christ is, with so pure a
conscience, so strong a faith, and so liuelye a hope, to offer your selves to
suffer most cruel torments at the hands of Gods enemies, and so to end
your days in peace, to receive in the resurrection of the ryghteous, life
everlasting? Heb. 11.


Be strong therefore in your battle. The Lord God is on your side, and his
truth is your cause: phi. 3
and against you be none, but the enemies of the cross of Christ, as the
Serpent and his seed, the Dragon with his tail, Math. 3. John. 8.
the marked me^ of the Beast, the offspring of the Pharisees, the congregation
malignaunt, the generation of Vipers, murtheters, as their father the devil
has been from the beginnynge. To conclude, such are they are the Lord God has
always abhorred, and in all ages resisted and overthrown. God, from whom
nothing is hid, knows what they are. He that searches the hearts of men,
Psalm. 34. Heb. 4.
he has found them out to be craftye, subtle, full of poison, proud,
disdaynefull, stifenecked, deuourers, rauenees, and barkers against the
truth, filthy and shameless: and therefore does the spirit of God, by the
mouths of his holy Prophettes and Apostles, call them by the names of Foxes,
Jude. 1.
Serpents, Cockatrices, Lions, Leopardes, Bulls, Bears, Wolves, Dogs,
Swine, Beasts, teaching us thereby to understand, that their natural
inclination is, to deceive, poison, and destroy (as much as in them lies)
the faithful and elect of God. Psalm. 76.
But the Lord with his right arm shall defend his little flock against the
whole rabblement of these worldlings, Matthew. 20. Luke 2i Math. 10. 1. Pet. 2.
which have conspired against him: he has numbered all the hears of his
childrens heads, so that not one of them shall peryshe without his fatherly
will. He keeps the sparowes, much more will he preserve them whom he has
purchased with the blood of the immaculate Lamb. He will keep them unto the
hour appointed, wherein the name of God shall be glorified in his Saints.
In the mean time let them work their wills, Math. 10 Sapi. 3.
let them envy, let them malign, let them blaspheme, let the^ curse, banne,
betraye, whyppe, scourge, hang and burn: for by these means God will try
his elect as gold in ye furnace, and by these fruits, shall they also bring
themselves to be known what they be, for all their shepes skins. For as he
that in suffering patiently for the Gospel of God, is thereby known to be of
Christ: even so in likewise is the persecutour of him known, Psalm. 7.
to be a member of Antichriste. Besides this, their extreme crueltye shall be a
mean, the sooner to provoke god to take pity upon his servants, and to
destroy them that so tyranouslye entreat his people: as we may learn by the
historyes, as well in the bondage of Israel under Pharao in Egypt, Exodus 13.
Esd. 3.13
as also in the miserable captivity of Judah in Babylon: Where as, when the
people of God were in most extreme thraldom, then did the Lord stretch forth
his mighty power to deliver his servants. 2. Match. 7. Jacob. 4. i Pet. 5.
Apo. 9. Heb 12. Jacob. 2
Though God for a time, suffer them to be exalted in their own pride, yet
shall they not escape his vengeance. They are his rods, and when he has
worn them to the stumpes, then will he cast them into the fire: this shall be
their fynall reward. Our duty is in the mean while, patiently to abide the
will of god, which works all things for the best.

Thus deals he with us, partly for our trial, 2, Cor, i2. Esdras. 36
and partly also for our sins, which we most grievously have committed to the
great slander of his gospel, whereby ye name of God was evil spoken of among
his enemies: Roma. 2.
for the which he now punishes us with his fatherly corrections in this
world, i. Cor, i, Luke. 15
that we should not be dampened with the world. By this means seeks he his
sheep that were lost, to bring them home to the fold again. By this way
seeks he to reform us, that we may be like unto him, Ephesi. 4
after the image of his son Jesus Christ, in all holiness and righteousness
before him. Finally, this way uses his godly wisdom, to make us thereby to
know him, Ose. 13.
and our selves in him, that before time had in a manner forgotten him, praised
be his name therefore. And as for these Balaamites, which now do molest us,
commit the^ to the hands of god, give him the vengeance, and he will reward
them. Romans 12. phil. 2 Luke. 8. Mark. 4. psalm. 8. psalm. 4. Jeremy. 12.
Fall ye to prayer, and let these belly gods prate. For he is in heaven and
slepeth not, that keeps Israel. He is in heaven that made the seas calm,
when the Disciples were afraid. Let us now faithfully call upon him and he will
hear us. Let us cry unto the Lord for he is gracious and merciful. When we are
in trouble he is with us, he will deliver us, and he will glorify us. If we
come unto him, we shall find him turned unto us. If we repent us of our
wickedness done against him, Jeremy. 18
then shall he take away the plague that he has devised against us.

Let us therefore earnestly repent, and bring forth the worthy fruits of
repentance. Let us study to be his, then shall we not need to fear what these
hypocrites do against us, Matthew. 12.
which with their pretensed holiness deceive the hearts of the simple, and abuse
the authority of god in his Princes, causing them (by their procurement) to
testify their ambicious prelacie, and to erect up their Idol again with the
Romish Masie. God in whose hands are the hearts of kings, Job. i2 pro. 15.22.
open the heart of the Queen's hyghnes, to espy them out what they be, and so
to wede them out, that they no longer be suffered to trouble the congregation of
God, and to poison the realm with Pope holy doctrine. psalm. 24.30 78.
God almighty for his son Jesus Christ's sake, deliver the Queen's highness and
this her church realm, from these proud prelates, which are as profitable in
the church of Christ as a polecatte in the mids of a warren of connies.

To conclude my brethren. I commit you to God and to the power of his word,
which is hable to establysh you in all truth. His spirit be with you and
work always that ye may be myndful of your duties toward him whose ye are
both body and soul. Whom see that ye love, serve, dread and obey, above all
worldly powers, and for nothing under the heavens, defyle your conscience
before God. Dissemble not with his word: Mark. 6 Matthew. 10. Apo 5.
God will not be mocked: nay they that dissemble with him, deceive themselves.
Such shall the lord deny and cast out at the last day: such (I say) as bear
two faces in one hoode: such as play on both hands: such as deny the known
truth: such as obstinately rebel against him. All such with their partakers
shall the lord destroy. God defend you from al such, and make you perfect unto
the end. John. 16.
Your sorrow shall be turned into joy.

A letter sent to a friend of his.
THe eternal God keep you in his fear. I have me heartily commended unto you
and your husband, besechyng almighty god to preserve you in well doing, and in
perfect knowledge of his Christ, that you may be sound fautles in the day of
the Lord. I have heard say that my friend is given over to vanity. It breaks
my heart, not only to hear that he so does, but also teaches other, that it
is unhurtful to go to all abominations, which now stand in the Idols
temples. Nevertheless (dear friend) be not moved to follow sinners: for they
have no inheritance with GOD and Christ. But look that by going into the
Idols temple, you defyle not the temple of God, for light has no fellowshyp
with darkness: but look what the Lord has commanded, that do. For if not
going to church were without persecution, they would not learn you that
lesson. But all thing that is sweet to the flesh, is allowed of the fleshly.
The Lord shall reward every man according to his works, and he that leads
into captivity shall go into captivity, and he that by the fleshly man is led in
the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption. The lord Jesus give you his holy
spirit, Amen.

Seek peace and ensue it. Fear god, love god with all your heart, with al your
soul, and with all your strength.

Your friend and all men's in Christ Jesus, R. Smith.
Scribled in have from Newgate the.12. of May.
To his Wife.
THe God and father eternal, which brought again from death our Lord Jesus
Christ, keep thee dear wife now and for ever, with thy Parents and all thy
friends, Amen.

I praise God for his mercy, I am in the same state that you left me in,
rather better then worse, lokyng daily for the living GOD, before whom I
hunger full sore to appear, and receive the glory, of which I trust thou art
wyllyng to be a partaker: I give GOD most hearty thanks therefore, desyryng
thee of all loves, to stand fast in that faith which thou have received, and
let no man take away the seed that almighty god has sowe^ in thee, but lay
hands of everlasting life, which shall ever abide, when both ye earth and al
earthly friends shall peryshe, desyryng them also to receive thankfully our
trouble, which is momentane and light, and (as S. Paul says) not worthy of
the things which shall be showed on us: that we patie^tly carrying our cross may
attain to ye place whether our Savior Christ is gone before, to ye which I
beseech god of his mercy bring us spedely. I have been much troubled about your
deliuerau^ce, fearyng much the persuasions of worldlings, and have found a
friend which will (I trust) find a mean for you, if you be not already provided,
desiring you in any case to abide such order as that my friend shall appoint
in god. And bear well in mind ye words which I spoke at our departi^g, yt as god
has chose^ us and made us worthy to suffer with him, we may endeavor our selves
to follow uprightly in this our vocation, desiryng you to present my hartye
commendations to all our friends, and especially to your Parents, keeping
your matter close in any wise. Give most hartye thanks to my friend, which
only for our cause is come to Windsor. Continue in prayer. Do well. Be fautles
in all things. Beware of abominations. Keep you clean from sin. Pray for
me as I do for you. I have sent you a piece of gold for a token, and most
entierlye desire you to send me word if you lack any thing. The lord Jesus
preserve you and yours, Amen. From Newgate the.15. of Apryll.

If you will mete with me again,
Forsake not Christ for any pain.
By your faithful husband Robert Smyth.

Letters of Master Bartelet Grene, a gentleman and professor of the Law:
who, for gods cause and the mayntenaunce of his holy Gospel, suffered
martyrdom, the.13. of Ianuarye. In the year of our Lord. 1556.
To his dearly beloved in the lord Mystres Elizabeth C.
WOuld God (if it were his pleasure) that with this letter I might send you my
heart and mind, and whatsoever there is in me else that pertains unto god. So
should I think it the best message and happiest letter yt ever I could write.
But though I obtain not my desire, yet shall I not cease with continual prayer to
labor for you, desiring almighty god to increase yt which he has long since
begone in you, of sober life and earnest zeal toward his religion. In faith as
says S. Paul) she that is a true widow and fre^dles, puts her trust in
god, i. Cor, 7,
continuing day and night in supplication and prayer: but she that lives in
pleasure is dead, even yet alive. And verily, a true widow is she that has
married Christ, forsakyng the vanities of the world and lust of the flesh. For
as the married woman cares how to love, please, and serve her husband: i. Tim,
5,
so ought the widow to give all her heart and soul, thoughts and words,
studies and labors, faithfully to love god, virtuously to bring up her
children and householde, and diligently to provide for the poor and
oppressed. Therefore Saint Paul first instructs a widow how to behave her
self, that is (to begin where Paul leaves) not to live in pleasure: then to
watch unto prayer as the only means to obtain al our desires, steadfastly
laying up all our trust in God, as Salomo^ right well says: psalm. 34. Luke 2.
first escheue evil then do good. Of Anna ye praise is written, that she never
went out of the temple, but served God with fasting and prayer night and day:
so well had she espoused Christ. Judith. 8.
Judith ware a smock of hear contynuyng in fasting, and had good report of
al men. The next care that belongs unto a wydow, is that she bring up her
chrildre^ and household godly, Ephesians. 6.
in the nourture and informacion of the Lord. Whereof Saint Paul says, if any
widow have children or Nephews, 1. Tym 5.
let them learn first to rule their own house godly, and to recompense
their elders. The incontinency and coueteousnes of Phynees and O phny not
corrected by Ely their father, ^. Reg. 2
provoked gods ve^geau^ce upon him and all his kynred. The over tender love of
Absolon expelled Dauyd from his kingdom. 2. Regu^. 15
The unrebuked sins of Ammon encouraged Absolon to slay his brother. Most
manifest examples against the parents, 1. Reg. 3.
for the offenses of their children. Contrariwse how greatly might Ha^nah
rejoice over Samuel her son, 2. Reg. 13
whom she had brought up in the house of the Lord? What thanks should Tobias
wife give for her son Toby? 3e Reg. 1
How happy was Solomon to be taught by the prophet Nathan? But above all
wydowes, thryse blessed was the happy mother of seven sons, that so had
instructed the^ in the fear of God, ^. Match. 7
that by no torments they would shrynke from the love of his truth. Of the
last part Saint Paul shows: that a widow should be chosen, if she have
nouryshed her chylderne, if she have been lyberall to strangers, if she have
washed the saints fete, and if she have ministered to them in adversity.
Herein it is evident how earnestly Saint Paul would have wydowes bent toward
the poor, for that (as though they only had been therefore mete) he appointed
only wydowes to minister unto the Saints, and to gather for the poor. Which
use also continued almost throughout the primitive church, that wydowes had the
charge and gatheryng for poor men and strangers.

Of your neighbors I need not to put you in remembrance, seeing you daily feed
them with good hospitality, by which means also many foreiners are of your
relieved: but of the poor alms houses and miserable prisoners here in London,
many lackyng their liberty without cause, some under the color of religion,
some only kept for fees, and some on private men's displeasure. Alas that
Christ so hungreth and no man will feed him: is so sore oppressed with thrust,
and no man will give him to drink: destitute of all lodgyng and not releued:
naked and not clothed: sick and not visited: emprisoned and not seen. In time
paste, men could bestow large sums of money, on copes, vestme^ts, and
ornaments of the church. Why rather follow we not Saint Ambrose example, which
sold the same to the relief of the poor, or Chrisostomes commandment,
which wylleth first to deck and garnyshe the living temple of God? But alas,
such is the wyckednes of these our last days, that nothing moves us:
neither the pure doctrine, the godliness of life, nor good examples of the
ancient fathers. If in any thing they erred, if they have written any thing
that serves for sects and dissension, that will their charitable children
embrace, publish and maintain with sword fagotte and fire. But all in vain:
they strive against the stream. For though in despyte of the truth, by force
of the ores of craftye persuasion, they may bring themselves into the haven of
hell: yet can they not make all men believe, yt the banks move whiles the
ship sayleth, nor ever shall be able to turn the direct course of the stream
of gods truth. Our Lord Jesus Christ strengthen you in all pure doctrine and
upright living, and give you grace, virtuously to bring up your children and
family, and carefullye to provide for the poor and oppressed, Amen. At Newgate
the.20. of Ianu. 1556.

Your assured, Bartelet Grene.

To my very loving friends and masters, M. Goring, M. Farneham, M. Fletewode,
M. Roses well, M. Bell, M. Hussy, M. Calthorpe* M. Boyer, and other my Masters
of the Temple, Bartelet Grene wissheth health of body and soul.
VEry friends are they which are knit together with the knotte of Charity.
Charity does not decay, but increase in them that dye faythfullye. Whereof it
follows that though we be absent in body, yet are we present in spirit,
coupled together with the unity of faith in the bond of peace, which is love.
How is be worthy ye name of a friend, that measures his friendship with the
distance of place, or partyng of persons? If thy friend be out of sight, is thy
friendship ended? If he be gone into the country, will thou cease to love him?
If he be passed the seas, will thou so forsake him? If he be carried into
heaven, is charity hyndred thereby? On the one side, we have the use of the
fathers from the primative church, that gave thanks for their friends that died
in the faith, to prove that charity died not with death. On the other side
(says Horace) Coelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt. What speak I
of Horace? Says not S. Paul the same thing? For we are members of his body,
of his flesh, and of his blood: yea we are members one of another. Is the
hand, or arm, foot, or leg, a member when it is disseuered from the body?
How can we be members except we be joined together? What is ye line that
coupleth us but love? When all things shall fail, love fails never. Hope
has his end, when we get that we hoped for. Faith is fynyshed in heaven. Love
endures for ever: love I say that proceeds of charity. For carnal love (when
that which he loved is lost) does peryshe with the flesh. Neither was that ever
but fleshly love, which by distaunce of place, or seueryng of bodies, is parted
a sunder. If love be the end, or su^me of the law: if heaven and earth shall
perish: if one jot of gods word shall not decay, why should we think that
love lasts not ever? I need not to write much to you my friends, neither can I
have leisure now that the kepers are risen. But this I say, if we kept Christ's
commandment in loving each other, as he loved us, then should our love be
everlasting. This frendshyp Paul felt when it moved him to say, that neither
length nor breadth (meaning no distance of place) neither height nor depth
should sever him from the love of Christ. Wey well this place, and mete it
with Paul's measures: so shall you find, that if our love be unfeigned, it
can never be ended. Now may you say, why writest thou this? Forsooth, to the
end that if our friendship be stable, you may accomplish this the last request
of your friend, perform after my death the friendship we began in our life,
that amity may increase, until god make it perfect at our next meting
together. Master Fletewode, I beseech, you remember Wittrance and Cook, two
singular me^ among common prisoners. Master Fernha^ and M. Bell with M. Hussy
(as I hope) will dispatche Palmer and Richardson, with his companions. I pray
you M. Calthrop think on John Grove, an honest poor man, Traiford and Rice
Aprice his acco^plices. My Cousin Thomas Witton, a scriuener in Lomberd street,
has promised to further their deliuerye: at the least he can instruct you
which way to work. I dout not but that Master Boyer will labor for the good
wife Cooper (for she is worthy to be helped) and Gerard the Frenchman.

There be also diverse other well disposed men, whose deliverance if ye will not
labor for: yet I humbly beseech you to seek their relief as you shall see
cause: namely of Henry Aprice, Lancelote, Hobbes, Lother, Homes, Carre, and
Buckingham a young man of goodly gifts in wit and learning, and (saving that he
is somewhat wild) likely to do well hereafter. There be also two women. N.
Coningham, and Alice Alexander, that may prove honest. For these and al other
poor prisoners here, I make this my humble suite and prayer to you all my
Masters, and especial good friends, beseching you of all bonds of amity,
for the precious blood of Jesus Christ in the bowels of mercy, to render the
causes of miserable captives. Help to clothe Christ, visit the afflicted,
comfort the sorrowful, and releue the nedye. The very God of peace guide
your hearts to have mercy on the poor, and love faythfullye together, Amen.
This present Monday, when I look to die, and live for ever.

Yours for ever. Bartelet Grene.

Letters of that faithful man of God John Careless, who by cruel imprisonmente
and unmerciful dealing of the papists, dyed in the Marshalsee and was buried
in the fields on a dungehill: and therefore is not unworthy here to be placed
among the Martyrs.
To my most dear and faithful brethren in Newgate, condemned to die for the
testimonye of Gods everlasting truth.
THe everlasting peace of god in Jesus Christ, the continual joy, strength and
comfort of his most pure, holy and mighty spirit, with the increase of faith
and lively feeling of his eternal mercy, be with you my most dear and faithful
loving brother Timmes, and with all the rest of my dear hearts in the Lord,
your faithful fellow soldiers, and most constant companions in bonds, yea of
men condemned most cruelly for the sincere testimony of gods everlasting truth,
to ye full finishing of that good work, which he has so graciously begone in
you all, that the same may be to his glory, the commodity of his pore
afflicted church, and to your everlasting comfort in him, Amen.

Ah my most sweet and loving brethren, and dearest hearts in the Lord, what shall
I say, or how shall I write unto you in the least point or part, to utter ye
great joy yt my poor heart has conceived in god, through ye most godly
example of your christian constancy and sincere confession of Christ's verity?
Truly my tongue can not declare, nor my pen express ye abundance of
spiritual mirth and gladness, that my mind and inward man has felt, ever since
I heard of your hearty boldness, and modest behavior, before that bloody
butcher in ye time of al your crafty examinations, specially at your cruel
conde^natio^ in their cursed Co^sistorie place. Blessed be god ye father of al
mercy, and praised be his name, for yt he has so graciouslye performed upon
you his dear dareli^gs, his most sweet and comefortable promises, in not only
giving you the continual aid, strength and comfort of his holy and mighty
spirit, to the faithful confession of his christ, for whose cause (O most
happy me^) ye are condemned to die: but also in giving you such a mouth and
wisdom, as al your wicked enemies were not able to resist, but were feign to
cry peace, peace, and not suffer you to speak. As truly as god lives (my
dear brethren) this is not only unto you a most evident probatio^ yt god is on
your side, and a sure certainty of your everlasting salvation in him, but also
to your cruel adversaries (or rather Gods cursed enemies) a plain
demonstration of their just eternal woe and dampnation, which they shall be
full sure shortly to feel, when ye shall full sweetly possess the place of
felicity and pleasure prepared for you from the beginning.

Therefore (my dearly beloved) cease not so long as ye be in this life, to
praise the lord with a lustye courage, for that of his great mercy and infinite
goodness, he has vouched you worthy of this great dignity, to suffer for his
sake, not only the loss of goods, wife and children, long imprisonment, cruel
oppression etc: but also the very deprivation of this mortal life, with the
dissolution of your bodies in the fire. The which is the greatest promotion
that god can bring you or any other unto in this vale of misery, yea so great
an honor, as the highest Angel in heaven is not permitted to have: and yet
has the lord (for his dear son Christ's sake) reputed you worthy of ye
same, yea and that before me and many other, which have both long looked and
longed for the same. Ah my most dear brother Timmes, whose time rests
altogether in the hands of thy Lord, in a full happy time came you into this
troublesome world, but in a much more blessed hour shall you depart forth of
ye same: so that the sweet saying of Salomo^, or rather of the holy ghost,
shall be full well verified upon thee, yea and al thy faithful fellows: Eccle. 7
better is the day of death (says he) then the day of birth. This saying can
not be verified upon every man, but upon thee my dear brother, and such as
thou art, whose death is most precious before God, and full dear shall your
blood be in his sight. Blessed be god for thee my dear brother Timmes, and
blessed be god again yt ever I knew thee, for in a most happy time I came first
into thy company. Pray for me dear brother, pray for me that God will once
vouch me worthy of that great dignity whereunto he has now brought you. Ah
my loving brother Drake, whose soul draws now nygh unto god, of whom you
have received the same, full glad may you be that ever God gave you a life
to leave for his sake. Full well will he restore it to you again in a thousand
fold more glorious wise. Praise God good brother, as you have great cause, and
pray for me, I beseech you, which am so much unworthy (so great are my sins)
of that great dignity whereunto the Lord has called you and the reast of your
godly brethren: whom I beseech you to comfort in the Lord, as you can full
well, praised be God for his gifts, which you have heartily applied to the
setting forth of his glory and the commodity of his pore afflicted church.
Which thing shall surely redownde to your everlasting joy and comfort, as you
shall most effectually feel or ever it be long, though the wicked of the world
judge far otherwise.

Ah mine own hearts, and most dearly beloved brethren. Cauell, Ambrose, and
both the Spurges: blessed be the Lord on your behalf, and praised be his name,
which has given you such a glorious victory. Full valiant have you showed your
selves in the lords fight, and full faithful in your painful service. Faint not
but go on forward as ye have most godly begone, for great shall your reward be
at ye end of this your travel. Ah my good faithful brethren al, what shall I
say, or what shall I write unto you, but even the same that good Elizabeth did
say to her godly kinneswoman Mary the blessed Mother of Christ. Luke. 1.
Happy art thou (quoth that good woman) which haste believed: for all things
which the Lord has spoken to thee, shall be fulfilled. So I say to you (my
dear hearts in the Lord) happy are ye all, yea twyse happy shall ye be for
evermore, because ye have stedfastlye believed the most sweet promises which
god the father has made unto you with his own mouth, in that he has promised
you (which are the faithful seed of the believing Abraham) that ye shall be
blessed ever world without end. The promises of God your sweet father as ye do
believe, so do ye bear record ye god is true. The testimony whereof ye have full
worthily borne to the world, and shortly will full surely seal the same with
your blood, yea even to morrow I do understand. Oh constant Christians: oh
valiant soldiers of the high Captain Jesus Christ, who for your sake has
conquered the devil, death, sin and hell, and has given you full victory
over the^ for ever more. Oh worthy witnesses and most glorious Martyrs, whose
invincible faith has overcome that proud, sturdie, bragging prince of ye
world, and al his wicked army, over who^ ye shall shortly triumph for
evermore. Ah my sweet hearts, the everlasting treasures are full surely laid up
for you in heaven. The immercessible and most glorious crown of victory is
already made and prepared for you, to be shortly clapped upon al your happy
heads. The holy Angels of your heavenly father are already appointed to
conduct your sweet souls into Abraham's bosom. All the heavenly host
rejoices already, for that they shall shortly receive you with joy and
felicitye into their blessed fellowship. Selach.

Rejoice with double joy, and be glad my dear brethren, for doubtless ye have
more cause then ca^ be expressed. But (alas) I that for my sins am left
behind, may lie and lamente with the holy Prophet saying, psalm. 119.
woe is me that the days of my joyful rest are prolonged. Ah cursed Satan,
which has caused me so sore to offend my most dear loving father, whereby my
exile and banishment is so much prolonged. Oh Christ my advocate, pacify thy
fathers wrath which I have iustelye deserved, that he may take me home to him
in his sweet mercy. Oh that I might now come home unto thee with my blessed
brethren. Well, thy will (Oh Lord) be effectuouslye fulfilled, for it is only
good, and turns al things to the best, for such as thou in thy mercyes haste
chosen.

And now farewell my dear hearts, most happy in the Lord. I trust in my good
God, yet shortly to see you in the celestial City, whereof undoubtedly the
Lord has already made you free Citizens. Though ye be yet with us for a little
time, your very home is in heaven, where your treasure does remain with your
sweet lord and redemer Jesus christ, whose calling you have heard with ye ears
of your hearts, and therefore ye shall never come into judgment, but pass from
death to life. Your sins shall never be remembered, be they never so many, so
grievous, or so great: for your Savior has cast the^ all into ye bottom of
the sea: he has removed them from you as far as the east is from the west,
psalm. 103.
and his mercy has much more prevailed over you, then is distance between
heaven and earth: and he has given you for an everlasting possession of the
same, al his holiness, righteousness, and justification, yea and the holy ghost
into your hearts, wherewith ye are surely sealed unto the day of redemption, to
certify you of your eternal election, and ye ye are his true adopted sons,
whereby ye may boldly cry unto god, Abba dear father, for ever more: so that
now no creature in heaven, earth, nor hell shall be able to accuse you before
the throne of the heavenly King. Gen, 3.
Satan is now cast out from you: he him self is judged and has no part in
you. He will once more bite you by ye heel, and then he has done, for at ye
time you shall squise his head through your own good Christ, and so have final
victory for ever more. In joyful triumph whereof, ye shall swetely ascend
into the place of eternal rest, whether your eldest brother Christ is gone
before you, to take possession for you, and to prepare your place under the
holy Alter, with Cranmer, Latymer, Ridley, Rogers, Hoper, Saunders, Farrer,
Tailour, Bradford, Philpot, with many other, who will be full glad of your
coming, to see vi. more of their appointed number, that their blood may so much
the sooner be revenged upon them that dwell on the earth.

Thus I make an end, committing you al to gods most merciful defense, whose
quarrel ye have defended, whose cause ye have promoted, whose glory ye have
set forth, and whose name ye have constantlye confessed. Farewell for a while
my dear hearts in the Lord: I will make as much have after you as I may. Al our
dear brethren salute you. They pray for you and praise god for you
continually. Blessed be the dead that die in the Lord, for they rest from their
labors says the holy ghost, Apo. ^1
and their works follow them.

Your own John Careless, a most unprofitable servant of the Lord, yet of his
great mercy, prisoner for his sake, abiding his further good pleasure. Pray,
pray, pray.

To M. Green, M. VVhittell and certain other prisoners in Newgate, condemned
and ready to be burnt for the testimony of the Lord Jesus.
THe everlasting peace in Jesus Christ, the continual comfort of his most pure
and holy spirit, be with you my most dear and faithful brethren and sisters
of Newgate, the Lords appointed sheep unto the slaughter, to the good
performance of the great and notable work of the lord, which he has so
graciously bego^ne in you all: that ye same may redownd to the setting forth of
his glory, and to the commodity of his church, and to your own everlasting
comfort in him. So be it.

Ah my dear hearts, and most faithful brethren and sisters in ye lord, what high
lauds and praise, yea what humble and continual thanks am I bound to give to
god our father for you and on your most happy behalf, who so mightily has
magnified himself in you thus farforth, in geui^g you his holy and mighty
spirit, to ye constant confessing of christ's veritye, even to the cruel
conde^pnation, and I dout not but he will do ye same to the death. Oh happy and
blessed are you ye ever you were borne, that ye lord will vouch you worthy of
this great dignity, to die for his sake. Doubtless it is ye greatest honor ye
god can give you in this life. Yea if they be so blessed of god yt die in ye
Lord, as the holy ghost says they be: how much more blessed and happy then
are you yt die not only in the lord, Apo. 11.
but also for the lord. Oh that it were the good will of god that the good
hour were now come, that I might go with you. Ah that my sins made me not
unworthy of such an excellent dignity.

Be tha^kful dear hearts, be thankful and rejoice in ye lord: for mighty is his
mercy toward you, and great is your reward in heaven, the which you like
faithful persons, have plucked to you with a godly violence of an invincible
faith. Oh worthy warriors of ye most high captain: oh constant confessors of
ye everlasting verity: how glorious a crown of victory shall you shortly
receive, which is prepared for all such as do co^nue to ye end? Oh you sweet
Saints of ye lord, how precious shall your death be in his sight? Oh how dear
are your souls to your redemer, in whole hand they shall most joyfully rest,
and the pains of death shall never touch you? Oh how blessed shall you be,
when Christ shall appear, at the which time you shall receive your bodies
again full of immortality: Oh how joyful shall you be, when Christ, according
to his promise, shall knowledge you before his father and his holy Angels, as
you have most constantlye confessed him to be your Lord and only Savior before
men?

Oh blessed Grene, thou meek and loving lamb of the lord, how happy art thou
to be appointed to die for his sake? A full deintye dishe art thou for the
lords own to the. Fresh and grene shall thou be in ye house of the Lord, and
thy fruits shall never wither nor decay. Although you go here forth sowyng thy
good fruits with tears, the time shall come yt thou shall reap with joy and
gladness, the fruits of everlasting life, and that without ceasing. Be merry
therefore and fear not, for it is thy fathers will to give thee a kingdom,
Luke. 12.
whereunto he has chosen thee before the foundations of the world were laid.

Oh happy Minister, thou man of God, how glad may thou be of Gods gracious
favor, which has prevented thee in ye day of thy trial? Oh happy Peter,
whose part thou have well played: therefore thy reward and portion shall be like
unto his. Now have thou good experience of man's infirmity, but much more proof
and taste, yea sense and felyng of gods aboundaunt bottomless mercy. Although
Satan desired to sifte thee, Luke 22
yet Christ thy good Captain, prayed that thy faith should not fail. Gods
strength is made perfect by thy weakness, and his grace is sufficient for thee
his dear child. Thine example did so encourage and strength thy pore brethren,
that God is every way glorified by thee, and shortly will he glorify thee with
him self, with that glory which he has prepared for thee his elect dearling,
before the world was made. Therefore rejoice and be glad, for thou haste good
occasion in finding such favor in his sight.

This is most true (Oh my other brethren who^ I do not know, neither have I
heard much of you) happy are you that ever you were borne, and blessed be our
god which has given you such victory over the bloody beast. Apo. 1^.
Shortly shall you be clothed in large white garments, and fine raynes of
righteousness, and so shall you follow the Lamb on mount Syon with new songs
of mirth and melody, for your delyuery forth of Satan's power and tyranny. God
for evermore be blessed for you, and strengthen you to the end, as I doubt not
but he will: for he never failed them that put their trust in him.

Oh my dear and faithful Sister Ioane Warner, what shall I say to thee? Thy
trial has been great: thy victory in Christ has been notable. Thou have
overcome many a sharp shower and storm. Shortly shall you ariue at ye haven
of quiet rest, and receive a reward due to a constant Martyr. Thou shall go
home to thy heavenly father, and possess for ever the inheritance which Christ
has purchased for thee, where thy earthly parents be, still lokyng for thee,
which have triumphed over Antichrist most victoriously. Oh blessed Parents of
happy children, which have showed such an example, as the like has been
seldom seen. I salute thee dear Sister of like constant mind: whose constant
example is worthy of continual memory. Praised be God for you my own sweet
Systers, which has made you to play such wise Virgins parts. Math. 25
He has ple^tifully powered the oil of his spirit into the lamps of your
faith, so that the light thereof shall never be extincte. You shall enter with
your bridegroom into everlasting joy, whereunto you were chose^ in him from the
beginning.

Oh my dear brethren and Systers, you blessed saints of the Lord, how much
and how depely am I bound to praise god for you both day and night? Pray, pray
for me (my dear hearts) for the tender mercy of God, that I may be made
worthy to follow your trace. Oh that I had run the race of my life, as far
as you have done yours, and were as nigh my iorneyes end as you be unto yours.
But alas, I lie like the lame man at the pooles side by Salamo^s porch, John. 5.
and every man goes into the place of health before me. But God will appoint me
one, one day to put me in. I trust my Lord of Londons colehouse is empty, and
all his officers idle. Therefore they must shortly fetch more sheep to the
Shambles: for he is the common slaughter slave of al England. But happy are you
that are passed through the pikes, and delivered out of his hands, and from
all the angels of the darkness of this world, which long tempted you in the
wyldernes of the same: but now shall the angels of god come and minister unto
you, for they are your servants to hold you up in their hands, that you shall
not hurt your foot, psalm. 60. 4. Reg. 2.
no nor one hear of your head shall perish. They shall carry you up to heaven in
a fiery chariot, though you leave your mantell behind you for a time, till God
restore the fame to you again in a more ample and glorious sort.

Thus in have, as it does appear, I am constrained to make an end, committyng
you all to gods most merciful defense: who ever have you in his blessed
keeping, desiring you all to remember me in your godly and faithful prayers,
as I will not forget you in mine by gods grace. The blessyng of God be with
you all my dear brethren and Sisters. All our brethern and fellow prisoners
here, have them most heartily commended unto you, and pray for you without
ceasyng. God send us a merry metyng in his kingdom, Amen.

By your brother and unfeigned lover John Careless prisoner, abidyng his most
merciful will and pleasure. Pray, pray, pray.

To my dear and faithful brother VV. Tymmes prisoner in Newgate.
THe everlasting peace of god in Jesus Christ, with ye continual joy, comfort,
and strength of his sweet spirit, be multiplied, and daly more and more
increased in your good heart (my most faithful and dear brother Tymmes) to the
full quietyng of your conscience, and beating back of all the fiety darts of
the wicked, that you may shortly receive the glorious crown of victory, and
in the same tryumphe over all your enemies foreuermore, Amen.

I cannot express the excedyng great joy and consolation of my poor heart,
considering the marvelous works of God most graciously wrought upon you, not
only in proving you and tryeng your faith by his great and huge crosses both
inwardly and outwardly, but also in geuyng you so great consolation and
constancy in the mids of the same. Faithful is god and true of his promises,
who has said that he will never suffer his chosen children to be tempted above
their strength, but in the mids of their temptation will make an outscape for
the^, by such means as may make to his glory and their everlasting
consolation. My dear heart, great cause have you to be of good comfort, for I
see in you as lively a token of Gods everlasting love and savor in Jesus
Christ, as ever I perceived in any man. In respect whereof I do eue^ with my
heart, love, honor and reverence you, besechyng god for his glorious names
sake, in ye bowels and blood of our lord and only Savior Jesus christ, to
finish his good work in you, as I doubt not but he will do, according to his
infallible promyses: yea I am well assured thereof, forasmuch as you have so
effectuallye received his holy spirit into your heart, as a pledge and sure
seal of your eternal redemption, and a testimonye of your adoption in Christ
Jesus. For which cause Satan so sore enuieth you, that he has now bente all
his fierce ordinance against you, thinking thereby utterly to destroy the
invincible forte of your faith founded most firmly upon the immovable rock
christ, against the which, the devil, sin, nor yet hell gates shall never
prevail, Selah.

Therefore mine own bowels in the lord, be not discomforted for this your
conflicte, which doutles shall greatly increase your crown of glory, triumph,
and victory: but take a good heart unto you, and buckle boldly with Satan both
in himself and in his subtle members. It is the very divine ordinance of god,
that all his regenerate children shall be tempted, proved and tried: as we see by
the example of our Savior Christ, who as soon as he was baptized, was
straight ways led of the holy ghost into the wilderness, there to be tempted of
the devil. But there got he such a glorious victory of Satan, that he could
never since finally prevail against any of his poor members, but in every
assault that he makes either inwardly or outwardly, he gets a foil and
taketd shame: so yt now he rages with all the spite possible, specially because
he knows his time is but short. James. 4.
Saint James testifies that he is but a very coward, that will sone fly if
he be faithfully resisted. And as for his temptinge tools, the Lord has made
them manifest unto us, so that he cannot deceive us, though he assault us: for
as Saint Paul says, 2. Cor. 3
his very thoughts are not unknown to us, as it does in you largely
appear, praised be the Lords name therefore.

You see dear brother, that now to molest you and such as you are, yt be even
passing from this vale of misery, he has but two ways, or two pieces of
ordinance to shoot at you, with the which he cannot hurt you because you
have two bulwarks to defend you. The first of these terrible gunnes that
Satan has shot at you, is the very same that he continually shoots at me,
that is to say fear and infidelity for the vglesomnes of death, and horror of
my sins, which be so many, grievous, and great. But this pellet is easily put
away with the sure shield of faith in the most precious death and bloodsheding
of our dear Lord and only Savior Jesus Christ, whom the father has given
unto us wholly to be ours for evermore, and with him has given us al things,
as Paul says: so that though we be never so great sinners, yet Christ is made
unto us holiness, righteousness and justification. He has clothed us with all
his merits, mercies and most sweet sufferyngs, and has taken unto him al our
misery, wretchedness, sin and infirmity. So that if any should now be
condemned for ye same, it must needs be Jesus Christ, which has taken them
upon him. But in deed he has made satisfaction for the^ to the uttermost jot:
so that for his sake they shall never be imputed to us, if they were a thousand
times so many more as they be. This do you most effectuously feel and know,
dear brother, a great deal better then I can tell you, blessed be God therefore.

And now Satan, seeing that he cannot prevail with his boistrous battery
against this bulwark of faith, which does so quench al his fiery darts that
they can do you no harm, but rather do you good service to cast you down under
the mighty hand of God, that he may take you up by his only grace and power,
and so you may render him all the glory by Jesus Christ, (which thing the enemy
cannot abide in no wise) therefore he shoots of his other piece most
pestilent, to provoke you to put some part of your trust and confidence in
your self, and in your own holiness and righteousness, yt you might that way
rob god of his glory, Christ of his honor and dignity of his death. But
blessed be ye Lord God, you have also a full strong bulwark to beat back
this pestiferous pellet also, even the pure law of god, which proves the best
of us al damnable si^ners in the sight of god, if he would enter into judgment
with us, according to ye severity of the same, and that even our best works
are polluted and defiled in such sort, as the Prophet describes them. With
which manner of speaking, Esaias. 64.
our freewyl Phariseis are much offended: for it felleth all man's righteousness
to the ground (I had like to have said to the botome of hell) and extolleth
only the righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is allowed before god, and is
freely given to all those that firmly believe, as blessed be god you do.

Ah my good brother Tymmes, Satan has put his hand in a wrong box when he
begins to tempt you, either to vain glory or mystrust: for you are an old
beaten soldier, and have had good experience of these manner of temptations
both by your self and other, whom you know well were the beloved of god. Be of
good chere therefore, dear heart, be of good chere, for now Satan has wrought
al his malice: he has done al yt he can, and has shot of al his last pieces
wherwt he had thought to have done most mischief: but now he sees he can not
prevail (ye strong tower of your faith being so invincible) he will pluck up
al his tents, and get him to some other place to practice the like
assaults: and then will the angels of god come and minister unto you ye most
sweet and heavenly consolations of the holy ghost. To him therefore who is able
to do exceeding abou^da^tly above al yt ever we can desire or think, I do most
heartily commit you, with all the rest of your godly prison fellows, who comfort
strengthen, and defend you with his grace and mighty operation of his holy
spirit, as he has he thereto done, yt you having a most glorious victory over
the subtle Serpent and all his wicked sede, may also receive ye crown of glory
and immortality prepared for you before ye fou^dations of ye world were laid,
and is so surely kept for you in ye hands of him whose promise is vnfaflible,
that the Devil, sin, death, or hell shall never be able to deprive you of
the same. The blessyng of God be with you now and for evermore, Amen. Pray,
pray, pray, for me.

Your own for ever, John Careless.

To my derely beloved in the lord Mystres A. K.
THe everlasting peace of god in Jesus Christ, the help, comfort, and
assistaunce of his most pure and holy spirit, be with you my most dear
Sister, to the performaunce of that he has so graciously begone in you, that it
may be to his glory, the profit of his church, and your eternal comfort in
him, Amen.

As I am right sorry at my poor heart (O worshipful Matrone) that any
afflictions or passions of heaviness should trouble your godly and loving heart
(unto the which I wish unfeignedly all godly joy and quietness) eue^ so am I
glad and give god most hearty thanks, that he of his great goodness has used me
poor wretched miser by any means, to be an occasion of the increase of your
godly mirthe and gladness. But O my good and faithful Sister, I see wherabout
you go. You play with me as a good loving mother does with her unwilling child.
When it does any thing at her desire, she prayseth it and makes her self
glad thereof, that it may take courage to do better, and be more willing
against an other time. Even so do you (right reverend Matrone) make your self
glad of my simple doings, to comfort and encourage me, to continue in that
which is good, and to grow and go forward willingly in the same. God for
Christ's sake, give me his grace that in all things I may satisfye your godly
expectation, that I may do some honor to his heavenly doctrine.

And as you have greatly comforted me with your most godly and loving letter:
even so I beseech you to assiste me with your faithful and hearty prayer, as I
dout not but you do, for I feel the present help thereof, praised be God
therefore. God make me thankeful for you my (dear Sister) and also mindful of
my duetye toward you and all other the lords elect children. Ah my dear and
faithful heart in the Lord, how much and how depely am I bound to praise god
for you, and to give him thanks day and night on your good behalf? Oh happy
are you that ever you were borne, ye God will so mightily be magnified in you. O
blessed woman that so surely beleuest and have so plentifully tasted of gods
holy spirit, that out of thy womb do flow the ryuers of the water of life: to
who^ god has made manifest yt might of his marvelous mercy, and has given
consolation in the same, so that you are able of your own good experience, to
comfort others in all their afflictions: which thing I can wytnes (I praise god
therefore) in that I do depely taste and feel of the same. God for christ's sake
recompense the same and all other your good doings, seven fold into your
bosom, as I doubt not but he will do, according to his promise. God make me
such a one as you report me to be, that my fruits might take such effect as
you speak of. But (alas) I am a great, horrible, and most grievous sinner:
therefore I fear me, god be angry with me for presuming to take his word in my
mouth. God hide my sins from the sight of the world, that I be not a slander
to his truth. But it is you (O dear daughter of Abraham) which do so love and
live the gospel, that I and other are more confirmed in the truth thereof by
your good example. God has at this day in his poor afflicted church, a sort
of worthy women, which do him and his such service as is acceptable in his
sight. I speak of experience (I praise god therefore) and not to the end to
flatter you or any other, the lord is my witness.

God for my sins has taken from me the company of godly learned men, to my
great grief and heavy discomfort: but of his great goodness and mercy he does
supply my spiritual lack by ye good ministry of godly and virtuous women. Of
which faithful laborers in ye gospel, whose names are written in ye book of
life (my derely beloved Sister) you are not the least. The lord be thanked for
you, and blessed be ye time yt ever I knew you: for your love and faithful
amity is to me a sure sign and seal of gods love and mercy. Oh dear lord what
am I upon who^ you should vouchsafe to show such great tokens of thine
inestimable love and kindness? Oh faithful father, forgive me my great
ingratitude and sins. Oh let me be no longer negligent in doing my duty
toward thy dear children, which thou haste lincked in love with me, knitting
our hearts together in a perfect bond of Christian charity, whereby all men
may see that we are thy Disciples. O my good Sister, I would you knew what joy
and comfort I do feel in my good christ, at this present hour. God make you
partaker of the same: for this which I have, partly comes by you whom god
has used as his good instrument thereto.

And where as you do most godly counsel me with S. Peter, 1. Pet. 5
to cast all my care upon the Lord, and to be careless, not only in name but
also in effect, specially in respect of him for whose sake I do suffer, and
the sincere truth which I do profess: I thank you heartily for your most godly
and comfortable exhortation, and I entend by gods grace to follow the same as
farreforth as he shall assist me with his holy and mighty spirit, without the
which I can neither take things patiently, neither rejoice under ye cross as I
ought for to do. Oh what great cause have I to rejoice and be glad ye god of
his great mercy and infinite goodness, will count me worthy to suffer for his
sake, and to bear his sweet cross, wherwyth he does meruelously begin to
fashion me into his own similitude and likeness, that in his glory I may be
like him also? Oh how well may I be Careless in deed, as well as in name, seeing yt
I have cast my care upon the lord himself, who (I am right well assured by
faith) cares for me, and has committed me to christ's safe custody, which
loves me unto the end, and will not lose me, but will raise me unto life at
the last day. psalm. 27.
The lord is my light and my defense, of whom then should I be afraid? The
lord is the preserver of my life, what can man then do unto me? I am one of
the lords elect, who shall lay ought the^ to my charge? The lord himself does
iustifye me, Romans 8.
who shall then condemn me? Since Christ is mine and I am his, what shall make
me careful, or who shall separate me from his sweet love: which (as Solomon
says in his sweet songs) is mightier then the death? No, no, let the
Tyrannes come when they will, I trust they shall find me ready and wyllyng to
go home to my heavenly father, whether my good brethern be gone before me with
joy, tryumphe, and victory over the bloodye Beast and her Babilonicall brood:
blessed be god therefore.

Your sweet examples of Helias, Daniel, and the Israelites, do much confirm
my faith in Christ, although I be far inferior to any of them. But as you
say full well, god himself is my father and does love me his prodigal son
with an everlasting love: sure I am therefore he will not see me lack either for
body or soul: for he fedeth the birds and brute beasts, yea and men that he
much worse then they, as you full well have said. And further (my dear heart)
where as you say that your heaviness and sorrow is, when you call to remembrance
my cross, and double cross etc: ah my good loving sister, let not my crosses
make your good tender heart heuie, but rather be glad and rejoice with me that
God of his great mercy will repute me worthy to bear them for his sake. Sing
psalms with me of praise and thankesgeuing, for God has made me able to bear
them patiently, if they were a thousand times so many more as they be, as in
deed my sins have justly deserved. Well is me ye ever I was born, yt he
would vouch me worthy to suffer at al hands, or al sorts of men for his sake:
or rather that it would please his goodness to choose me poor caitiffe in whom
him self would suffer: For the enemies do not punish me for my sins (as
they might justly do) but they do persecute sweet Christ in me, whose truth
I do profess.

And now, as concerning the most comfortable doctrine of our eternal election
in him, before the foundation of the world was laid: I do protest before God
and man, that if every hear of my head were a man's life, I would willingly
give them all in the defense thereof. Full little wotteth our free will men what
they do, when they go about so rashely to condemn that doctrine. The Lord
illuminate their minds with the light of his holy spirit, that they may once
see the truth thereof, and leave their kicking against the prick. In deed dear
friend, in the respect of the^ and the peril which they be in, you and I both
have good cause to mourn, lament, and be sorry, and to pray for them day and
night, that the Lord if it be his will, would convert them. And whether their
blindness be of simplicitye (as I hope it is) or of wilful obstinacy (which
thing is greatly to be feared) yet have I no cause to be angry with them, for
it is their own harm: where as mine should have been the like, if god had left
me to my self, as he might most justly have done: and for that I am as I am,
his name only have the praise, and for his sake I will always seek to do them
good as much as lies in me. And what soever they have said, or shall say or
do against me, I do and will as heartily forgive them al, as I would be
forgeuen of god, my great sins and trespasses. For sure I am that what soever
he be, that has any true taste or lively felyng of the great mercy, love, and
kyndnesse of God toward him in Christ, he can not bear hate or displeasure
against any thing but sin and Satan ye only author thereof. Therefore, in
that they do talk so much of love, and let so little appear in their deeds,
it does evidently appear how little taste and liuelye feelyng of the free
mercy of God in Christ they have. A weak faith has ever a cold charity
annexed unto it, which is quenched with every unkind word.

Yours unfeignedly, John Careless.

To my dear Sister. M. C.
THe everlasting peace of god in Jesus Christ, the continual aid, strength,
and comfort of his most pure, holy, and mighty spirit, with the increase of
faith and lively feling of his eternal mercyes, be most effectuouslye wrought
in your heart (my dear and faithful Sister) to the full accomplishing of that
good work which the Lord has so graciously begone in you, yt it may be to
the setting forth of his glory, the comfort of his poor afflicted church, and
to your own eternal consolation in him, Amen.

I thank God most heartily for you (my dear heart in the Lord) with all
remembrance of you in my prayers, as of duty I am bound, not douting but you do
the same for me to my great joy and comfort in the midst of my crosses, which
daily do increase, yea and that in such sort that if the faithful god by your
hartye prayer and others gods dear children, did not put to his helpyng hand,
I should surely syncke down under the^. Ah good sister, beg hard of our
dear father for me, that he would shortly tread Satan under my feet, and yt
I may play ye man in ye Lords battle, as you bydde me, and be joyful in my
Christ, what pain or peril soever I suffer. And rejoice with me (good sister)
in the Lord, and let us be merry in him, not only to chere ye good hearts of al
our faithful friends, but also to anger ye cankered heart of Satan that crooked
Serpent our ancient enemy. For I know yt there is nothing yt can grieve his
malicious mind more, the^ ye mirth, gladness, and hartye reioysyng of the
children of God in their good Christ.

Ah my faithful friend, if your good heart be heuye, who ca^ make mine light? If
you be sorry, who ca^ make me glad? But if you be merry and rejoice in ye Lord,
there shall no trouble, make me sad or sorrowful. Be of good cheer therefore my
good sister, and comfort my sweet brother. V. Oh yt I might once hear that he
and his bridegroom were in bed both together, and that he had taken a sweet
sleep in his lovers arms, as John did upon his lap on ye Maundie night.
John. 13
Commend me unto him most hartelye, and desire him for the Lords sake, to
fulfill my joy and increase my crown. Bid him be mindful of me in his hearty
prayers, as I neither will nor can forget him in mine. Full dear is he unto my
soul. So are you my good sister (the Lord he knows) eue^ so are you: you
have so surely knitte me to you with that bond of unfeigned love, whereby you are
lyncked to the children of God. Oh blessed bond of perfection, and true badge
of Christ's Dysciples. Oh true and unfeigned love, wroughte by his spyrite in
the hearts of all his elect. This is to us a true sign and sure seal that we
are the very children of GOD. This love is that flower that never shall fade,
but floryshe daily more and more, and be made perfect in that place where
faith and hope shall have no office, 1. Cor. 13.
but possess for ever that which they have here long looked for with patience.
My dear heart, be of good cheer: for though our bodies be here separated a
su^der for a little time, yet shall ye lord bring us together again ere it be
long, into a place of great joy, where we shall dwell for ever. Yea god ca^ and
will, if he see it good for us, bring us together again in this life, that we
may have a merry meting and further occasion to praise his holy name. He can
work wonders when him self lists. Psa. 91.
Oh what it is to dwell under the defense of the most highest, and to sit under
ye shadow of the almighty? The buggysh Bishops can not make such a one a feared,
because they can not take away one hear from our head until god give them
leave: which I am sure he will not do until such time as he shall see it most
to his glory, and the profytte of his saints: and when that time is once
come, who will desire to tarry here any longer?

Thus dear sister, I have scribled a few lines to you in haste: I will not
say that it shall be my last farewell, although it be very like in this life.
Commend me to my good brethren M. Heath, Robert Cole, John Lydley etc. I would
be glad to see them, and take my leave of them, if they may do it without
danger, as I think they may: but in no wise let them not danger themselves
for that matter: sure I am we shall all have a most joyful meting shortly. God
strengthen you al in his truth, and make you instruments of his glory, to
defend the gospel of his grace against al sorts of enemies thereof. Amongst
who^, me thinks I do foresee dear sister, the great plague that these frewill
men shall pour upon the poor afflicted Church of God: for without all doubt
the Dragon will make the river of reproach, Apo. 12
which you now sustain for the verities sake, a great flood or ever it be
long: but in the end they shall drink it up all them selves, as they now do
that, which they spued forth against our blessed brethren, Bradford and
Philpot. And yet the verity does floryshe, and shall spyte of the Pie, which
greueth Satan at the heart, and therefore he bestirreth him like a wode Lio^,
knowing that his time is short. The lord deliver us from these poisoned tongues.
Verily I can not tell whether I may more lament my long tarying among these
Ismalites, so given to malice, or the leaving of you and other my dear lovers
in the Lord, among them. The Lord be merciful unto his elect, and shorten
these sorrowful days for their sakes, as he has said he will. Farewell mine
own dear heart, farewell in the Lord Jesus christ, who pour his holy sprite
plenteously upon you, that by the mighty operation of ye same, you may daily
more and more effectuously feel the sure certaintye of your eternal salvation
in Jesus Christ, that you may ever be able to comfort other with the same
co^fortes, wherwyth you are comforted in him. To whose most merciful defense I
do heartily commit you now and ever more. Amen. The blessing of God be with you
all now and ever, Amen.

Your own poor brother John Careless, prisoner of the Lord, abiding his good
pleasure.

To my good Sister. M. C.
THe peace of god in Jesus Christ, the eternal comfortes of his sweet
spirit, be with you my dear and fatithfull sister: to the full accomplyshment
of that good work which he has most graciously bego^ne in you, that the same
may be effectual to ye setting forth of his glory, and to your everlasting
consolation in him Amen.

My loving and faithful sister in the Lord, I thank you for all your loving
kindness showed unto me, but specially for your godly remembrance of me in your
fervent and faithful prayers, and for your most godly and comfortable letter,
whereby you do not only much increase my joy and comfort, but also put me in
remembrance of my duty toward you. Blessed be the Lord our God, which of his
great mercy has so beautifyed his church in these our days, that even unto
many godly women, he has given most excellent gifts of knowledge and
understanding of his truth, so that they are not only well able to inform their
own consciences in all things necessary to salvation, but also most swetely to
comfort their sorrowful brethren and sisters that sustain any trouble for the
testimony of gods truth, yea and that which is more, even in the mids of
their great confllictes of conscience. Of which most happy number of godly
and virtuous women, my dear heart, you are one and that of the chiefest, being
plentifully endewed with the gifts of gods most gracious spirit, as it does full
well appear in your daily doings, God only have the praise therefore. For as
much then as God has given you the gift to write, I shall most heartily desire
you to let me hear from you somtymes, be it never so little, for truly I take
great comfort and courage thereby, specially in my poor conscience, which is
sore assaulted of subtle Satan, and in a manner oppressed of my sins. Pray
dear sister, that god may give me true, hearty, and earnest repentance, and
increase my faith, for they are both the good gifts of God only, and far
pass the reach of my power to take at my plearsure. Therefore dear sister, if
you will help me to beg ye same of our dear loving father, I am sure that
he both can and will give them me in his good time. And as for the fear of
death or terror of the fire, I most heartily thank my good God. I feel it
not: only it is mine own sins and unthankfulness, which holds hard battle,
and wageth strong war against me, which only goes about to separate me from
my good captain Christ, that I should not enjoy his glorious victory: but
God being on my side (as I am sure he is) that can not continually prevail
against me. Though God for a time permit Satan to take his pleasure on me,
as he did up on Job, yet I doubt not but in the end all shall turn to my
profit, through the merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whose
most merciful defense I commit you dear sister, with all the rest of the
Lords elect. Farewell in Christ.

Yours unfeignedly, John Careless. Pray, pray, pray, pray.

To my most dear and faithful brother in the lord. T. V.
THe everlasting peace of god in Jesus Christ, with continual joy comfort and
quietness of conscience, through the mighty operation of the holy ghost, be
with you my most dearelye beloved brother. V. to the increase of your crown
and victory, now and ever, Amen.

I have been often times earnestlye minded to write unto you (my dear heart in
the Lord) sith I received your most godly and loving letter: but the
likelyhode and hope which I have often since conceived to see you and talk with
you mouth to mouth, has caused me to forbear, that love has so often
provoked me unto. But since mine expectation is not yet certifyed, nor (as far
as I can perceive) is like to be in this life: I can no longer forbear ye
scribbling of these few lines unto you. The which I desire you to take in good
worth: for as I have done ye same altogether in have, so is it ye contents of
an heart something troubled, and not altogether in so sweet a security as it
has been in times past, and I dout not but it shall be so full well again.

Ah my dear brother, if I should not now and then drink with Christ of the
bitter cup of inward afflictions, I should to much neglecte my duty
toward you and other my dear hearts in the Lord, whom the mighty God has
made worthy to feel with Christ, the fellowship of his passions. But blessed
be my God, and most dear loving father, which of his great mercy and infinite
goodness in Christ, will vouch me worthy with you and other of his dear
dearlings, to carry as well the inward cross, which is most grievous and heavy,
as the outward cross, which is so light and easy. 2. Cor. 4
I know there is an exceeding weight of glory prepared for me, although Satan
now, by gods permission seeks all means possible to persuade me to ye
contrary, by castyng of his clouds and mistes over me yt he might darke^ the
love of my dear lord and Christ, which dyed for me, yea and that when I was
his utter enemy, and by nature ye very child of wrath and perdition: but I
know that the love of my Christ being so great, will burst out again most
gloryouslye. Oh God, me thynkes even now I feel it begin to kyndle in my
breast meruelously. Pray for me dear heart, pray for me, that my soul may
sweetly turn to her old rest again: for verelye Satan has made a sore
ruffelyng with her of late, that he might have bereft her of her vyrginitye,
with the fornication of mistruste and infidelitye. But I see well, my God is
faithful (as Saint Paul says) and will not suffer her to be tempted above
the strength he will give der. Pray for me dear heart I say again, and
praise GOD most heartily for his great mercy extended toward me, as by your
letter I understand you do: I thank you most hartelye therefore, and I
promise you (by Gods grace) I will never forget you so long as the breath is in
my body, neither can I though I would.

And now mine own bowels in the Lord, I long much to hear of your state,
which I trust be most happy and blessed. Gladly would I hear that the
celestial brydegrome were at home with you, and that in respect of his most
blessed and cherefull presence, you had cast away all your mournyng
garments. Oh that I might once bear you heartily sing with the spouse this
sweet verse: Can. 2.
My delyght is to sit under the shadow of my love, for his fruit is full
sweet unto my throat: he brings me into his wine seller: his banner spreads
over me his love: his left hand lies under my head, and his right hand shall
embrace me etc. Oh my dear heart, I am now constrained to end for this time,
but god will send me an other I doubt not, to whose most merciful defense I
do heartily commit you.

Yours unfeignedly, John Careless.

To my dear brother. T. V.
THe everlasting peace of god in Jesus christ, the continual comfortes of his
most pure and holy spirit, be with you my most dear friend and faithful
brother V. to the increase of your faith, and comfort of your sorrowful
spirit, which is to the father a sweet sacrifyce through Christ: for whose
sake he will never despise your humble and contrite heart, but does fauourablye
accept the same, and will in most ample wise perform the desire thereof to his
glory and your eternal comfort in him.

In the mids of my manyfold crosses and troubles, wherein I am constrained to
flee unto God for refuge and succoure by earnest and faithful prayer, I can
not forget you (my dear heart in the Lord) but esteminge your state for mine
own. I do pour forth my complaynte for you, as I do for my self, and
rather more, as I think presence need does require, desyring most heartily to
hear of the good success of the same in you. The Lord God for his great
mercyes sake, accomplish my desire, as I doubt not but he will, when he sees it
good and most to his glory, and to your comfort and commoditye. Oh that I might
once see you so merry in christ as you have just cause to be, yt you might say
with Dauyd: psalm. 57.
Awake my glory, awake Lure and Harp, bring forth the Psalter with the merry
song, that I might sing a new song of praise and thankesgeuynge unto the
Lord for the light of his favorable countenance, his help and
deliverance. Psa. 45.
Oh that would refreshe me as a most precious oil, and gladden my poor
heart, which is assaulted with sorrow more ways then one. I doubt not but the
same shall by your means receive much comfort, though for a time it does
mourn with you, that we may be made both glad together, yea and that with such
gladness as shall continue for ever. But in ye mean space (I say) most happy
are you that so heartily mourn the absence of the brydegrome. Math. 9.
If you were not a weddyng child, you could never do it. Only Christ's true
Disciples do mourn for his absence: therefore shall they doubteles rejoice at
his presence, which will be so much more joyful, by how much the absence is more
sorrowful. Therefore my good brother, take a good heart unto you and be of good
chere. Say with the prophet Dauyd: psalm. 42
O my soul why art thou so heuye, and why art thou so disquieted with in me? O
put thy trust in god, for I will yet give him thanks for the help of his
loving countenance and because he is my god. Read psalm. the.41. and.42. for
your comfort, and consider that the holy king and Prophet, at the making and
first saying of them, was even in the same case that you are now in: but he
still comforted himself with the sweet promises of god: and so do you my dear
heart, for to you they do as well pertain as they did to him, and as surely
shall they be performed upon you, as they were upon him: for he is one god and
dear father unto you both, and for his mercy, truth, and promise sake, he must
needs make good unto you all that he has said. If his love toward you, stood
in the respect of your own merit or worthiness, you might well mourn, lament
and complain: yea you had good cause to doubt, fear, and mistrust. But seeing
he loves you only for and in Jesus Christ, who is your whole holiness,
righteousness, and redmption: lay away all mourning, lamenting and complaining:
banishe from you all fear, mistrust and infidelity, and know that as long as
Christ does continue gods son, so long must the love of the father continue
toward you immutable, and his good will unchangeable, and cannot be altered
through any of your infirmities. For this is most true, that as long as the
cause of any thing does last, so long must the effect remain: but christ is the
whole cause, why the father loves you, and he also continues for ever, then
must I needs conclude that the love of the father continues toward you for
ever, and (as the Palmiste most joyfully so often syngeth) his mercy endures
for ever and ever. This is most true mine own dear heart, although the Lord
for a time bide it from your senses, that you might be the more earnest in
prayer to him for the feelyng of it, and also the more thankful for it when
he does give the lively taste of it, as doutles he will do or ever it be long:
and then shall you be well hable to comfort other in the same state that you
are now in, with the same comfort wherwyth you are, and further shall be
comforted of god.

Heb. 12
Therefore, lift up your hands that are now a little fallen down, and stretch
forth the weak knees of your troubled mind; which now mourns with a godly
mourning, and therefore shall it be full well comforted with that sweet peace of
GOD which passes all understanding: and you are sure already to enjoy the
blessing that Christ gave unto the godly mourners of Sion upon the mount.
Eccle. 7
at the first set mo^ that he made. Oh happy.V. in, whose mourning company I
had rather be, then in the house of mirth and banckettyng of such as see not
what cause they have to mourn and be sorry. But yet my good brother, use a
measure in this your godly mournyng, and make not your faithful friends to much
sorry for you. Let the persuasions of such godly lovers as you do daily company
withal, or rather the persuasions of the holy ghost by them, move you to some
godly mirth and rejoicing. Phil 4
Consider that you are commanded of God by the mouth of Saint Paul thereto:
Rejoice in the Lord (says he) and I say again rejoice. Mark how he
doubleth the sentence, that we may perceive it is a most earnest and necessary
thing he requires. Obey the commandment of God in this behalf: wherein as you
cannot but highly please him, so I assure you, you shall very much rejoice my
poor heart, and the hearts of other which pray for you with mournyng tears,
and make that cruel enemy Satan and all your adversaries sorry, which will
rejoice and laughe to see you mourn. Oh my good brother, let it manifestly
appear that the lord of his great mercy has heard our faithful and
hartye requests for you. Oh how would that rejoice me in the mids of my
troubles?

Therefore now to conclude, because the darkness constrayneth me to make an end
for this time, I say my dear and faithful brother.V. in respect of the great
cause you have of your own part through Christ, and for the glory and honor
of almighty GOD: the comfort, joy, and reioycyng of your dear brethren and
Sisters in Christ: also your own duty by the commandment of GOD: and last
of all to vex, molest and grieve Satan wythal rejoice in the Lord, and be most
heartily glad in him, who is wholly yours and you are his and shall be for
euermor^. Selah.

Farewell mine own bowels in the Lord, and praise GOD with joyful lips and
a merye heart, and pray for me his most unprofitable servant, which have more
cause concerning my self, to lament then any one man living: out my good
bridegroom is present, and byddeth me cast away my mourning garments, and
therefore I must needs be merry with him: and so he bids you to be by my
mouth, for he is present with you, although for sorrow you cannot know him,
as Magdalen could not in the garden, until he spoke unto her. The Lord God
speak the words of comfort in your heart, and open the eyes of your mind,
that you may perfectly perceive and feel his blessed presence, and so rejoice
in the same for evermore, Amen. Comfort your heart in Christ and cast your care
upon him, for he cares for you.

Your brother in the Lord abydyng his good pleasure. John Careless.

Unto all the faithful flock of Jesus Christ within ye city of London, which
fear god unfeignedly and seek to serve him in such holiness and righteousness
as is acceptable in his sight: John Careless wysheth the eternal peace of God
in Jesus Christ, the continual aid, strength and comfort of his most holy
spirit, wych the increase of faith and lively feling of his mercy, now and
evermore, Ame^.
WHen I had with my self well waied and considered (right worshipful
citizens) the great charge and burden that you have borne and ben at, not only
with me (which am most unworthy of your liberal benefits) but also with many
other the poor afflicted people of God, ever since the time that Tyranny last
broke lose into this miserable land etc: I was even ashamed and in conscience
confounded to think of my great slouthe and negligence, yea ingratitude and
unthankfulness toward you, in not sowing some of these spiritual gifts
which God has given me, amongst you, of whom I have reaped so manifoldly
your temporal benefits.

God for his dear sons sake, forgive me my great sin that in this point I
have commiited against both him and you, desiring you also to do the same, and
I will promise you by gods grace, if he spare me life, I will henceforthe
better perform my duty toward you, my poor prayer alwais supplieng that,
which otherwise I am not hable to perform. And in testimony thereof, I have
here written unto you this simple admonition, the which I wene will be my leave
taking of you and last farewell in this corruptible life, as by many likelyhodes
it does appear: wherefore I beseech you all to accept it in good part as a
sign and token of some parcel of my good will toward you. But what shall I
write unto you, or whereof shall I entreat that you already do not perfectly
know? You have had ye pure word of God plentifully preached amongst you: yea
and the same sealed (praised be god therefore) with good store of blood. You
have also the blessed Bible, and al other good books of godly men's doings among
you, so that I think you are ignorant of nothing that pertains to the life
of a perfect christian. Therefore I will not here take upon me to teach you any
thing, sith I know that ye most part of you perceives of the mind of God, as
much or more then I do. But I will now most humbly pray you, and heartily beseech
you, and that by the mercifulnes of god in Jesus Christ, and as we shall al
assemble shortly before him, that you will in no wise do contrary to your
knowledge, least your own conscience become also a swifte witness at the great
day against you. I will not meddle with secret matters, but speak of those things
which be to much apparent, and yet not of all, but namely of one: the which as
it seems to be least regarded amongst you, so am I sure the same is yet most
horrible and odious in the sight of god: that is to say, the being present with
the papists at any of their Antichristian and idolatrous service, which is
not only a wicked dissemblyng of your faith, and a very outward denial of the
gospel of God, but also a manifest committyng of idolatry with the wicked, and
does depely deserve gods heavy wrath and displeasure: which is not far of,
unless you hartelye repent in time and turn to the Lord, coming clean away
from the filthiness aforesaid, as he does lovingly call you.

Ah my dear hearts, what shall I say to you, or how shall I temper my pen to
persuade you? All the godly preachers that in times past have taken pains
amongst you, have fully agreed and wholly concluded, yea and by the holy
scriptures plainly proved, that it is not lawful for any of you to be
personally present with the papists at any part of their Antichristian
service. This have they truly taught you: this have they largely and learnedly
written unto you: and this have they most godly confirmed with their blood before
you. What would you have more? Yea many a faithful heart has followed them, and
to their power done the like, and yet (alas) all will not now serve. How
happens this (my dear friends of London) yt neither the loving admonitio^s of
al gods good Prophets, nor the earnest warnings of his dear witnesses and
worthy Martyrs, will take no place amongst you? Do you think that they have
not told you the truth, but some dream or vain tale that shall not so come to
pass? Do you think that they did but dallye with you to delude you, and to
make you afraid of a flea bityng or vain shadow, where no need of fear is?
Certainly you shall find it otherwise shortly, if you so think, as you may see
if you will, by experience of that which is already come to pass, even as they
did truly tell you in their preaching or rather prophesye for your for warning.
Be you sure the Lord is no less mighty to-performe his word pronounced by
these his fore runners, before his latter coming: then he was true to pour
forth his plagues upon ye Jews prophesied both by John Baptist and other his
foreru^ners, before his first coming. Latymer, Rydley, Hoper, Rogers,
Bradforde, Saunders, with the rest of their blessed brethren that are fled or
burned, are as well to be believed in this point, as Helias, Esaias, Jeremy or
John Baptist, in those things that they warned the world of. It is al one word
which they al have preached: and in the power of one spirit, that they have
ministered. And as verily as they were ye lords messengers to Israel for that
age: so surely were these later sort the lords ministers to warn England for
this age, and I fear, the last that ever shall be sent unto it. But I ask
again, how happens it, that you pretending to be of the flock of Christ, do
not now harken to the voice of your head pastor Christ, pronounced by his
servants, to obey and follow it? Verily I fear me, because you be but wild
goats, and none of christ's true elect sheep. For if you were Christ's sheep
in deed, you would surely give more regard to the voice of your shepeharde
speaking in his godly preachers, and not presume to follow strangers (as I
here say you do) which entise you to lewdnes and backeloking from the plough,
on which you had once laid hand: Luke. 17
but Christ byddeth you remember Lottes wife.

I here say that there is amongst you now adays, a sort of worldly wise men
(whose doings will prove folishnes before god one day, without doubt) which have
so diligently sought ye scripture, that they have found out that which none of
our good preachers ever could do, though their whole study was only therein
day and night. And what is that? Forsooth as some say, they have found there,
that it is permitted lawful for christian men that know the truth, to be
present with the papists at their Anitchristian and idolatrous service, and
that they may cloak their knoweledge and dissemble their faith, and seek
what shifts they can, to save their life, lands and goods, so that they do
not utterly deny the truth in their hearts or by express words, in the way of
recanting. Ah sirrah, have they so? Yea Sir I warrant you they have not had the
Bible in their houses all this while for naught. They have found one trick to
serve their turn when the time of trial comes, yt al our folish preachers
could not perceive: for had they known that knacke, they would not fo hedlong
have run into ye fire as they have done. But with your leave, I will now a while
talk with these worldly wise Divines, which have found out this hyd mystery, I
might say of iniquity well enough. I pray you my Masters, Massemongrel
gospellers, where do you find that any faithful christian, may dissemble the
profession of his Masters religion, to frame and fashion him self like unto
the wicked world, where out the Lord has chosen him to serve him in spirit and
truth? You find it be like in ye bottom of your bags of gold and silver,
for in gods Bible book, I am sure you find it not, but altogether the
contrary. You here there, how god does bid you not to bear a strange yoke with
the unbelievers, but to come out from amongst them, and to separate your selves
from the^: but many men's hearing will not serve them on that side. You here
there also that God will spue out such luke warm gentlemen as be neither hot
nor cold, forth of his mouth: Apo. 3.
but I ween you do not believe it, well I say no more, but mark the end of
this gear. I will not deny but that you may wring and wrest some places of
the holy scripture contrary to all the rest, to make them seem among the
simple or carnal, as though they served for your purpose: and even so may the
rankest heretyke in the world do to stablish his heresy withal. But surely in
the end such rakers shall receive a heavy reward, which will be a great deal
sooner the^ they wene, let them make as light of the matter in the mean space
as they list.

Ah what a great grief is this, and how greatly to be lamented in these our
woeful dais, yt so many which bear ye name of christians, unto whom it has
pleased the lord of his great goodness and infinite mercy to reuele ye blessed
knowledge of his holy and sincere word, and thereto has opened the eyes of their
minds, and illuminate their understanding, whereby they do perceive, as well what
is pleasant and acceptable in his sight, as also what is abominable and
detestable in ye same: do yet that not withstanding, not only leave ye good
which they ought withal their endeavor to have done, but also with a wicked
boldness do commit that evil, which they ought in no wise to have done: that is,
where as they ought by all godly means, to have encouraged their christian
brethren, and Sisters to be strong in the lord, and boldly to confess Christ,
bearyng his cross also with joy and patience, and to avoid al detestable
idolatry, superstition, and wickedness, which is the right occupieng of their
talent, and the very end whereto God has given the^ the same: do contrariwise
as much as in them lies, both by word and wicked example, discourge their
weak brethren and Sisters from the bold confession of christ's verity, that
they should not with joy and patience bear Christ's sweet cross: and also
do provoke, yea allure and draw the^ to all kind of idolaty, supersticion, and
wickedness, in being present with the papists at their most horrible and
blasphemous Mass and other Antichristian service. Whereby it is now come to
pass (alas therefore) that the old proverb that S. Peter speaks of, 2. Pet.
2.
is found to true: the dog is turned to his vomit again, and the Sow that
was washed, to her wallowing in the mire, to the utter destruction of many a
one, unless the lord of his great mercy give them grace to repent and turn in
time.

Oh world of wickedness, and case most lamentable, that ever any man, to whom
the Lord has given any of his good gifts, should now apply the same to the
destruction of his christian brethren and Sisters, for whom Christ shed his
most precious blood. Alas that ever there should be any such unthankfulness
found amongst those that bear the name of gospellers. It had been much
better for such, unless they in time repent, that they had never known the
gospel, then thus beastly to abuse their knowledge, not only to the terrible
destruction of themselves, but also of many other simple souls, which would
never have been present or pertakers with the Antichrists at their Babilonical
superstition, had it not been for such te^pting Serpents which have subtely
deceived them under a pretense of knowledge, Oh miserable blind guides and blind
leaders of the blind, who can sufficiently lament your woeful state, into ye
which your worldly wisdom has brought you has god for your ingratitude so
given you up to your selves, yt you can now find in your heart with your
knowledge to go about to destroy that thing which you ought chiefly to edify,
I mean ye church of Christ whereof you pretend to be members, and also to
erecte and edify the thing which (God he knows) you ought by all lawful
means to pull down and destroy, I mean the Sinagoge of Satan, or malignant
church of Antichrist? Full well am I assured (O you holow hearted hypocrites) yt
the pestilent papists themselves, neither by fear nor flattery, could ever
have been able to have brought so many simple souls, that had some zeal to
gods word, to the presence of their deuilyshe Idolatry, if you and such like
carnal gospellers, had not help the^ as well with your lying persuasions, as
also with your deuelysh doings and most wicked examples. Therefore I must needs
say yt you have showed your selves to be greater enemies to ye church of
Christ, and dearer scends to the church of Antichrist then the very papists
the^ selves be. Verily you are far fitter instruments for the devil to use
his disceate by, then the papists, be they never so rank: yea to say the
truth, you are a far sweeter bayte to catch ye simple souls that do not
suspect you, then ye fynest papists upon the whole earth. For is not this a
sweet kind of gospelling (trow you) to the senses of the carnal man, to come
and tell him that is something fearful and worldly minded with all, that he may
by the word of God lawfully go to church, and do al things outwardly as the
papists do, only let his heart be toward god, and al shall be well enough: yea
and so he may live and be quiet and save his lands, and goods, and do much
good an other way many a day to come, when ye gospel shall come again etc: and
(to make this bayte yet something more sweter and more subciller to deceive) to
garnishe ye same with diverse sayings and examples of the holy scriptures,
which at the first blush, before they be well weighed, seem to make something for
your purpose: think you (I say) that this is not a sweet slight of the subtle
Serpent to deceive the simple souls of carnal and wavering minded men withal?
Yes verelye: for this is (as the Prophet Ezechiell says) a sowing of pyllowes
under al arm wholes, EZec. 13.
and bolsters under the heads of young and old, to catch souls, and to lay
the conscience a sleep upon. But when the time shall come that God does waken
them, then will such slepers say with the Prophet, woe be to the^ that so have
done: Woe be unto such ungodly gospellers that give such counsel unto carnal
me^, making them by evil means to seek to save their lives, whereby they are
like utterly to lose the same both in body and soul for ever. These be the
enemies of the cross that Saint Paul speaks of, Phil. 3.
which with sweet preaching and flatteryng words deceive unstable souls.
These do not choose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasure of sin for a little season, esteming the rebukes of
Christ to be greater riches then all the treasures of Egipte, Heb. 11. Matthew.
8.
as good Moses did. But these godless hypocrites, with the Gergesites, set
more by their Porkettes then by the company of Christ, and therefore have
they not only desired him, but also compelled him to depart out of their
coasts, and in his stead they have gently received ye Devil and Antichriste
his eldest son, yea with all their force and might they have brought him in
again as a good Swineheard to keep their pigges of worldly pelf etc. Could
the wicked papists ever have wroughte their cursed feats as they have now
done for the aduauncing of their paultrye, and brynging the reaste of their
tyranny and cruel purpose to pass, had not these dissembling gospellers been
so aplyable to their minds at the first dashe, and with their subtle
persuasions bewitched the hearts of others to come to their wickedness? No
surely, they should sooner for shame, despair, and distress of mind, have
hanged themselves, as their predecessor Judas did: and therefore I dare accuse
them all before God (except they repent) as accessaryes to the wilful murder
of all the Godly Christian Preachers that have of late been put to death
within this Realm, and also of the souls of such as perish for lack of true
preaching.

Ah, now do I perceive that it was not for naught that the Prophet so sore
threatens them with eternal damnation, Esaias. 30
when he cries, woe be unto those shrincking children that secke succor under
the shadow of wicked Pharao. Oh woe is my heart for them, that ever they
should so slide from the Lord their Instructour, and cause other to do the
same. Yea the most merciful Lord him self does in his word bewail them,
and as it were mourn for them, saying: alas for these disobediente shrinckyng
children, that they will take counsel without me: alas that they will take a
secret advise, and not out of my spirit, Esaias. 30.
and therefore heap they sin upon sin etc. Now tell me, O you vain and
carnal gospellers, that be not only content to play the disobediente
shrincking children your selves, but also as much as in you lies, do assure
all other to do the like, to the great dishonor of GOD and destruction of
your brethrens souls: tell me (I say) where you have that counsel and wicked
advise? Verily out of the spirit of error and lies: for out of the Lords
spirit of truth you have it not, for the spirit of God is always consonante
and agreeable to his word. Yea in his word he commands the true servants
of God to set themselves at liberty, 2. Cor. 6
and not any longer to bear the strange yoke with the unbelievers. But you
contraryewyse counsel them to become again the bondslaues of Satan and his
son Antichriste, seruyng their Idolatrye and superstition with their bodily
presence. You bid them bear still the straunge-yoke of men's traditions and
deuilyshe inventions, with the unbelievers, tellyng them that there is honest
fellowship between righteousness and unrighteousness, and good company
between light and darkness, and frendlye concord between Christ and
Beliall, and that the beleuer and the infidel may part stakes well enough:
that their body which is, or ought to be the temple of ye holy ghost, may
agree with Images well enough, which be forbidden by the word of God: yea and
teaching them to worship the greatest Idol that ever was under heaven: and
therefore, whereas the Lord by his holy Prophet does command his people to
come out from amongst them, and to separate the^ selves from the^, and to
touch no unclean thing: you like tempting Serpents, do will them to thruste
in them selves among the thickest of them, and to join the^ selves, which
ought to be the members of Christ's mystical body, to the wicked members of
Satan. And not only to touch unclean things, but also to behold, and
outwardly worship them, yea to receive into their bodies (which ought to be the
temple of the living god) ye most filthy Idol, the strange god Mauzim, the
papists God of defense, yea and there to retain him, until the Iakes receive
him, which is a more meter place for him then ye sanctified body of a
Christian. Alas and weal away that ever any man that bears the name of a
Christian, yea of a Gospeller and favorer of Gods word, should become such a
vile slave to Satan, and to do him such notable service in these perilous
days: by ye means whereof he has prevailed more then he ever did in so short
time, since the beginnynge of the world.

Oh what devil has bewitched you, you runnagates from God, that you should
now do him such diligente service: whom you have not only pretended to hate,
but also promised at your baptism utterly to forsake? Yea and that you
should now become such pernicious enemies to Christ, whose word you have
so long pretended to love, some of you nygh these.20. years? Have you clean
forgotten what you professed and promised unto him at your baptysme? Has not
the devil servants enough of the papists and infidells to set a work to
suppress Christ's sincere religion, but he must send forth you to help him,
which of all other ought to hinder his cruel enterprise? Where be your
wits become (oh you mad men) the which for a little mucke of this molde,
will lose the precious part of everlasting life? Well, if you will needs play
the traitors against God, and dissembling devils, and run hedlong into hell
your selves, yet I pray you take not such pains to draw others with you,
which by their will would not come there? Go not about to persuade them, that
evil is good, Esaias. 5.
that darkness is light, and that sour is sweet, least your woe and damnation
be the greater. If he shall be sore punyshed that hydeth his talente in the
ground, and does none other man good therewyth, how much more shall he be
punished that occupyeth his talent to evil uses, and imployeth the same to the
destruction of his weak brethren, Math. 18.
for whom Christ dyed? If it were better for one to have a mylstone hanged
about his neck, and to be cast into the midst of the sea, then to offend
one of Christ's little ones, yea though it were but by example: what then shall
become of them that lead them forth of the way to commit most strong and
detestable Idolatry? If evil may not be done although good should come thereof,
then that evil may not be done whereof comes nothing but innumerable evils
both to body and soul, yea so many as a great volume were not able to
contayn the^, if they should be ryghtly descrbed. I could make a great many of
strong arguments forth of ye scriptures, to prove the doings of these
disse^blers both with god and man, to be deuilish and detestable, but these be
sufficient to warn such as have not their hearts hardened: but as for the rest,
I will say with S. John, Apoc. 22.
he that is filthy let him be filthy still, and upon their own heads be the
peril of their perishyng.

And now again to you my dear hearts, which by such have been deceived, or
are by fear or fragilitie fallen: to you I speak, and of love I warn you, my
dear and faithful friends of London, whom I love in the Lord, as I am no
less bound: I would be full loathe to be a witness against any of you all
at the great day. I have found great kyndnes of you, God recompense you, and
therefore duty does bind me, and love does compel me to call and cry unto you
to come away from that filthy whore of Babylon, and bie no more of her wicked
wares. Meddle not with her marchaundyse at this market time of Easter, for
verelye her sin is already ascended up into heaven, and has also procured
Gods plagues and vengeance shortly to be poured upon her: whereof you shall
surely be partakers, if you do not in time repent your backeslidyng and
shrinking from the Lord. Repent I say, repent for the tender mercy of God, and
have compassion upon your own souls before it be to late. Truly dear
friends, it is now no time to flatter with you, neither can I laughe at your
harm, which I see to be at hand, though it be hid from your eyes, as it
was from the Ierosolimitanes, when Christ wept full bytterly at their merye
singing, etc. It is not the part of a true heart to laughe with his friend when
present peril is at hand, but rather to lament to see him so merye, when he
has more cause to mourn. In which respect, I am even constrained with
weepyng tears to call unto you my dear friends of London in general, because
I will name no person, that you may yet take heed and know the time also of
Gods first visitatio^: for sure I am that his second is hard at hand. Do
not you think to flee from his presence, for his heuye hand will find you
out, though you should hyde your selves in the very bottom of hell, as the
Prophette David says. Psalm. 139
Think not then that these Romyshe rocks whereinto you daily creep, can
cover you from his fearful face, when he shall begin to call you to account
for the talent that he has lent you. It is not that your feigned excuse of
fear and fragilitie of the flesh, that shall excuse your follye and flying
back from him. No no, you will be even spechles at that day, when every body
shall spy how you have defiled your marriage gramente with the superstitions
of the whore of Babylon, Apoc. 7.
and how you have with that great harlotte committed fornication in the body
and spirit, against your dear husband Christ, which redeemed you neither with
corruptible gold nor silver, 2. Pet. 1.
but with his own most precious heart blood, and cleansed you in the
fountain of water through his word, that you might be unto him self a
glorious spouse and congregation, Ephesians. 5.
without spotte or wryncke in his syghte. Then will it appear in the presence
of Angel, man, and devil, how like dogs you have turned to your vomitte
again, and as filthye swyne soyled your selves in the popyshe mier pittes and
dyrte of the Romyshe dregs. Repent therefore I say again, repent in time,
and take the earneste warnyng that GOD does send you by me his poor
messenger, willing you to turn unto him before it be to late.

But peradventure you will say, as the gestes did that were first bidden to
the feast, you can not so easelye forgo your farms, your cattle, goods and
lands, your wives and children etc. O my dear friends for the Lords sake, lay
away these vain, yea wicked excuses, for verelye God will in no wise accept
them. Consider for Christ's sake, your duty toward God in these dangerous
days, Math. 3.
wherein the Lord is willing to try the chafe from the good corn, and to
purge his store with his fan, that is, his cross, that he may bring the
wheat into his barn, and burn the chafe with unquenchable fire. You are
called unto a kingdom that must be won with suffering on every side. Into
the which you must also enter (as S. Paul says) through many tribulations,
temptations, and afflictions, Act. 14.
in yt which you must travel as strangers and pilgrims in this wretched
world, which is not our native country, nor ye place where we must rest for
ever. Oh the^ learn to leave all things willingly that you do here possess,
and lift up your minds always to the heavenly habitation, where you shall
continually remain in joys unspeakable. Repose not your felicity in ye
pelf of this world, which shortly shall perish and come to naught: but set your
hearts joy upon the living god, who in Christ and for his sake, has given him
self wholly to be your portion and inheritance for ever, and therefore of right
ought you with gladness to give your selves wholly unto him, both in body and
soul. But that do you not so long as you seek to serve two Masters, Math. 6.
which yet you can not do as Christ affirms, though you cloak, color, and
counterfeite never so much. Do you think it but a small thing for the Lord god
him self, even the mighty Jehovah, to give him self wholye to be your own
good God and most dear loving father? Do you think it but a light matter
that he has given for you eue^ to ye death of the cross, his own only dear
son Jesus Christ, in who^ was and is all his whole pleasure and delight, yea
and yt when you were his very enemies: by ye which gift he has given you al
things both in heaven and in earth? Do you esteem it but a trifle yt he has
given you ye holy ghost, by whose power and mighty operation you are made the
very sons of god, and coheyres annexed with Christ of al your fathers goods
and possessions? But peradventure you will ask me, who does not seriouslye
regard all these aforesaid most precious gifts? Verily I say yt none of you
al does regard the^, that do not wholye give over your selves again to serve
him, yea and that in such holiness and righteousness, as is accepted before
him. For if you did dulye consider the depthe of his aboundaunte bottomeles
love and mercy in Jesus Christ, you would so love him again, that you
would boldly burste out and say with S. Paul, who is he, or what is it, that
shall be able to separate us from the love of God in Jesus Christ our Lord? Romans
8. Read the whole Chapter and the.11. and.12. to the Hebrews, for your comfort.

But I know that some of you will say, does none love god and serve him
truly, but such as lie in prison or give their lives for his sake? Then God
help us, for very few shall be saved. In deed dear friends, eue^ so our
savior christ does say: Math. 22. Math. 7. Luke ^2.
many are called but few are chosen: and strait is the gate that leads to
life, and few find it. And in an other place Christ calls his true Church a
little flock. And as concerning the first part of your question, Christ does
also make you a plain and direct answer, saying: that whosoever will be his
Disciple, Math. ^6.
must needs take up his cross and follow him. And again, he that loves
father, mother, wife, or children, Math. 10.
goods or lands or yet his own life more then me (says he) is not worthy of
me. And S. Paul affirms to you plainly, 2. Timo. 3.
that al without exception, that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
persecution. And in an other place he says, Phil. ^.
to you it is given not only to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for his
sake. Now tell me I pray you, whether these textes of Scripture do not prove
that all such as will not gladlye suffer with Christ, do neither love him,
nor serve him, nor yet be any of his Disciples? Say what you will, and think
what you list, yet shall you find this full true, that all such as will not
suffer with Christ here, shall not reign with him elsewhere, neither is it
meet that they should.

But now me thinks I hear some of you say to me, why Sir we do suffer with
Christ as it becomes Christians, in helpyng you to bear ye cross with our
liberal relief. If we had loved our goods more the^ we do Christ, as you
seem to lay to our charge, then would we not have bestowed so much of them
upon you and other, as we have done, yea and daungered our selves to bring it
to you, etc. In deed dear friends, in this point I must needs confess
that you have done your duty toward us: the Lord GOD grant you to do
the reast belonging to him as well, for verelye this is not all that GOD does
at this time require of you, as all those good men and women can tell, that have
as largelye sowed the fruits of faith amongst us, as any of you have done, and
yet never came at any of Antichrists service. God will not be answered with a
piece of your goods, since you have promised to forsake all for his love. You
must not play the part that Ananias and Saphira his wife did, Act. 5.
for the holy ghost will not suffer himself to be dissembled withal:
therefore be warned by that example. Also, God does not think it sufficient
that you do forsake all your goods and lands, but does look that you should
suffer in your own persons also for his sake, yea the very loss of your life's
if he so permit. And but reason, since Christ did not only give us the gifts
of his grace and all other good things that we do here possess, but also his
very life, yea and that when we were his very enemies. He gave us that freely
which was his own, and shall we think scorn to render unto him again that
which is his, and but for a time lent us, specially seeing that we shall receive
the same in a far more glorious wise? Leave it we shall shortly, will we, nil
we, and God he knows in what horror, fear, or trembling. And were we not
better then to wish the same taken from us by such means as might not only
make most to the setting forth of gods glory, and the commodity of his
church: but also to our own everlasting joy and comfort, being certified by the
same, that we be the true servants or rather ye chosen children of god, whose
death is right dear and precious in his sight? Ah why do we not with the
Apostles, desire to be reputed worthy to suffer for Christ's sake, seeing the
same is ye greatest dignity and highest promotion that god can bring us unto in
this life, yea and an honor that the highest Angel in heaven is not permitted
to have? Oh lord that the cross which is now come amongst us for the trial
of our faith, should seem a strange thing unto us that profess the name and
gospel of Christ, whereas in very deed we should be most familyarlye acquainted
therewith, as with our inseparable companion in this life? Look upon all the
holy patriarchs and prophets before the coming of Christ: look upon all the
apostels, Martyrs, Virgins, and confessors since the coming of Christ, and
tell me if any one of them all did not continually carry the cross as long as
they lived, and al in a manner in the end died for gods sake: yea most chiefly
of al, look upon Jesus Christ himself, the very dear and only son of god,
and tell me if all his life and death was not full of most painful and
bitter crosses: and will you look to be his disciples, and yet think scorn to
bear your cross with him? Disdain you to drink of that same cup that your
lord and master has done before you? Will you look to enter into the kingdom
of god, otherwise the^ all other have done that are gone before you? I pray you
show me your privilege and tell me where you have this prerogative above the
rest of your brethren, yea above the son of god himself, concerning his
humanity.

My dear friends and faithful lovers of London, be not deceived with self
love and your own fleshlye imagination, for at one word this is true, even as
God in heaven is most true, that if you do not forthwyth and even out of hand
fly from that filthy whore of Babylon, and all her abominable Idolatry and
superstition, you shall surely perish with her in the plagues that god shall
shortly pour upon her. And furthermore I say, that if you will not here
willingly suffer with Christ for the testimony of his everlasting truth, you
shall suffer with ye world here for your own wickedness, and then shall you not
reign with Christ in glory at his gracious coming: unto the which I hope
now it be not very long. For this is the firm decree and purpose of the
immutable God reveled in his everlasting word, that al they which will live
godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution, 2. Timo. 3.
and that every one of his elected sons shall be scourged, proved, and tried,
as gold in the furnace or fire. And these words of Christ shall continue for
ever, and be most effectuously fulfilled, that whosoever shall be ashamed of
him, Mark. 8.
or of his word amongst this sinful and adulterous generation, of him will the
son of man be ashamed before his father and his angels, and he that goes
about by such wicked means to save his life, shall surely lose it for evermore.

Therefore dear hearts, look to your selves in time, and consider your calling.
Lay away al vain excuses, for verily they will not serve for your discharge
when he shall come that will reward every man after the works of their bodies:
but he will require of you in this point, all that he has commanded you, as
he before hand has told you both plainly and often enough: God give you grace
to take it as a warning. And if you feel your selves to weak to confess gods
truth before the tyrannes, then for your refuge, the Lord has given you leave
to fly from place to place, and that is the uttermost that he will permit
you to do: which doing yet is a good confession of Christ and his verity before
the wicked world. Oh that you would follow the good example of a great number
of your godly neighbors, which are graciously escaped ye snares of Satan, and
are now where they serve the Lord with a safe conscience, and enjoy ye right
and free use of his word and sacraments: follow them for the lords sake,
and get you hastily out of Sodom, for surely the lord is utterly minded to
destroy it. Linger not as Loathe did, if you love your own lives, lest you find
not altogether so much mercy at ye lords hands as he did: for verily you have
tempted him to far already, and have to much despised his long sufferyng,
leuitie and gentleness, which ought to lead you to earnest and hartye
repentance. He has mercifully forborne you these ij. years past and more: if
he find no fruit in you shortly, make reckening to be pulled up by the rotes
every mothers son of you: for the axe is already laid at ye rote of England,
as it was by ye Romans at the root of the Jews, when John Baptiste began his
preaching I pray god that we feel not the sharp stroke of it as they did.
Pray, pray, pray, and repent in time: convert to the lord that he may heal
your backslidings before your wounds be incurable.

I could here say much more, but time will not suffer me. I trust this shall be
sufficient to al such as have any spark of faith, love, or true fear of God.
As for the rest, they are as a point with themselves: whatsoever any man either
write or say, they will surely disse^ble one way or other to save their pigges,
yea though they do but put their names in the Popes books. Well, yet say not
an other day but that ye were warned and though it were but by a poor simple
man, yet it was by him that wishes wealth to all your souls, and one that
in this point has told you the truth, and he trusts shortly you shall see
him seal the same with his blood through the help of the good prayers of all
you that truly repent and mind unfeignedly to turn the lord in time. As for the
rest, I will pray for them, but let them keep their own prayers to themselves
in gods name, for I will be no pertaker with them, since I know the same is
turned unto sin. Thus with most hearty thanks for all your benefits and
manifold kindness showed unto me and my poor brethren, beseching god to
recompense the same seven fold into all your bosoms, as I doubt not but he
will, according to his infallible promises, I do heartily commit you al unto gods
most merciful defense, who ever have you al in his blessed keeping, Amen. The
blessyng of God be with you al, Amen.

Your poor, daily, and most bounden Orator John Careless, prisoner of the
Lord in the kings Bench, at all times abiding gods most merciful will and
pleasure. Pray for me for gods sake, as I will never forget you by gods grace.

To his Wife.
AS by the great mercy of God, at the time of his good will and providence
appointed (my dearly beloved wife) you and I were joined together in the holy
and christian state of godly matrimony, as well to our great joy and comfort
in Christ, as also to the increase of his blessed church and faithful
congregation, by having lawful children by and in the same, with the which God
of his mercy has blessed us, praised be his name therefore: even so now, by his
merciful will and divine ordinance, the time is come (so far as I can
perceive) wherein he will, for his glory and our eternal comfort, dissolve the
same and separate us asunder again for a time. Wherefore I thought it good, yea
and my bounden duetye, by this simple letter to provoke, stir, and admonish
you, to behave your self in all your doings sayings, and thoughts, most
thankfully unto our good God for the same. And therefore (my dear wife) as you
have heartily rejoiced in ye lord, and oftentimes given god thanks for his
goodness in bringing us together in his holy ordinance: even so now I desire
you, when this time of our separation shall come, to rejoice with me in the
lord, and to give him most hearty thanks, that he has (to his glory and our
endless commodity) separated us again for a little time: and has mercifullye
taken me unto him self forth of this miserable world, into his celestial
kingdom: believing and hoping also assuredly, that God of his goodness, for his
son Christ's sake, will shortly bring you and your dear child^rne thither to
me, that we may most joyfully together sing praises unto his glorious name for
ever. And yet once again I desire you for ye love of god, and as ever you loved
me, to rejoice with me, and to give GOD continual thanks for doing his most
merciful will upon me.

I hear say that you do oftentimes use to repete this godly saying, the
Lords will be fulfilled. Doubtless it reioiceth my pore heart to hear that
report of you, and for ye Lords sake use that godly prayer continually, and
teach your children and family, to say the same day and night: and not only
to say it with your tongues, but also with your heart and mind joyfully to submit
your will to gods will in very deed, knowing and believing assuredly that nothing
shall come to you or any of yours, otherwise then it shall be his almighty and
fatherly good will and pleasure, and for your eternal comfort and commodity.
Which thing to be most true and certain, Christ testifies in his holy
gospel, saying: are not.ij. Math. 10.
little sparrowes sold for a farthing, and yet not one of them shall perish
without the will of your heavenly father? And he concludes saying: fear not ye
therefore, for ye are better the^ many sparowes. As though he should have said,
if god have such a respect and care for a poor sparrow, which is not worth
one farthing, that it shall not be taken in ye lime twig, net, or pitfall,
until it be his good will and pleasure: you may be well assured that not one of
you (whom he so derely loves, that he has given his only dear son for you)
shall perish, or depart forth of this miserable life without his almighty good
will and pleasure.

Therefore dear wife, put your trust and confidence wholly and only in him, and
ever pray that his will be fulfilled and not yours, except it be agreeing to
his will, the which I pray GOD it may ever be, Amen. And as for worldly
things, take you no care, but be you well assured the Lord your dear God and
father will not see you nor yours lack, if you continue in his love and
childly fear, and keep a clear conscience from al kind of idolatry,
superstition and wickedness, as my trust is that you will do, although it be
with the loss and danger of this temporal life. And good Margaret, fear not
them that can but kill the body (and yet can they not do that until God give
them leave) but fear to displease him that can kill both body and soul, and
cast them into hell fire. Let not the remembrance of your children keep you
from God. The Lord himself will be a father and a mother, better then ever you
or I could have been unto them. He himself will do al things necessary for
them: yea as much as rock the cradell if need be. He has given his holy
angels charge over them, therefore commit them unto him. But if you may live
with a clear conscience (for else I would not have you to live) and see the
bringyng up of your children your self, look that you nourture them in the
fear of God, and keep them far from Idolatry, superstition, and all other
kind of wickedness: and for gods sake help them to some learning, if it be
possible, that they may increase in virtue and godly knowledge, which shall be a
better dowry to mary them withal, then any worldly substance: and when they be
come to age, provide them such husbands as fear god, and love his holy
word. I charge you take heed that you match them with no papists, and if
you live, and marrye again your self (which thing I would wish you to do if
need require, or else not) good wife take heed how you bestow your self,
that you and my poor children be not compelled to wickedness. But if you
shall be able well to live gods true widow, I would counsel you so to live
still, for the more quietness of your self and your poor children. Take heed
Margaret and play ye wise womans part. You have warning by other if you will
take an example. And thus I commit you and my sweet children unto gods most
merciful defense. The blessing of god be with you, and god send us a merry
meeting together in heaven. Farewell in Christ, farewell mine own dear hearts
all. Pray, pray

To my dear Sister, M. C.
THe everlasting peace of god in Jesus christ, the continual comfortes of his
most pure and holy spirit, be with you (my dear and faithful loving Sister)
and comfort your heart with the plenteous consolation in Christ, that with the
abundance of the same you may (according to your old custom) comfort me in my
sorrowful estate, that I may be occasioned thereby to praise the lord with and
for you, and other his dear children, Amen.

Albeit my dear and faithful loving Sister, yt it were now my part and very
duty to show myself so comfortable and joyful in god for ye great triu^phe and
glorious victory yt he has so graciously given unto his dear and faithful
child good M. Philpot, yt you and al other (whose sorrows I dare say are much
increased) might be solaced by ye same: yet (alas) such is my loss and lack of
him, yt I cannot but so sore lament ye same, yt I fear me I shall not only
disco^fort you therwt, but also displease god, which for my si^ne has taken
him away. And though it had been both mine honesty and duty, seeing my self to
be in so much sorrow, to have kept ye same to my self, and not to have
increased yours therewith: yet could I no longer forbear but to communicate
some part thereof, to ye end yt you might communicate again to me either your
joy or sorrow, whether so ever you have most store of. If your joy in christ
have ye victory, as doutles it ought to have in ye respect of gods glory, which
is so mightily set forth by his sweet saint: the^ I pray you come to me as
shortly as you can, and communicate some part thereof unto me, whose froward
and stubborn heart cannot yet be content to prefer the good will and glory
of god, before mine own will and commodity, as I ought to do. But if sorrow in
you have gotten ye upper hand (as in very deed it does be guide to do in me)
good Sister come and speak with me ^o love as you can, yt we may measure our
mourning together, and in co^forting one an other, may be both constrained to
forget our sorrows, and praise god with him, who is now synging in sola^e ^ his
sweet companions that so constantly went before him, loking and wishing for us
two, I dare well say: god grant us grace to follow their faith and fotesteppes
unto the end, Amen.

Ah my dear heart, me thinks I am like a vessel of wine, that after it has
been tumbled and tossed to and fro, if it should not have a vente, would burst
in pieces: Even so the taking away of this very man of god (whose sweet comfort
my poor soul does lack) so tosseth and tormoileth my poor heavy heart, that
except I should, as it were with a vent, express the same to god with weping
tears, and open the same to you with words and letters: I think verelye it
would burst in pieces: which thing were to me most happily welcome, so that god
were pleased therewithal. Oh, if nature will so work in a wicked worldlyng, to
make him heartily to lament ye loss of his friend, by whose death he does yet
obtain diverse commodities: how can it be but the tender hearts that be
mollified with the good spirit of god, must needs bewail the taking away of
those dear hearts, by whose death they are deprived of so many heavenly
benefits, which so far without comparison do pass al earthly treasures? Ah
dear heart, I never wiste what the benefit of that worthy Bradford was, until
now that I feel the want of his dear fellow Philpotte, which full often poured
the precious water of life and comfort upon my poor afflicted foul. But now
(alas) for my great ingratitude, negligence and other my great sins, god has
taken them both from me: I shall no more hear the^ in this life (the more is my
sorrow) declare unto me ye most comfortable message of gods great mercy toward
me. Their worthy writings (alas) shall no more bring me the most joyful news
and merry tidinges of the Gospel, to tell me that al my horrible sins and
offenses are freely forgiven me. Oh my great loss which makes me much to
lament, and so vexes and tormenteth my mind, that I cannot well tell what I
write. Oh true token of gods terrible wrath against me, in taking away such
precious jewels of comfort from me. But just is the judgment of god against
me for my sin, which have largely deserved to be deprived of their sweet and
comfortable company, not only in this life, but also in the life to come. But
yet I know the Lord will not so do, but of his great mercy he has taken the^ at
this time from me, yt I might make the more haste with hearty desire, to be
dissolved and to be with them. Oh gracious god, how much is thy mercy? How
marvelous is thy loui^g power, and how great is thy goodness and the abundance
of thine exceeding kindness, which turnest all things to thy glory and the
commodity of thy chosen children? Oh make me so much to rejoice in the
respect of thy glory, which thou so mightily have magnifyed in thy sweet
Martyrs, that ye same may sone swallow up my deserved sorrows, Amen. Commend
me to my good sister.C. and bring her with you if you can. John was wont to
comfort Mary: but now good sweet Maryes come comfort John.

Written in have with plentiful tears, by your own in Christ, John Careless.

To my dear and faithful brother, Augustine Bernher.
THe peace of god in Jesus Christ, the help, comfort, and assistance of his
eternal spirit, be with you my dear and faithful brother Augustine, and with all
the rest of my good brethren and sisters of ye houses of Baxterley, and
Mancetur (which mourns for ye miserye of gods people) to your everlasting
consolation in him, Ame^.

Right glad I am to hear (my dear and faithful brother Augustine) that god
of his great mercy and infinite goodness, has yet so graciously delivered and
preserved you out of your enemies hands, beseching almighty god also, from the
bottom of my heart, to be your continual defense unto the end, as hitherto he
has most graciously been, that you may both live and die to gods glory, the
commodity of his church, and to the increase of your own everlasting joy and
comfort in him.

Know you dear brother yt I have received your letter, for the which I heartily
thank you. Indede I think it very short, although it seems something
sharply to rebuke me in the beginning, for the breach of my promise in not
writing to you of this long time. Well brother, I am content to bear it with
patience, considering that you are troubled otherwise (the Lord comfort you and
al heuie hearts) neither will I spend ynke and paper for my purgatio^ in this
point. God he knows whether I be so mindles of my promise as it appears in
your sight I am. Your request I will truly perform to the vttermoste of my
power, as gladly as any poor wretch shall do in the world, and I thank GOD
I have done no less of long time. And as my poor prayer shall be a hand
maid to wait upon you which way so ever you tide or go, so I beseech you
that my simple counsel may take some place in you, in this time of your
pilgrimage, which you pass in no small parell: GOD keep and preserve you for
his names sake. I do not disalowe, but much praise and commend your hartye
boldness in puttyng your self in preasse, when any one of Gods people
needs your help in any point. But yet I would not have you thruste your
self in danger, when you can do them no good, or at least wise when they
may well enoughe spare that good you would do them. For if you should then
chance to be taken, you shall not only be no comfort unto them, but also
a great discomforte, adding sorrow unto their sorrow. I do not persuade you
to absente your self from any place where your presence of necessity is
required, for in all such places, I know, GOD will preserve you, as he has
hitherto wonderfullye done, praised be his name therefore: or if it shall please
him to permit you in any such place to be taken, I know he will most
sweetelye comfort your conscience with this consideration, that it is the
very providence and appointmente of GOD that you should there and then be
taken up for a witness of his truth unto the world: but I can not allow
you, nor be contented that you should rashelye or negligentlye thruste your
self into that place where your wicked enemies do continually haunte, yea and
lay wait for you, when no necessity of your self nor of any other of Gods
people does require your company. If they need any of your Godly counsel,
you may write unto them that thing that you think good: which, I dare say,
will be sufficient unto them. For (continual thanks and praises be given
unto the everlasting God) there is none of those that be cruellye condemned for
Gods truth, that now be weakelings: for they have manfully passed through the
pikes, and they have boldly abidden the brunte of the battle, and therefore I
reckon ye worst is past with the^ already. So that now and then a Godly letter
from you to them, shall do as much good as your company shall do, and
perchance more too. For writing sticks longer in the memory then words
do: yea though your letters were as short to them, as your last was to me,
so that the same be something sweter and not all thing so sharp.

This (dear brother) is the simple counsel which I would gladly have you
observe, partly for that I heartily pray for your preservation to the
commodity of Christ's church, and partly for yt I unfeignedly wish the peace,
comfort, and tranquillity of your own conscience, which I know will be quickly
ready to accuse you if you do any thing wherein you have not the word of God
for your warrante. For in a glass that is clear, a small mote will sone
appear: even so ye good conscience of Gods chosen children being more clear
then Christ all, will quickly accuse them at the least fault they do commit,
where as the wicked worldlings have their conscience clogged and corrupted
through the custom of sin, that they can not once see nor perceive their
own shameful deeds and wicked works, until GOD set the same before them for
their utter destruction, and then despair they immediately. But seeing ye god
has given you a clear conscience and a pure, sharp, quick, and lively sight
in your soul, I would wish you to beware that you do nothing unadvisedly, but
upon a good ground. For an accusing conscience is a sore thing when death
does approach, and then Satan will not stick to tell you yt you have to much
tempted god, when peradventure you have done nothing so at all. For this cause
(I say) partly I have thought it good to admonish you (as I have done often)
to be circumspecte, according to the counsel of Christ, Math. 10.
which bids you beware of men. Other things I have not for to write, for I
know this bearer can certefye you of al things at large, better then I can
declare it by writing.

I beseech you good Augustine, help me forwards with your hartye prayers, for
I trust I have but a small time to tarry in this troublesome world. Doctor
Storye told our Marshal yt we should al be dispatched so sone as he came from
Oxforde, whether he and other bloodye butchers be gone to make slaughter of
Christ's sheep, ye lie there appointed to be slain. God for Christ's sake put
them and such like, besides their cruel purpose, if it be his good will and
pleasure: Amen good Lord. I pray you do my most hartye commendations to my
dear sister and faithful friend, good Mystres Marye Glouer. I beseech GOD be
her comfort, as I doubt not but he is. I am very glad to hear that she
does so ioyfullye and so patientlye bear this great cross that God has
laid upon her. I pray GOD strengthen her, and all other his dear Saints
unto the end, Amen. Commend me unto my dear and faithful

Sister Elizabeth. B. I thank her most hartelye for my napkin, and so I do
you dear brother, for my sherte. Truly that day that we were appointed to
come to our aunsweare before the Commissioners, which had sent word the
same morning, that they would come to the Kings Benche by viii. of the
clock, and the house and all things were trymmed and made ready for them: I
got that shert on my back and that napkin in my hand, and me thought that
they did help to harness me and weapon me well, to go fight against that
bloodye beast of Babylon. And trust me truly, if they had come, I would
have stryken iij. strokes the more for your two sakes, as well as GOD would
have abled me to have set them on, as by Gods grace I will not fail to do
at the next skirmyshe that I come to: Wherefore I pray you pray for me, that
I may be strong and hardye to lay on good load. Oh that I might so strike
him down, that he should never be able for to rise again: but that stroke
belongs only unto the Lord to strike at his coming, the which I trust will
be shortly. Oh hasten it good Lord, and shorten these sorrowful and sinful
days, for thy great mercyes sake. Fare well my dear and faithful brother:
the Lord defend, keep, and preserve you from the power of your enemies visible
and invisible, and send us a most joyful and merye meting here or elsewhere,
as it shall please his goodness to appoint us. In the mean space I shall most
earnestly desire you to pray for me, for I never had more need in my life: and
doubtless you shall never want my poor prayer, if it shall please god to accept
the prayer of so synnefull a wretch as I am. The Lord impute not my sins to
me, for Jesus Christ's sake, unto whose most merciful defense, I do most
heartily commit you. The blessing of God be with you now and ever, Amen. I pray
you do my most hearty commendations unto M. John Glouer. I do not forget him in
my daily prayers, and I trust he does remember me.

Your pore brother always mindful of you in my prayer, John Careless prisoner,
abiding gods pleasure.

To my dear brother Harry Adlington prisoner in the Lolardes Tower.
THe everlasting peace of GOD in Jesus Christ, the continual aid, strength,
joy, and comfort of his most pure, holy, and mighty spirit, with the
increase of faith and liuelye feelyng of his mercyes: be most effectuouslye
wroughte in your heart, my dear and faithful loving brother Adlington, and in
the hearts of all your other Godly prison fellows, to the full finishyng of
that good work, which the Lord has most graciouslye begone in you: that
the same may be to the setting forth of his glory, the commoditye of his
poor afflicted Church, and to your own eternal joy and comfort in him,
Amen.

My most dear and faithful loving brother in our Lord, I with all the rest of
my loving brethren here with me, do most humbly and heartily commend us unto
you, with all faithful remembrance of you in our daily prayers, giving god
earnest thanks on your most happy behalf, for that he has given you such
hartye boldness and Christian consta^cye in the faithful confession of his
everlasting verity. Blessed be God for thee my dearly beloved brother, which
has vouched thee worthy of so great dignity, as to suffer for his sake and
the setting forth of his glory. Oh glad in heart may thou be, to whom it
is given, not only to believe in thy Lord and Christ most liuelye: but also
to suffer for his sake, as one of his seelye sheep appointed to the slaughter.
Be of good comfort therefore my good brother, for your calling unto the
cross of Christ, was after a merueilous sort. Surely, it was only the Lords
appoyntmente, and therefore he will well perform his own work in and upon
you, to the great magnifying of his glory, and comfort of your brethren:
whose hearts are mightelye refreshed, to hear how hartelye you have behaved
your self hitherto. This present day I received a letter from you, at the
reading whereof my brethren and I were not a litte comforted, to see your
conscience so quieted in Christ, and your continuance so steadfast in him:
which things be the special gifts of GOD, not given unto every man, but to
you his dear dareling, elect, and chosen in Christ, and such as you be. And
where as you do require to know my simple mind concerning your aunsweare unto
Doctor Storye and the Chauncelour: truly I say you did aunsweare them very
well: for there are but two Sacraments in deed: that is to say, the
Sacrament of Baptism, and the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, as
you have full well aunsweared them: praised be God for his good gifts, who
choseth the weak to confound the strong, and the foolyshe to confound the
worldly wise. If, when you come before them again, they do ask you what a
Sacrament is, say you that a Sacrament, being ministered according to
Christ's institution, is a visible sign of an invisible grace, and has the
promise of Gods mercy annexed unto it, available to all such as do
worthelye receive it, and not unworthily worship it: as they would have us
to do, contrary to Gods commandment. And these properties belonging to
Christ's true Sacraments, can not be applied unto any one of those five
Sacraments which they have invented of their own brain, since Antichriste
began to reign, to blind the people with all.

I perceive dear heart, that upon fridaye they do entende to condemn you and
to give you your judgment. Therefore I think they will have no great
reasoning with you, but bydde you aunsweare them directlye, either yea or nay,
to all such things as they have to charge you with all, which they have
gathered of you since you came into their cruel hands. But if they will
needs make many words with you, because you are but a simple man, and
therefore perchance they will be the busier with you to ttouble you with many
questions to comber your knowledge, and then seem to triumph over you and
that truth that you do hold: if (I say) they do this, as perhaps for some
evil purpose they will: then be you so plain and short as you can, saying
roundlye unto them these or such like words as nyghe as you can. Be it
known unto you, that I in all points do believe as it becomes a true
Christian, and as I have been truly taught in the days of that good King
Edward, of such godly Preachers and Prophets sent of GOD, as have sealed
their doctrine with their blood: from whom I will dissente in no point: for I
am a poor man without learning, but am commanded of GOD to follow the
counsel of his constante Preachers, and so do I entend to do, god giving me
grace and assistance thereto. As for you, I know you to be none of Christ's
shepeheards, but ravening wolves which come to kill and scatter the flock of
Christ, as the Lord said you should: and does will us to beware of you and
your poisoned doctrine, bidding us to judge you according to your fruits,
whereby all men may see and know what you be, that will not be wilfullye
blind. But the good shepeheardes have given their lives for the defense of
Christ's flock: and I am commanded to follow their faithful and Godly
example, and to confess with them one truth, even to the fire, if GOD shall
see it good: and this as a true Christian. I have hitherto done and hence forth
by Gods grace entende for to do. And if for the same, GOD shall suffer you to
take away my life, as you have done theirs, I am contented therewith* his will
be done, for that only is good. But of this be you sure, the Lord will
shortelye call you to account for all the innocente blood that is shed with
in this Realm: which you have brought into a most woeful case, and made many a
heavy heart in the same, and more I perceive you will make, so long as the Lord
for our sins will suffer you to prosper, and until the time that your own
iniquitye be full ripe. But then be you sure, the Lord will sit in judgment
upon you, as well as you do now upon his Saints, and will reward you according
to your deseruings: to who^ with my whole heart I commit my cause, and he will
make answer for me, when the full time of my refreshyng comes. In the mean
space I will keep silence with this that I have said, trusting that I have
sufficiently discharged my conscience in confessing my faith and religion to
you, declaring of what Church I am, even of the catholyke Church of Jesus
Christ, which was well known to be here in ^^glande in our late good Kings
days, by two special tokens which can not deceive me, nor suffer me to be
deceived: that is to say, the pure preaching of his holy word, and the due
administration of the holy sacraments: which is not to be seen in your Romyshe
church, and therefore it can not justly be called the Church and spouse of
Christ. I believe in the holy Trinity, and all the other articles of the
Christian faith contained in the three Credes, and finally all the canonical
Scripture to be true in every sentence. And I detest al sects both of the
Arrians and Anabaptists, or any other that divide themselves from the true
church of Christ, which is his mystical body, the ground and pillar of truth,
and the very house of ye living God. And if for these things you take away my
life, and make yourselues giltye of my blood, you may: for I am in your hands,
as the sheep brought to the Shambles, abiding the grace of the Butcher. And be
you sure, your judgment stepeth not, but when you cry peace, peace, 2. These.
5.
and all is safe: then shall your plagues begin like the sorrows of a woman
trauelyng with child, according to Christ's infallible promise.

This kind of aunsweare my dear heart, it shall be best for you to make,
and by Gods grace, I do entende to take the same order my self in time to
come, when the Lord shall vouche me worthy of that great dignitye, whereunto
he has called you. And if they shall laugh you to scorn, as I know they will,
saying thou art a fool and an unlearned asseheade, and art able to make
answer to nothing etc: care not you for it, but still co^mmit your cause unto
god, who will make answer for you, and tell them that they have been answered
again and again of diverse godly and learned men: but al will not help, for you
have one solution for all manner of questions, even a fair fire and fagots,
this will be the end of your disputations. Therefore I pray you to trouble me
no more, but do that which you are appointed, when god shall permit the time. I
am no better the^ Christ, his Apostels, and other of my good brethren that are
gone before me. This kind of answer will cut their combs most, and edify the
people that stand by, so that the same be done coldly with sobriety, mekenes,
and patience: as I heard say out sweet brethren Thomas Harla^d and John Osward
did at Jews in Suffex, to the great rejoicing of ye children of god yt were in
those parties: and I hear say, yt they were dissolved from this earthly
tabernacle at Leawes on Saturday last, and were condemned but ye wednisday
before: so that we may perteine ye papists have quick work in hand, that
they make such haste to have us home to our heavenly father. Therefore let us
make our selves ready to ride in the fiery chariot, 4. Reg. 2.
leaving these sorry mantels and old clokes behind us for a little time which
god shall restore unto us again in a more glorious wise. My good brother Harry,
you shall understand ye bragging John. T. has begilde his kepers (who trusted
him to well) and is run away from them, and has brought the poor men into
great danger by the same. The one of them is cast by the Councels
commandment, into the gate house at Westminster, the other is sted forth of
the country for fear. Thus you may see the fruits of our freewil men, that
made so much boast of their own strength. But that house which is not builded
surely upon the immovable rock, will not long stand against the boistrous
winds and storms, that blow so strongly in these dais of trouble. But my
derely beloved brother, blessed be god for you and such as you be, which have
played ye parts of wise builders. You have dygged down paste the sand of
your own natural strength, and beneath the earth of your own worldly wisdom,
and are now come to the hard stone and immovable rock Christ, who is your
only keeper: and upon him alone you have builded your faith most firmly,
without doubting, mistrust, or waueryng. Therefore neither the storms nor
tempests, wyndes nor weathers that Satan and all his wily workmen can bring
against you, with the very gates of hell to help the^, shall ever be able once
to move your house, much less to overthrow it: for the lord god himself (and
no man) is the builder thereof, and has promised to preserve and keep the same
safe for ever. Unto his most merciful defense therefore, I do heartily commit you
and all your good comapany, desiring him for his sweet son Jesus Christ's
sake, to confirm and strengthen you all, that you may be constant unto the
very end: that after the final victory is once gotten, you may receive the
inmercessible crown of glory, of gods free gift through his great mercy in
Jesus Christ our alone Savior. To whom with the father and the holy ghost be
all honor, glory, praise, thanks, power, rule and dominion for ever and
evermore, Ame^. The blessyng of God be with you all.

John Careless.

To my faithful and loving brother William Aylsebury.
THe everlasting peace of god in Jesus Christ, the continual aid, strength and
comfortes of his most pure, holy and mighty spirit, with the increase of
faith and lively feelyng othys mercy: be with you my dear and faithful
loving brother W. Ailsebury, to the increase of his good gifts in you and the
full finishyng of that which the Lord has so gratiouslye begone in you, that
the same may be to the setting forth of his glory the commoditye of his poor
afflicted church, and to your own everlasting comfort in him. Amen.

Albeit, my dear heart in the lord, that at this very present, my sorye slow
hand is something pestered with writing, to please my friends which daily call
upon me for the performance of my promise and duty toward them, by the
means whereof I cannot now write unto you in so ample manner as I feign would:
yet lest by my to long silence, my great ingratitude for your love and godly
letters, should to much appear, I have here in haste scribled these few
words unto you, desiring you to accept the same in good part, until the
Lord shall send me a more conueniente time to express my good will and
bounden duty more largely unto you, promisyng you in ye mean space, that my
poor prayer shall supply yt which wants otherwise: as I trust you do not
forget me in yours, for verily I have great need of it. My dear brother. I
thank you most heartily for your godly, loving, and most comfortable letters,
in the which I do evidently perceive the precious gifts of God wherewith you
are plentifully endued: the Lord be praised for you, and from the bottom of
my heart I do reverence his spirit in you. Wherefore my good brother, be not
negligent in the talent that God has delivered unto you: but diligently apply
the same, as I know well you do, that the Lord may receive his own with
vauntage, and you the reward of a faithful servant at the time of his most
ioyefull return. Truly I will not speak it to flatter you, neither would I
provoke you to vain glory, but I will say as I see just cause, that god
has abundantly blessed you with the sweet knowledge and pure understanding
of his holy word. Be always thankful unto god I charge you, and humble and
meke in your own sight, that GOD only may have all the glory from the bottom
of your heart: And look that you be very circumspect in all your life and
conversation, that ye light of your good works may so shine before men, that
they may be occasioned to glorify your heavenly father on your behalf, Be
diligent in your doings, and quick and trusty in all your Masters business yt
you go about, that by all means you may do honor to ye doctrine of our
Savior Jesus Christ. Remember that Satan now will have greater spite at you,
then at many other, because you are such a mortal enemy to his kingdom on
enerye side. Therefore be you sure he will now lie bitynge at your heel, to
see if he can give you a fall any manner of way. that he might make the truth
of that godly doctrine, which you constantly confess, to be slaundered by ye
means thereof. I know well that Satan's thoughts are not hid from you. 2.
Cor. 2.
I doubt not but you will be more circu^specte the^ I can declare:
notwithstanding I thought it my bounden duty to warn you, as one whom I love
as mine own soul, wyshing you all the good I can possible. Commend me unto my
dear friend John Manning and thank him for his manifold kindness. I am much to
blame for him: but if the lord do spare my life a little longer, I will write
something to him for a remembrance when I am gone. Desire him to pray for me,
as I do not forget him. I have sent you your writings again with thanks. I
pray you write me a copye of that, concerning the Trinity: for I like it
marvelous well, it is so brief and pithy. I have no leisure to write it, yet
would I feign have it: as knows the lord GOD, to whose most merciful defense
I do heartily commit you, with my good brother John Manning: that he with his
grace and spirit, will guide you both, with all ye rest of his dear children
unto the end, Amen. The blessing of God be with you now and evermore, Amen.

Your own unfeignedly John Carelet prisoner of the Lord. Pray, pray, pray.

To my most faythefull and dear brother. T. V.
THe everlasting peace of god in Jesus Christ, the continual comfortes of his
most pure and holy spirit, be with you my dear and faithful brother. V. and
in all things make you joyful through the liuelye feeling of his fatherly
mercy and godly providence for you: that you having daily more and more ye sure
sense of ye same, may be able of your own good experience, perfectly to
comfort me and all other with the same comfort which you have, and further shall
receive of god: who bless and keep you now and ever, Amen.

I cannot express (my dear heart in the Lord) how my joys do increase to
see how god of his great mercy does daily add unto his true church and poor
afflicted congregation, such as he in Christ has elected to salvation, before
the foundation of the world was laid: of which most happy number preserved only
by his free mercy and grace, the lord (no doubt) has chosen, and does reckon
you for one, and has registered your name in his book of life, where it shall
remain for ever, and that so sure, that neither Satan, death, sin nor hell
shall ever be able to blot or scrape out the same: though for the further
proof and trial of your faith, god many times suffers the same to appear to
your senses far contrary. Rejoice therefore, and with gladness give god most
humble praise and hearty thanks that ever you lived to see this day, in the
which he has surely sealed you with his holy and mighty spirit, unto ye day
of your final redemption and most happy deliverance from all corruption. God
make ye same certain unto you, by you true testimony of the holy ghost in your
heart: whose witness unto your spirit that you are the adopted son of God, is
more sure and certain, then all the outward oracles in the world. And as this
most true and heavenly doctrine does bring al mirth, joy, peace, and quietness
unto a christian conscience: so does it set Satan in a most sore rage and
malice against the same: for that ancient enemy of ours cannot abide, that we
should altogether hang and depend upon god our most dear father with full
trust and confidence. He would not have us thoroughly persuaded of his great
love and kindness toward us: yea of his most fatherly care and providence for
us his dear children. For the enemy knows that whosoever has faithfully
conceived this true opinion of God, shall by the same be allured, yea forced
and constrained to set all his love and hearts delighte upon the lord again,
and in respect of the same only, be willing to serve him in true holiness and
righteousness all the days of his life: yea of love and childlye fear, seek to
please him, be loathe to offend him, and ready with good will to suffer all things
for his sake: which be ye points and properties belonging to the lords elect.

Therefore, above all things* Satan seeks to darken and make dymme this
doctrine of our salvation: yea clean to quench it out if he could, and to
bring us from this persuasion of gods spirit, unto distrust and infidelity.
which is the very root and fountain where hence al other wickedness does
spryng: for whatsoever is not done of this faith and godly persuasion, is sin
in the sight of god, how glorious soever it does appear in the sight of men.
Let us therefore above all things, pray for the increase of faith, by the
light whereof we do perfectlye see in our good Christ. God to be presently
ours, with all that ever he is or can be, and shall be for evermore. Let us
hold this fast, as the sure shore ancker of our soul: and though Satan stir
up never so many storms and te^pestes of trouble and persecution, or never so
many foul and foggy mistes of darkness and heresies, yet shall our ship
sail in safety: for god himself is our lodes man, and his holy and mighty
spirit is the Master mariner, and both can and will guide and conduct us into
the haven of health and port of everlasting safeguard. Therefore let us say with
David, that though ye waves and ragyng surges of the seas be marvelous, yet
the Lord is more mighty and marvelous, and can still them with a word. Alas, I
am here constrained to make an end eue^ in ye midst of my letter, and truly
I have been feign by occasions yt has come, to lay aside this letter vi. or
vij. times since I began. Therefore take it in good worth as it is, and an
other time I trust to finishe the same to your comfort, and to the
acco^plishyng of my duty toward you, to whom I do owe my self and all
that I can do: as knows God, to whose most merciful defense, I do heartily
commit you my dear brother V. and al ye rest of his dear darlinges, whom I
love as mine own soul, and thank God for your love to me. The blessyng of
God be with you all, Amen.

Yours unfeignedly John Careless, prisoner of the Lord at all times abiding his
most merciful will and pleasure. Pray for me for gods sake* as I will never
forget you.

To my most dear and faythefull brother. T. V.
THe everlasting peace of god in Jesus Christ, the continual joy and comfort
of his most pure, holy, and mighty spirit, with the increase of faith and
lively feling of his mercy, be with you my dear heart in the Lord, and
faithful loving brother. T. V. to the full accomplishing of that good work
which he has so graciously begone in you, that the same, by all means, may be
to the setting forth of his glory, to ye commodity of his poor affliced
congregation, and to the sweet comfort and quietness of your conscience in him
now and evermore, Amen.

With such due honor, love, and reverence, as it becomes me to bear unto
the sweet saints and dearly beloved children of god, I have me most heartily
commended unto you, my dear brother V. with al earnest and faithful
remembrance of you in my daily prayers, thanking God right heartily that you do
likewise remember me in yours, assuryng you that my poor heart does daily
feel great consolation thereby, GOD only have the praise for the same and
all other his benefits. Ah my dear heart in the lord, well is me that ever I
was borne, that God of his great mercy and infinite goodness has used me most
miserable wretch at any time, as his instrument to minister any thing unto
you either by word or writing, that might be an occasion of your joy and
comfort in the Lord, and a provoking of you to praise and thankesgeuing unto
GOD for the same, as your most loving and godly letter seems to importe. Oh
happy am I that the Lord has appointed me unto so good a ground to sow
his seed upon: but much more happy are you whose heart ye lord has prepared
and made so meet to receive the same so effectuouslye, giving thereto the
sweet showers and heavenly dewes of his grace and holy spirit, that it may
bring forth fruits in due season accordingly: the increase whereof we shall
shortly reap together with perfect joy and gladness, and that continually.
Therefore (my dear brother) I say unto you as good Elizabeth did to her dear
cousin Mary: happy are you, Luke. ^.
and happy shall you be for evermore, because you have believed. The most sweet
and faithful promises of your redemer Jesus christ you have surely laid up in
the treasury of your heart. His comfortable callinges you have faithfully heard:
his loving admonitions you have humbly obeyed, and therefore you shall never
come into judgment: your sins shall never be remembered: for your savior has
cast them all into the bottom of the sea: Miche. 7 Psalm. ^03.
he has removed them from you as far as the East is from the West, and has
given you for an everlasting possession his justification and holiness: so that
now no creature neither in heaven nor in earth shall be able to accuse you before
the throne of the heavenly king. Satan is now judged: he is now cast out from
you: he has no part in you: you are wholly given unto Christ, which will no^
lose you: your steadfast faith in him has overcome that sturdie and bragging
prince of the world: Christ has given you the final victory over him and al
his army, that they shall never hurt you. What would you have more? Oh my dear
heart, how great treasures are laid up in store for you, and how glorious a
crown is already made and prepared for you?

And albeit the holy ghost does bear witness of all these things in your heart,
and makes you more sure and certain thereof, then if you had all the outward
oracles in ye world: yet I being certainly persuaded and fully assured by the
testimony of gods spirit in my conscience, of your eternal and sure salvation
in our sweet Savior Jesus Christ, have thought it good, yea and my bounden
duty, not only at this time to write unto you, and to show my joyful heart in
that behalf: but also by the word and commandment of Christ, to pronounce
and affirm in the name and word of the heavenly king Jehovah, and in the
behalf of his sweet son Jesus Christ our lord, to whom all knees shall
bow, whom al creatures shall worship: and also by the impulsion of the holy
ghost, by whose power and strength all the faithful be regenerate: I do I
say, pronounce to thee my dear brother. T. V. that thou art already a citizen
of heaven. The lord thy God in whom thou do put all thy trust, for his dear
sons sake in whom thou do also undoubtedly believe: has freely forgeuen
thee all thy sins, clearly released all thine iniquities, and fully pardoned
all thine offenses, be they never so many, so grievous, or so great, and will
never remember them any more to condemnation. As truly as he lives, he will
not have thee die ye death, but has verily determined, purposed, and
eternallye decreed, that thou shall live with him for ever. Thy sore shall be
healed, and thy wounds bound up, eue^ of him self for his own names sake. He
does not nor will not look upon thy sins in thee: but he respects and
beholds thee in christ, in who^ thou art lively graffed by faith in his
blood, and in whom thou art most assuredly elected and chosen to be a sweet
vessel of his mercy and salvation, and waste thereto predestinate in him
before the foundation of the world was laid. In testimonye and earnest
whereof, he has given thee his good and holy spirit, which works in thee,
faith, love, and unfeigned repentance, with other godly virtues, contrary to the
corruption of thy nature. Also he has commanded me this day (although a most
unworthy wretch) to be a witness hereof by the ministerye of his holy word,
grounded upon the truth of his most faithful promises: the which thou
beleui^g, shall live for ever. Beleuest thou this my dear heart? I know well
thou do believe. The Lord increase thy faith, and give thee a liuelye feeling
of all his mercyes: whereof thou art warranted and assured by the testimonye
of the holy ghost, who confirm in thy conscience (to the utter overthrowing
of Satan and those his most hurtful dubitations, whereby he is accustomed to
molest and vex the true children of god) all that I have said: and by gods
grace I will, as a witness thereof, confirm and seal the same with my blood, for
a most certain truth. Wherefore (my good brother) praise the Lord with a
joyful heart, and give him thanks for this his exceeding great mercy, casting
away all dubita^ on and waueryng, yea all sorrow of heart and pensiveness of
mind: for this the Lord your God and most dear and loving father,
commands you to do by me, nay rather by his own mouth and word pronounced
by me. But now my dear brother, after that I have done my message, or rather
the Lords message in deed, I could find in my heart to write ij. or.iij.
sheets of paper, declaryng the joy I bear in my heart for you, mine own
bowels in the Lord: yet the time being so short (as you do well know) I am
here constrained to make an end, desiring you to pardon my slacknesse, and to
forgive my great negligence toward you, promising you still that so long as
my poor life does last, my prayer shall supplye that my pen does want: as
knows the almighty god, to whose most merciful defense I do heartily commit
you and all other his dear children, as well as though I had rehearsed them by
name, desiring them most heartily to remember me in their hearty and daily
prayers, as I know right well they do: for I feel the daily comfort and
commodity thereof, and therefore I neither will nor can forget them nor you or
any such like. The blessing of God be with you all, Amen.

Yours for ever unfeignedly, John Careless, still careful for you, prisoner for
the testimony of gods everlasting truth, abiding his most blessed will and
pleasure. Pray. p.p.p.

To my dear friend and faithful Sister, Mystres Marye Glouer.
THe same everlasting god and most gracious good Lord, that blessed Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob and Joseph, and comforted them in all their crosses, troubles, and
manifold afflictions, yea and preserved them and provided for the^ in all
extreme parell, danger, and necessities: bless, comfort, preserve and keep
you, with all your sweet children and familye (my dear friend and faithful
Sister in the Lord, good Mystres Mary Glouer) with and by the power of his holy
and mighty spirit, our eternal comforter now and for evermore, Amen.

Ah my dear friend, what shall I say, or how shall I comfort you in this
great cross that GOD has laid upon you, in taking home to him self, those
his blessed Saints whom he for a time lent you? Verelye I am afraid least I
shall renew your sorrows in speaking of them. But my dear heart, let that be
far from you: rather now with them rejoice in GOD for their great glory,
triumph and victory, ever submitting with all meekness, your will unto his,
which only is good and woorketh all things for your best: of which thing
if you be fullye and thoroughly persuaded, you can by no means lack spiritual
joy and comfort. Whereof in few words I will something say, although I
doubt not but you know it already, though perhaps now sorrow does a little
darke^ the same, as at times it has done in many good men: but faith is of
such force and power, if it be unfeigned, that it will with Jonas, forth of the
Whales bellye, cry unto the Lord, and bring from him the comfortes of his
spirit and promyses: which chiefelye do consiste in that which is rehearsed
in the first commandment. Hear Israel (says the Lord) I am thy Lord GOD,
and thou shall love me etc. Behold with a steadfast and lively faith, this
sweet saying and commandment of God. He bids us hear, and give credence.
To what I pray you? Forsooth that he of his goodness has given him self wholye
unto us, to be our own peculiar and proper possession for ever, Psalm. 16.
as the Prophet David does pleasauntlye sing: The Lord him self (says he) is
my portion and enheritaunce: my lotte is fallen unto me in a happy ground
etc. Oh gracious GOD, what a thing is this, that the great Lord Jehovah, that
omnipotente GOD which made heaven and earth, the sea and all that is therein,
upon whose providence all things do depend, at whose only beck, both
Angel and devil must be feign to obey: Oh Lord (I say) what a thing is
this, that he will vouchsafe to give him self wholye to be ours, with all that
ever he may be? Oh what are we most vile dounge, earth, and ashes, yea most
wicked cattiffes and horrible sinners, that he would vouche us worthy of this
great benefit, which can not be expressed with the tounges of men or
Angels? This must we now needs think and believe of GOD, or else we do
most wickedly transgress the great and first commandment. But do we
obey, and believe that this is true? So shall we of force by the same be
constrained to fulfill the second part, that is to say, love him with all
our heart etc. For who, seeing the goodness of GOD toward him in Jesus
Christ (for whose sake only he has given him self wholye to be ours in
most large and ample wise that may be) who I say, seeing this would not with
all his heart, soul, and mind, love ye Lord again, and of love, not only
leave the doing of such things as might displease him, but also be ready and
willing to do what so ever is acceptable in his sight? yea most gladly and
ioyfullye suffer what soever he will appoint us to do for his sake, knowing
assuredly that nothing can come unto us (no not the diminishing of one hear of
our head) without his good will, pleasure, and merciful appointment and that he
loving us so well that he would give his son him self, the holy ghost, and
finally all other things in Christ, to us: will not appoint any thing unto us
otherwise then shall be to the setting forth of his glory, and our everlasting
commodity. This great aboundaunt bottomless love and mercy of god, did holy S.
Paul depely feel when he made that bold proclamation in the latter end of
the.8. Chap. to the Romans saying: who is it, or what is it that shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: Read the
whole Chapter often times I beseech you.

Thus dear heart, you see the eternal love and fatherly care and providence of
God toward you. In respect whereof, I trust you do not only cast al your
care upon him: but also most lovingly obey him in all his holy ordinances,
evermore meekely submitting your will unto his in all and every thing: knowing
that the same will make all things turn to your best, and that without his
pleasure, a poor sparow shall not peryshe in the foulers net: much less
you, or your dear husband, your good Uncle M. Latymer or any of yours. Let
this faith and godly persuasion, ever more be firm in your heart without
doubting or wavering: for ^ou^ it, all that ever you go about is in vain: yea
without this faith in God, you can not please him: you can not commit and
betake your self wholly unto him: you can not truly fear him: you can not love
him in deed: you can not call upon him or heartily pray unto him, neither yet
praise him a tyght. Therefore let this be your alone and continual endeavor, to
be confirmed more and more of this, that GOD is your own most dear loving
father through Christ, that he has a most tender care over you, and for you,
as always he has had and ever will have, both in soul and body for this
life and for eternal life, how so ever things have or shall happen to appear
unto you. According to this your faith and as you believe, so shall it be unto
you: and as you think god to be unto you, so shall you feel him. Think
therefore swetely of ye lord and of his goodness, and thank him most heartily
that ever he would vouch you worthy to sustain the loss of your chefest
treasures in earth for his sake, and that he would ever give you any thing to
bestow for his love. And as you praise the Lord for his great mercyes and
manifold benefits so largelye given unto you before many other: so do you
faithfully pray unto him, that he will continue his loving kindness toward you,
and keep you blameless through love in Christ, unto the end: yea and make you
worthy, strong, and able, to suffer the loss of your own life for the
testimonye of his truth: which (as your good Uncle said to me once, and your
dear husband full often) is the greatest promotion and dignity that God can
bring us unto in this life, yea it is an honor which the highest Aungells in
heaven be not permitted to have. And in this your hartye and faithful prayer,
I do most humblye require you to remember me a most miserable wretch, I
fear me, not compted worthy to become one of his constante witnesses unto the
world in such sort as I would feign be: pray for me my dear heart, pray for
me, as I will never forgette you nor your blessed children so long as I am in
this prison of the body. Commend me unto Hewgh Glouer, Marmaduke, and to their
younger brother and sister. The Lord god comfort and bless them, and pour his
good spirit upon them, wherewith their good father was plentifully endewed. I
pray you do my hartye commendations unto my good brother her Augustine and his
wife, and I heartily thank you for your goodness toward them. Desire them
also to pray for me, for now the needful time does approach. I praise God, I
am more hearty then ever I was, and so I beseech him to make you all to be. I
have many things to say more, but I am here constrained to make an end. Al my
doings come to an end with extremity. God grant that I may enter into his
glory through the strait gate, though I struggle and strive, thrusting among
ye preasse with great violence. I beseech you yet once again, and all my dear
friends in god, to aid and strengthen me with your prayers, as I will never
forget any of you, so long as this wrasteling life of mine does last: as
knows God to whose most merciful defense I do heartily commit you and al
yours. The sweet blessing of god the father, the son, and the holy ghost be
with you all, Amen.

Your daily and most bounden Orator, John Careless prisoner of the Lord, pray,
pray for me in faith.

To my good brother M. John Bradford.
THe peace of god in Jesus Christ, the eternal comfort of his sweet spirit,
which has surely sealed you unto eternal salvation, be with you and
strengthen you in your joyful journey toward the celestial Jerusalem (my
dear friend and most faithful brother M. Bradforde) to the setting forth of
Gods glory, and to your eternal joy in Christ, Amen.

Ever since ye good M. Philpot showed me your last letter (my dear heart in ye
lord) I have continued in great heaviness and perplexity* not for any hurt or
disco^moditie that I ca^ perceive coming toward you, unto whom doubtless,
death is made life and great felicity: but for the great loss that gods
chuch here in England shall sustain by the taking away of so godly, worthy, and
necessary an instrument, as the lord has made you to be. Oh that my life and a
thousand such wretched lives more might go for yours. Oh why does god suffer me
and such other Caterpillars to live, that ca^ do nothing but consume ye alms
of ye church, and take away you so worthy a workma^ and labourer in ye Lords
vineyard? But woe be to our sins and great unthankfulness, which is the
greatest cause of ye taking away of such worthy instruments of god as should
setforth his glory and instruct his people. If we had been thankful unto god
for the good ministers of his word, we had not been so sone deprived both of
it and them. The Lord forgive our great ingratitude and sins, and give us
true repentance and faith, and hold his hand of mercy over us, for his dear
son Christ's sake. Take not away al thy true preachers forth of this realm (O
lord) but leave us a sede, least England be made like unto Sodom and Gomore,
when thy true Lothes be gone. But what go I about to mi^gle your mirth with my
mourning, and your just joy with my deserved sorrow: If I loved you in deed, as I
have pretended, I should surely rejoice with you most heartily, and praise god
on your behalf from the very bottom of my heart: I should praise god day and
night for your excellent election in and through his great mercy, and should
give him most humble thanks for your vocation by his gospel and your true
knowledge in ye same: I should earnestly praise him for your sweet
justification, whereof you are most certain by gods grace and spirit, and
should instantly pray unto him for your glorificatio^ which shall shortly ensue:
I should rejoice and be glad to see you so dignifyed by ye crown of martyrdom,
and to be appointed to that honor, to testify his truth and to seal it with
your blood: I should highly extolle the lord who has given you a glorious
victory over al your enemies, visible and invisible, and has given you grace
and strength to finishe the tower that you have begone to build. Finallye, if
I loved you, I should most heartily rejoice and be glad to see you delivered
from this body of sin and vile prison of the flesh, and brought into that
heavenly tabernacle where you shall be safely kept and never offend him more.
This and much more should I do, if I had a good heart toward god, or you his
dear child. But (alas) I am an hypocrite, and do seek nothing but mine own
commodity. I would have gods everlasting providence, give place to my peuish
will and purpose, although it were to ye hinderance of his glory and your sweet
commodity. God forgive me my horrible ingratitude, sins and offenses against
him, and good brother do you forgive me my great negligence and unthankfulness
toward you, and hence forth I promise you, I will put my will to Gods will, and
pray that the same may be fulfilled in you, so long as you be on this earth:
and when you are taken hence, I will most heartily praise the Lord for you, so
long as I have my being in this world. Ah my dear heart, now I must take my
leave of you, and as I think, my vltimum Vale in this life, but in the life to
come I am right well assured we shall merely meet together, and that shortly I
trust. And in taking of my leave of you (my dear heart in the lord) I shall
desire you faithfully to remember all the sweet messages that the Lord our
good God and most dear loving father has sent you by me his most unworthy
servant, which as they are most true, so shall they be most truly
accomplyshed upon you eternally: and for the more assurance and certificate
thereof to your Godly conscience, he has commanded me to repete ye same
unto you again in his own name and word. Therefore now give ear and faithful
credence. Harken O ye heavens and thou earth give ear, and bear me witness at
ye great day, yt I do here faithfully and truly ye lords message unto his dear
servant, his singularly beloved and elect child John Bradford. John Bradford,
thou man so specially beloved of god, I pronounce and testify unto thee in ye
word and name of ye lord Jehovah, that al thy sins whatsoever they be, be
they never so many, so grievous, or so great, be fully and freely pardoned,
released, and forgeuen thee, by the mercy of god in Jesus Christ, thine only
Lord and sweet Savior, in whom thou doste undoubtedly believe. Christ has
cleansed thee with his blood, and clothed thee with his righteousness, and has
made thee in ye sight of god his father, without spot or wrinckle. So that when
the fire does his appointed office, you shall be received (as a sweet burnt
sacrifice) into heaven, where you shall joyfully remain in gods presence for
ever, as the true inheritour of his everlasting kingdom, unto yt which thou
wast undoubtedly predestinate and ordained by ye lords infallible purpose and
decree, before ye foundation of ye world was laid. And that this is most true
yt I have said, I call the whole Trinity, the almighty and eternal Majesty of
god the father, the son, and the holy ghost to my record at this present:
whom I humbly beseech to confirm and stablishe in thee the true and lively
feling of the same, Amen. Selah. Now with a merry heart and a joyful spirit,
something mixed with lawful tears, I take my farewell of you, mine own dear
brother in the Lord: who send us shortly a merry meting in his kingdom, that we
may both sing praises together unto him with his holy Angels and blessed spirits
for ever and ever. Farewell you blessed of the lord, farewell in Christ: depart
unto thy rest in the Lord, and pray for me, for Gods sake.

As I had made an end of this simple letter, I heard some comfort both of good
Master Philpottes servant and yours: but (alas) I do scarcely believe them. Well
I will hope in god, and pray al night that god will send me some comfort to
morrow, and if the Lord give you sparing to morrow, let me hear.iiij. words of
comfort from you for gods sake. The blessing of god be with you now and for
ever, Amen.

Yours for ever in the Lord Jesus, John Careless, living in hope against hope.

To a faithful friend of his, by whom he had received much comfort in his
trouble and affliction.
THe peace of God in Jesus Christ, with the eternal comfort of hs sweet
spirit, be with you my dear brother now and ever, Amen.

Ah my dear and faithful brother, what humble praise and hearty thanks am I
bound continually to render unto god for you, in yt he has made you so worthy
and comfortable an instrument unto me his most unworthy servant in this time
of my great conflict, This is the conflict whereby Satan has alwais sought to
molest and vex the true children of god, and to pluck them from the hope of
their salvation in Christ* Read psalm. 77.88.22 31.38.69. and concerning this
matter, read before fol. 152 194. 288. 325. and the whole letter followyng.
not only against flesh and blood, but also against the spiritual power of
darkness? In which wrestling though I be very weak, yet have I (I thank God
most heartily therefore) received such strength and comfort by your faithful
prayers and most godly and comfortable letters, that I am put in great hope,
yea in full assurance of a glorious victory. Blessed be the time that ever I
knew you, for God (I perceive) has made you an instrument in the steed of
good Master Bradforde, to supple my soul with the oil of his mercy, by
pouring into the same his most gracious promises: god for Christ's sake mollify
my hard heart, and give me grace to believe them. Oh Lord increase my faith. I
believe lord: oh help my unbelief, that I may taste and feel the certainty of
my salvation, and be thoroughly persuaded and assured, that thy grace good Lord,
is sufficient for me. Oh pray, pray, dear heart pray for me, and as you can,
comfort me with more such sweet letters, that I may sometimes feel a flashe of gods
favorable countenance in my face, as doutles I did at ye reading of your last
most comfortable letter. God verify your saying, or rather his saying by you,
upon me for ever: and ye same Lord will I continually beseech, to make you alwais
plentifully to feel the fruition of his most gracious favor, that you may
always plentifully pour forth upon me and all others that have need, the
consolations of Jesus christ. Oh that the time were now come, that I might put
of this trayle tabernacle of the flesh, in this heavenly security and
quietness of conscience in Jesus Christ. God make you dear brother, and all
other his dear servants, to feel the like in your most need. Truly dear
heart, I have vij. most godly and comfortable letters of that blessed of the
lord good master Bradforde, which he wrote only for my comfort. When I
signified my woeful state unto him: This state, to the worldly, and such as
have not tasted of gods sweet cross, seems folishnes: but it is not strange
to gods children.
and though he have therein plentifully published the promises of gods mercy
unto me, and sealed the same with his blood, yet had Satan blinded mine eyes,
and put the same for the of my weak and frail memory, until your most happy
letter came, yea in a most happy hour may I say. But of this enough until an
other time. I am here constrained to break of from this thing, which I have
scribled in have, as this bearer can testify. Farewell in Christ, farewell I say
mine own dear heart in the lord. The Lord our god bless you, and increase
his good gifts in you, to the setting forth of his glory, and to your
continall comfort in him, Amen.

Your daily Orator and poor brother John Careless. Pray, pray.

An other letter written to the same person.
BLessed be god the father of all mercy, for the great comfort and christian
consolation which he has so mercifully ministered unto my poor afflicted heart
by your means, my most dear and faithful brother. Truly me thinks your
words or rather gods words by you uttered, have a wonderful power and
efficacy working in my heart at the hearing or readyng of them. Rejoice
therefore my dear brother and be thankeful unto god: for verily he both is and
will be mightily magnified in you, and that diverse and many ways, both to the
strengthenyng of the^ that stand in his truth, and also to the raisyng up of
such as are fallen from the same. God make me thankful for you and on your
behalf, for verily great is the goodness of god toward me in geuyng me
acquaintance in faithful love and amitye with you: gods name for ever be
praised therefore, and he perform all his merciful promises upon you, as I
doubt not but he will for his sake in whom you trust.

I thank my god most heartily, and also you my good brother, for yt you are so
careful for me in your faithful prayers, remembering my just deserved sorrows,
as though they were your own, and laboring so much to solace ye same. Ah my
gracious good god, what am I, for who^ thou and thy dear children should be so
careful? Oh sweet lord, forgive me my great ingratitude and sin, and grant
that I never abuse thy great benefits. Oh let the love of thine elect, which
love me for thy sake, be a sure sign and token, yea a most firm testimonye
and a seal to my sinful conscience of thine everlasting love and mercy
toward me in Christ: as verily it would and ought to be, if mine infidelity
did not let it. Oh circu^cise therefore the foreskinne of my heart, that I may
with lively faith behold thy great love toward me in all thine elect, that I
may always be thankful for the same, and love thee and them again most
heartily and unfeignedly.

Ah my dear heart, how swetely and how truly, yea how godly and how
comfortablye have you rehearsed the sweet saying of Solomon concerning
prosperity with true and godly friends. I will join with it the sentence which
goes a little before, for doubtless it may be well verified on you. A sure
friend (says the wise man) will be unto thee even as thine own soul, and
deal faythfullye with thy householde folk. If thou suffer trouble and
adversity, he is with thee and hydeth not his face from thee. A faithful
friend is a strong defense: who so fyndeth such a one fyndeth, a treasure. A
faithful friend has no peer: the wayght of gold is not to be compared to the
goodness of his faith. A faithful friend is a medicine of life, and they that
fear the lord, shall find him, etc. Lo (my dear heart in ye lord) here is a
lively image or description of you: for verily such a one have I alwais found
you unto me, not only sorrowyng for my great sorrow: but also oftentimes making
me merry and joyful, with such joys as the world cannot feel. Now let the
world brag of his fained frendeshippe: but I will boast of this true
friendship in god, and esteem it a more treasure then all tra^sitory things. And
as for my mourning, dear brother, god has made you to turn it unto mirth: for
god has put you in ye stead of the^ to be my comfort, whom he has in his
great mercy taken away. I trust henceforth to leave the mourning for my great
loss, and to praise god for gayning unto himself so great glory by his
chosen children. God make me a true mourner of Sion, Such mourners should we
be continually with this and other gods dear children: and blessed be they
that so mourn. Math. 5.
both for mine own sin and wyckednes, and also to see his honor defaced,
that I may be made meet and apt to hear the joyful and comfortable message
that your beautiful feet shall bring me. God bless thee my dear heart and
faithful loving brother, and increase his good gifts of grace in thee, as he
has most happily begone, that you may daily more effectually feel and lively
perceive the certainty of gods grace wherein you stand, and firmly to testify
the same, to the conversion or confounding of al gainesaiers, and to the
comfort and confirmation of al gods dear children. Amen. Farewell mine own
sweet brother, farewell as mine own heart.

Your own in Christ John Careless.

Because he makes mention in the former letter and other heretofore, of the
most godly and christian conflictes which he had sustained, we thought good to
adioyne hereto this sweet and heavenly exercise followyng, whereby it may
appear what fruit these conflictes wroughte in his most godly and christian
conscience.
SOme men for sudden joy do weep,
And some in sorrow sing:
When that they lie in danger deep,
To put away mournyng.
Between them both will I begin,
Being in joy and pain:
In sighing to lament my sin,
But yet rejoice again.
My sinful life does still increase,
My sorrow is the more:
From wyckednes I cannot cease,
Woe is my heart therefore.
Sometimes when I think to do well,
And serve God night and day:
My wicked nature does rebel,
And leads me astray.
As bond and captive unto sin,
which greueth me full sore:
This miserye do I live in,
Woe is my heart therefore.
In deed sometime I do repent,
and pardon do obtain:
But yet (alas) incontinent,
I fall to sin again.
My corrupt nature is so ill,
Offending more and more:
That I displease my Lord god still,
Woe is my heart therefore.
Woe is my heart, woe is my mind,
woe is my soul and sprite:
That to my God I am unkind,
In whom I should delight.
His love always I should regard,
which toward me was so pure:
But I with sin do him reward,
O most unkind creature.
The beast, the bird, the fish, the foul,
Their maker do obey:
But I that am a living soul,
Am far much worse then they.
For they according to their kind,
To serve him do not cease:
But I with sinful heart and mind,
Do daily him displease.
Thus do I sore complain of sin,
And with king Dauyd weep:
For I do feel my heart within,
The wrath of God full deep.
To heaven mine eyes I dare not life,
Against it I have trespaste:
And in the earth I find no shifte,
Nor succor that can last.
What shall I do? shall I despair,
And from my Savior slide?
Nay god forbid, there is no fear,
Sith Christ for me has dyed.
God became man, and for us men,
He dyed and rose again:
His mercy great we may see then,
For ever does remain.
Therefore my sin I will confess,
To God, and mourning make:
who will forgive the same doutlesse,
for his son Christ's sake.
If sin in me god should respect,
Then do I know full well,
His justice would me sone reiecte,
To the deep pit of hell.
His glorious eyes cannot abide
The foul and filthy smoke:
Wherewith I am on every side,
Covered as with a cloak.
But he in Christ does me behold,
In whom he does delight,
And mine offenses manyfold,
Through him releaseth quite.
Reputyng me amongst the just,
Forgeuyng al my sin:
Therefore my faith, my hope, my trust,
Shall ever be in him.
O Lord increase true faith in me,
Thy good spirit to me give:
That I may grow in love toward thee,
And ever seek to live,
In true obedience of thy will,
And thankefulnes of heart,
And with thy grace so guide me still,
That I never depart
From thy true word and testament,
All the days of my life:
Nor from thy church most innocent,
Thine own true spouse and wife.
But from that filthy whore of Rome.
Lord keep me evermore:
As graciously thou have yet done,
Thanks be to thee therefore.
And since thou haste of thy goodness,
Forgeuen me all my sin:
Strength me, thy truth for to confess,
And boldly die therein.
That as I have confessed thee,
Before the wicked sort:
thou may in thy good time know me
To my joy and comfort.
My soul return unto thy rest,
Thou art well satisfied:
The Lord has granted thy request,
And nothing thee denied.
Praise be God the father of might,
Praise be to thee O Christ:
Praise be to thee O holy sprite,
Three in one God most highest.
Continue constant in Christ quod Careless.

A brief admonition written to Mystres Jane Glascocke, in a book of hers when
she came to the prison to visit him.
THere is nothing that the holy Scripture throughout does so much commend
unto us, as a true faith and steadfast trust in the promises of gods eternal
mercies toward us in Jesus Christ. For from the same, as forth of the chief
fountain and welspring of life, do flow al kinds of virtues and godly
fruits, specially true love toward God, in the which we ought purely to
serve him all the days of our life: and also christian charity toward our
neighbors, as well to help them at all needs, as also not to hurt them by any
means. Therefore pray earnestly for the increase of faith and lively felyng of
gods mercy: for all things are possible unto him that can undoubtedly believe.
Faith is the thing which assures us of gods mercy, and whereby we vanquishe
all the fiery darts of the devil: our victory that overcomes the world:
the knyfe that kills and mortifieth the flesh: and finally that which
sets us at peace with God, and quieteth our consciences always before him,
and makes us merry and joyful under the cross, with many more things then I can
now express. Pray therefore for faith, in faith. And for the Lords sake,
beware of popery and popish idolatry, the id^lle of the wicked Mass, and other
Idolatrous service. Make not your body, which is a member of Christ, a member
of Antichrist. Remember that we shall receive of God according to that we do in
the body, be it good or evil. Therefore glorifye god in your body, which is
dearly bought. Betray not ye truth, lest the Lord deny you. If God be God,
follow him. You ca^ not serve.ij. Masters. I write not this as doubting you,
but by the way of admonition. God keep you from al evil.

My Sister dear god give you grace
With steadfast faith in Christ's name,
His gospel still for to embrace,
And live according to the same.
To dye therefore, think it no shame,
But hope in god with faithful trust,
And he will give you praise with fame
When you shall rise out of the duste.
For which most sweet and joyful day
To God with faith your prayer make,
And think on me I do you pray,
The which did write this for your sake.
And thus to God I you betake
Who is your castle and strong rock:
He keep you whether you sleep or wake.
Farewell dear Mystres Jane Glascoke.
If God be with us, who can be against us.
Though worldly waves do rage apace,
And wicked wyndes blow out of frame,
Though Mountains move forth of their place,
Through the great tempests of the same:
Yet shall the Lord still you defend
Under the shadow of his wings:
He loves you unto the end,
And for your wealth does work all things.
Therefore in him put all your trust:
Fear not these boisterous wyndes that blow.
The Lord can lay them when he lust,
And bring the raging waves full low.
But your safeguard shall still remain.
In a strong castle of defense.
God grant us well to meet again
With mirth and joy in his presence.
John Careless.

To the afflicted Christian.
Fear not for death, pass not for hands,
Only in God put thy whole trust:
For god will require thy blood at their hands,
And this you do know that once die thou must,
Only for Christ thy life if thou give,
Death is no death but a mean for to live,
A letter of Doctor Taylour of Hadley, written to his wife, This pac^er is
called sir Robert Bracher, a false protesstant in King Edwardes days, and
afterward a deadlye enemy to that religion which he had professed, and now is
become a protesstante again, and serves at S. Denis in London in Fann^-church
street, and calls him self Harry Bradshawe. This peddler coming to the buryal
of his friend, and gods great enemy Walter Clarke of Hadley, albeit he came
somewhat to late to the market (as he said) yet being desirous to utter his
ware, opened there his pack full of most p^stilent and poisoned doctrine. This
was one of the^ that so vnmerc^fully thrust D. Taylours wife and children out
of the do^es, as she h^^ (...) can testifye.
which we have here placed as it came to our hands, with certain other
letters following.
Dear wife, I pray god be ever with us through Christ our only Mediator, Amen.

I thank you for my cap, I am something proud of it, for it is one step from
ye clergy in these days. I thank god, my heart is clean divided from their
proceedings. For I know yt no man can serve.ij. Masters, specially if they
agree no better the^ Christ and Antichrist do. I am glad that Hadley can skill
of such packing ware, as was brought thither ye first day of May last past.
Christ's sheep ca^ discern christ's voice from the voice of strangers, thieves
or hyrelings. The pack bringer was sorry yt he came to late to the funeral
market of his faithful friend. But here I will leave the^ both to Gods
judgment, and someting touch ye matter whereof the packer made mention on his
opening day. At ye first he called ye scripture (as I hear) full of dark
sentences, but in deed it is called of S. David, a candle to our fete, and a
light to our paths. Our Savior Christ calls his word ye light, which evil
doers do fly from, and hate, lest their deeds should be reproved thereby. S.
Paul would have us to walk as children of light, and in any wise not to
continue in ignorance or darkness. But al we in the world perteyn to.ij.
princes: either to ye father of light and truth, or else to the prince of
darkness and lies. In these days preachers declare evidently of who^ they are
sent, and with what spirit they speak, and to what prince they belong: For they
cry out against Gods lights, sun, moon, sterres, torches, lamps,
lanternes, cressets, and ca^dels in gods book ye Bible, provided of gods great
goodness and mercy, to avoid al foul darkness, clouds, and mistes or dangerous
doubtful ways in this our journey to our heavenly father, long home, mansio^
houses, and derely purchased heritage. Esaias gods faithful messenger says:
woe be unto the^ yt call sweet sower, good evil, and light darkness. Therefore
comes my people into captivity, because they have no understanding. Our
savior Christ pronou^ceth errors and heresies to remain among the people, so
long as ignorance of ye scriptures remains. And hereby it appears to al
good consciences, what they mean, which defame or accuse gods blessed word
being full of light, as though it were full of darkness. These oules would have al
day lights scraped out of books, hearts, and churches. Oh lord, turn their
hearts and tongues: bow the^ from the way of darkness, lest they go to ye
prince of darkness, and be cast into ye paradise of utter darkness, where is
weping and gnashing of teeth.

Now, touching ye packes of wolle, and packes of cloth, I fear they were, as
al other their wares be, transsubstantiate into flocks, eue^ his very finest
packing stuff against only faith justifying* and for the corporal presence of
Christ's body in the sacrament, for praying for souls departed, and for
auriculer confession. Abraham's justification, by faith, by grace, by promise,
and not by works, is plainly setforth both in the Epistle to ye Romans cap. 4
and to the Gala Cap 3. And Abraham's works of obedience in offering up his son
so long after his justification, must needs be taken as a fruit of a good tree
justifying before men, and not of justification before god: for the^ had man to
glory in: then did Christ die in vain. And where as ye.6. chap. of S. John
was alleged, to prove ye Christ did give his body corporally in his supper,
eue^ as he had promised in ye said 6. chap. it is most untrue. For only he gave
his body sacramentally, spiritually and effectually in his supper to the
faithful Apostles, and corporally he gave it in a bloody sacrifice for the
life of ye world upon the cross once for all. There in his own person, in his
own natural body, he bare al our sines: by whole stripes we were healed, as S.
Peter proves. 1. Pet. 2. and Esaias cap 53. In deed, receiving Christ's sacrament
accordi^gly, as it was instituted, we receive Christ's body and Christ's blood,
even as I said before the Apostles did. But the popysh Mass is an other
matter. The Mass, as it is now, is but one of Antichrists youngest daughters,
in the which ye devil is rather present and received, then our Savior, the.2.
person in Trinity, god and man. O Lord god, heavenly father, for Christ's
sake, we beseech thee to turn again England to the right way it was in, in
King Edwardes time, from this babilonicall stewyshe spiritual whoredom,
conspiracye, tyranny, detestable enormityes, false doctrine, heresye, hardness
of heart, and contempt of thy word and co^mau^dements, from this evident and
open Idolatry, sacrilege, simony, blasphemy, superstition, hypocrisy,
transubsta^tiate Angel of light and day devil, kingdom of lies, foul vain
schisms, sects, sedition, apostasy, gaye sweet poison, honied and sugered
viperous venime, wily woluishnes, Sathanical subtiltye, and abomination in the
sight of God and of all such as put on ye true spectakles of holy scripture. I
am the more plain now in this matter, because I fear greatly, ye many will be
to much ready to go from Christ to Antichrist, from the Bible, true gods
service and religion, to latin lying legendes, portases, Massebokes and
superstition. They say their church can not err in any point, when in deed
they be not of gods church, and therefore they can do nothing but err, even as
they do almost in all cases of true faith.

But to come again to ye packer, rather the^ preacher, he bri^geth S.
Chrisostomes sentence writing ad popu^u^ antiochenum, where he, making a
co^pariso^ between Christ's flesh and Elias cloak cast down to Elizeus when
Elias was taken up in ye fiery chariot, at length he says, ye Christ ascending
up to heaven, took his flesh with him, and also left his flesh behind him in
earth. The meaning of it is, he did ascend with his flesh and left a memorial
cloak of ye same body and flesh, which he calls his flesh, as he in the
sacramental phrase, calls bread his body, because it represe^teth his body:
and as in ye like manner of sacramental speech, a Lamb was called ye
passover, the circumcision, gods covenant. He took up his flesh corporally,
and left his flesh in mystery and sacrament spiritually. Or it may he said yt
he left his flesh upon earth: that is, his mystical body, his faithful people,
who^ S. Paul calls ye members of his body, of his flesh, of his bones. Ephesians.
5. In ye.49. chap. of Gene. there is no word of Christ's sacrament, but there
is a prophecy of Christ's passion, wherein his fool was bound, yt is, his body.
And where he speaks there of grapes and wine, it is as yt is spoken of christ
in an other place, where he says: ego solus torcular calcaui, I alone did
tread ye wine press, meaning thereby, that christ alone suffered painful
passion for ye remission of sins, and for the consolation of al his faithful
soldiers.

It is not true, yt the packer said, that Christ's infinite power may make his
body to be in a thousand places at once, as a loaf to be in a thousand
bellies: for the^ might christ divide ye parts of his body, as a lofe is
divided and so consumed, and the^ might scripture be false, appoynting Christ's
body to be but in one place, Act, 3. Phi. 3 He. 1. The Articles of our faith
tell us sufficiently, where Christ's body is. It was never in.ij. places at once,
neither ever shall be, neither ever can be corporally and naturally: neither
ever was, is, can, or shall be eaten so ^ any corporal mouths, as ye
Capernaires and papists most erroniously and heretically do judge. If our
savior Jesus christ has no other body natural, the^ is made of the substance
of bread, and is in a thousand places at once, as I have often said in Hadley:
we are not yet redeemed, neither shall our bodies rise again and be made like
unto his glorious body. We are sure yt our Savior Christ's body is made of
none other substance, the^ of his mother ye blessed Virgin Maryes substance. We
are sure, yt he takes not ye nature of Angels, much less of bread. Only he
takes on him ye sede of Abraham. Heb 2. in all things like unto us, only sin
except. And this is a comfortable doctrine to us christians, believing
steadfastly, as ye true catholic says is, ye Christ has but.ij. natures,
perfect god and perfect man. Upon this rock Christ's church is builded, and the
gates of hell shall never prevail against it. Math, 16.

I speak nothing now of auricular confession and prayi^g for souls departed,
because I do not hear what authors the packer brought in for this purpose.
Sure I am, ye he ca^ bring no authe^tical and canonical warrant for such his
packware. He may say what he will of Hebricians and Grecians, and flesh under
forms and not above forms, or above ye board. He may conjure and co^uay,
pass and repasse, eue^ what he will, in such clouds and mystes. He reproved ye
scriptures as full of darkness, and yet is full of darkness him self. He did
wittily to bring profes out of Iewrye, Turkye and other strange places for his
round white cake, for that such his pedlary pelf pack is contrary to the
plain symplicitye of Christ's supper. He glaunced at priests marriages. He
might against that have brought as ancient a Doctor as any he alleged out of
Hebrew, for his Mass or wafer cake, ye is doctor Devil. 1. Tim. 4 I marvel
that he did not confute and confound S. Paul for the sentences, written above
ye alter, of ye which he made mention in the pulpit. For he and his fellows of
Oxford be so profound, so excellent, so glorious and tryumphant clearkes, that
they can easily prove a man an ass, and al writers in ye Bible ignorant,
simple, full of errors, full of heresies, and beggarly fools. Yet they will be
called catholykes, faithful true christian people, defendours of ye holy mother
ye church: but truly they take part with the Prince of darkness, with Antichrist,
with Iezabell. Apo. 2. They will not be called papists. Pharisees, Jews,
Turks, heretics, and so forth: but what soever they will be called, gods
religion had never more euydent adversaries, and yt in all ye chief points of
it: no not then, when our Savior Christ whipte such merchants out of the
re^^le, calling them a company of thieves. Man. 21. God give them grace to
repent. God be thanked yt the nobilitye somthyng of late has spyed and stopped
their tyranny. Oh unhappy England. Oh more ungrate people, sooner bewitched,
the^ the folysh Galathians. We have now none excuse. We have undoubtedly seen
ye true trace of ye prophetical, apostolical prymatyue catholic church. We are
warned to beware, lest we be led out of that way, society, and rule of
religion. Now we shall show what country me^ we be: whether spiritual and
heavenly, or carnal and worldly. We had as true knowledge as ever was in any
country or in any time, since the beginning of the world: god be praised
therefore. If Hadley being so many years persuaded in such truth, will now
wyllingly and wittingly forsake the same, and defyle it self with the cake god,
Idolatry, and other Antichristianitie thereunto belonging, let it surely look
after many and wonderful plagues of god shortly. Though an other have now the
benefice, yet as god knows, I can not but be careful for my dear Hadley. And
therefore as I could not but speak, after the first abominable Mass begone
there, I being present, no more I can not but write now being absent, hearing
of the wicked profanation of my late pulpyt, by such a wylye wolf. Gods love,
mercy, goodness and favor has been unspeakable in teaching us the right way
of salvation and justification. Let us al have some zeal, some care, how to
serve him according to his good will written. The God of love and peace be ever
in Hadley through Christ our only advocate, Amen.

Rouland Taylour.

A leter of M. Philpot written to certain of his faithful friends, as his last
farewell a little before he suffered.
THe knowledge of god which has illightned you with true understanding of ye
gospel of Christ, be remaining with you still to the end, and be augme^ted in
your hearts and doyngs through ye operation of the holy spirit to the glory of
God and your eternal salvation. Ame^.

A man that is passing into far countries, before his departing, commits
such goods as god has endued him with all, to his dearest friends, to the end yt
they might be the better by them if he return not again. Even so dearly
beloved, and right worshipful, my good friends, I having shortly to pass
unto my heavenly inheritance which is hidden with Christ, and to our common
country and eternal dwelling place, which we shall have ^ god, never to return
before the latter day, in the which our souls shall come to judgment, and
receive their bodies to be glorified, according to their doings: have thought
it my duty to communicate unto you something (with who^ I have found great
humanity) of the few heavenly treasures, with the which God among others,
has endued me in Christ, whereby he has made me his child, and assuredly
the enheritour of ye kingdom of heaven, which all those which unfeignedly love
him, and constantly cleave to his holy gospel: and that is, by the renouation
of his Image, whereunto man was first created like unto god, which is to be in
the favor of God, to know God truly, to live justly, to delight fervently in
the conte^pplacion of God, to be continually happy, to be immortal, void of
al corruption and sin: the which blessed Image, through sin is deformed in
us, and in manner lost, saving that it has pleased GOD of his mercy (who
wills not the death of a sinner) to restore that Image by grace, through
knowledge and belief of the Gospel, which otherwise in our nature is clean
suppressed and extinguished.

Therefore, we knowing the great and lamentable loss which we do sustain
in Adam, ought most earnestly to seek the recouerye thereof, that we might
eternallye live like unto God in immortality and felicity: the which we
shall never recover, unless we go about to mortifye our outward man all the
days of our life more and more, and be renewed in spirit, according to the
true knowledge of GOD: the which if we be, then may we be assured that we
have found that joy, felicity, and eternal life, which Adam had in
paradise, yea and more then that ten thousand fold, for that it is such as
the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither the heart ca^ conceive
which christ has prepared for us. This image of god, whosoever by faith does
find, he has found the most precious treasure that any man can find, for he
is even here a citizen of heaven, and in possession of eternal life. Therefore
I commit unto you principally a dailye care of the renouation of this image, as
the chiefest jewel you can desire in this world. And hereof now I am the more
moved to put you in remembrance, because I love you entierly in the lord, and
desire your fellowshyp, which the iniquity of our time will not permit me to
enjoy here. And for as much as we have a better life to come then this present
is, an eternal society with Christ, which neither the malice of time, neither
the distance of place can dissolve or separate: I exhort you now as one yt has
obtained mercy of god in the reparacion of his image in me, to embrace the care
thereof, with earnest desire to attayn ye same, whereby we shall al have a perfect
fruition of our love and friendship, which already we have here begone, and with
god in heaven shall be (without all doubt) made joyfully perfect.

Let this be a perpetual remembrance of your poor afflicted friend, which daily
looks through fire, to enter into that eternal life, where he trusts
assuredly to enjoy your fellowship, if the image of god be renewed in you
through ye knowledge of Christ, which you have received and do know. Look whose
image the coin bears, his it is. Semblably, if your conversation be after
the gospel, verily you are the elect of Christ: but if it be according to ye
world, his servants you are whom your life does express. We have all in
Baptism put on Christ, whom if we endeavor to represe^t, we are in deed the
sons of God and inheritours with Christ. One good rule S. Paul to the Romans
in the xij. chap. does appoint for ye restoration of this our image of God.
Fashion not your selves (says he) unto this world, but be ye changed in your
shape, by the renewyng of your mind, that ye may prove what is the will of
god, which thing is good, acceptable and perfect. God grant that this rule may
take place with you, and then doutles our company shall be inseparable with
all the saints of God in eternal bless.

Be you not deceived by the vain possessions and uncertain pleasures of this
world, which serve to none other purpose, then to blind your eyes that they
might not behold the things which be glorious and permanent for ever. The
things which we see, are mortal: but the things which we see not but
certainly hope for, be immortal. For all flesh, as the Prophet Esaias says,
is but grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of the field. Oh that you
which have the possessions of this world, would so account the^, and not sell
your eternal inheritance for a mess of porrige, as Esau did. God open your
eyes that you may see the glory of Christ in the mount with Peter, John, and
James. Then I doubt not, you would say with Peter. Lord it is good for us to
abide here: let us here make our dwelling places. We have in this world no
fyrme mansion, but we seek after that which is to come: the which if we seek
now where it may be found, we shall surely find it. If we mortify the image
of Adam, which through sin reigns in our flesh, then shall the image of
Christ revive in us to our eternal glory. We are all baptized to die with
Christ, to the end we should walk in newnes of life as persons dead to the
world, and living to God. And if we dye with him by crucifieng our
concupiscence and lusts, we shall eternally live. Infidelity is ye cause of
all our misery: which causes us to fear man more then GOD, and to esteem the
things presence more then the things to come. God illighten our eyes that we
may understand how precious an inheritance Christ has prepared for such as
hunger and thurst thereafter. Then I doubt not we would say with Sayncte Paul,
I am surely persuaded that neither death nor life, neither Angels nor rule,
neither power, neither things present, neither things to come, neither any
other treasure, or creature, shall separate us from the love which is in
Christ Jesus. The Lord increase our faith, and give us his holy spirit to
discern with our selves, how much we are grown in his image, and are like
unto him: for how much we are unlike to the world, so much more are we like
unto god, and so much the more do we approach unto him. The lord draw you by
his holy spirit, and fashion you unto his lykenes, that we may eternally live
together. The means to come thereunto, is diligent exercise in gods word:
continual and faithful prayer: a desire and love to GOD: the fear of God:
the contempt of the world: and a constant faith in the knowledge of his
word, joined with the works of righteousness.

This is the Sum of all our christian religion which we do profess: which
if we follow, happy are we that ever we were borne. But if we be negligent in
this, it had been better for us never to have been borne: for cursed are they
that declyne from the Lord and his holy commandments, and have their
delyghtes in the vanities of this world. Cease not to follow the image of
God, and to express the same in your selves to the glory of god, and then god
will glorify you for his image sake, which he says to live in you. We are all
weak in transformyng the same in us at the beginning: for our flesh is clean
contrary to it. But we must not give over by lawfullye striuyng, till we may
say with Saint Paul, now live I, but not I, but Christ in me. The Lord
grant that Christ, which by the gospel is planted in us, may be fashioned in
our godly conversation, to the glory of God, and to the good example of our
brethren, that our temporal life may be changed into eternal life, and our
frendeshyppe in God, eternallye endure, Amen.

This last farewell I send unto you to be a toke^ of my love until we shall mete
in the kingdom of Christ, there to rejoice perfectlye of that godly
fellowshippe which here we have had on the earth. God hasten that meetyng and
deliver you from the temptation which is now come upon the Church of
England, for the trial of such as be faithful in the Lords Testamente, to
the crown of their glory if they be found faythefull to the end. Let us
watch and pray one for another, that these evil days do not ouerwhelme us,
in the which our adversary the Devil goes about like a roaryng Lion sekyng
who^ he may devour. The peace of GOD remain with you for ever. Wryte^ in the
kings Bench by one of ye poor captive sheep of Christ, appointed to ye
slaughter for ye testimony of ye truth, where he does joy, and wysheth you to
joy, praisyng God with him, Amen.

John Philpot.

A letter of M. Bradforde, to certain men which maintained the heresy of the
Pelagians and papists concerning man's freewil: which upon occasions, were
then prisoners with him in the Kings Benche.
THe good spirit of god, which is the spirit of truth, and guide to gods
children, be with us all, and lead us into all truth, Amen.

Hitherto I have oftentimes resorted unto you (my friends, as I thought) and by
all means sought to do you good, eue^ to mine own charges and hinderaunce.
But now I see it happens otherwise: and therefore I am purposed, till I may
know more then I do, to absent my self from you* but not my help: and by
these letters to supply that, which by mouth patiently you cannot abide to
hear. You report me to my face that I am a great slander to the church of
God: which may be two ways understand, that is by living and doctrine. But as
for living you your selves (I thank god therefore) gave testimonye with me. In
doctrine therefore you mean it. Now, in that there be many parts of the
doctrine of christ, I trow you mean not generally, but perticulerly: for you
in generality have diverse times given your commendation on my behalf, both to
my face and behynd my back: for the which I humbly praise my god, through
Christ. In perticularitie therefore you mean that I am a slander: which (as
far as I know) is only in this to you wards, that I believe and affirm the
salvation of gods children to be so certain, that they shall assuredly enjoy
the same. You say it hangs partly upon our perseueraunce to the end: and I
say it hangs only and altogether upon gods grace in Christ, and not upon
our perseueraunce in any point: for then were grace no grace. Romans 11.
You will and do in words deny our perseueraunce to be any cause, but yet in
deed you do otherwise. For if perseueraunce be not a cause, but only gods
grace in Christ the whole and only cause of salvation: then the cause, that is
to say grace remaining, the thing, that is to say salvation, cannot but remain
also. Of which thing, if with the scriptures you would make perseueraunce an
effect or fruit, then could you not be offended at the truth: but say as it
says, that the salvation of gods children is so certain, that they shall
never finally perish, the lord putting his hand under the^, that if they fall,
yet they shall not lie still. For whom he loves, he leaves not, John. 13.
but loves the^ unto the end: so that perseueraunce is proper to them and
does discern them from hypocrites, and such as seem to other and to
themselves also sometimes, that they be gods children. Which if they once were
in deed, then as S. John says, they should not sin the sin to death, 1.
John. 3.5 1. John. 2. Heb. 3.
neither should they go out of gods church, but as Paul says, should persevere
to the end. Now to be gods child, is no less in all points above the power of
man, then to be man's child, is above our own power: but so much it passes our
habililie in all points to be gods child, by how much this dignity is greater.
Again, once gods child in deed, and gods child for ever: that is, finally
shall not he that is so, perish eternally, if that god our father be both of
good will infinite, and also of power accordyngly: and if the sede of god which
remains in his children, 1. John. 3 Matthew. 6. Romans 6
can keep them from synnyng (I mean to death) for otherwise they sin, and
therefore pray dailye: forgive us our debtes, etc. Moreover, gods children be
under grace, and not under the law, Romans 4.
and therefore sin shall not da^pne them. For where no law is, there is no
tra^sgression (transgression I say to fynall damnation) for the new covenant
of god is, never to remember their sins, but to give them such hearts and
minds, that as they naturally lust and labor to do that is evil: so their
inward man renewed, strives to the contrary, and at the length shall
prevail, 1. John. 3 Romans 8 John. 6.10 Math. 24. Heb. 13 Heb. 3.
because he is stronger that is in the^, then he that is in the world. And S.
Paul says, who shall lay any thing to the charge of gods elect, in that god
absolueth them for Christ's sake, of whom they are kept? so that it is not
possible for them to perish in respect of their pastor, who is faithful over
gods people.

This certainty and assurance, who so feels in himself by the testimony of
gods sprite: in deed and of truth, ye same is happy for ever, and cannot but as
he hops he shall be like to Christ in his coming, so desire it, and purify
himself in all purity (so far will he be from carnal liberty) and as the
elect of God, he will endue and apparel himself daily with the apparel of the
elect, vsyng prayer night and day: which is an other property of gods
children. To this certainty, all the creatures of god call us, concerning their
creation and use. This assurance gods first commandment requires under
pain of dampnation: the gospel of god and all his promyses: the sacraments
and the substance of them, which is Christ Jesus our Savior, does above al
things require it of every one that is baptized and brought into gods church.
Nothing else does GOD to require of us, as thus to be persuaded of him: for
out of it flows al godliness to god and man. So that it cannot be but they
take Satan's part, which go about to let or hynde this certainty in themselves
and in others. The which thing in that you do in deed, howsoever you mean: I
cannot but as I have done often before, admonish you of it eftesones, that
your bloodes may be on your own heads, if you persevere in your obstinacy, and
if you do it obstinately and not ignorauntly. From the which I beseech
almightye God to deliver you, Amen. 1. January.

John Bradford

A letter of M. Thomas Whyttel written to a friend of his, declaryng the
shameful tyranny of bloody Bonner: who like a right angel of Satan, to
peruerte his faith and drive him from God, buffeted him with his butcherly
fystes, and most cruelly beat him.
Upon thursday, which was the.x. of January, the bishop of London sent for me
out of the Porters lodge, where I had been all night, lying upon the earth
upon a pallet: where I had as payneful a night of sickness as ever I had, I
praise god. And when I came before him, he talked with me many things of the
sacrament, so grossly, as is not worthy to be rehearsed. And amongst other
things, he asked me if I would have come to Mass that morning, if he had sent
for me. Whereunto I answered that I would have come to him at his commandment,
but to your Mass (said I) I have small affection. At which answer he was
displeased sore, and said I should be fed with bread and water. And as I
followed him through the great hall, he turned back and beat me with his
fifte, first on the one cheke, and then on the other, as the sign of my
bearing did many days after apeare. And then he sent me into a little
salthouse, They that saw his face thus miserably arrayed, and much worse then he
reports, can bear witness to the truth hereof. S. paul commands that a
bishop should be no fyghter or stryker Titus* ^
where I had no straw nor bed, but lay two nights on a table and slept
soundly, I thank God. Then upon the Friday next after I was brought to my
lord, who gave me many fair words, and said he would be good to me. And so he
going to Fullam, committed me to D. Harpesfield, that he and I in that after
noone should common together: and drew out certain articles, whereunto if I
would subscribe, I should be dismissed. But D. Harpesfield sent not for me till
night, and the^ persuaded me very sore to forsake my opinions. I answered, I
held nothing but the truth, and therefore I could not so lightl^ turn
therefro^. So I thought I should at that time have had no more add: but he had
made a certain bil, which the Register pulled out of his bosom, and red it.
The bil indede was very easily made, and therefore more dangerous. The children
of god, when they see their imperfections, frailty, falls, and offenses, are
many times brought to such heaviness, doubting, and mistrust of gods mercy
toward them as though he had clean forsaken them: as you may read psalm.
31.22.77. but then wax they most strong and receive new comforts again in
Christ: as here you may see in this man of God.
For the effect thereof was, to detest al errors and heresies against the
sacrament of the altar, and other sacraments, and to believe the faith of the
catholic church, and live accordingly.

To this bil I did in deed set to my hand, being much desired and cou^selled so
to do, and the flesh being alwais desirous to have liberty, I considered not
thoroughly the inco^uenie^ce yt might come thereupon: and respite I desired to
have had, but earnestly they required me to subscribe. Now when I had so done,
I had little joy thereof. For by and by my mind and conscience told me by gods
word yt I had done evil by such a slight to shake of the sweet cross of
Christ: and yet it was not my seeking, as god he knows, but altogether came
of the^. O ye crafty subtilty of Satan in his members. Let every man ye god
shall deliver into their hands, take good head, and clean fast to Christ: for
they will leave no corner of his conscience unsought, but will attempt all
gileful and subtle means to corrupt him, and make him to fall both from God
and his truth. But yet let no man despair of gods help: for Peter did fall and
rise again. And David says, a righteous man though he fall, he shall not be cast
away: for the Lord up holds him with his hand. For I for my part have felt my
infirmities, and yet I have found gods present help and comfort in time of
need, I most humbly thank him therefore. The night after I had subscribed, I
was sore grieved, and for sorrow of conscience could not sleep. For in the
deliuerau^ce of my body out of bonds, which I might have had, I could find no
joy nor comfort, but still was in my conscience tormented more and more, being
assured by gods spirit and his word, that I through evil council and
aduisement, had done amiss: and both with disquietnes of mind, and with my
other cruel handling, I was very sickly, lying upon the ground when the keeper
came: who^ I desired to pray D. Harpesfield to come to me, and so he did. And
when he came and the Register with him, I told him that I was not well at ease,
but specially I told him I was grieved very much in my conicience and mind,
because I had subscribed, and I said that my conscience had so accused me
through the just judgment of God and his word, that I had felt hell in my
conscience, and Satan ready to devour me: and therefore I pray you M.
Harpesfield said I, let me have the byll again, for I will not stand to it.
So he commanded it to be fetched, and gave it me, and suffered me to pull out my
name: whereof I was right glad when I had so done, although death should
follow. And hereby I had experience of gods providence and mercy toward me,
who tries his people and suffceth them to fall, but not to be lost. For in the
mids of this temptation and trouble, he gave me warning of my fall, and also
delivered me, his name be praised foreuermore. Ame^. Neither devil nor cruel
Tyra^ne can pluck any of christ's sheep out of his hand. Of the which flock
of christ's sheep. I trust undoubtedly I am one, by means of his death and
bloudshedyng, which shall at the last day stand at his right hand and receive
with other, his blessed benediction. And now being condemned to dye, my
conscience and mind, I praise god, is quiet in Christ, and I by his grace am
very well willing and content to give over this body to the death for the
testimony of his truth and pure religion, against Antichriste and all his
false religion and doctrine. They that reyort otherwise of me, speak not
truly. And as for Fountain, I saw him not all this while.

Thomas Whittle Ministes

Another letter of M. Thomas VVhittell written to a cerrayne godly woman.
OH my dear and loving Sister in Christ, be not dismayed in this storm of
persecution, for Paul calls the gospel the word of the cross, because it is
never truly taught but the cross and cruel persecution immediatlye and
necessarilye does follow the same, and therefore it is a manifest token of
Gods truth, that has been here, and is still abroad, and that is a cause of
the rage and crueltye of Satan against Christ and his members, which must
be corrected for their sins in this world: their faith must be tried,
that after trial and paciente suffering, the faithful may receive the crown
of glory. Fear not therefore my well-beloved, but proceed in the knowledge and
fear of GOD, and he will keep you from all evil. Call upon his holy name,
and he will strengthen you and assiste you in all your ways: and if it please
him to lay his cross upon you for his Gospells sake, refuse it not, neither
shake it of by unlawful means, lest you should (as God forbid) find a more
grievous cross, and tormente of conscience, if you should dissemble and deny
the known veritye, then is any persecution or death of body. Oh how happy
are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake? Their reward is
great in heaven. The momentane afflictions of this life are not worthy of the
glory that shall be showed upon us. Oh remember the Godly women of the old
testamente and new, which lived in Gods service and fear, and therefore are
now in bliss and commended for ever: as namely Judith, Hester, Abigaell, the
Mother of the.vij. sons, Marye, Elizabeth, Susanna, Lidia, and Phebe, and
others. Set their examples before your eyes, and fear nothing: for Satan is
conquered by our Savior Christ: sin is put to flight and the gate of
immortality and eternal life is set wide open: God grant we may enter
therein through the door Jesus Christ, Amen.

Thomas Whittel.

Master Bartlet Grene to certain of his friends a little before his death.
BEtter is the day of death, says Solomon, then the day of birth. Man that is
borne of woman, lives but a short time, and is replenyshed with many miseries:
but happy are the dead that die in the Lord. Man of woman is borne in travel,
to live in misery: Man through Christ, does die in joy and live in felicity.
He is borne to die, and dies to live. Straight as he comes into the world,
with cries he utters his miserable estate: strayghte as he departs, with
songs he prayseth god for ever. Scarce yet in his cradell, in deadly enemies
assaults him: after death no aduersarye may anoye him. Whilst he is here, he
displeases god: when he is dead, he fulfilleth his will. In this life here he
dies through sin: in the life to come, he lives in righteousness. Through
many tribulations in earth, is he still purged: with joy unspeakable in
heaven, is he made pure for ever. Here he dies every hour: there he lives
continualy. Here is sin: there is righteousness. Here is time: there is
eternity. Here is hatred: there is love. Here is pain: there is pleasure.
Here is myserye: there is felicity. Here is corruption: there is immortality.
Here we see vanity: there shall we behold the Majesty of God, with
triumphant and unspeakable joy in glory everlasting. Seek therefore the
things that are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God the
father: unto whom with the son and the holy ghost, be all honor and glory
world without end, Amen.

Christ deus, sine te spes est mihe nulla salutis:
Te duce vera sequor, te duce falsa nego.
In English thus.
O Christ my God, sure hope of health besides thee have I none:
That truth I love and falshode hate, thou art my guide alone.
Yours in Christ, Bartlet Grene.

A letter of John Careless to one Mystres Cotton.
THe everlasting peace of god in Jesus Christ, the eternal comfortes of his
most pure, holy, and mighty spirit, with the increase of faith and lively
feeling of his sweet mercies, be with you dear friend and faithful loving
Sister (good Mystres Cotton) to the full increase of your joy in Christ, now
and evermore, Amen.

As from the very bottom of my poor heart, I wish unto you health both of body
and soul, my dear loving Sister in ye Lord, so will I never cease praying
unto god for ye same, according unto my most bou^de^ duty. Howbeit of your body
upon condition, but of your soul without any condition, being well assured yt
the lord for his dear sons sake, will perfectly grant me ye same, so far
forth as shall be most for your profit. So yt if the health of your body, will
stand with the wealth of your soul, I am sure I shall have my peticio^ granted
for the health of ye same. But if ye sickness of your body be for the health of
your soul, as I am sure it is, then have I also my desire granted, because I
ask ye same no further the^ it may stand with the other. But for the
everlasting health of your soul do I heartily pray without the addition of any
condition, for it is the lords good will I should so do. Therefore I am sure my
request is already granted therein for his sake, who has redeemed ye same with
his most precious blood, yea in who^ you were elected before ye foundation of
the world was laid. This is most true, and therefore let nothing persuade you
to ye contrary. Rest upon this rock, and be you sure the gates of hell shall not
prevail against you. I know dear heart, yt you have done much good to the
poor for Jesus Christ's sake, yet beware you do not put any trust or
confidence in your good deeds, merits, or deseruings, but only in Jesus christ,
which has given you him self wholly to be yours with all his holiness,
righteousness, justification and rede^ptio^, and al yt ever he may. On the other
side he has taken upon himself al your sins, misery, and infirmitye, and
has made a full satisfaction for them, with the sacrifice of his own body and
blood offered once for all. This I know (my good sister) you do consta^tly
confess and believe, as ye godly fruit of your christian faith does daily
testify. I trust to be a witness with you at ye great day, yt your faith is
unfeigned and full of godly charity: the lord increase ye same. I am constrained
here to make an end full sore against my will. My poor prayers shall supply
that, which my pen does lack. The blessing of God be with you now and
ever, Amen.

Your daily Orator, John Careless.

A letter of M. John Rough written a little before his death, to the Christian
congregation in London, whereof he was a minister and Preacher.
THe comfort of the holy ghost make you able to give consolation to others in
these dangerous days, when Satan is let lose to the trial of the chosen,
when it pleases our God to sift his wheat from the chafe. I have not leisure
and time to write the great temptations I have been under. I speak to Gods
glory; my care was to have the senses of my soul open to perceive ye voice of
god, saying: who that denies me before men, them will I deny before my father,
and his Angels: and to save the life corporal is to lose the life eternal:
and he that will not suffer with Christ, shall not reign with him. Therefore
(most tender ones) I have by Gods spirit given over the flesh, with the
fight of my soul, and the spirit has the victory. The flesh shall now
ere it be long, leave of to sin, the spyrite shall reygne eternallye. I have
chosen the death to confyrme the truth by me taught. What can I do more?
Consider with your selves, that I have done it for confyrmation of Gods truth.
Pray that I may continue unto the end. The great part of the assault is
paste. I praise my GOD. I have in all my assaults, felt his present aid, I
give him most hartye thanks therefore. Look not back, nor be ye ashamed of
Christ's Gospel, nor of the bonds I have suffered for the same: thereby ye
may be assured it is the true word of God. The holy ones have been sealed
with the same mark. It is no time for the loss of one man in the battle, for
the camp to turn back. Up with men's hearts, blow down the dawbed walls of
heresies. Let one take the Banner, an other the Trumpet: I mean, not to make
corporal resistance, but pray, and ye shall have Elias defense, and Heliseus
company, to fight for you: for the cause is the lords. Now my brethren, I can
write no more, time will not suffer, and my heart with panges of death is
assaulted: but I am at home with my God, yet alive. Pray for me, and salute one
an other with the holy kiss. The peace of God rest with you all, Amen. From
Newgate prison, in have the day of my comdemnation,

John Rough.

A letter of Cutberte Symson, a Deacon of the Christian congregation in London,
and burnt in Smythfielde for the veretye of Christ's Gospel, written to his
wife out of the Colehouse.
MY dearelye beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ, Of the exceeding cruel and
unmerciful Rackings and other torments that this man of God most patiently
suffered, read and see in the book of Martyrs. Fol. 16^1.
I can not write as I do wyshe unto you. I besethe you with my soul, submytte
your self under the mighty hand of our God, trusting in his mercy, and he will
surely help us, as shall be most unto his glory and our everlasting comfort,
being sure of this, that he will suffer nothing to come unto us, but that which
shall be most profitable for us. For it is either a correction for our sins,
or a trial of our faith, or to set forth his glory, or for altogether, and
therefore must needs be well done: for there is nothing that comes unto us
by fortune or chance, but by our heavenly fathers providence. And therefore
pray unto our heavenly father that he will ever give us his grace so to consider
it. Let us give him most hearty thanks for these his fatherly corrections: for
as many as he loves, he corrects. And I beseech you now, be of good chere,
and count ye cross of Christ greater riches, then all the vain pleasures of
England. I do not doubt (I praise God for it) but that you have supped with
Christ at his Maundie, I mean, that you believe in him, for that is the effect,
and the^ must you drink of his cup, I mean his cross, for that does the cup
signifye unto us. Take ye cup with a good stomach in the name of god, and then
shall you be sure to have ye good wine Christ's blood to your poor thirstye
soul. And when you have the wine, you must drink it out of this cup. Learn
this when you come to the Lords supper. Pray continually. In all things give
thanks.

Cutbert Symson

A letter of William Coker, then prisoner in Caunterburye and afterward
burnt, for the testimonye of the truth, written to a friend of his.
AS your hartye friend in god, and through the mercy of our lord Jesus Christ,
as pertaining to the faith, your brother, I send you greting and most Christian
salutations. For your kindenes, in that you wrote so spedely to me again. I
commend you, and thank god for it, though of necessity (you say) you were
partly moved so to do by reason of my bonds in ye Lord. I heartily ioyed by
occasion of your letter, because I understood thereby the state of mine old
friends and godly acquaintance, and how ye al continually labor, as we do, in
the Gospel of Christ, which is the word of salvation to as many as believe.
Wherein we have this confidence through our faith in the blood of Christ, ye
though Satan and his rabble of ministers do rage never so much with lying
and deceaueable power, yea though he should appear never so glorious and
Angellike in the sight of ye world: yet shall his fiery darts be quenched and
he never able to prevail against us. For the which testimonye of conscience, I
give thanks unto god from the bottom of my heart, and pray always unto the
Lord, that as we have begone, eue^ so we may go forwards unto the end, until
the time yt the darkness be clean put away, and the perfect light shine in our
hearts, souls and bodies in the eternal kingdom with god, where we shall be
sure our enemies shall not prevail against us, but then most victoriouslye be
overcome by that sweet Lamb, the son of God. In the mean time, the Lord
preserve and keep us from evil. The Lord make us stout in his cause, and
give us grace to confess the truth before this whorysh generation. The Lord
grant we may work his heavenly will, that when the time shall come, he may
receive us unto himself in the glory everlasting. To whom be praise and honor
for ever and ever, Amen.

Your brother in bonds for the Lords cause. William Coker.

A letter of Nicholas Shetterden a faith full Martyr of Jesus Christ, written
to his Mother a little before his death.
O My good Mother, who^ I love with reverence in the Lord, according to my
duty, I desire your favorable blessing, and forgiveness of all my misdedes
toward you.

Oh my dear Mother, in few words I wyshe you the same salvation, which I
hope my self to feel, and partly taste of before this come to you to read,
and in the resurrection I verily believe to have it more perfectlye in body and
soul joined together for ever: and in that day GOD grant you to see my face
with joy: but dear Mother then beware of that great Idolatrye and
blasphemous Mass. O let not that be your GOD, which Mice and worms can
devour: behold I call heaven and earth to record, that it is no GOD, yea the
fire that consumes it, and the moystnes that causes it to moulde. And I take
Christ's Testament to witness, that it is none of his ordinances, but a mere
invention of men, and a snare to catch innocents blood, and now that GOD
has showed it unto you, be warned in time. O give over old customs, and
become new in the truth. What state soever your fathers be in, leave that to
God, and let us follow the counsel of his word: dear Mother, embrace it with
hartye affection: read it with obedience: let it be your pastime, and cast of
all carnal affections, and love of worldly things: so shall we meet in joy
at the last day, or else I bid you farewell for evermore. Oh, farewell my
friends and lovers all: God grant me to see your faces in joy, Amen.

From Westgate the.11. of July.555. Nicholas Shetterden, appointed to be slain
for Christ's cause and the mayntenaunce of his most sound and true religion.

A letter wrytttn by the Lady Jane Gray to her Sister the Lady Katheryne,
immediately before she suffered.
I Have here sent you (good Sister Katherin) a book, which although it be not
outwardly trymmed with gold, This book was a new Testament in Greek, in the
end whereof she had written this letter.
yet inwardly it is more worth then precious stones. It is the book (dear
Sister) of the law of the Lord: it is his testament and last will, which he
bequethed unto us wretches: which shall lead you to the path of eternal joy:
and if you, with a good mind do read it, and with an earnest purpose follow it,
it shall bring you to an immortal and everlasting life. It will teach you to
live, and learn you to die. It shall win you more the^ you should have gained
by ye possession of your woeful fathers lands. For, as if god had prospered him
you should have in herited his lands: so if you apply diligently this book,
seking to direct your life after it, you shall be an inheritour of such
riches, as neither the covetous shall withdraw from you, neither the these shall
steal, neither yet the mothes corrupt. Desire with David (good Sister) to
understand ye law of ye Lord your god. Live still to die, yt you by death may
purchase eternal life. And trust not that ye tenderness of your age shall
lengthe^ your life: for as sone, if God call, goes the young as ye old. And
labor always to learn to die. Defye ye world, deny ye devil, and despise ye
flesh, and delight your self only in ye Lord. Be penitent for your sins, and
yet despair not: be strong in faith, and yet presume not, and desire with S.
Paul to be dissolved, and to be with christ, with who^ eue^ in death there is
life. Be like ye good servant, and even at midnight be wakyng, lest when death
comes and steals upon you like a thief in the night, you be with the evil
servant found slepyng: and least for lack of oil, you be found like the five
folyshe women, and like him that had not on the wedding garmente, and so be
cast out from the marriage. Rejoice in Christ, as I praise God I do. Follow the
steps of your master christ, and take up your cross: lay your sins on his
back and alwais embrace him. And as touching my death, rejoice as I do (good
Sister) that I shall be delivered from this corruption, and put on incorruption:
for I am assured that I shall for loosing of a mortal life, win an immortal
life. The which I pray god grant you: send you of his grace to live in his
fear, and to dye in the true christian faith: from the which (in gods name) I
exhort you that you never swarne, neither for hope of life, nor for fear of
death. For if you will deny his truth to lengthen your life, God will deny you,
and yet shorte^ your days. And if you will cleave unto him, he will prolong your
dais, to your comfort and his glory: to the which glory god bring me now and
you herafter, when it pleases him to call you. Fare you well (good Sister) and
put your only trust in god, who only must help you.

Letters of M. George Marshe, a godly, faithful, and learned pastor in
Christ's church, put to death at VVestchester, with most cruel kinds of
torments (as you may see in the book of Martyrs, fol. 1122) for the constant
and faithful confession of Christ's Gospel.
To the professors of gods word and true religion in the town of Langhton.
GRace be with you, and peace be multiplied in the knowledge of Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.

I thought it my duty to write unto you, my beloved in ye lord at Langhton, to
stir up your hearts, and to call to your remembrance the words which have been
told you before, and to exhort you (as that good man and full of the holy ghost
Barnabas did the Antiochia^s) that with purpose of heart ye continually cleave
unto the lord, Acts. ^^
and that ye stand fast, and be not moved away from the hope of the gospel,
whereof (God be thanked) ye have had plenteous preaching unto you by your late
pastor M. Saunders, and other faithful ministers of Jesus Christ, Luke. 8.
Romans 1
which now when persecution aryseth because of the word, do not fall away like
shrinking children, and forsake the truth, being ashamed of the gospel whereof
they have been preachers, but are willing and ready for your sakes (which are
Christ's mistical body) to forsake not only the chief and principal delites
of this life, I mean their native countries, friends, livings etc: but also
to fulfill their ministry unto the uttermost, that is to wit, with their
paynful imprisonments and bloodshedings (if need shall require) to confirm and
seal christ's gospel, whereof they have been ministers: and (as S. Paul
says) they are ready not only to be cast into prison, Acts. 12
but also to be killed for the name of the lord Jesus. Whether these being that
good salt of the earth, Matthew. 5.
that is, true ministers of gods word, by whose doctrine, being received
thorough faith, me^ are made sauory unto god, and which themselves lose not
their saltnes now when they be proved with the boisterous storms of adversity
and persecution: or others being that unsavory salt, which has lost his
saltnes: that is to wit, those ungodly ministers which do fall from ye word of
god unto ye dreams and traditions of Antichrist: whether of these (I say) be
more to be credited and believed, let all men judge.

Wherefore my derely beloved, James. 1.
receive the word of god with mekenes that is graffed in you, which is able to
save your souls, and see that ye be not forgetful hearers, deceyuyng your
selves with Sophistry, but doers of the word: whom Christ does like^ to a wise
man which builds his house on a rock, that when ye great rain desce^deth,
Math. 7.
and the floudes come and beat upon that house, it fall not because it is
grounded upon a rock: that is to wit, that when Satan and al his legio^ of
devils, with all their subtle suggestio^s: ye world and all the mighty princes
thereof, with their crafty councils, Psalm. 2
do furiously rage against us, we faint not, but abide constant in the truth
being grounded upon a most sure rock which is Christ, and the doctrine of the
gospel, against which the gates of hell, that is the power of Satan, cannot
prevail. Math. 16
And be ye folowers of Christ and the apostles, and receive the word in much
affliction, as the godly Thessalonians did: 1 Thessalonians. ^
for the true followers of Christ and the apostles be they, which receive the
word of god. They only receive the word of God, which both believe it, and
also frame their lives after it, and be ready to suffer all manner of adversity
for the name of the Lord, as Christ and all his Apostles did, and as all that
will live godly in christ Jesus must do: 2. Tim. ^ Acts. ^ Math. ^ Math. 7
Mark. ^.
for there is none other way unto the kingdom of heaven, but through much
tribulation. And if we suffer any thing for the kingdom of heaven and for
righteousness sake, we have the prophets, Christ, the Apostels and Martyrs for
an ensample to comfort us: for they did al enter into ye kingdom of heaven at
the strait gate and narrow way ye leads unto life, which few do find. And
unless we will be co^te^nt to deny our own selves, and take up ye cross of
Christ and follow him, we cannot be his disciples: for if we deny to suffer
with Christ and his saints, it is an evident argument, 2. Tim. 2
yt we shall never reign ^ him. And again, if we ca^ find in our hearts patiently
to suffer persecutions and afflictions, it is a sure token of the righteous
judgment of God, that we are counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which
we also suffer. 2 Thessalonians. ^
It is verily (says the Apostle) a ryghteous thing with God, to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble us, and rest to us that be troubled. For
after this life, the godly being delivered from their tribulations and pains,
shall have a most quiet and joyful rest, whereas the wicked and ungodly
contrariwise, shall be tormented for evermore with intolerable and unspeakable
pains: Luke. 16.
as christ by the parable of the rich glutton and wretched Lazarus, does
plainly declare and teach. These ought we to have before our eyes always,
that in time of adversity and persecution (whereof all that will be the
children of god, shall be pertakers, Heb. 12
and wherwyth it has pleased God to put some of us in ure already) we may
stand steadfast in the Lord, and endure even unto the end, 2. Tim. 2.
that we may be saved. For unless we like good warriors of Jesus Christ, will
endeavor our selves to please him, who has chose^ us to be his soldiers, and
fight the good fight of faith, even unto the end: we shall not obtain that
crown of righteousness, which the Lord that is a ryghteous judge, shall give to
all them that love his coming.

Let us therefore receive with mekenes the word that is graffed in us, James. 1.
which is able to save our souls, and ground our selves on the lure rock
Christ. For (as the Apostle says) other foundation can no man lay, besides
that which is laid already, which is Jesus Christ. If any man build on this
foundation gold, 1. Cor. 3.
silver precious stones, timber, hay, stubble every man's work shall appear,
for the day shall declare it, and it shall be showed in the fire, and the fire
shall try every man's work what it is. If any man's work that he has builded
upon, abide, he shall receive a reward: if any ma^s work burn, he shall
suffer loss, but he shall be safe himself: nevertheless, yet as it were
through fire. By fire here does the Apostle understand persecution and trouble.
For they which do truly preach and profess the word of god (which is called
the word of the cross) shall be rayled upon, abhorred, hated, thrust out of
company persecuted and tried in the furnace of adversity, as gold and silver
are tried in the fire. By gold, silver, and precious stones, 1. Cor. 1. Math. 5
Luke. 6. Math. 3 Psalm. 1
he understands them that in the mids of persecution abide steadfast in the
word: by timber, hay, and stubble, are meant such as in time of persecucion do
fall away from the truth, and when Christ does purge his flore with ye wind
of adversity, these scatter away from the face of the earth like light chafe,
which shall be burned with unquenchable fire. If they then which do believe, do
in time of persecution stand steadfastly in the truth, the builder (I mean the
preacher of the word) shall receive a reward, and the work shall be preserved and
saved: but if so be that they go back and swerve when persecution aryseth, the
builder shall suffer loss, that is to say, shall loose his labor and cost:
but yet he shall be saved if he being tried in the fire of persecution, do abide
fast in the faith.

Wherefore (my beloved) give diligent head, that ye, as living stones, be
builded upon this sure rock, 1. Peter. 2. 2. Cor. 3
and be made a spiritual house and a holy priesthode for to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable unto god by Jesus Christ. For we are the true temple of
god, and ye spirit of god dwells in us, if so be that we continue in the
doctrine of the gospel. We are also an holy and royal priesthode, for to offer
up spiritual sacrifices and oblations: 1. Pet. 2
for the sacrifices of the new testament are spiritual, and of three manners.
The first is, the sacrifyce of praise and thankesgeuyng, which S. Paul does
call the fruits of those lips which confess the name of god. The second is
mercy toward our neighbors, Heb. 13 Osee. 6 Romans 12
as the prophet Osee says: I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Read the 25.
chap. of Math. The third is, when we make our body a quick sacrfice, holy and
acceptable unto God: that is, when we mortify, and kill our fleshly
concupis^nces and carnal lusts, and so bring our flesh, through the help of
the spirit, under the obedience of Gods holy law. This is a sacrifice to god
most acceptable, which the apostle calls our reasonable serving of God. And
let us be sure that unless we do now at this present take better head to our
selves, and use thankefullye the grace of God offered to us by the gospel
preaching these years past, whereby we are induced and brought to the knowledge
of the truth, Ephesians. 3
unless (I say) we keep Christ and his holy word, dwelling by faith in the
house and temple of our hearts the same thing that Christ threatens unto the
Jews, shall happen unto us: Math. 14
that is to wit, the unclean spirit of ignorance, superstition, idolatry,
and infidelity or unbelief, the mother and head of all vices (which by the
grace of god was cast out of us) bringyng with him seven other spirits worse
then himself, shall to our utter destruction, return again into us, and so shall
we be in a worse case then ever we were before. 1. Pet. 2
For if we after we have escaped from the fylthines of the world through the
knowledge of the lord and savior Jesus Christ, be yet tangled therein again and
overcome, then is the latter end worse then the beginning, and it had been
better for us not to have known the way of ryghteousnes, then after we have
known it, to turn from the holy commandment given unto us: Prouer. 26
for it happens the^ unto us according to the true proverb, the dog is
turned to his vomit again, and the sow that was washed to wallowyng in the
mire. And thus to continue and persevere in infidelity, and to kick against
the manifest and known truth, and so to dye without repentance, and with a
despair of the mercy of god in Jesus Christ, is to sin against the holy
ghost, which shall not be forgeuen, neither in this world, neither in the world
to come. Math. 23 Heb. 6
For it is not possible (says S. Paul) that they which were once lighted,
and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were become partakes of the holy
ghost, and have tasted of the good word of god, and of the power of ye world to
come: if they fall away, should be renewed again* by repentance for as much as
they have (as concerning themselves) crucified the son of god again, making
a mocking of him. Saint Paul's meaning in this place is: that they that
believe truly and unfeignedly gods word, do continue and abide sted fast in the
known truth. If any therefore fall away from Christ and his word, it is a plain
toke^ that they were but dissembling hypocrites, Math. 26
for all their fair faces outwardly, and never believed truly: as Judas, Simon
Magus, Demas, Hymeneus, Philetus and others were, which al fell away from ye
known verity, and made a mock af Christ, which S. Paul does call here, to
crucify Christ a new, because yt they turning to their old vomit again, did
most blaspemously tread the benefits of christ's death and passion under their
fete. They yt are such, ca^ in no wise be cenued by repentance: for their
repentance is fleshly, as ye repentance of Caine, Saul, and Judas was, which
being without godly comfort, breeds desperatio^ unto death. These are not of
the number of thelect, and as S John does say, they went out from us, but they
were not of us: 1 John. 2.
for if they had been of us, they would have remained with us unto the end.
Also the apostle says in an other place, Heb. 10
if we sin willingly. after yt we have received ye knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful loking for judgment
and violent fire, which shall devour ye adversaries. They sin willingly,
which of a set malice and purpose do wthold the truth in unrighteousness and
lying, Romans 1.
ky^kyng against the manifest and open known truth: which although they do
perfectly know yt in all the world there is none other sacrifice for sin,
but only that omnisufficie^t sacrifice of christ's death, yet notwithstanding
they will not commit themselves wholly unto it, but rather despise it, allowyng
other sacrifices for sin, ^inue^ted by the imagination of man, as we see by
daily experience: unto who^, if they abide still in their wickedness and sin,
remains a most horrible and dreadful judgment. This is that sin unto
death, for which S. John would not that a man should pray.

Wherefore my derely beloved in Christ, 1. John. 5 1. Cor. 10 Apoc. 12 Math. 24.
Romans 1
let us (on who^ the ends of ye world are come) take dilligent head unto our
selves, that now in these last and perilous times, in ye which the Devil is
come down, and has great wrath, because he knows his time is but short, and
whereof ye prophets, Christ and the apostles, have so much spoken and given us
so earnest forewarning, we wthold not ye truth in unrighteousness, believing,
doing, or speaking any thing against out knowledge and conscience, or without
faith. For if we do so, for what cause soever it be, John. 8. phi.. 2. Math. 3
it is a wilful and obstinate infidelity, and a sin unto death: as our
Savior Christ says: if ye believe not, ye shall die in your sins. For
unless we hold fast ye word of life, both believing it, and also bring forth
fruit worthy of repentance: we shall with yt unprofitable fig tree, which did
but cu^ber ye ground, Luke. 13
be cut down, and our talent taken from us, and given unto an other yt shall
put it to a better use: and we through our own unthankfulness put from the mercy
of god, Matthew. 18.
shall never be able to pay our debts, yt is to say, we shall altogether be
lost and undone. Heb. 6.
For the earth that drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and
brings forth herbs meet for them that dress it, receives blessing of
God, But that ground that bears thorns and brears, is reproved, and is nygh
unto cursyng, whose end is to be burned. Nevertheless (dear friends) we trust
to see better of you, and such things as accompany salvation: and that ye being
that ground, watered with moistnes of gods word plenteously preached amongs
you, Luke. 8 James. 1.
will with a good heart hear the word of god and keep it, bringing forth
fruit with patience, and be none of those forgetful and hypocritishe
hearers, which although they hear the word, Math. 13
yet the Devil comes, and catches away that which was sown in the heart:
either having no root in themselves, endure but a season, and as soon as
tribulation or persecution aryseth, because of the word, by and by they are
offended: either with the cares of this world and deceitfulnes of riches choke
the word, and so are unfruitful. Read the parable of the sower, and among
other things note and mark, that the most part of the hearers of gods word
are but hypocrites, and hear the word without any fruit or profit, yea only
to their greater condemnation: for only the fourth part of the seed does
bring forth fruit. Therefore let not us that be Ministers or professors, and
followers of gods word, be discouraged, though that very few do credit and
follow the doctrine of the Gospel, and be saved.

Math. 11.
Whosoever therefore has ears to hear, let him hear: for whosoever has, to
him shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but whosoever has not, from
him shall be taken away that he has: that is to say, they that have a desire of
righteousness and of the truth, shall be more and more illuminated of God. On the
contrary part, they that do not covet after righteousness and truth, are more
hardened and blinded, though they seem unto themselves most wise. For God does
here follow an example of a loving father, which when he sees that fatherly
love and correction does not help toward his children, uses an other way:
He cease to be beneficial unto them, and to minister unto them fatherly
correction: he gives them over unto themselves, suffering them to live as they
lust themselves. Heb. 6 Mat. 8
But we trust to see better of you (my derely beloved) and that ye like
Gaderenites, for fear to lose your worldly substance or other delytes of this
life, Acts. 14.
will not banysh away Christ and his Gospel from amongst you: but that ye ^ all
diligence of mind will receive ye word of god taught you by such ministers as
now when persecuio^ aryseth because of ye word, 2. Tim. 1 2. Tim. 2.
are not ashamed of ye testimony of our lord Jesus, but are content to suffer
adversity with the gospel, and therein to suffer trouble as evil doers, even
unto bonds. And if ye refuse thus to do, your own blood will be upon your own
heads. And as ye have had plenteous preaching of ye gospel, more the^ other
have had: Acts. 18
so shall ye be sure if ye repent not, and bring forth fruits worthy of
repentance, to be sorer plagued and to receive greater vengeance at gods hand
then others, and the kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and be given to an
other nation, which will bring forth the fruits thereof.

Wherefore my dearly beloved in christ, take good heed to your selves* and
ponder well in your minds, how fearful and horrible a thing it is to fall into
the hands of the living god. And see yt ye receive not the word of god in
vain, 2. Cor, 6. Iame. 2.
but continually labor in faith, and declare your faith by your good works,
which are infallible witnesses of the true justifying faith, which is never
idle, but works by charity. Gala. 5. Tit. 2. Romans 13.
Give your selves (I say) continually to al manner of good works. Among the
which the chiefest are, to be obedient to ye Magistrates, sith they are the
ordinance of god, whether they be good or evil, unless they command Idolatry
and ungodliness, yt is to say, things contrary unto true religion: for then
ought we to say with Peter, we ought more to obey God then man. But in any
wise we must beware of tumult, Act. 5.
insurrection, rebellion, or resistance. The weapon of a christian man in this
matter, ought to be the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6
which is gods word, and prayer coupled with humilitye and due submissio^, with
readiness of heart rather to dye then to do any ungodliness. John. 19. Job 34.
Romans 14
Christ also does teach us that all power is of god, yea eue^ the power of the
wicked, which god causes oftentimes to reygne for our sins, and disobedience
toward him and his word. Whosoever then does resist any power, does resist
the ordinance of god, and so purchase to him self utter destruction and
undoing. We must also by all means, be promoters of unity, peace, and concord.
1. Pet. 2 Ephesians. 6
We must honor and reverence princes and all that be in authority, and pray
for them, and be diligent to setforth their profit and commodity. Secondly, we
must obey our parents, 1. Tim. 5.
or the^ that be in their romes, and be careful for our housholdes, yt they be
provided and fed, not only with bodily food, but much rather with spiriturall
fode, which is ye word of god. Thirdly, we must serve our neighbors by all
means we can, Math. 7 1. Tim. 2
reme^bryng well the saying of Christ: what soever ye would that me^ should do
unto you, do ye likewise unto the^: for this is the law and the Prophets.
Fourthly, we must diligently exercise ye necessary work of prayer for all
estates: knowing yt god therefore has so much commanded it, and has made so
great promises unto it, and does so well accept it. After these works we must
learn to know the cross, Math. 5.
and what affection and mind we must bea^e toward our adversaries and
enemies, what soever they be, to suffer al adversities and evil patiently, to
pray for the^ that hurt, persecute, and trouble us. And by thus using our
selves, we shall obtain an hope and certainty of our vocation, that we be the
elect children of god.

And thus I co^me^d you brethren unto god, and to the word of his grace, 2.
Pet. 1 Acts. 20.
which is able to build further, and give you an enheritance among al the^,
which are sanctified: beseching you to help M. Sau^ders and me your late
pastors, and al the^ that be in bonds for the gospels sake, with your prayers
to god for us, yt we may be delivered from al the^ yt believe not, and from
unreasonable and froward men, Romans 15. Coloss. 4 Phil. 1.
and that this our imprisonments, and affliction may be to the glory and
profit of our christian brethren in the world, and that Christ may be
magnifyed in our bodies, whether it be by death or by life, Amen. Salute from
me all the faithful brethren: and because I write not several letters to them,
let them either read or hear these my letters. The grace of our Lord be with
you al, Amen.

The.28. of June, by the unprofitable servant of Jesus Christ, and now also
his prisoner, George Marshe. Save your selves from this untoward generation,
pray, pray, Acts. 2.
pray: never more need.

To certain of his dearly beloved friends, dwelling at Manchester in
Lankeshyre.
GRace be with you, and peace from God our father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ, Amen.

After salutations in Christ to you, with thanks for your friendly
remembraunces of me, desiryng and wyshing unto you, not only in my letters, but
also in my daily prayers, such consolation in spirit, and taste of heavenly
treasures, that ye may thereby continuallye work in faith, labor in love,
persevere in hope, and be pacient in all your tribulations and persecutions,
even unto the end and glorious coming of Christ: Coloss. 2. Phil 2. 1. Pet. 3
Mat. 10 Luke 11.
these shall be earnestly to exhort and beseech you in Christ, that as ye have
received the Lord Jesus, even so to walk, rooted in him, and not to be afraid
of any terror of your adversaries, be they never so many and mighty, and you
on the other side never so few and weak: for the battle is the Lords. And
as in times paste, God was with Abraham, Moses, Isaac, David, the Machabees and
other, and fought for them, and delivered all their enemies into their hands:
even so has he promised to be with us also, unto the worlds end and so to
assist, strengthen, and help us, that no man shall be able to withstand us.
Math. 28. Joshua. 1.
For as I was with Moses, so will I be with thee (says God) and neither
leave thee nor forsake thee. Be strong and bold, neither fear nor dread: for
the Lord thy God is with thee, whether so ever thou go. Now. if God be on
our side, who ca^ be against us? Romans 8.
In this our spiritual warfare, is no man overcome, unless he trayterouslye
leave and forsake his Captain, either cowardly cast away his weapons, or
willingly yield him self to his enemies, either fearfully turn his back and
fly.

Be strong therefore in the Lord (dear brethren) and in the power of his might,
and put on all the armor of god, Ephesians. 6.
that ye may be able to stand steadfast against the craftye assaults of the
devil. Now what weapons ye must fight with all, 2. Cor, 11.12 Act. 21.
learn of S. Paul, a champion both much exercised, and also most valiant and
invincible. For we must think none other, but that the life of man is a
perpetual warfare upon earth as the examples of all godly men, throughout al
ages do declare. The valiant warrior S. Paul, being delivered from the hands
of the ungodly, and that so many times, and from so many extreme perils and
dangers of death, as he him self does witness, is feign to commit him
self in the end to the rough waters of the sea, where he was in great peril
and ieoperdie of his own life: Act. 12.
yet was god always (to the great comfort of all that hear of it) most
ready to comfort and succor him, and gloriously delivered him out of al his
troubles: so that no man that did invade him, could do him any harm, and in ye
end he was compelled to say: I have fynyshed my course, 2. Tim. 4. Phil. 1.
Romans 15.
the time of my departing is at hand, I long to be losed and to be with christ,
which thing is best of al, most heartily desiring death. These things be written
for our learning and comfort and be to us a sure obligation, that if we submit
our selves to god and his holy word, no man shall be able to hurt us, and that he
will deliver us from al troubles: yea eue^ from death also, until such time as
we covet and desire to dye.

Heb. 12.
Let us therefore run with patience unto the battle that is set before us, and
look unto Jesus the captayn and fynysher of our faith, and after his example
for the rewards sake that is set out unto us, patiently bear the cross and
despise ye shame: for all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution. 2. Tim. 3. Math. 3.4.
Christ is no sooner baptized and declared to the world to be the son of god,
but Satan is by and by ready to te^pt him. Which thing we must look for also:
yea the more we shall increase in faith and virtuous living, the more strongly
will Satan assault us, who^ we must learn after the example of Christ, to
fight against, and overcome with the holy and sacred scriptures, Ephesians. 6. Math. 4
and word of God (which is our heavenly armor) and sword of the spirit. And
let the fasting of christ, while he was tempted in the wilderness, be unto us
an example of sober living, not for the space of fortye days (as the papists
do fondly fansye of their own brains) but as long as we are in the wilderness
of this wretched life, assaulted of Satan, who like a roaring Lyo^ walks
about, and cease not seking our utter destruction: 1. Pet. 5.
neither ca^ the servants of god at any time come and stand before god, that
is, lead a godly life and walk innocently before god, but Satan comes also
among the^: Job. 1.3.
that is, he daily accuses, fyndeth fault, vexes, persecuteth and troubles
the godly: for it is the nature and property of the devil always to do harm,
and to hurt, unless he be forbidden of god: for unless god do permit him, he
can do nothing at al, Math. 8
no not so much as enter into a fylthy hog: but we are more of price them
many hogs before God, if we cleave unto his son by faith. Let us therefore,
knowing Satan's deceites and rancour, Ephesians. 6.
walk the more warely, and take unto us the shield of faith, wherewith we may
be able to quench and overcome all the fierye and deadlye darts of the
wicked. Let us take to us the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the
spirit, which is the word of god, and learn to use the same according to the
example of our grau^d Captain Christ. Let us fast and pray continually: Mat. 4.
Math. ^7.
for this frantike kind of devils goes not out otherwise (as Christ does
teathe us) but by faithful prayers and fasting, which his true abstinence and
sobernes of living, if we use ye same according to the doctrine of the gospel
and word of God. Fasting is acceptable to god, if it be done without
hypocrisy: that is to say, if we use it to this intent, that thereby this
mortal body and disobedient carcass may be tamed, and brought under the
subjection of the spirit: and again, if we fast to this intent that we may
spare, wherewith to help and succor our poor nedy brethren. This fast do the
true christians use al ye days of their life, although among the common sort
of people remains yet still that supersticious kind of fasting, which god so
earnestly reproves by his Prophet Esaias. Esaias. 58
For as for true chastening of the body, and abstayning from vice, with showing
mercy toward our nedy neighbors, we will neither understand nor hear of, but
still think with the Jews, that we do god a great pleasure when we fast, and
that we then fast when we abstain from one thing, and fill our bellies with
an other. And verily in this point does our superstition much excede the
superstition of the Jews, for we never read that they ever took it for a fast
to abstain from flesh and to eat either fyshe or white meat, as they call it.

To fasting and prayer must be joined alms, and mercy toward the poor and
nedy. And that our alms may be acceptable unto god, three things are chiefly
required. First, 2. Cor. 9.
that we give with a cherefull and joyful heart, for the lord loves a cherefull
geuer. Secondly that we give liberally, putting a side al nigardship, knowing
that he ye sows little shall reap little, and he that sows plentifully, shall
reap plentifully. Let every man therefore do according as he is able. The
porest caitife in ye world may give as great and acceptable an alms in the
sight of god, as the rychest man in the world can do. The poor wydowe that did
offer but two mytes, Mark. 12
which make a farthing, did hyghly please Christ, in so much that he affyrmed
with an oath, yt she of her penury had added more to the offerings of god, then
all the rych me^, which of their superfluity had cast in very much. For if
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted, according to ye a man has, and
not according to that a man has not. Thirdly, we must give without hypocrisy
and ostentatio^, not seking the praise of me^, or our own glory or profit. And
although ye scriptures in some places ache mention of a reward to our alms and
other good works: yet ought we not to think yt we do merit or deserve any
thing: but rather we ought to acknowledge, that god of his mere mercy
rewards in us his own gifts. For what has he yt gives alms, that he has
not received? He than ye gives unto a poor man any manner of thing, gives not
of his own, but of those goods which he has received of god. What have you
(says ye Apostle) yt thou have not received? If you have received it, ^, Cor. 4
why reioycest thou, as though you had not received it?

This sentence ought to be had in remembrance of al me^: for if we have nothing
but that which we have received, what can we deserve? or what need we to
dispute and reason of our own merits? It comes of ye free gift of God, yt
we live, that we love god, that we walk in his fear, where is our deserving
them* We must also in this our spiritual warfare arm our selves with continual
prayer, a very necessary, strong, and invincible weapon: Math. 26. Heb. 4. ^.
Match. 4
and after the example of Christ, and al other godly men, cry heartily unto god
in faith, in all our distresses and anguyshes. Let us go boldly to the seat
of grace, where we shall be sure to receive mercy, and find grace to help in
time of need. For now is pride and persecution increased: now is the time of
destruction and wrathful displeasure.

Wherefore my dear brethren, he ye fervent in ye law of god, and ieoperd ye your
lives, if need shall so require, for the testament of the fathers, and so shall
ye receive great honor, and an everlasting name. Remember Abraham: was not he
found faithful in temptation, Gene. 22. Gene. 41. Number. 25.
and it was reckned unto him for righteousness? Joseph in time of his trouble
kept the commandment, and was made a Lord of Egypt. Phinees was so fervent
for the honor of god, that he obtained the covenant of an everlasting
priesthod. Joshua. 1 Number. 14 1. Regu^. 24
Joshua for fulfilling the word of God, was made the captain of Israel. Caleb
bare record before the congregation, and received an heritage. David also in
his merciful kindness obtained ye throne of an everlasting kingdom, 4. Regu^. 2
Elias being zealous and fervent in the law, was taken up into heaven. Annias,
Azarias, Dan. 3.
and Misaell remained steadfast in the faith, and were delivered out of the
fire. In like manner Daniell being unguilty, Dan. 6.
was saved from the mouth of the Lions. And thus ye may consider throughout al
ages since ye world began, that whosoever put their trust in god, were not
overcome. Fear not ye then the words of ungodly men: for their glory is but
donge and worms. Psalm. 38.
To day are they set up, and to morrow are they gone: for they are turned into
earth, and their memorial comes to naught. Wherefore let us take good hearts
unto us, and quyte our selves like me^ in the law: for if we do the things that
are commanded us in ye law of ye lord our god, we shall obteyn great honor
therein.

Beloved in Christ, let us not faint because of affliction, wherewith God
tries al the^ that are sealed unto life everlasting: for ye only way into ye
kingdom of god, Act. 14. 4. Esdr, 7.
is through much tribulation. For the kingdom of heaven (as god teaches us by
his Prophet Esdras) is like a city builded and set upon a broad field, and
full of all good things: but the enteraunce is narrow and sudden, full of sorrow
and travail, perils and labors, like as if there were a fire at ye right
hand, and a deep water at the left, and as it were one strayte pathe between
the^ both, so small that there could but one man go there. If this city now
were given to an heir, and he never went through the perilous way, how would
he receive his enheritance? Wherefore seeing we are in this narowe and strayt
way, which leads unto the most joyful and pleasant city of everlasting life,
let us not stagger, either turn back being afraid of the dangerous and
perilous way, but follow our Captayn Jesus Christ in the narow and strayt way,
and be affrayd of nothing, no not even of death it self: for it is he that
must lead us to our iourneyes end, and open us the door unto everlasting life.
Consider also the course of this world, how many there be which for their
Masters sake, or for a little promotions sake, would adventure their lives in
worldly affairs, as commonly in wars, and yet is their reward but light and
transitorye, and ours is unspeakable, great and everlasting. They suffer
pains to be made Lords on the earth for a short season: how much more
ought we to endure like pains (yea peradventure much less) to be made
kings in heaven for ever more? Consider also the wicked of this world, which
for a little pleasures sake, or to be avenged on their enemies, will fight with
sword and weapons, and put the^ selves in danger of imprisonment and
hanging. So much as virtue is better then vice, and god myghtyer the^ the
devil, so much ought we to excel the^ in this our spiritual battle. And seeing
brethren, it has pleased God to set me and that most worthy minister of
Christ* John Bradford your countreyme^, in the forefront of this battle, where
for ye time, is most danger: I beseech you all in the bowels of Christ, to
help us and al others our fellow soldiers standing in like perilous place,
with your prayers to god for us, that we may quite our selves like men in the
Lord, and give some example of boldness and constancy, mingled with patience
in the fear of god, that ye and others our brethren, through our example may
be so encouraged and strengthened to follow us, that ye also may leave example
to your weak brethren in the world to follow you, Amen.

Consider what I say: the Lord give us understanding in all things. 2. Tim. 2
3. Cor. 7 1. John. 2.
Brethren the time is short: it remains that ye use this world as though ye
used it not: for the fashion of this world vanysheth away. Se that ye love not
the world, neither the things that are in the world. But set your affection on
heavenly things, where Christ sits on ye right hand of god. Be meke and long
sufferi^g: serve and edisy one an other with the gift that god has given you.
Beware of strange doctrine: lay aside the old co^uersatio^ of gredy lusts,
and walk in a new life. Beware of al uncleanness, covetousness, folish talking,
false doctrine, and dronkennes: rejoice and be thankful toward god, and submit
your selves one to an other. Cease from sin: spend no more time in vice: be
sober and apt to pray: be pacient in trouble: love each other, and let the
glory of god and profit of your neighbors be the only mark you shote at in all your doings. Repent ye of the life that is past, and take better head to
your doings hereafter. And above al things cleave ye fast to him, who was
delivered to death for our sins, and rose again for our justification. To
whom with the father and the holy ghost be al honor and rule for ever more.
Amen.

Salute from me in Christ, al others which love us in the faith, and at your
discretion make them partakers of these letters: and pray ye all for me and
other in bonds for the gospel, that the same god (which by his grace has
called us from wicked papistrye, unto true christianity, and now of love
proves our patience by persecution) will of his mercy and favor in the end
gloriously deliver us, either by death, or by life, to his glory, Ame^. At
Lancaster the.30. of Aug. 1554.

By me an unprofitable servant and prisoner of Christ, George Marshe.

The copy of a letter written by Steven Cotton to his brother John cotton,
declaryng how he was beaten of Bonner.
BRother, in the name of the Lord Jesus, I commend me unto you, and I do
heartily thank you for your godly exhortation and counsel in your last letter
declared to me. And albeit I do perceive by your letter you are informed, that
as we are diverse persons in number, so are we of contrary sects, conditions
and opinions, contrary to that good opinion you had of us at your last being
with us in Newgate: be you most assured (good brother in the Lord Jesus) ye we
are al of one mind, one raith, one assured hope in our lord Jesus, whom I
trust we altogether with one spirit, one brotherly love, do daily call upon
for mercy and forgeuenes of our sins, with earnest repentance of our former
lives, and by whose precious blood hedyng we trust to be saved only, and by
no other means. Wherefore good brother, in the name of the lord, seeing these
impudent people whose minds are altogether bent to wickedness, envy,
uncharitableness, evil speaking, do go about to slander us with untruth,
believe them not, neither let their wicked sayings once enter into your mind.
And I trust one day to see you again, although now I am in gods prison, which
is a joyful schole to them that love their lord and god, and to me being a
simple scholar, most joyful of al. Good brother, once again I do, in the name
of our lord Jesus, exhort you to pray for me, that I may fight strongly in the
lords battle, to be a good soldier to my captain Jesus Christ our lord,
and desire my Sister also to do the same: and do not ye mourn or lamente for
me, but be ye glad and joyful of this my trouble. For I trust to be losed out
of this dongeon shortly, and to go to everlasting joy, which never shall have
end. I heard how ye were with the commissioners for me, and how ye were
suspected to be one of our company. I pray you sue no more for me, good
brother. But one thing I shall desire you, to be at my departing out of this
life, that you may bear witness with me that I shall die, I trust in god, a true
christian, and I hope all my companions in the lord our God, and therefore
believe not these evil disposed people, who are the authors of all untruth. I
pray you provide for me a long shirt against the day of our deliverance: for
the shirt you gave me last, I have given it to one of my co^panio^s, who had
more need then I: and as for the money and meat you sent us, the bishops
servants delivered none to us, neither he who^ you had so great trust in.
Brother there is none of them to trust to: for qualis magister, talis ser^us. I
have been twice beaten, and threatened to be beaten again by the bishop
himself. I suppose we shall go into the country to Fulham, to the bishops
house, and there be araigned. I would have you to harken as much as you can:
for when we shall go, it shall be suddenly done. Thus fare ye well. From the
Colehouse this present Friday.

Your brother Steven Cotton.

A letter of Richard Rothe burnte at Islington, to certain condemned at
Colchester, and ready to die for the lords cause, written with his own blood.
O Dear brethren and Sisters, how much have you to rejoice in god, that he
has given you such faith to preuail against these bloudthirsty tyrannes thus
far: and no doubt he that has begone that good work in you, will fulfill it
unto the end. O dear hearts in Christ, what a crown of glory shall ye receive
with Christ in the kingdom of god? Oh that it had been the good will of god,
that I had been ready to have gone with you: for I lie in my lords little ease in
the day, and in the night I lie in the Colehouse, from Rafe Allerton, or any
other. And we look every day when we shall be condemned: for he said yt I should
be burned within.x. dais before Easter: but I lie still at the pooles brynke,
and every man goes in before me: but we abide patiently the Lords laysure, with
many bands, in fetters and stocks, by ye which we have received great joy in
god. And now fare you well dear brethren and Sisters in this world: but I trust
to see you in ye heaven, face to face. O brother Munt, with your wife and my
dear Sister Rose: oh how blessed are you in the Lord, that god has found you
worthy to suffer for his sake: with all the rest of my dear brethern and
Sisters known and unknown. O be joyful even unto death, fear it not says
Christ, for I have ouercommen death. Oh dear hearts, seeing that Jesus Christ
will be our help, tarry ye the lords laysure. Be strong, let your hearts be of
good comfort, and wait you still for the lord. He is at hand, yea the angel of
the lord pitcheth his tent round about the^ that fear him, and delivers the^
which way he sees best: for our lives are in ye lords hands, and they can do
nothing unto us before God suffer them: therefore give al thanks to god. Oh my
dear hearts now shall you be clothed with long white garments upon the Mount
Sion, with the multitude of Saints, and with Jesus Christ our savior, which
will never forsake us. Oh blessed Virgyns, ye have played the wise Virgins part,
in that ye have taken oil in your la^pes, that ye may enter with the
brydegrome, when he comes, into the everlasting joy. But as for ye folysh
they shall be shut out, because they made not themselves ready to suffer with
Christ, neither go about to take up his cross. Oh how precious shall your
death be in the sight of the Lord: for dear is the death of his saints?
Farewell mine own dear hearts, and pray. The grace of our lord Jesus Christ he
with you al. Ame^, Ame^. Pray, p.p.

By me Richard Roth, written with mine own blood.

The copy of a letter written and cast out of the Castle of Caunterbury by the
prisoners there in bands for gods wo^^, declaring how the papists went about
to famish the (...) death, of the which company five were famished amongst
them already.
BE it known unto all men that shall read or hea^e read these our letters,
that we the poor prisoners of the Castle of Cauntorbury for gods truth, are
kept and lie in cold irons, and our keeper will not suffer any meat to be
brought to us to comfort us. And if any man do bring any thing, as bread,
butter, chese, or any other food, the said keeper will charge them that so bring
us any thing, except money or raiment, to carry it with them again, or else if
he do receive any fode of any for us, he keeps it for himself, and he and his
servants do spend it, so that we have nothing thereof. There were five famyshed
in that prison whose names were these: John Clarke, Dunston Chettenden, W.
Foster, A. Fotkins, John Archer.
And thus ye keeper withholdeth and keeps away our vitails from us, in so much
that there are.iiij. of us prisoners there for gods truth, famished already. And
thus is it his mind to famishe us al: and we think he is appointed of the
bishops and priests, and also of the justices, so to famish us, and not only us
of ye said Castle, but al other prisoners in other priso^s for the like cause
to be also famished. Notwithstanding we write not these our letters to that
intent we might not aforde to be famished for the lord Jesus sake: but for this
cause and intent, that they having no law so to famish us in prison, should not
do it privily, but that ye murderers hearts should be openly known to all the
world, that al men may know of what church they are, and who is their father.

Out of the castle of Caunterbury.
A letter of that true pastor and worthy Martyr D. Ridley: wherein you may see
the singular zeal he had to the glory of God, and the furtherance of his
Gospel: written to Master Cheke in King Edwardes days, and here placed as it
came to our hands.
Master Cheke, I wish you grace and peace. Sir in Gods cause, for Gods sake,
and in his name, I beseech you of your help and furtherance toward gods word.
I did talk with you of late what case I was in concerning my Chaplens. I have
gotten the good will and grant to be with me, of three preachers, men of good
learning, and (as I am persuaded) of excellent virtue, which are able both
with life and learning, to set forth Gods word in London, and in the whole
diocese of the same, where is most need of al parts in England: for from
thence goes example (as you know) into all the rest of ye Kings Majesty's whole
Realm. The men's names be these. M Grindall, whom you know to be a man of
virtue and learning. M. Bradforde, a man by whom (as I am assuredlye informed)
God has and does work wonders, in setting forth of his word. The third is
a preacher the which for detecting and confuting of the Anabaptists and
papists in Essex both by his preaching and by his writing, is enforced now to
bear Christ's cross. The two first be Scholars in the University. The third
is as poor as either of the other twain. Now, there is fallen a Prebende in
Paul's called Cantrelles, by the death of one Layton. This Prebend is an honest
man's living of.xxxiiij. pounds, and better in the Kings books. I would with
all my heart give it unto M. Grindall, and so I should have him continuallye
with me and in my diocese, to preach.

But Alas Sir, I am let by the means (I fear me) of such as do not fear
God. One M. William Thomas, one of the Clerks to the Counsel, has in times
past set the Counsel upon me, to have me to grant that Layton might have
alienated the said Prebend unto him and his heirs for ever. God was mine aid
and defendour, that I did not consent unto his ungodly enterprise. Yet I was so
then handled before the Counsel, that I granted that whensoever it should
fall, I should not give it, before I should make the Kings Majesty preuye
unto it and of acknowledge, before ye collation of it. Now Layton is departed,
and the Prebend is fallen, and certain of the Counsel (no doubt, by this
ungodly man's means) have written unto me, to stay the collatio^. And where as
he dispaireth, that ever I would assent that a preachers living should be
bestowed on him: he has procured letters unto me, subscribed with certain of
the Counselles hands, that now ye Kings Majesty has determined it unto ye
furniture of his highness stable. Alas Sir, this is a heavy hearing. When
papistrye was taught, there was nothing too little for the teachers. When ye
Bishop gave his benefices unto idiotes, unlearned, ungodly, for kindred, for
pleasure, for service, and other worldly respects, all was then well allowed.
Now, where a poor living is to be given unto an excellent Clarke, a man known
and tried to have both discretion and also virtue, and such a one as before
god, I do not know a man yet vnplaced and unprovided for, more meet to set
forth gods word in all England: when a poor living (I say) which is founded
for a preacher, is to be given unto such a man, that then an ungodly person
shall procure in this sort letters to stop and let the same, alas M. Cheke,
this seems unto me to be a right heavy hearing. Is this the fruit of the
gospel? Speak M. Cheke, speak for gods sake, in gods cause, unto whom soever
you think you may do any good withal. And if you will not speak, then I
beseech you, let these my letters speak unto M. Gates, to M. Wroth, to M.
Cicill, whom all I do take for men that do fear God.

It was said here constantly, my Lord Chamberlain to have been departed. Sir,
though the day be delayed, yet he has no pardon of long life, and therefore I
do beseech his good Lordship, and so many as shall read these letters, if they
fear God, to help that neither horse, neither yet dog be suffered to devour
ye poor livings appointed and founded by godly ordinance, to the ministers of
gods word. The causes of conscience, which do move me to speak and write
thus, are not only those which I declared once in the cause of this Prebend,
before ye Kings Majesty's Counsel, which now I let pass: but also now ye man
M. Grindal, unto who^ I would give this Prebend, does move me very much: for
he is a man known to be both of virtue, honesty, discretion, wisdom, and
learning. And besides all this, I have a better opinion of ye Kings Majesty's*
honorable Counsel, the^ (although some of them have subscribed at this their
Clerks craf^ie and ungodly suit, to such a letter) then (I say) they will let,
and not suffer, after request made unto them, the living appointed and founded
for a preacher, to be bestowed upon so honest and well a learned man.

Wherefore for gods sake, I beseech you al, help that with the favor of the
Counsel, I may have knowledge of the kings majesty's good pleasure, to give
this preachers living unto M. Grindall. Of late, there have been letters
directed from the Kings Majesty and his honorable Counsel, unto all the
bishops, whereby we be charged and commanded, both in our own persons, and also
to cause our preachers and ministers, especially to cry out against the
insatiable serpent of covetousness, whereby is said to be such a gredynes
among the people, that each one goes about to devour other: and to threaten
the^ with Gods grievous plagues, both now presently throwe^ upon them, and that
shall be likewise in the world to come. Sir, what preachers shall I get to
open and set forth such matters, and so as the Kings Majesty and the Counsel
do command them to be set forth, if either ungodly men, or unreasonable
beasts be suffered to pull away and devour the good and godly learned
preachers livings? Thus I wyshe you in god, ever well to fare, and to help
Christ's cause, as you would have help of him at your most need. From Fulham
this present, the 23. of Iulie. 1551.

Yours in Christ. Nicholas London

A letter of Cutbert Symson, to certain of his friends concerning his Rackyng
and other cruel torments which he suffered in the Tower.
THe.13. day of December, I was sent to the Tower, and on the Thursdaye
after, I was called into the warehouse before the Constable of the Tower and
the Recorder of London, Master Cholmeley. They commanded me to tell them whom
I did will to come to the English service. I answered, I would declare
nothing. This Engine is called Skenyngtons Gives, wherein the body stands
double, the head being drawn toward the seete. The form and manner of these
Gyues, and of his Rackyng, you may see in the book of Martyrs. Folio. 1631.
Then was I set in an engine of Iron for the space of.iij. hours as I judged.
After that they asked me if I would tell them. I aunsweared as before. Then
was I losed and carried to my lodging again. On the Sundaye after, I was
brought into the same place again before the Lieutenant being also Constable,
and the Recorder of London, and they examined me. As before I had said, I
aunsweared. Then the Lieutenaunt swear by god, I should tell. Then did they
bind my two forefyngers together, and put a small arrowe betwixt them, and
drew it through so fast that the blood followed, and the arrowe brake. Then
they racked me twyse. After that was I carried to my lodging again, and ten
days after, the Lieuetenaunt asked me if I would not confess that whi^he
before they had asked me. I said, I had said as much as I would. Then five
weeks after he sent me unto the high priest, where I was greatly assaulted,
and at whose hand I received the Popes curse, for hearing witness of the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. And thus I commend you unto God, and to the
word of his grace, with all them that unfeignedly call upon the name of
Jesus, desiring GOD of his endless mercy through the merits of his dear son
Jesus Christ, to bring us al to his everlasting kingdom, Amen. I praise God
for his great mercy showed upon us. Sing Osanna unto the highest, with me
Cutbert Symso^. God forgive me my sins. I ask all the world forgeuenes and I
do forgive all the world: and thus I leave this world, in hope of a joyful
resurrection.

Cutbert Symson

A brief admonition written by M. Bradford in a new testament of a friend of
his.
THis book is called sermo crucis, the word of the cross, 1. Cor. 2
because the cross does alwais accompany it: so that if you will be a student
hereof, you must needs prepare your self to ye cross, which you began to
learn before you learned your Alphabet: and Christ requires it of every one
that will be his disciple, therein not swaruing from the common trade of
callings or vocations: for no profession or kind of life wants his cross. So
that they are far ouerseene which think that the profession of the gospel,
which the devil most enuieth, the world most hates, and the flesh most
repineth at, can be without a cross. Let us therefore pray that god would
enable us to take up our cross by denying our selves. E carcere. 18.
Februarij. 155^.

John Bradford.

A letter of Master Thomas Leauer being then in exile for the testimonye of
gods gospel, to M. Bradford prisoner in the tower of London.
THe grace of god be unto you, with my hearty commendations.

I have seen the places, noted the doctrine and discipline, and talked with the
learned men of Argentine, Basyll, Zurich, Berne, Lausan, and Geneua, and I have
had experience in all these places, of sincere doctrine, godly order, and great
learning, and especially of such virtuous learning, diligence, and charity in
Bullinger at Zurich, and in Calvin at Geneua, as does much advance gods
glory, unto the edifying of Christ's church with the same religion for the
which you be now in prison. And as I dout not but you in readyng of their
books, have found much godly and comfortable knowledge, so I am sure that they
in hearing of your constancy and patience, take occasion greatly to rejoice,
with thanks giving unto God, which does testifye his truth unto the world,
not only by their writing, but also by your suffering. The lord therefore,
which uses this your suffering joined with godly learning, to set forth his
glory, not only unto the comfort of simple souls in England, but also unto
the great rejoicing and encouraging of ye most godly learned men in all
countries: will (as I desire and trust) give you such comfort in conscience,
as shall easily bear ye pains of your imprisonment. If you desire to suffer
or do that thing which might testifye the truth, advance the glory, and
edifye the church of Christ, truly you have your desire: yea and I ensure you,
very many godly men in diverse places, give daily thanks unto god in prayer
for you.

You know your cause is good: your friends be in favor, and your adversaries
in displeasure with the almightye god, your heavenly father: your sufferyng for
the truth, shall not be unrewarded: your hope in Christ shall never be
confounded. For although your bodies be kept within prysons, yet your
testimony unto the truth, shyneth far abroad in the world, and your faithful
prayers in charitable unity, joined with many others, be continually presented
before the throne of god. God grant you grace to find and use comfortable
meditation of his word, in diligent obedience unto his will. Christ be your
keeper in comfort, Amen.

From Zurich the.52. of October. by yours faithfully in Christ. Thomas Leauer.

Sap. 3. They are punished in few things, but in many things shall they be
rewarded.
He tries them as the gold in the furnace, and receives them as a hurnt
offering.
Gratia (sancte pater) tua det, quo in firma ferendae,
He caro victrici nostra sit apta cruci.
Thy holy spirit and grace grant us, O father dear,
whereby we may be strong thy cross always to bear

A Table of the letters contained in this book, declaryng by whom and to
whom they were written,
Letters of D. Cranmer Archb. of Cant.
A Letter to Queen Mary. 1 An other letter to Queen Mary. 3 To the Lords of
the Council. 16 A letter wherein he reproves the slanderous reports that he
had set up Mass again at Caunt. 17 To a certain Lawyer. 19 To Mistres
Wilkinson. 23
Letters of D. Ridley B. of London.
TO the brethren dispersed abroad in sundry prisons. etc. 28 To the brethren
which constantly cleave unto Christ etc. 34 To Queen Mary. 38 An answer to
West. 40 To master Hoper. 45 A letter sent unto him by master Grindal being
in exile. 49 An answer written by him to ye former letter. 15 A letter to D.
Cranmer, and D. Latymer. 56 Viii. several letters to M. Bradford. 58 iii.
letters to Augustine Berneher. 70 To mistres Mary Glouer. 74 To a friend yt came
to visit him in the prison. 75 A letter of his cruel ha^dling in Oxford. 76 To
D. Weston. 78 To a Cousin of his. 79 A letter written to all his faithful
friends as his last farewell. 80 An other farewell to the prisoners in the cause
of christ's gospel. 103 A letter of his cruel handling in the schools at
Oxford, and of his condemnation. etc. 112
Letters of M. Hoper B. of Gloucester.
TO certain godly persons enstructing them how to use themselves at the
change of religion. 114 To certain of his relieuers and helpers in the City of
London. 117 An answer to a letter whereby he was certified of them that were
taken at Bow. 120 To the prisoners in both Cou^ters which were taken at Bow.
121 To certain of his friends, exhorting the^ to stick to the truth. 123 An
other letter to the same effect. 125 To a merchant man by whom he had
received comfort in the Flete. 127 A letter of his cruel handlyng in the
Flete. 128 A letter against false reports that he had recanted. 130 To
mystres Wilkinson. 131 To mistres A. W. 132 To master Farrar. D. Tailor, M.
Bradford, and M. Philpot. 134 To M. Hall and his wife. 136 To one yt was fallen
from the truth of the Gospel. 137 To the faithful in the city of London. 140
To a certain woman teaching her how to behave her self in her widowhode. 142 A
letter concerning a woman that was troubled with her husband in matters of
religion. 143 To his beloved W.P. 146 To M. John Hall. 146 An exhortation to
his wife. 147 To the christian congregation. 157 A letter of M. Bullinger to M.
Hoper. 166
Letters of D. Tailor.
TO D. Cranmer. D. Rydley, and D. Latymer. 171 To a friend of his concerning his
talk with the commissioners. 172 A letter concerning the cause of his
condemnation. 175 To his wife and children. 178 Another letter to his wife. 641
Letters of M. Laurence Saunders.
TO D. Cranmer. D. Ridley and D. Latymer. 179 To the professors of the gospel
in the town of Lichfield. 182 To mystres Lucie Harrington. 191 An other to
mistres Harrington. 192 To his wife, M. Harrington and M. Hurland. 193 An other
letter to them. 195 A letter concerning D. Westons coming to him to the
Marshalsee. 197 To his wife and certain other of his friends. 197 ii. other
letters to his wife. 200 To S. Gardener B. of Winchester. 201 To his wife and
other of his friends. 204 An other letter to his wife and certain other of his
friends. 205 ii. letter to M. Robert Glouer and John Glouer. 205 To a certain
backeslider from the truth of gods word. 208 To M. Ferr^r, D Taylour, M.
Bradforde and M. Philpot. 211 A letter to mistres L. Harrington. 212
Letters of M. John Philpot.
A Letter written to the christian congregation. 216 To John Careless prisoner
in the kings Benche. 224 An other letter to John Careless. 226 An answer of I.
Careless to the former letter. 230 To certain godly women going beyond the
seas. 234 An exhortation written to a Sister of his. 236 To M. Robert
Harrington. 239 To M. Robert Glouer prisoner in Coue^. 241 To mistres Heath.
243 To John Careless. 245 To mistres A. Hartipole. 247 To a faithful woman
exhorting her to be patient under the cross. 249 To certain of his friends as
his last farewell 645
Letters of M. John Bradford.
To the faithful professors of gods word in the City of London. 251 To the
true professors of gods word in the university and town of Cambridge 257 To
the professors of the true religion of christ in Lankeshyre and Chesshire. 263
To the unfeigned professors of ye truth dwelling at Walden. 269 To the
honorable L. Russell. 275 An other letter to the L. Russell. 278 To Master
Warcup, mistres Wilkinson and other his friends. 280 To Sir James Hales. 286 To
his Mother. 290 To D. Hill Physician. 294 To Mistres M. H. 298 An other letter
to her. 303 To his beloved. W. P. 305 To mistres I. H. 306 To M. Humphrey
Hales. 309 An other letter to master H. Hales. 312 To certain of his friends
encouraging to be joyful under the cross. 314 To M. Laurence Saunders prisoner
in the Marshalsee. 319 An other letter to M. Saunders. 321 A letter of comfort
to a faithful woman in her heaviness and trouble. 322 To his loving brethren,
B.C. 330 To the Lady Vane. 334 ii. other letters to the L. Vane. 335 To his
dear friends. R. E. 338 To Mystres Wilkinson. 342 An other letter to mystres
Wilkinson. 343 To M. Richard Hopkins. 345 An other letter to M.R. Hopkins. 357
To D. Cranmer, Ridley, and Latymer, prisoners in Oxford. 357 To his friend M.
Shalcrosse and his wife. 359 To his godly friends G.N. exhortyng the^ to be
patient under the cross. 363 An other letter to certain godly persons to the
same effect. 366 An other letter to the same persons. 370 To John Careless. 373
To M. John Hall and his wife prisoners in Newgate. 374 A letter to mistres
Hall. 377 An admonition to certain professors of the truth, that they consent
not to the shrinking and ha^ing gospellers. 379 To his friend M.H.R. and his
wife. 383 To Sir W. Fitzwiliams knight. 386 To his friend M. Coker. 388 To a
friend of his enstructing him how he should answer his adversaries. 389 To a
friend of his entreating of gods election and predestination. 391 To a woman
desiring to know whether she might come to ye popish mattins. 401 To the Lady
Vane. 403 To M. John Philpot. 408 To. R. Cole and N. Shetterden. 409 To Robert
Cole. 411 To mistres Elizabeth Brown. 412 An other letter to mistres Brown.
413 A letter to a friend of his whom he called Nathanaell. 414 To certain
godly men exhorting the^ to patience, and constancy in the truth. 419 To
mystres W. and mystres. W. 423 To mistres M.H. 426 To all the professors of
the gospel with in the realm of England. 427 To M. George Eaton. 446 An other
letter to M. Eaton. 449 A letter to his mother as his farewell 451 A letter to
his mother as his last farewell. 454 To one by whom he had received much comfort
in his imprisonment. 456 To mistres A.W. 457 An other letter to mistres A.W.
458 To certain relieuers of him and others in their imprisonment. 460 To D.
Cranmer, Ryd. and Lat. 466 To the Lady Vane. 467 ii. letters of Augustine
Berncher. 468 To certain men not rightly persuaded in the doctrine of
election. etc. 470 To True and Abington freewil men. 474 An other letter to
them. 476 To Queen Mary the counsel and parliament 478 A letter entreatyng of
the place of S. Paul concerning the desire and groninges of the creature for
ye deliverance of gods children 478 To certain men mayntaynyng the heresye of
ma^s frewil with ye Pelagians and papists. 682
Letters of M. Thomas Whyttle.
TO his dear friend I. Careless. 490 To Thomas Went and others. 493 To the
professors of the Gospel in the City of London. 494 To John Careless. 500 To
M. Fills and Cutbert. 502 A letter declaring how cruelly he was handled of
Boner* 652 To a faithful woman exhorting her to patience under the cross. 655
Letters of M. Robert Samuel.
AN exhortation to the pacient suffering of afflictions. 504 A letter to the
Christian congregation called Samuells faith. 511
Letters of M. John Hullyer.
TO the Chr^stian congregation 517 An other letter to the Christian
congregation. 523
Letters of M. Robert Glouer.
A Letter to his wife 517 To the Mayor of Couentry and his brethren. 542 To his
wife and whole familye. 541
Letters of Robert Smith.
TO the true and unfeigned professors of the Gospel. 544 A letter to a friend
of his, to beware of Idolatry. 552 A letter to his wife. 553
Letters of M. Bartelet Grene.
TO his beloved in the Lord Mystres Elilizabeth. C. 555 To certain Gentlemen
of the temple. 557 To certain of his friends a little before his death. 656
Letters of John Careless.
TO certain in Newgate condemned to be burnte. 560 To M. Grene, M. Whittle,
and certain other in Newgate condemned to be burnt. 565 To William Tymmes. 568
To mystres A.K. 572 To his beloved Sister M.C. 578 An other letter to M.C. 579
To his dearly beloved. T.V. 580 An other letter to T.V. 582 To the faithful
flock of Christ in the city of London. 585 To his wife. 602 To his dear
Sister M.C. 605 To his faithful brother. A. Berneher. 607 To H. Adlington
condemned to die. 611 To W. Aylesbury. 616 ii. letters to T. V. 618 To mistres
Mary Glouer. 624 To M. John Bradford. 628 To a friend by whom he had been
comforted in his trouble. 631 An other letter to the same person. 632 His
christian exercise. 634 An admonition to mistres Jane Glasclocke. 638 To one
mystres Cotton. 657
Letters of M. George Marsh.
TO the professors of Gods word in the town of Langhton. 664 To certain of
his friends at Manchester. 672
Letters of other men.
A letter of M. John Rough. 658 A letter of Cutbert Symson. 659 A letter of
William Coker. 660 A letter of N. Shetterden. 661 A letter of the Lady Jane
Gray. 662 A letter of Steven Cotton to his brother I. Cotton. 679 A letter of
Richard Roth to certain condemned at Colchester. 680 A letter of the prisoners
of Caunterbubury Castle. 681 A letter of Cutbert Symson, of his cruel handlyng
in the Tower. 682
FJNJS.
Jmprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath S. Martyns.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


