A MIRROVR OF MERCY OR The Prodigals conversion, briefly, and learnedly
expounded, and full of comfortable consolations for all penitent sinners.

By William Cooper, Minister of Gods word, and B. of Galloway.

LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for John Budge, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the South door of Paul's, and at Britains Burse. 1615.

To the right worshipful, David Arkenhead, Deane of Gild, Thomas Ingles, of
Edernie, Mongo Macala, Edward ^^r, James Dennistorne, with others his
worshipful Counselors and Assessors.
IT is no great wonder though these parts of Africa which are under Torrida
Zona, abound in many kinds of unkindly monsters, seeing they are distempered
with such extremity of hea^ that their b^astes provoked by raging lust, mix
themselves with others, not of of their own kind. But in this soil wherein the
S^nne of the world sends out his beams in most temperate manner, and the Sun
of Righteousness, shines most favorably: it may much more be admired to see
so many, who look like men, but indeed are monsters. Of whom that may be
spoken, which story records of Constantinus surnamed Coprominus, Eum nec
Christianum, nec Iudaeum, nec Paganum fuisse, that he was neither a Jew, nor a
Pagan, nor a Christian: Sed colluuiem quandam impietatis, but a certain mass
or heap of all impiety: with the Jews they salute Christ as their King, and
yet buffet him, they profess him with the Christian, and persecute him with
the Pagan, at one word they bless him, and at another blaspheme him. They are
named Israelits and live like Ethiopians: Amos.
they speak with the voice of Jacob, but work with the hands of Esau, and
walk with the feet of Ioab, that any man may perceive, not by their coat, but
their party-colored conditions that sundry parents have begotten them.

The nature of man distemperate with the heat of unruly desires, and
affections, refuses not the ^nlawfull ^ompany of any evil that will ^ome with
it: for sin is nothing else, but a child gotten in a most unhappy and
unkindly coni^nction between Apostat spirits, and the corrupt nature of man,
whereof proceeds such manifold deformities in the lives of men, that ye may see
one and the self same man to be but a mixed monster, made up, and misshapen of
sundry sorts of vices. He is begotten of Concupiscence, and has ^ies of
Adultery: he is nourished and rocked in the cradle of Intemperance, be
grows up by Covetousness to such excess, that his little finger is bigger
then by just measure his body should be: his motion is from anger, his
greatness from his pride, he is made strong to evil by his malice, he wa^eth
old with wickedness, consumed with lechery, and worn with envy. Thus he
ends worse then he began, and in all these he is boulstred up by hypocrisi^,
and shows himself as if he were a Christian. Malac.
And so couers the injury under the garment of God: but they are deceived, God
will not be mocked, Let them not say we have Abraham for our father, The
answer our Savior gave the carnal Jews is fitting for them, Ye are of your
father the Devil, for ye do his works. Partus patrem iudicat, the birth
bewraies the begetter, and their image declares they are not the generation of
Christ.

But judgments are prepared for scorners: strange sins will be repaid with
strange punishments proportionable to them, They that sow the wind, shall
reap the whirlewinde, they who sow to the flesh shall of the flesh reap
corruption. They turn not from their sins to the Lord, and the Lord most
justly wraps them in their sins as in a wind^ng sheet, which cannot be
consumed, thus are they laid in the grave, and Their bones full of the iniquity
of their youth. O fearful, recompense, but yet rigteous, their needs no more
to plague them but that the Lord turn their own ways upon their own heads,
and give them to drink of the cup themselves have prepared. For howsoever
wickedness be sweet in the mouth, yet in the bowels it turns into gall. They
shall know in the end, it was an evil thing and a bitter that they forsook
the Lord. Oh that they who forget him, could consider this in time.

To waken them if it be possible. I have presented to them here a twofold
mirror, in the one if they look into it, they may see how miserable a man
makes himself by departing from the Lord. In the other how gracious the Lord
is, and ready to receive such as return unto him. And this have I published
under your honorable names, who as ye live in your selves Exemplars of a
godly life unto others: so I am sure it shall be contentment to you if by this
treatise dedicate to you, others may be made better. Receive it as a token of
my best affection toward you, for your loving acceptance of me into the
honorable fellowship of your Burgiship of Edenborough, which howsoever by
birth it was due to me, yet was it conferred by you with such willingness of
mind, as binds me to account my self obliged to your favors while I live.
So wishing the multiplication of the grace of Jesus Christ unto you, I rest.

Yours in the Lord Jesus W. B. of Galloway.

A MIRROVR OF MERCY.
LVKE 15. VERSE 11. He said moreover, A certain man had two sons.

Ver. 12. And the younger of them said to his father, Father give me the portion
of the goods that falls to me. So he divided unto them his substance.

Verse. 13. So not long after, when the younger son had gathered all together,
he took his journey into a far country, and there he wasted his goods with
riotous living.

Ver. 14. Now when he had spent all, there arose a great dearth throughout
that land, and he began to be in necessity.

Ver. 15. Then he went and claue to a Citizen of that country, and he sent
him to his farm to feed Swine.

Ver. 16. And he would feign have filled his belly with the husks, that the
Swine ate, but no man gave them him.

Ver. 17. Then he came to himself, and said, How many hired servants at my
fathers have bread enough, and I die for hunger?

Verse. 18. I will rise and go to my father, and say unto him, Father I have
sinned against heaven and before thee

Verse. 19. And am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy
hired servants.

Verse. 20. So he arose and came to his father, and when he was yet a great
way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his
neck, and kissed him.

Verse. 21. And the Son said unto him, Father I have sinned against heaven, and
before thee, and am no more worthy to he called thy son.

Verse. 22. Then the Father said to his servants, bring forth the best robe,
and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet.

Ver. 23. And bring the fat calfe, and kill him and let us eat, and be merry.

Verse. 24. For this my son was dead, and is alive again: and he was lost
but he is found, and they beegan to be meery.

My help is in the name of the Lord.
This parable entitled a Mirror of Mercy. and why?
THis Parable may properly be called, A mirror of Mercy: for in it the Lord
lays open unto us the bowels of his fatherly love and compassion toward
penitent sinners, he proclaimed once by word his name to Moses, The Lord,
strong, merciful, Ex. 34 6.7.
and gracious, slow to anger, abundant in mercy and truth, reserving mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgressions, and sins. By many proofs
sensiue has he declared it, and here most clearly he shadows it. Setting
down to us one, a most miserable sinner worthy to be condemned, yet upon his
repentance, graciously pardoned, for an example of the like mercy to be showed
unto all, who after this manner repenting of their sins, shall return unto the
Lord their God.

Why the Parable is tripled.
To this purpose has our Savior deliliuered before two Parables. One of the
wandering sheep, an other of the lost piece of money, and now he adioynes the
third of the Prodigal child. It is not without great cause that our Savior
takes such pains to confirm us in this point. For it is a difficill thing,
yea a supernatural work, to persuade a guilty sinner of Gods mercy: the
reason is, because the law, which threatens a curse against the transgressors
of her commandments is naturally written in every man's heart, The sentence of
damnation is written by nature in every man's heart.
and the sentence of death due to sin, by capital letters is graven in the
conscience, so that it is true of all sinners which the Apostle speaks of one
sort that they are (...) such as have within themselves, Tit. 3.11.
against themselves pronounced a ditty of damnation, and every man may feel in
himself a conscience armed not un. Genesis 3.24.
like that Cherubin with a sword of wrath, shaking against him, and telling him
that his sin has made him unworthy to enter in the paradise of God.

Whereof it comes to pass, Men under the bondage of sin, either perish in
the deadsleep of Atheism,
that miserable man abiding under the bondage of sinful nature perishes in one
of these two fearful sickenesses of the soul, atheism, or desperation. The
first is a most dangerous and deadly disease, Hermes.
(...) (...), and opens a door to all kind of impiety, for what wickedness
will not that man commit who being blinded by the deceit of sin is brought
to think there is no God nor judgment to come. But against this dangerous and
devouring poison, the Lord has provided most effectual Antidots, Psa. 14.3
for besides the works and the word of God which cry out that there is a God, he
preserves even in the most corrupt conscience such a light as forces the
deepest contemner to fear that same Godhead which he denies, and so proves it
true in all Atheists, which Cicero spoke of one Metrodorus. Nec quenqnam vidi
qui magis ea timeret, quae timenda esse negaret. I never saw any more feared,
for which he said was not to be feared at all.

Or then being wakned are oppressed with dessperation.
And thus the Atheist being wakened out of the sound sleep of Atheism, and
brought to some sense and fear of a Divinity is incontiuent sore oppressed
with the other evil of desperation; for the first thing that a guilty soul
apprehends in God is judgment, and wrath, the conscience sending out, (...),
Romans 2.15
accusing cogitatio^s, which conclude within the^, against themselves a
condemnatory sentence, and in this he that has escaped the first shall not
fail to perish, if ^ door of mercy be not opened unto him.

On the other extremity many are deceived by presumption
And here again, many are deceived by presumption, who think the way of mercy
plain, easy, well enough known, and that they are sure they have it. But alas
they flatter themselves with a conceit of it, who had never the certainty of
it. All have no faith, who speak of it. 2. These. 3.2
Many are called, Mat. 20.16. Mat. 11.12. Genesis 3.8.
few are chosen. The kingdom of heaven suffers violence. If Adam after one
transgression ran away from the Lord afraid at his voice and presence in who^
he delighted before: what marvel his sinful children guilty of so many
transgressions like perturbed and confounded men, fearing his judgments, run
from him and fall into the gulf of despair. And if Joseph and Mary having
lost the company of Christ but for one day not regarding him as they should,
Luke 2.46
were three days in seeking, before they could find him again, shall men who
so long a time lived strangers from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18.
be so foolish as to think it requires no pains, no labor to seek him, to
find, and to be reconciled with him? But if they can get only in their
ending day one word to cry for mercy, they are sure to obtain it Let us not be
so far deceived, it is no wisdom to hazard so great a matter, as is our
eternal salvation upon so small an adventure.

To cure therefore these great evils, To cure these evils many ways uses the
Lord to persuade us of mercy.
specially, the last two, of desperation and presumption, by many ways does
the Lord draw us to an experience and sense of his mercy, and then to a
conscience of our duty toward him, for where before the Cherubin, an Angel
was set at the entry of Paradise with a shaking sword to hold out man, we have
now the Christ the Lord of Angels with the keys of David's house to open
Paradise unto us, and as conscience within us cries condemnation to us for
sin, so the spirit of adoption sent into our hearts from the Father, cries
with a stronger voice, absolution from sin. Romans 8.1. Christ set over against
the excluding Cherubin, the Comfo^ter over against the accusing conscience a
tripled Parable against our manifold doubtings.
No condemnation to the^ which are in Christ. And against the terror of the
Law and curses thereof we have the grace of the Gospel full of sweet
b^essings, both promised, and practiced toward penitent sinners. And for this
one purpose it is that our Savior here triples the Parable to make up unto us
the stronger preservative against our natural disease of distrust and
desperation. For so, as Joseph spoke to Pbaroah of his doubled vision. Genesis
41.32
The dreme is doubled to Pharao the second time, because the thing is
established by God, and God hastes to perform it. May we also speak of this
tripled parable Jesus has done it, to show the heirs of promise the stability
of his Counsel, Heb. 6.27
for it is a decree established with God to show mercy to the penitent, and he
will hasten to perform it.

For the sense of mercy is an effectual motive to repentance.
Now as it is a great work to make the soul, guilty of sin, conceive any
sense of of mercy, so the soul once having conceived it, is easily moved
through the sense of mercy to return unto the Lord, as we may see in this
example. Many are the arguments whereby we are moved to repentance, but among
the^ all, none goes so near the hearts of his kindly children, Three degrees
of Gods mercies.
to prick them with a godly sorrow for their sins, as the sense of Gods
mercy, 1 He was good to his children before they sinned. Ier. 2.5.
when they consider how good the Lord was unto them before they sinned. Have I
been unto you as a wilderness, or land of darkness: what iniquity have ye
found in me, that ye are gone from me. When they consider how patiently the
Lord bare with them when they sinned against him, 2 Good to them when they
sinned.
might have done unto thee as thou have done unto me, Hos. 11.^8.
but for my names sake I will refrain my wrath, I might mak^ thee like Admah
and Zeboim, but my heart is turned within me, and will not execute the
fierceness of my wrat^ upon thee. And when again they consider* how willingly
he received them into his favor after they had sinned, 3 Good to them after
they had sinned.
they are wounded and grieved in their spirits for that they offended him.
Servants fear him for his judgments, if he had no plagues they would not
regard him, Psalm. 130.
but his Sons fear him for his mercies, according to that of the Psalmist,
Mercy is with thee that thou may be feared. And therefore the Apostle puts
this in the forefront of his reasons, when he exhorts us to a godly life.
Romans 12.^.
I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God.

The Lord stands not now upon Mount Sinai, In the Gospel, God discouers the
bowels of his mercies.
with burning fire and blackness o^ darkness, proclaiming the law with the
fearful sound of trumpet* threatening us with death if we fulfill it not. No
marvel the people did tremble at that sight; Heb. 12.21
for Mose^ himself did quail and fear to behold it, but now he stands on
Mount Sion, a father alluring us with mercies, not affraying us with
judgments, speaking to us not by a terrible trumpet, but by the meek mediator
of the new Testament Jesus, Heb. 12.24.
whose blood cries for better things then the blood of Abel. Miserable are
they who are not moou^d with mercy to repent.
O how inexcusable are they whom this mercy of God moves not to repent, are
they not worthy of a double condemnation? The sins done against the Law, may
be cured by the grace of the Gospel: but where this grace also is despised,
and men who may receive mercy for repenting will not repent, wherewith shall
this impiety be cured? remains there any more sacrifice for sin? shall any
new savior be sent to save these men? No, no, there abides nothing for such,
but a fearful looking for of judgment and violent fire? Heb. 10.27.
which shall devour them.

A certain man had two Sons.
NOw to enter into the Parable, This man in the Parable represe^teth God.
in it we have three persons introduced with three several actions. The
Prodigal child sinning, and repenting his father pitying, and pardoning him,
his elder brother grudging and mumuring. We have first then to see who is meant
by this man, and his two sons. This man in the Parable ^^esents God the Father
of our Lord Jesus, and our Father in him, We must beware that we diminish not
the majesty of GOD in our thoughts, to think him like man.
where we must be ware to assign unto God with the Anthropomorphits and
Papists, any visible shape, though he demitte himself to our capacity, and
shadow himself like unto us: let us not diminish in our hearts the glory of
his majesty, as to fashion him in our imagination to be like unto us. For God
is no^ as man. Eyes, and ears, jealousy, anger, and repentance are ascribed
unto him. But he has not carnal eyes, nor ears, to see and hear, as man
does. If he has with such wonderful wisdom made some of his cretures that
they are, Macar. him. 24.
(...) incomprehensible to man, Him. 12.
yea the very soul of man whereby he knows all other things, yet knows not
its own self in many things, how shall we know him that made it, or conceive
of him as he is, he being in himself infinite, in regard of his creatures
incomprehensible, in regard of place, incircumscriptible, in regard of time
everlasting, and shall we then imagine him to be like one of us.

The reason why he figures himself like a man
But why then will you say, is he called a man? doubtless for our comfort and
instruction, because we cannot conceive of his majesty as he is, he speaks
to us of himself as we are, insinuating his love toward us. Among all
creatures none more familiar to a man then a man, and among all men none more
kindly and loving then a father; therefore when the Lord will signify his
love, he shadows himself unto us like a man, and such a man as is our father.
And this is for our instruction, as often as the Lord expresse^ himself under
the name of a man, it is not because he is so indeed, but because it is
needful for us that so his majesty should be expressed. Look then what
goodness God has created in man, Every good and excellent thing in man is a
witness of the incomparable goodness and excellency of God
and then go up, and consider by it what a good creator is he that made him.
Has man an eye to see, and an ear to hear; can man being an earthly father
have compassion on his children and provide good things for them. The^ let us
gather with the Psalmist, Psalm. 94.
Vnderstundye unwise, he that made the eye, does he not see, or he that
planted the ear does he not hear: and again with our Savior, Mat. 7.11
If ye which are evil can give to your children good gifts: Atheists are
injurious to the Lord, for they do not think him so good as themselus
how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them
that ask him. But here is the fault, that as Anthropomorphites ascribe unto
God such a shape as themselves have. So Atheists do abase his majesty so far,
as to think he is not so good as they are, he has not such knowledge and
power as a man has, other deny his providence, and say he has eyes and
sees not, they deny his mercy, and distrust that he will show kindness, and
compassion to his own, But makes him like an Idol of of the nations that has
eyes and sees not. Psalm. 115.
they deny his justice, whiles as they think he will not punish
transgressors, and so setting his majesty less then one of them selves, they
make him in their mind like the Idols of the Nations, that have eyes and see
not, ears and hear not, hands and work not, feet that walk not, and in a
word, such a one as can neither do good nor evil: but their wickedness shall
reprove them, and they shall find the contrary by miserable experience in
the end. Thus have we seen for what cause it is that the Lord expresses
himself unto us by the similitude of a man.

Many ways has God honored the nature of man: How god has honored man's
nature, appears

1 In creation


First, in our creation that when he made man he beautifieth him with his
image. 2 In redemption.

3 In the word.


Next in our redemption, wherein he shows himself so enamoured with the
love of man, as to marry our nature with his own in the person of his Son
Christ Jesus. And thirdly, in his word, that when he speaks of himself he
borrowes comparisons from man to express himself; once he made man to his own
similitude, but often describes himself according to man's similitude Plerunque
a corporibus hominum in se similitudinem trahit Deus, And this serves, Gregor.
mor. l. 32.
shortly to make man ashamed, who spares not to dishonor his own nature, Romans
6.
giving the members of his body as weapons of unrighteousness to sin,
subiecting to Satan's slavery that nature, which God has so highly honored
above the nature of Angels, and all other creatures whatsouer.

Had two sons.
The two sons in this Parable represent, not Jews and Gentiles.
Having seen who is meant by this father in the parable, we come now to see who
are his two sons. By the younger some understand the Gentiles, and by the elder
the Jews. It is true indeed they are our elder brethren, and were in the
covenant before us, and shall again return unto it, we have to pity them and
pray to God for them that he would take the veil from their eyes, 2. Car. 3.
and bring them home again, Ioh. 10.16
that there may be one Sheepeheard, and one sheepefold. But they cannot be
figured here by this eldest son, because they have forsaken their fathers
family, and are now strangers from the tents of Sem. Nether yet Angels and men.
Others again by these two sons understand elect angels and men, it is true
also that they triumphant in heaven are our elder brethren called therefore by
the Apostle The congregation of the first borne. Heb. 12.
Like as they again call the Church militant on earth their little sister.
Cant. 8.8.
But by this elder brother they cannot be represented, for they murmur no^ at
any compassion showed us, or loving intertainement made to us by our heavenly
father, they grudge not, Nor yet Pharisees and Publicanes.
but rather rejoice at the conversion of a sinner. There are yet the third who
by this elder brother understand pharisees and iustiti^rs, by the younger
publicans and sinners. Truth it is the Pharisees grudging at Christ for his
familiarity with Publicans gave him occasion to utter this parable, and by it
also he conuinces them. But the doctrine herein delivered extends further,
as now we shall hear.

These two sons then represent two sorts of Gods children in the militant
Church: But the two Sons represent sorts of Gods children upon earth.
some not only chosen but effectually called by grace, and these are figurate
by the elder son, some chosen, but yet not called nor renewed by grace, and
these are figurate by the younger son. The ^lder son represents such as are
chosen and called.
The first sort of these will not go from their father, they resolve to abide
in his house, and are willingly content to live under their fathers government
and correction, their desire is with David, Psalm. 27.
One thing have I desired of^ the Lord, and I still require it, that I may
dwell all my days in his house, to behold his beauty.

Their resolution is with Joshua, Josh. 24.17.
Though all the world should forsake the Lord, I will worship him. And their
protestation is with Peter, Ioh. 6.68.
whither shall we go from thee, thou have the words of eternal life. I have
not said that these sort of men sin not, if they fall, they fall in their
Fathers floor, whose merciful hand raises them up again, but it is far
from them to profess a departure from him, and for such as these are in the
Church we giu^ thanks to God.

The yoner son rep^esents such as a^e chosen, but not yet called.
As to the other represented by the younger son, they are Gods children in
regard of election, but not yet called, no^ sanctified by grace. These in their
ignorance care not to shake of the yoke and discipline of their Father, they
will not abide with him, as they promised in baptism to be ruled by him, and
live under his commandment; but they will do their own will, walking after
the lyberty of their own lusts with the wicked in the way of reprobation,
their heavenly father suffering the^ with long patience to prove their own
weakness, These are disobedient chilchildren till they be called.
that his mercy may be the more manifest toward them, when by his effectual
grace he calls them out of this snare of the devil, as here at length he did
to this Prodigal child. And these in the Church whom all men may see like unto
this younger son in departing from God: we pray the Lord they may also be
like him in returning: but alas, wee^ have many like the one, few like the
other. For which we may complain with Augustine. Aug.
In occulto est vnde gaudeam, in publico vnde torquear. The matter of our joy
in such as cleave unto the Lord for the most part is hidden in secret: but the
matter of our grief in such as depart from him is public and manifest.
Always sure it is that they that live most licentiously, if they be the elect
children of God, shall once ere they die be effectually called by grace, and
so renewed and made obedient children unto their heavenly father. This learneth
us to look with pity to men in their sin, it may be they are our brethren in
regard of election.


And this should learn us compassion toward men in their sins, for thou
know not, whether, if or not in Gods secret counsel he be an elect child of
God, thy brother and an heir of grace with thee, who in regard of his present
evil conversation, lives as an enemy and a stranger from grace. Ananias feared
Saint Paul, Act. 9.13.17.
as an adversary, whom shortly after, he favored and embraced as a brother;
and many such no doubt there are in the Church, concerning whom the
commandment is given. 2. Tim. 15.
Instruct with meekness them which are contrary minded, waiting if at any
time God will bring them out of the snare of the Devil.

And the younger:
We have first to consider this Parable according to the letter: This Parable
being first considered according to the letter, teaches us.
for it is certain that our Savior borrowes no similitude from that which is
not. Parabola enim de nullo non conuenit. It will let us see that often times
good and godly fathers have wicked and ungracious children. That good fathers
oftentimes have evil children. Esa. 1.
Seeing God who is the Father o^ us all, complains o^ it. I have nourished an^
brought up children, bu^ they have rebelled against me. It becomes other
fathers to bear this cross the more patiently.

And all to declare that grace is Gods free gift and comes not by nature.
Neither is it without cause, that oftentime^ so it falls out, for if wise and
godly fathers had always wise and godly children, i^ might be thought grace
were heritable flowing from nature not given of God from above; but we see the
contrary, as circumcised parents begat uncircumcised children, so regenerate
fathers, unregenerate children. Adam has a Cain, Noah a Cham, Abram an Ismael,
Isaac an Esau, Ezechiah a Manasse. For godly fathers beget natural children
not out of new grace but out of old nature
The reason hereof is, that the goodness which is in man, he has it not by
nature, but by grace of regeneration and in begetting children according to
nature, he communicats to them that which he has of nature, not that which he
has above nature by grace. Homo liberos gignit ex carne vetusta, Aug. cont.
Pelag. lib. 2. ca. 9.
and peccatrice non ex spiritu, quocircamini me mirum, si iustus iustos non
gignat, sicut peccator peccatore^. A man begets children of sinful flesh,
not of the spirit. No marvel therefore that a righteous man begette not
righteous children, as a sinful man begets sinners. The Grains of wheat
which are sown in the earth purged from all their superfluities, having
neither stalk, nor ears, nor chafe, This is cleared by similitudes. Aug.
cont. In^ian. lib. 6. cap. 6.
yet grow up again with them all, Quia purgatio illa, non natura contigit
granis, sed hominum art. Because that purgatiof the corn is not made by
nature, but by the art of man. Cum autem frumenta non nascantur ab his
principijs artis, and industria, sed naturae, necesse est vt nascentia
sequantur non rationem humanae industriae, sed naturae. Therefore is it they
grow up not such as the art and industry of man has made them, but such as
they are by nature. Et sicut gignitur ex oleastri semine oleaster, August. de
nuptijs and concupis. lib. 2. c. 19
and ex oleae semine non nisi oleaster, Cum inter oleastrum and oleam plurimum
distet, ita and de carne peccatoris, and de carne iusti vtrinque peccator, quam
vis inter peccatorem and iustum multum distet. And as the seed of the wild
Olive brings out a wild olive, and the seed of the olive brings out also a
wild olive: albeit between the olive and the wild olive in themselves there
is a great difference: No matter of gloriation in flesh.
even so out of the flesh, both of just men and sinners, sinners are begotten,
albeit in themselves great difference be between the righteous and the
sinner. That all matter of gloriation may be taken from flesh, and he who
glories may glory in the Lord, boast as thou will of the privileges of
nature, they are but the matter of thy mourning. Comfort can thou have none,
but in that which grace has given thee above nature.

Parents should take heed that in their own default children be not crosses
unto the^ 1. Sam. 3.13.
Only let parents take heed that in their own default their children become
not crosses unto them. Justly was Adonijah a scourge to David in his old
days, because he would not displease him from his youth. 1. King. 1.6
And Ophni and Phinees a cross to their father Eli, because he suffered the^
to run into a slander. A threefold duty therefore, A threefold duty parents
owe to their children.
should fathers discharge to their children; first, by a godly life give them
good example, 1 First, to give them good example.
do not that which thou would not wish thy children to follow; it is an
evil great enough that thou have derived sin unto them by propagation, let
them not also draw it from thee by imitation. Secondly, have a care of their
education, Ephesians. 6.4.
to bring them up in the information of the Lord. Foolishness is bound in the
heart of a child, Pro. 22.15
but the rod of correction drives it away. 2. Secondly to have a care of their
education. Nazian. orat. 48. in Julian.
Nazian records, that the Lacedaemonians learned their children to excel in
fortitude, and tollerance of sorrows by frequent beating them. Licurgus taught
the Spartans what power was in good education. When of two dogs procreat of the
same parents by his pains he made the one a hound for the fields, the other,
not so trained up, remaining but a curre for the kitchen. And Socrates was wont
to say that many children, for want of good education were like unto courageous
horses, st
who for lack of government become no better then Asses. It is a shame for
Christians to come behind Ethnickes in this duty. And yet that education will
not always do it is evident in Isaac and Ismael, both brought up in the house
of Abram; yea in Jacob and Esau both gotten of one father borne of one mother,
that lay together in one belly, their education was alike, their dispotition
unlike. Thirdly, to be instant in prayer to God for them.
Therefore besides the ordinary means of information and correction, the last
duty fathers ought to their children is earnest prayer unto God for them: even
as Job every morning sacrifised for his children, that GOD would frame their
hearts to his holy love and obedience, that the corruption of nature which in
the first generation they communicate to their children, may be taken away, and
they by the grace of regeneration sanctified and renewed unto his holy image.

Having noted these things in the parable, Children in grieuing their Parents
prepare griefs for themselves.
according to the letter in the point of the father: two things also occur to
be marked in the part of the son: first, his vile ingratitude to his Father,
that upon no necessity, only to the end he might follow his own will and
enjoy the perishing pleasures of his sinful lusts, he forsakes him. And that
all children may learn to flee this fault: let them mark that because this
young man became a cross to his father, he becoms at length a cross also to
himself. Children cannot requite the good they have of their parents.


It is the first duty of godliness in children (said Cyrill) to be thankful
to their parents, to wait upon them, serve the^, comfort the^, especially in
their old age, Quamvis enim illis plurima eiusmodirediderimus, rursus tamen eos
generare non possumus, for albeit in some things we may be able to requite
them, Cyrill. ^at. 7.
as Joseph being fed 17. yers by his father Jacob in Canaan fed his father
again other 17. years in Egypt; Gen* 47.
yet are we never able to beget them again, Nazian. ad Vitalianum filios suos
auersantem.
Ab illis primam viuendi causam accepimus, adeo vt parents velut dij quidam
sint, hoc est liberis vice Dei, hos Deus increatus and immortalis, nobis
creratos and mortales deos dedit, vt homines honor afficeret. For parents are
as little Gods unto their children.
For under God we have our being of them, he who is the father immortal and
increated, for the honoring of mankind has communicated his name to mortal
and created creatures, to make them also fathers and begetters of others, thus
are they to their children like little gods, or in God his steed, which as it
should waken in fathers a care to be answerable to there name and place, in
wise and loving dealing with their children; so warnes it children of that
love, thankfulness and obedience, they ought every way unto their parents.

But such is the iniquity of this age, The unrighteous dealing of Children
with their parents in this age.
that many parents would willingly be content to forgo all the good they may
have by their children, upon condition they were quit of their evil. This
prodigal child failed in omissio^ of his duty, his fault was in the desertio^
of his father, we hear not that other ways he did him any evil, or was
vnreuerent toward him either in word or deed, like unnatural children now, who
are not ashamed to be mockers, cursers, and oppressors of their parents. A
fearful impiety, a beastly stupiditie, doubtless a forerunner of great
wrath to fall upon these, who fall into such sins. There was infirmities in
Noah, when Cham mocked his wickedness, but did he not for that incur the
curse? and think thou that the faults of thy parents shall excuse thine
unnatural contempt of them? The fearful punishment of undutiful children to
their parents.
Will thou look into the law, thou shall see an heavy penalty laid on every
injury, that either by word or deed thou do to thy father. Ex^. 21.17
He that curses his father or his mother shall die the death. Eu. 21.15
He that smites his father or his mother shall die the death. Ye shall fear
every man his father and his mother. Leu. 19.3
If any man have a son which is stubborn and disobedient, who will not
hearken to the voice of his father, nor the voice of his mother, Deuteronomy. 21.18.
etc. Then all the men of the city shall stone him with stones unto death. De.
27.16
Cursed be he that curses his father, or his mother. Pro. 30. 17.
The eye that mocketh his father, and despises the instruction of his mother,
let the ravens of the valley pick it out, and the young Eagles eat it.

And if we shall come down lower to look into nature, we shall find this vile
ingratitude condemned by her decree also, Filius cum patre quoquo modo ne
expostulet, Nazian. senten. Natures decree, co^demns such impiety.
cum hoc lex interdicat, tum ante leges ipsa natura. Let not a son any manner
of way contend with his father, seeing this is forbidden by the Law, and by
nature it self, before any Law was given, The young Ciconia (supposed by some
to be the Storke) which lappeth her wings about her parents when through age
they become naked, spoiled of their own feathers, feeds them, and carries
them from place to place upon their wings; may condemn, Basil. hex. hom 8.
said Basil, the barbarous inhumanity of unnatural children, who either will
forsake their parents in time of age, or then abide with them only to oppress
them, pulling from them their feathers, that is, the means of their life, to
make up themselves, these are not men, but beastly creatures like Lions, Hom 9.
and vipers which are borne to the destruction of their parents. Let these be
out of doubt, that with the same measure it shall be measured again unto
them, if a worse do not overtake them.

The other thing to be marked here is, Why this son is called the younger
son.
that this child who here casts off his fathers yoke is called the younger.
Does learn us that as Satan has his tentations for every age: So the age
whereupon he works most busily, and preuailes most mightily is youth. Satan
has tentations meet for every age of man.
The affections then being strongest, are impatient of correction, they will
not submit their shoulders to the yoke of God, Ier. 2.24
but like wild she Asses they snuff up the wind, and despise the hunter.
Therefore said Nazian. Nazien, orat. 46 in Ecclesiast. Amb. li. de viduis.
Inuentutis assecla est stultitia, as a Page follows his master: so folly
follows youth. Vicina lapsibus est adolescentia. It is the age whereunto men
are nearest and most ready to fall. In the Law God required unto himself the
first fruits, Leu. 2.14.
Wheat beaten out of the green ears, to signify, that God will be served
with the first fruits of our green and flourishing age: Youth should be
consecrat unto God
but alas, men remember not how far they dishonor the Lord, when their young
and lusty years they will give unto Satan, promising their old, whithered and
decrepit age, as good enough to serve the Lord. Such iniquity many times is
repaied with a proportionable plague, that because they will not give there
young years unto the Lord, he will not accept the service of their old age,
but cuts them away, (yea, which is most fearful in their sins) and lets
them never come to the honor of a hoarie head.

Sometimes it falls out that younger men are the Nazarites of God, A great
blessing when younger ones are Gods Nazarites. Amos 2. Lam. 3.27
and a great blessing where so it is; for it is good for a man to bear the
yoke in his youth. Then may a man see youth beautified with great graces, with
Chastity like Joseph's, with temperance like that of Daniel, who was not
delighted with the Kings delicates, with ripe understanding, and knowledge (a
rare grace in young years) like Samuel or Solomon; But alas, how small is the
number of Gods Nazarits, purer then the snow, Sam. 4.7.
whiter then the milk, who separate themselves from all filthynesse of the
flesh and spirit, 2. Cor. 7.1.
that they may adhere unto the Lord in regard of these whom justly I may call
Satan's Nazarites, But many of them may be justly termed Satan's Nazarites.
who dividing themselves from God do in most execrable manner deuote themselves
to Satan by drunkenness, harlatry, and deboshing in all kind of impiety.

Now, Sometime also aged men in years are found young in manners.
as these lusts of the flesh are noy some in youth, so also in old age, it is a
double sin and shame both, where men with grouth in years, have made no grouth
in knowledge and godliness, be what they will in regard of their years, if
they be not Morum gra^daeuitate maturi, aged in manners, Gregor, Mor. li 19
Philo. Bern. in Can.ser. 44.
they are, Longaeui pueri, they are but old children, in aquibus nullus succus
virilis sapientiae, maturitatis and forti^udinis, in whom there is no sap of
manly wisdom, maturity, nor strength. Athan. in ep.ad Tim.
Carnalibus desiderijs etiam senex ad inuentlem redit aetatem, for by carnal
desires an aged man shows himself to be but foolish and young, such were these
elder men that first vainly tempted Susa^^ to sin, and then wrongfully accused
her, Ignat. ad Magnesianos.
Ca. niciem vanam habentes, let such aged men know that in this Parable, they
are also figured by the younger son, These are worse then this young for^ome
child
and much more miserable then he, that where he in his younger years returned
to the Lord, they in their old days are yet under the servitude of sin,
carrying in a weak and impotent body, strong affections wickedly inclined unto
evil, wherein if they dye as they were borne, and ly down in the grave, their
bones being full of the sins of their youth, Job 20.11.
It had been better for them they had never been born.

But now leaving the letter, The pararable considered according to the sense,
lets us see our manifold faults, whereunto man by nature is subject Ephesians. 2.
we come to search the sense of the Parable. This Prodigal child is proposed
to us as a type of all the Children of disobedience, that in him we may see
what are the sins by which a man deuides himself from God, and draws upon
himself perdition unless he return again by unfeigned repentance.

First, I Ignorance of God makes a man to dissteeme of God.
then in that he is called a young man, there is noted in him want of knowledge
and experience as the ground and fountain of all his folly, he knew not as yet
what his father was worth unto him. And therefore he is not afraid to forsake
him. This is to teach us that none forsakes the LORD, but such as do know him
not, and understands not that in so doing, they forsake their own mercy. Jonas
2.8.
My people perishes for want of knowledge, says the Lord: and again, they
are a nation void of counsel, neither is their any understanding in them.
Deuteronomy. 32. 28.29.
Oh that they were wise, then they should understand this, they would consider
their later end. And our Savior when he came near Jerusalem, wept for it,
and said, Luke 19. 42.
Oh if thou had known, at the least in this thy day these things which
belong to thy peace. All these complaints make clear unto us that it is only
the ignorance of God which makes men to despise him and cast of his yoke. No
otherwise the^ beasts disesteem of most precious things, because they know them
not.
As beasts that know not the value of pearls care not to trample them under
their feet, or as young children laugh at the death of their parents, because
they know not for the present, what they loose thereby, but afterward remember
it with grief, so blinded man without remorse runs away from God, not
knowing what he lost by departing from the Lord, for he is light, and they
go into utter darkness that go from him: he is life, and they are but dead
who abide not in fellowship with him. Ps. 73.27.
For lo, they that withdraw themselves from thee shall perish, thou destroiest
all them that go a whoring from thee. Genesis 3.7.
But afterward, When their eyes are opened, they shall know that they are
naked, and that it was an evil and a bitter thing that they did forsake the
Lord. Ier. 2.9.
But such as have felt the sweetness of the Lord, and Tasteed how gracious he
is, the more they know him, Such as know the Lord can not be co^te^t to live
without the Lord. 2, K. 2.6.
the better they love him; and the nearer their souls cleave unto him without
separation, as Ehsha said to Elijah, as the Lord lives, and thy soul lives I
will not leave thee, so they went both together: so speaks unto the Lord
every soul that knows the Lord.

This is evident in elect Angels.
One example of this we have in the elect angels they are never weary to
behold his excellent majesty they find ever new matter of joy in his face when
they come forth as his messengers to execute his will upon the creatures, they
come so to us, that they depart not from him, Gregor. M^ral.
nunquam sie for as exe^^nt vt interne contemplationis gaudijs priuentur, for
they are full of eyes before and behind, they never so look to the creature,
that they lose sight of their Lord the Creator, In men also called and
sanctified by grace.
and so it is with his saints on earth, though they be far from that
perfection, yet prease they to it by daily imitation, that the will of God may
be done on earth by them as it is done in heaven by the holy Angels, every one
of them resolves for himself. Psalm. 73. 28.25.
It is good for me to draw near unto God, whom have I in heaven but thee, and
I have desired none in earth with thee, yea in comparison of the Lord all
things seem as dung unto them, Phil. 3.8. Math. 13. 44.
he is that precious treasure, they who once have found him are content to sell
all that they have to the end they may enjoy him.

2 Upon ignorance follow^s rebellion whereby man s^aks of Gods yoke and vsurps
his glory.
Secondly, in this Prodigal child is noted here, that natural rebellion which
is in all men, that they will not submit themselus to the will of God their
heavenly father, but will follow their own wills, for in this only stands the
question between God and man, Whose will should be done, where God with all
reason craves that his holy will may be done, man against all reason preferres
his will to the will of God. It is the only glory of almighty God, and his
proper privilege, which he will not give unto an other, that he is supreme
ruler and governor of all, having none above him, only apostat Angel and man
vsurps his glory, for man not content to have all all the cretures of God
subject unto him, refuse also to be subject unto God, and does what he can to
set his throne above the throne of God, and to subdue the will of God unto his
own.

This is that perverse imitation of GOD, which Satan taught our first parents.
Unto this rebellion Satan was the first tempter of man promising to make him
equal with God, which he no less foolishly then wickedly vsu^ped, A^gus. d
v^rb d. m
Peruersa enim haec imitatio dei, vt quemad^odum de^s non habet alium a quo
formetur, and regatur, it a and homo velit sua vti potestate: for this is a
perverse imitation of God, that as he has none above him who made him and
rules him: so man also will have none above him this is not the right way to be
like to him, but a pert aspiring to that which he should not, Man usurping more
then God gave him, lost that which he had, but attained not to more.
and never shall be able to attain unto. By this presumption man was not
advanced to a better, but in most miserable manner abased to a worse estate,
seeking more dignity then he had, he obtained not that which he sought but lost
that which he had, for every creature, Bern. de subject. u^s^re voluntaris.
velit, nolit subject a est creatori, whether it will, or will not, must be
subject to the creator. Aug de Corrept. and gra. 14.
Et de his qui faciunt quae non vult faci^ ipse quae vult, and o^ them who do
that which he will not, the Lord does that which he will, the pride of man may
empaire^ himself, but cannot preiudge the privilege of the almighty, Woe be
to him that contends with his maker, Es^ 45.9.
woe to every will which is against Gods will, for it shall never obtain that
which it wills, but shall for ever sustain that which it will not. As we
pray, 3 With these two is conioined hypocrisy, man in word calls God his father
when no such thought is in his heart.
so let us practice that Gods will may be done, and not our own.

The third evil noted here in this Prodigal, is his hypocrisy he calls him
in word Father, but in deed did not so account of him, he carried not toward him
the heart o^ achilde, this is a part of that poison, Pisid. (...)
where with Satan has infected our nature. C^^ deciperet, consiliarium se^
exhibebat, and s^^^laba^ amicum, (...) coming to our parents of purpose to be
a deceiuer, Satan a notable distembler.
he showed him self as if he were a counselor, a deadly enemy, yet
professing friendship; he has spou^ed this poison o^ hypocrisy into our
first Fathers to cover their wickedness with fair shows and sensiue, Omnem
illorum posteritatem haereditarium hoc virus infecit. Ber. in C^t. S^rm. 82.
This heritable poison has poisoned all their posterity. Quem enim dabis de
filijs Adam, qui quod est, non dico velit, sed vel patiatur se videri. Whom
will ye get among all the sons of Adam, who willingly desires, By hypocrisy
man couers the ^u^^ which he has, and simulate^ the good which he has not.
yea or can suffer himself to be known for such as he is.

And this evil of hypocrisy is then worst, when not only men by it will cover
the evil which they have not. Bet. in C^^t. ser. 66.
Boni videri, non esse muli non videri, sed esse volunt, they will be evil, and
yet will not seem to be evil, they will not be good and godly, and yet will
make a show as if they were good and godly. But be not dec^iued, Genesis 27.
God will not be mocked. Rebecca in subtle manner decked up Jacob under Esau
his apparel, and Isaac being olde^ and dim of sight, misknew him. Now Satan
more cunningly buske up Esau under Jacobs apparel. O how this leaven of of
hypocrisy has sowred the whole mass of mankind, But by no shadow of
dissimulation can the Lord be deceived.
the world is full of carnal men walking under the covering of Christians;
they have rejected the yoke of God, walking after their own lusts, and yet
with this forlorn child they will come and call God their father being indeed
but counterfets, they look as if they were Christians, but is our Lord like
Isaac, weak of sight to mistake them; No, no, they may mourn and shed many
tears they may confess their sins, they may put on sack cloth, they may
offer sacrifice: So Esau mourned, so Judas confessed, so Achab humbled himself
in dust, so Cain sacrificed, but by none of these shows will the Lord be
deceived.

Hipocrits co^uinced by their own words.
Out of thine own mouth shall thou be judged, o hipocrite. For if I be your
Father (as thou call me) where is my honor, Malac. 1.
and if I be your Master, where is my fear: 1. Pet. 1.17.
and again, If ye call him father, who without respect of persons judges
every man according to his works, pass the time of your dwelling here in
fear: But thy works convince thy tongue of a lie; thou call him Father, but
do not resemble his image: shall we think that God begets children to an
other image then his own. Yea, beside the evil of a wicked conversation, the
very show of a good profession shall also improve thee: A meet question for
hypocrites.
for tell me (hypocrite) why will thou not he indeed, which in show thou
would seem to be, if it be a good thing to appear to be godly, is it not
better to be godly indeed? and if thou think shame to appear to be of an
evil life, should thou not much more think shame to be evil indeed. Thus
as the fish Sepia is bewraied by the black color which she casts out to
cover her: so^ is the hypocrite convinced by the very show of godliness,
vnderwhich he hoped to have lurked.

And truly, The just and proportional punishment of hypocrites.
most just and fearful is that recompense, wherewith God paieth home such
hypocrites; for as they take the name of God in their mouth, when the love and
reverence of God is not in their hearts, so shall not they be in the heart of
God, Esa. 62.3.
as David was, nor graven on the palms of his hand, as his Church is, 1. Sam.
13.14.
Nor written in the beoke of life, as his elect are, but God shall have them in
his mouth, Ps. 69.28.
like lukewarm Laodicaeans to spew them out of it; Revel. 3.
their doom is set down by Jeremy, Will ye steal, Ier. 7.9.
murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal,
and walk after other Gods whom ye know not. And come and stand before me in
this house where my name is called upon before your eyes, and therefore will
cast you out of my sight.

The fourth evil pointed out here in him is a great presumption (...), Man is
so presumpteous by nature, as to make God a debtor unto him.
give me the portion of goods that befalls me. Men not regenerate by grace make
the Lord a debtor to them, not content to receive good things from the Lord,
they challenge, Patris bona quasi sibi debita, their fathers goods as debts dew
to them for their merits, and good deseruings. Doctrine of merit is learned in
the Scoole of Nature.
Of the which it is evident that the doctrine of merit is learned out of the
school of nature, wherein all proud Iust^tiars what ever show of external
piety they have, are but condisciples with this forlorn child, for if the
Lord should give unto man the portion that is due unto him, Psa. 11.6.
then he should rain sire and brimstone upon him, for that is the portion of
his cup. Thou art never able to recompense the Lord for the good he has
given thee already, and how then shall thou deserve that which he has
promised. Is there any comparison between that which thou give the Lord, and
that which thou gettest from him: for from thee that have no more he will
graciously accept the sacrifice of one cuppefull of cold water, or a tribute of
tears, No proportion betvveene our work and the Lords revvard.
and shall thou for this brag of thy merit, and make him a debtor to thee of
eternal life. Si quis a diebus Adami vsque ad consummationem saeculi, Macar.
hom. 15.
viueret, and fortiter contra Satanam pugnaret, non posset tamen, tantam
gloriam promereri, quato minus qui tam breui tempore militat. If a man should
live from the days of Adam to the end of the world, and strongly fight against
Satan, yet were he not able to merit so great a glory, far less are we able
to do it, who so short a space are militant on earth. The vanity of such as
trust in their merits, is discovered. Ber. in annunt. Mar. Sermon. 1.


Our reioicing says the Apostle is the testimony of our conscience; this
testimony, says Bernard, consists in these three. Necesse enim primo omniu^
credere quod remissionem peccatorum habere non potes, nisi per indulgentiam
Dei. For first of all, thou must believe that thou can not obtain remission
of sins except only by the indulgence and mercy of God,. Deinde quod nihil
prorsus habere queas operis boni, nisi and hoc dederit ipse. Secondly, that
thou art not able to do any good work except God give it unto thee. For we are
not of our selves sufficient to think a good thought Postremo, 2. Cor. 3.5
quod aeternam vitam nullus potest operibus promereri nisi gratis, detur and
illa. And last, that no man is able by good works to merit eternal life, it is
the free gift of God. If we do any good, let us say with the Apostle Not I but
the grace of God in me. If we get any good, ascribe it not to our merits but
let the praise of it always be returned to his mercies.

Fifthly, 5 Man naturally esteems more of the comfort of the creature, then
favor of the creator.
that he seeks a portion of his fathers goods, but not his fathers favor and
blessing, represents to us, the earthly minds of naturalists, who prefer the
gifts of God to God himself. all creatures that the Lord made, he made them
for man, and man for himself; but this is a fearful contempt of God, and
vile disestimation of his majesty, when the creature which God has subjected
unto man in the heart of man is preferred unto God, and better loved then God
himself, Genesis 3^
as Euah for the love of an apple lost the love of the Lord; Ge. 25.32.
and Esau for a mess of pottage sold his birthright which has annexed the
blessing, and the Gadarans, counted their swnine more precious then the Son
of God Christ Jesus.

It is written of them who tame the Tigre, The folly of man in so doing
declared by an example.
that when they have taken away the young one, knowing that incontinent they
will be pursued by the old, they set looking glasses in the way by which they
fly, whereunto when the old Tigresse comes, and sees some representation of
themse^ues, lingreth about them a good space, deceived by the shadow and
detained in a vain hope to recover their young again, and in the mean time
the hunter most speedily posts away with his pray.

So deals Satan with the men of this world, he castes before them the
deceitful baits of worldly pleasures and profits, being indeed no other
thing but shadows and representations of good; yet are men so delighted with
these that they dote about them, having no care to pursue their enemy for
recovery of that image of God which Satan has stolen from them. Not without a
sore and unrecoverable loss to themselves. Aug. epist. 162. Pitiful blindness
so to love the world that for it a man should lose himself.
Cum vsque adeo hominibus charus est hic mundus, vt sibi ipsis vilescant, When
this world is so much esteemed of man, that to obtain it, he debaseth, yea he
loses himself, living like a drudge of the earth, and a vile slave to every
creature, having a reasonable soul captiued under subjection to unreasonable
creatures. A most pitiful estate, Chris^an Mat. ho^. 9.
(...), then the which to speak with Chrysostom, what can befall more shamfull
and dishonorable to man, for if we overcome not sensible things, how shall we
encounter with insensible enemies, (...) or how shall we subdue
principalities, powers, and spiritual wickedness.

But the children of God, It is far otherwise with the godly.
illuminate with his light renewed by his grace, having there eyes opened in a
part to see that high prise of the calling of God, Phi. 3.13.
and the riches of that glorious inheritance prepared for the Saints. begins
to account with the Apostle the most excellent things of this world to be but
(...) dung in respect of our Lord Jesus Christ, and have a ready answer to give
their adversary when he tempts them with the love of the world, what is it
thou can offer to me comparable to that which thou would steal from me.
When we come to age of perfect men we laugh at those things we were wont to
do when we were children. As they grow in the knowledge of Christ: so they
increase in a contempt of the world
They build to themselves in the streets houses of shells, stones, clay, and
such like, wherein they delight for a time, no less then wiser and more
ancient men do, in the building of their sumptuous Palaces, but they rush to
the ground as soon as they are raised, yea, albeit they could continue, yet
are they unprofitable, and when we come to riper understanding, we set light
by them as childish trifles of no importance: so is it with the child of God
as he grows in the age of Christ, he grows also in a contempt of the world,
and all the perishing pleasures thereof he will have nothing for his portion
that cannot continue with him, all the works of God cannot content him, the
desire of the soul is upon the Lord, to enjoy him.

And truly happy is that soul, The soul of the godly compared to Jacobs
tabernacle Ambr de sugasaeculi cap. 5.
which is like unto the house of Jacob. Beata anima quae est instar domus
Iacobi, in qua nulla simulachra, nulla effigies vanitatis. Wherein there is no
image, no representation of vanity. For doubtless it is a miserable thing so
to be bewitched with the shadows of good, that we lose the substance.
Fugiamus hine vbi nihil est, vbi inane est omne quod magnisicum putatur. Let us
fly from this world, wherein there is nothing but vanity, yea that which is
most magnificke after trial is found most impotent. Ibid.
Nihil siquidem a somni vanitate dissert rerum praesentium sigura, sieve illae
tristes sint, sieve prosperae. The most excellent shows of this life are but
dreams, which may affect for a time, but do vanish so soon as the man
awaketh, Exhortation to a contempt of this word.
let such as know no better, and have no hope, but in this present life rejoice
in that which they have, let us endeavor to that which is to come. Oh (says
David) if I had the wing of a Dove, Ps. 55.6.
then would I flee away and rest. So long as we abide fixed in our affection to
the earth we shall find no rest. All the works done under the Sun, Eccl.
1.14.
(said Solomon) are but vanity and vexation of spirit. He searched all, he
found them so, what then? Let us go above the Sun, let us fly upward
toward the Lord, let us go up after the Eagle, who has ascended on high,
Can. 2.10.
he calls and cries upon us to follow him. Arise my love, my f^ire one, and
come thy way. Why linger we? what should we do here. Now the Lord, who calls
us, draw us, that we may run after him, so shall we find joy and peace, and
rest unto our souls.

So he divided unto them his substance.
Why the Lord suffers for a time his children to follow their own will.
That the Father here in this Parable gives to his child that which he
seeks and lets him go his way, figures unto us how God for a time leaves his
children to themselves, suffering them to do what they will, not of purpose to
let them perish in sin; but that by the experience of the bitter fruit of
sin, he may draw them out of their sins, and make them the more humble in
themselves when they look to their former folly, and the more thankful to God
who of his mercy has recovered them. Seeing earthly parents will not give a
Scorpion to their children when they seek bread, shall we think our heavenly
father will do it? No indeed, If he permit them to fall into sin, it is for
a respect which God has to good, which out of evil he can work to his own
glory and their salvation. Potentius and melius esse iudicans etiam de malis
benefacere, Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 22, c. 1.
qua^ mala esse non sinere. For so wonderfully wise and good is our God that
even by sin he can destroy sin in his own, as by the bussets of Satan he
subdued pride in the Apostle Saint Paul. Ephesians. 2.3.
Thus the Apostle considering how he had his conversation in time past in
fulfilling the lusts of his flesh, To wit, that after their conversation they
may know how much they are bound to his grace.
no less then other children of disobedience and wrath; and that he was a
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and an oppressor, does so much the more magnify
the Lord who received him to mercy, whose grace was exceeding abundant toward
him with faith and love in Christ Jesus. 1. Tim. 1. 13.14.
For in this that elect men before their calling, walk with the reprobate in
the course of disobedience, it manifestly appears that it is not by nature,
but by grace that they are saved, and the Lord in making a difference by his
grace, where there was no difference by nature, vindicates unto himself the
praise and glory of salvation in all such as are saved.

For in respect of nature there is no difference bevveene the elect etc repro^
bate, till grace make it.
And this grace of God declared upon his own shall the better appear if we
consider the elect and reprobate to be like unto two men, walking in one way,
with one mind, of one purpose to one proposed end, and God suddenly comes in
and sundres them, causing the one to come back again, letting the other go
forward till he fall into the pit: so in his just judgments he gives the
wicked up to their own hearts desire, Romans 1.26.
he lets the^ fulfill the cup and measure of their iniquity: he lets down the
loose reins unto them, and suffers them without controlment to do what they
will. Then man commits sin with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19.
and drinks in iniquity like water, Job 15.16.
making out a just ditty of his own damnation. Aug. Mar. epist. 5.
Peccata cum impunita dimittit Deus, tunc punit infestius. When the Lord lets
sin be unpunished, then he punishes most severely. Vides quia tunc magis
irascitur Deus, cum non irascitur. God is then most angry when he he is not
angry. Let us say with Bernard, Miserceor dia^ hanc nolo, Ber* in Ca^t. Se^m.
42.
such a mercy I will not have: or rather, from such a misery the Lord deliver
us, that he never suffer us to go on in the course of our sins till we
perish.

So not long after.
This younger son as ye see, Man left to himself cannot stand long.
being left unto himself, incontinent manifests his own weakness, and in
him all of us may see what a fearful thing it is to be forsaken of God and
left unto our selves, for then quickly we become a prey unto our enemy. As a
staff if a man takes his hand from it, falls incontinent to the ground: so man
if he be not sustained by grace, cannot stand in a good estate. All the
benefits which God created for Adam in six days, he lost them in six hours.
Proof of this in Adam, his fall should make us humble.
Augustine and Theophilact thinks that he fell the sixth hour. Thomas Aquinas
that he fell the ninth hour others the twelfe, most of all agree that he fell
the same day he was made. What cause then has his sinful posterity to
distrust themselves and to pray earnestly with David. Direct me in the path of
thy Comm^ndements, Psalm. 119.
stablish me that I may live, and let no iniquity have dominion over me.

When he had gathered all.
This is also a point of the cursed corruption of our nature^ that when God is
best unto man, Man commonly is most undutiful to God, when that is most
beneficial to him.
then man is worst, and most unthankful to his God. For this, the Lord
complained on the Israelites, That as they increased, H^s. 4.7.
they sinned. As Pharao when the plague was upon him spoke, Genesis 9.27.
and looked somewhat like a penitent man, but being relieved of it, like iron
taken out of the fire, returned to his wonted hardness, so natural men when
they are pinched and straited with poverty, sickness, or any other sort of
affliction they make then some show of godliness, but when God changes there
estate and gives them prosperity and health, it becomes their ruin. Pro. 1.32.
the prosperity of fools destroies them: and their table becomes a snare unto
them: Psa. 69.22
as is daily seen by lamentable experience, for then are the hearts of men,
most empty of thankfulness, and their mouths most filled with the blasphemies
of Gods name when their tables and their stomachs are most replenished with
Gods benefits, most like this forlorn son, who then went away from his
father, when his father was most beneficial to him and had given him his
portion.

He took his journey into a far Country.
What is meant by the far Country in this parable
We have here, first, to consider what is this far country: and next, how this
Prodigal child went unto it. This country is said to be far, not in regard
of the distance of place: the Lord measures the earth in his fist, and no part
of it is farther from the Lord then an other. Psa. 46.12
David knew this, Ps. 139.7
and therefore said he, Every part of the world is a like near to the Lord.
Where away shall I sly from the presence of of the Lord. Jonas at the first
considered it not in the darkened cogitations of his mind, he took his
journey from Ioppe to Tarsus, thinking so to fly from the presence of the
Lord, but he found himself deceived, for even in the Sea did God erect a
tribunal for judgment, and made him there to find the presence of the Lord,
where he looked least for it. Genesis 4.16.
Cain also went out from the presence of the Lord, but go where he would God
sat in his conscience. This far country is not to be estimat by distance of
place.


This far country then is to be estimate by the distance of man his will and
assections from the Lord, this is, Ber. parab. de prod.
Longinqua regio dissimilitudinis, for then is a man farthest from God, when
he is most unlike unto God: so the Lord himself expounds it. What iniquity
have your Fathers found in me, Ier. 2.5.
that they are gone far from me, walking after vanity, and are become vain.
And the Apostle to the Ephesians, But by distance of affection from the Lord.
comparing their former estate by nature with that which now they were renewed
by grace he says. Ye which once were far off, are now made near by the
blood of Jesus Christ. Whereof we see it is sin that makes us to be far from
the Lord, grace again that brings us near unto him. Otherwise Satan is not
nearer the Lord in the air, then in the helles, and the wicked no nearer the
Lord in the Temple, then in the tents of wickedness: so no longinquity nor
distance of place, makes men further from him.

The superstition of will-worshippers binds the Lord to particular places at
the pleasure of their conception, No place makes a man nearer the Lord then
another.
but it is not so. Aug. ad frat. her. Ser. 27.
Locus non facit sanctos, sed operatio sancta, and locum sanctificat and nos,
peccauit angelus in Caelo, peccauit Adam in Paradiso, si locus hominem bear
possit, nec homo, nec angelus dignitate sua corruissent. It is not the place
which sanctifies men, but men by holy exercises, sanctify both the place and
themselves, the Angels sinned in heaven, Adam sinned in Paradise, if the place
might have blessed the creature, neither man nor Angel should have fallen from
their dignity. To this purpose Gregory Nyssen disputing the question,
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem for sanctification is but a superstious conceit.
whether pilgrimage to Jerusalem sanctify a man or not? answered it does not.
Many reasons he gives, among which this is one, Greg. Nissen.
Loci mutatione ad deum non acceditur, sed vbi locorum fueris, ad te veniet
dom^nus, si modo tale in venerit animae tuae diuerrium vt possit in te
inhabitare dominus. By the change of place men come not unto God, but in what
place soever thou be God shall come unto thee, if so be the harbor of thy
soul be such that God may dwell in it. Not warranted by the journey of
Gregory Niss^n to Jerusalem.
And it being objected unto him, that himself had iournied to Jerusalem, he
answers, and tells them how, and upon what occasion, not to acquire any
sanctity by so doing, but that at the will of the Emperor Theodose and upon
his charges he went to reform the Churches of Arabia, and thereafter composed
a scisme that had entered in Ierusalems Church, but wherewithal he protests.
Nec hoc itinere imminuta est, fides nostra, nec aucta. That by this journey,
neither was his faith empaired, nor augmented. For I believed said he the
incarnation of Christ before I saw Bethleem, and the resurrection of Christ,
before the sight of the sepulcher, his ascension also before that I saw the
mount of Olives.

To return then, They are nearest the Lord, who are likest unto him, and be
the contrary.
this country far from God, is not to be estimate by the elevation of the
Pole, or our distance from it, which way the distance of people from people are
measured on earth, but by the disposition of our hearts, as they are in
similitude with God: so are we accounted far or near unto the Lord, and
hereby shall we try it. Things that are far off were they never so precious,
and excellent, either else we see them not at all, or then they seem far
less to us then they are. The Sun is many times more then the earth, yet do
we account it less then our selves. The reason is that it is far from us
when men travail so far to the South, How a man may discern whether he be
near or far from the Lord, by two tokens.
that the North pole in there sight comes near to the earth, and at length the
sight thereof is intercepted from them by the earth, it is a sure argument they
are far from it: even so when men esteem the incomprehensible majesty of God
who by infinite degrees surmounts the beuty of the Sun to be but small in
their eyes, or when in their imagination they draw down the Lord to assilate,
or compare him to any thing in earth, 1 Such as are near him, esteem him a
great God.
or when in their affections the earth coms in between their souls and the
sight of the Lord, and the love of the earth preuailes, it is an argument such
miserable souls are far from the Lord.

Look then if your eyes be set to behold him; and if ye can say with the
Prophet David. I set the Lord always in my sight, Psalm. 16.
look how your affections account of him Is he your light, your life, your
joy, your portion? is the delight of your soul upon him? 2 They feel his
effectual virtue in themselus
is again the power of his virtue effectual in you, that as the sun
ascending brings a flourishing spring, so by it ye find a reviving of your
hearts to his holy love, the dead winter, the cold season, the hard, frostie
and barren heart goes away, and the soul warmed with the love of God, begins
to budde, to flourish and bring out fruit. Then may ye have this comfort^ that
the Lord has drawn near unto you, and ye also are become near unto the Lord.

Not by their feet but by affections go men from the Lord.
And this also serves to clear the second point proposed by us. How is it that
a man goes, or comes to the Lord, to wit, non pedibus, sed affectibus, not by
feet of the body, but by affections of the soul. So this young man Egressus
de paradiso bonae conscientiae, Ber. parab. de prod.
per campos licentiae, per nemora luxuriae, per paludes carnalis
concupiscentiae, per fluctus secularium curarum caepit vagari. Departing out of
the Paradise of a good conscience, goes a wandering through the fields of
liberty, through the woods of luxury, through the lakes of carnal
concupiscence, through the floods of worldly cares, Not resting in one sin,
but from one falling into an other. Erranti enim nullus terminus. It is much
easier to stop the beginnings of sin, then to stay the course of it if it once
break forth. Nazian. Orat.
Sicut lapide^ initio inhibe re facilius est, qua^ motu^ retorquere. 7
Multiplication of sins is like multiplicatio^ of steps which at length make a
long journey.
As it is less labor to stay a stone before it be moved, then turn it back
again when it is in the tumbling. Thus then goes a man away further and
further from the Lord by multiplication of his sins, as a man by
multiplication of his steps goes a further away from the place wherein he was.
It should therefore be our first care to beeware of the beginnings of sin,
and the next to beeware we multiply not our sin, least by so doing we go
far from the Lord.

And there he wasted all his goods.
There is the fruit of his departure from his father. The fruit of a man's
departure from God.
A man that will forsake the Lord, and refuse to be governed by him, can
neither keep himself nor yet the good things which God has given him. The
service of sin is a costly service, all the portion of goods thou have, is
not sufficient for it. Sin is a profused and unthrifty spending of all that
God has given thee, yea of thy body and soul also at the length. Unto every
man God has given his own portion of gifts, of body and mind, of these also
which are external, profanely called by Ethniques, Fortunae bona, will thou
abide with the Lord, and serve him, he shall teach thee to use his gifts, The
service of sin is very coastly and expensiue.
to his glory and thy good; for the service of the Lord is easy, honorable,
profitable, nothing is wasted, nothing is lost, that thou spendest in it. But
if thou will forsake the Lord, experience shall prove that no good thing he
has given thee, will bide with thee. Thy years go away in vanity, the
strength of thy body consumed in the way of iniquity, thy quick ingenie, thy
memory, and all the gifts of the mind are spent, without any fruit to thy
self, or to others, for the present time, or the time to come. Thus all being
wasted thou shall in the end be ashamed of thy self when thou look back
to thy former ways.

That which me^ gather wickedly shall be scattered vainly.
The word our Savior here uses, (...) signifies to scatter, there is not
long (ye see) between his gathering and his scattering in the beginning of this
verse, he gathers his portion, and in the end thereof he scatters it, that
which men gather with offense of God shall not fail to be scattered ere it be
long. Carnal covetousness made Judas take from the high Priest thirty pieces
of silver, the wages of iniquity, to betray Christ; but a tormenting conscience
forced him shortly to cast it back again. No better shall it be with them,
who gather where they should not, They shall vomit their substance, Job 20.15.
even as a stomach casts out that disdainfully which wickedly and
superfluously men have ingested into it. Though there were none but themselves
to do it.
Worldlings may enlarge their desire as the bell and death which cannot be
satisfied, but against them shall the parable be taken up, Abac. 2.
Ho, he that increases that which is not his? how long? and he that loadneth
himself with thick clay. Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite
thee? and awake that shall stir thee, and thou shall be their prey? Yea
truly, though there were no Chaldean, nor Sabaean, no oppressor, no robber to
do it, thy own hand shall scatter that which thou have wickedly gathered.

It is lamentable to see the vain security of worldlings, Worldlings delight
in abundance of wealth as if their life were in it.
they delight in abundance, as if their life were in it; when they have, they
look never to want; when they die, they dispone with confidence as if their
decrees were certain, and God would not revoke them. In their legacies they
leave their souls unto God and their goods unto men, as best pleases them.
But consider not with what warrant they do this. For as to the first, How
foolish they are in making their legacies
how can thou be assured that GOD in death will receive thy spirit: seeing
thou in thy life would never give him the reasonable service thereof. And as to
the second, how often is it seen that God annuls the decrees concerning the
distribution of their goods: that either their portion perishes before
themselves, or soon after them, and what they leave unto one, God disposes it
to an other, crossing them in the same thing wherthey offended him, that as
they gathered not according to Gods will, so God scatters and distributs it not
according to their will.

Verse. 14
Now when he had spent all.
After the description of his sin follows a description of mercy.
Hitherto we have heard his sin described, and the degrees thereof. Now
follows a description of that miserable estate whereunto his sin carrieh
him.

Spent all.
He sought a portion of his fathers goods, 3. sorts of goods bestovved by God
upon men.
he sought not his fathers favor and blessing. Now all is spent. There are
two sorts of goods that God distributes to men: the one I call his moueables:
the other I call, the goods of the permanent inheritance. The first sort he
gives indifferently to all men: The second sort he reserues for his own
children, and there is the difference between the earthly and heauenportion,
the one is spended by using, the more ye take of it, the less ye have, they
refresh not us unless they be diminished in themselves, if we be increased
by them, they are empaired by us: Spiritual goods of the best sort can not be
spent.
but the goods of our heavenly inheritance are not spended by using, the more
we use them, the more we are increased by them, and the more also are they
increased by us, by frequent prayer we learn to pray more fervently, from the
beginning of faith we make progress to the fullness of faith, our light, our
love, our life, once begun have their own increasings till they come to
perfection, but they can never be lost nor wasted by using. It cannot be good
for us to rest in that which decaies by serving us: if we love eternity, and
seek to be blessed for ever, let us weane our hearts from perishing things and
make choice of that portion which endures for ever.

There arose a dearth.
Pleasures of sin ends in most fearful pains.
The end of sinful pleasures is pain, the wealth of worldlings ends in
fearful want. As the image which Nabuchadnezer saw in his dream, had an head
of gold, but feet of clay: so the glorious show of this miserable life of
sinful men concludes with shame. The plenty which Egypt had in seven years
was eaten up by the seven years of famine following it. The pleasant river of
Jorden is at length swallowed up by the salt Sea or loach of Sodom. It shall be
executed upon all the wicked which theatned against cursed Babel. The apples
after which thy soul lusted, Reu. 18.14.
all the fat and excellent things are departed from thee, and thou shall find
them no more. There the wine shall dry up and the Fig tree shall decay,
Joel. 2.12.
the Pomegranate, the Palm tree, and the Aple tree, all the trees of the field
shall wither away from the sons of men. Then shall arise a dearth and
fearful famine to them, when all the objects of their sinful delights shall
be taken from them. The present pain of the godly end in pleasures.
Oh that men were wise to think upon their end, how comfortless will their
state be, who because they will not comfort themselves in God shall at length
be banished from the presence of his glory, and deprived of the comfort of all
his cretures. It is far otherwise with the godly, their murning shall end in
comfort. the end of their labor is rest, their light and momentany afflictions
shall be swallowed up by that eternal weight of glory, let us never drink with
the wicked in the cup of their sinful pleasures, the dregs thereof is
intolerable bitterness. Psalm.
Waters of a full cup are wrong unto them for the present, but want and
fearful famine shall overtake them. Not so much as a drop of water shall be
given them to comfort them, and let us never refuse to bear the rebuke of
Christ, Heb. 13.13
the end whereof is joy unspeakable and glorious. 1. Pet. 1.


He began to be in necessity.
Comfort of the Creatures now blinds the wicked that cannot they see their
misery.
This man was miserable before, but he felt not his misery till now. And in him
we see an image of worldlings, who albeit they be most miserable in regard they
are strangers from the life of God, yet do they not know their misery, till
through the want of earthly comforts they be redacted to necessity. So long as
they enjoy Gods creatures, they feel not what loss it is to want himself the
vain show of the creaturs so bewitches them, that they are not touched with
the misery of their fearful deuorceme^t from God; and this is the very cause
why reprobate men ordained to wrath, who in hell shall mourn continually
(where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth,) Math. 22.
do upon earth spend their days in laughing and vain reioieing. The reason,
I say, is partly because the judgment due to their sins is restrained from
them by the patience of God, the vial of his wrath is not as yet poured out
upon the^, But their eyes shall be opened when the object of their pleasures
shall be taken from the^.
and partly, because the use of his creatures which belongs not to them, is of
his goodness licentiate to them, but when the objects of these pleasures shall
be taken from them, when the earth shall refuse to bear them, and the Sun
shall no more shine upon them, when all the creatures shall forsake them, and
none of them render either comfort, or service to them; then shall they be in
necessity, and then woeful misery shall be manifested to them.

And of this, And this they may learn if they could mark it by present
experience.
some taste wicked men may have out of their present experience, if they could
observe it. For in the midst of their worldly pleasures, when by eating and
drinking they are filling their bellies, when the harmony of music delights
their ears, and the company of solatious friends refreshes them: even then,
faith Solomon, Pro. 14.13
In laughing their heart is sorrowful: yet does not the terour of an evil
conscicience trouble them, unless God intend it against them, as he did
against Beltazar, Dan. 5.6.
But when company is gone, and they are solitary, when lights are put out and
they left in darkness, when Musical instuments are silent, then conscience
begins to speak, Nunquam enim conscientia oculatior, qua^ in tenebris. For
conscience sees best in darkness, and speaks most lowdly in siilence, then
their inward fears proceeding from her just accusations forewarnes them of a
more fearful estate abiding them if they could consider it.

Verse. 15.
Then he went and claue to a Citizen of that country.
They who will not serve the Lord shall serve a worse master.
He refused to serve his Father, and now he is forced to serve a worse master.
This is it which the Lord threatened to his people Israel, Psalm. 137.
I will put your neck under the yoke of the King of Babel, And ye shall know
what difference there is between my service and the service of other Kings, and
Lords of the earth, and so indeed they found it, when they were carried into
captivity, and sat mourning at the rivers of Babel, they remembered what a
sweet liberty they had lost, when sitting peaceably in Sion they were wont to
sing the praises of the living God. And let it stand for a warning to us that
we cast not off the yoke of the Lord our God: for if we refuse to serve the
Lord we shall be compelled to serve others, whose wages shall be found
ungracious at the length. O quam multos dominos habet ille, Ambros.
qui vnum non habet. O how many masters has that man, who has not God for his
master.

But now we have to see who this is that here is styled a Citizen, Citizens of
the country far from God, are Satan and the reprobates.
the far country as we heard, is the region of sin: this Citizen represens
as Ambrose expounds it. The prince of darkness, with his cursed confederats,
reprobate angels and men, they are called Citizens in the kingdom of sin,
because not only have they sinned, but they abide and continue in sin, they
dwell in it, and will not come out of it. These are the two fearful sins of
apostate Angels; Presumption, 2. fearful sins of Apostate Angels.
and Obstinacy, by presumption they fell, obstinacy holds them impenitent, that
they cannot rise, yea they have not so much as a desire of reconciliation, but
are obdurat in a perpetual rebellion against God, despising mercy, because
they know they shall never obtain it, trembling at judgment, which they know
they cannot eschew. Therefore they are not called soiourners, or pilgrims in
that country, which is far from God, but citizens, because they make
perpetual reside^ce in it. A most cursed and unhappy condition, Peccare
humanum est, perseuerare in peccato diabolicum. To sin is common to all men,
to persevere in sin is a property of Devils and reprobates.

To clear this, Two cities Jerusalem and Babel compared together.
let us compare these two Cities and there inhabitants together, Jerusalem and
Babel; for under one of these two societies, is comprehended the whole mass of
mankind. Citizens in the one are all the elect of God, Citizens in the other,
are the reprobate. And yet it is to be marked, Citizens of Jerusalem, are
sometimes also in Babel, but trari^ not in it.
that sometimes the Citizens of Jerusalem are found in the streets of Babel,
the elect for a time may walk in the way of the wicked, so Paul in the way of
Idolatry, David in the way of adultery, Noah in the way of drunkenness, Lot in
the way of incest; but they are in it as soiourners, not as citizens, they
dwell not in Babel, but at the voice of the Lord come out of it, and are drawn
home to Jerusalem.

Sometime again, Babels Citizens are sometime also in Jerusalem, but tarry not
in it.
ye shall see many citizens of Babel walking in the streets of Jerusalem,
wicked and impenitent men making a show, as if they were religious; but their
heart is not upright before God. 2. Tim. 3.5.
Having a show of godliness they deny the power thereof. They taste of the
powers of the life to come, Heb. 6.5.
by the hearing of the word, but digest it not in their hearts by faith, their
souls feed not upon it, they are like the Corn that gowes up in the blade,
but comes never to the fruit, because it took no root. These are not citizens
in Jerusalem, but soiourners; they are carried out of it like chafe, with
every kind of vanity, their goodness vanishes like the morning dew, they are
weary at length of Jerusalem, 2. Pet. 2.22.
and go home again to Babel, like dogs returning to their vomit and swine
to their puddle again.

And he sent him to his Farm to feed swine.
In this part of the Parable is figured unto us, How Satan abasheth his
captives to most vile servitude.
how the service wherein Satan imploies his miserable captives is vile and
dishonest. What baser imploiment can be, then to take the son of a freeman
borne unto honor, and make him a swine heard? for the sow is a filthy and
dishonest beast, that likes the puddle better then the palace, and counts more
of the dung then of the most precious pearls; and yet this is Satan's dealing
with all these wretches, that come under his commandment, he waltereth them
in the depth of filthy and unclean cogitations and affections, he plungeth
them in the stinking puddle and mire of sin, An image thereof thereon in
Isreal's bondage under Pharao.
abusing them far worse then Pharao did the Israelites of God; for he
oppressed their bodies compelling them to work in brick and clay, an
unseemly servitude indeed for so honorable a people, yet he could not detain
their minds from sighing and crying to God for the bondage. But Satan
oppresses his captives in such sort that they have no mind of God, no thought
of liberty, no weariness of the bondage, no desire of any heavenly or
excellent thing is in them, they are beastly in all their motions, affections,
and actions. O fearful exchange that a man once made to the image of God, and
to rule all the creatures of God should so far mismake himself, as to become
a companion to the beasts, and a slave unto Satan.

And he would feign have filled his belly with the husks.
This now is the highest degree of his misery that having offered to serve in
the most vile servitude, Satan his best delicates are shadows without
substance.
he cannot get meat for his service; yea not so much as the husks of acornes
to fill his belly withal. The word (...), signifies a little horn, as also
the skin or codde, or hull, within which is the kirnell. Now so great was this
man's penury, that not only he could not get the kirnell of any fruit
whereupon he might sustain his miserable life, but could not get so much as
the husk or shell wherewith to fill his belly. By this kind of speech the
Lord will let us see, that the best delicates which Satan has to give his
captives are shadows without substance, husks without kernels, burdenable, when
they are eaten, no way profitable but as to inward pleasure, solid joy, or any
thing that is truly good, Satan has it not to give.

He is but a iugler and a false deceiuer, What a iugler and deceiuer Satan is.
promising much when he tempts, performing nothing. O pitiful blindness that
our souls should be deceived with such a seducer, and that other men's loss
cannot learn us to become wise. He promised much to Adam and Euah, Ye shall
be as Gods. But what got they. He bewitched this prodigal child with great
hopes, but they euanished and proved vain; and still he abuses the world
after the same manner. Ever from the beginning he has proved a lier, yet men
will credit him, he is (...) an alluring Serpent, and that in most miserable
manner. It is true which Pisida says of him, Pisid. (...).
(...), he allures us to serve him for nothing, without giving any kind of
good unto us.

For if a man shall cast his eyes on the multitude, How miserably Satan
intertaines his guests.
what shall ye see? Do they not dote after Satan's allurements: Psalm. 4.
like Israel doting after Ashur and Egypt, loving lies and following vanities?
Some deceived one way, and some another, but all delighting in things that
profit not. Naturalists write that the Chamelion a little spotted beast,
neither eats nor drinks but lives on the air. The Ostrich eats iron and is
able to digest it. The Viper lives on venomous things. The Sow on filth, and
vile uncleanness. No better, yea, not so good as these are Satan's banqueters,
some he feeds as he did Ephraim with the wind. Hos. 12. Some he feeds like
the Chamelion, some like the Osstrich, and some as the Viper, etc.
Men vain glorious who wax proud in themselves for the blast of another man's
breath Others, like the Ostrich whose hearts ar^ delighted with their treasures
of silver and gold, as if it were a portion meet for the soul of man: but they
cannot digest it. They shall vomit the substance, Job 20.15
which they have devoured. Some again are worse, who with the Viper, live upon
hatred, envy, maliciousness, loving all such things as may destroy. These
also are Satan's delicats which nourishe not, but rent, and consume the belly
which receives them. But most part of his miserable guestes feed like the sow,
they hanch up all sort of uncleanness with greediness they take it for food,
but death is in their pot. 2. Ki. 4.20


Cyp. 8.2. epist.

2. The svvetnesse of sin is sensible but the poiso^ secret.


Malorum blandientium virus occultum est and arridentis nequiliae facies laeta
instar veneni poculum esse videtur, quod sumitur, vbi epotaueris pernicies
hausta grassatur. The poison of slartering sin is secret, the face of it
smiling, it seems to be a cup of pleasant drink, but when it is drunk out it
destroieth. I^b. 20.12
Wickedness was sweet in his mouth, he sauoured it, and would not forsake it,
but the gall of Aspes was in the midst of him.

But this does more augment their misery that by no service of Satan can they
find satisfaction to themselves, The more a man seru ^s the pleasures of
sin, the less is he satiate with the^.
even when they enjoy the objects of their sins, yet have they not their
desired joy and contentme^t, He would feign have filled his belly with the
husks, and he could not, says the parable. What then? can not the hunger of
sin, begotten satisfy? No doubtless, no more then the grave, or the fire,
or the barren womb, give them as ye please still they call for more. Will
covetousness, will concupisence say ho, it is enough? No, though thou could
live Methusalems days, and had the strength of all bodies into one body,
the more thou serve the pleasures of sin, the less shall thou be satiate by
them. O miserable servitude, wherein do what thou will, an insatiable hunger
still oppresses thee. Every wicked man by unhappy experience shall at length
prove in himself, that which now he hears in this Prodigal.

Verse. 17.
Then he came to himself again:
Now follows the The repentance of the Prodigal.
second and most comfortable part of the Prodigal, wherein is set down how
this Prodigal son returns home again to his Father, we have all been
like him in wandering, happy are they who are also like him in returning. A man
in his sins is as a mad man or one out of his wits.
The word whereby his repentance is expressed is worthy observation, (...) he
came to himself. What was he then before, when he was in his sins? Naught
else, but a man out of himself, out of his wits, as repentance in the
Scriptures is frequently described to be a returning unto God: so also a
returning to our selves, return to your mind O transgressors, ^sa 46.8.
Gregor. M^r^l. l. 2 When he r^pents he comes to himself again.
in true repentance. Electorum corda ad ^eredeunt, the hearts of the elect
return to themselves, for a man going from the Lord goes also from himself,
if he grieves the Lord, he hurts himself in forgetting and forsaking the
Lord, he forgets and forsakes himself also, and is but like a mad man, a
phrentike a possessed man with uncouth furies, with unclean spirits: he is
not (as our proverb is) his own man, this should waken in us a pity and
commiseration of men walking in their sins, even to pray to God for them as
our Savior and Saint Stephen did for the persecuting Jews. Father forgive
them, Lu 23 34. Act. 7.60.
for they know not what they are doing. The Lord open their eyes to see it.

And he said:
Before his resolution, the motives of his resolution are set down, and these
are two: The two eyes of a penitent sinner, the one sees misery, the other
mercy.
First, the sense of his own misery, next the hope and trust of mercy in his
father. These are the two eyes of a penitent sinner: one whereby he sees his
misery, and that chaseth him out of himself: another whereby he sees Gods
mercy, and that makes him bold to come to the Lord, he can not taste the
sweetness of Gods mercy, who in some measure is not first touched with the
sense of his misery: indeed misery may be felt without mercy, but not mercy
without some sense of misery: some think themselus ^^re of mercy, that were
never humbled with the sense of misery, these are deceived by presumption:
others again, feels their misery and see no mercy, and these if they abide,
so fall in desperation.

This esperance of mercy is nourished in his heart by consideration of his
fathers liberal dealing, Esperance of mercy is ^orished by examples of mercy
showed unto others.
even toward hired servants, which makes him confident to look for goodness
toward himself that was his son: How many hired servants in my fathers house
has bread enough. This house of his father represents the Church of God, Ephesians.
3.
this is The family of God, distinguished in two houses: in the upper house
there are none but the sons of God, in the lower house, besides sons, there
are also hired servants, which shall not abid in the house forever and ever,
unto these the Lord is good and gracious, how much more unto his own children.
He that makes his Sun to shine, Math. 6.
and the rain to fall on the unjust, he that cloatheth the Lillies of the
field, and feeds the fowls of heaven, will he not be favorable to his own.
Seeing the Lord is good to his servants in general, much more will he be
good to his children.
Are not ye much better then they? But to go further, the mercy of God which
he shows to his children, is not only to comfort them who receive it, but
to convert and confirm others also. It is true of all his mercies, which Saint
Paul speaks of the mercies showed himself: they are exemplar mercies, every
time that Gods shows mercy, there is a box of precious ointment powered out
not only for the good of him upon whom it descends, but that the sweet smell
thereof may allure others to come and get the like. C^m. 1.2. In all the Gospel
^e read not of one that went co^fortl^sse from Christ.
Thy name is as an ointment powered out, therefore the Virgins love thee. Let us
go then to the Poole of Bethesda there we shall see a great multitude of all
sorts of diseased men, made whole by the waters of Siloa^, Io^. 5.1.
all of the^ allure us, and assure us, that if we will do as they have done,
we shall be healed as they were, whatsoever be our di^ease. Look all the
hystory of the Gospel we shall not find one touched with a sense of their
misery that came to Christ, and went away comfortless. The lepers, the
lunaticks, the Adulterers, the Demoniacks, the Paraliticks, the Publicans, and
all sort of miserable sinners, stand up as a cloud of witnesses to confirm
thee, that if thou will also return to the Lord and seek mercy, thou shall
find it.

Crosses chase men to the Lord.
The other motive of his repentance, is the sense of his present misery, in
these words, And I die of hunger. It is the wisdom of God by crosses to
correct our corruption, Es^. 28.19
fear or trouble shall make you to understand the hearing. What they cannot
learn by the word, he causes them to learn it by affliction. When all these
things shall come upon thee, Deu^. 30.1
then shall thou turn in thy heart and return unto the Lord thy God. It is a
great blessing of God, Happy thing where crosses become corrections.
when his crosses beecome corrections. Corrigunt, makes a man better then he
was, and chaseth him homeward toward the Lord. It is needful, it is
profitable for us to drink of this cup. I never knew any that learned true
religion without some grievous affliction, inward or outward. A sore famine
sent the Lord upon Canaan in the days of Jacob, Genesis 41.
was it because he loved not Jacob? Exodus 1.
No, but that he might chase him to Joseph. Sore affliction laid he on Jacobs
children in Egypt by the hands of Phar^^, was it because he loved them not?
No, but that he might make them weary of Egypt, and draw the^ to Canaan
again. Manasse his bonds, M^riam her leprosse, Paul's blindness, the Prodigal
his poverty, among many more may witness what great good GOD works by his
cross. in the hearts of his children.

Therefore the Prophet David said, Psalm. 119.
It was good for me that I have been afflicted. And good were it for
impenitent wanton ones that God would make them bear the yoke in their youth,
Ier. Lam. 3.27.
and would do to them as he promises to do to his Church, that is by his
rods bring her home again to himself. I will stop thy way with thorn^s, Hos
2.6.7
and make an hedge that she shall not find her paths, though she follow
after her lovers, The felicity of men prospering in their sins is great
infelicitie.
yet shall she not come near them, then she shall say, I will go and
return to my first husband for I was better then, then now. The felicity of
men prospering in their sins is great infelicity. Aug.
Nihil infaelicius faelicitate peccantium: therefore said Nazianzen peccatum
fructum esse stultae sanitatis. Nazian. orat. 27. d^ Pauper.
That sin is the fruit of unhappy health, and that holy sickness is to be
preferred unto it, and the same is to be thought of all other crosses, being
sanctified to our use.

Verse. 18.
I will rise and go to my Father, and I will say.
These being his motives; As sin is a falling so repentance is a rising.
now follows his resolution, wherein, first we see that true repentauce is a
rising, we fall by sin, we rise. by repentance, in the godly there is a
death, and a resurrection, and an ascension, even while they live in the body,
Repentance is a (...) death (...) resurrection and first ascension
by the first death sin dies in them. By the first resurrection they arise
from their sins, by the first ascension they go up after their Lord, though
they walk upon earth. They have their conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.20.
and their affections are set on these things which are above at the right hand
of God. Col. 3.
Blessed is he that has part in the first resurrection, for upon him the
second death shall have no power. If the soul, while it is in the body rise not
out of the grave of sin, sure it is the body shall never rise out of the
earth, but to shame and confusion. Awake therefore, Ephesians. 5.14.
thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light.

But we must know Repentance is a work of divine power.
that this rising of a sinner from his sins is not a work that can be
wrought by the power of nature, the second resurrection will be wroght by the
mighty power of God, and much more the first, Ber. annu^t. Mariae sermon. 1. It
innocent Adam stood not, how shall sinful Adam rise of himself.
Si stare perse non potuit humana natura adhuc integra, multo minus per se
resurgere potestiam corrupta. Every man by nature is a vessel replenished, and
loadned heavy with sin, not unlike that Ephah wherein wickedness was
covered, Zach. 5.6.
and pressed down with a talent of lead, how shall he the^ rise if grace come
not from above to remove the talent: he cannot so much as lift up the head, no
more then that man diseased of the Palsy till the Savior come and give the
command, and with the command, grace. Job. 5.8. The work of repentance no less
miraculous then the raising of the dead.
Arise and walk. Lazarus was dead but four days, he stunke already, but
should have lien still till he had rotted, if Jesus had not stood over his
grave, and called upon him, and no better is it with us, we are dead in sin,
till the Lord quicken us. Vtinam ad hoc monumentum meum digneris accedere
domine Jesus voca me de monumento huius corporis, Ambr. de paenit. li. 2. cap 7.
si illachrymaueris prome, saluus ero. It was the desire of Ambrose alluding to
Lazarus his resurrection, and should be ours also: Oh Lord Jesus that thou
would draw near this sepulcher of mine, that thou would raise me out of
the grave of this body, and command me to come out, that my cogitations and
affections he not enclosed in darkness, but I may see thy light, and being
set at liberty may walk after thee.

And go to my father.
He sinned by going from his father, Penitent men keep a course plain
contrary to that which they kept while they walked in their sin.
when he repents he returns to his father again, this repentance has a
course plain contrary to that, which men kept, while they walked in their
sins. So Chrysostom alluding to the doings of wise men, who went home an
other way, then the way they came to the field: observes it in all penitent men,
they come home to the Lord an other way then they went from him. Have thou gone
from the Lord by the way of anger, or hatred, return again by the way of
meekness, and love. Have thou sinned by intemperance, amend by abstinence.
Wentst thou astray by the way of concupiscence, return by continence. Have
thou sinned by covetousness, taking from thy neighbor what thou should
not, make restitution with Zaccheus. Luke 19.8
This is that effect of repentance, which Saint Paul calls revenge, 2. Cor.
7.11
When a man grieved in himself, for that he has grieved the Lord, resolves
to be revenged on his sins, by following a course plain contrary unto them.

Again, No rest for a sinner till he return to the Lord.
we see here, go a sinner where he will, he can never find rest and
contentment till he come home to God his heavenly Father. Seek it as thou will
in the creature thou shall never find it. God made all his creatures for man,
but man he made for himself, and he is content, all that is his be thine
providing thou will be his. All things are yours, 1. Cor. 3. 22.
things present and things to come, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.
God calls upon us to come to himself. My Son give me thine heart. Come unto
me, Math. 11.
I will refresh you. Iiuery creature in their kind sends us to the creator.
Psalm. 4.
And every creature in their kind sends man back unto the Lord, this is their
voice, Why wander ye in vanity. Why follow ye after lies: for your sins we
our selves are subject to vanity, Romans 8.
seek not your good in us, seek it in him that made us, by your restitution
to his favor, We look for deliverance from this bondage of corruption, Romans
8.21
in to the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. By your going a whoring after
us ye may increase bondage, and ours also but cannot procure to your self
wished contentment. All that ever tasted the pleasure of the creature before
us, All that ever have sought pleasure in the creture witnesses to us that it
a vame thing to do so.
witness the same unto us. But alas, so foolish is man that he dreams of a
possibility to find contentment for himself, where never one could find it
before him, he regards not the testimony of others; he will not be taught of
any, till experience the the Schoolmaster of fools teach him, and then though
he were ten times more wise and wealthy then ever Solomon was, and would lay
down his head and his heart to seek desired comfort in the creature, yet
shall he be forced to acknowledge, that All the labor under the Sun is but
vanity and vexation of Spirit: Eccles. 1.
there is a short abridgement of our life. Job. Eccles. 64.
Man comes into vanity and goes into darkness: it is no better if we do
no more but follow the course of nature: let us therefore go above the Sun,
seek rest, joy, and contentment in our God in whom only it is to be found.

And I will say:
Both virtues and vices go together in bands.
When he was in the way of his sins, he went from one sin to another, till
he came ad profunaum, to the deepth of sin. Now when he comes to the way of
repentance: repentance: ye see from one grace he proceeds and steps forward
to an other; As ^irtues ioyn^, one with another among the^dues, So vices.
for both virtues and vices have their own fellowship. Vices are linked
together like the links of a chain, any one of them prevailing over a
miserable man delivers him to another. Open vicaria fugitiuum seruum vitia ret
nent. Thus is he carried as a capt^ue from hand to hand in that cursed
fellowship, till he come to their common master the prince of darkness.
Virtues also and graces have their own society, and a man coming in amongst
them is sent from one of them to an other, till he be delivered into the hands
of their Lord and master Jesus Christ; for no virtue nor vice is solitary, but
have ever some of their own kind in company with them. They who seek from the
LORD should offer unto him.


As he resolves to rise and return to his father: so he forethinkes what to
say, when he comes teaching us not to appear before the Lord without reverend
preparation. Resolve what thou have to say, what to seek, what to offer before
thou come to him. If thou seek and have nothing to offer, it is a token thou
seek thy self and not the Lord. If thou offer other things to the Lord, but
not thy self, Eccl. 4 17.
thou offerest The sacrifice of sooles, for it is thy self the Lord does
seek, and he offers himself to thee again, if thou seek anything from
him, and offer not thy self unto him, thou shall lose thy self, thou shall
not obtain what thon seek, neither yet shall thou enjoy him.

Two sacrifices which this penitent prod^g^ll offieth to the Lord.
This Prodigal prepares a twofold sacrifice: first the sacrifice of confession
of his sins, doubtless from a heart truly penitent. Psalm. 51.
The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit a broken heart the Lord despises
not. Next, the sacrifice of oblation of himself, he offers his service unto
the Lord. Make me as one of thy servants.

The carelessness of professors in this age when they appear before God,
reproned.
But in this the careless negligence of men of this age is exceeding great,
they pray, but without preparation, neither considering themselves how they
are, as Abraham said, Genesis 19.
but dust and ashes: Yea, viler then the earth, in as much as they are unclean,
through their sins, neither yet, what a great majesty the Lord is, before
whom they appear: they forethink not what they have to seek, neither provide
they a sacrifice to offer, they enter into Gods house, as if it were a private
house, forgetting Salomons precept. Eccl. 4.17.
Take heed unto thy feet when thou entrest into the house of God. The Courts
of the Lord, and a common causey are a like unto them, yea even upon most
solemn days, neither are they sanctified to offer prayer, praise, service,
which God craves, neither yet are they ready to receive mercy, and peace which
God offers; they come without preparation, they sit without sense or devotion,
they go away without answer or edification. But as those beasts which entered
unclean into the Arc, went out unclean: so come they to the house of GOD
unpenitent, and goes out unpenitent.

Such as will not confess their sins are Satan's Secretaries.
Some will not confess their sins at al, but hide them as Achan did the
accursed thing, under the earth in his tent: these may be called Satan's
Secretaries, by so doing they deminish not the knowledge of God, but debar
themselves from the mercy of God, while they seek to Conceal the iniquity of
their bosom as Adam did, they do but reveal their own shame, and hasten the
declaration of Gods judgment upon them. Pro. 29.13
He that hides his sins shall not prosper. Ier. 2.35.
Behold I will enter in judgment with thee, because thou say, Cousession of
sin without amendment, is profession.
I have not sinned. Others again, confess their sins, but yet continue in
their sins, not like this Prodigal, I will rise and say I have sinned: these
men will say, they have sinned, but will not rise out of their sins, such a
confession is but a profession of sin, which will never obtain mercy, it may
well increase guilt, and draw on the greater damnation.

I have sinned against heaven, and before thee.
Penitent sinners illuminate with the light of faith, How the godly amplify
their sins.
amplify their sins two manner of ways: First, that their sins are done
against God: next, that they are done before GOD. David in his confession, Psalm
51.
as likewise the Prodigal here ioines, both these two together. Every sin is
against God, but not done in the sight of God, in respect of the committer.
Every sin is against God, but every sin is not done in the sight of God (I
mean in respect of the sinner,) for there are many that sin, and yet know
not that they sin as Turks in their adultery, Pagans in Idolatry, simple
Papists in their cruelty, when they are persecuting sincere worshippers, they
think they are doing good service unto God. But such as have the light shining
unto them, who know the will of GOD, and yet will do against it, they sin
not only against God, but before him and in his sight. And this shows the
greatness of sins, The greatness of sin committed now under this clear
light of the Gospel.
which are now committed under this clear light of the Euangell, they are not
done in the night but in the day; not only against the Lord, but before him,
under his eye, and in his very face he is a bold these that will steal, and
the Judge looking upon him, he is a shameless Adulterer that seeks not the
twilight, but will work villeny in the noone tide of the day, and men
beholding him. He that knows his Masters will and does it not, shall have
double stripes;, says our Savior. What then? he that does not only leave
his Masters will undone, though he know it, but also does directly against him,
shall he not have triple strokes? And which is worst of all, he that
transgresses his masters will, and his Master looking upon him, are not
quadruple plagues due unto him. From such high high impiety, and proud
rebellion, the Lord deliver us.

Verse 19.
And am no more worthy to be called thy Son make me as one of thy hired
servants.
When he had the place and honor of a Son he set lightly by it, The worth
of Gods benefits is not known till we want them.
he abused it, now is he feign to seek the room of a servant. The worth and
value of Gods benefits are not known till men want them, and be touched with
a sense of their misery, then the least of his mercies are esteemed great
mercies even to be a Door keeper in Gods house, or to have the place of a
servant in it, Math. 25.
or to have the benefit of little dogs to eat of the crumbes of bread that
fall from the table of his children: so thought David, so this Prodigal, so
the Cananitish woman, when they were humbled It is greater wisdom to ponder
the goodness of God in time, that we may esteem of it, and be thankeful to
God for it, he made us his sons by the first creation, we become his
enemies by our transgression, we lost all the holiness of our nature, all the
happiness of our state by our own folly. If we had died in that estate we
should have accounted the use of water a great benefit: yea, greater then we
do the abundance of all his creatures, which now of his goodness, he
communicates. But the Lord had mercy upon us, Miserable is man for that he
lost his first grace, more miserable, if now he despise grace offered again.
Ioh. 15.15 1. Ioh. 3.
and has restored us, not to the place of servants only. Henceforth I call
you not servants, but to the dignity of sins. Behold what a love the Father
has showed, you that ye should be called his sons: so that now we are
advanced to a greater, surer, and more enduring honor, then that which we had
by our first creation, shall we not fear to hazard it again by walking after
our sins, if we do so, the second error shall be worse then the first:
Miserable is man already by his first fall, more miserable shall he be by the
second, if he despise the grace of the Gospel, and trample the blood of the
new Covenant under his feet, Heb. 10.27
what remains but a fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire. Let
us take heed in time, and learn to be wise by this Prodigal child, when we
hear him glad to get the room of a servant, shall not we rejoice in our God,
who has given us the place of his children. Lord make us thankful for it, and
give us grace to Walk worthy our heavenly vocation, Ephesians. 4.1.
that in our life we may express our virtue, Col. 1.13.
who has Translated us out of darkness into marvelous light.

VERSE 20.
The godly as they are blessed with grace to begin, so also to persevere.
As he concluded before, so he performs now. In the godly, resolutions are
first, but actions follow. In the wicked sometimes there are resolutions to
amend their lives, but no execution follows, their motions of repentance are
like to the Morning dew, or the false conception of a woman, which comes
never to the birth: but the Lord blesses his own children, both with the first
and latter rain; that is grace to begin well, and grace to persevere unto
the end.

And when he was yet a far off.
A i^isull meeting between a merciful God and a miserable sinner
Now follows the last part of this Pararable: figuring unto us how gracious
the Lord is, how ready to show mercy to poor sinners, whenever they repent
of their sins, and return unto him. Here then is a joyful meeting between
a merciful God, and a miserable sinner. Blessed is the soul (says Bernard)
wherein mercy and truth meet together and every one of them kisses one another:
Here is truth in the prodigal child, no guile, Psalm. 32
no deceit in him, simply and sincerely he confesses his sin, and the Lord
who loves truth in the inward affections, meets him with mercy. How far the
loving affection of God toward us, exceeds ours toward him.


But howsoever these two meet together, yet you see there is no comparison
between them in the measure of their affections, the one would fainer show
mercy, then the other would have it, the child is not so willing to return as
the father is joyful to receive. He arises, and is coming, but the father
sees him a far off, and runs, he falls on his neck and kisseth him. Non
Pari vbertate s^uune, Ber. in Ca^t. Sermon. 8.
amans, and amor, sponsus and spon^a; creator; and creatura; non magis quam
sitiens, and fons. As there is great difference between the flowing of the
Ocean and the flowing of a little river: No less then theflowing of the ^
ceedes cean, exthe running of a river.
and as there is great odds between that which the thirsty man drinks, and
that which the fountain has to give him: so is there between the creature
loving GOD, and GOD who is love it self. What then? shall we not love him,
because we cannot equal him in love? shall we not go to him, because we cannot
go so fast as he comes to us. No, no, Nam etsi minus diligit creatura, quia
minor est, Ibid.
tamen si tota diligis, nihil deest vbi totum est. For albeit the love of the
creature be less, because it self is less: yet if we love him with our
whole hearts, nothing is lacking where the whole is.

The very beginning of our conversion is acceptable to the Lord.
And most comfortable is it that he says, when he was yet a far off, he had
compassion upon him, he had not yet come, he had fallen down, he had not
confessed, and yet the Father shows mercy upon him. See then how the very
first motions of repentance, if they be unfeigned, even the beginnings of our
conversion, if they be from the heart are acceptable to GOD, He bruseth not the
bruised reed, Esa 42 3 M^. 12.20.
he quenches not the smoking flax. Though our repentance be but in a
beginning, yet if it be true, God will meet it with mercy, there is the
nature of Gods compassions. Dan. 9.
In the beginning of Daniel his supplication God sent him an answer, and at
the beginning of our turnings to God, Esa. 65.1.
God turns unto us. I have been sound of them that sought me not says the
Lord, will he then hide his face from them that seek him. Romans 5.9.10.
If when we were sinners, Christ died for us, much more being now justified by
his blood: shall we be saved from wrath through him, and if when we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God: much more being reconciled, we shall be
saved by his life. If he ran to this child when he was a far off, will he
not embrace his children that are come near unto him.

Non persuadet nudo verbo, B^sil. de Paenit.
sed and exemplo. He will assure us of mercy, not by his naked word only, but
by example also. Ier. 7.8.
I will speak against a Nation to destroy it, but if this Nation turn from
their wickedness, I will repent of the plague that I thought to bring upon
them. The Lord perswads us of mercy.
What can be more clear, will we turn from our sins God will turn from
his judgments. 1 By his word.
Neither is there any place here to speak of the greatness of our sins, as
though they were not curable by his mercies. Esa. 1.28.
Though your sins were as Crimson they shall be made white as snow, though
they were red like Scarlet, they shall be made as woll. Howsoever thou have
done them, and made them many and great, and they are double dipped: will thou
repent, the strength of his mercy shall undo them, shall change them, and make
them, 2 By his work.
as if they had never been done. And if yet thou believe him not when he
speaks, at least believe him when he swears. Ezech. 33.11.
As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner, but that he
should turn and live. Basil. Ibid
Estne Deus cum iur at indignus cui credatur? Is not the Lord when he swears
worthy to be credited. But: 3 By the example of his mercy shevved to others.
if neither his word, nor his oath can move thee, yet look to his works, and
for them believe his word. Were not the Niuiuites spared when they repented.
Was not Achab spared when he was humbled. Who ever turned to the Lord, and
found not the Lord turning to him. When the Leaper cried, If thou will thou
can make me clean: The Lord Jesus answered, I will, be thou clean. Math. 8.
When the Centurion besought him to come to his house, and heal his servant.
Luke 7.
Jesus answered I will come and heal him. There is a cloud of witnesses, all
proving this one point. Quidenim? forte peccasti in saeculo nunquid amplius
Paulo? Bern. in festo Pet. and Paul.
Quod si in ipsa religione, nunquid plus Petro. For why? have thou sinned
before thy calling, so did Saint Peter, and though thy sins were greater then
theirs, yet are they not so great as his mercy, who has promised to pardon.
Thus then in this Prodigal child, have we not only mercy showed to himself,
but exemplar mercy, proposed to all such, as repenting of their sins return
unto him.

His Father saw him.
Albeit this be^ put here in the last room, yet is it to be referred to the
first time of his conversion. The Lord looked upon him as he looked to Peter,
after he had denied him, he made him to go out and weep bitterly for his
sins; grace was sent with the look. This is the look of Gods face, that
David prays for Look upon me and be merciful unto me, Psa. 25.15
as thou do unto those that fear thy name. And it is this look that
brought home again the Prodigal child, for as the Image which the glass
represents, lifts not up the eyes till he that looks into it lift up his eyes
first: So man who is the Image of God, cannot lift up his eyes unto heaven till
God first look down with the eyes of mercy upon him. And therefore Bernard
expounding this Parable of the forlorn^ Son, having declared the depth of the
misery wherein to he had fallen by falling from his father. He describes the
beginning and progress of his restitution and home coming unto the Lord, for
so says he Et vbi nunc est pater ille, Bern. parabol. de filio Regis.
potentissimus, dulcissimus, and liberalissimus, nunquid potest obliui^ci
filium vterisui? Absit, absit. And where now is the most powerful, sweet, and
liberal father, can he forget his child, the fruit of his womb? No, no, Non
obliuiscitur, ed miseretur, dolet and conqueritur de absentia and perditione
silij sui. He forgets not, but he has compassion, he mourns and lamenteth
for the want and loss of his son: yea, he sends out his servants to seek
him. The first servant, is Fear, which following and finding the Kings son
in most miserable case, beats him, and pricks him with terrors ^^ chase him
to his ^ather. But the second servant, Hope, coming forth to seek him,
finds him rather hurt, then helped by fear, cast down, not raised up:
therefore hope puts her hand lovingly under his head, and raises him out of
despair; it wipes away the dung from his eyes, and then begins to see, O how
many hired servants in my fathers house have bread enough, and I die for
hunger. Arise, says Hope, Go home to thy Father, I have brought thee here,
The horse of desire. Thus is he no sooner mounted upon the Horse of desire,
but incontinent, wisdom comes with the bridle of discretion. Go not, says
he, too fast, lest the Kings Son fall into the hands of his enemies, hold you
in the high way, for the enemies are not in the path way, but in the by rodes
lurking in ambushment. Then came in the valien^ warrior Fortititude, and he
drawing out the sword of gladness and joy, be not troubled, says he, they are
more with us then with them. (...) are signified by these but the riches of Gods
manifold mercies, whereby he supplies all our wants, fulfilleth all our
necessities, for their confimation in the state of grace, that once are
converted to it. And it is to be noted, that all these good things are taken
out of our fathers treasure, they are given us freely, we have them not of our
selves. The third perfiting grace is figured here that being taken in into his
Fathers house, he is set down to a banquet, they are meery together,
repesenting the mutual joy, that is between God and his children, the Lord
reioicing in the conversion of a sinner, and the sinner rejoicing in the
salvation of his God.

See what a difference is here between his former estate when he went from his
father, and the estate whereunto he is advanced now after his returning. How
far is his satisfaction above his desire, he sought but the room of a
servant, and he is honored with the dignity of a son; the mourning weed is
taken from him and he is made to rejoice, in steed of his former scarsity,
wealth, and abundance of al good things is given unto him. As men see it in the
Parable, so is it to be wished, they would prove it in the practice. If they
would forsake the pleasures of sin, and come and taste how graciou^ the Lord
is, they should see the one are but husks of Acornes, meeter for beasts then
for men, and are no way to be ma^ched with the delicates of GOD, whereby he
refreshes his children.

The Lord work this change in us, that as we have wandered with this Prodigal,
we may repent and return with him, and the Lord who has given us the
beginning of conversion, confirm us more


