Two very Godly and comfortable Letters, written over into England.

THE ONE TO A GODly and zealous Lady: wherein the Annabaptists error is
confuted: and the sin against the Holy Ghost plainly declared.

THE OTHER AN answer to a Godly Merchants Letter: written for his comfort,
being grieved with the heavy burden of sin: wherein is declared the true
confession of sin.

Written by T. C.

AT LONDON Printed by Edward Allde for Edward White. 1589.

A comfortable Letter written to a Godly and zealous Lady: Wherein the
Annabaptists error is breefly confuted, and the sin against the holy Ghoast,
plainlye declared.
MADAME, where as it pleased your good Lady ship to require me to writ unto you
my mind, concerning the true sense and meaning of this place of S. Paul, in
his Epistle to the Hebrews: Heb. 6. 4,
It cannot be that they which were once lightened and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were become pertakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of
the good word of God, and of the power of the World to come: if they fall
away (and as concerning themselves, crucify the son of God a fresh, and
make a mock of him,) that they should be renewed again by repentance.

Madame, many in time The error of the Nouatians, and now of the Anabaptists.
past, and at this present day mistaking this text, and not truly understanding
it, both have been and are incombred with the Nouacians error: which is,
That after man by Baptism and the holy Ghost is regenerated, and has tasted
of the grace of God, and has embraced Christ and his holy word, if he fall
to sin again, he is without remedy of Salvation.

Undoubtedly this is a very damnable error, enough to bring all them that
are infected therewith to desperation. But albeit they ground this their
error upon this before aleadged text of S. Paul, and certain other textes:
yet they miss the Mark, because they take this Scripture too straitlye, not
referrng it to many other places of scripture, which plainly show: That when
soever and how often so ever a Sinner repents him truly of his sins, and
commits him self with a sure faith unto y^ mercy of God through Christ: God
receives him again to grace and salvation.

Doubtless No prophecy in the scripture has any private 2. Pet. 1. 20.
interpretation, but must needs be expounded according to the general
articles of the Christian faith and agreeable to other textes of holy
scripture, and so must this text be also.

Now truth it is, that there is almost innumerable texts in holy scripture,
that most plainlye do declare: that when so ever a true repentaunte sinner by
unfeigned faith returns unto God, and asks mercy for Christ's sake, he shall
undoubtedly have it. And albeit the holy scriptu^^ is full of such places, yet
here by Gods grace, I will show and rehearse to you some of them, to give you
occasion to mark them, and such like places as you shall find almost in every
leaf of the Bible. Pro. 24. 16.


A just man falls seven times, and rises up again. Mark y^ scripture
says: he rises up again.

The wickedness of the Ezech. 33.
wicked shall not hurt him, whenever he conuerteth. Note what it says: when
soever he conuerteth.

Let the ungodly man forsake Esaias. 55.
his own way, and the unrighteous his own imaginations and turn again unto
the Lord, so shall he be merciful unto him.

Thou disobedient Israel Iere. 3.
turn again (says the Lord) and I will not let my wrath fall upon you.

Thus says the Lord: do Iere. 8.
men fall so, that they rise not up again? or if Israel do repent, will not
God turn again to them?

Turn you unto me (says Zach. 1.
the Lord God of hosts,) and I will turn me unto you.

Remember from whence Apoc. 2.
thou art fallen, and do the first woorks.

Mark in the Gospel of Luke. 15.
Luke, the example of the unthrifty Son.

Also Christ said unto Peter, Peter I have prayed Luke. 22.
for thee, that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen
thy Brethren.

Mark, he says: When thou art converted, etc. Lo, if you weigh these places
of scripture before alleged, and almost innumerable more of the same sort, you
shall perceive euidentlye, that though A Christian have sinned never so often
(as who does not daily offend God) yet when soever he returns unto God by
true repentance (which consists of inward contricion and a sure faith in
Christ Jesus) he is assured by the word of God to recover and receive again
the grace, favor* and mercy of God, which through his disobedience he had
worthily lost and immediately to enjoy full, absolute, and perfect remission and
forgiveness of all his sins, through Jesus Christ, in whom he reposeth all
his faith, trust and confidence of salvation. The Gospel assures him no
less saying: So God loved the world Ioh. 3.
that he gave his only begotten son, that who so ever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life.

More over, if you mark well the examples of godly men, which are registered in
holy scripture, you shall plainelye perceive, that albeit they were highly in
Gods favor, yet for all that many of the^ had great falls and committed very
heinous offenses, but they did rise up again returning to Gods mercy by true
repentance and faith, and so recovered again their former grace, which they
through their own folly had lost.

Aaron was so much Aaron.
favored of God, that by Gods calling he was made the high bishop and curate
over his People. And yet at the light request of the Israelites, he let them
make and worship the Golden Calfe, contrary to his Conscience: by reason
whereof both he and they committed that most detest able sin of Idolatrye,
and yet he by true repentance and faith, returning to grace was saved. David
Gods dear darlinge, David.
after that he had the knoweledge of God, and had much tasted of his grace,
being endued aboundauntlye with the holy Ghost, and gracious gifts from
above, fell both into the sin of adultry and murder. And yet by true and
unfeigned repentance, returning to Gods mercy, was accepted and received again
into Gods favor.

Manasses also contrary Manasses
unto his Conscience, fell willinglye to Idolatrye, but yet he rose again by
true repentance and faith, and recovered again the grace of god.

So likewise that wicked The sinful Corinthian 1. Cor. 5.
man of the City of Corinthus, whom S. Paul straitlye charged the Corinthians
to excommunicate and erclude out of the holy congregation of Christian men, and
that they should neither eat nor drink with him, because of his open and
abominable crime of incest and outrageous whordome: and yet when he declared
him self to be truly repentant for his great and infamous sin: Saint Paul
admonished 2. Cor. 2.
them with all gentleness and Christian Charity to receive him again into the
Congregation as a Christian Brother, and so to esteem him and take him.

What shall I say of Peter Christ's Apostle? Peter.
Had not he a sure knowledge of Christ, confessing him openly before all the
Apostles, To be very Christ, the son the living God? Was not he eue^ then
endued with the holy Ghost and grace from above, unto whom Jesus Christ said:
Blessed art Math. 16.
thou Simon, the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not opened that unto
thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And yet after all this, he had such a
fall, that contrary to his own conscience, willinglye without any compulsion,
threats, or imprysonme^t, he did most cowardlye and shamefullye forsake and
deny Christ, not without blasphemy, swering that he never knew him, cursing and
committing him self to the Devil if ever he had to do with him.

What would the N^^atian and Annabaptiste say unto this? Was it not a fall?
Could there be any greater sin then this? Was it not done of knowledge? Was
it not done willinglye? Was it not against his own conscience? Yes doubtless,
it was no less but against his own conscience. But yet thanks be unto
almightye God, it was not the sin of blasphemye against the holy ghost,
neither the sin unto death, the which Saint John speaks of, for he 1. Ioh. 5.
continued not therein unto his end, but immediately he went forth of the
Bishops house and wept bitterly, very much lamenting his heinous offense, and
by faith he returned again unto christ Mat. 26.
knoweing his mercy to be infinite and without measure: and so he was accepted
unto grace again, and Christ appeared unto him (to his great comfort) after
he rose again from death to life and afterward sending down his holy
Spirit, endued him with wonderful gifts of grace from above. And then Peter
became a strong Champion, setting forth Christ to be the only savior of the
whole world Preaching and openly confessing him before all men, without any
fear, either of y^ Scribes, Pharisees or. Maiestrates.

Now good Madam, lay this example of S. Peter to this text of S. Paul to the
Hebrews: It can not be that they which were once lightened, etc. If they fall
away etc. that they should be renewed again by repentance.

If a man would apply the aforesaid example of S. Peter unto this text of S.
Paul, he would think that Peter should utterly have been cast away from Gods
favor, mercy and grace. only Messiah and savior of the world. Secondlye,
Peter was become pertaker of the holy Ghoast, and had tasted of the good word
of God, it appears evidently by Christ's sentence, saying: Blessed art thou
Simon, for flesh and blood (that is man) showed thee ^^ot that, but my father
which is in heaven. Which ^as by the inspiration of ^is holy spirit. Finally,
Peter had a taste of the world to come. For he did see in the mountain the
transfiguration of Christ, and so did James Mat. 17.
the more, and John the Evangelist also. Where in the presence of them all
Christ was transfigured and showed him self unto them in the form of a
glorified body, So that his face did shine as the Sun and his clothes appeared
as white as the light. There appeared also among the^ Moses and Elias. And
even there the clear voice of God the father of heaven, was plainlye heard
among the^ out of y^ cloud, saying upon Christ. This is my dearlye beloved
son, in whom I delight, hear him.

Lo, all this and much more Peter both heard and saw, being almost
continuallye in Christ's company, eating and drinking with him, hearing daily
his heavenly doctrine, preaching and teaching, seeing every where (as occasion
served) his great and wonderful miracles. And yet for all this, what a great
fall Peter had, it appeared plainly by his denial of Christ his loving
master and Savior, and by the circumstaunces thereof, which I touched
before. But yet to make Peter's fall more horrible, Christ said unto him and
unto all the other his Apostles, when he sent them ^^^rth to preach the Gospel
of salvation. He that denies Math. 10.
me before men, I shall deny him also before my Father.

Alas good Peter, what case stand^^ thou in now^ How does this saying of
Christ touch thee* remembringe this saying of Christ, art thou not utterly at
thy wits end? Is it not most certain, and true, y^ thou have too horriblye
fallen after that thou had tasted of all these gracious gifts, before
rehearsed? Have thou not contrary to thine own conscience most shamefullye
denied thy master and savior Christ before men? Ah good soul what shall become
of thee? How will thou answer for thy self? for it seems here plainly, that
both S. Paul in the before alleged place to y^ Hebrews and also Christ him
self in the scripture before rehearsed have given sentence of condemnation
against thee. Wherefore, both the Nouacian and the Annabaptist, grounding them
selves upon these two places of holy scripture, will plainelye pronounce thee
to be a reprobate, and that thou art dispatched, and utterly cast away from
all hope of salvation. But here let us not too lightlye pass over, but
earnestlye weigh and deeply consider, what may be said in this matter on
Peter's behalf. And first it may be rightlye answered, that that place of S.
Paul unto the Hebrews, makes Heb. 6.
nothing against S. Peter, neither yet against any Christian man, how
greeuouslye or how often soever he has sinned, so that he has not utterly
forsaken Christ and fallen clean away from him. For S. Paul says: It
cannot be that they which were once lightened, etc. If they fall away they
should be renewed by repentance.

Mark here diligently that S. Paul says: If they fall away. He says not
If they fall, But: if It is not all one thing to fall, and to fall away
they fall away. For it is not all one thing to fall: and to fall away.

For Peter did fall, but he did not fall away from Christ, but returned unto
him again. An old proverb it is: A man runs A Prouerb^
very far, that never returns again. All we christians do daily fall, for we
daily break Gods commandments, but yet we do not fall away from christ neither
refuse we him to be our Savior, but acknowledging our manifold sins and
offenses: we daily return unto him again by true repentance, faith and
amendme^t of life, nothing doubting of his great and unmeasurable mercy toward
us.

They fall away from christ Who falls away from Christ.
y^ utterly forsake him and refuse him to be their savior, and never returns
unto him again to obtain his mercy, but are become plain Apostataes, utterly
forsaking y^ christian faith making but a mock of Christ, perseuering in
their obstinate Apostasy and unbelief, even till their lives end: as did
Judas the 1. Tim. 1. 2. Tim. 4.
traitor* Iulianus Apostata Simon Magus, Porphirius, Hymeneus and Alexander the
Coppersmith.

Secondarily* as touching the saying and thretning of Christ, saying: He that
de nieth me before men, I shall Math. 10.
deny him before my father.

It is to be considered that all the terrible thretnings that are in the holy
scripture threatened against great sinners, are threatened conditionally, A good
and general rule to be noted.
that is to say: if the sinners do not truly repent and return unto God by
Faith and amendmente of life, this plague and punishment or that, shall light
upon them. But if they at the Preaching, reading, or hearing of Gods holy
word, do repent and return unto God, by faith and godly life, then that
Plague threatened shall not once touch the^.

Example by the Ninevites upon whom Jonas Gods Minister and preacher, Jonas.
3.
(or rather God by him) pronounced this terrible judgment, saying: There are
yet Forty days, and then shall Niniuye be ouerthrown. But there, as the
Scripture says: the people of Niniuy believed God and earnestly repented them
of their great sins, and so was the sentence of GOD retracted, and the City
saved and not overthrown.

So likewise this terrible sentence of Christ: He that denies me before men,
I shall deny him before my Father, must needs have this condition joined A
condition.
with it: If he does not repent, neither return again:

But Peter did both repent and return again unto Christ. For albeit his
Faith was weak and faynte, (as was the faith of all the Apostles) yet it was
not utterly extincte. For Christ had said unto him before.

Simon, I have prayed for Luke. 22*
thee that thy faith fail not.

And in any wise take heed, and note this well: Christ said not: He that
denies me, I shall deny him, though he repent and return. But remember well
that Christ said: M(...). 9.


I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Peter therefore
repented, and returned unto Christ again, and so was received unto grace and
was saved.

Wherefore good Madam, in this hard Texts of S. Paul unto the Hebrews, way well
this condition: ( if they full away) For they only fall away, which commit that
most horrible crime, which is called in the holy Scripture, The sin unto
death, blasphemy against the spirit, and sin against the holy ghost, which
never shall be forgiven, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.

differs from all other grievous sins. I say unto you, Math. 12.
All sin and blasphemye shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemye
against the spirit shall not be forgiven unto men.

Lo, here is the matter plainelye opened by our Savior Christ, what kind of
sins shall be forgiven, and what never forgiven. Blasphemye against the
spirit shall never be forgiven: all other sin and Blasphemye shall be
forgiven.

And Christ in saying: All sin shall be forgiven, compriseth both original
sin, and also actual sin.

Moreover Christ speaks here of three sorts Three sorts of Sins. Sin.
Blasphemy. Blasphemye against the Spirit.
of sins. The first he calls Sin, the second Blasphemy, and the third
Blasphemye against the Spirit. Which the scripture also calls, The sin unto
death, and the sin against the holy ghost. These three kinds of sins, and
the difference of every of them, I intend by Gods help seuerallye to declare
unto you so breefelye as I can, and so for this time commit you unto God, and
first, consider well what sin is.

Sin.
that is done contrary unto the Law and Commandments of God, without
murmur, grudg or evil speaking, either against the Law, commandments, or
God him self, that is the maker and giver of the law.

As is Idolatrye, superstition, periurye swearing unadvisedly, breaking of the
Holy Day, dishonouring father and Mother, Murder, malice, hatred, envy,
wrath, strife, treason, sedition, slander, Whoredom, theft and such like.

All these and such other are called, and are indeed sin so long as the
dooers of them do neither murmur, repine, grudge nor speak evil against God
or his holy Law: neither allow in their conscience the thing and evil that
they do, but rather do utterly disalow, accuse and condemn in their own
conscience those their own damnable acts, as evil and detestable.

Blasphemy.


Blasphemye is more haynouse then is sin alone, for all blasphemye is sin,
but all sin is not blasphemye. For truth it is, that blasphemye compriseth
in it self both sin, and also a murmr, grudge, reuiling, evil speaking,
slander and reproach of God and Godlynes, but it is always coupled with
ignorance and unbelief, and proceeds not of such obstmate malice as
continues to the end of the life, as does the sin against ye holy Ghost. In
this sin of Blasphemy S. Paul offended before his conversion unto the faith
of Christ Jesus. For thus he speaks of him self.

Before, I was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and a Tyrant, but I obtained
mercy, because I did it ignorauntlye in unbelief. Lo, here it is plain and
evident, that this blasphemye, though it be a great offense, yet it is
remissible and forgiueable, and is not excluded from Grace and mercy, because
it proceeds of Ignorance, and not ^f knowledge, nor of obstinate malice,
that does endure to the lives end. Neither is it the sin unto death: and
therefore we may lawfullye pray for such blasphemers. As S, John says: If any
man 1. John. 5.
see his Brother sin a sin, that is not unto death, let him ask and he shall
give him life.

In this simple blasphemy (for so we may call it) many of the Jews offended,
taking Christ to be nothing less, then the Son of David or Messiah, because
his parents were very poor, and him self supposed to be but a poor
Carpenters Son, which bare but a simple port in the world. Yea, and some of
them that crucified Christ, were overwhelmed in this simple blasphemy. And
therefore Christ prayed for them, saying: Father forgive Luke. 23.
them, for they know not what they do. So Peter in his Sermon excused the
crucifiers of Christ, saying. Now dear brethren I know that you have done it
thorough ignorance. etc. Repent you therefore and return, Acts. 3.
that your sins may be done away.

So did S. Steven also pray for his persecutors, whom before he called
Stifnecked, adversaries Acts, 7.
of the holy ghost, Traitors and murderers of Christ. Doubtless he would
not have prayed for the^ so ear nestly, unless their sins had bin forgiueable.
And therefore their sin and offense was no more but simple blasphemy.



They commit blasphemye against the spirit, or sin against Blasphemy
against the Spirit.
the Holy Ghost, which willinglye, upon knoweledge, and advisedly contrary
to their own conscience do deny, forsake, impugn, slander, revile, and
persecute the plain, open, manifest, and known truth, stiffly, maliciouslye,
and obduratly, perseuering and continuing without unfeigned repentance in that
their wilful blindness and obstinat malice so long as they live in this world.
As did Pharo, Saul, Herod Judas the traitor, Iulianus Apostata, Porphirius,
Himeneus and Alexander the Coppersmith, with other.

But mark this dilige^tlye that we can not (as far I can perceive) certainly
judge of these Blasphemers against the spirit before the time of their
departure out of this present life: because we cannot certainelye knew,
whether at the end of their life they can repent and by faith return and take
hold of the mercy of God or not.

We may conjecture, Coniecturare uncertain.
but we cannot as I suppose) certainlye define of them. Let us consider that
the thief that hung on the right hand of Luke. 23.
Christ, even at the last hour, repented him with a strong and Faithefull
prayer, committed him self wholly unto ye mercy of Christ, and was saved. In
consideration whereof, let us think it to be our bounden duetye (as the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles did) to revoke and calback again open
sinners and blasphemers to earnest repentance for their own sinfulnes, and to
have a sure trust in the mercy of God, and in the merit of Christ's passion
and death, though they be even at the departure out of this present life. For
it is never too late so long as life lasts. Let us therefore with all
feruentnesse call upon them and exhort them in any wise, with a good courage
and a sure and undoubtful Faith: ask, call and cry for gods mercy, for his
sweet son our savior Jesus Christ's sake: and undoubtedly they shall have it.
For since the beginning of the World hitherto was there never one that in faith
asked mercy hartelye, but he had it, through the gracious goodness of our
aforesaid merciful Savior Jesus Christ, unto whom with the Father and the
holy Ghost, be all Lawde and Praise, world without end.

Amen.
An answer unto a godly Merchants letter, wherein is plainlye opened the true
way of confessing our sins.
THE grace and peace of GOD, be given unto you, thorough Jesus Christ, etc.
Whereas in your last Letters, to me most Trustye and assured Freende, you
instantlye desired me to write unto you, what I have read and learned in holy
Scripture, touching The Confession of Sins. Truly Sir this your reasonable
request, I would, if I were able right gladly satisfy.

But as you know, I am far unable to pen this matter according to the
worthiness thereof.

Nevertheless, when I consider with my self, how much I am bounden to you,
for your loving kindness daily showed to my poor kinsefolke and friends in
England, I can-not but think it to be my bounden duetye somewhat to gratifye
you again. And albeit that ignorance, rudeness of style, and lack of
learning plucketh me back from the handling of this matter, yet the
consideratione of your great discretion and gentleness pricketh me forward
to attempt what I can do therein. Certes, I nothing doubt, but that you will
gentlye accept my simple rudeness, good will, and endeavor in this behalf, no
less then if the matter were Gloryouslye garnished with Eloquence, and set
forth with the most profitable persuasions of the freshest Philosopher or
Rethoritian in both Universities in England, I trust you will credit and
embrace the truethe though it be never so basely and homelye written or
declared unto you. For the truth shall abide and flourish, when al profane
painted persuasions, and fond pharisaic all fantasies shall vanish away, and
be scattered abroad as dry dust before a whirle wind. Wherefore to keep you no
longer from this matter, I shall by Gods grace, so breefelye as I can declare
unto you, what I have learned and read in holy scripture, concerning this
article, of confession of sins. And that is this that follows.

Of Confession of Sins.
THE holy scripture, doothe diversely in sundry places set forth and treat of
the Confession of sins. In some places it makes mention of a general and A
general Confession
sollemn Confession openly made of all the People being assembled and gathered
together, at the appointment, calling and exhortation of their high
Magistrate, Bishop, Curate, or public Minister of Gods Word.

The cause thereof was commonly some great plague, vengeance or punishment,
wherewith God scourged them for their sinful, heinous, and abominable
offenses, committed and done by them and their forefathers, example thereof we
have in the second book of Esdras, where it is thus written.

In the four and twenty ^eem. 9.
day of this month, came the Children of Israel together with fasting and
sackclothes, and earth upon them, and separated the seed of Israel from all
the strange Children, and stood and knowledged their sins and wickednesses
of their fathers, and stood up in their place, and read in the book of the
Law of the Lord their God, four times on the day, etc. And after a solemn
rehearsal of the judgments, and great mercifulness of God declared in
holy scripture: they conclude thus saying: Thou (O God) art righteous in all
that thou haste brought upon us, for thou haste done right. As for us, we
have been ungodly, and our Kings, Princes, Priests and Fathers have not
done after thy Law, nor regarded thy commandments and thine earnest
exhortations, wherewith thou have exhorted them, and have not served thee in thy
Kingdom, and in thy great goods that thou gave them etc. and are not
converted from their wicked works. Behold, therefore are we in bondage this
day. Yea, even in the land which thou gave unto our Fathers to enjoy the
Fruits and goods thereof, behold, there are we bondmen, etc.

Lo, Here is a solemn open Confession. Would God that this example of
public Confession of sins, were well practiced through out all
Christendom, namely at this day, seeing y^ the plagues of God do daily
increase more and more upon us, our sinful lives and abominations iustlye
deserving the same and much more.

There are also three Three more sort of confeson of sins.
more sorts of Confession of sins. declared in the holy Scriptures.

The first is secret confession of sin only unto God.

The second is an open confession before men.

The third is a private and secret confession made unto man. Confession unto
God only.


As touching y^ first, it is an humble and lowly confession of sins, made unto
God, even from the heart. As when a sinner examineth his life by ye
comma^dements of God, and so finds his conscience burdned and encombred with
sin, and feels thereby what danger of damnation that he is in: this feeling
of his sick conscience will greatly move him to seek a Physician. And when he
perceives that there is no medicine will heal his disease but only the
mercy of God, he will not cease to make all the suite that he can to obtain
it. He will without any delay prostrate him self before God, and with an
humble, lowlye, and contrite heart and mind acknowledge him self greeuouslye to
have offended his Godly majesty, in thought, consent, delectation, word, and
deed. He will never leave off his lamentable suite and faithful prayer and
request of this his bountiful mercy, till he obtain it. The swelling rage
of his putrified conscience will never be assuaged, till the precious oil of
Gods mercy have suppled it, mittigated it, quieted it, and utterly cured and
healed it. Of this manner of confession the holy Scripture does many times
treat, both by plain authority and examples. By authority. If we knowledge
our sins Authority. 1. John. 1.
(says S. John) God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Examples there be many. Of which I will at this time content my self with
two or three. King David feelinge the David.
intolerable burden of his sins, cried out saying.

Have mercy upon me (O God) after thy great goodness, Psalm, 51.
and according unto thy great mercies, do away mine offenses. Wash me again
from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin. For I knowledge my faults,
and my sin is ever before me. Against thee only against Psalm. 24.
thee have I sinned, for thy names sake (O Lord) be merciful unto my sin,
for it is great,

The Publican also The Publicane. Luke. 18.
says: Be merciful (O God) to me a sinner,

This confession and knowledging of our sins unto God if with a contrite and
sorrowful heart it be done in faith, God (which knows the secrets of every
man's mind) will accept and allow, though the repentant sinner utters not
one word with his mouth.

Example of the sinful The sinful woman. Luke. 7.
woman, that came unto Christ. She spoke nothing, but wept, and lowlye fell
down at christ's feet, and washed them with the tears of her Eyes, and dried
them with the hairs of her head, and anointed them with oyntement.

All which things were evident witnesses of her true and unfeigned repentance
of her sins, and fruits of her sure faith, that she had in Christ's
goodness. For whose comfort Christ said, thy sins are forgiven thee, thy
Faith has saved thee: go thy way in peace. This earnest confession of sins
unto God should every Christian, daily practice and exercise unfeignedly.

Of this aforesaid confession to God, springs out the Confession of our own
sinfulness before men.

For he that felt a taste of the mercy of God, as he shall see occasion to
Confession of sins before men.
glorify God by his example, will not be ashamed either priuatelye before one
man, or openly before many men, yea, though all the whole world were
present, to confess him self to have been an horrible, transgressour of Gods
Holy commandments. He will nothing doubt, but that he with this his meek
Confession, shall much glorify God, and move the Hearers by his example, to
abhor sin, and change their evil life. Of this, we have an euidente
example in Gods chosen vessel. S. Paul, which after his conversation unto the
faith of Christ, was not ashamed many times, openly to confess before Act.
22. 16.
men, what an unmerciful Tirant and ungracious graft he was against the Holy
Congregation of christ, before his conuertion to the Faith. This thing also
ashamed he not to write and set forth to the whole world, sayeing: I am not
worthy to be 1. Cor. 15. 1. Tim. 1.
called an Apostle, because I persecuted the congregation of God. And in an
other place he says: I was a blasphemer and a tirant, etc And after Christ
Jesus came into the World to save sinners, of whom I am chief.

This example of Saint Paul very few of the Papists in England have
followed, unless it Few of the Papists of England follow this example.
were by constrainte, for fear of bodilye punishment. And therefore for my
part, I suspect them to remain Papists still in their hearts. For if they
had unfeignedly abhorred Papistrye, they would after this example of S. Paul
with all their hearts, have confessed themselves to be deceived, and also to have
with false doctrine deceived the people, and therefore have openly and hartelye
asked them mercy for the same: by doing whereof doubtless, they should very
much have glorified God.

Private confession of sin is needful to many for knowledge, counsel and comfort.
toward God. The other is touching the reconsiliation and confession of a
man's fault and trespass to his Neighbor whom he has offended. And as
touching the first way of private Confession to man, I think it is a good and
wholesome manner and fashion convenient and needful to be used and observed of
many of Gods People for three causes, that is, for knowledge, counsel, and
for comfort.

First for knowledge: For knowledge.
as when a simple man or woman that has heard little or no preaching of Gods
word, by reason whereof they have almost no knowledge of God or his
Commandments, neither of the profession of Baptism, neither of faith,
neither have they in a manner any knoweledge at all of the way of Salvation by
Christ's death. Is it not needful (think you) for such ignoraunte Persons
to hunte and seek out some discrete and learned minister of Gods word, and
to acknowledge unto him their great ignorance, and to require at his mouth the
knowledge of the Law of the Lord, and of the way of salvation? Is it not
written,

That the Priests lips Malac. 2.
shoolde be sure knowledge, that men may seek the law at his mouth, for he is
a messenger of the Lord of hosts? It is meet therefore that Priests should
have good knowledge in Gods word, for they are appointed to be shepherds
over the flock of Christ, to feed the souls of gods People with the delicate
food of Gods word, and specially with the holy bread of life Christ Jesus,
that came down from heaven to save al his people from their sins. But alas
for pity, the spiritual sheepeheardes in many places of the world, and
specially in England are very rude, unlearned, and unable to teach other
men, because they themselves lack the knowledge and right understanding of
the holy Scriptures. For how should they teach others, being unlearned
themselves? Doubtelesse it has been heard of, in not a few places of
England, that the Parishioner has been better learned in holy Scripture then
the Parson or Vicar, which thing is much to be lamented: Is it not a great
shame, It is very strange that the sheep should have more wit and learning,
then the shepherd.
yes, it is utterly against nature, that the Sheep should be wiser and better
learned the^ the sheephearde. But no men are so much in this behalf to be
blamed, as the Bishops: partelye for admitting such doltishe dodipoles to the
office of the ministrye: and partelye for the instituting to fat beneficies,
and to the cure and charge of Christian souls, so many unlearned Idyotes,
which neither can nor will feed them with the Spiritual food of Gods word.
Our Lord redress this matter. Amen.

Secondarily, this private Confession is very For counsel
needful for Counsel, specially for such persons, whose consciences are
encombred with scrupulouse Superstition of meats, vows, or with perplexed
doubts in causes of matrimonye, of restitution of wrong gotten, or withholden
goods: of reconciliation, and such other: Or else, if they be sore assaulted
with diverse temptations of their ghostly enemy the devil, and know no
remedies how to avoid them. In all these and such like doubtful cases, whom
ought they rather to go unto, and ask counsel, then of the heardman of their
Souls? In worldelye affairs and business which way a man may defend his
right title of enheritaunce, and how he may overthrow his aduersarye that
would do him wrong, men will spare for no labor nor cost, but will retain
of their counsel the best lear nedmen of law that they can get: much more in
spiritual matters for the souls health, ought every true Christian to seek
for the best learned and discret este Ministers of Gods word, to satisfy
their consciences in doubtful causes, and to show the^ apt remedies for the
avoiding of their sundry temptationes of their ghostlye enemy the Devil. For
if he be a good Spiritual Physician, he will minister unto the patient a
convenient medicine for the healing of his spiritual sickness and disease. And
ye patients duty (if he will recover his health) is no less then thankfully
and obedientlye to embrace and receive the wholesome counsel of his spiritual
Physician. For the wise man Pro. 22.
says: He that is wise will be counseled. When John the Baptist preached in
the desert* the people came unto Math. 3.
him from Jerusalem, and all the regions round about Jordan, confessing their
sins.

And the Publicanes came also to be baptized, and said unto him: Master, what
shall we do? Lo Luke. 3^
here the Publicanes, which were very extorcioners and bribers, at the
Preaching of John the baptist, came unto repentance, and calling him Master,
asked him counsel how they should order their lives. Then he like a discrete
ghostly Father said unto them thus: Require no more then is appointed you. As
though he should say: For as much as heretofore you have been extortioners
and very Caterpillars and bribers, and have taken more of the poor people,
for task, tribute and custom then you ought to have done. Now seeing you are
converted and become the disciples of the heavenly doctrine, you must with
all diligence change your evil life unto a better, and oppress the people no
longer, but take your appointed duetyes and no more. So likewise the soldiers
also asked him and said: What shall we do then? And he said unto them: Do no
man violence nor wrong, and be content with your wages, etc.

If the same trade were likewise had in use among us that are now living, so
that when soever we were encombred with any grievous temptation, or entangled
or overthrown in the same if we even then as soon as we could possible
would consulte with our souls physician, to know which way we might best
avoid the temptation hereafter, were it not a godly fashion and worthy
praise and commendation?

Example: If a young An Example.
man being sore tempted unto Whordome, and many times overcome of his
temptation, has yielded and given him self over unto the Devil for that
time, committing the very act of filthy Whordome and adulterye: If he (I say)
upon the consideration of his own damnable state that he stands in, would go
unto a discrete, godly, and well learned Preacher of Gods word, and
plainelye utter unto him his abominable deeds in general words, and ask
his best counsel and advise therein. Truly this Preacher would first declare
unto him by Gods word, what great danger of eternal damnation that he then
stood in, and plainly tell him that God says in the Holy Scripture: That
neither Whoremongers nor adulterers shall inherit the Kingdom of God: And
that God thretneth to Judge and condemn both Adulterers and fornicatours. And
so grounding him self upon the Scripture and such like, thereby beating into
his Conscience, the fear of God* he would (...) him in any wise earnestlye
repe^te him self of his great sin, and commit him self by earnest,
faithful, and continual* Prayer, to the mercy of God in Christ Jesus. And in
any wise without any dela^e, refuse that filthis and detestable fashion of
living, or else, though he seemed never so much outwardli in this miserable
world to flourishe, yet should he continually live without the favor of God,
and under his great wrath and vengeance, not being in that state the seruante
of God, but the devils slave and bondsman, out of Gods Kingdom, and subject to
eternal death and damnation.

This thing earnestly How a great sinner should use him self to recover the
favor of God.
heard, diligently waied, and deepelye from the very he art considered: If
this sinner were one of Gods flock, at the hearing of this terrible sentence
of the Law, he would tremble and quake for fear, weep, wail and lament his
horrible and detestable state, cry and call incessantly for the unspeakable
mercy of God in Christ Jesus, trusting by his only means to obtain and get
again the favor of God, which through his careless disobedience he had lost.

And feather, he would humblye desire Counsel, which way he might best
hereafter avoid that horrible crime of filthy whordome and adultery.

Then his discreet Preservatives against whordome.
ghostlye father would exhort him, in any wise with all his due diligence,
daily and continuallye to practice these whole some preseruations and most
present remedies against whordo^. That is to say.

















avoiding of Whordome, then in any wise to take a wife, for when all other
remedies fail, that with the practicing of the other will serve. For that is
the most present medicine, and natural remedy that God has properly ordained,
to cure the disease of filthye concupiscence, whordome and adultrye, after the
doctrine of S. Paul, which faith: To avoid Wh^^do me, let every man take his
own wife, and 1. Corin. 7.
every woman her own husband.

Thirdly, this private ^^^^lession, is cheefelye needful for them that are
tormented in their Consciences, and are not fullye persuaded y^ their sins
are forgiven them, by reason whereof, they are half in desperation. These I
say, have much need of a discrete spiritual Physician to comfort them. For
unless their, weak faith ^e stayed and lifted up by some comfortable
restoratiues of the sweet promises of grace and mercy in Christ's Jesus: it is
to be feared, that their ghostly enemy Satan, will shortly bring them to
desperation, and finallye to everlasting damnation. Therefore here the
discreece ^oule Physician, will labor with too the and nail, to beat into
this spiritual pacients mind and remembrance, the most sweet, plain and
evident promises of Gods aid and assistance, to be always ready to them that
ask it in faithful prayer. Wherefore it is very needful to such weaklings
in the Faith, that are so sore bruised in Conscience, to make all the haste
that they can possible, to the Heardman of their souls, and plainly to open
and acknowledge their grief unto him, desiring to here of his mouth the
comfortable promises of grace in Christ Jesus, to stay and lift up their
weak and feeble Consciences.

Saint James says: Pray one for another, that ye may be healed. For (says
James. 5.
h^) the feruente Prayer of a righteous Man anayleth much. If the prayer of one
godly person be of much value, then is the prayers of two good Christians,
agreeing together in prayer, for any Godly purpose, of more value. For Christ
says: If two of you shall agree upon Math. 18.
earth (for what thing soever it be that they desire,) they shall have it of
my Father which is in Heaven. For where two or three are gathered together in
my name, there am I in the midst among them. Mark that Christ says: If two
of you shall agree upon earth etc. And where two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am I present among them. And I pray you, is not
this weak faythed person and his curate consulting of these matters gathered
together in Christ's name? If they be (as undoubtedly they are) then is Christ
in company with them, by the assistaunce of his grace and presence of his God
head. Again, if they two, thus assembled do agree to pray together to God,
for the increace and establlshme^t of the faith, of this Spiritual patient,
then says Christ unto them thus: If two of you shall agree upon earth, ( for
what thing so ever it be that they would desire) they shall have it of my
Father which is in Heaven. Good Lord what a comfortable place of scripture is
this? For we may learn by it, that if there be but two persons gathered
together in Christ's name* for any good and godly purpose, then is Christ
present with them* And if they agree to ask any godly request of God, they
shall have it granted, what thing soever it be (says Christ) so it be a
godly request contained within the lymits of faith and charity, and agreeing
unto 1. John. 5.
the will of God* For ^^ John says: If we shall ask any thing, according to
his will he hears us.

But here one will say:

For albeit S. James says Iam. 5.
Knoweledge your faults one to another.

Yet he says not one lay man unto a Preeste, nor one Parishione^ unto his own
Curate, and to no other: but he says generally, one to an other. Therefore I
think that I may as well make my confession to any other man, as unto a
Preeste, or unto mine own curate.

of God to preach unto thee, and to all other his Parishioners, both privately
and apertly, secretlye and openly, the Gospel of Christ to comfort thy soul
when need is. Which preaching of What is the true absolution.
Gods mercy, freely given to the faithful for Christ's sake, what other thing is
it, then the true absolution of their sins? For what other thing is the
private absolution of the priest, but a private or secret preaching of Christ's
Gospel. What can the Preeste more promise the sinner by his absolution, but
thereby to declare unto him, that if he repent him of his sinful life, and
unfeignedly purpose to amend, reposing his whole faith, trust and confidence in
the promises of grace and mercy in Christ Jesus, that then Gods truth shall
save him for Christ's sake? Can he promise the sinner any other thing then to
be saved, if he from the heart do repent, believe, and purpose to walk in a
new life? I think not. Resort therefore to thine own Curate if he be honest,
discreet, (and well learned, as I said before) and think him to be that
person that is appointed of God, to minister Christ's Gospel and his Sacraments
unto thee, at such convenient times, as shall be needful to the comfort of
thy troubled conscience.

There is also another kind of private Confession, Confession of
reconciliation.
which may aptly be called, the confession of reconciliation. As when I have
offended my christian Brother, and have provoked him to anger: It is my bounden
duetye, to reconcile my self unto him, and to acknowledge my fault, and
desire of him forgiveness thereof. This Confession is no less the^ commanded
of Christ to be done, and he esteems it so necessary to be done, y^ he
profereth it, and will have it done before we do any outward service,
sacrifice, honor or woorship unto him self. For this he says: If thou
offerest thy gift at the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has
ought against thee, leave there thine offering before the Altar, and go thy
way first, and reconcile thy self to thy brother, and then come did offer thy
gift.

L^^, h^^re may we see that Christ so much regards the atonement of them
that are at variante, and y^ mutual redress of charity, unity, peace, and
concord between them, that he will have that done before we shall ^^^
allowed of him to do any acceptable service or outward woorshippe unto him.
And truly I am much afraid, that the transgressing of this commandment of
Christ, will condemn almost all the whole world, because there is so much
breach of Charity, and so little regard of mutual reconciliation and
attoneme^t.

How be it, they that are of God, regenerated by his holy spirit, will be
very circumspect and take good heed that they give no just occasion of anger
unto their neighbor. But if they chance at any time (as all men are frail) by
their occasion to offend and grieve their even Christian: yet they will seek
all means to their possible power, and with all the speed that they can, to be
reconciled again unto them.

For who knowinge that he can by no means obtain Gods favor, unless he be at
one with his neighbor, will not in this point lay all worldly shame apart,
and (submitting his obedience unto the commandment of Christ) go to his
neighbor, knowledge his fault unto him, and humbly desire the forgiveness of his
tr^space? Truly he that unfeignedly fears God, and intends earnestly^ to
avoid his displeasure will not stick to do^ this godly woork, but will be glad
to do it and much more.

Also, I think it not unprofitable for you, if I inserte the Judgment of some
of the Ancient Fathers touching the Confession of sins.

Chrysostom says, I say not unto thee, that thou Chrysosto^ upon the 12. to
the Heb. the 31. Homely.
should bewray thy self abroad openly, neither yet accuse thy self
before other. But I will that thou obaye the Prophet, which says, Show unto
the Lord thy way, (that is, thy manner of living) therefore confess thy sins
before God, Confess thy sins before the true Judge, with prayer for the
wrong that thou have d(...)e, not with thy tongue, but in the memory of thy
conscience; And rhen at last believe, that thou may get mercy; if thou have
them continuallye in thy mind, thou shalt never keep any evil in thine
heart, against thy neighbor.

And furthermore says Chrysostom, If thou be ashamed Chrisosto^ upon the 56
Psalm.
to tell any man thy sins, tell them daily to thy soul; I say not to thee
that thou should confess thee unto thy fellow servant, that he might
rebuke thee for them, tell thy sins unto God, which heals them, and if thou
do not tell him them, he knows them, for he was by when thou did them.
Chrisostom upon the in comprehensible nature of God in the 5. Hom.


Again he says, I desire and pray you, most dear brethren, to confess you
often unto the immortal God; and after that ye have reckoned up your sins,
ask forgiveness and that God will be merciful. I do not lead thee into the
common Hause of thy fellow servants; I compel thee not to open thy trespasses
unto men, rehearse thy conscience before God, declare and open thy self. Show
thy wounds unto the most excellent Physician, and ask of him a medicine.
Show unto him that will vpbraide thee of nothing, but will most gentlye heal
thee.

It is the office of God only to quicken within, and to take away sin,
which faith by the Prophet Cyrillu^ upon John the 11. Chapter.
I am he that puts away your iniquities.

And the same Cyrill says upon John, in the ^0. Chap. and in the 12. Book 56.
Doubtless it beelongeth only unto God to be able to loose men from sins,
for to what other man is it lawefull to deliver and quite the breakers of the
Law from sin, but to him that is the Auctor of the Law. And it follows:

For when they forgive and hold, the spirit which dwells in them, forgiueth
and holds thorough them.

It app^rtaineth only to God to forgive sins, Ambrose upon the l^tter of the
Corinth^ans 12. Chapter.
and to give the Holy Ghost if God have the effect and end of our health,
man can have no praise in this thing. And the same Ambrose says: The word of
God forgiueth sins, the Priest is the Judge. And the same Ambrose says: He
alone* forgiueth sins, which alone dies for our sins. Austen in the b^oke
of wholesome teachings.


^. Austen says: All evil vices ought to be far away from us, whiles
Christ will be our heritag^* Therefore because that we be uncertain of ^^che
things, let us fall down lowlye in the sight of our only Savior, and let us
bring forth our sins roundlye at once that our heavenly Father may take
them away, and when we have confessed us, let us not justify our selves in
our Prayer, least we go away condemned as the Pharisee did. Let us remember
the Publicane, and let us pray, so that we may deserve to get forgiveness
of our sins* let the crying of our heart beat and ascend unto the ^ares of
almightye God For with a pure mind he will be pleased in the time of Prayer.

It is not now necessary Chrisostom in a sermon of Confession and repentance.
to confess, other being present, which might hear our Confession; let the
seeking out of thy sins be in thy thought, let this Judgment be without
the presence of any body, let only God see thee, making thy confession. God
which does not vpbraide thee for thy sins, and cast them in thy teethe: but
loses them for thy Confession.

Go and show thee to a Preeste, etc. who is the Ambrose in the third Sermon,
upon Beat^ imaculat^.
true Priest, but he that is a Preeste for evermore? after the order of
Melchisedech.

What have I to do Austen in the tenth book of Confession in the third
Chapter.
with me^? that they should hear my Confessions, as though they should heal
all my diseases? Here is a curious and a busy kind of(...), to know another
man's life: and a slow sort to amend there own. Wherefore seek they to hear
of me what man I am, which will not hear of thee (O Lord) what they be.

Christ could not have Theophelactus upon Luke, in the first Chapter.
been known any other way, but by forgiving the people their sins, for it
is the office of God to forgive sins.

Of a surety it belongs to the virtue of Christ to deliver men from the
Chrysosto^ upon the fifth chap. of Matthew fifteen Homely.
filthiness of sins, but that they fall not again a fresh into them, it
pertains to the cure and labor of the Apostles. And Chrysostom, upon
the.viij. Chapter, in the liij. Homilye says: The bondage of sin is most
grievous, and from it only God can deliver us. For no man has power to
forgive sin, save only God.

We are reconciled and Austen in his book called Enchiridion, the 32. chap.
brought in favor again with God through Christ which is the mediator, that
of Enemies we might be made Sons. And in the xix. Chapter. Neither should
we be delivered through him as (...)lie the mediatoure of God and man, Christ
Jesus, if he were not also God. But when Adam was made, that is to wit, a
right man, he needed no mediator. But when as sin did separate and sunder
mankind far from God, we must be brought in favor again with God, by a
mediator and a mean which was only borne without sin* lived and was
slame, unto the rising again of the flesh and to everlasting life.

Beware thou show any Chrisostom of Lazarus in the 4. Sermon.
man thy sins, least he cast them in thy teeth, and revile thee for them.
Neither do thou confess thee unto thy fellowe-seruaunt, that he might tell
thy faults abroad, but to him which is the Lord and Master, which also
suffered for thee, to him that is kind and gentle, and then show thy wounds
unto him, which is a Physician. And a little after he says: God will that thou
should tell, not that thou should be punished, but be released and justified,

Seeing that we know Chrisostom of repentance in the fourth Homely.
these things, let us always flee for succor unto God, which both will and
may take away all our greefes and sins. If at any time we must get any
thing of men, by prayer, we must first meet with the Porter, and entise the
flatterers, the iesters, and the Plaiers, and Skoffers, and oftentimes go a
great way. There is no such^ thing in God, ye may easily get by prayer of
him, he will grant you your petitions and Prayers without any money or cost.

Saint Ambrose says: Peter mourned and wept, because he erred as a Ambrose
upon Luke.
man. I find not what he said, I know that he wept, I read of his tears,
but I read not of his satisfaction.

Thou need no helpers nor Advocates with God, neither any great Chrisostom
in the Homely of the going forward of the Gospel.
running about to flatter other men, but though thou be alone, and haste no
Patron or Advocate, and make thy Prayer thy own self unto God, doubtless
thou shall obtain thy purpose. For God does not so easilye hear when other
prays for us, as when we pray our selves, although we be full of much
evil and unrighteousness.

Thus have I declared unto you after my slender gift of knoweledge both the
Judgment of the Aunciente Fathers of the Primitive church, and what I have
read and learned in holy Scripture, touching the confess(...) of sins.

Besides al these former fortes of confession, there was also used in the
primati^e Church, an open Confession, which they that had been excommunicated
Another Confession
for great and ha^nous sins, made before the whole congregation at such time
as they were restored again to the same. But because this is now out of use
(it is the more to be lamented) I will here speak no more of it. But whereas
in the latter end of your letters, you instantlye desired me to write unto
you, what I think of the ear Confession, that is so straitlye commanded
among the papists. Truly to utter my Conscience plainelye unto you in few
words: Abuses of ear Confession.
I think it brings many a simple soul to the hazard of damnation. For
doubtless there are many shameful abuses therein, of which I will (by the
grace of God) rehearse two or three which are intolerable.

they cannot be saved, So this opinion of necessitye of the one party, and
the compulsarye laws made of stinking Papists for the maintenance of the
same, on the other party, (I know this certainlye) brings very many to
perplexed and doubtful straites of conscience, which (if it be not in time
removed by y^ sw^te promises of grace i^ christ) will doubtless d^ine the^ to
desperation.

and place: and how many times every sin was committed. Which opinion
persuaded to the unlearned People, is not unlike to bring many of their souls
unto the devils danger. For they think themselves bounden in Conscience (for
so are they coruptly taught) to confess every sin perticularlye by it self,
and ^^ open and declare to their ghostlye father, every circumstaunce of the
same. And yet sometime for fear, and sometime for shame, they confess not
all, but concealeth and hides some offense. Which not confessed oppresses
their weak and feeble Consciences, sometime three or four years or more, and
so all that space they think themselves because of that concealemente to be
in the state of damnation, and quite out of Gods favor. And many times (if the
thing were thorowelye known) it is scantlye so weighty a matter, as the
eating of an egg upon a Fridaye, so deepelye are the Popish traditions
printed in their tender Consciences, esteeming the breach of them to be a
greater offense, the^ idolatrye, blasphemye, perjury* theft, slander or any
transgression of Gods holy commandments. Which thing ought to make all the
Babilonicall Bishops ashamed (but y^ they are past all shame already) because
they suffer Gods people to be so drowned in ignorance, that they can not
discern the commandments of God, from the dirtye dregs of Papisticall
traditions. And albeit the holy scripture allows these sorts of Confession
that I have spoken of before in this Epistle: yet for all that, the prowdest
Papiste of them all, cannot find in holy Scripture these words or
sentences: To his own Curate whatsoever he is: all Sins perticularlye: all
circumstances: and such like trash. For all these are nothing else but Pedlarye
patches of Papistrye. Which I pray God may be purged again, and banished out
of Christendom, and that shortly.

Finally, beside the aforesaid abuses of ear Confession, the common sort of
people are therewith two manner of ways deceived. First, because they think,
that their Confession is the cause of forgiveness of their sins: by reason
whereof, they blotte out the blessed benefit of the passion and death of
Christ our only Savior: which is the only obtayner of Grace and Mer^ys, for
the Sins of all mankind Secondarilye, because they are fullye persuaded that
the Penance, that is, that Fasting, Prayer, or alme(...) enjoined them of
their ghostlye Father, is the due satisfaction and full recompensation to God,
equiuolente for their sins past, which they have confessed to the Preeste:
And so for lack of knowledge and instruction, they are therein utterly
deceived. For sure it is, that to God, no man is able to satisfy for Sin:
for that satisfaction has only our Savior Christ wrought in his paynefull
(...) ^ ^ ^ ^^* but ^^ will at this (...) them over (...).

Thus (...) have I (...) you of the Confession of sins, to declare unto you
my conscience and simple Iudgmente therein, according to your request in you:
(...) Letters, written unto me by NICHOLAS NERIN, from Roane in France, the
eight day of IANVARIE. And ^^ you accept of my rude writing and collection in
this matter: I shall by the grace of God do mine endeavor likewise in other
matters of holy Scripture, to show you hereafter my small and slender
knowledge and judgment. Thus the living God increace in you daily more and
more, faith, charity, meekness, godliness and patience. Amen.

From Copyn Haven in Denmark the 3. of Februarye. If you write again to me
write to Geneua, for thitherwards by Gods grace, I intend to go shortly. Yours
in the Lord. T. C.

(...) by Eaward Allde for Edward White, and are to be sold at the little
North door of S. Paul's Church at the sign of the Gun.


