A HAND OF FELLOWSHIP, TO HELP KEEP OVT SIN AND ANTICHRIST. In certain
Sermons preached upon several occasions: By ROBERT ABBOT, Preacher of Gods
Word at Cranebrooke in KENT.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Nathaniel Butter. 1623.

DAVID'S DESIRES. THE ASSIZE AT HOME. UPON PSALM 27.4. By ROBERT ABBOT.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Nathaniel Butter. 1623.

The principal Contents of the Book following, are,
1 DAVID'S Desires, from PSALM 27.4. wherein we are persuaded to desire the
ordinary means of salvation, and to be true members of the true Church, wherein
we may use them. 2 The Assize at Home, from JAMES the 2.4. wherein all are
persuaded to hearken to the voice of Conscience, that all things may go well
both in the Church and Commonwealth. 3 The hid man of the heart, from the 2
COR. 4.17. wherein we are directed in the trial of our spiritual estates,
that so we, finding our death to sin, and life in grace, may assure our
hearts that we have right in Christ. 4 A preuenter of Security from 1 PETER
4.7. wherein we are persuaded to watch both against Popish doctrine and wicked
living in these last and perilous times. 5 The new man's new life, from GAL.
2.20. wherein both our cursed death in sin is discovered, that we may be
wounded for it, and our life in grace is opened, that we may rejoice in it, and
seek to nourish it. 6 The trial of True Religion, from JAMES 1.27. wherein we
are persuaded to be of a Religion, and are taught by easy trial to see the
truth of our Religion, and the falsehood of the Romish Apostasy.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR THOMAS ROBERDS Knight and Baronet, and to the
Lady FRANCES his faithful yoke fellow; Grace, mercy, and peace from God our
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ by the Holy Ghost.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
IF I may be bold to look so high, I dare look no higher than your selves in
this my dedication. Were I able to bring forth a birth worthy of a higher
countenance, to whom should I offer it but unto my Lords Grace of Canterbury,
from whom I have received all my worldly maintenance, under whom I do enjoy
all my best earthly countenance, and at whose lips I have received such most
fatherly encouragements (both to take heed to reading, and to doctrine, and
also to pray to God morning and evening, that God may be my God when I least
dream of him) as I hope I shall never be backward to acknowledge, always
ready to make use of, to the improuement of those spiritual graces, wherewith
through Gods gracious gift, I came into this Country. But I never yet could so
ouerweene my own abilities, as to think their fruit worthy of such a
patronage. If I seem not too presumptuous in what I do, (I hope) I never
shall in what I might do. It is my joy and my rejoicing, that within mine own
circle God has raised me up such friends, as will not easily take in ill part
my loving rudeness toward them. Some few years experience makes this good of
your worthy selves, who have so faithfully showed your selves friends, so
cheerfully auditors, and so patiently given me leave, both publicly and
privately to stir up your willing minds, that I cannot entertain the least
doubt of your kind embracings of this poor acknowledgment of my thankfulness
unto you. I remember what Socrates did reply to Aeschines his scholar, when
being poor he took it to heart that he was not able to gratify him, his
Master, as others did: Annon intelligis quam magnum munus mihi dedisti? nisi
forte teipsum parvi aestimas.
Do thou not know (says Socrates) how great a gift thou have given me?
belike thou accountest thy self little worth. Implying that he accounted his
gift (though poor) more precious than theirs who were rich; because they had
given him of theirs, he had given him himself. Right thus do I judge the case
to be between your Worships and my self: It may trouble me that I have no
better to give, but I know it contents you that I give my self, to wit, my
presence to your persons, my prayers for your estates, and my uttermost
abilities in the execution of my weak ministry for the eternal good of
your, with all my dear peoples, souls. A taste of this I offer unto you in
these two Sermons, which were first made public at two Assizes by the joint
request of you both: next are made public in Print by mine own offer, and
desire of the good of Gods Church. God give them acceptance in the eyes of his
people. I do not look that they should find a like entertainment amongst
all. My aim is to warm the hearts of my dear Countrymen: whereto if the
force of my poor spark will not extend, my nearer aim^ is to do good unto my
flock: which yet if I cannot reach, my nearest aim is to show my self
thankful unto you both; and above all to set forth the honor of God in
awaking conscience, and wooing and winning desires to this his true Church.
Busy are the adversaries of our common mother (the Church of England) to gain
appetites and affections to Rome. Many words are thought too few, much
eloquence too little, and the rolling of all stones not enough to this end. If
therefore Croesus his dumb son could speak when he saw one offering
violence to his father, Homo, ne intersicias Croesum.
saying, O man, kill not Croesus: then no marvel if we, that are speaking
sons of our dear Mother, do plead her cause, and redeem her credit from
the slander of strangers, yea of her unnatural children. It was a military
law of old, that the soldiers who had not killed an enemy should not be
girded with a girdle but with an halter: and surely me thinks the law were good
to be executed upon them who have not maintained the Church their mother as
they are able. To avoid this censure I have done my best, as I could, in a
word: and if I meet with a heavier censure for doing what I have, than if I had
done nothing; my comfort is that I have used my talent with an honest heart;
and therefore am not altogether out of hope, that I may be a little blast in
Gods mouth, a little to consume the Man of Sin in them that cannot search
either more large or learned books. There is but one thing above the rest
which breeds prejudice in men's minds, and keeps them from making use of our
writings: and that is this, A politic persuasion by cunning leaders, that we
preach a new doctrine, and walk not in the traces of our forefathers. But if
either of these could be justly fastened upon us, we should hate our selves, our
doctrine, our course. As for our doctrine, we heartily confess that it is
impossible that saving truth should be kept up in a corner and not disclosed
till latter days. It neither stands with Gods love, who wills that all men
should be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth: nor with his truth, who
has promised to lead his Church, (so long as it is so) not by divine unction
only, as others say, but by ordinary means, into all supernatural truths.
Therefore as our blessed Savior put his doctrine upon this trial, From the
beginning it was not so; even so do we. It is true, that truth must stand
though it have no outward thing to commend it, even naked truth. When therefore
we appeal to the times before, Veritati credimus, non quia cana, sed quia sana.
we do it not as if Antiquity could make a truth, or as if we had no other
cause to embrace it; for the Devil was from the beginning, though God was
before him; (In which respect as Aristippus said to one who bragged of his
swimming, Art not thou ashamed to boast of that which every sprat can do? so
may we answer the great braggers of Antiquity, that they may be ashamed to
boast of that which the Devils may claim as well as they) but we do it as
outwardly commending that which is already truth unto us. Now because our
adversaries tell us that the truth we boast of has not this badge, but is of
yesterday of Luthers and Caluins hatching; I humbly beseech you but to inquire
Vide Musc. h. comm.
We cannot affirm it, because it is not evil in it self, and in it own
nature: for who desires not a new house rather than an old, and a new garment
rather than one consumed with age? I know there is difference between earthly
and heavenly things, but even in these things newness in it self is not to be
disallowed. For Christ compares his doctrine to new wine; Matthew 9.
and says, A new commandment give I unto you; Ioh. 13.
and gives a new testament, Luke 22.
whereof the cup in the Sacrament is a sign and seal. It remains then that
we do distinguish of newness, and find out two kinds of it: The first we
may call cursed Novelty, when, by intrusion of error to those that are in the
right way, truth and goodness are iustled out of the way: Deuteronomy. 32.
as when the Jews brought in new and strange gods which their fathers knew
not, the false Apostles another Gospel, Gal. 1.6.
and the like. The second we may call gracious newness, when divine truth is
brought in to those that are in sin and error. 1 Cor. 5.
Thus those that are in the old leaven of sin are provoked to newness; 2
Cor. 5. Ephesians. 4. Col. 3. Mar. 1.27. Act. 17.19.
and our fathers who were in the old way of error had the new doctrine of the
Gospel preached unto them. Secondly, put case Illud novum est quod antea nec
fuit unquam, nec visum est, nec auditum hactenus, sed jam primum coepit, and in
lucem emersit.
is the truth in our Church new? No surely: that did not then begin to be, when
the fresh preaching of it was renewed. For it is that which the Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Apostles, have taught and believed; and from thence we fetch it.
We carry it along in that little flock of all times, who, according to the
measure of means which God vouchsafed, have kept their garments in the midst
of Popish tyranny, and at the length after much corruption, contracted through
the want of watchfulness in a secure and prosperous estate, we present it unto
the Church again in that blessed manner wherein we now enjoy it. As the Law of
Moses was not new when it was published unto Israel, but the renewed law of
nature; and the Gospel was not new, when it was preached by the Apostles, but
the renewed doctrine of faith: so the truth of our Church was not new, when it
was published by Luther, and Calvin, and the other Worthies of God; but the
renewed truth which appeared more gloriously after the desperate sickness of
error in the Church under the more prevailing power of Antichrist. If you
shall here say, that it did appear new to the wise of that age; I yield it did
so to the wise men after the flesh: our improuident fathers, was scarce
confessed of them that were her children at her return. These three points
being thus considered, we say, Act. 24.14.
that after the way which they call heresy and novelty, we worship the Lord
God of our fathers; but that our truth and doctrine is novelty, we leave it
unto them that can to prove. Especially considering that we take but his
liberty, who, being urged with what a Father thought, Sed pater patrum
Apostolus aliter sensit. Mihi antiquitas Jesus Christus, cui non obedire
manifestus est and irremissibilis interitus.
said, But the Apostle the father of Fathers has thought otherwise; and
resolve with another, that Jesus Christ is our antiquity, whom not to obey is
apparent and irremissible ruin.

Now for the second part of the charge, that we walk not in the traces of our
forefathers; may it please your Worships to consider thus much: First, that we
hearken to the voice of God in the Scriptures, which do blame Gods own people
for sticking too close unto the examples of their fathers, I^r. 44.16, 17.
Ezekiel. 20.18, 19, 30.
where the word of God gives no warrant; and do threaten them who follow their
fathers who have forsaken the Lord and walked after other gods; Ezekiel. 16.11,
12, 13.
and do charge them that they should not be as their fathers, unto whom the
Prophets said, Zach. 1.4.
Turn from your evil ways, but they would not hear. Secondly, we have
tender and child-like affections to our forefathers. And therefore we
cheerfully imitate their manifest virtues; we do, in reverence to their
persons, bury their errors in oblivion; of their doubtful actions we do
admit of the most favorable construction; the blemishes of their religion we
wash from their understandings, wills, and affections, with remembering their
miserable times wherein the key of knowledge was kept from them, and the
blindness of their guides, who kept them in darkness that they might the
better make their own games: and concerning their eternal estate with God, we
have thoughts of comfort, both because their ignorance was inevitable, as also
because they practiced according to that Christian knowledge which then was
attainable, and sinned not wilfully as we do against that glorious light which
God does now offer in the ministry of his most holy word. Thirdly,
considering that our forefathers acts are no sufficient warrant for us, we,
notwithstanding our reverence unto them, dare not swear to their sayings, and
admit of a blind imitation of their actions without trial; but, with a holy
anger against that cursed apostasy which misled our dear predecessors, and
brought them to some acts of superstition, we bring them to the touchstone of
Gods word, and wherein he will have us leave them we follow God, and humbly
thank him for that revelation; wherein he will give us leave to go with them,
we cheerfully follow them; blessing the same God who made them such faithful
guides.

Thus (I fear) I have been too long in striving to root out the conceits of
novelty and unnaturalness in those truths, which our writings will present
unto you. But having so good proof of both your loves unto me, I doubt not but
either of you, and both of you, will spare so much time as may afford diligent
reading and observation of what is written. As for the Writer, ye may have a
more complementall, not a more hearty well-willer. As for the subject of my
writing, as Terentius, a noble Captain, in days of old, when he saw his
petition (which he put up for the Christians) to be torn in pieces by the
Emperor, gathered up the tottered shreds, and said, I seek neither houses nor
lands, gold nor gain, but a Church: So have I wholly aimed at Conscience and a
Church, the Church of God amongst us. What shall I now say? To you (Sir) as
Occham said to the Emperor in another case and kind, when he was vexed with
the Popes ambition; Tu me defend gladio, ego te defendam verbo.
Defend me with your sword, and I will defend and second you by the Word, the
Spirits sword. To you (Madame) as Paul to the Hebrews, Pray for us: Hebr.
13.18.
for we are assured that we have a good conscience in all things, willing to
live honestly. To you both, live to your selves, live to yours, live to the
Church of God amongst us. So shall he with more cheer put up your suits to
God, who already is much, and desires to be more bound unto your Worships, and
shall rest

Your faithful Shepherd to use in any thing within the compass of his office,
ROBERT ABBOT.

TO THOSE CHRISTIAN Readers, of whose reading I am well assured, even to my
dear and loving Parishioners of Cranebrooke in Kent.
THE GOD of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, Heb. 13.20,
21.
the great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you all perfect in all good works, to do his will, working in
you that which is pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Though
I cannot say with Paul to the Galathians, I bear you record, that if it had
been possible, Gal. 4.15.
ye would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them me: Yet, out of
a taste of the singular love and respect which ye have had unto me for my
works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.
I can with good conscience greet you as the same Apostle does the Philippians;
My brethren, beloved and lon^ed for, my joy, Phil 4.1.
and my crown; and do beseech you to continue in the Lord ye beloved. Ye
see that in publishing these Sermons, I do offer my self unto public
censures. In so good a cause I only desire to be found faithful, 1 Cor. 4.2, 3.
and then I care little to be judged by man's judgment: I know that some of the
things which I write of, are commonly known: 2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 14, 15.
yet I will not be unmindful to put you in remembrance of what ye have
knowledge, and of that truth wherein ye are already established. And though I
cannot say that the time is at hand, that I must lay down this my Tabernacle,
yet I think it meet, so long as am in it, to stir you up, yea and to
endeavor that you may have in remembrance the secret of the Gospel even after
my departure. 1 Timothy 3.16.
For I have not followed deceivable fables, but the mystery of godliness,
which may help you with, or hold you out, a right hand of fellowship to keep
out sin and Antichrist. I have no dominion over your faith, 2 Cor. 1.24.
yet am I under God a helper of your joy: Gal. 3.7.
In which respect ye have run well, and ye do well, in that (in my weak,
but, by Gods favor, willing Ministry) ye have and do take heed unto the
most sure word of the Prophets, 2 Pet. 1.19.
as unto a light that shines in a dark place, James 1.21.
and as to that good word of God, which is able to save your souls. 2 Thessalonians.
1.11, 12
And I desire to pray always for you, that our God may make you worthy of his
calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of
faith with power: That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in
you, and you in him, according to the grace of our God. 1 Thessalonians. 2.19, 20
For what is my hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the
presence of our Lord Jesus at his coming? Yea, ye are my glory and joy. And
therefore (because one desire of mine is to keep out sin) I will pray again
for you, Ephesians. 3.14. Verse. 16.
and bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, That he would grant
you according to the riches of his glory, that ye may be strengthened by his
Spirit in the inner man: Verse. 17.
That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. Oh how unwillingly should I say
of you with the Apostle, Gal. 4.11. 1 Cor. 6.15.19.
I am in fear of you, lest I have bestowed on you labor in vain. Know ye
not that your bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost in you, and the members
of Christ? Phil. 2.1, 2.
If therefore there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if
any fellowship of the Spirit, if any compassion and mercy, fulfill my joy, In
thinking upon and doing whatsoever things are true, Philip. 4.8.
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things pertain to love, whatsoever things are of good
report, or if there be any other virtue. I know that in times past ye were
foolish, Titus 3.3.
disobedient, deceived, serving the lusts and diverse pleasures, living in
maliciousness and envy, hateful and hating one another. But it is sufficient,
yea too too much for you, 1 Pet. 4.3.
that ye have spent the time past of your lives after the lusts of the
Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts, drunkenness, in gluttony, drinkings,
and in abominable security. Now therefore dearly beloved, 1 Pet. 2.11, 12.
abstain from fleshly lusts which fight against the soul, and have your
conuersations honest amongst the wicked, both that they who speak evil of
you, as of evil doers, may glorify God in the day of their visitations; and
also that you may assure your selves that you are in Christ by being new
creatures. 2 Cor. 5.17. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.


Dearly beloved, Antichrist also and his mystery of iniquity has already
wrought even from the Apostles times, and is so far grown past his height,
that his raging time is come, because his time is but short. Therefore, Beware
of dogs, Phil. 3.2.
beware of evil workers: For there are false teachers, which privily, 2 Pet.
2.1. Mark 8.15.
with many false glosses, bring in damnable heresies. But take heed and beware
of the leaven of the Pharisees: Matthew. 7.16.
By their fruits ye shall know them. 1 Timothy 4.1.3.
They forbid marriage and meats by the doctrine of devils, and serve not the
Lord Jesus, Romans 16.18.
but their own bellies, and with fair speech and flattering deceive the
hearts of the simple. They despise government, 2 Pet. 2.10.
and fear not to speak evil of them that are in dignity. They have hearts
exercised with covetousness, Verse. 14. Verse. 16.
eyes full of adultery: tongues that speak swelling words, and boast of high
matters. They are brute beasts, lead with sensuality, Verse. 12.
and made to be taken at the last and destroyed. 2 Pet. 3.17, 18.
But beware lest ye be plucked away with the error of the wicked, and fall
from your own steadfastness; but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Finally, brethren, 2 Cor. 13.11.
fare ye well, be of one mind, and live in peace. Gal. 5.15.
If ye bite and devour one another, take heed lest ye be devoured one of
another. All which that it may the better be effected, Gal. 4.19.
(my little children of whom I have traveled in birth, Heb. 13.17.
and for whose growth I shall travel) I beseech you obey me still, who have the
oversight of you, in the Lord, and submit your selves, for I desire to watch
for your souls, as one that must give accounts, that I may do it with joy,
and not with grief, for that will be unprofitable for you. Now because my
hearts desire is, Romans 10.1.
that you may be saved; and that to this end I may still pray for you, and show
you the good way; therefore I humbly pray the very God of peace to sanctify
you throughout, 1 Samuel 12.23. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
and that your whole spirits, and souls, and bodies, may be kept blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. So prays he, who desires that his
ministry amongst you may be a savor of life unto life, even your euer-louing
Shepherd and Watchman,

ROBERT ABBOT.

Faults escaped.
PAge 20. line 10. read brethren for brother. p. 22. l. 30. r. in the mids of,
for about. p. 39. l. 22. r. ye for yea. p. 40. l. 7. r. him for whom. p. 44.
l. 14. add to service (in an) and l. 15. add to unknown (tongue) p. 56. l
22. r. in them, for them in. p. 62. l. 1. r. mouings for meanings. p. 71. l.
15. r. parley for party. p. 84. l 9. r. five for fine. p. 113. marg. r. Gal. 2.
for Apoc. p. 118. l. 21 r. and for in. l 22. r. thy for the, and wherein for
whereof p. 129. l. 26. between ^he second and the third word, put in (live in
sin.) p. 136. l. 1. for I am, r. (am J) p. 184. l. 12. between the eight and
the ninth words, put in (powers of.)

TO HIS REVEREND and right Worshipful brethren, the Preachers of the glorious
Gospel within the Deanery of Charing in Kent: ROBERT ABBOTT their
fellow-Souldier, for the maintenance of the Gospel wishes faithfulness and
constancy to the end.
Right Worshipful, Reverend, and beloved:
WHom our gracious God has united in one common service, I neither can in
affection, nor could in Epistle at this time sever; especially, considering
that what I shall say to one is fitly appliable to you all. My request only is,
that what I speak freely to one, may with a loving and yielding acceptance be
entertained of all, as the messenger of an honest heart, desirous to stir up
the grace of God which is in you, and to provoke your willing minds. I
remember what is said of the sack of Benjamin by the way, when the sack was
opened, Sacco soluto reluxit argentum.
the money appeared: which though I cannot apply to what I have said in my
Sermon, or shall say at this time; yet this I will say, that no packet shall be
opened wherein you shall discover more love and intention of spirit to do your
souls good. Man's good thoughts were not given him for himself only, but for
communication. For if they had, as the G^d of Nature would not have taught the
tongue to speak them; so the God of Art would not have taught the pen to write
them. This is the cause that what meditations God has briefly put into my
heart to warm my self, those have and shall I more largely blow and kindle
to heat you all in that ministerial course, in which God has set you. I
presuppose these two propositions to be Gods truth. First, that the Churches
special servants are of Gods sending. And secondly, that it is necessary that
the people, to whom we preach, should be persuaded of it. Is not Jerusalem
which is above the Mother of us all? Whence then should we expect all her
seruitours not left free to her self, but from our fathers appointment? Yet
what though we are called by God; will it ever be so comfortable unto us, if
the people to whom we are sent do not know it? We would willingly that they
should hear what we speak in Christ's stead, not as the word of man, but as it
is indeed the word of God: which yet they can never do, except they are
persuaded that we are sent of God.

It is therefore worth our marking, to see how the Apostle labors the
persuasion of this point: For himself, he does still urge his mission; That
the Gospel which he preached was not after men, but that he was called by
God. And for all others, he calls them Soldiers, as having received their
press from God; and Ministers, that all the world may know, that God keeps
the royalty of his Office in his own hand, and makes us his Servants, yea
Cryers, to lend our good will and voice to his matters to be published. No
doubt the holy Ghost foresaw the necessity of this persuasion, not only that
the ministry might have the greater attention, and respect given unto it, but
that Lydeas heart might be opened, Felix might tremble, the Jews might be
pricked in their very hearts, and made to cry out; Men and brethren, what
shall we do to be saved! Yea, and the secrets of hearers hearts might be made
manifest, and they may fall down on their faces, and worship God, and say
plainly; That God is in you indeed. Oh that now and ever God would give us
hearts to live like those that are sent. By the arm Physicians pass judgment
of the heart, Per Brachium fit iudicium de Cord.
and the people of our Sending by our Actions.

If therefore your tender consciences do enquire, how ye may so live? Oh that
I could persuade you to satisfy them by observing these three rules: First,
strive to behave your selves like men of knowledge, by taking heed to doctrine
and to reading; they that must divide the word of God aright, and buckle with
such cursed wits, as are in many places abroach to defend the ways of sin,
had need be more then idle or Idol Shepherds. They that must have an eye (as
far as they can) to discern the state of their flocks, that they may encourage
the strong, add strength to the weak, and defend all (as near as they can)
from the privy blames of their secretest adversaries, had need be such
Messengers, such Interpreters as beseem that glorious calling. Indeed, Vt
prodeat, vt appereat os, vt finem faciat.
if it would suffice a Minister, that he come up into the Pulpit, and speak,
and make an end, we might soon persuade our selves that we are sent; but I
like Luthers judgment well, who requires three things in a sent Preacher;
Prayer, Study, and Temptation: The first, to prevent and follow study; the
second, to practice prayer: and the third, to sweeten both. We must pray, that
we may study profitable things: we must study, that we may do answerable
to our petitions, both toward our selves and others: and we must find by
experience in the combats with the power of darkness, that we being tempted
against both, do fight the good fight of Faith. Now, whether it be thus with
us, I appeal unto our souls, as in the sight of God.

Secondly, seek your Masters honor: He is an Antichrist, who comes in his
own name; but he that can say with John Baptist; He must increase, I must
decrease, he is the man that is sent. How many times do our accusing thoughts
hit us in the teeth with our seeking our selves? How did that speech become a
dying Prel^te: So the Church may live and flourish, Modo viuat ac storeat
Ecclesia me moriente, ago non curo.
I care not though I dye? And how would the speech of Ecebolius become us (in
another case) Trample upon me unsavory salt, so my God may be honored? But
alas, as a false-hearted woer, who is sent to speak a good word for his
Friend, speaks one word for his friend, and two for himself: so (I doubt)
deal some of us with God. For our Masters sake, whose Ambassadors we are; for
our souls sake, which we do pawn unto God, think seriously upon these
things. And know this for a truth, that by how much more we make God to
appear in his Treasure (hiding humane wisdom, and speaking by power from on
high, in evidence of spirit) and our selves to be but earthen vessels, by so
much more we may persuade our hearts, that we are sent of God.

If you ask me, what particular direction I propound unto my self in seeking
of my Masters honor? I answer, the Sun is called in Hebrew tongue by three
names. The first signifies the warm Sun, because nothing is hid from the
heat thereof. The second does signify the glistering Sun, because it being
an excelling sensible dazeleth the eyes of all beholders. The third signifies
a Minister or Servant, because God by it does minister light, heat, and
precious fruits to all people under heaven. When therefore I do consider, that
Ministers are called Stars in Gods right hand; and withal, that this great
Star, which God sends out of the Chambers of the dust, does thus declare the
glory of its Maker; I thought my self bound even so to seek the honor of God
by the light of Doctrine, by the heat of zeal, and by the fruit of a good
life. The same direction I commend to you: the light of Doctrine must shine
from you: the heat of zeal must show in you: and the fruit of a good life must
be brought forth by you.

First, never forget that you are charged before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge both quick and dead, to be instant in preaching the
word: So that if the dignity of your Flocks, who are co-heires with Christ; or
the price of their redemption which is the blood of Jesus; or the hungring of
their souls for spiritual food, do not move you to powerfulness, yet let
Gods forenamed charge. O vtinam tam vigiles reperirentur ad curam, quam alacres
currunt ad cathedram.
I know that Bernards complaint may fitly take place; Oh that men were as
watchful to discharge their Cures, as they are cheerful to run unto their
Chaires! But, though Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah sin; though
others be careless, yet be it far from you, even from your thoughts and
inclinations. Is it difficult? be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus,
and not in your selves. Does it exhaust your spirits? care not to sacrifice
your selves in the service of the Church, so your God may have honor, and his
people edification.

Secondly, what Christ says to the Angel of Laodecea; Be zealous and amend:
that would I say to you. For what more needful? We dwell like men under the
friged zone, our Parishes Friezeland, our people frozen into the mud of the
world, and dregs of sin; and will not you be hissing hot in spirit? When
Paul saw the Idolatry of Athens, his spirit was stirred within him: and shall
we have no piety to God, no pity to men? Our words in our own cases manifest
heat; Caro suscepit dignitatem and anima perdidit honestatem.
and shall we be in Gods key cold? Ah, let it not be said, That the Flesh has
won honor, and the Spirit has lost honesty. I add no more to this, but
these few words; Let us take heed, lest as lukewarm creatures, God do spue
us out of his mouth, as a dishonorable burden.

For the last, be careful for a good life. Ambrose says; that, Speech without
life is not Gods. I will not say so, I know that God may speak out of a bush
that is good for nothing but burning: Yet this I say concerning him who
honors not his Master with the fruit of a good life, that I doubt whether he
can assure himself that he is of Gods sending, when as his steps lead toward
hell, though his finger point toward heaven. How frequently does God press
the good life of a Preacher? Yea, I remember the godly care which the great
Synderion amongst the Jews had to this purpose: They sat in a Chamber of the
Temple, to try and judge the Priests, both for their Genealogies, and
blemishes: by whom whatsoever Priest was found disallowable, was clothed in
black, and so went out of the Priests Court; and whosoever was found perfect and
fit, was clothed in white, and accounted worthy. To what end should the care of
God and man concur in this, if it were not necessary? You have learned how to
apply deeper things: I will therefore end this rule, with that speech of Jerome
to Nepotian; (...), sors. Talem se exhibere debet, vi and ipse possideat
dominum, and pos ideatur a domino.
Ministers are therefore called Clergymen, either because they are the Lords
lot, or because the Lord is their lot and portion: Now he which either is the
Lords part, or has the Lord for his, ought to carry himself, that both he
may possess the Lord, and be possessed of him.

The last rule which I would commend unto you to be observed, that you may
prove your selves to be sent of God, is, to be in a readiness to give your
Master an account of your service: For this is an argument of faithfulness,
and faithfulness of a divine Sender, who before he sends can try the heart and
reins.

Put case therefore that now ye heard that voice of God; Arise ye dead and
come to judgment: that now the earth did vomit up her dead; that Saint Peter
stood up with his converted Jews, and Paul with his Gentiles; that John came
in with Asia, Thomas India, and Titus Creta, What would ye do? What would ye
do, I say? Could ye say, Lord, I took thy person upon me, to feed thy Sheep,
of conscience, not of covetousness, to build up thy kingdom, not to enlarge
my own praise and purse: I have walked before thee with an upright heart in
the midst of thine house; and now (Lord) behold I am ready to give thee an
account of my sincerity, though not of my perfection? If it be thus (my
Reverend and beloved Brethren) give me your hands, and let us with comforts go
together and trade into heaven by prayer, study, and meditation for the best
commodities, that in Gods stead we may enrich his people, and present such as
belong to him as chaste Virgins to God in the day of Christ. What shall I now
say? I will humbly beseech you to measure with love what I have said; and to
supply some of the defects in particulars, with what I could say in the throng
of my businesses in the Sermon following, which I offer unto your eyes, as I have
(for the most part) unto your ears at our last Visitation, as ye freshly
remember: and with it I present you with the prayers of my heart, that this my
service may (in this kind) as it has (in another) be accepted, and also that
it may some way be profitable to provoke against all Antichristian
abominations. So prays he who desires ever to rest,

From my Study this 9th of May, 1625. Your faithful fellow-helper in the
harvest of CHRIST JESUS. Robert Abbott.

DAVID'S DESIRES.
PSALM. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I require, that I
may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the
beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his Temple.


WE have often, from this place, This Sermon was preached at an Assise.
been full fed and fatted with Sermons from Texts which have put both Judges,
and Iurers, Lawyers, Plaintiffes, and Defendants, in mind of such duties as
God does require at their hands: If you will give me leave this one time to
digress, I shall strive to wind up your hearts to heaven, to kindle your
affections to religion, and religious duties; knowing assuredly, that if once
we be good men, we shall also be good Commonwealths men, and do nothing but
that which is just in the sight of God and Man.

We read of the Bird of Paradise, that she having no legs, never touches the
earth, but lives in the air with the vapors which arise from below, till she
dies, and then she falls to the ground, and is discovered. Many such birds
of Paradise has our God, who though they suck upon earthly things for their
necessary relief and maintenance, yet have their conversation in heaven, and
are never discovered to be more earthly, than when by death they are brought
into the womb and embracings of the earth their common mother.

Amongst the rest DAVID has been famous in this kind, whose devotions do
discover such lively graces, such mortified lusts, such a heavenly mind, and
such an anatomy of a good soul (as the Psalms are aptly called) that as it
was with Jerome, when he had read the life and death of Hilarion, he folded up
his book and said, Well Hilarion, thou shall be the Champion whom I will
follow: so it may be with us when we read the sweet precepts and godly
patterns of devotion in David, we may justly cry out, Well David, thou shall
be the champion whom we will follow.

Through the whole body of the Psalms he has discovered wonders in this
kind; neither is this Psalm barren. For ye may find a threefold piece of
devotion in it. The first is showed by elevation: when by an exuberancie of
speech he lifts up his heart, and draws it to cling close unto God amid all
his enemies, Verse 1, 2, 3.
as his light, salvation, and strength.

Verse 4, 5, 6.


his heart to rest upon God to be unto him as he had said, and to do unto him
as he had desired. Verse 7, 8, etc.


We have to do, you see, with the second discovery of DAVID'S devotion, that
is, his admiration, secretly implied in the frame of his whole speech. Wherein
by the heavenly disposition of his desires, he does show his dependence upon
God in his ordinary course of offering grace. For whereas the souls of men
are considered, either according to their understandings, or according to their
desires and appetites reasonable and sensitive: DAVID having exercised his
understanding in the beholding of God, as he was to him, and as he would be to
his enemies, does here exercise his desires to Gods house. Touching which
desires these three things offer themselves to our consideration.

1. The office of his desires: which is showed in two things:

1. The first is their choice [One thing have I desired] They chose one thing
above the rest.

2. The second is their constancy [That will I seek.] He does prosecute his
desires, and will not let them vanish to no purpose.

2. The object of his desires [The house of God.] There was nothing after which
his heart panted more eagerly than Gods house.

3. The motives of his desires: which are two;

1. The worth of Gods house in it self: [Beauty,] amenitie, or sweet and
amiable presentment, which it offers and holds out to the godly view.

2. The worth of Gods house to DAVID: [To inquire in his Temple.] There he
could have matter of direction in such doubts and difficulties as did arise in
his whole course.

In the opening and applying of these several parts, let us in the fear of
God take diligent heed, and desire God that a voice behind us may so work upon
the hid man of the heart, that our hearts may answer to DAVID'S heart, as the
face of man answers to the face of man in the water, to our endless comfort.

1. The office of DAVID'S desires.
The first thing which we are to consider in the office of DAVID'S desires, is
their choice. Concerning which choice I offer this point to your consideration,
that

1. Choice.
The desires of Gods children are reserved for special uses.

It is a good Art to learn to limit our desires. By nature they are
boundless: the thirst whereof it is impossible that we should q^ench and
satisfy, but b^ filling them with God. For herein is seen the wisdom of God,
that he has made them of such an ample cap^citie, as we, perceiving no other
thing to be able to satisfy them, may conclude that they are reserved for a
more infinite object: which being perceived of Gods children, herein is
employed that skill which God has given them to call home their desires from
all other things to those things for which they are r^serued.

1 Cor. 12.31. 1 Cor. 14.1. Exodus ^0.
Desire you the best gifts: and Covet spiritual gifts; there are precepts.
Thou shall not covet any thing that is thy neighbors; there is a prohibition.
Paul desired no man's gold, silver, Act. 20.30.
or apparel: and he desired to know nothing among the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 2.
but Jesus Christ and him crucified; there is practice. And the Scripture
sets down the punishment o^ those who desired what they should not, with
the name of remembrance, Numb. 11.
Kibroth-Hattaauah, that is, the grave of lu^t. To what end else are those
precepts, that prohibition, Paul's pattern, and this judgment set down, but
to enforce this truth, that our desires ought to be reserved.

unto them, and to spend them as they should be spent! It is too true (as our
God knows, and our own consciences) that our desires are too too bad, being
infinitely carried to worldliness and wickedness. By them we have no peace,
but are like the raging Sea foaming up mire and dirt. By them our neighbor can
neither keep house, nor wife, nor goods, nor servant, nor cattle, nor any
thing that is his. By them we are made like the daughters of the Horseleech,
crying, Give, Give; Prou. 30.15.
and have enlarged our hearts like Hell which never cries Ho. Hosea 4.18.
By them the rulers love to say with shame, Bring ye: and Felix was often
moved by them to grope Paul, hoping that he should have found some money. Act.
24.27.
By them sometimes Judges hear persons speak, and not causes: and Iurers will
pollute their consciences for a friend. They are our greedy desires, which are
the causes of many crafty trauerse, repeales, delays, demurres, writs of
error, non-suits, excuses, and yet when the most is grasped in, the heart is
not at rest. Alas, what beauty is in this? Give me leave to propound (as in the
sight and presence of God) two sorts of things to your considerations.

1. Rules of limitation for our desires. 2. Motives to stir us up so to rule
them.
First, for the limiting of our desires, Three rules to li^ it our desires.
let us write in our hearts these three rules.

First, in worldly things let us only desire necessaries: Sufficiency in them:
for all the world is too little for our appetites; they being like fire, on
which the more wood is laid, the higher the flame rises. The reason whereof is
this; because our souls were made for God: as therefore no man can fill a
chest or bag with learning, because they were not made for it; so none can
fill their desires with the world, because they were made for God. Secondly,
there is no Perpetuity in them: for either we are taken from them, as it is
said to the rich fool in the Gospel, Luke 12.
O fool, this night shall thy soul be taken from thee; or else they are taken
from us, both when they perish in themselves by their corruptible nature, as
the rich man's gold in his chest and fold in his field; James 5.
as also when they perish to us, Job 1.
as Jobs substance by thieves and winds.

Exodus 15.11.
as Moses sings, Who is like unto thee among the gods? who is like unto thee
so glorious in holiness? 1 Thessalonians. 4.7.
So we are called not unto uncleanness, but unto holiness; 2 Cor. 6.16.
and God does dwell and walk amongst us. Remember what Moses says, Deuteronomy.
23.13, 14.
The Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy camp, therefore thine host
shall be holy: whereof that he may make the deeper impression, he gives the law
of the paddle staff to cover their excrements. Yea as God is holy, and we are
called unto holiness, and the holy God does dwell amongst us, so to make our
thirst to be freed from sin the greater, let us deeply apprehend that sin
is more hurtful unto us than the Devil. Were it not for sin the Devil
could do us no more hurt than he did to Christ, 1 Cor. 5.5.
when he tempted him. We may be delivered over to Satan, and be the better for
it; but if we be delivered over to sin, Romans 1.24.
there is no wickedness so great, which we will not run into to ripen our
damnation.

Satietas in sacris ne sit: erit. Two motives to stir us up to rule our
desires.
for this is the measure of our desires in these things, to covet them above
measure. At which height that we may aim, let us but commend unto our hearts,
and crave from God a blessing upon these two considerations.

First, that unruly desires do further discomfort much; Mark 4.19.
as Christ says of the lusting after the profits and pleasures of this world,
that they are as thorns. If inordinate desire after other things, does hinder
our worldly thriuing (it carrying our minds from our employments) then much
more the thriuing and well liking of our souls in grace and godliness.
Secondly, by helping sin: for as they do incline the will, and make the
whole man more apt for execution, (in which respect our desires may well be
said to add wings unto our souls;) so they do poison the understanding, and
make it sottish in spiritual things: for though there be first darkness in
our thoughts, and enmity in our wisdoms, Hester 1.
yet as Ahashuerosh does first draw his Courtiers unto wickedness, and then
his Courtiers do make him worse by flattery and other sinister means: so the
understanding does first surrender up her natural powers and offices, being
content to be blinded and mislead, and that way be given to the will and
desires to inthrone the Devil, and then the will and desires do more
infatuate the mind, the belly fighting with the brain, and misleading it
being blinded to the ruin of the whole man.

Secondly, consider that unruly desires do hinder comfort. Christianus est in
fieri non in facto.
A Christian is what he hopes to be (and therefore desires it) rather than what
he is by present practice. What is the good man's faith? Oh that I had Christ:
no doubt DAVID'S heart was not without a mystery, when he was so eagerly carried
after the water of the well of Bethlehem: and this is the mystery of faith in
our hearts, which is more eagerly carried after Christ with desires, than with
full persuasions. Psalm. 119.5.
And what is the good man's obedience? Oh that my ways were so direct, that I
might keep thy statutes! As therefore if we had but one worldly thing whence
we might reap comfort, we would make much of that; so let us deal by our
desires, make we them as precious as we can in Christ Jesus, that God may
accept the will for the deed.

It is true indeed, that that cursed flesh which is in our bosoms, prevails
against us much: but blessed shall we be, if our ears hearken in time to the
wholesome counsel following. We read of the Lake of Armach in Ireland, that
it has this property; If you thrust a staff into the bottom of it, that
part which is in the mudde is turned into iron, and that which is in the water
is turned into a whetstone. Like unto this staff is the flesh and spirit of
man in the Lake of this life. The flesh which carries a man's desires to dig
in the mudde of this world, is turned as it were into iron, (and therefore it
is no marvel if it prevail against our frailty:) but the spirit (which, at
the worst, descends no lower than to the troublesome billows of this world) is
as it were, turned into a whetstone: this must be broke off, and not only
scour the rust of the flesh, but even consume it, that so at the last we may
have our desires at command, as DAVID. Happy shall we be, if by being strong
in the Lord, and in the power of his might, we shall make our desires to be
like that living herb called Sentida, of which they write thus; That if a man
do but offer to touch it, it withdraws the leaves, and if he touch it
indeed, it dries up and withers, which yet so soon as the hand is
withdrawn flourishes again: happy (I say) shall we be, if thus, so soon as
any worldliness or wickedness do but offer to approach, we draw our desires
away by a sigh to heaven; if it take possession, we droope and die within our
selves, and never be at rest and flourish till it be gone again.

Thus we have viewed the choice of the Good-mans desires: Constancy.
The wickedest man amongst us may say: If this be so precious a thing to
reserve and limit my desires, as DAVID did to this (one thing) then I am sure
enough of my hand: for even I Balaam, who would have pleaded an ill cause, and
pronounced an unrighteous sentence, Numb. 23.10.
in cursing them whom God had blessed, and blessing them whom God had cursed,
Genesis 27.34.
have reserved my desires for the death of the righteous: and I Esau, who have
set more by earth than heaven, have reserved my desires for my Fathers
Prophetical blessing. But DAVID takes up the matter, and tells us, that as
it is the office of the good man's desire to make choice, so to be constant in
their choice, and to like the good object whereat it looks too well to change:
What I have desired, that will I seek. Hence carry this point with you, That

Gracious desire is not satisfied, till the party desiring do embrace the
thing desired.

Ye know how it was with DAVID, when he was desirous to find out a place for
the Arc, that sign of Gods presence, he had no rest till he had done it; he
would not come into the Tabernacle of his house, nor come upon his pallet or
bed, he would not suffer his eyes to sleep, Psalm. 132.3, 4.
nor his eyelids to slumber, till he had found out a place for it. Even so is
it with all Gods people, in prosecuting of al good desires: they are sick and
their souls faint within them, till they have brought them to some good pass.
See it in Christ's Spouse in the Canticles: Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
she desired communion and fellowship with Christ; wherefore she gave her
self no rest in her bed by night, she sought him whom her soul loved, and
though she found him not, yet she arose and resolved to seek him still: when
she could not enjoy her desired content by her own industry, she runs to
the Ministry of the Word, the Watchmen: thus she is like the Turtle that
mournes her self to death, if she cannot find her mate.

To open this more distinctly; the vnweariednesse of holy desires is seen in
three things.

Nehemiah, Should such a man as I fear? and this not out of self-love,
vainglory, check of conscience, but for God and goodness sake.



possessed the soul, wherein they were, for good, as we may see in Balaam:
for good desires look to the means, and will do any thing to accomplish
them, and not rest until in some measure they have embraced the desired good.

Now call over what has been said, again,

There is nothing more comfortable unto us, than to be brought within the
compass of the covenant of grace: A posteriori.
we know that none can conclude their interest in it, but such as have faith
and repentance. When we fall to the examining of these things, we comfort our
selves with this, That they are blessed who hunger and thirst after
righteousness: Matthew. 5.
for we, by the power of our consciences assuming that we are as hungry after
them, as DAVID and his soldiers, when they eat the Shewbread, and as thirsty
as Sampson after his fight, who cried out, Give me water, I die for thirst; do
conclude that we have faith and repentance. Seeing therefore that we do rest
upon our desires, is it not fit that we should try them? Yes surely, Lay then
then to DAVID'S, and we shall find that his were officiously constant, and ours
are negligently fickle. Do we desire faith? If our desires be gracious, we
will not only do it for a fit (as a jade will go upon speed for a plunge)
but, as a woman is at deaths door till she have her longing, we will be
heart-sicke till we have it. Oh how we pant to God, Lord that I may believe,
Lord increase my faith: How do we press upon the means, and will never give
rest till we find Jesus Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith, there killing
sin, and quickening grace. Do we desire repentance? If our desires be
gracious, we will never rest till in some measure we find it: yea when we
enjoy it in a less measure, we will not suffer our selves to be at peace till
we find it in a greater: yea we will fear always lest we have not repented
enough, and therefore we will roll our repentance together, and renew it
daily. Thus should our desires be constant; and as heavy things do naturally
tend downward to the Center, Plutarch.
so should our desires tend to practice and perfection. But as one does write
of young Marius, that by reason of the stoutnesse of his talk and gesture, he
obtained to be called the son of Mars, but when he came to proof he gained
a new name, and was called the son of Venus: so may we write of our desires,
that by our words they appear gracious, but by our actions they are led by our
souls, which live in our senses, to be too basely effeminate and fickle. As we
are wise-hearted Christians, let us be careful not to be deceived in them. To
this end let us never forget their offices both for choice and constancy, that
when they are brought unto their trial before the judgment seat of God, we
may plead, Lord, we have carried and spent our desires according to thine
assignement.

(the house of God:) which is to be considered two ways: 1. In the type, that
is, as that place which God did then ordinarily allow for his public service.
2. In the truth, that is, as the true Church of God, the body of Christ,
whereof this house of God, whereof DAVID speaks in this place, was but a
shadow.


If we consider it as the Tabernacle which was the place whither the Saints of
God did assemble for the public worship and service of God, then, in the
object of DAVID'S desires, I would have you to observe this point, That

The godly man's heart is carried after nothing more vehemently, than after the
house of God.

The Hebrews had a proverb, Blessed is he that dusteth himself in the dust
of the Temple: by which out of the height of their desires they bare witness
to DAVID'S speech, Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: Psalm. 84.4.
and showed that they were glad with him, when others said unto them, We will
go into the house of the Lord. Psalm. 122.1.
It is true indeed that DAVID did earnestly desire life at Gods hand, when he
says, Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: But why was it? For in death (says
he) there is no remembrance of thee; Psalm. 6.4, 5.
in the grave who shall praise thee? Mark I pray; that which set DAVID'S desire
on float, was not the kingdoms and glories of the world, but that he might
praise God after the manner of the living, with them that keep holy day. He
does as it were set his own glory upon one hand, and the worship of God in the
assembly of the Saints on the other; and his heart was more violently carried
after this than after that. Thus also was it with Paul, though he desired to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ; yet when he saw his place in the house of
God, and the use which the Church would have of him, he knew not what to
choose. Phil. 1.22.


Hence is it also that the Church in the first and chief place cries out to
Christ, Cant. 1.1.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. You will a^ke me, what are
these? I answer: There are two sorts of kisses betwixt Christ and us: First,
those which we give to Christ, that is, obedience and subjection, whereof the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 2.12.
Kiss the Son lest he be angry. Secondly, those which Christ gives to us:
which are not the kisses of his lips, as if ordinary, outward and bodily,
Proverbs.
but of his mouth: what are those? God has a wisdom which is also sometimes
called, Ioh. 1.1.
The Word, and this is the Christ the Son of the living God. He has a word
to signify it, and this is the Scripture, which is therefore called the sign
of his good pleasure to us: Voluntas signi.
and he has a mouth to declare and express it, which is the Ministry of the
Word in the Church: therefore the Prophets used this phrase, Esaias 1.20.
The mouth of the Lord has spoken it. This then was that which the Churches
heart was so violently carried after, that God would intimate and manifest his
dearest love unto her in his garden of Spices, in his Wine-seller, in the
assembly of the Saints by the Ministry of the Word.

Menstrua diligentia.
knowing that they are blessed that watch at the gates of wisdom, Prou. 8.33.
and give attendance at the posts of her doors. The impious Church-robbers can
say, come let us take the houses of God into our possession: let us take them
into our possessions by a better right; and comparing all the glory of the
world with them, cry out with the Psalmist, Why hoppe ye so ye high hills?
Psalm. 87.2, 3.
This is Gods hill in which it pleases him to dwell. God loves the gates of
Zion above all the dwellings of Jacob. And shall not we love his Church?
Consider what I shall say, and God give you understanding in all things. Here,
even here in the assembly of the Saints, God gives his beloved meat and drink,
with other necessary refreshments for their souls. The whole Church of God
may be compared to an house where there are places of repast, and places of
lodging: the Church militant may be compared to the Hall where all Gods
servants meet together in several assemblies for their spiritual food; the
Church triumphant to the lodgings where they rest from their labors. As
therefore we do discover our natural appetite to meat, drink, and clothing,
without which we cannot live; so should we discover the health of our souls by
a spiritual appetite to the refreshments of Gods house, without which we
cannot live happily.

It is true indeed, that our frequent assemblings to Gods house in many places
were enough to make us judge that we do vehemently affect it: but all is not
gold that glistereth. Some come of pride, when they so ouerweene themselves, I
condemn not hearing in season and out of season, but this foolish abuse by the
superstitious.
as if the ordinary employments of the world were not worthy to be a task for
them: and therefore they (by their good wills) will do nothing but hear,
hear, hear, as if the whole practice of Christianity stood in nothing but
hearing: some come of custom; some because others come; some because it is the
fashion; some of vainglory, and some of policy. Their motion hitherward is
not natural, proceeding from some internal principle of the spirits dwelling
in them, but violent by some of these outward engines.

Therefore in the fear of God hearken what I shall say. Some Heralds tell us
that none ought to bear gold yellow color in Arms but Emperors and Kings,
and such as be of the Blood Royal. Oh that none would bear the glittering
show of profession and holiness, but those that are of the race of Jesus
Christ the King of Kings! then should we not be as the Priests, Prince, and
people of Israel, a snare in Mizpeh to the simple, and a net spread on Mount
Tabor to catch them that know us not with an opinion of good men and women,
faithful companions, and dear friends, when nothing less.

To prevent this, and to work the contrary, let us but do as DAVID desires,
that is, dwell in Gods house: which yet he understands not of corporal
habitation (for the house of God is no ordinary palace for a Prince) but in
respect of spiritual affection. His heart was always there: not so much
through the love of the outward fabric, though never so glorious, as for the
presence there, and the duties performed. Let it be thus with us: let us not be
like the baser sort of people in Swethland, who do always break the Sabbath,
saying, that it is only for Gentlemen to keep that day; but let our hearts
dwell upon it, and upon Gods house, which was principally ordained for it. Let
our hearts be ready to meet it before it comes, and let our hearts follow after
it when it is gone. If it be thus with us, it is the only way to root out all
formalitie in us, and to work us to walk in this duty as in the sight and
presence of God. If it be not thus with us, the house of God will be so far
from doing of us good, that our corporal dwelling in it will do us hurt. For
as it is with a river near Buda in Hungary, it conuerts wood into stone: so
the word will be a savor of death unto death, and make the heart stony out
of Gods just judgment for the abuse of it.

3. Motives.
We have thus considered the object of DAVID'S desires: In the applying whereof,
I have striued to persuade you to desire as DAVID did. And because we are
backward to practice good duties, we therefore have need of many motives. But I
will not stray: take but the two motives of DAVID'S desires in this place.

1. The ^^ith of (...) house in ^^selfe.
The first is the worth of Gods house in it self, that is, the comely visage,
sweet presentment, or beauty of the Lord. Whence carry this observation always
with you, That

The house of God has worth in it self to draw our desires after it.

How amiable (says David) are thy Tabernacles, Psalm. 84.1.
O Lord of Hosts? Mark here two words; first he says, that the tabernacles of
God are amiable: That is amiable which has worth in it self to draw our love.
Love is in the lover, and not in things loved, it being wrought in us and
bestowed upon other things upon our weak apprehensions and opinions: but this
amiablenesse is in the thing it self whereto we look, which having worth does
draw our desires and affections after it. Secondly he says, How amiable!
whereby he does imply a secret consultation which he does make with his own
soul, concerning the excellency of the house of God, and a resolution that it
is so excellent that he cannot express it. But what was this beauty that set
on fire David's desires? Truly, there were many excellent rudiments both in the
Tabernacle and in the things contained in them pointing at and teaching Christ
to come, in which there could not but be matter of much beauty: yet this was
not all, nor it may be the principal that David means: For though (no doubt)
he was an excellent Master of Ceremonies, both for sign and sense, yet these
were not they that he beheld (for even Kings came but to the outer Court) and
the beauty of that stood in the common sacrifices, the word, prayer, and
praise, by the singing voices of men well ordered. You will say, what beauty
was there in the killing and burning of an ox? Surely none in it self, but as
it was the ordinance of God, showing both our guiltiness and lying in our own
goare, and also Jesus Christ dying to acquit us. What beauty is there in having
the Word of God read and expounded by a weak earthen vessel? Nothing in it
self, but as it is the ordinance of God for the discovering of God, seeing of
sin, converting of souls, mortifying of lusts, and putting of life into
grace. What beauty is there in hearing a man of polluted lips to pray, or in
praying with him, yea though his tongue be the pen of a ready writer? Truly
none in it self, but as the sighs and groans of the heart are linked together
in love, to knock at the gates of heaven to talk with God, to bind and open
his hands, to go into Gods treasury and fill our selves of Gods dainties, or
at the least to view them, and by confidence to crave and enjoy them. What
beauty is there to hear a company of people to clear their throats and to
chant out a Psalm or song, yea though spiritual? None in it self, but as by
the voice the graces of the spirit in the heart are exercised; as faith in
promises, fear in threatenings, love and joy in mercies, humility in arguments
of power and the like: When melody is thus made to God in the hid man of the
heart, this is beauty indeed.

These are also the beauty of the Lord in our Assemblies, save that now they
are more beautiful, because knowledge abounds as the waters of the Sea, Es. 11.
in a more plentiful and seasoning manner; as also now the sacrifice is more
excellent, being that one, once for all, appearing before God for us, and
presenting his merits to God, as a perfect and sufficient atonement, in our
behalf in the highest heavens, where is glory for evermore.

love with it. You know that once the sons of Ely made the people to abhor
the sacrifices; once was too too often, God forbid it should be so again. It
is true, we ordinarily complain of our people (and truly we have too just
cause, it being the fault of most to seek their own, and not either Gods by
giving him his duty, or ours by giving us our due) but be we sure that the
black coal be not in our own hands. It is truly said that our fancy first
wrought a face in the Moon from the unequal enlightening of her unequal
substance; and that afterward it was thought that the Sun had a face too (as
it may seem) because it should not be outfaced of the Moon. God forbid that
we (who should be as the Sun in glorious presidents amid this crooked
generation) should have our blots and spots because they are to be found in
the Moon and other sublunary creatures, within the cope and compass of our
lots, our earthly heavens. It will condemn them, not help us, if they be
worse than we. Let them go alone (yet with our compassions, tears, prayers,
preachings, and examples following to revoke them) but for us, take we heed
that we lay not the least blot upon the beauty of Gods house, either by our
Preaching, or by our Practice.

We may do it by preaching when we do discover shall be so marshalled, and
every sentence with its apt fall, shall lie in such aequipage, as if the owner
were cosen German to that proud man of sin, whose name is
six-hundred-sixty-six. 666
Hence is it that some are content to borrow their preachings from his
Chaplains, as Cowesta and Bercorius, and a rabble of his croaking Postillers,
wherein they only magnify Player-like conceits, and Frier-like elegancies,
and so make themselves like tinckling Cymbals tickling the ear, but not
turning the heart unto God. Hearken (my brother) what Zerubbabel answered to
the enemies of Judah, who offered their service craftily to build the Temple:
Ezr. 4 3.
It is not for you but for us to build the house unto our God: So let us say
unto Popish Authors, We need none of your help to instruct in righteousness,
and to convert and comfort our brethren, that they may be temples of the holy
Ghost. Do we not know that it is a Jesuitical brag, that we are not able to
stand before them for learning and eloquence, and that all Europe is beholding
to their Church for her knowledge? Do we not see how ready they are to feed
our humors by printing and reprinting such moth-eaten Books of theirs, as the
Such as think that a p^ore Amos and plain Preacher is not worth the hearing.
Amaziahs of the time do most hunt after? Shall we thus seed our enemies
humors, and in magnifying our selves, make them swell who are too proud
already? God forbid. I know that there may be use of Popish Writers, to show
that true men's silver may be in a thieves purse (to confute themselves, and to
show the confusions of Babel) as is told them to their faces, while they are
driven to say, through want of sufficient answers, we are wounded with our
own weapons (save that they have this poor and silly slight, P^^s^^js ^eunis
co^sig^in^.
that all their divisions in opinion are compounded in the unity of their
monstrous head, before whom they will lay their hands upon their mouths when
he shall determine) yet to lay our foundation in them (as too too many do in
Aquinas his School) and to build our congregations by them, with such poor
and powerless conceits as are spunne out of the word of the spirit, by their
wisdom of the flesh, does deforme the beauty of Gods house.

Secondly, we may besmeare the beauty of the Lord by Paul himself upon
occasion met his friends at the three Tauernes, where no doubt there was much
passage, much people: but seldom has some savor in it, especially in sports
and recreations, when mirth breeds familiarity, and familiarity contempt. Oh
how much honor does bowlings, cardings, dicings and the like, steal from the
persons and service of the Tribe of Leui (who willingly forget that all things
are lawful, but all things are not expedient) whereas seldomnesse does make
the young men when they see us to hide themselves, the aged to arise and stand
up, the Princes to stay talk, Job 29.8, 9.
and lay their hands upon their mouths, as Job speaks of himself. Secondly,
it may be done by our worldliness. If with Judas we love the bag better than
the Pulpet, and we delight more to prare with them for ours, than to pray with
them for themselves and theirs, we are spots and blots in the beautiful
assembly of the Saints. What beauty is it to see those that should live in
Heaven, and draw their people after them, to live in the holes of the earth
like Moles and muck-wormes? Who will believe him that says, Heaven is the best
place in the world, when all his business is to make his nest upon the earth?
I dare not say that there ought to be no care for earthly things (for we have
bodies that do depend upon us as well as souls) but when the thorns do so
choke the good seed in us, that the beauty of Gods house decaieth, then woe
unto us. Thirdly, it may be done by our wickedness: if the white Nazarites
become as black as coals, if Jacobs smooth voice be accompanied with Esaus
rough hands, if studies be turned into tap-houses and tauernes, and holy
tongues which should speak blessings, into tongues of wantonness and vanity,
how does the beauty of Gods house in us look like a stinking dunghill to all
godly beholders? In the fear of God therefore cast we these filthy coals out
of our hands: we have sinned against Gods beauty too much already, and these
miserable times do call for more beauty in our selves, and for more godly care
by praying, preaching, and examples, that more of Gods beauty may appear in
those congregations over which God has made us Shepherds. Oh it is a fearful
case to refuse (operative) knowledge, Hosh. 4
and to forsake the law; and fearful shall be the judgment upon such
Priests, Hosh. 10.
they shall weep for want, thorns and thistles shall grow upon their altars.



My first suit is that you willl be provoked and fiered with this beauty. I
could tell you that the name of this place is the Lord is there: that Jesus
Christ walks about this candlestick: that the Holy Ghost is present to
second the word in the hearts of all believers: that the good Angels do pry
into with admiration, the holy fellowship which we have with God and man: but,
though I do pass by the beauty of persons, the beauty of things may (through
Gods blessing) prevail with us. Would you go to heaven? It is the beauty of
Gods house which shall lift you up thither. Would you feign see Satan
vanquished? it is the beauty of Gods house shall do it: the preaching of the
Gospel shall make Satan fall down from heaven like lightning. Would you
discover the wickedness of your own hearts, that you may amend? It is the
beauty of Gods house that is the discerner of our thoughts and intents of our
hearts. Heb. 4.12, 13.
Would you willingly see God in his ordinances, and more than an earthen
vessel in the congregation of the Saints? It is the beauty of Gods house that
will manifest the secrets of your hearts unto you, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.
and will make you fall down on your faces and say plainly, God is in us
indeed. It is true indeed, you will say that you can pray, and sing Psalms,
and that you can have the word of God at home; and therefore this is no such
great beauty. But let me say with the Apostle, Heb. 13.22.
I beseech you suffer the words of exhortation, for I have written unto you in
few words: as if I should say, It is necessary that with a good heart you go
to behold the beauty of Gods house in the preaching of the word, because the
Scripture is so brief.

My second suit is, that you would do your best to make the beauty of Gods
house appear more beautiful through you. He that sees the worth of a thing
thoroughly, will do his best to make it appear the more worthy through him,
both in affection, in word, and in action; he will think of it more entirely,
he will speak of it with greater praises and commendations, and (if it be
within his reach, and he be capable) he will do his best to procure it. So let
us deal with the house of God and the beauty thereof: let us think of it as
of the glory of Israel, the testimony of Gods presence: Let us not think our
best words too good for it, either in thanksgiving to God, that we have had it
thus long, or in praying to him that he would be pleased for Christ's sake to
continue it amongst us still, or in commending it to others, and persuading
them to give it that right and place in their hearts which it requires: and
for our actions, o that we would live worthy of it. Holiness becomes Gods
house for ever; from which if we degenerate, what can we expect but that God
should take away this beauty, and give us up to vile affections, to go a
whoring after our own inventions?

What shall I now say unto you? I will put you in mind of a pretty custom in
Hungary. If an Hungarian be called a coward, he does never wash off the
disgrace, except he have proved himself in single combat with a Turk. I
confess I have done as much as called you all cowards. He that uses switch
and spur, does as much as tell others that his horse is dull: and he that
uses pressing exhortations and motives, does all one as if he should tell them
that they are dull of hearing, and too slow to right their own causes, against
the propensity of their cursed natures to the contrary. You shall never wash
off this aspersion, except you enter Duel with that damnable Turk (Security.)
I might tell you how it lulleth us asleep in a cursed peace, and makes every
one of us from top to toe neither to mind heaven nor hell: how it makes us
pollute our consciences, and sin against them for a friend, for a see: how it
makes the foundations of the earth to be out of course: but I pass these
things, and entreat you only to see how it makes us profane Gods Sabbaths, and
pollute his ordinances, because it does blind us from seeing the beauty of the
Lord. Oh therefore as we love God and our souls, let us fight against it by
walking as in the sight and presence of our God; and as by thinking, speaking,
doing, all things in this meeting, as if the great king of heaven and earth
were with us, in our charge, inquiry, verdict, and sentence; so by humbly
craving at Gods hand, with the blind man in the Gospel, Lord that I may
receive my sight: that we seeing Gods beauty may admire it, we admiting it may
be moved by it to cleave to God and his goodness, in the assembly of the
Saints. Thus much of the first motive of David's desires.

There is yet another motive whereby he did provoke himself to love Gods
house, 2 Matter of direction in it.
and that is matter of direction to be found there, implied in these words (To
inquire in his Temple.) As if he should say, There I may consult with God and
know what is best for me to believe and do. It may be David had reference to
that holy oracle, Psalm. 28.2.
toward which (to help his faith) he held up his hands in prayer: but yet
Gods house is an ordinary place of inquiry also. I went unto the sanctuary of
God (says the Psalmist) then understood I their end and was satisfied. Psalm.
73.17.
For if we must hear the word of God not as the word of man, but as it is
indeed the word of God: 1 These. 2.13.
then how has it not power to bring us all manner of content and satisfaction,
in those necessary scruples that may arise in our souls? If I should say of
Gods house as of those rivers in Transiluania, wherein there are found lumpes
of gold which weigh a pound weight, then I make no question but it would be a
motive strong enough. Why should it be less when I say that there we may
inquire? seeing this is the way to get wisdom, whose merchandise is better
than silver, Pro. 3.13, 14.
and whose gain is better than gold.

Thus we have considered Gods house in the type: now in the truth. You must
know that David's desires reached further than his own time. As when he desired
the waters of the Well of Bethlehem, his desires reached, as some think, to
our desires after Christ borne at Bethlehem, who is called the desire of the
Nations: so when in banishment or other distress, he desires Gods house, his
desires do reach unto ours after the Church of God, the body of Christ. Lay
therefore down this ground from hence: that

We must have earnest desires to be of the true Church of God.

Mallem esse membrum ecclesiae quam caput imperij.
That Emperors heart must be in every one of us, who said; I had rather be a
member of the true Church, than the head of an Empire. To urge this, consider
these four points.

David is opened unto us for sin and for uncleanness: Zach. 13.1. Mat. 1.21.
because Christ is the Savior of his people. It is said of one of the Canary
Islands, that it has no water to be found in it, yet that through the
providence of God, the people want none, for there does grow a certain Tree
which is covered with a misty Cloud, whereby it becomes so moist, that it
abundantly drops down water to suffice both man and beast. Such a Tree of Life
is Jesus Christ unto his Church; for though he be clouded and covered with the
veil of infirmity, yet to his Church which has fellowship with him by faith,
he does drop down the sweet liquour of grace for grace, to the refreshment of
their souls.

Ezekiel. 48. Es. 45.14.
But the name of Gods City is, The Lord is there: yea, Aethiopia, Sabaea and
Egypt shall say, God is in her; Apoc. 1.
yea, Christ is in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks: and when his
father and his mother sought him sorrowing, they found him in the Temple, to
teach us where we should find him ever after, to wit, in the true Church of
God.

Mat 20.
so well that they shall condemn many thousands of Christians that come short
of them in civil righteousness: yet they had no true comfort, because their
service was not to the true God, nor in the Vineyard of the Church.

Mat. 13.
and that both in respect of distance, the men of the world being as far in
goodness from the men of the Church, as heaven from earth: and in respect of
influence, the Church deriuing her ministerial helps to a new generation to
all within her reach and fathom: as also in respect of the Churches employment
from God to be none other but the gate of Heaven (as Iaacob said of Bethel)
and a nursery for the Kingdom of glory. Now would it not be an unspeakable
comfort to be assured that we live in the Kingdom of Heaven? I know that we
have many troubles and vexations of spirit, many fightings within, and terrors
without, but what can they hurt our happiness so long as we are in the
Kingdom of Heaven?

that there is the fountain of the house of David? Will it profit us to join
our selves with that society wherein there is not God and Christ in grace as
well as in power? Can we look for any good in those assemblies where is not
the Kingdom of Heaven, and wherein if we work we cannot look for Gods penny?
No surely.





Transire in Christum.
1 By your head.

2 By your coapting and fitting to be united to him.

3 By those ligatures and ties whereby you are knit unto him.

1. First, we shall know our selves to be of the true Church, if Jesus Christ
be the head of that Church whereunto we cleave: we are sure that that is the
true Church whereof Jesus Christ is the head, but we cannot be certainly
assured that that is it which has the Pope to be another princely, spiritual,
and monarchical head, no though but ministerial.

Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
as the Apostle says, God has put all things under his feet, and has given
him to be the head over all things, to the Church which is his body. in him
should all fullness dwell, Col. 1.19. and 2.9. John 1.16.
and out of his fullness we all receive grace for grace: he being made of God
unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Apoc. 9. Ioh. 10 27, 28. Ephesians. 5.26. Romans 8.
He does redeem the Church by his blood, preserve it by his power, instruct it
by his Word, renew and lead it by his Spirit. Es. 9.6. Ephesians. 5.23.
but only Jesus Christ the Counselor and Prince of peace, as the wife her
husb^nd. Ephesians. 4.16.
and give effectual power to every p^rt to do its office. Yea, he so far
does these good offices for his Church as her Head; that as the head cannot be
taken from the body without the certain death and ruin thereof: so (as it is
well said) without Christ the Church is nothing else but as a dead carcass.
Thus Christ being the undoubted Head of the Church, we may be sure that that is
the true Chruch whereof he is the Head.



First, we have no assurance that Jesus Christ requires a Deputy in this world
(to wit, as Mediator) for we know that a Deputy serves to supply the absence
of the principal; whereas Christ is always present by his word and spirit.
Mat. 28.20. Ioh. 14 16. Totum Christi secu^^^m esse essent a^c. Act. 3.21.
Totu^ Christus secundum ^s^^ p^rson^e. Act. 2^.28. Io^^ ^^
If you say that he is absent in respect of bodily presence; I confess, that
if you respect the whole essence of Christ, his body is in Heaven, and the
Heavens must contain him till his coming again: but if you do respect the
whole person of Christ, of whom when the Scripture does speak^, it does
attribute that unto whole Christ, which is proper to either nature; so we say
that Christ is present with us though his body be in Heaven, because we are not
without the blessed communion and fellowship of the divine nature. Neither to
his sufficient presence do we need his body now, for though the Kings body
be only at the Court, yet is he a sufficient head for government under God
of his whole Kingdoms as his body politic.

Secondly, we cannot be sure (if Christ were altogether absent) that any man in
the world, by virtue of any coined divine anointing, is able to supply his
place. For though as God the Kings and Princes of the earth are his Deputies to
see his laws observed, and to execute his judgments, because he has made
them so: yet as Mediator and Head of the Church he has none; partly, because
he has made none; Heb. 7.24. (...).
and partly, because his office is such as passes not from one to another. For
every work of a Mediator is a compound work, issuing from two natures
concurring in the same action, as the carved work of Aholiab and Bezaleel, was
the issue of their bodies and souls: in which respect there is required a
strength above any created power.

Thirdly, (because the Papists say, that the Pope is not the head of the Church
in such a sovereign and principal manner as Christ, but the Ministerial Head
over the whole Church upon earth) therefore I add this, that we cannot be sure
that a deputation of any inferior government and ministry, is put over to any
one man whatsoever. For there are three things which do hinder our through
persuasion in this point.

First, that Christ does reserve even outward administration in his own power.
For it is he which sends forth his word and spirit, which has ordained a
ministry, fitted Evangelists, Pastors, Doctors, whence he is called the
Arch-shepherd: It is he who assisteth his ministry with power; and has
provided the trumpet and sword of the magistracy to call and to dissolve
counsels, to summon and to disparcle armie^, to defend his Church (so far as
it is good for her) from Satan the liar by heresy, and Satan the murderer by
persecution. Therefore what need have we of a ministerial head?

Secondly, that there is no ministerial head but must work ministerially that
which the principal head does principally: For else it is but a rotten head,
such as the Wolf found in the caruers shop, without wit or brains: But no
mortal man nor Angel can do that which Christ our head does: because the
office of his headship is executed by two natures, concurring in one person
Christ, as I said before.

Thirdly, Christo s^cluso.
that then there should be a Lordlike power over the whole Church upon earth,
out of Christ in some creature; which cannot be. For ye know what Paul says,
There are many divisions, or diversities, of ministeries, 1 Cor. 12.5. (...).
or administrations, but the same or one Lord. So that as it is with Kings who
are never out of their kingdoms, though there are diverse officers under them,
yet there is but one in whom there is Regal power, and that is the king
himself: so in this kingdom of heaven upon earth, the Church I mean, though
there are diverse offices, yet he keeps the royalty in himself: which if he
have put over unto another, it must either fasten upon him sloth, or at the
least ease to put the burden of government upon a weaker persons shoulders, or
it must make us say that he has done a needless thing, to make a substitute
in his own presence to do that which is impossible.

4. Lastly, if Jesus Christ were absent, and it were possible that there could
be a deputy, yet we cannot be sure that the Pope is he. And of this I shall
give you four grounds of suspicion.

First, because it stands upon improbable interpretations, such as can
neither arise properly nor figuratively, such as cannot be derived by any
succession to confirm the doctrine which they now hold concerning their great
head. They say that God said to Peter, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will
I build my Church: and to thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven:
and again, feed my sheep. Therefore, they say, he said to Peter (as their
new doctrine concludes) I make thee Vicar and ministerial head over all the
world, both for order and jurisdiction, over all Bishops, all Christians; to
set out the rule of faith, laws, dispensations, over all the world, to trample
upon kings, and to decree them to butchery or honor, as they serve for the
good of the Catholic cause. Now how this and the like stuff can be inferred
from the words of Christ to Peter, to uphold their monarchical head, I would
entreat you to call your best Logic to an account and to do your best to
judge.

Secondly, because the Pope pleades more for himself than he does for him from
whom he pretends to receive deputation. He is like an unfaithful friend, who
being sent to speak a good word, speaks one for his friend and two for
himself. For what is it that does imbroyle the whole Christian world more than
the Popes monarchy? All kingdoms must be at his dispose, that so such Princes
as he can train up in dull ignorance, may through ambition be provoked to be
his white sons, that they may attain to great honors, and other men's
inheritances, under him. All must be Heretics that are not within his Pale.
The word of God must depend upon his allowance. Scripture must be no Scripture
except he look favorably upon it, and give it what sense pleases him. Kings
must be no Kings, if it pleases him to excommunicate them: and we must be no
ministers, because our calves are cow-calues, (as that blessed Martyr Woodman
answered the Bishop of Chichester, who wanted the Popes Bull to consecrate or
confirm him in his Bishopric) with many other pretty toys.

Thirdly, because all the notes of the great Antichrist that are in Scripture
do agree to him, to wit, the Pope, as is maintained to his face by our dread
Sovereign, and the reverend Father Bishop Downame in his treatise of
Antichrist, and in his Diatriba of the same subject. It is true indeed, they
would make us believe that his chair is made of Irish wood, to which no
copwebs of falsehood can cleave, nor any venomous creature come near without
death: and that his Church is like that which the mariners built in Illiria to
Saint John de Maluatia, whose very mortar was tempered with malmsey; a sweet
and precious Church: but all the water in Tyber will not wash off that
imputation, except he do penance for his ambition and opposition, and become
such a Bishop as the primitive godly Fathers were.

Fourthly, because it cannot be showed that Christ has appointed the Pope to
be his Vicar, he often speaks of the Holy Ghost, as when he says, Ioh.
14.26.
The Holy Ghost whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all
things: and again, When he is come which is the Spirit of truth, Ioh. 16.13.
he will lead you into all truth: but he never speaks of the Pope. If he
do, let him show it: if he do not, let him consider how hateful it is for a
man to put himself into such high commissions without warrant from God: and
how justly we may lay this in his dish, No man takes this honor but he that
is called of God as Aaron was.

Thus (I hope) you perceive that we cannot be assured that that is the true
Church, whereof the Pope is the head. therefore (my beloved contrymen) lean
not to him and to his politic apostasy: lift up your heads and behold by
faith the bowing pillars of his proud monarchy. All his divine unction cannot
foresee, nor all his keys and swords help himself from that misery which
the Kings of the earth (who are and shall fall from him) shall bring upon him.
As therefore Moselanus a Jew, when he had killed a foul, whose flight the
host of Alexander expected to prognosticate good or evil success by, said
unto them, What a foul shame is it for so many worthy men to seek knowledge
of her, that knew not what should happen to her self? So say I, What a shame
is it for so many wise men to seek wisdom and direction from him, who is not
wise enough for himself, but rages now like the devil because his time is
but short, and yet cannot see it? Surely, as he that died of the bite of a
weasell, lamented because it was not a Lion: so will such at the last lament
that they have fallen by that weak one (though never so great in the eyes of
his flatterers) whose very throne shall fall as a millstone into the sea, to
wit, with great violence, noise, horror, and trouble to the world.



Richar. Transire in Christum, et coalescere cum Christo. Membra secundum
praescientiam, et s^cundum praesentem iusticiam.
First, I must show you how God does fit us to be made one with our head, and to
be members of his body. We are falsely charged to require inward qualifications
of holiness in every member of the Church (for there are members in Gods Book
before calling, as well as such as are called, and of such as are called there
are members by profession, which do admit of a cutting off) yet if we would
assure our hearts that we are so in the Church, as we are also of it, Membra,
1. Numero, 2. Merito et electione, ut corrupt a scholasticis pro opere et
electione.
we must be inwardly coapted and fitted to be made one with him.

Now for this fitting of us for our head, it must be by three actions of our
good and merciful God.

First, God must cut us from the wild olive, that is, he must separate us from
corrupted Adam, as we are borne after his cursed image. To this end God gives
us by the law a sight of some one sin, which has happily made deepest gashes
in our consciences, together with the punishment due unto it. At which sight,
we suspecting what all our sins may deserve, if God shall muster them together,
through compunction of heart we are brought to a detestation of our former
estate, and so to a casting off of our transgressions that we may not die.

Secondly, God must pare us to put us into the true olive, Christ, by
humiliation: when we see how fearfully we lie liable to Gods justice, we,
despairing of all help and comfort elsewhere, do humbly lay our selves down
at Gods feet, to be disposed to shame, sorrow, fear, confession, prayer, and
application of spiritual reasons to our carnal hearts, to mortify and dead
our corruptions according to Gods Word.

Thirdly, God must ingraft us into Christ. How is this? When by the power of
the Word and Spirit he does work faith in our hearts; by which we comparing
the bottomless pit of our sinful estate, with the height, length, breadth, and
depth of Gods love to us in Christ, and see^ng there superabundant store of
love, merit, power, to do us everlasting good, our hearts are overcome to
ecche out to God; I come Lord, I come: and so the Father bestows the Son
upon us, and us upon him.

Church, though they hold their heads never so high amongst us; none, none can
do it? Are they, that are corrupt and lie rotting in carnal wisdom, and
proud enmity against God, that go a whoring after pleasures, profits,
honors, according to their several dispositions, are they (I say) cut off
from the wild olive? Are they, whose souls were never filled with shame,
sorrow, fear for sin, and who never from a bleeding heart confessed their
particular sins unto God, or from a melting soul begged pardon, resolving
for ever after to be disposed as God shall please, are they (I say) pared and
made fit to grow into one body with the head? Are they who never have had
experience of sin-sicke souls, who do never see by any comfortable
adiudication their wants supplied in Christ, who do not pant after him in such
means as God has appointed, are they (I say) ingrafted into Christ? No, no,
when these things come to pass, heaven and hell will be all one kingdom. As
you will be kind and loving people to your souls, therefore apply these three
particulars to your hearts: and never think your selves to be of the true
Church (though you are in it) till you find them in some measure wrought in you.

Gentlemen, who are given to that study, know that there is an abatement of
honor in Heraldrie to him that tells a lie, or is devoted to the apron, or
commits Idolatry to Bacchus. And do we not think that God will clip the
wings of those who think to fly aloft to this honor to be of the true Church,
and yet live in sin? Yes, write this for a truth, that as sure as all are not
Israel according to the spirit, which are of Israel according to the flesh, so
surely none are univocal members of that Church whereof Christ is the head, but
those who find in themselves this total alteration from their estate natural,
to a feeling and comfortable estate in Christ Jesus.

But secondly, you will now ask me what are those ligatures and ties whereby
we are knit unto Christ, that we may grow together with him? For those are of
the true Church, who are knit unto Christ by the true bands: I answer
therefore, that they are the saving and sauourie truths in the word of God.
This is that alone which makes our faith apt to conglutinate and glue us to
Christ: Who is my mother? (says Christ) and who are my brethren? Matthew. 12.48.
Who are those that are knit unto me by the nearest bond? They that hear the
word of God and do it; that is, Luke 8.21.
they that receive the truth of Gods word by faith, and conform themselves
unto it; these are the men. Antiquity cannot knit us unto Christ, for age is
no crown of honor, except it be found in the ways of righteousness.
Succession cannot do it, except together with it we depart not from the true
faith which was formerly holden. Bonum et verum convertuntur.
Unity cannot do it, except it be good, and nothing is good which is not
true. The bare titles of Catholic, and Apostolic cannot do it, except
together we forsake not the Catholic and Apostolic doctrine and truth.
Holiness cannot do it, except it be holiness agreeable to the truth, without
which there is none: for Christ says, Sanctify them by thy truth. Ioh. 17.
Thus you see that truth is that very glue and cyment in the hand of faith,
that must knit us unto our head.

Jude speaks, which was once given unto the Saints. Jude v. 3.
If ever we strove for it, now is the time; now more than ever (because their
destruction is nearer) does the Pope hound out (as our Soueraign terms it)
great swarms of Jesuits to disgrace the Scriptures, and to steal away the
word of truth from us. Blessed is he that holds fast in this fearful time
of temptation. Apoc. 16.15.
Behold I come as a thief (says Christ) blessed is he that watches and
keeps his garments (of holy truth and true holiness) lest he walk naked, and
men see his filthiness.

Rome.

2. These. 2.4.
which has the Scripture: but the Church of Rome, the Popes apostacy,
consisting of head and members united by the doctrine of Trent, has it not.

Rome:

A fuisse ad esse non sequitur. Es. 1.21, 22. 1 Thessalonians. 1.8.
the faithful City may become a harlot, and her wine may be mixed with water:
and Thessalonica, from whom sounded out the word of the Lord in Macedonia and
Achaia, and whose faith which was toward God, spread abroad in all quarters,
is now a cabine of unclean Turks: yea, and who knows not that a chaste
virgin may in time become a stinking harlot? Even so is it with Rome.

Rome? for some or other must needs observe it.

Rome, though by reason of her strength, and that good temper she was in while
Martyrs possessed her seat, she stood out long before she kept her bed (because
she was not heart-sicke at the first infecting of her blood) in which respect
happily her first lying down cannot be observed of every eye: yet he that has
but one eye may see that she is sick unto death, by her sick and powerless
actions: as her surfeiting upon temporal glory, Laesae actiones laesas arguunt
facultates.
her vomiting up of the wholesome food of Gods word, her desire not to be
stirred from her old rotten couch, her pettishnesse if we do but touch her to
try whether sick or sound: and many the like symptoms not only of a
declining, but of a desperately consuming estate.



John says) Great Babylon the mother of whoredoms has this name written in
her forehead, A Mystery. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. Apoc. 17.5.
This apostacy of Rome held communion with the true Church still: Hodie
effusum est venenum in ecclesiam.
and when prosperity like poison was powered out upon the Church, she took
advantage upon the deadness of men's hearts to make her own gain; and while
men were either diuerted by other occasions, or rocked asleep in the cradles
of ease, profit, pleasure, honor, or blinded with the outward splendour and
glory of her whorish and hypocritical attire, to sow tares in stead of good
wheat: which yet was never so closely carried, but that some faithful men
still observed her and opposed her in every age (as has been showed by
diverse, Du Plessis his Mysterium iniquitatis. White his Way.
who still lie unsatisfied) though her policy and tyranny still did crush
them to her power.

Oh therefore, seek not truth at Rome, where you have so good causes to doubt
that the true head is not; yea know of old that truth has sought for succor
in Cloisters and could find none: seek it therefore at home, where the true
head Christ is calling us from our dead sleep of sin, Pauli Ferrij Schol.
ortho. Spec. page 102.
giving unto us the habit of faith for our sanctification, the act of faith to
receive Jesus Christ for our justification, the spirit of adoption to seal us
unto the day of our redemption.

of it, and chained with inevitable ignorance, (having the key of more distinct
knowledge kept from them by tyranny and policy) and do forsake their popish
grounds, as it is said that the Bishop of Chichester that then was, would have
had Gardner to do, when he did comfort him upon his deathbed with Gods
promises, and with free justification in the blood of Christ. Fox Martyrol.
To whom Gardner did answer; What my Lord, will you open that gap now? then
farewell altogether: To me and such other you may speak it; but open this
window to the people, then farewell altogether. Thus likewise Bellarmine, after
his large discourse of that confidence which we may draw from our works,
lays down this proposition as his last sanctuary, Propter incersitud^nem
prop^iae iusti^iae, and peri^u^um man^s glor^^, tutissi^i^ est siduci^m totam
in sola Dei misc^i cordia et ben^gnitate reponere.
that, By reason of the incertaintie of our own righteousness, and the danger
of vaineglorie, it is most safe to put our whole trust and confidence in the
mercy and bounty of God alone. Now if Papists shall do in truth and
sincerity of heart, as these say, renouncing the trappings of the whore of
Rome, though they die in the Popish Church, they being chained in the fetters
of Rome, they may give a good ground for the judgment of charity to work
upon concerning their salvation with GOD.

Neither be ye moved with this which they so often bellow out against us, That
our truth was not known before Luther: for though for many of our negatiues,
whereby we do deny their false novelties, there was no use of them (though the
Spirit of God foreseeing the mystery of Antichrist, left sufficient ground for
them in the Scriptures) yet we willingly disclaim all that cannot draw a
longer pedigree than Popery. Thou art of yesterday, says the Pharisie to
Christ: Before Abraham was I am, says Christ to the Pharisees: So may our
truth say in respect of Luther; It appeared more plentifully in his time, not
otherwise than a clear morning after a dark and drowsy night, no otherwise
than fair weather after a tedious storm, no otherwise than health after a
lingering sickness. And if it seemed to be new, we may thank the Church of
Rome for it, which so prevailed with our improuident fathers through glorious
titles and outward splendour, and the mystery of abominations in the golden
cup, that their mother truth being iustled out of doors for a time, was not at
the last, when she came again, scarce acknowledged of her own children. Let
us be wiser and acknowledge her, though she come naked and in rags, remembering
that true but fearful saying, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12.
Because they receive not the love of the truth that they might be saved,
therefore God shall send them strong delusions that they should believe lies,
that all they might be damned which believed not the truth.

Thus have I showed you how you may know your selves to be of the true Church
amongst us, Motives.
that so your desires may pant after it. As David added two motives to provoke
himself to hunger after the house of the Lord: so shall I add the same to
further us to desire to be, and to be still of the true Church amongst us.

The first is the beauty of our Church, 1 The beauty of our Church.
which does stand in the beauty of that Religion which it does profess: I
know that the Papists do what they can to disgrace it, and to make it appear
ougly in the sight of men; Ps. 45.13.
yet (though the Kings daughter be all glorious within, and her best ornaments
without are but needle-worke, full of stitches and pricks: though the whore do
excel in her garish attire the modest and honest woman; in which respect it
cannot grieve us that they object against us, as the heathens of old did
against the less ancient Christians, the want of glory in our outward service
and worship) yet, I say, there are diverse things which make our religion
beautiful, above that which does so much stand upon outward feature and
proportion.

Luther and Calvin; that all is very easy in Scriptures; that God forces us
against our wills, without any respect of our consents; that we allow no
fasting but moral temperance and fasting from sin; that we esteem nothing of
Christian works toward salvation, but condemn them as unclean, sinful,
hypocritical; that God imputes the righteousness of Christ to justification
though we be not just; as if the righteousness of Christ applied by faith did
not cure as well as cover, purge sin as well as pacify Gods wrath for sin.
These and the like odious lies do they put upon us and our religion. But
blessed and beautiful are we when such men as they are speak all manner of
evil against us falsely. We cannot think our selves the more deformed for
their false charges, whose whole Apostacy is a mixture of lying and vanity
from head to tail. They call the Pope the Head of the Church, when he is
neither able to be present with the whole body, nor infuse capital spirits
into any one member. The Pope calls himself A servant of servants, when yet
he seems to be a prouder Lord than the Turk, breathing out nothing but
sovereignty and unlimited jurisdiction, and would think foul scorn that any
earthly Potentate or King should be preferred before him. Their Jesuits will
be so lyingly called of Jesus the Truth; when (as it has been often told
them, and cannot be disproued) as Abshalom was unjustly called, the Fathers
peace, being the Fathers war, so they are not without blasphemy so called,
seeing they do nothing more than cunnicatch the wealthy, gull the poor,
disloyalize subjects, conspire against Princes, undermine States and Kingdoms,
and under the hood of Religion kindle wars, and closely lay the cause upon
others. Yea, and what is their religion but, like these grand practisers, one
thing in show, another thing in truth, and none other but a draught of deadly
wine in a golden cup.

Christ only. Ye know that he is called beautiful, whose head is so, though
he have a crooked body, a withered hand, and a gowtie toe: so may our Church
and Religion well be accounted; because we cleave unto, keep whole and sound,
to our power, our whole head, (both God and Man by nature, Priest, Prophet, and
King by office) that he might be the alone Savior of his people. We know how
the Church of Rome does share out his honor with his offices, and divide them
between Christ and others. See of this subject Dr. Fownes his Trisagion.
His Kingly Office is parted between him and the Pope; his Priestly, between
him and the Saints; his Prophetical, between him and their traditionall
Church. But for us, Ephesians. 1.23.
we desire that he may fill all in all things: we do strive that he may
increase, though we and all the world perish, decrease, and come to nothing:
yea, as David said of the sword of Goliath, which was laid up behind the Ephod,
there is none to it: so say we of our blessed King, Priest, and Prophet, there
is none to him, neither shall there be any but he, in whom we will seek the
least dragme of beauty.

See for this Hispa. Refor. Bellar. Ample declaration of Christian Doctrine.
nor dash out the second, as the Church of Rome does. We dare not admit of the
Mass, for fear of having any other god save the true God. We dare not embrace
Popish Traditions, for fear of giving God that worship which is not his own:
our consciences will not so far abuse us, as to give us leave to entertain a
service unknown, lest we should serve God in vain, and not give him his
worship in the right manner: we cannot spend the Lords day in seeing Mass, or
only in praying (though it be the sweetest of our service) knowing that,
because God does in the Commandment of the Sabbath, chiefly aim at our
edification, Es. 2.3.
we must go up to the house of the Lord, that he may teach us his ways, and
we may walk in his paths. We settle the Chair of State upon Princes,
renouncing a superior power among men, to excommunicate them: and put case the
Pope do, to his utmost, hunge them with his Bulls, we renounce and hate the
not accounting of them Kings, and the executing of them as delinquents to him,
and to his Pope-holy-Church: Yet lest we should flatter them, we tell them
that they must be Fathers, not Tyrants, that so they may not be wilful
hinderers of that honor which is due unto them. Having thus pressed upon the
head for orderly politic government, we learn of God to press upon the
heart, the seat of valor, that there be no taking away of life through base
cowardice. Can we think of poisonings, stabbings, underminings, strengthening
the hands of wickedness, sadding the hearts of the good by lies and
impostures? We can sooner look upon the persons of our enemies without malice,
their wrongs without desire of revenge, their prosperity without envy, and
digest all our griefs by venting them into Gods bosom by fervent and
faithful prayer. We press upon the seat of Lust, and teach our appetites,
that as we must live, so we must live honestly, lest we be a burden to the
earth. We cannot abide the slighting of Fornication, the blanching of Priests
Minions and Concubines, the stink of Stews, with that cursed caution, If thou
can not live chastely, yet carry it warily. Si non cast tamen caute.
We teach that honest persons must have honest maintenance by possessing their
own: that they must maintain their right by truth. As we cannot maintain our
Religion by lying Legends, or our persons and causes by equivocation: so can we
not but be careful to press and teach that there be no liar amongst us for
gold or gain: yea we will not suffer the whole soul to be at rest with her
concupiscence. Can we flatter the heart with the neglect of the first motions
of sin by the flesh, though the spirit do not consent; as if a knave be not
a knave, because an honest man reproues him for it? No: we will labor that
there be peace at home without mutiny, that there be such soundness of mind,
and such a peaceable possession of our own souls in the enioyment of God, as
nothing that is others may or do disquiet us. Thus does our Religion rub off
the rust of all sin, pressing this as a note of an upright man, to have an
equal respect to all Gods Commandments: yea that the least rubbish of
Hypocrisy may not (by our good wills) stick upon our Church, we aim at and
endeavor, the through mortification of the whole body of sin, and
reformation of all our hearts. The Popish Church, whatsoever it talk of
mortification, and what glorious shows soever it does make to that end, either
by whippings (wherein yet Baals Priests went beyond them) or by drawing their
blood, like Pharisee draw-blouds, or by going barefoot, like the Heathens in
their barefoot solemnities, Nudepedalia sacra.
or by their precious Pilgrimages, forced Fastings, and the like; yet it is
far (and I pray God they may see it) from true mortification and reformation
of heart. For do but consider that either they do not know or will not know
the right enemy wherewith they should fight to this end; that is, the cursed
Flesh which is in our bosoms: For when the Scripture speaks of the lusts of
the flesh, which we must mortify, they do sometimes understand our bodies:
and therefore for the suppressing of it, Understand me not as if I did condemn
Fasting and other laudable bodily exercises, but only as showing by these
principal weapons, what principal adversary they fight against, to wit, the
body. Ephesians. 5.28, 29.
they do press upon bodily exercises, as Fastings, whippings, Haire-cloth,
barefoot visitings of Temples, Shrines and the like: whereas the body and the
spirit may well go hand in hand; as the Apostle says, No man ever yet hated
his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church:
to wit, so far forth as it may be done without making Nature either proud or
wanton. Sometimes again, they do understand the brutish and inferior
faculty of the soul, whereby it affects and desires profits, pleasures, as
meats, drinks, clothing, and procreation. But even this also in it self
cannot be said to be our enemy, which being well manned, is of so good and
necessary use in the life of man, that without it there would neither be
preservation of particulars, nor kinds; Nature would neither preserve it
self, nor the succession thereof in its like. In both these they miss the
mark, and shoot at a friend in stead of an enemy. In which respect a man may
go to the height of their taught devotion, and yet be as arrant hypocrites as
ever were. But as for our Church, the whole bent of it tends to perfect our
sanctification in the fear of God. 2 Cor. 7.1.
It makes the flesh to be the corruption of our whole nature, both in our
bodies and souls. The corruption of our minds by enmity and ignorance, of
our consciences by stupiditie and fury, of our cogitations by vanity, of our
wills by rebellion, of our desires by disorder, and the like. So that we teach
and press, that the mind must go to the pot (as we say) as well as the
appetite; yea the wisdom of it (whereby we exalt our own righteousness, and
set up our holiness and other worth as cursed idols) as well as the brutish
folly that is in our carnal desires. We do not flatter the mind with an
aptness to spiritual wisdom, or the will with an aptness to will good if it
be excited by the Spirit; (that so we may dishonor Gods work of grace, and
make our selves something, when we are nothing) but as we do give the greatest
glory of good (as it is wrought in and by us) to the mind sanctified; for
which cause the whole work of our conversion (as it is well observed) is
called the changing of the mind: (...). Matthew. 3.2.
so in sinning we make it the arch-rebell, in yielding it self so freely to
think of wickedness, so fully to discourse of the profit, pleasure, and honor
of it, so friendly to parley with every suggestion which offers it self to
our corrupt hearts, that it is even basely bribed and blinded to give way to
the consent of our wills, to the greediness of our desires, to the swift
moving of our affections, and to the eagerness of our actions, to do those
things which are wicked in the sight of God and man. Oh how does this make us
to deny our selves, and fly unto him that is made wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30.
righteousness, sanctification and redemption to us, while the Popish Church
living in a seeming holiness in some of her choice members, does yet vnholily
rest upon her own wisdom, though it be to the tolerating of Stews, to the
filling of Rome it self with the cries of Sodom. But (say they) what are
their unholy Stews more than our unholy Usury? For if Stews be collerated
amongst them to prevent a greater mischief; so is Usury amongst us. But stay a
while: As Leontines pointing to his gray hairs, said to the Antiochians; Hac
niue liquefacta multum erit luti.
When this snow is thawed there will be much dirt: so when this blister is
pricked (may we say) there will appear much vlcerous matter. For the clearing
therefore of our Church in this point of Usury, that the Stews of Rome may the
more stink in the nostrils of good men, consider two Questions: First, whether
England do permit Usury, as the Church of Rome does the Stews. Secondly,
whether if we did, it might stand in equal balance with a Stews.


To the first I answer two things:

England does not permit Usury, but restrain the abominable griping that was
brought in by the Jews. For if you look into the Law, you shall find it
called a Statute against Usury; yea it calls Usury a vice and sin, and
says, it is detestable, as you may see in the Statutes at large, where the
Prefaces are; yea I have heard (as I take it) men skillful in the Law say, that
if it can be proved by bond that a man do but take ten sh^llings in the
hundred for Usury, he forfaits the whole sum. Therefore the Usurers are so
crafty, as to make their Creditours upon the lending of an hundred pound, to
become debtors to them for an hundred and ten, or eight, or seven, or the like,
by bond, and not to bind them to give ten pounds for the mere use of an
hundred.

England deals not with Usury as Rome does with the Stews; for she does
blanch and excuse it, and therefore sometime they say, that it is but a
permission of a less evil to avoid a greater, as Sodomy, Buggery, and the
like; when yet under this cloak Ely might without blame have suffered the sins
of his sons in the porches of the Tabernacle to prevent more heinous sins,
and further degrees of Sodomy. Sometimes again they tell us that they do not
permit them without means to reclaim them both by punishments and preachings:
as if it could excuse them to permit houses of sinning, that they may exercise
their censures: they are mad men that build houses for thieves, and burn them
down when they have done. Sometimes again they will tell us that the rents
and pensions so gotten are employed to maintain penitent harlots: as if God
delighted in the price of a harlot, or it were lawful for us to do evil that
good might come thereof. Thus would the Church of Rome like a harlot, put a
beautiful complexion upon an ugly face, yea from such like and other
filthiness, even in their holy Fathers the Popes, See Bellar. in his preface
to his books, De Pontif. Romans
they can draw an argument of glory and renown to Peter's chair, as being a
sign of Gods special hand that it has endured so long. But as for us, we are
ready to condemn usury to the pit of hell, as God shall clearly manifest
unto us what it is, and as we already do so far as we are come.

that honest means may be settled upon honest persons will have truth: usury
therefore, failing against the justice of the eighth commandment, though
detestable in it self, yet from Gods order, seems to me to be of a shorter
size than the Stews which fights against the person in the seventh.

Pharaohs policy, when he would work most wisely, could not prevail against
Israel: so in the greatest Egyptian darkness under the dominion of Antichrist,
our Church could not be so obscured but that she has felt the strength of
Romes policy, and the stroke of her power without her subversion. And at the
time when it pleased God to make light to shine out of darkness, that our
religion might by degrees climb again to its wonted glory, what could the
power of the Emperor with the policy of the Pope prevail against a poor
weak man, Luther.
who came with the spirit of power in the name of the Lord? For the further
propagating of our religion, it neither has, neither does it stand in need of
policy. If we should hold a Council, we need none of the tricks of the
Council of Trent. We need not either propound our Canons in such ambiguous
terms, as will admit of diverse constructions, Vpsalensis and Armachanus were
created Ar^h bishops (as we read) in the Council of Trent, who yet were
Nullat^ncases.
like the ancient Oracles of Apollo; neither need we to create either
Archbishops or Bishops to fill up the number (that our voice may be the more
full) who have neither Church nor Diocesses. We need no bloody Inquisition to
clap the title and punishment of an Heretic upon every one who does smell
either by conversation or conference of a religion opposite to us: we need not
that Idol sacrifice of the Mass to fill our purses, that poor and poetical
conceit of purgatory to warm our kitchins, their Auricular confession to make
us terrible by being of the secretest counsel: we defy to purge either
Fathers or any other Authors, of their true meaning, to make them our
witnesses, or to be so exact in the prohibition of Heretical books, Mar.
Anto. de Dom. prosectionis consilium. p. 8. 9.
that careful Students in Divinity, yea Bishops may not read books
contrary to our opinion without license: we say with the Apostle, Judge ye
what I say; do not swear to the truth of our words, except ye find them so:
yea of the common people (into whose hands many Popish books do fall) we do
but desire this favor, that they would read them with our answers, and humbly
desire God that they may find out the truth; remembering tha^ sweet speech of
our blessed Savior, John 7.17.
If any man will do Gods will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of
God, or whether we speak of our selves. Pia mendacia.
We abhor godly lies, as they term them, to work devotion and blind
obedience: equiuocating can find no countenancing amongst us: yea our religion
persuades to die, and manfully to confess the name of Jesus, rather than thus
to lie. Neither these nor any other tricks of policy (blessed be God) do we
stand in need of, but confidently expect the turning of Achitophels wisdom
into folly, and the ruin of the spiritual Egypt and Sodom of Rome, in Gods
due time, notwithstanding all her politic factors and agents throughout the
Christian world.

Thus have we considered the first motive to further our desi^es to be, and to
be still, of the true Church amongst us.

The second is, that in it we may inquire, 2 Matter of direction in it.
and have full and sound direction to bring us to life eternal. And that it is
thus amongst us may be seen in two things.

the oracles of God to consult withal, Romans 3.2.
as the Apostle calls the Scriptures. Every mean Artizan with us may wind
up his heart from all the distractions and troubles of this world, by a daily
conferring with God out of the divine acts of his own heavenly wisdom. The
book of God is or may be in every man's house and hands. And if the word of the
great Cham of Tartarie stands for a law, because he is blasphemously called
of his subjects, the son of God, and the shadow of God, Filius Dei, Vmbra
Dei, and Anima Dei. Colos. 3.16.
and the soul of God: then infinitely more worthily do we account the word of
our God to be a law unto us, it being the shadow of his wisdom. And therefore
he commanding the Colossians no unnecessary obedience, we hold it as
necessary for us that the word of Christ dwell plentifully in us. Yea we
account it our happiness, that as in the Island Rhodes the Sun is never so
masked with a cloud, but that once in a day it does shine upon it: so our
worldly employments do never so dampe and darken our spiritual life, light,
and heat, but that there is, or may be (at the least) some little comfortable
intercourse between us and the word of God day by day, if we be not our own
enemies. We are sure that we are bound to follow Gods will, and therefore we
are not afraid to know it. Yea we hold it our duty as Gods children to look
into our Fathers Will and Testament, that we may be the better furnished not to
break it. And if at any time we neglect the reading and searching of the holy
Scriptures, we do desire God that he would send his fatherly rod to whip us up
to more diligence; and to say unto us, as Aristippus said unto one who asked
him what was become of the friendship between him and Aeschines, It is
asleep, but I will awake it. Can we think it a fault deserving burning to
have and to read a Bible in our native tongue? Or can we be so miserable as
not to obey God in reading the Scripture, except some holy Father grant us a
license to do it? No: as those blessed instruments who made us acquainted with
Gods voice in our mother tongue might rejoice more than he that made the Harp
of Thales, whereby he did appease the tumult of the Lacedaemonians; so we
account it our joy and our rejoicing, that God speaks not unto us in an
unknown language, but that we can confer with him as our fathers and mothers
do talk with us when they either do or should train us up in the knowledge
and service of God. What shall we say then (my brethren?) Surely as Peter said
to CHRIST, Whither shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life: so let
us say to the Church of God amongst us, To what Church shall we join our
selves, seeing here are the words of eternal life? If we grow surfetted and
weary of so divine a blessing, let me in the fear of God vpbraid you as
Themistocles did the Athenians who were sick of him; Are you weary of
receiving so many benefits from one man? So, Are you weary of receiving so many
comfortable blessings from one book? Well, I say no more of this, but pray to
God to give you understanding in all things; and entreat you all but to think
upon this one thing, Bona a tergo formosissima.
that good things are best when they turn their backs, and will most wound our
souls in their loss, when we are driven to say, Had I wist.

we have the assistance of the learned for the ministerial declaration and
application of this blessed rule. Does Gods carpenter who should square the
Church of God by the rule of the word only dwell at Rome? Or has any one
there a commission from God to square out the faith and manners of a Church by
his own prophetical wisdom without direction from the once given written
rule? No surely: as we know no such man by the glass of Gods word; so (blessed
be God) we find good workmen at home. God has given the gift of tongues to
our Church, whereby she can present us Gods holy word in our own language; and
lest she should be taxed of keeping the key of knowledge from others; as also,
chiefly to show her love to God in executing her office, she has done it
already, that Gods name may be great amongst us, and the meanest member of our
Church may follow the direction of our blessed Savior, John 5.39.
to search the Scriptures; Act. 17.11.
and the example of the Bereans, to try whether those Texts which we allege to
prove our Doctrines be so or no. Beside the gift of tongues, God has given to
our Church the gift of Interpretation. We pray to God with David, Psalm. 119.18.
Lord open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy Law. We desire and
endeavor in our practice to have an equal respect unto all Gods commandments,
Agant orando and been v^v^ndo ut ^ntelligant.
and because we cannot do as we would, we are full of that heroical motion of
David, Oh that my ways were so direct that I might keep thy statutes; Psalm.
119.5.
and all because God may not justly keep away the light of his word from us.
We yield unto Gods whole truth, so far as we are come and can conceive it,
lest God should deliver us over to believe lies. We compare spiritual things
with spiritual things, one place of Scripture with another, carrying the sense
along according to the scope and circumstances of the place, and never
willingly varying (without clear testimony from the word of God) from the
generally received sense of the true Church of God. Though sometimes in respect
of our persons we look like private Elihu rebuking the Ancients: Job 32.6.
1 King. 22.
and like private Micaiah defending the truth against many false Prophets, yet
we speak by the public Spirit of God, as the mouth of the Lord has spoken in
the Scriptures: yea we are so careful that the true sense should be given,
that we subject the spirit of the Prophets to the Prophets: and confidently
resolve that whosoever shall plead a spirit expounding contrary to the
Scriptures is not an administrer but a diminisher of Gods meaning. Again, if
any controversy or difficulty do arise, can we say as the Pope, that we are
Judges in our own cases, or that we are the Judges of that which shall judge
us in the day of Christ? No, we hate such partiality, such blasphemy. We have
the Holy Ghost, Act. 15.28. John 16.8. Es. 2.4. Psalm. 119.106. John 12.48. Luke
16.29.
who rebukes the world of judgment, and judges amongst the nations, and
pronounces righteous judgments, by the word which he has spoken, and
speaks so loud as we may hear him, as the hearing heart knows full well, to
satisfy us in our doubts. And because we are slow of heart and dull of
hearing, and must hear by the hearing of the ear to have the truth of Gods
word brought home unto us; Act. 15.27.
therefore as Judas and Silas were sent to speak by mouth; so have we the
ambassadors of God, that are in Christ's stead to publish and apply the sentence
of the Holy Ghost. Or if that be not enough, as when there was great dissension
between Paul and Barnabas and them of the circumcision, there was a putting
over to a Council to determine that question: Act. 15.2.
so have we lawful Synods, Councels, and Assemblies, and all this that the
door of faith may be opened unto us, so long as they are built upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20.
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone. Oh blessed be the Father
of lights, and the God of all consolation, who has given us this comfortable
direction. How miserable were we if we had not the word whereat we might
inquire? And how much comfort should we want, if we had not the ministry of
it to declare and apply it unto us? As therefore it is with the heart of man,
though naturally it be heavy, yet it is not carried downward but with another
natural motion for the health of the whole body it is carried to and fro: so
though naturally we are carried after novelties, and are too too apt to follow
the directions of our own minds, yet by another natural motion of grace, let
us in our eager desires be carried after our Church, where we have such
complete direction for a godly and humble Christian soul.

Cat^^dra in calis habet qui corda mo^^t.
Thus have I whetted your desires to pant after the type and the truth. It is
God that must move your hearts unto it. To provoke you therefore to pray unto
him to this end, remember that as a white shield was anciently given to
fresh water soldiers that they might strive to have it garnished with titles
and testimonies of deserts: so God has given you souls like bare and naked
tables in respect of knowledge attaineable by Art or industry, Anima tanqu^m
abrasa tabula ^esp^^^^^s^tentiae acquisit^e non naturalis.
or any other gift. How shall we strive to adorn them with testimonies of true
Gentry more than by praying unto God (and using other means accordingly) to
write them in knowledge, faith, repentance, humility, and the like: and among
the rest, forget not DAVID'S desires in this place, that you, having their right
office, right object, and right motives, may have some comfortable testimony
that you are men after Gods own heart as David was.

Soli Deo gloria. Amen.
THE ASSIZE AT HOME.
JAMES. 2.4. Are ye not convicted in your selves, and are become Judges of
evil thoughts?


WE know by long proof and experience the good work of God, which has been
wrought by Parables. Sometimes they have been used for Edification, as when
Christ teaches by them the dignity of the preaching of the Gospel, Matthew. 13.
and the duty of the receivers of it: sometimes for Conviction, as to the
Pharisees, Matthew. 21.45.
who, when they heard Christ's parables, by the power of their consciences
perceived that he spoke of them: sometimes also they are used for conversion,
as to David, 2 Samuel 12.
who by a kind of covert speech, being brought to give sentence against
himself, was so wounded at the soul, that he presently thought, I will
confess my sin, and God forgave the wickedness of his heart.

This Sermon was also preached at an Assize.
I have for these reasons at this present resolved (through Gods assistance) to
take the same course. I will speak to you in a Parable, I mean, drawn from
the Court of Conscience, and applied to this Court of Assize, that so (I hope)
every one may perceive (though not do) with the high Priests and Scribes,
after Christ's propounding of the Parable of the Vineyard, that I have spoken
this Parable of (though not against) them.

To make way, that it may the more easily come unto you without thought of my
straining, we will see how this verse is coped in with those that are about it,
and then how we take our ground from the words themselves. As for the first,
conceive that in the former part of this Chapter the Apostle disswadeth from
respecting of persons. To conceive aright of which particular fact, consider
with me two questions.

Christ) than unto the poor faithful members. They went contrary to the
practice of that worthy instrument, Master Fox, who when he was asked, whether
he knew a certain poor man, who had received succor from him in the time of
trouble? answered, I remember him well: I tell you, I forget Lords and Ladies
to remember such. Hereupon the Apostle, taking occasion to redress other
exorbitances, falls upon this exhortation which we have now in hand.

Hester.
The bone in Mordecai his knee was never more stiff to Haman, than we should
be to such as have nothing to commend them unto us, but the Ring and gay
clothes. Psalm. 15.4.
It is the property of Gods children to have such vile persons to be contemned
in their eyes. But if besides their riches they have an office, or virtue
either natural or moral, or any thing wherein God shines (it being Gods
appointment) we must honor God in them, according to that of the Apostle, Romans
13.4. 1 Pet. 2.17. Matthew. 22.21.
Give honor to whom honor belongs. This we may and must do, though we
must not judge partially, but give every man his own. And thus is the
exhortation opened.

He urges it in this verse, by an Argument drawn from within; to wit, from
the testimony of their consciences. Are ye not judged between you and them?
or is not the case judged betwixt you and them? or are you not convicted that
you are made Judges of evil thoughts? Ye think he is a Ringed man; therefore
he is to be honored: and this is a ragged man; therefore he is to be
despised: Are these good thoughts, think ye? As if he should say; Corrupt
reasonings must not be given way unto by you: but your own hearts know that
these reasonings are corrupt; therefore ye must not give way unto them.

Thus you see the purpose of God in these words: for the opening whereof,
consider first the manner of propounding; and secondly the matter propounded.

Ahabs sons put forth, when Iehu sent a letter of defiance unto them; 2 King.
10.4.
Behold, two Kings could not stand before them, how shall we then stand?
Secondly, a teaching question; such is that of the Prophet, Who are these that
fly like a cloud, Esaias 60.8.
and like Doves unto the windows? Teaching thereby the greatness of Gods
flock in the times of the Gospel, in respect of what it was in the time of
the Law. Thirdly, a learning question; such was that of the Disciples, Matthew.
13.
Why does he speak in Parables? And that of the young man, Mark 10.17.
Good Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? when they would be
satisfied in some thing. Fourthly, a denying question; such is that of the
Prophet, Malac. 1.9.
O ye that offer the lame and the blind, will he regard your persons? As if
he should say, he will not. Lastly, an affirming question; such are common in
the Book of the Kings, Are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles, of
the Kings of Judah or Israel? As if he should say, they are: and such is the
question in this Text; which is as much as if he had said, Ye are convicted in
your selves, and are become Judges of evil thoughts.

Thus have ye the manner of propounding.



First, Do ye not, or have ye not judged in your selves, say some? (...);
Do or have ye not discerned or put a difference in or with your selves, say
others? Let every man abound in his own sense, where faith is not impeached or
destroyed, and the Scripture wilfully wronged and neglected. The Word is known
to be passive, and is derived of a word that signifies (to judge.) And whereas
judging does imply four acts in it; that is, hearing, inquiring, conuicting
the wrong doer, and passing sentence: some do understand it of the act of all
four, when they express it thus (Are ye not judged in your selves?) Others
understand it of the sin against all four, or at the least, against the
last, upon the abuse of the three former, when they express it thus, (Are ye
not partial in your selves?) Others understand it of the act of conuicting:
which I am the more willing to follow, because of that apt addition ( In your
selves: (...).
) Implying that though they would not pass righteous judgment, yet by
diligent inquisition and knowledge of the cause they were convicted in the
Court within.

As for the second Phrase, how shall I express it? (...).
Shall I say Judges of unjust cogitations, as if I meant to veil and obscure
it? Or Judges of evil thoughts, in more plain and popular terms? Or ^udges
wickedly deliberating? It may be the words may more fully be expressed. That
which is translated (Thoughts) does signify a secret reasoning about, or
discussing of a thing within a man's self, as with another, whereby he does
argue the case and debate the matter, both by asking and answering, and so
resolving within a man's self. And therefore as sometimes it is translated,
thoughts, as when Christ says, (...). Matthew. 15.19.
Out of the heart come evil thoughts: so as aptly is both the word, from
whence it comes, rendered to reason, (...). Luke 5.22. Matthew. 16, 8.
and the word it self reasonings: as when the Scribes and Pharisees thus
argued; Christ forgiueth sins; therefore he blasphemeth: Jesus perceived
their reasonings, and said, What reason you in your hearts?

Now, these reasonings, debatings, dialogues and discourses, are called
Thoughts; which are the meanings of the mind, to and fro about those things
which it apprehends: and are of two sorts. For either they are about the
nature, essence, excellency, and uses of things in general, which may be
called Theoreticall thoughts: or about the same things as they are to be
apprehended, approved, disallowed, practiced, or disauowed of us in particular,
which may be called practical thoughts: because by them the soul viewing and
staying upon it self, and comparing it self with the first pattern, does
shape a course for the owner to walk in (so far as it apprehends) and does
comfort and confound accordingly. So that indeed these thoughts are only the
work of the conscience, upon the ill carriage whereof, in corrupt reasonings,
the same conscience does play the corrupt Judge in withholding the truth in
unrighteousness, as we may see in this particular. For the question lying,
whether a rich man were to have respect merely for his riches sake before a
godly poor man? and their thoughts beating upon it, and chewing it up and
down by variety of motion, because they saw more outward glory coming by the
one than the other, and mo^^ danger prevented, they did imprison the truth and
(...) ^orrupt Judges concluded and gave sentence against ^he poor Saints: and
so they became Judges of evil reasonings.

Now you see in this Verse the ground of my parable, where I would consider two
things.

First, the power of practical conscience. Secondly, the abuse of that power.
For as it is with most power, it is abused unto sin, namely to serve men's own
turns, and the like: so the power of our consciences, which is to reason it
out, and conclude accordingly, is abused to judge wickedly even against
conviction.

The power of our Consciences.
and to give judgment according to reason. And to Reason is upon two premises
to infer a conclusion: and this is a judicial proceeding. The Proposition
like the Judge does open the truth, and like a witness does bear witness
unto it. The Assumption like the Jury does apply it to the parties to be
tried. The Conclusion like the Judge does give and pass the sentence.

This is the sum of what I have to say from hence. For the more clear
delivery whereof that we may as fully as we can comprehend the virtue of these
reasoning thoughts, lay we down first these two propositions in general, and
so we shall fall to the particulars.

The first general proposition is this, that God has established an assize
for judgment within our selves. Hence is it that we are said to be Judges. To
conceive therefore aright of it, consider that there is the Judgment seat, or
Court Hall, within a man's self; An Assize within us.
the party to be tried, man himself; the Judge, witness, Jury, the
conscience which shall proceed according to true allegations and proofs; and
all these sweetly inwrapped in these reasoning thoughts. Yea and that all
things may be carried the more fairly, there is the law imposed upon the
reasonable creature, as apprehended by him to be the rule and records.

The causes and grounds of this Assize are these two. be kept in his several
Shires and Counties, that he may have an account of the justice of his
Magistrates, estate of his country, lives of his subjects, and that he may
preserve them in peace and love in their several places: so God has appointed
this petty Assize, that he may have an account of the conscience how the mind
does rule and govern; how the whole man is governed in righteousness,
holiness, and sobriety; how the state of the body and soul stands before God
in the case of life and death; and that the desires and affections may be kept
from mutiny and rebellion, and the whole man may be brought under the
subjection of Gods will. Vel medio huminis naturalis, vel medio luminis fidei.
Our understandings, either by the light of reason, or by the light of faith,
should have the law of God presented unto them, whereby they should survey both
moral duties, and the mystical points of Divinity; our inventions should
find out variety of duty for us; our memories should keep the records; our
wills should choose and command all good actions; our judgments should sit at
hand, to give advice; our affections should attend upon them, to maintain and
defend all honest resolutions and actions against all comers; and lastly, our
desires should work natural instincts to practice them, and the whole man
should do accordingly. Or thus; God has placed the powers of the soul in
excellent order for the government of man. Our minds in a throne above, to
govern all the motions, dispositions, passions, and affections of the heart:
our hearts are set in the midst to receive information from the minds to
direct themselves and our desires, and valorously to fly upon them by fear,
love, joy, anger, and the like, if they shall rebel: our desires are set
lowest to be corrected by the heart, and governed by the head. Now, that God
may have an account how this work within us goes forward, and we may be
furthered in our course to happiness, God has appointed our consciences to
keep Assizes, to try whether we have been faithful yea or no.

David had arraigned himself at home, he goes to God, and says, Try and
examine me, whether there be any way of wickedness yea or no.

Facti sumus fugitivi a cordibus nostris.
that we are made runnagates from our own hearts. But if ever we would have a
glorious trial before our God, let us see how our cause will stand or fall
before the bar of our own hearts. I know that in the case of good we may be
deceived by the voice of conscience: For the law of nature which should direct
us, being in a great part dashed out, and ignorance of the word being wilfully
favored, there are many fearful evils which we do not apprehend as evils:
(as for example, to sin in thought is nothing, for thoughts are free; to
sin in word is but a word, and what is that? so we sin not against our
neighbor, it is no matter though we make bold with God; to sin with the
times, to do as others do, to walk in the ways of our fathers is good
religion:) yea and besides, such is the darkness of our cogitations, that in
the midst of diligence that which we know is not the tenth and tenth part of
what we are ignorant of. How therefore can it be other, but that our own
hearts should deceive us in good? yet in the case of evil we may assure our
selves, that it does not make us worse than we are in and of our selves. Though
in affliction o^ ^on^cience o^ pan^^^ o^ the new birth, ^t may make our estates
worse th^n they are: we being more sen^^ble of our ^st^tes from within than of
that from without.
As therefore it is not safe for us to rest in the voice of conscience when it
makes us good, (for Paul knew nothing by himself, yet was he not thereby
justified:) so we must be careful to hear what conscience says when it
lays sin to our charges, that so Gods Assize there may go on to Gods glory
and our good. What will it avail us to be crowned with a May-flower garland of
the praises of this world, if we walk not in the presence of our own hearts?







keep any fair quarter with themselves, much less can it be expected that he
should wisely execute any deputation from others: so spiritually mad men, who
are out of their wits with self-love and love of this world, who run upon
the pikes of hell-dangers, who will not be persuaded by the prayers and tears
of their best friends, are neither fit nor able to receive order from God for
so high and so excellent employment.

Pharisees in justifying our selves, priding our hearts in our civil
righteousness, and therefore setting our passions on work upon whomsoever
shall discover their hellish nakedness, there is no inward Assize, because (as
they think) there is no need.





Psalm of mercy, that we shall have no rest till we have rolled our selves
upon God in Christ, and have found our selves in some measure sealed with the
spirit of promise against the day of redemption.

Sedente Cu^ia.
while they sit, does aggrauate the Delinquents fault, and hinder their speed
in the business: so is it in our not suffering conscience to work. Call we
our selves therefore from all the employments of this world: examine we our
hearts on our bed in our chambers, and be still, and then if our consciences
acquit us from all wilful sins, happy are we.

As therefore when one persuaded Lycurgus, that the government might be
committed to the people; he answered, Do thou first make trial in thy house,
giving thy servants the rule: So let us say to the Devil, laboring the rule
of our affections and desires, Bear thou no longer rule in the children of
disobedience, and suffer thy slaves to rule over thee first, and then we will
hearken unto thee. If the mind rule according to right, and be not blinded and
bribed by the Will and Affections, then Conscience will work: but if the
servants rule, then truly there will be no place for an Assize.

In the fear of God let us use these means to further this divine work, that
so (as Pausanias said to a Physician, who told him all was well with him; It is
(says he) because I use not thee for my Physician) we may not say to our
flattering consciences which tell us all is well, when all is amiss; it is
because I have not thee for my Judge.

We may plead our cause before the bar of our consciences. Genesis 3.9. Genesis
4.6.9, 10.
that We may reason out our cause before the bar of our Consciences. For
these reasonings here spoken of, are within. Hence is it that God said to Adam,
Where art thou? and to Kain, Why art thou wroth? where is thy brother Abel?
what have thou done? To all which questions he could well enough answer
himself, but that he would have them return unto their own hearts, Redire ad
corda. Luke 15.
and come unto themselves (as it is said of the prodigal) and say, I have
sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
son. For want of this God complained and said, Ier. 8.6.
I harkned and heard, and none spoke aright, no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, What have I done? that is, they did not reason out their
cases with themselves. To this David exhorted the Courtiers of Saul, Commune
with your hearts: Psalm. 4.4.
and David practiced it himself, saying, Psalm. 42.5.
Why art thou heavy o my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? yea and
Christ sought to bring his Disciples to this when he said, I have chosen you
twelve, but one of you is a Devil: and again, One of you shall betray me:
that they might say within themselves, Is it I? and Is it I? And no doubt this
was one cause why he said so often to Peter, Love thou me? and that the
Angel, when Agar fled from her mistress, said unto her, Whence came thou?
and whither go? that they should reason out their cases before their own
hearts, and speed accordingly.

Ego and Rex meus.
that so we may never climb to Wolsies style, I and my King, but may feelingly
descend to Paul's free confession, I am the least of Saints, the greatest of
^inners: so also has he not this way deprived us of means to warn us of our
future estate. If our hearts condemn us, God is greater: therefore according
to the reasonings within we shall know how we shall speed with God. As Jonathan
shot forth pricke-shafts to warn David of the Kings ^ispleasure: so
conscience, if we arraigne our selves before it, will warn us of the
displeasure or favor of God. As we love our selves therefore, let us not
neglect this kindness on Gods part, and duty on ours. We may easily find by
experience the backwardness of our natures unto it: for let our hearts tell us
of any of our wanderings, we put it off till another time, as Foelix did Paul.
But will we be so unkind to our own soule^? We will talk with our friends,
with our acquaintance, wi^h strangers, yea and with our enemies: why then shall
we not do it with our selves? Bee-masters tell us that they are the b^st
hiues which make the greatest noise: so that is the best conscience which makes
the greatest noise in this kind. If we never go to b^d before we have
parlied it out thoroughly with our hearts; then as we shall find of our
selves, as Alexander said of Antipater, that he did wear white garments
without, and was purple within, so we will give God no rest till we find some
confortable testimony of our amendment. As therefore David said unto Solomon,
Up and be doing, so let us: delays breed danger, if in any thing, much more in
this Stir we therefore up our hearts by considering these ^otiues.

when we will commune with our own hearts, In ordine ad salutem.
we are in the way to our eternal help and good.

Saul to the Priest ready to sacrifice when his enemies were upon him,
withdraw thy hand: Remember, as it is with men deeply in debt, so long as they
are busy and keep their trading current, so long their creditors let them
alone; but when once they make fault, then one party after another, and one
writ upon the neck of another creepes abroad in darkness till they be quite
down the wind: so will it be with you and us all, when once the course of our
lives makes default by affliction, sickness, or death, then our consciences will
make one summons after another, and give us no rest, till it has brought us
down to the desperation of hell.

Thus we have passed the generals of this reasoning: In reasoning there is
first the
to descend now unto the particulars, we shall first meet with the proposition
(which is the first part of reasoning) wherein we do propound and bear
witness unto that truth which is made known unto us. 1 Proposition.
Whence I offer this point to be considered; that

In our selves there is a witness, which will propound the truth according to
knowledge.

From hence is it that Paul joins these two together, to wit, the knowledge
of God, and the knowledge of our own hearts: 1. Cor. 2.11.
No man knows what is in man save God and the spirit, that is, the
conscience. From this witnessing power David says, Psalm. 51.3.
My sin is ever before me: and the brethren of Joseph were compelled to utter
this speech, We verily sinned against our brother, Genesis 42.21.
in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he besought us and we would not
hear him: therefore is this trouble come upon us. Yea and God himself
implying this power unto Kain, Genesis 4.
says, Sin lies at the door. Sin lies at the door? What is that? We
ordinarily look unto one of these three senses: either the punishment of sin
is at hand; for amongst the Hebrew sin is taken for the punishment of sin,
as Christ is said, To be sin for us: 2 Cor. 5.21.
or else thy sin is not secret; for thou shall be no more able to conceal
it, than that which does lie at the door in every ones view: or else the
conscience of thy sin shall forthwith fly upon thee; because the witnessings
and twinges of the conscience do ineuitably follow sin. But if we take all
these three together, they make one entire sense: as if God should say; Kain,
thou can not so hide thy sin from me, but that it will inwardly fret and
gnaw upon thy conscience, and outwardly draw speedy vengeance. But more fully
to open this witnessing power of conscience, I would consider four points.

Acts 15.
as when the Gentiles accounted fornication a thing indifferent, when the
people of Calicute and Narsinga do without regret worship the devil, when we
walk in the ways of our Fathers whether good or bad without check, and the
like: as also by the just judgment of God, when he does give us over for our
sins to hardness of heart, and to a cauterized conscience, as the Gentiles,
Romans 1.
who because they did not glorify God with their natural knowledge, were
given over to unnatural sins. Yet we shall not always sleep thus
securely, it will look upon us with a witness, and speak so loud in our
ears that we shall see a map of our miseries, as Theodoricus did the face of
Symachus, whom he had murdered, in a fish-head on his table; and shall make us
leave behind us such a desperate will when we die, as English Hubertus did,
who had been a covetous oppressor, I yield my goods to the King, my body to
the grave, my soul to the devil.

Psalm. 50.21.
conscience takes notice of it: for as we will say for our own clearing, In
my conscience I did not so much as think it: so Paul said of the Gentiles,
their thoughts accused or excused them: Romans 2.
yea and those that are come from the knowledge of conscience to the feeling of
it, can with grief tell that conscience does thus. If we sin in our wills and
affections, conscience takes notice of it. As Paul says, Romans 9.1.
My conscience bears me witness by the Holy Ghost that I have great
heaviness for you: So on the contrary, if his will and affections had not
been carried the right way, his conscience would have been upon the back of
him for it, as we see in his reluct^tion between the flesh and the spirit,
Romans 7.15.
I allow not that which I do, yea what I hate that I do. If we sin in our
words, conscience presently hears: therefore Solomon observing it says, Take
no heed to all words, for oftentimes thine own heart knows that thou have
also cursed others. If we sin in our actions, conscience will not ouerpasse
them: It told Judas, that he had sinned in betraying innocent blood, and makes
infinite complain^s and con^essions in all sorts of people at some times or
other. Se^ondly, as for o^r righteousness, conscience does witness our
sonship, as the Apostle says, Romans 8.16.
The spirit of Go^ bears witness with our spirit that we are the children
of God: as also our new obedience and holiness. For this w^ see plain in the
example of Paul, Heb. 13.18. 2 Cor. 1.12. Act. 23.1.
whose conscience told hi^, That he was willing in all things to live
honestly, that in simplicity and godly pureness he had his conversation in
the world, and that in all good conscience he served God.

Jacob did the selling of Joseph) yet in day of affliction, hour of death, and
day of judgment, our reckonings will be bleeding new: and then this divine
power does take a view of our whole lives, and from that office which God has
given it, witness truly, and bring to pass all our doings as in the sight and
presence of God.

If now in the fourth place you will ask me, Why the conscience does in these
reasonings as a witness propound the truth? I answer, In two respects: First,
In respect of God, that God may be manifested to be a just God in his
proceedings. There a^e many secret sins which no man in the world can
witness: for which if God should proceed against us, he might seem unjust. To
the end therefore that God might be cleared in the day of vengeance, he has
set a witness within our selves which will not lie.

Secondly, In respect of our selves; because it might be of excellent use
through the whole course of our lives: Semen humilitatis.


Semen compassionis.
to witness against them, and to think hardly of them beyond proofs, yea and
when we can prove to execute extreme right. To the end therefore that we might
be filled with compassion, we have a witness within us which tells us that
we are as bad as they.

Semen gratitudinis.
and notwithstanding all his mercies to turn our backs upon him, as if they
were not worthy the taking notice of. To the end therefore that we may be
driven to cry out with David, My soul praise thou the Lord, and forget not all
his benefits, God gives us a witness of our own unworthiness to say within
us, that we are less than the least of Gods mercies.

Semen pietatis.
we are provoked to live holily and in the sight of God; and as we have
committed many faults without shame, so to do many good things not looking for
the praise of men.

5 Semen c^^sol^t^^^.
Lastly, it is a seed of comfort. For Gods children practicing much good, which
the world knows not of, or if it do know it, which it slighteth, or is apt
to forget, or to misinterpret as the act of an Hypocrite: therefore God has
put a sufficient witness within our selves. As it breeds horror in a wicked
man to have the witness of God, the witness of the creatures, (whereof
Ioshuah speaks, The stone has heard all, Ios^. 24 27.
and shall be a witness: And James, The rust of your gold and silver shall
rise up in judgment against you; James 5.2.
) and also the witness of his conscience, which he cannot stop: so it breeds
comfort in a good man, not only to have a witness in heaven, a witness of
words, a witness of doings, a witness of sufferings, as Job speaks, That
his wrinckles and leanenesse were a witness; Job 16.19. Test^m^^um d^cti per
v^c^m ^^ngua: and ^^cti, per vocem of cris. Job 16.8. Numerus s^ppl^^ defectum.
but also the witness of his own heart; which being in stead of a thousand,
if others should fail, might with the number supply the defect, and make a
sufficient testimony for our eternal clearing.

Abraham and Abimelech did depend upon Beershebah, Genesis 21.31.
that is, the well of oath: so likewise that between Iaacob and Laban did
depend upon Galeed or Iagar-sahadutha, Gen 31.47.
that is, the heap of witness. Thus is it also in many things that do depend
between God and us. It is pity therefore that Conscience should be lulled
asleep with the profits, pleasures, and honors of this world. It is a
thousand pities that Discretion (as we call it) and Policy should cut the
throat of a witness that should stand us in such stead. O conscience,
conscience, awake in time: urge thy mind to a diligent inquiry, that thou
may give witness according to knowledge. It is a base thing for a witness
to be asleep, or willingly to suffer himself to perish when he should speak
the truth: so it is for thee, O Conscience. In such a case we may say, as
Leosthenes said of Alexanders army, when their Captain was dead, That thy
owner is like a blind Cyclops, groping with his hands when he has lost his
eye. It is a more base thing for a witness to be afraid to utter the truth, or
when he speaks, to testify not as the thing is, or not as his mind is, or
not to those ends for which he should speak, that is, Sermonem non adaequatum
rebus, vel menti, vel fenibus.
to maintain charitable truth, and so to bear false witness: so it is for
thee, O Conscience. That therefore thou may be a competent witness, do but
mark that as witnesses before men must be fitted; so must thou to be a
witness before God.

First therefore, 1 Conditio. Azor. Just. mor. praecep. 9. Alsted. Theol. Cas.
cap. 21.
as in a witness is required a certain condition of life: he may not be a
servant, because he may be a party either by fear or hire: so thou must not
be a slave to sin; The blood of Jesus Christ must purge thee from dead
works, to serve the living God. The Spirit of God must rest upon thee, to
bring liberty to that soul where thou art, and then witness when thou will,
thy witness shall be taken.

Secondly, as in a witness is required a certain Sex: 2 Sexus.
because in some criminal causes, a woman has not of old been admitted: so
if thou be timorous, effeminate, and of a reuengefull nature, thou shall be
shut out from Gods bar. But if thou art as bold as a Lion, if like a man
indeed thou can look upon the person of thine adversary without anger, upon
his prosperity without envy, upon his wrongs without desire of revenge; then
speak and welcome, thou will neither smother impiety to God, nor
uncharitableness to man.

Thirdly, as in a witness is required Age; 3 Aetas.
in so much as a child is not admitted, who can neither feel the working of a
lying soul, or the danger of a false testimony, or is carried more by
affection than by judgment: so if thou be childish, more diligently
attending upon the butterflies, babies, and rattles of this world, than thy
own reflecting upon thy self, to present justly thy own estate to God; take
thy hand from the book, thou art no fit witness. But if thou art grown to a
full age in Christ, and can discover the hid man of the heart in thee, who
will easily give a true testimony of his own estate, then come before the
Judge of heaven and earth, and speak thy mind.

4 Discretio.
Fourthly, as in a witness is required discretion: for an Idiot or mad man is
not fit; he is not his own man, and therefore he cannot freely give himself
to the King and the country in any faithful service: so if thou be a beast by
knowledge, Gal. 3.1. (...).
like the foolish Galatians, without understanding, and so madly running through
thick and thin, thou art no fit witness. But if Christ have shined in thy
soul by a new light, and have made thee come unto thy self with the
Prodigal, and have the understanding of a man in thee, then come to Gods
Court: I hope thine own heart will not suffer thee to deceive thy self by
falsehood.

5 Fama.
Fifthly, as in a witness is required good fame or credit: for infamous persons
are repelled, and excepted against, from witnessing, especially in criminal
causes: so if thou be infamous for sluggishnesse (like those who use their
bodies to the bone, but seldom use their consciences in any thing) or for
suffering thy power to be suppressed, or thy office to be neglected; then thou
art more fit to be a slave, than a freeman to be sworn. But if thou be of
credit for speaking the truth amongst millions of lies, and for thy daily
employment in thy office, as in the sight and presence of God, then thou have
Gods good leave to speak, and without question thy testimony will be admitted.

Sixthly, as in a witness, together with the former, 6 E^ Fortuna.
is required a certain estate and condition of life; because poor men, who
are of base conditions, may more easily be corrupted: so if thou suffer thy
self to be needy and hungry after the things of the world, and lose the
honor of that selfe-sufficiencie, whereby thou do resemble God, a
purse-promise will easily spoil such a witness. But if thou be kin to the
woman who has the Moon at her feet, and can say with Iaacob, I have all
things, Apoc. 12.
then thou will refuse gold and gain to be a true witness at Gods Bar.

Lastly, as in a witness religion is required; 7 Fid^^ in testibus ^sta
requires.
for an Infidel is not admitted against a Believer: so if thou be not knit
unto God, as the deputy of the faithful Witness in heaven, cursed is thy
witness in this divine Court. But if God and thou do walk together, as two
that are agreed, and if thou do so proceed according to the rule of Gods word,
as thou do not condemn thy self in that which thou do, then speak on;
prosper with this thy glory, which God has given thee to be a witness in this
Court, and this thy power shall teach thee terrible things.

Strive (O Conscience) that thou may have all these qualifications. This is
the way so to do thy office here, that thou may not be blamed hereafter.
Yea, this is the way so to preserve thy self, that thou shall preserve thy
owner. I remember that Pythagoras was wont to give this precept to his
Scholars: Not to taste of those things which had black tails: so let me say
to the conscience of every one here present, take heed of the black tail of a
drowsy conscience. It may speak pleasing things for a time, it not being
qualified as before; but at the last, as a babbler said to a wise man of old; O
Philosopher, I am troublesome unto thee with my speech: so shall conscience
trouble our patiences: and as we would account him miserable, who has a
witness of his thoughts, words, and actions against the law of man; much more
will our consciences make us miserable in witnessing our thoughts, words, and
actions against the law of God.

Assumption.
Thus we have heard these reasoning thoughts as a witness propounding the
truth: next we shall hear them as a Jury applying the truth to the parties to
be tried. A Jury within us.
And this it does as an Assumption: whence we note that In our selves there is
a Jury which will bring in a verdict concerning us, either of guilty or not
guilty.

To open this I will show you two points: First, that Conscience like a Jury
brings in the verdict of guilty upon sinners. And this is discovered unto us
two ways. First by word: and secondly by work. By word thus: Adonibezek said,
Judge. 1.7.
Seventy Kings having the thumbs of their hands and feet cut off, gathered
bread under my table: as I have done, so God has rewarded me. Joseph's brethren
said, We have verily sinned against our brother, Genesis 42.21.
in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he besought us, and we would not
hear him: therefore is this trouble come upon us. Kain said, Whosoever finds
me shall slay me. Whence proceed these words but from the verdict of guilty
which their consciences had brought in? 2. Sam. 24.7. Job 13.26.
By work thus: Look to David, and his heart smote him: look unto Job, who
possessed the sins of his youth: Dan. 5.6.
to Belshazzar, whose counten^nce was changed, his thoughts were troubled, his
joints were loosed, and his knees smote one against another: Act. 2.37.
to the Jews, who were pricked at their hearts: Act. 24.25.
and to Foelix, who trembled. Whence proceed all these, but from the power of
Consciences verdict; seeing they are evident signs that they were sick of
that worm which never dies. Mar. 9.46.
Which power is given unto conscience,







The second point to be showed you is, that conscience like a Jury brings
the verdict of not guilty upon him that does well. Genesis 28.
What was it that made Iaacob sleep so sweetly, when his head lay hardest in
Bethel, but this acquitting Jury? This made a feast in Iaacobs bosom: Pro.
15.15.
and whereas the guilty being rouzed and left to themselves, have a trembling
heart, and fear at the shaking of a leaf, Deuteronomy. 28.65.
Iaacob was as bold as a Lion. Pro. 28.1.
This made Paul so often appeal unto his conscience. Before the Jews, Act.
23.1.
I have in all good conscience served God unto this day. Before Foelix, Act.
24.16.
I have plotted to have a clear conscience toward God and man. To the
Romans, I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, Romans 9.1.
my conscience bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost. To the Corinthians; 2
Cor. 1.12.
My rejoicing is the testimony of my conscience. Heb. 13.18.
To the Hebrews; We trust we have a good conscience. To make this yet more
plain, do but mark Paul his phrase of speech, David's confidence, and Gods
childrens comfort.

Paul's phrase is this: Phil. 4.7.
The peace of God which passes all understanding. What peace is this? A peace
in health, wealth, prosperity, ease, and the like? No surely: For what
worldling has not such a peace ordinarily? but a peace in sickness, poverty,
persecution, death: to have peace when the foundations of the earth are out of
course, and shaken, and shake at us, and when all worldly contentment is taken
from us, is peace which passes understanding. And whence comes all this, but
from this excusing power of conscience, which says of us not guilty in our
souls? David's confidence was such, as he was sure of his hand, and durst put
himself upon Gods trial. Judge me, o Lord, Psalm. 7.8. In^^tia ^^se non
personae. Psalm. 26.1, 2. Psalm.
according to my righteousness: and again, Judge me, o Lord, for I have
walked in mine innocence: Prove me and try me, examine my reins and my heart:
and again, Try me and examine me, whether there be any way of wickedness in
me. Guilty Rachel will be unmannerly and sit down before her father rather
than she will be tried. The wicked in the day of wrath will rather call upon
the mountains to fall upon them, than come to trial: but David will lift up
his head and not be confounded. Now whence does this confidence proceed, but
from this acquitting Jury? Gods childrens comfort is constant amid all
discouragements. It sometimes faints, it never fails. It gives us such a
first fruits of heaven in our hearts, that we pass along with our hands upon
our mouths under good report and ill report, honor and dishonor, want and
abundance, and through all the changes and chances of this present world. As
hell were no hell without an accusing conscience; so heaven no heaven without
an excusing one. That therefore the godly man before he enter into Canaan might
have a taste of the grapes of Canaan, this good spy does bring a cluster;
which yet it could not do if it were not an acquitting Jury.

they justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of the
righteous from him. Make the whole Jury to say as David, I have sworn to
keep thy righteous judgments. Put them apart into the presence of God, and
see what verdict they will bring in, and whether they will not find according
to truth. Secundum praesentem justitiam.
I warrant thee if God have any part in thee, thou shall speed according to
faithful evidence. The Iuries that are empaneled in this world before the
Judgment seats of men sometimes will too much incline to the affections of the
Judge. So that as Alexanders Courtiers did imitate his stooping; Platoes
scholars his crookedness; Aristotle's followers his stammering, and Dionysius
his hearers his dim-sightednesse, so as they would stumble one upon another: so
well they incline to the weaknesses of them before whom they stand. Sometimes
again they will be carried by their own passions, and serve their own turns
upon them, upon whom their spleenes will not give them leave to laugh (except
in hypocrisy): as if they were warned to execute vengeance upon enemies, and
not show justice upon all. Sometimes again they will be swayed to serve the
turns of those particular men upon whom they do depend, as if they had
forgotten their names to be Iurers, and had assumed the names of parasites and
flatterers, yea worse of spaniels, to quest about for others games and gains.
In Heraldry they tell us, A nominibus ad a^i^a bor^m de duc^ur argumentum.
that a good argument is drawn from Names to Arms: but so is it not always
in Iuries here; as if an oath had no teeth, and could not bite if we did offend
it. Sometimes again they would feign do something, but that they are choked
by letters, and suits, or threats of friends, foes, or superiors: or if not
thus, then the weakest horse bears the burden, and they that are worst able
to manage such affairs are drawn up, the more sufficient, mean while, having
their heads hid in the Sheriffs or Bailiffes pocket. In all which respects we
may say to our temporal Iuries as Cyprian of the fine schismatikes who had
taken shipping for Rome with their mart of lies, Quasi veritas post eos
navigare non posset.
They are gone, as if truth could not follow them: so the truth follows them,
and shall one day be discovered, though they fail never so fast with lying
verdicts. But as for the Iuries in our hearts, though some things are passed
here with a doubtful and deceivable conscience, because we know in part; and
with a regret of conscience, because we make not conscience enough of
offending it; yet when God sends out his summons there shall be no frowning
Judge to fear, no great man to pleasure, no passions to stop the mouth of
conscience, no penal statute of the God of heaven whereof we shall be
ignorant, no let to such a bold and faithful Jury as shall fill heaven and
earth with Guilty, Guilty, to the confusion of the bad, and not guilty, to the
eternal comfort of the good. The scholars of Pythagoras were to suffer
themselves rather to be slain than to stir their foot and tread down a
bean: and this Jury will rather not be (which is impossible) than not take
notice of every act and every circumstance which may make the justice and mercy
of God shine in the eternal disposition of all the children of Adam.

Oh therefore harken to this work of conscience. If it deal with us as the word
of Peter with the Jews, that is, prick us at the heart, beware in time. God
does then deal with us as with Saul when he cast him into a dead sleep, and
sent David to take away his spear, water-pot, and the lap of his garment, that
is, he gives us a remembrance to tell us that we are in Gods hand, who, if we
will take no warning, will further punish us. But if it speaks peaceably unto
us, kills that worm within, and binds up our wounds with wine and oil, I
mean, with the pacifying and purging blood of our blessed Savior, then shall
we be able to stand before our own consciences, and before the God of our
consciences. We shall stand (I say) before our consciences: for though in the
winter of our hearts it may be with us as with Job, in whom were the terrors
of the Lord, and the venom thereof (as he termed it) drinking up his spirit;
or as with David, who roared all the day because Gods hand was heavy upon him
day and night, and his moisture was like the drought in summer: yet, in the
spring when the voice behind us shall say that Christ is our salvation, we
shall have more joy in heart than they whose corn and wine and oil increase.
We shall stand again before the God of our consciences: for though he seem to
frown and send afflictions, and crosses, and diseases, and death; Esai. 38.3.
yet as Hezekiahs Jury gave way to that comfortable prayer, O Lord, remember I
beseech thee how I have walked before thee with an upright heart: so will ours
give way to our comfortable grasping of God and his promise, that we perish not
in trouble.

A Judge within us.
and as a Jury applying it to the parties to be tried: we come now unto it as
a Judge concluding, Conclusion.
without all which three there can be no perfect reasoning. Whence I offer this
point to consider, that We have also in our selves under God, our Judges.

For hence is it that we are said to have reasonings, because as a Judge we
both open the law that the witness may propound fit truths, and as a Judge we
determine accordingly in the conclusion. As it is with Princes and Kings, who
are the high Judges of their kingdoms, they have Judges under them by
deputation to whom they commit their judgments of God, and allot their
several circuits: so though God be the high Judge of heaven and earth, over
the hearts and consciences of all men, yet does he depute these inferior
Judges in the circuit of every man's breast, to pass the conclusion and sentence
of God. Hence is it that Saint John does couple God and conscience in the
selfsame action of a Judge: 1 John 3.20.
If our hearts condemn us, God is greater then our hearts, and knows all
things. To condemn we know is an action of a Judge: and how good cause we
have to account our consciences our Judges, will appear if we consider these
three points.

Adam had sinned (though no man pursued him, no Angel reproved him, and the
Lord was not yet come) he found himself condemned by the inward Judge, and
when God came he ratified the same sentence. But we cannot think that God
would confirm the sentence of a rebel, who has set himself in Gods throne
to judge without God.

1 C^^ ^^.4
I pass very little to be judged by you, or of man's judgment: no I judge not
my self; for I know nothing by my self, and so forth: as if he should say,
Ye are very forward in censuring me, both in respect of my gifts and
faithfulness in my place: I weigh your censures little; though I will not be
the preacher of my own praise, yet I tell you I know nothing by my self. Thus
conscience of his faithfulness did bear him out against the slanders of false
Apostles.

Adam, when he was driven to hide his head in a bush: the pleasures of Canaan
did David little pleasure, when he was driven to cry out, My sin is ever
before me. All the delights of Babylon could not raise up Belshazzars heart,
when the hand wrote Gods sentence against him on the wall and in his
conscience. If the Judge condemn, who shall absolve? Excellent is that
similitude which an ancient makes to this purpose. A man condemned to die
tries his three friends to procure his pardon: one says, I have no grace with
the King, and therefore I can promise thee no such kindness: yet this will I
do, I will buy thee meat, and drink, garments, and music: thou shall want
nothing that may give thee content while thou art here. All this is good, and
yet it contents not, because the poor man wants a pardon. The second
answers, I know not how to get to the King, but this I will do, I will
bewail thy miserable hap, weep for thy loss, and attend thee to the court
gates. All this is good kindness, and yet it contents not, because the poor
condemned man would have a pardon. The third says, Rest upon my kindness, I
am one of the Kings favorites, and he will deny me nothing: I will go to the
court and before the day of execution I will surely bring thy pardon sealed.
This is he: this is the friend that will make the poor man outface all his
trouble, because he answers to the point indeed. Behold the case is ours; we
are poor condemned wretches, who must to hell without our pardon: our three
friends are the world; wife, children, and kindred; and a good conscience. The
world will provide all necessaries for our bodies, but not a pardon: this is
not purchased with a corruptible price of silver and gold. Wife and children
will lament our loss, and go sighing and sobbing to the grave with us, but
they leave us to our own shifts for a pardon. But a good conscience will make
us outstand all dangers, it will procure our peace, and our pardon. As the
world cannot help where conscience hurts; so the world cannot hurt where
conscience helps.



We must do our office to conscience three ways: Brasile, Sine fide, Sine
lege, Sine rege.
who are said to be without religion, without law, without a King; and they
are no less wretched who are without this religious Judge and governor,
conscience. Therefore let us pray for it that God would give it, that God would
keep it, and keep it tender, that so we may live a quiet and comfortable
life under it. Secondly, we must do our duty to conscience by giving it good
words. Ye know the Word of God, Thou shall not curse the ruler of thy people:
Oh that we could always remember it in the case of conscience! he that buies
with conscience, sells with conscience, rules with conscience, obeies with
conscience, is commended even of men that have no conscience: yet if conscience
rule in any in the serving of God, and make them tremble at Gods precepts,
promises, or threatenings and the like, he is but a by word among the
multitude. But blessed conscience, encourage thy friends, and discourage them
that flout at thee, with that true but fearful saying; Esa. 66.5.
Hear the Word of the Lord all ye that tremble at his Word; your brethren that
hated you, and cast you out for my Names sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified:
but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed. Lastly, we must
do our duty to conscience, by paying tribute to it, and yielding to it
honorable means of maintenance. Give tribute to whom tribute belongs: shall
we have a governor, and will we starve him for want of maintenance? God
forbid. Deck therefore the table of thy conscience richly with the Word of
God; let thy conscience use it as in the sight and presence of God; attend with
all the parts and powers of thy body and soul in state upon this honorable
governor: and if thou can not give it entertainment answerable to its place,
weep to God for more grace; that as one said to Saint Augustines weeping
mother; Non potest perire tantarum lachrymarum filius.
A son for whom so many tears are shed cannot perish: So thy conscience for
which thou do weep to God may not be corrupted, or want necessary means of
maintenance.

Remurmuration: As a Judge does or should fret and grudge at every evil cause
that comes before him, and cannot abide that any Gallio should either plead the
excuse or defense of it: so conscience must work an inward repining, when any
of the advocates of sin does blanch the least wickedness. The least sin is
hellish in its sight, the greatest is ten times damnable. Instigation: Look as
a Judge does or should provoke to every good occasion for the repressing of
vice, and encouragement of virtue: so conscience must goad us up, and stir us
forward to take every good opportunity to do good unto our bodies and souls
to the honor of God. The Jews who were as the swift Dromodaries, were not
more eager to commit wickedness, than conscience must be to do that which is
good in Gods sight. Condemnation. Even as a Judge does condemn the guilty, and
pronounce definitive sentence against him whatsoever he be, whether friend or
foe, rich or poor, because he hears causes speak, and not persons: so
deals conscience, yea even against the owner of it, if he do offend.
Therefore the Apostle speaks of those who are selfe-condemned. Or look as if
a soldier demean himself not well in battle, the Judge Martial may cause
his Escocheon to be pierced: Even so conscience must pierce the heart of the
offender by a full pronouncing of the judgments of its God. Absolution. As a
Judge does absolve the guiltless, and when his innocence does once appear,
does make no delays, or demurres, or the like to keep him from the comfort of
his cause: so when conscience finds innocence, it cries out, Well done good
and faithful servant, enter into thy Masters joy. Know thine office
conscience. And as thou will answer it to him from whom thou have thy most
immediate deputation, see thou deal righteous-Iudge-like in all these
particulars.

Assize: tell God how it stands with thee in the case of life and death. Help
O King, I have found rebellion in thy kingdom, without thy pardon all will
perish: with thy pardon without thy wisdom to plant religion, to order thy
subjects, and to prevent future mutinies, all will come to naught. Thus deal
faithfully with thy soul: And as good Judges will not trust particular
Justices with the government of the Country (lest they should make their own
gains and aim at their own private ends, more than at the public good) but
will diligently search into their proceedings, that so their account may be the
more current: so the good conscience will not commit the government of the
soul to the will and affections, but will every day search into their courses,
that so they may give the more through and honest account unto our God and King.

Thus having viewed the power of practical conscience in these reasoning
thoughts which are in us, 2 The abuse of the power of Conscience.
we come to the abuse of this power, in judging euilly and partially even
against conviction. Whence we may note, That it is no news that there is
disorder and corruption in the judgments of our own hearts and consciences.

Ye know that Paul found out this wickedness of old, To withhold the truth in
unrighteousness: Romans 1.18.
even so is it still. The prisoner to be tried within us is Truth; the case to
be tried, is, whether Truth should be set at liberty to be a guide to our
actions, yea or no? Truth pleades for her self, as the cause of poor
Christians in this place: but the Jury of will and affections hears not:
they are corrupted with carnal wisdom, pleasure, profit, or the like: and
therefore in comes the foreman (Will) and says, I will do as I have done,
and I will be persuaded, as I have been persuaded: and so Reason like a
corrupt Judge gives the sentence that Truth must into prison, and rebellion
and wickedness flourish.

If now you will ask me, what are the reasons of this corruption in our inward
iudgings? I answer, that I shall give you four reasons of it.

Deuteronomy. 33.9.
Thus Leui is said to say to his father and mother, I have not seen thee,
neither knew he his own brethren, nor his children, when he was to execute
the judgments of God.



many persons of vile conditions are maintained, or some profit which is reaped
from them; and many houses of notorious disorder are vpheld (as if they were
the very life-bloud of societies wherein we live) for the greatness of that
rent which they may bring unto us: so is there much disorder in our inward
judicial proceedings, because we love our selves too well. All our Logic is
too little to conclude for our selves, and all our reason employed to bring
sackes to our own mills for the time by profits, pleasures, honors, and the
like; and for after times, let come what can come, we care not.

quaeres, whereby Religion was drawn from the heart to the head: and the kind
work of conscience never went on less to our comfort, than since we healed
the hurt of it with sweet words, and stopped up the mouth of it with politic
euasions.

these, any of these, nor any others shall order our consciences from roaring
the truth in our ears. In the Pro^ince of Cottie in Scotland.
We read of a stone in Scotland about thirteen foot in height, which if we
may believe it, will so dampe the roaring of a Cannon, that, if it be shot off
on the one side, the report cannot be heard on the other. But we shall find no
such defense from the cries of conscience, when before the judgment seat of
God the secrets of our understandings, memories, wills, affection, Romans 2.16.
and bodies, yea all secrets shall be judged by Jesus Christ according to the
Gospel.

Oh therefore ye that are witnesses to propound the truth, look unto
conscience, speak the whole truth, and nothing but the truth for conscience
sake. Let not malice, ill will, private gain, make you to offend conscience
for a world. Ye that are the Jury to apply this truth according to law, take
heed that ye incline not to the look, to the word, to the profit, to the
pleasure of any man whatsoever; what or who can do you good when your
consciences are wounded? when ye are called to an account for the breach of
the peace of your consciences? Then surely as Seneca, when he came to his Farm
and saw the house which he had builded decayed, a tree which he had planted,
rotten, a Boy, which he had brought up, with gray hairs; Quocunque ocul^^
conuerto^ deo documentance aetatis.
said, whithersoeuer I look, I behold the monitors of my age: so ye shall see
on every side the remembrancers of your woe. Your honors, the Judges, watch
over the peace of your consciences in your conclusions. Ye may often read and
think of that Judge, whom your Fortescue mentions, Saepius ipse mihi fass^es
est, qu^d nunquam in (...) i^ animum cius de hoc sacto ^p^purga^et.
who having condemned a Gentlewoman to death, for the murder of her husband,
upon the bare accusation of her man, which was afterward found false, Often
confessed unto him, that he should never during his life be able to purge or
clear his conscience of that fact. And to conclude, that conscience may be the
better furthered in all others; we that are men of God, men of conscience,
look we to conscience. Have we another way to heaven than we teach others,
that we should teach them to keep a good conscience, and neglect it our
selves? In the fear of God please we our consciences, and not our passions, or
the lusts of your youth: and as Seneca willed Lucilius to do all things, as if
grave Cato were present: so let us do all things as if our consciences looked
upon us: yea as Hierome, whether he did eat, or drink, or walk, and so forth,
he thought he heard that fearful voice, Arise ye dead and come to judgment:
so let us hear the voice of conscience. We press our people to walk in the
presence of their consciences, at the least, once a day: but for us, as at the
banks of Euboia the sea does ebb and flow seven times a day; so let us do it
seven times a day also. Oh how would this (as the Prophet speaks) make us
Priests after Gods own heart? How would it kill pride, passion, contention,
self-love, covetousness, and the like, which make us many times less
profitable to Gods people; yea and to account them which have many graces, the
scum of our assemblies? Is not this to be judges of evil reasonings?

Well, let all of us think how this power of conscience abused, will pay us
home at the last. Call to mind the example of James Abbes the Martyr, Fox Acts
and Monuments.
who being drawn by crafty reasonings to fall from the Gospel, was pitiously
vexed in conscience, and could have no rest till he went and told the Bishop,
that it repented him that ever he had consented to their wicked persuasions.
Remember Thomas Whittle, who being constrained through imprisonment to yield to
the Bishop of London, afterward felt such a hell in his conscience, that he
could scarcely refrain from destroying himself, and could be at no rest till
he was under the cross again. Forget not also that which we read of
Archbishop Cranmer, who writing for fear of death contrary to truth, was more
troubled in conscience for it, than for all that ever he did; and therefore
because his hand writ contrary to his heart, he would burn that first. The
like we read also of William Sparrow, who after submission to Popish
Idolatry, went with a troubled soul, and could not be quiet till he had
preached against it, and professed that if every hair of his head were a man,
he would burn them all rather than go from the truth again. Let us always
have fresh in our memories, these and the like examples, that we may be afraid
to abuse our consciences: for this we may be assured of, that though our
consciences be calmed for a time, yet as Nycippus his sheep brought forth a
Lion, which portended to tyranny: so our consciences which seem to be as
quiet as lambs, will at the last bring forth roaring, as a presagement of our
eternal thraldom.

Soli Deo gloria.
THE HID MAN OF THE HEART. UPON 2 CORINTHIANS. 5.17. By ROBERT ABBOT.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Nathaniel Butter. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR HENRY BAKER Knight and Baronet, and to the Lady
KATHERINE his religious and loving Wife, Grace in this world and glory in the
world to come through CHRIST our LORD.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
The rule is not more old than good, Ingenuum est fat^r^ per quem prof^^cris.
That it is an ingenuous thing to confess by whom we reap profit. Having
therefore by good proof found your hands not to be sealed up to me: though I
beg no new favors (because through Gods mercy I have learned to want, and to
abound, and in all estates to be content) yet I humbly beseech you to give me
leave freely to acknowledge your love unto me. It was not without your charge
that I came first to settle in this Cou^^ry: neither have I here continued
without the enlargement of my Library by your Books bestowed upon me. What
therefore can I render unto you (besides my public Ministry) but some such
poor acknowledgment as this is? A plain Sermon I confess it is, yet such an
interpreter of my heart, that I hope you shall plainly see my honest desires to
lay before you a picture of your (together with the rest of Gods peoples)
gracious estates. It was a use in rich men's feasts, Herodot. lib. 3.
amongst the Egyptians of old, to appoint one who should show a wodden
carcass of a man liuelily cut out, to every guest, and to say to this effect:
So eat, drink, and delight thy self as withal thou cast thy eye upon this
which shows thee what thou shall be when thou art dead. It may be this
spiritual anatomy (which I offer unto you) may have as good a use to call
back our ouer-lauish loves from the delights of this world, by showing us
either what we are, or what we should be. What though it be rudely cut; yet
when I remember a worthy speech of your own, ( What care I for a young man who
can talk of genus and species, and other logical and philosophical
subtleties: give me an experienced Preacher who can speak to the heart;) I
cannot doubt of your loving entertainment of this my homely work. I know you
neglect not any humane Arts, provided they do prepare and not imprison our
wits from more noble employments; Modo praepareat no^ detinc^^t ingentum.
it has been your glory to be well seen in some of them: yet when I do
consider what S. Augustine says, if my memory fail not; Surg^^^ (...) and
(...) and (...) ^^^or^^ tr^^^^^^ (...).
The unlearned arise and take heaven by violence, whereas great Doctors are
thrust into Hell: and when I see that many thrive in grace, who have no
learning but Scripture, and no eloquence but what conscience does dictate, I
cannot but humbly pray to God, that you may always be of that mind which you
d^e d scouer in that gracious speech. I know right well that they are to be
found in the world, who will lay other draughts of holiness before you than
you shall here find. They will tell you of Masses, of haire-cloth, of
whippings, of pilgrimages, and other penances; and were it not that God has
taught you already to discover the hypocrisies of these, and to see that, to
stop the mouth of conscience for a time, they may be practiced by the wickedest
wretches, they might happily prevail with you, being gilded over by the
subtleties of Antichrist. But, blessed be God, your souls are from amongst
Lions, and I hope you have been longer trained up in Christ's school, than to
be so gulled with such impostures. My care and prayer to God for you shall
rather be that ye may adorn the profession of the Gospel which ye have
undertaken. There are too many in the world, who with Caius Curio are
singularly eloquent, Lin. vitae ex vell. Pat^r^. lib. 2.
and wittily wicked: but how much better is it to have a flower tongue, and a
duller brain, with more true godliness and honesty? Go on, I humbly beseech
you, to be recluses from the world, and from the wickedness of it. And because
there are many who are like Copronimus, of whom it is said, Ne^ Christianu^,
nec Iudaeum, nec Paganum fu^sse, sed colluui^m quandam impietatis.
that though he would be called a Christian, yet he was neither Christian, nor
Jew, nor Pagan, but a very sink and puddle of sin: therefore how will it
honor such persons as ye are, to redeem the c^edit of the Gospel from
obloquie, and to honor God by sincere and constant practices of piety? They
lay a kind of disgrace upon God, as well as upon the Gospel, that would be
accounted Christians, and yet are not good. If a King should send, with
instructions for the presenting of his person and will to another Prince, such
a messenger as could not execute it, did it not lay this disgrace upon him,
that he is not able to choose a fit person to do his business? So is it
disgraceful to God to send such an one into the world in his name, and with
the honorable title of his servant, yea Son, who does the errand of the
world, the flesh, and the devil, rather than of him whose name he bears.
That therefore the censure of the Cynick upon the common people, who did highly
extol those that contemned money, and yet were very money-mongers themselves,
may not fall upon you, let it be your glory and your rejoicing not only to
praise and countenance the virtuous, but also as you have begun, to be of the
same knot and blessed society. I know that this must be effected by a
spiritual death unto the world and sin: but if it were a comfort to be put
to death with Phocion, (...)
because Phocion was innocent and well-deseruing of the Commonwealth; then how
much comfort may it be unto us to have fellowship in the death of Christ to our
death unto sin, and in his resurrection to our rising unto newness of life.
This Sermon shall (through Gods blessing) a little help you forward in this
gracious work: in which respect my humble suit unto you is, that you would be
pleased to use it as your own. I was loath to let you pass amongst my public
acknowledgments of others loves (though I cannot at thi^ ti^e give you what
place you have) and I would be lot^ that, now I do show my self unto you, I
should not give you that content which I desire. To end in a word: SIR, let me
put you in mind of that Axiom which was registered amongst the Ciuilians in
the days of Justinian: (...)
That it wa^ not convenient for any man to look after what was done at Rome,
but to examine justly what ought there to be done. Th^s politic rule was ma^e
to uphold Romes cre^it (...) Rom^s villainies. I would a little alter it unto
your Worship, and say, that it is conu^nie^t for you to look after what is
done am^n^^ us, and to examine justly what ought to be done. This is the next
way to give you to see the idleness, drunkenn^sse, and o her d^sorders that
do abound through Alehouses, those cursed nurseries of villainy, which do
compass^ us in on every side, and provoke you to vnsh^ath the sword of justice
which God has put into your hand. C^ra ^^^^^^nte^ nem^^^ (...) D^^ (...)
^^st^^ a^^^^^^ ^^quam induc^re.
Oh how well would it become you, how much would it honor God, and how would
it cheer the spirits of the good, who are sadded with this burden upon us!
MADAME, let me put you in mind of that speech of John to the elect Lady, If
there come any unto you, and bring not the doctrine of our Lord Jesus, receive
him not to house, neither bid him God speed: and let your special care be that
your children be found walking in the truth. To you both, I have, as a Minister
of the Gospel, Onus vel ipsis A^g^^ so^m^o^^^.
a fearful burden which lies v^on me. God is my ^ortion if I shall under go
it with an honest heart. This shall also add unto my reward if in your places
you shall still carry your selves as the beloved of God. This therefore he
prays for, who desires for ever to remain,

Your Worships poor friend, and careful Shepherd, ROBERT ABBOT.

THE HID MAN OF THE HEART.
2 CORINTHIANS. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature.


NOT to stand upon the coherence of these words; there is decided in them a
case of conscience, which being well conceived, will give great satisfaction to
a tender soul.

The case is this: How I may know my self to be in Christ? The resolution is
this: If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. Which resolution that we
may conceive and apply, I shall take this course: First, I shall open the
doctrine of it: and secondly, apply it. 1 Explication.
The doctrine of it is this; He that is in Christ is a new creature.

For the opening whereof consider two things. First, the subject or party
spoken of, that is, he that is in Christ: secondly, the predicate or thing
spoken of him, to wit, that he is a new creature.

To conceive aright of the party spoken of, consider three points. First, what
it is to be in Christ. Secondly, the necessity of it. And thirdly, how many
ways we may be in him.

Wh^t it is to be in Christ.
that is, to be converted from sin, to be glewed by faith unto Jesus Christ,
and so to have fellowship with him in righteousness and holiness. As to be in
the Lord, Apoc. ^.^^
is to b^ in a gracious estate, cut off from the old man, and grafted into
jesus Christ: so is it likewise to be in Christ. Romans ^
There is no cond mnation to them that are in Christ, says Paul, tha^ is, to
them tha^ are in the ^ta^e of grace. And no other thing does Paul ^ignifie by
sleeping in jesus, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14, 16.
and dying in Christ, but dying in a conue^ted and gracious estate.

It is necessary that we b^ i^ Christ.


I have accounted and I do judge all things to be loss and dung, Philip. 3.9.
that I might win Christ, and that I may be found in h m.



I^^ ^^.3^
God puts the law in our inward parts, for our illumination; he writes it in
our hearts, for our sanctification; he takes charge of us, for our protection;
he manifests the inward graces of the Spirit in us by his knowledge and
worship; he forgiueth our iniquities, and remembers our sins no more, for
our justification; Ier. 32.40, 41.
he will delight to do us good, and never depart from us, for our
perseverance; and all this comes to us by covenant. Be it temporal an^ bodily
things: Hosea 2.21, 22.
I will hear the heavens (says God) and they shall hear the earth, and the
earth shall hear the corn, and the wine and the oil, and they shall hear
Israel; that is, they shall have plenty of the things of this world: and all
this comes unto us by covenant, and by Gods marriage of himself unto us, as the
Prophet speaks. Now then, seeing ^ll things come unto us by covenant, let me
a^ke you, what difference is there between coming to us by couen^nt, and
coming to us by Christ? Surely no^e at ^ll. For therefore the Prophet calls
Christ, Esaias 42.6. Esaias 49.8.
The Covenant of his people, that is, of the Jews (the seed of Abraham
according to the flesh) first, because to them belong the Promises, and to
their Children; next and in reuersion to us, who are Abraham's seed ac^ording ^o
the Spirit. If you a k^^e why Christ is called the Cou^nant of the people? I
answer; First, because he does re^^iue the Promises from God in Abraham,
Isaac, and Iaacob, in the behalf of the Church. In which respect the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 1.20. Which as I ^^ke it may be ^xt^nd^d ^oth to the ^^^^^t and
to the ac^omplishment of ^he^. Gal. 6.15.
that in him (that is, in Christ) are all the Promis^s, yea and in him they are
Amen. Secondly, because in him the Church does bend her self to perform
covenants, yea and does it in him, and as his body: In which respect the
Apostle says, (In him) a new creature a^aileth. So that not only the promises
o^ God are in him, but our performances also. Thirdly, because as Christ ^ade
this Covenant, so he confirmed it by his death. In which resp^ct his blood,
even in the shadow, is called the blood of the Covenant: Heb. 9.20.
and the remembrancer and seal of it is called the New Testament in his blood.
Luke 22.20.
Now do but briefly collect these points together: seeing without Christ we
shall perish for ever; because without Christ we have no saving right to our
natural, civil, gracious, or glorious life, because all saving good comes
unto us by covenant, and Christ is the Covenant of his people: therefore it is
necessary that we be in Christ.

ways we may be in Christ. How many ways we may be in Christ.
To speak then to this point, we may be said to be in Christ three ways.

Ordination and appointment in Baptism: for God has ordained Baptism to be
the outward sign and seal of our putting on Christ, Gal. 3.27.
and to be the outward means of our grafting with him to the similitude of his
death and resurrection. Romans 6.5.
For the laying on of water does signify and seal our burial with Christ,
and the wiping of it off our resurrection: which, because it is conditional in
respect of the effectual working of it, to wit, so far forth as we shall,
when we grow to years of discretion, manifest our effectual faith by making
the right use of Baptis^e, that is, keep the covenant which we publicly enter
with God in it, Romans 11.22.
therefore it admi^teth of a cutting off, and stands or falls as the
condition is observed.

Christ by Acceptance: for God does account of us as in him, he being the
prince of our salvation, and that general root and stock which stands in the
room of the whole Church before God. In which respect as the whole Church
(being the body of Christ) is called Christ: 1 Cor. 12.12.
Be^ma. in manud. ling. l^at. cap. 2. ex Keckerm.
so likewise (and that not by the fond conceit of the unlearned) may Christ be
signified by the name of the Church, as well as other members; when Paul says,
The Church is the pillar and ground of truth. 1 Timothy 3.15.
As the first Adam was the general root of mankind, and stood in the nature
and name of all mankind before God, and received and lost all the indowments
of his nature both for himself and us: so also was it, and is it with the
second Adam; he is the root and head that stands in the room of all his
Church, to pay for them, and purchase for them.

Christ by Contract and covenant: not only by outward contract, which is
outwardly and solemnly made in the face of the Church in Baptism, and renewed
in the Lords Supper, but by inward contract, whereby God does marry us unto
him for ever, and whereby God being the God of us and our posterity after us,
the Children of believing parents are holy. 1 Cor. 7.14. Hosea 2.19.20.
Of this the Prophet speaks in the name of Christ, I will marry thee unto me
in righteousness, and in judgment, and mercy, and in compassion: I will even
marry thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall (know) the Lord; alluding
it may be, to the conjugal knowledge of man and wife, and signifying that we
shall have spiritual communion with God, and through the work of the Spirit
bring forth fruit unto God. Look as therefore man and wife do become one
flesh, and are concorporated either into other by virtue of that contract and
covenant of God betwixt them made, Prou. 2.17.
and that actual knowledge which they have either of other: so those that are
thus giued unto the Lord (as the Apostle speaks) are one spirit, and are so
united unto Christ, 1 Cor. 6.27. (...).
that there is a mutual fellowship betwixt him and us in three things. First
in Natures, be being made partaker of the humane, and we of the Divine Nature.
Secondly, in Goods, 2 Pet. 1.4.
he being made sin for us, and we the righteousness of God in him. Thirdly,
in Estates, 2 Cor. 5.21. Rom 6.5. ^^. l. 2.9, 20. ^^l. 3 1. (...). ^^.6.
we being grafted into the similitude of his death, and having the old man
crucified with him, and being risen with Christ, and fitting with Christ in
heauenl^ places; and Christ suffering with us, and being honored with us: as
Christ says, He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you
despises me; according to that of the Psalm, Psalm
Thine enemies have reproched thee, O Lord, because they have reproched the
footsteps of thine anointed.

Thus have I opened the first part of the doctrine of the Text, namely, the
party who is spoken of (He that is in Christ.) God stir up our hearts above
all things to be thankful for Christ, through and with whom we have this
estate. We can with some sense and feeling be thankful unto God for those
mercies we receive with our senses; Oh that our hearts would be alike (if not
more) enlarged for those which we receive with our souls by faith!

Christ, A new c^eature.
namely, That he is a new creature) consider with me two points: What this new
creature is: Secondly, Why he that is in Christ is a new creature. What it is.
For the first, either we may call it a new man, 1 Pet. 3 4.
which is called by Peter, The hid man of the heart: for the word (creature) is
taken by Jesus Christ for man, Mark 16.15. (...).
as when he says to his disciples, Preach the Gospel to every creature, that
is, to men, who by an excellency are called creatures, they being the most
excellent of all the sublunary works of Gods hands: or we may call it, A new
creation, as the word seems to be used by Paul otherwhere, Romans ^ 2^ (...).
when he says, The whole creation groaneth: and this the rather, because it is
a difficult work, and far above all created power; yea it is more difficult
than to create a world, it having all cursed powers against it: and therefore
the Holy Ghost speaking of the creation of the world, Psalm. 33.6.
says, By the Word of the Lord were the heavens made: Psalm. 8.3.
and again, When I behold the heavens the work of thy fingers: Psalm. 102.25.
and again, The heavens are the work of thy hands: as if the greatest
strength that was put to that work was but the power of a hand. But speaking
of the purchase and procurement of this new creation, he says, Luke 1.51.
He has showed strength with his arm: Esaias 9.6.
and the government is upon his shoulder: and again, A body have thou
prepared me: Hebr.
Yea and he has made his soul an offering for sin; Esaias 53.
as if his body and soul must be employed in this work; whereby he would
signify the difficulty of this work. All which may easily teach us, not to
wonder that it should be called a new creation: or else happily we may call it
a new structure or building: as when the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.10. (...).
We are his workmanship built in Christ to good works. And the reason is,
because the foundations of sin are ruinated, the rotten posts of sin pulled
down, and when the dross of the substance and faculties of body and soul
(which still remain) are scowred and pared off through the work of the
Spirit, we grow up into a holy building fitted for God to dwell in. Would you
have in a word now what this new creature is? I answer: It is The hid man of
the Heart, which contrary to all powers of darkness, and the corruption of our
own hearts, is, through the work of the Spirit by the Word, builded up from
the seeds of grace toward a full age in Christ, to resemble the excellency of
Gods image in all the parts and powers of the body and soul.

Secondly, Why is he that is in Christ a new creature? Why he that is in
Christ is a new creature. 1. In respect of acceptance.
receive (I beseech you) a fourefold reason of it. First, in respect of
acceptance: because God does account them that are in Christ new creatures,
accepting the will for the deed, and covering our imperfections with his
merits. Whence are those speeches of Christ to his Church, My love, behold,
Cant. 1.14, 15.
thou art fair: behold, thou art fair; thine eyes are like the doves: my
well-beloved, behold, thou art fair, and pleasant? Whence does the Apostle say,
That the Church having received sanctification from Christ, Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
is a glorious Church to him, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing?
Whence (I say) does the Holy Ghost speak unto Gods people, Let us as many as
be perfect be thus minded? Philip. 3.15.
as if they had no sin, but only because God does accept us for such, seeing
we are in Christ.

2 Of apparition.
Secondly, He that is in Christ is a new creature, in respect of apparition to
the world. A burning candle cannot lie hid in a light lantern: no more can
grace in the heart of him that is in Christ. Faith that inrighteth us to Christ
cannot but be seen: It will easily make an apparent difference in us from what
we were. When the Apostle Peter says, 1 Pet. 1.3.
It is sufficient for us, that we have spent the time past of the life after
the lusts of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts, drunkenness, in
gluttony, drinkings, and in abominable idolatries: do we not think that this
difference in the Christians lives did easily appear to the Gentiles? 1 Pet.
4.^
Yes surely: therefore it both seemed strange unto them that they run not
with them into the same excess of riot, and also they spoke evil of them:
even so is it with all new creatures. As they appear to the good to be new, as
Paul did, Gal. 1.21, 23.
when of a persecuter he became a preacher of the faith which before he
destroyed, insomuch as they glorified God for him: so they appear to the
wicked to be new, and therefore their by-words, tants, reproaches, and
disgraces are more ordinary with them, then their thanksgiving to God for so
gracious a change.

3 Of inchoation.
Thirdly, He that is in Christ is a new creature in respect of inchoation: Old
things are passed away, behold all things are become new. There are new eyes,
leaving with delight to behold vanity, 2 Co^. 5.17. Psalm 1^ 9. ^^b 31.1.
couenanting against lust, and searching into the wonders of Gods law: there
are new ears stopped against the inticements of the serpent, and open to hear
what God will speak: there are new tongues, Psalm. 85.8.
not to sing the old dittie of nature, Psalm. 40.3.
but to sing a new song to the praise of our God and Savior, that so the
tongue of the righteous may be like fined silver: there are new hands, Prou.
10.20. Esaias 58.4.
not to smite with the fist of iniquity, not to pull in with rapine and
robbery, but to deal (according to ability) the dole of mercy to men in
misery, Eccles. 11.1.
to cast our bread upon the waters, to turn over the pages of Gods Book, that
the Word of God may dwell plentifully in us, Coloss. 3.16. Apocal.
and to give the right hand of fellowship to every good action within our
reach: there are new feet, Romans 3.15. Psalm. 122.2.
not to be swift to shed blood, but to stand in thy gates, O Jerusalem, and
(so far as the body can execute it) to run the way of Gods commandments:
Psalm. 119.
there are new understandings to know and acknowledge the truth that is
according to godliness, Titus 1.1.
new wills and affections to come unto Christ, to love him, Matthew. 11.28.
to fear him, to cleave unto him, to put a man's whole trust in his mercies and
merits, Matthew. 5.6. Psalm. 119.5.
new desires to hunger and thirst after righteousness, and new consciences to
be watchful over all our ways, 2 Timothy 4.5. Psalm. 39.1.
and not to let the least sin to pass without a strict examination,
condemnation, and settled purpose and resolution against it. In all parts there
is newness, and as Christ has given us a new commandment, so we, through the
power of Gods spirit, do give him a new obedience in all the powers of our
souls and bodies.

Col. 1.19.
It pleases the Father that in him should all fullness dwell: John 1.16.
and out of his fullness we do all receive grace for grace. Which grace does
not only cover sin, but cure sin, according to that of the Prophet; Esaias
53.5.
The chastisement of our peace is upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
How therefore can it be otherwise but that such a man should be a new creature,
seeing before times he had fellowship with corrupted Adam, and so was the
child of wrath, but now he has fellowship with him, who above David, is a man
after Gods own heart, even his well-beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased?

2 Application.
You have heard now the Doctrine of the Text opened unto you, namely, that he
that is in Christ is a new creature: now if you will be attentive, you shall
hear the application of it for the benefit of our souls. To apply it then, we
shall make a double use of it.



How we may prove our selves to be new creatures.
Yea, but now you will say unto me: How may I prove my self to be a new
creature? I answer, We may do it two ways:

First, if we be cut off from the old stock.

Secondly, if we be grafted into the new.

1 We must be cut off from the old stock. Ephesians. 2.
The old stock is Adam corrupted; in whom we are by nature, and in which
condition we are the children of wrath, as much as the most cursed wretch in
the world (as he is borne) and so dead in sins and trespasses. Now, from this
stock we must be cut off: for as a sience must be cut off from one tree,
before it can be concorporated into another: so we must be cut off from the
wild Olive, before we can be planted into Christ. If therefore we can find
our selves to be cut off from the natural root wherein we are by birth, then
we may secure our selves that we are in a good way to be in Christ. Perhaps
you will say that here is difficulty still: for how shall I know that I am
cut off from the old Adam? I answer that (through Gods blessing) I shall give
you two manifest signs of it.

The first sign is taken from the cause of it, 1 How we may know that we are
cut off from Adam. Col 2.11. Dan. 2.45.
which is God only. As our circumcision is made without hands (as Paul
speaks:) so must our cutting off be. As our Savior Christ is that Stone
which was cut out of the mountain without hands (as Daniel speaks:) so we
that are his members must be cut from the quarrie of Nature. Of his own will
begat he us by the word of truth, says James; James 1.18. (...). Matthew. 3.9.
and we that are borne of God, are borne, not of bloods, (the highest
prerogatives that births can afford unto us, cannot make us more precious with
God:) nor of the will of the flesh, (all humane observation and outward
righteousness attained unto, by the power and policy of man, Phil. 3.6, 7.
can stead us little with God:) nor the will of man (heroical gifts of
wisdom, valor, noble spirits, in which respect men of old have been called
the sons of God (which is translated The Sons of the Mighty) cannot make
us any thing sooner dear to God:) but we are borne of God (says John. Psalm.
29.1. 1 Cor. 1. John 1.13.
) There are many men seem to be cut off, when they desist from the outrageous
sins of nature, who yet are not in Christ, because they are cut off with
hands: for the means to restrain them are some of these. Sometimes their
complexion pulls them in: choleric Saul, finding his opportunity, threw
his jaueline at David; he would have writ the malice of his heart in blood: but
sanguine David, though he had his opportunity, took but Saul's water-pot,
Spear, and lap of his garment, and that (justly) with touch of Conscience
also. Though David fell into murder in temptation, thinking so to cover his
sin. Sometimes Natures impotencie pulls them in: to some sins are
required the courage of a Lion, to some the craft of a Fox, to some
comeliness, to some strength, to some the heat of youth, to some the
experience of age, and the like: In any of which, when Nature is defective,
there is a restraint. Sometimes they are pulled in by knowledge: when a man is
not given up to a reprobate mind, he sees duty and comeliness, and is
restrained from thence. As some know their masters will and do it not, so
there are others that do it not, because they are ignorant: whereas if they had
knowledge but according to that light which Nature can afford, it would be a
bridle. Sometimes they are pulled in by prosperity: He that has enough will
not steal; and if he sometimes do steal by oppression, bribery, usury, or
the like; so much the greater is his sin, by how much more violently God
pulled him ba^ke by taking away the cause. Sometimes they are restrained by
adversity. He that is poor cannot exercise the outward acts of pride, he
cannot ordinarily ambitiously climb to honor, he cannot be actually covetous
in keeping, seeing he has not what to keep. So that in these cases his
poverty is a bridle. Sometimes they are held in by Education and employment. A
Citizen will carry himself more gravely in habit, complement, and
conversation, than a Courtier, for his credit sake: and who sees not that
imploiment does hold back from many sins? Vellem si non of sem imperator.
Scipio could say when an Harlot was off^red unto him, I would have her if I
were not a Governor. Sometimes they are restrained by the power of natural
conscience: for though it be much wounded and weakened in the offices of it,
yet even natural men cannot be rid of those blows which it does give in
secret. In which respect they have been and are kept from many sins made
known from the light of nature. Sometimes again they are restrained and
pulled back by policy, because they might the better conceal and cover their
aims and intentions. Thus was Iezabel restrained from the open murder of
Naboth: and of Haman it is said, Hester 5.10.
that, though he was full of indignation, yet he refrained himself. All these
bridles we may observe to be in the hand of Nature to restrain: Or thus; These
eight knives are in Natures pocket, to cut us off from the old stock. But all
this is but a seeming cutting off: for it does but cut off from the outward
practice of sin, it weakneth not the root one jot. The habits of sin are no
less powerful, the will no less willing, the affections no less vehement,
and the desires no less violent. Under all these Nature sins not either
because Nature cannot, or because Nature dare not; and not because there is
disabilitie either in the seeds and sp^wne of sin, or in a willingness to
sin, if it either could or durst. Durst, I say: because natural conscience
may plie a man with club-law, and awe him from that which with all his heart he
would be doing.

But now on the contrary, when our cutting off is wrought without hands, and
is such as Nature with all her bridles and knives cannot reach unto; then we
do not only desist from the practice of sin, but we do weaken the power of
sin; we do not only not commit sin, because we cannot or dare not, but
because we will not. And though sometimes through the power of the flesh
fighting against the spirit in our minds, wills, affections and desires, we
are against our wills ouer-taken with sin: yet (because sin does defile us,
who are the temples of God, and does displease God, as God, and does carry the
Devils stamp upon it, though it were never so small, though never so
profitable or pleasurable unto us, though God did not see and judge, and the
Devil would not execute) we would not willingly commit it.

Behold this is our cutting off without hands. Oh (my beloved Christians) now
enter into your hearts, and I hope that by this sign you shall see your selves
to be in Christ. If, when you compare your selves with them that walk in
natural courses, and see that you are cut off from them in judgment, in
heart, and in conversation, you can in simplicity and godly pureness say,
Lord thou know that our care has not been only to have holiness to the
Lord without, but to reform our hearts, and to dress them up for thee,
according to those spiritual abilities which thou have given us. Thou know,
Lord, that we have complained, sighed, and prayed unto thee against the body
of sin and death: and because thou love the soul best, we do account all
the sins of the soul most fearful, and therefore have labored against the
blindness, vanity, and carnal wisdom of our minds, against the deadness
and security of our hearts, and the like. It is not hid from thee our God,
that we have been and are upright with thee, Psalm 18.23.
and have kept us from our wickedness, not so much because it hurt us, as
because it dishonored thee; not so much because it displeased us, as because
it displeased thee and was contrary to thy most holy Law and Nature, in the
in^oyment of the communicable glory, whereof stands our joy and happiness.
If it be thus with our souls, at the least according to the desires, purposes
and endeavors of our hearts: and if we do groan under the want of that full
measure of it which we might attain unto: then we may comfort our hearts with
this persuasion, that we are in Christ.

Adam, is taken from the effect of it, which is tenderness of heart and
conscience. We know that a thing newly cut is tender, as we may see in the
example of Sychemites, Genesis 34.
newly circumcised. And this was the reason why the Israelites were not
circumcised in the wilderness, because through tenderness they might not be
unfit for war or travel. Now, you must know that this our cutting off from
Adam (which, being so done, as it is always doing till death, is still fresh
and bleeding new) does breed a double tenderness. First, an inward
tenderness, which is discovered by a sensiblenesse of our own estate.
Secondly, an outward tenderness, which is manifested by our sensiblenesse of
another touch. We are inwardly tender over our own estates, when with
quickness we can apprehend the sinfulness of our natures. Thus it was with
Paul, Romans 7.18.
when he professed to know, that in him, that is, in his flesh dwelt no good
thing. This will fill us with godly sorrow, with a base opinion of our selves,
with Christian watchfulness, and with a care (to our power and in our places)
to prevent sin in others, and not willingly to admit of any thing that may
kindle any lust, or increase the practice of any sin.

We are outwardly tender under another touch, either in respect of evil or
good. In respect of evil, when it is death and daggers to our souls that God
should be dishonored. As in respect of our selves, if sin do but touch our
ears, eyes, tongues, hands, or thoughts, we do speedily turn them over to
Gods uses, desiring God to protect them, and make them weapons of
righteousness unto holiness: so in respect of others, like Joseph's irons it
enters into our souls, that God should be dishonored by them. It was thus
with Moses, who, Exodus 32.32.
when he saw how greatly God would be dishonored, if he should destroy a
people whom he had so newly delivered by his mighty power, was so tender of
that evil, that he desired God rather to raze him out of the Book of life.
You can parallele this with Paul his example also. Romans 9.3.
Oh how excellently had they profited in Gods School, and learned to manifest
their cutting off from the old stock, by their tenderness under the touch of
sin! We shall well imitate them when we can make all the rest of the
petitions in faithfulness and truth to follow, Hallowed be thy name.

In respect of good also we are tender under another touch when we startle at
the touch of God. If God touch us with his threatenings, we must be as sensible
as he that said, Psalm. 119.
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. If he
touch us with his promises, we must hide them in our hearts, and be so ravished
with them that we can feelingly say, How sweet are thy promises to my mouth,
Psalm. 119. 1 Samuel 3.
yea sweet^r than honey to my mouth. If he touch us with his precepts, we
answer with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears: and our hearts can
echo as David's did to this precept, Psalm. 27.8.
Seek ye my face, saying, Thy face Lord will I seek.

What shall I now say? I will call upon all our souls to apply this sign. Let
us examine our own hearts upon our beds, Psalm. 4.
and be still. Assure our selves of this, that if we would fi^de our selves to
be cut off from Adam, we must find our selves tender, Psalm.
as I have said. Me thinks I hear you say, that your sinful estate is a
burden too heavy for you to bear: that daily you groan to God under the
sense of it, as Paul, Romans 7.
Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? That
you are grieved when God is dishonored, and because he is dishonored daily,
therefore the very thought of it does daily make you sigh. Me thinks you say
that you heartily desire that your eyes could gush out rivers of waters because
men keep not Gods law: Psalm. 119.
and that you quickly apprehend the touch of God in all his word; or at the
least if you cannot, that your souls are filled with godly sorrow, and that
you do desire God to circumcise the foreskin of your hearts. Deuteronomy 30.6.
If it be thus, then fear not but that you are in an undoubted way to your
being in Christ. But if otherwise, that our hearts are hard and senseless of
our own miseries and Gods touch, then woe, woe, woe unto us: we are far from
being new creatures, and so far from Christ, and so far from heaven and
happiness.

T new creatures, We must be grafted into the new stock.
is by our ingrafting into the new stock: for before we are in Christ we must
be grafted in. Now, in this ingrafting (which is by the power of faith whereby
we are through Gods ordinance made one with Christ in his life, death,
resurrection, and ascension) there being two things distinctly to be conceived
(which yet go together in time): first, our being made members; and secondly,
our receiving the gifts of members: upon this, I say, there will grow two
questions, wherein our consciences will desire satisfaction, whereunto I would
entreat you to attend in their order. How we may know that we are made living
members of Christ? How we may know that we are made living members of Christ.


It is a sweet question, and worthy our consideration. Therefore mark
diligently that this secret will be discovered unto us by three signs
especially.

If we are borne again. No member can be a member of the body but by natural
generation (and therefore in the want of arms and legs, all that are made by
Artizans are but counterfeit members:) so none can be a member of Christ but by
spiritual regeneration. Therefore through the power of Gods spirit and word we
must find an alteration in all the parts and powers of the body and soul
from what we are by nature. This is called a turning in the Scriptures, when of
Prodigals we become Conuerts; feeding no longer upon the husks of swine, those
noisome and filthy lusts of the flesh, but of the feast of fat things and fined
wines (as Esaias speaks) or of the fat calfe which God has provided; Esai.
25.6. Luke 25.
that is, chearing our hearts with the wisdom of Christ against our folly and
blindness, with the righteousness of Christ against our guiltiness, with the
sanctification of Christ against the relics of our sin and uncleanness, 1
Cor. ^.3.
and with the redemption of Christ against our apostaticall and backsliding
hearts.

If we receive new sense and motion from the head. As in the natural body all
the members do receive sense and motion from the head: so in the spiritual
body. For though there be no natural connection of parts betwixt Christ and
us, Act. 3.21.
the heaven containing him in respect of his bodily presence, and we being here
on the earth: yet by virtue of the spiritual ligatures and ties of faith
(which is Gods ordinance to this end) we have no less real conjunction
(though we cannot see it) than natural head and members have. We cannot see
the conjunction betwixt man and wife, who yet are one flesh, though they are a
thousand miles asunder, Prove. 2.17.
by virtue of that contract and covenant of God betwixt them. The union betwixt
the beasts and the wheels in Ezekiels vision was not visible, Ezekiel. 1.21.
yet it was real, because the spirit of the beasts was in the wheels, which
made them move together and stand still together. So it is betwixt our Head and
us. If therefore by virtue of this union we do not dance after natures pipe,
which the Apostle calls, walking after the flesh, or sowing to the flesh, or
fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, but are moved to walk after the spirit, so
to run that we may obtain, not to be clogged with the earth, but to have our
conversation in heaven, to sit with Christ in heavenly places, and in our whole
course (though with much strife and reluctation) to move upwards, then may we
safely say, that we are members of Christ.

we work for the head. As the whole natural body is under the obedience of
the head: so the whole spiritual body does work for its head, as for its
king and sovereign. If the head be warred against, the foot runs, or
stands, and the hand does defend: if the head be in peace, the whole body
maintains its honor, uses means to better understanding, to ripen
judgment, to corroborate memory, to quicken senses, and to perform other
offices unto it. So must we work for Christ: he must increase, we must
decrease. All our labor must be to maintain his honor: therefore we must
deny our selves, to wit, our natural judgments, wills, affections, and the
worth of our worke^ that Christ may be all in all unto us, and we may cry out
with that blessed Martyr, None to Christ, none to Christ.

Oh that we had hearts to try our selves by these signs! How great will our
comfort be if we can find our selves to be members of Christ! Some men joy
that their arms and legs are members of sound and healthful bodies: but it is
no matter though the outer man perish, so long as the inward man by being a
member of Christ is renewed daily. I bow therefore the knees of my heart unto
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and beseech him, that he would grant,
both to you all, and me, and all Gods people, that we may for ever prove our
selves to be borne again, to receive heavenly motion from Christ, and to work
for him, that so we may prove our selves to be his members. I will open a
little light unto you in these three points.

How we may know our selves to be borne again.
if God have given us a conscionable care to nourish the hid man of the heart.
Every thing has a natural instinct to nourish it self, so soon as it has a
natural production: even so must we have. 1 Pet. 2.2.
For therefore Peter says, As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the
word, that ye may grow thereby. As babes desire the mothers dug, so must our
souls (if they be regenerated) desire the word of God. How is that? 1
Vnappeasably.
I answer: First, we must desire it vnappeasably. Give a child houses and
lands, gold and gain, profit and pleasure, and nothing will content it but a
dug: so all the world is worth nothing to Gods babes without the word; Psalm. 1
19.
as David says, The word of thy mouth is dearer unto me than thousands of gold
and silver. Secondly, we must desire the word constantly. 2 Constantly.
Little children do not only desire the dugge waking, but when they are
asleep their lips will be going: so Gods babes (though they being overtaken
with drowsinesse cry out with the Spouse, I sleep) yet their hearts awake,
Cant. 5.2.
and when they are most drowsy they will be nibbling upon the word; yea they
cannot be content without it. For look as the needle of a Dial does nothing
but tremble and shake, and has no rest till it be turned upon the North pole:
so the heart of Gods child can have no peace in any degree of security, till
it be raised feelingly to embrace the word of God again. 3 Cryingly.
Thirdly, we must desire the word cryingly. Every one of us do see the
newborn babe to cry for the dugge: even so must we for the word. We must cry
to God for it, and desire him that we may never be without it. Thus we shall
resemble that man after Gods own heart, Psalm. 84.
whose soul longed and fainted for the Courts of the Lord. supernatural
instinct. By instinct.
Babes in desiring the dugge do not respect the profit, the pleasure, the
goodness, and nourishment of it, but are carried unto it by a natural
instinct: so we must be addicted unto the word, not for eloquence, learning,
law, or times sake, but by a supernatural instinct and spiritual inclination,
to seek nourishment from thence from whence we received our being in grace.
Let these four be tokens of our n^w ^irth, which if we find in our souls,
yea but in desire, (provided there be a purpose and endeavor to increase) let
me then say unto us all with joy, that if we care a while we shall be for ever
safe.

How we may know that we receive motion from Christ our head.
if our heads and hearts be not moved to the world as the world, but as it may
be (in any of the kinds of it) a testimony of Gods love, and a necessary
supply for our pilgrimage in this vale of tears. It is true that Agar may be
in the family for service, but Sarah must be mistress. Abraham may build a
Grove for his delight, Genesis 21.33.
^ut he must not forget God, but call upon the Lord the everlasting God there.
The things of this world are but left hand blessings, and they must be used
accordingly. We all feel to our grief, that naturally we are carried to the
earth: but Christ swayeth his members another w^y. For as it is wi^h the waters
of the Sea, though by their natural course they follow the Center, yet by
obedience to the Moon they are subject to her motion, As it is conceived and
resolved by the wise men of nature.
and so turn and return, ebb and flow, and are kept in continual motion to
keep them from corruption: so is it with Christ's members, though by their own
motion they are carried to the ear^h, yet by obedience to Christ their first
mouer they seek the things that are above to keep themselves from corrupting.

How we may kno^ that we work for Christ our head.
if we seek to advance the honor of Christ in all things, but especially in
our selves. If we look into our own souls, we shall find that there is a
cursed carnal wisdom which will work a glorying in our worldly happiness,
and an advancing of our own righteousness and morality, together with a
drawing us to pride our selves in the many graces which God has given us. But
if we can wisely separate the work of Christ from our own working: and when
we feelingly consider our selves, cry out with that holy Martyr, Gehennah sum
Domine.
I am hell, Lord, I am hell; and with the blessed Apostle, I am the least of
Saints, I am the chief of sinners; and notwithstanding all the graces that are
in us, to say in humble wise with the same Apostle, I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord: Romans 7.25.
and again, thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift: then with a holy
confidence in the merits of our Savior, we may write our selves members of
Christ.



What are those gifts of members which we do receive in our ingrafting into
Christ.
The second question may be this: What are those gifts which we do receive in
our ingrafting into Christ, by which it may be manifested unto us that we are
new creatures and in Christ? I answer, that there are many gifts which God
bestows upon us at that time: but I shall only speak of those that are most
sensible in their working, as being most manifest discouerers of our new
estates in Christ. These gifts are two. The first is the death of sin: the
second is the life of grace. Sin must die and by degrees perish; Grace must
live and by degrees flourish in us, if we be new creatures in Christ.

mortifying our earthly members, Mortification.
by crucifying the old man with the lusts thereof, and by casting off
concerning our conversation in times past, Col. 3.5. Gal. 5.24. Ephesians. 4.22.
which is corrupt through the deceivable lusts.

For the effecting whereof I would have you distinctly conceive these two
points.

First, what we must do against sin.

Secondly, what we must suffer for the death of sin.

What we must do against sin.
which is an exact pattern of Gods justice against sin. First, we must
attache sin, by not suffering it freely to do that mischief which it has
done. It has conuersed formerly in our souls without control, but now we
must begin to think that it is possible for sin to be our enemy. We must
suspect it of felony and treason against God; therefore we must lay hands upon
it, and resolve that it shall not have that liberty to play its prancks as it
has had. This counsel Paul gives to the Romans when he says, Let not sin
reign; that is, Romans 6.12, 13.
call the authority of it into question, give not your members as weapons unto
it, call in your forces from it, and put it in hold that it may be
forth-comming to answer that which shall be laid unto its charge.

Secondly, We must arraigne sin, by bringing of it unto a judicial trial
before the bar of our consciences, as before Gods deputy. We must examine it
upon the dishonor which it has done to the God of mercy, the wounds it has
made in our souls, and the hurt it has done to all which we are and have:
want of this it was that God complained of by Jeremy, when he hearkened and
heard, and no man spoke aright, saying, What have I done? That is, Ier. 8.6.
no man between God and his own soul called his sin to an account.

Thirdly, we must indite sin, by making the accusation of it as large as the
flying book of Zacharies curses. As if we should say; O my God, Zach. 5.2.
this rebel sin dishonors thee, defaceth thy image, makes me like the
devil, hides thy fatherly countenance from me, grieves thy spirit, and wounds
my conscience, Luke 15.17, 18, 19
and the like. Thus the prodigal laid to the charge of sin, that he died for
hunger, that he had sinned against heaven, that he departed from his father,
and that he was not worthy to be his son.

1 Cor. 11.31.
Fourthly, we must condemn sin by judging of it out of measure sinful, and
our selves for it worthy of eternal wrath. Ezekiel. 36.31.
Mark the words of the Prophet, Ye shall remember your wickedness and your
deeds which were not good, and shall (judge) your selves worthy to have been
destroyed for your iniquities and abominations. Thus the Prodigal judged
himself not worthy to be called his fathers son. Luke 15.19.
Most of us judge our selves better than we are, because we compare our selves
with our selves, and with them that are worse: some judge themselves worse than
they are, as some few poor afflicted souls, who being ouer-borne with the
violence of temptation, cannot see themselves in Christ but in the Law: but we
must pass righteous judgment, and that without repeal.

Fifthly, we must execute sin: and to this end we must do three things.
First, we must make a cross for it, by crossing and thwarting all the slights
and fetches of sin whereby it would gain upon us. And this must be by caring
and speedy paines-taking in our souls both after the pardon of sin, 2 Co^.
7.11.
and after power against it: by apology, or clearing of our selves, and
vomiting the poison of sin up by hearty confession so soon as it is committed:
by indignation, in renouncing all friendship with sin, and being angry with
our selves that we should be such varlets as to commit it: by fearing lest we
should fall into it again: by desiring spiritual communion and fellowship
with God in Christ in the use of such means as God has appointed for our
strengthening: by Zeal, burning up and consuming all fleshly love and desire
after sin, and all sluggishnesse to the practice of contrary graces: by
revenge, depriving it of that which does maintain it, that is, not only the
lusts of pleasure and profit, but the garment spotted by the flesh, together
with all occasions which may either draw on sin, or encourage it to be the
more bold, or take new hold upon us, as excess in our Christian liberty,
either in the use of our meats, drinks, or clothing. Of these parts is the
cross of sin excellently framed to bring it unto death.

Secondly, we must number sin amongst thieves before we will execute it.
We use not to execute any but those which are malefactors: to this end
therefore we must account sin so, and reckon it to be as odious as may be.
For thus we shall both keep our selves from danger, when the very thought of
the greatness of it does affright us: as also we shall manifest our hatred of
sin, when all the rhetoric and eloquence we have is little enough to set
out the deformity of it.

Thirdly, for the executing of sin we must die with Christ: for by faith we
must set our selves in his room, and feel so near an union betwixt him and
us, that his death may really be ours, and we virtually die in him. Then shall
we have our just plea against all allurements to sin; How shall we that are
dead to sin live yet therein? Romans 6.2.
We cannot and be in Christ too: for he that has suffered in the flesh (says
Peter) has ceased from sin, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2.
that he hence-forward should live, (as much time as remains in the flesh)
not after the lusts of men, but after the will of God.

Thus (dear Christians) have I taught you what we must do against sin that
sin may die: which because it cannot be without our passion and suffering;
therefore in the second place consider what we must suffer for the death of
sin. My hope and desire is, that as your souls have gone along with me
hitherto, so they shall still hold out unwearied in such saving points of
divinity.

We must suffer for the death of sin, some things that go before it; some
things that come with it; and some things that do follow after it. First, ye
know that, ordinarily, sickness goes before death: so we must be sick of
sin. As a man that is stomack-sicke can have no ease till the humors be
abated one way or other: so must it be between us and sin till sin be
abated. Look upon David, (...)
and you shall see that his bones were troubled, his soul was vexed, his heart
fainted, his eyes were dimmed, his bed was washed, his couch was watered, and
all because he knew his iniquities and his sin was ever before him. P^^l ^1.^.
When David was thus sick of sin, there was hope that the grave should be
dug for it ere long: mean while the spirit within him compelled him to go
to the Physician of his soul, and say, O Lord heal me, for my bones are
vexed: And again, O Lord deliver my soul, that the bones which thou have
broken may reio^ce.

Secondly, ye know that two things come with death; namely, decay of senses,
and pangs of death: so these two things also we must suffer for the death of
sin. Our sense of sin must decay: our eyes must feebly behold the objects by
which ^inne is nourished. See ^y S^r^on upon Gal. ^.^.
We must turn them away from beholding vanity with pleasure, our ears must
not endure to hear of it, as I have said before. Our senses abused are the
Devils cinque ports, both to let out that wickedness which is bred in our
hearts, M^^^m (...) and (...)
and to let in that which by the adversary is sowed in the field of Gods
creatures: when therefore we do challenge them from the Devil, I^b 31.1.
and sense them for Gods uses, as Job, when he made a covenant with his eyes;
and David, when he would hearken what the Lord will say, and the like: then
do ^hey decay and perish from sin, and from uncleanness. Again, we must
find, to the grief and v^x^tion of our natural estate, that our sins do
struggle and strive as for life and are unwilling to die. The Devil, finding
his kingdom in sin to be diminished, must then or never bestirre himself,
as a she Lion robbe^ of her whelps. We know by common experience that the
birth of a child natural cannot be without pain: so neither can the birth of
the new man, that hid man of the Heart. Was it not a pain to the Israelites to
be called out of Egypt, and in the wilderness to be fitted for fellowship
with God by thunderings, lightnings, earthquakes, and the like? It is no less
to all Gods Sons, whom he calls out of the Egypt of sin, whereof Pharaohs
Egypt was but a type and shadow. Therefore was David cast into the deep,
Psalm. 130.1.
out of which he called unto God: and when Jonas was of a prodigal to become
a convert, he cried unto God out of the belly of hell. Jonas 2.2.


Thirdly, ye know that two things also follow after death, to wit, coldness
and putr^faction: even so these two things also we must suffer for the death of
sin: for first, sin must be cold in us: Before it was, as it were, our life
blood (in our account) without which we could not live. If ever we showed any
actiuitie, it was in sinning: we rushed into wickedness, as a horse into the
battle, we drunk iniquity, like as the wild Ass does water. But now our
heat is much abated. As it was with Job, when God had brought him to see
himself, he was cold in his pleadings against God, and said, Once have I
spoken, but I will answer no more, Job 39.38.
yea twice, but I will proceed no further: so it is with all Gods people; so
that if ever they fall into sin again, they are very bu^glers at it, they
cannot hide it, and color it as they did before, they cannot give it the full
strength and force of will and affections: yea as there is great difference
betwixt the natural work of a child and of a man; so is there no less
difference betwixt sin in the child of God, (in whom it waxes more cold
every day than other) and in the wicked, who is a man in sinning, and in whom
it is vigorous, and (like the Leuiathan in the sea) in its own proper element.

Secondly, sin must, as it were, stink in our nostrils. It must be like
Lazarus in the grave, John 11.
of whom it was said, he stinketh already. As therefore David's enemies said to
him, Fie upon thee, fie upon thee: so must we with loathing say to sin. The
Prophet speaking of those that should be true conuerts from Idolatry, Esaias
30.22.
says, Ye shall pollute the couerings of the Images of silver, and the rich
ornament of thine Images of gold, and cast them away, as a menstruous clout,
and thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence. Thus mu^t all true Conuerts deal
with all sin. If the righteous man can smell sin and iniquity even in his holy
offerings, Exodus ^8.38. ^^a^ ^4.^.
in which respect our righteousness is as a menstruous and polluted cloth: how
much more must a penitent man smell hell in his sin, to make him to abhor
it for evermore! Me thinks now (my beloved) I have laid a glass before you,
wherein you may view your souls: God make it to cause a comfortable ^eflexion
upon you, that ye may see your own pictures. My hope is, that the more ye
view it, the more ye shall see that it is none other, but what ye feelingly
and from experience find to be wrought in you already toward the eternal
death of your cursed enemy.

2 Vivification.
Yet ye must go one step further (as I have told you:) for as sin must die
and perish, so grace must live and flourish. The second gift therefore which we
do receive, in our grafting into Christ, 2 Cor. 4.10. ^phe^. 4.18. 1 Pet. 4.2.
is a new life. This is called the life of Jesus, and the life of God, and
living after the will of God, and Christ's living in us, and living unto God,
^al. 2.20. Romans ^.^7.
and obeying from the heart unto the form of doctrine to which we are
delivered, and the like. Look as when there shall be a new heavens and a new
earth, wherein righteousness shall dwell (as Peter speaks,) there shall be a
new life, ^ Pet 3.13.
and a new m^nner of living (for we shall not need the ordinary supplies in
this world for our necessities or infirmities, when the Lamb shall be all in
all unto us:) so when we are new creatures in Christ Jesus, we do receive a
new life, and a new manner of living. The old course of sinning cannot agree
with this estate. Romans 8.1.
He that is in Christ must not walk after the flesh, but after the spirit.
Hence is it that Christ says, He that abides in me, and I in him, John 15.5.
the same brings forth much fruit: And John does strongly second it, saying,
If we say that we have fellowship with him, 1 John 1.6.
and walk in darkness, we lie. As therefore when we look upon the Impes
which we have grafted, and see them bring forth bud, leaf and fruit, we
rejoice in the work of our hands, and say they take well: so when we look
upon our selves, who are grafted into Christ, Philip. 1.11.
and see that we bring forth the fruits of r^ghteousnesse, which are by Jesus,
we may rejoice in the work of Gods hands (who has wrought all our works for
us) and say that we take well. Esaias 26.12.
The Spirit of Christ, which, in our grafting into him, he conueigheth unto us,
is a Spirit of life: it is an active and operative Spirit, Romans 8.2.
in which respect the second Adam is called a quickening Spirit. What must we
do now? I will tell you: 1 Cor. 15.45.
Seeing those that are new creatures in Christ, must live a new life, therefore
every one of us must try whether we have this new life in us, yea or no. I
know that the newest life we can procure, cannot deserve Gods presence and
favor, yet by Gods gracious acceptance, it gives a fit qualification for the
entertainment of such a guest as God is. For if to bring us unto Kings, we must
not be base and sordid in our persons and conuersations, yea we must be
acquainted with fit complements for such a presence (for Mordecai might not
enter into the Kings gate when he was clothed with sackcloth: Host. 4.2.
) much more must we be furnished with fit complements and qualities for the
presence of God in Christ, and to have communion and fellowship with him.

How we may discover this new li^e.
Lift we up our hearts then, and let us consider whether we have this life in us
yea or no.

It may be you will say, How shall we know whether we have this new life of the
new creature? I answer, that this may be discovered unto us two ways.

1. By our aptness in procuring the helps of life. 2. By our employment of our
strength in the acts of life.
Helps of a new life.
or our enemies.

Fit maintenance.
Grace thriues not where it cannot be maintained, and wheresoever it is it
will seek for more. As I said before, that in the very entrance of our new
birth, We will as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word: so at
that time, when our ingrafting into Christ is more manifested unto our
consciences, we still aim at means to maintain and preserve it. Oh how do
we pray to God, That God would stablish us by his free Spirit, Psalm. 51.
and not take his holy Spirit from us? How do we pant unto God, That he would
grant us according to the riches of his glory: ^^hes. 3.16, 17.
that we may be strengthened by the Spirit in the inner man, that Christ may
dwell in our hearts by faith, and that we may be rooted and grounded in love?
How do we hunger and thirst after the good Word of God which is able to save
our souls? As we do wry our mouths with the newborn babe, after the dugge
of Gods Word: so with the grown man we have a good stomach and appetite unto
it. The husks of man's wisdom and humane traditions are hunted after, of those
of whom the Apostle says, Beware of dogs: Phil. 3.2.
but the man of God hungreth to hear God speak. And because he knows that he
is borne again for the kingdom of God, therefore, though when he meets with
the things of this world, he does thankfully embrace them, and use them as if
he used them not; yet he seeks after the things above: Col. 3.1.
above the world, the Church; above nature, grace; above the favor of Princes,
the grace of God; above sin, a Savior; above earth, heaven. If therefore it
be thus with our souls, that, as all creatures do seek their meats suitable to
their natures: the Lion, flesh; the Horse, grass; the Fowls, Worms; the
Catts, Mise; and the Bees, honey; so we do hunt after these things, then have
we entered into this life.

Secondly, Those helps that do respect our enemies, are our natural
vigilance and watchfulness, against that which does thwart and oppose life.
And from this head I shall commend unto you two signs of life.

The first is Sensiblenesse of the least degree of death or opposition of life.
He that is in an irrecouerable estate, 2 Sensiblenesse of death.
finds not the least degrees of death creeping upon him, and when he is
ready to die, says, He is well; whereas he that is well is sensible of the
least distemper: but if a man be dead, he does not feel death it self, he
hears no alarm to battle, sees not the approach of any enemy, nor smells the
stink of any wound: So if we be in a spiritually-dead estate, we feel not
killing sin to approach; Prou.
as Solomon says of the fool, He casts firebrarnds, arrows, and mortal
things, and says, I am not in jest: So we make sport unto our selves in the
committing of sin, and say, Do we not live? Yea, if we be dead, let God send
one letter of defiance unto us after another, for our sins, we hear and
hear not, we know and understand not: and though from ^he crown of the head
to the sole o^ the foot there be no part whole, (...)
nothing but botches and blaines full of corruption, yet we smell not the
stink of the corruption of our wounds, we run not to the b^lme of Gilead,
we desire not the good Samaritane to help us: but if we are alive, oh how
do we scud from death, as the fearful Hare from the greedy Hound? How does
the least approach of this death by the least sin, make us cry out with Paul,
Wretched man that I am, Romans 7.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Poor Christians, who are
dejected and cast down at the fearful fight of their own guiltiness, the
more sensible they are of the death of sin, the more they cry out of
themselves as of dead men: whereas if they would pass righteous judgment,
they should conclude that the spirit of life is in them.

3 Fi^hing against death.
The next sign of life is fighting against that which would take it away. The
living worm being trod upon will turn up the tail, Hear O worm Jacob: so
will thou, if thou have any life in thee. When the worm feels the earth to
be shaken, presently it comes running out of the earth, fearing the approach
of the mole: so if thou live, when thou feel the shaking of the cabin of
thy ease and security (thy body I mean) by paine^, ache^, and diseases, then
thou do presently startle, come to the door to see what news, meet thine
enemy death, disarme him, and pull out his sting, that at the last ^he conquest
may be thine. Again, is there life in us? then the Spirit of life does fight
against the flesh, ^om ^.^
lest, we living after it, do die. Oh how do living men strive against the
whole body of sin and death? How does the spirit lust against the flesh?
Yea, Gal. 5.17.
how does the living spirit get the upper hand, and sight more manfully every
day than other, especially against that sin which does most cross it? I have
kept me from my wickedness, says David; that is, P^^l. 18.23.
that sin whereunto he was most inclined: even so must we if we have this
new life. This is the way to find all living gr^^es to increase, and all sin
to be in a decaying estate. For we know that there is no equal match between
the old man and the new: as God smites the enemies of his people on the check
bone, that is, Psalm. 3.7.
he deals not with them as with men, but as with boys, in stead of opposing
them with swords and stau^^, he sends them away with a box on the ear: so
will the living spirit deal with the dying flesh, it will master it at the
last, as a grown man would a child, and overcome it with less difficulty,
though not without all danger to it self.

Secondly, Where there is the life of grace, there will be an employment of our
strength in the acts of life. The actions of living men are proper to men that
are alive: so are they to these new men. From this head therefore I shall give
you further two sorts of signs; either such as do concern a man's own
individual person, or those which are showed for succession in propagating
their kind.

They which do concern a man's person are two. 4 The breath of the new man.


First, if we can freely draw the breath of the new man. It is a sign of life
to men of the world, if we can freely draw that breath which God does offer
for the prolonging of natural life: so likewise is this a sign of this new
life, if we can freely draw the breath of Gods mouth which God does breathe
unto the hid man of the heart. And what breath is this, but the Spirit of the
Lord in the Scriptures? Mark therefore, if we can draw in the Word of God, to
the cooling, comforting, and refreshing of our weary hearts, which pant under
the burden of sin, and if we can put it out again, both to cool the
violence and fiery courses of sinful men, and to heat and warm the lukewarm
and frozen hearted sons of men, this will assure us that we live the life of
God.

5 Service of God.
The second sign, which does concern our persons, is this; If we do put over
our whole bodies and souls to the service of God. For as then we do live a
natural life, when we do employ all our strength to the service of nature:
and as then we do live a loyal life to our Sovereign, when we are wholly
taken up for his honor and maintenance in good: so then we live the life of
God, which is called a new life, when both in body and soul we are taken up
for the service of God. Dead and cursed Idols serve not them who gave them all
their imaginary liuelihood, they have eyes and see not, ears and hear not:
but it must be otherwise with us if we live. Our minds must be enlightened with
the eye-salue of Gods word in some comfortable measure to know our selves and
God in Christ; our memories must be confirmed to lay up the promises of God in
our hearts; our consciences must be cleared, at the least, to begin to testify
truly of our estates in Christ; our wills must be inclined to put over all that
we are and have to the honor of our Savior; our affections must be wooed to
run unto Christ, and to roll themselves upon him for the succor of the
whole man; our desires must be insatiably carried after him above all things;
our bodies must have all the parts and powers of them directed to do the will
of God cheerfully, and to be weapons of righteousness unto holiness; Rom 6.
and because there are failings in every one of these, therefore we must attend
them with godly sorrow, and supply their defects by faith in Christ, in whom
all their wants are covered. Thus must our whole living man attend upon the
service of the living God. It is true that we owe duty to others as well as to
God; as to country, kindred, friends, yea to our selves: yet all this must be
done as serving the Lord; Romans 12.11.
and then may we be said to serve the Lord, when all our service either to him
or other is employed according to Gods will. Oh that we may ever see our selves
new creatures by this new service! How easy will it then be for us to see us
in Christ prepared unto good works to the glory of God and our eternal comfort?

Lastly, 6 Begetting to God.
that sign of life which is showed in propagating our kind is this, If we
strive to beget others to God. We see that it is natural to every living
creature to gender, and by the blessing of multiplication, to bring forth
living creatures like unto themselves: so is it natural to this new creature
in us to shed abroad that grace whereof we have been partakers to beget
others to God. Christ weddeth Peter to this work, when he says, Luke 22.32.
When thou art converted strengthen thy brethren: so likewise Paul, Timothy,
saying, What things thou have heard of me by many witnesses, 2 Timothy 2.2.
the same deliver to faithful men which shall be able to teach others also. So
that here is a spiritual line wherein new creatures must be begotten unto God.
Paul begets Timothy, Timothy faithful men, (as they prove, or as they
are) to wit, to the increase of grace, and faithful men, others. If therefore
we can say that we are not satisfied with our own goodness, Iam. 5.20. Dan.
12.3.
but have a spiritual pronenesse to convert a sinner from going astray, and to
turn many to righteousness, that we may see more men like God, and walking
holily before him after the manner of the living; then build upon it, that we
are living men.

Thus have we (through Gods assistance) ended the first Use. The Doctrine of
the Text was this, that He that is in Christ is a new creature. The Use was
this, to learn us that we must labor to be new creatures, if we would
persuade our hearts that we are in Christ. To this end I have directed you how
we may prove our selves to be new creatures, both by our cutting off from the
old stock, and by our grafting into the new. As for our cutting off from the
old, I have showed you both how it is wrought, and how it is discovered. As for
our grafting into the new, I have showed you that in it we are made members,
with the signs of it, and that in it also we do receive the gifts of members;
that is, our dying unto sin, for which we must both do and suffer: as also
our living unto grace, which I have also striued in some measure to manifest
unto you. What shall I now say unto you? I will heartily in^^^at you that you
will be all of one mind in proving your sel^es by these notes whether ye are
in Christ yea or no. D^ferre not a work of such moment. Ye may all die before
ye are aware, this night may your souls be taken from you, and then woe, woe,
and a thousand woes unto you i^ ye are not in Christ. Or it may be ye may live
longer, but what comfort is there in that estate, wherein we have not the least
security that we are in the favor of God? Hear therefore the words of the
Prophet something altered; Fan your selves, Zeph 2.1.2
fan you, o people, whom I would feign have to be the beloved of God, before
the decree come forth, and ye be as chafe that poss^th in a day, and before
the fierce wrath of the Lord come upon you, and before the day of Gods anger
come upon you: for why, why will ye die, o ye house of Israel? I say no more,
but leave you thus in the consideration, and to the practice of this first Use.

Seeing he that is in Christ is a new creature, therefore we learn that if we
sin against Jesus Christ, and walk in the old trace of corruption, we are
not in Christ. Such as are in Christ must be new creatures: and Christ cannot
but spew out him, and disclaim him utterly, who pretending to be a member does
yet sin against him.

If now, that ye may avoid this danger, you shall ask me, how we may be said
to sin against Christ?

I answer; How we may be said to sin against Christ.
that infinite are those sins which we commit against him; yet, as more
direct, I name only sins of two sorts: either such as are committed against
the members, or such as are committed against the head. Sometimes we may sin
against Christ in sinning against his members: and that two ways. First in
others, when we do persecute the mystical body of Jesus Christ, that is, the
saints and people of God: when we are either Ishmaelites in persecuting them
with the tongue, or Saulites in persecuting them with the hand. For what is
this but to persecute Christ, seeing Christ said to Saul, Act. 9.
Why persecutest thou me? Secondly, in our selves, when we profess our selves
to be flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, yet live like devils incarnate:
when we take the members of Christ and make them the members of a harlot,
drunkard, liar, 1 Cor. 6.15.
or swearer, and the like. What greater indignity can there be to Christ his
body than to take his members, and give them unto the Devil? Sometimes again
we more nearly sin against Christ our head: and that both in his own
person, and in his ordinances. We sin against Christ in his own person,
either when we expect the forgiveness of sins and justification from God for
the works of righteousness which we have done through the assistance of Go^s
grace; (for by how much we fl^^ to any thing o t of Christ, by so much we
derogate from the worth o^ Christ:) or when we do no^ learn to know him in
his natures and offices, and work, as God has set him forth to be a
reconciliation through faith in his blood, Rom 3.25. Hebr. 2.3.
to d^clare his righteousness, etc. (for what is this but to neglect so great
salvation?) or else when we return to the lusts of our former ignorance (as
Peter speaks: 1 Pet. 1.14, 18, 19.
) for as this is to sin that the merits of Christ may abound, so in a manner
we do account the blood of Christ an impure thing, and therefore do rather
cleave to sin than to it, which is alone able to purge our consciences from
dead works to serve the living God.

Secondly, we may sin against Christ himself in his ordinances, both in the
Word, and Sacrament. We sin against Christ in his word either when we despise
the ministry thereof as a poor powerless, and beggarly means to bring us to
salvation; whereof Christ speaks, He that despises you despises me: or when
we apply not the promises to our own souls in particular. For what is this
but to say that Christ came in vain? In vain should ^he clouds drop fatness,
if the showers that be sent by God should not be applied unto the earth: so in
vain should our Christ be given, if he should not be applied to every soul,
by it self, to whom he is given. I know that Christ ha^h not spoken unto me by
name: but if when a man does bequeath legacies to all the sons of my father,
I will come in for a share though I am not named; how then can I do less than
sin against the will and new testament of Jesus, if I that am a son of my
Father in heaven (to whose sons all things are given) do not come in for a
childs part for my self in particular?

Lastly, we sin against Christ in the Sacrament, when we do receive it with
a profane and unworthy heart. Ye know the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 21.27.
Whosoever shall eat this bread and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. If therefore we receive
bare signs of bread and wine, and do not discern the Lords body, yea and
receive it according to the spi^ituall manner, of perceiving and receiving,
wherein God does offer him and communicate him unto us: or if we do deny the
truth of these signs by transubstantiation, whereby it is childishly feigned,
that the substance of bread and wine does pass away, and the very body and
blood of Jesus Christ do come in the room, whereto (besides the word of God)
even our very senses do give the lie: or, if we come to eat this Lamb, but
without the herbs of godly sorrow: or lastly, if we, by sealing Christ unto us
when he belongs not to us, do betray him into the hands of an impenitent and
unbelieving heart; then do we sin against our blessed Savior in the
Sacrament.

Lo thus (my brethren, beloved, Philip. 4.1.
and longed for) have I showed you in part how we may be said to sin against
Christ, that so we may avoid the danger. God stir us up and sanct^fie our
hearts and minds wisely to consider these things. How miserable are we if we
are not in Christ? yet to be in Christ is impossible if we sin against him.
Alas Lord, what then can we do to help our selves? Plow up we humbly beseech
thee (o thou Creator of clean hearts) the fallow ground of our hearts: cut us
off from the old Adam by that circumcision which is made without hands: glue us
unto thy self in thine only Son Jesus Christ by a true and a living faith:
out of his fullness let us all receive grace for grace: open from him a
fountain for us the house of David for sin and for uncleanness, that we
having ability and power of not sinning willingly, either against thee our
God, or against him our Savior, either in his members, or in his own person;
either in his ordinances, or in himself, we may do accordingly: that so we
assuring our hearts that we are in Christ, and new creatures, we may live like
Christians, and by power from on high prepare our selves for that new estate in
heaven, which thou at the last wilt bring us unto, to thy eternal glory and
our eternal comfort. Even so, Amen.

A PREVENTER OF SECVRITIE. UPON 1 PETER 4.7. By ROBERT ABBOT.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Nathaniel Butter. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR THOMAS HENDLEY Knight, and to the Lady ELIZABETH
his dearly- beloved Wife; Life, Health, and Salvation through Christ Jesus our
Lord.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL:
I DO not know whether those that do adventure to publish books, in these
woeful times wherein we live, do go too fast or too slow. I remember it was
fained of old, that Aeolus having bestowed a bottle upon Ulysses, wherein all
the winds were enclosed, his servants let them out, when he was asleep, to
their own hurt: so many times it falls out, that we do empty our own
poor withered bottles by the Press, to our own prejudice. Howsoever it
proves, for mine own particular, I do humbly commit the success to God, who
only knows with what heart I do it: and being drawn out by little and
little to appear in public, I, being sensible of the many favors, which,
above my expectation or desert, I have reaped both from you and yours, can do
no less than make you publicly to appear also together with me your Pastor,
who joy in your love, and shall more joy in the increasing of your graces, and
the further fitting of your souls and bodies for heaven and happiness. I know
not what benefit this poor Sermon can bring unto you: yet (so far as I can
be mine own carner) thus much I resolve, that whatsoever good shall arise by
it, either to your selves or others, it shall bear your Worships names in the
forehead of it, and thereby speak thus much, that the world should never have
seen it, if the love of God, together with your kindnesses, had not drawn out
from me (who can show little other) such a kind of fruit and acknowledgement
as this is. I thought it was enough for me to preach unto my own, and now and
then to lend the best dugge I had to a neighbors child abroad. I well knew
mine own weakness, and the weight of a presses burden. Yet considering how
apt the weak mud-wals of my poor house are every year to fall, and withal
that it is not altogether impossible that I should do some small good unto my
good people, even when I am dead by some short Mementoes of what I have
formerly taught, I thought that it would become me a little to write something,
whereby the weak faith of me unworthy thy Abel might speak being dead, and in
the publishing of which, I might not be altogether unmindful of the kindnesses
and favors of my loving friends. Hence then comes this Sermon to appear;
which though in respect of the manner, it be rude and homely, yet it has
matter which is worth our consideration. It presses sobriety, watchfulness,
and prayer, which are necessary and useful duties every day: and it will stand
up as a little sea-marke, to point at those rocks of the Papacy, from which
it has pleased God hitherto to preserve you. I know that your temptations have
not been small nor seldom; kindred and kind opportunities have given much
advantage to the tempters: but by how much more open you lay, by so much
greater appears the glory of God in your weaknesses, which have been
preserved from the defilements of the filth of Babylon. Long and ever may that
gracious work be continued upon you and yours: And I humbly pray God, that (as
the Egyptians did use to offer in sacrifice to their cursed gods of the fruit
of the Peach-tree, which is not altogether unlike to a man's heart; and of the
leaves of the same, which are like to a man's tongue; thereby teaching that God
requires both tongue and heart: so) you may still continue and abound in
offering up the outward and inward man, in public and private services to the
true God. I hope that from sound knowledge you do thoroughly hate the many
lies, wherewith our adversaries do seek to disgrace us and our cause (as of
the novelty, impuritie, and blasphemy of our Religion and the like:) and have
learned from the Persian Law, after the third lie, to enjoin a man perpetual
silence; or, if that be not in your power, yet never to believe him more. I
know that as it is said of Aspes, they are of a sky color, and hide their
inuenomed teeth within soft gummes: so ye shall see, and have seen, the
Proctors of Antichrist veluet-mouthed, and like heaven in appearance, mustering
the Fathers, yea and Scriptures in such order and equipage, as if in the cause
of Religion all were theirs: but I remember what we read of Balm, Pozel. de
Patef. D^i.
that Vipers are nourished with the juice of it (which they turn into poison)
and that they with their whole broods are delighted with the shadow of the
leaves of it; yet the juice of Balm is an excellent remedy against their
poison: Even so the maintainers of Schisms and Heresies do feed upon the
Balm of Gilead (I mean the sacred Scriptures and Fathers abused) and do
turn those wholesome viands into poison, and yet that very word of God and
vnsophisticated antiquity, are excellent remedies against all their impostures
of false doctrine whatsoever. Let me therefore beseech you, in the
entertainment of any doctrine, to use Gods spectacles still, that no false
colors may deceive you to the prejudice of your souls: and so to provide for
sobriety and watchfulness in prayer in these perilous times, that ye may not
be like to unthrifty servants, who having their allowance of candle, spend it
out in gaming and riot, and at the last are feign to go to bed darkling. This
would be a woeful abuse of that light of knowledge which God has given you.
From this therefore even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ (who has
preserved your Worships hitherto) keep both you and yours for evermore. Thus
he humbly prays, who heartily desires the welfare of your bodies and
souls:

ROBERT ABBOT.

A PREVENTER OF SECVRITIE.
1 PETER 4.7. The end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sober and
watch unto Prayer.


THIS speech of the Apostle is short in words, and long in sense. Brevis in
verbis, longa in sententijs.
He has spoken much in a little: and the further opening and applying of it,
shall, by the blessing of God, bring it close both unto our heads and hearts.
As therefore God says unto his people, Hear O my people, Psalm. 50.
and I will speak; so say I; Open your hearts and ears wide, and, through
Gods assistance, I shall not feed you with the wind, but offer you the
connection, scope, and meaning of the words, that at the length ye may taste of
the good word of God in the application of it, for the benefit of your souls.

For the Connection, Connection.
conceive it thus. The Apostle Peter, from the beginning of this Chapter, goes
forward to exhort unto holiness; and to this purpose he uses diverse arguments.

Christ has suffered for us (and in our room) in the flesh, that is, in his
humane nature. As therefore he that has suffered in the flesh, has ceased
from sin: So it behooves us, having suffered, that, from hence forth we
should live, not after the lusts of men, but after the will of God. That faith
which unites us to Jesus Christ, is a living faith, which lives both to kill
sin, and to quicken us to grace. As we read of a certain tree which
brings forth such leaves as do go, when they fall to the ground, as if they
were alive: so the godly man, as from the tree of Faith, he does bring forth
leaves of profession, so when they fall off for the use of themselves and
others, they do not prove dead and unprofitable, but going and living for the
ruin of sin, and the upholding of the kingdom of Christ.

It is sufficient for us that we have spent the time past of the life after the
lusts of the Gentiles: as if he should say, we have done wrong enough unto God
already in living wickedly: let us not for shame go on still, but let us now
live unto God.

Esaias 59.15. Or as others read it: He that departs from evil, is counted
trad. Dr. Cur. Ser. page 41. f.
But ye will say, mean while we are made a byword to the wicked: as the
Prophet says, He that refraineth himself from evil, makes himself a prey.
Like enough (says the Apostle:) they carry themselves like strangers, because
ye run not with them into the same excess, and they speak evil of you: but
yet know that they shall give an account to him that is ready to judge quick
and dead. As if he should say, Look as it is with a Bat or Flinder-mouse, it
is in kind like a bird, and it flies like a bird, but it does not bring forth
young like a bird, nor feed them like a bird, nor feed it self like a bird: So
ye that are the children of God, though in respect of kind ye be men, though
in civil and natural conversation ye walk like men, yet ye are neither
bred nor fed like men, but by immortal seed, and with immortal food, and so
are odd persons form the common rout of the world, as Pellicans in the
wilderness, and Owls in the desert. In which respect ye may not wonder if
worldly men do carry themselves like strangers unto you. Yet let this comfort
you, that for these things they shall come to judgment.

Now, the Apostle being come thus far, does seem to remove two objections to
the end of my Text. The first is of carnal men, who to flatter themselves in
their own ungodly courses, might say; If we be let alone till the day of
judgment, we shall do well enough: for we hope it will be no worse with us,
than with those who are dead, who walked without control in the same courses.
Do not say so (says Peter:) for though they are dead, yet while they were
alive the Gospel was preached unto them to this end, that sin might be
killed and grace might be quickened. For this is implied in that which Peter
seems to signify by the condemning of those that are dead according to men in
the flesh, to wit, Mortifi^atio veteris hominis in ipsis, vt aboleretur corpus
peccati, and v^v^rent se^undum Deum sp^ritu. He^ming. ex Turnim.
the mortification of the old man in them, that the body of sin being
abolished, they might live according to godliness.

The second Objection seems to be of fearful, yet secure, Christians, who
might be cast down with this thought, that they should endure these
inconveniences too long. To whom the Apostle answers, No: because the end of
all things is at hand; be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer.

Scope.
Thus we have seen the context; whence the scope does easily appear to be
this; to wit, partly to give comfort unto crossed Christians, because the time
was not long: and partly to keep their spirits from deadness and dullness
(through the discouragements of wicked men) that they may be found worthy
through Jesus Christ in that day when the Judge shall judge both.

Now, because even we also have experience of the gaine-sayings of
unreasonable men, and of our own cursed dullness and backwardness through
them: therefore it is not unfit for us in these times of sin thoroughly also to
consider these words.

As for their meaning, Meaning.
there is no such difficulty in them as should cause our stay, which we shall
not more fitly meet with in our further pursuit of them. Only for the present
consider we two points in the words:

1. A Doctrine, in these words, The end of all things is at hand.

2. A Use, or inference upon it, wherein the Apostle does press to a double
duty.

1. First, Sobriety, in these words, Be ye therefore sober.

2. Secondly, Prayer: which is expressed both by the matter, in this word
(prayer:) and also by the means furthering it, in these words (watch unto it.)

Or, if ye will, the Apostle does rather press to a threefold duty.

1. The first concerns us as we stand in relation to the world, and that is
Sobriety.

2. The second concerns us as we have respect to our own wicked hearts and
the other enemies of our good, and that is, watchfulness.

3. The third concerns us as we have reference to God, and that is Prayer. As
if he should say; Let your watchfulness which may give you experience of your
weak estates, and make known the vigilancie of your enemies, and your own
necessities, drive you to God in Jesus Christ by Prayer.

Touching the Doctrine, 1 The Doctr.
I will observe no other than that of the Apostle in the very words themselves,
to wit, That the end of all things is at hand.

And if the Apostle might say so, much more may we, upon whom the ends of the
world are more come.

For the opening therefore of this point consider with me three things.

First, what is meant by the end.

Secondly, what is comprised under these words (All things.)

Thirdly, how the Apostle could say, that the end of all things is at hand.

As to the first point, 1 End.
(not to stand upon that Schoole-distinction of a consummating, and a consuming
end) the end of a thing is taken diverse ways. First, for that which first
moves the agent, and for the which something is intended: as Gods own glory
is the end of all things, according to that of Solomon, God made all things for
himself; Prove.
and our comfort and instruction is the end of the Law, according to that of
Paul, Romans 15.4.
That which is written before is written for our learning, that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope; and the fulfilling and
satisfying of the Law is the end of Christ's coming, according to that of Paul,
Christ is the end of the Law. Secondly, Romans 10.4.
it is taken for the perfection of a thing: as when Paul says, The end of the
commandment is love; 1 Timothy 1.5.
that is, the perfection of the Law. 1 Cor. 10.11.
So likewise when the Apostle says, These things are written to admonish us
upon whom the ends of the world are come; some interpret (end) by perfection:
because in Christ and the Apostles times the world was in its perfection.
Thirdly, End is taken for the issue and vpshot of a thing whither at the length
it comes: so the end of faith is the salvation of our souls; 1 Pet. 1.9. Romans
6.22.
and the end of holiness is everlasting life; that is, the issue of faith and
holiness is glory with the Saints in heaven. Lastly, it is taken for the
determination and final conclusion of a thing, in respect of its present state
and condition: so God says to Noah, An end of all flesh is come before me;
Genesis 6.13.
as if he should say, I will cast the world into a new mold; and thus is it
taken in this place. For the end of all things is as much as if he should say,
It has been a long time disputed, whether God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost be alone to be rested in as our faithful Creator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier, yea or no, or whether we may cleave unto sin. Now God is come
unto the conclusion, to destroy and take away all outward confidence
whatsoever: and to resolve in the sight of men and Angels that we must only
cleave unto God by casting the gaine-sayers into the pit of hell, and receiving
the maintainers into everlasting habitations, where are pleasures at the right
hand of God for evermore.

2. All things.
But is the end of all things come? I do not mean to fall into those nice
questions touching the abolishing of the creatures, and what creatures shall be
abolished, and what restored, as whether animate or inanimate, severally, or
all jointly: only let us strive to maintain peace betwixt Gods word and it
self. For, whereas it is said, that the whole creation shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, Romans
8.21.
wherein a new beginning and not an end of things does seem to be implied, it
may seem that the Apostle does miss his mark when he says, that the end of
all things is at hand. But I answer that both are true: It is true that the
creature shall be delivered from vanity, and it is also true that they shall
perish, or that their end is at hand. They shall perish in respect of their
natural and civil fashion, 1 Cor. 7.31. (...). Trans^^us accid^n^alis.
Eccles. 1.4. 2 Pet 3.
as the Apostle says, The fashion of this world passes away: but they shall
not perish in respect of their elements and elementarie materials. For as
Solomon says, The earth remains for ever: and though the heavens shall pass
away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with heat, yet God shall but
change them as a vesture, and they shall be changed. Psalm. 102.26.
So that as once God sent water to cleanse and purge the earth, and to restore
it to a better state, when the rebellions of the earth were washed out of Gods
sight: so God shall one day send his fire to burn up the stubble of vanity,
and consume all that dross which sin has made in the creatures, to what use
we shall know hereafter.

Here is the end of all things, to wit, a perishing from their present state
and condition. Thy end, when thou shall be left destitute of all outward
supplies, and stand naked before God, to give an account of all things which
are done in the flesh whether good or evil: The end, when all outward
necessaries, delights, and profits shall vanish away.

But how could the Apostle say, 3 Is at hand.
that the end of all things is at hand, when from this time there have slid
along above a thousand and six hundred years? I answer, that yet this end
might well be said to be at hand in diverse respects.

with whom a thousand years is as one day, and one day as a thousand years. 2
Pet. 3.8.
There is no succession with God (he being infinite,) yea he does all things
with one eternal and undivided act. In which respect John speaks of his time
as of the last hour, (...) 1 Ioh 2.18.
and we may speak of ours as of the least and last degree of time in it.

last time, wherein he should publicly show it by drawing his body into the
same glory with the head: such honor have all his Saints.

the end may be said to be at hand, in respect of the course of time which is
run into the last age of the world: which though it be not pointed at in
particular, because we should always be provided for it, yet is it in
general, because we might not be without warning. Hence is it that as there
were six days in the Creation before the Sabbath: so there are reckoned up six
ages of the world before our sabbatisme comes in the day of Christ, as they
are manifestly distinguished in the Scriptures. The first age is from Adam to
Noah's flood, which was of ten generations: 2 Pet 2.5.
and this is called the old world. The second is from the Flood to Abraham:
which is also of ten generations; and here Matthew begins the genealogy of
Christ. The third is from Abraham to David of fourteen generations. The fourth
is from David to the captivity of Babylon, of fourteen generations. The fifth
is from the captivity of Babylon to Christ, of fourteen generations, all
which are reckoned by the Holy Ghost. Matthew. 1.17.
The sixth age of the world is the age of christ. In which respect it may well
be called the last days, and the last time, after which remains the rest for
the people of God.

the end may be said to be at hand in respect of the state and condition of the
world since Christ's time, which has bowed and declined unto her crutches, as
we may see in two things. First, in the malignitie of her diseases, which have
ever since brought her toward her grave of destruction. If you ask me what
these diseases are? I answer, sins: especially the mystery of Antichrists
iniquity, which begun to work even in Paul's time, 1 Thessalonians. 2.7. 1 Thessalonians. 2.4.
and has by little inthroned it self even in the temple of God to the
dishonor of God, and discomfort of his people. We ordinarily say that then the
end of a man approaches, when the vital parts decay, and sickness gets
the upper hand: so when the Church decays, and sin, Satan, and Antichrist
prevail, it may well be said, that the end draws on. Secondly, as the worlds
diseases do argue that the end is at hand: so let it not be ouer-curious to
say, that the conquest which fire gets over the world may persuade us also
in some measure that it is even so indeed. Fire incroacheth upon the world in
dwarfing the creatures. All things wax less and less: things or persons
ordinarily neither grow so great, nor continue so long, Consumente ubertate,
seminum exustione.
as they have in former times. First came the water abounding with moisture,
and the world flourished with giants and mighty creatures: but now the fire is
entering its kingdom, and the world is pestered with little creatures; for the
heat consumes the moisture, and shall in process of time burn the whole
world.

Thus we have considered the Apostles doctrine, and cast up the sum to be
thus much, that the time approaches when God by fire will give an end to the
present state and condition of all outward things.

We will now look no further for Uses of this point then to the words of the
Apostle. Let me say unto you therefore, suffer the words of exhortation, that
we be sober, that we watch, and that we watch unto prayer in these last and
miserable days wherein we live.

the end of all things is at hand, let us be sober. For the pressing of this,
Be sober.
consider with me two points. First, wherein sobriety stands: and secondly,
what motives may stir us up to the practice of it.

As to the first, if you ask me, wherein Sobriety stands? I answer; Wherein
sobriety stands.
As drunkenness does not only stand in an immoderate and unmeasurable
drinking of wine or beer; but also in a spiritual doting and surfeiting upon
and with any of the outward things of this life, according to that of the
Prophet, Oh thou that art drunken but not with wine: so sobriety is not only
showed in the moderating of the appetite in the use of drinks, but in a
repressing of our account, and love, and liberty to all outward things, as
meats, drinks, and clothing, houses, and lands, profits, and pleasures of what
kind soever. When we look upon them, and use them as a sick man, who is
dieted, does his victuals to cure the inevitable miseries of this life, that
is, moderately. When we so behold them, as our inward peace is not hindered by
any of the worlds glories, and that sweet contentment which we should have in
God is not abated, nor our hearts so bewitched with any outward thing, as to be
wrought not to make that account of God and godliness which we should. It is
(as it were) a second nature to the things of this world (which have a cunning
merchant about them, that is, the Devil, to set them forth to our greatest
disadvantage) to bewitch our souls, and to gain ground of us daily: but when
we can possess them as if we possessed them not, and use them as if we used
them not, and (being assisted with power from on high) preserve our inward
peace and comfort in God and godliness in the midst of the confluence of all
outward things, this is Sobriety.

sobriety, consider 4. things. Motives to Sobriety.


sober.

after other Gods. But he that is sober reserues his heart for God, will not
clog himself with the chains and fetters of this world (no tho of gold) that so
he may have his conversation in heaven. And how can such a man fear that God
has not reserved a place for him in heaven? Therefore be sober.

they trust in their goods, says David, and boast themselves in the multitude
of their riches, yet a man can by no means redeem his brother, he cannot give
his ransom to God that he may live still for ever, Psalm. 49.6, 7, 9.
and not see the grave. If we respect our Christ, he is not come unto by any
thing in this life but by faith: Non q^aeritur Christus argento, sed fide.
and if we have faith, then as a penny purse with a most precious Jewel is
better than the richest purse that is empty; so the most despicable man who
has faith in his heart is more precious than he who has all the trappings of
the worlds wantons without it. Seeing then that we have so little cause to
love the world, oh that we would show it! And how can we do it better than
when we restrain our hearts from it by sobriety? Rowze we up our hearts
therefore: Suffer them not to rot with wallowing in the dung of this life. All
creatures have their place in the great workmanship of God according to their
worth and dignity: the Angels in heaven, the Sun, Moon, and Stars in the
firmament, the Elements, as they are more pure, superior one to another, the
dearly beloved metals, gold and silver in the intrals of the most gross
creature, the Earth: and do we think that we are put into the earth, to hunt
and hunger after earthly things? No, No: this is not our proper place; we look
for a City, whose Maker and Builder is God: here is but the place of our
banishment, Heaven is our home; Oh therefore let us be sober.

Take heed lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and cares of this life, Luke 21.34.
lest that day come upon you at unawares: So when a man is full fed of things
of this life, his soul is ready to sleep and snort in security. Whereas
even as a spare diet does make us less sleepie; so sobriety is a great means
to watchfulness, which is the next use which is to be pressed, as the Apostle
says, Be sober, and watch.

And watch.
let us be exhorted in the fear of God to watch. Now because watchfulness
does refer it self unto two heads of Divinity, first to Faith, and secondly
to Love; or first to Doctrine, and secondly to Manners: and because both these
are in danger in these last and perilous days: In which respect Jesus Christ
says, Apoc. 16.15.
Behold I come as a thief: Blessed is he that watches and keeps his
garments, (of faith and love) lest he walk naked, and men see his filthiness:
therefore we must watch for the health and security of them both.

First, we must watch in respect of Doctrine, that so we be not nuzled up in
falsehood and error. There is a stabbing of our souls, as well as a staruing
of them, and that is by false doctrine, against which we must watch. For the
pressing whereof, I shall keep the same course which I did in the former;
namely, to show you wherein it stands, and how we may be stirred up to the
practice of it.

How we must watch in doctrine. Philip. 3.2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
I answer: It stands in a holy care to observe that rule of the Apostle to
the Philippians, Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the
concision: And that to the Thessalonians, Try all things and keep that which
is good: 1 John 4.1.
And that of John, Try the spirits whether they are of God. When we are thus
vigilant and watchful over that doctrine which is taught unto us, as the men
of Berea, who as they received the Word with all readiness, so they searched
the Scriptures daily whether those things were so or no, Act. 17.11.
which were taught unto them: when we are careful not presently to admit of
every point that is shrouded under the authority of a Teacher, 2 Cor. 1.24.
Who has not dominion over our faith: when we are not sluggish to enquire and
search into every doctrine that is offered unto us, but do humbly resign our
selves unto Gods teaching, Psalm. 25.9, 14. Psalm. 119.18, 34 John 7.17.
do pray that God would open our eyes that we may be taught, do strive to do
the will of God, that we may know of the doctrine whether it be of God or no,
and do get a form of doctrine, or the doctrine of the beginning of Christ,
Hebr. 6.1, 2.
or the doctrine of Baptismes and laying on of hands, or whatsoever else you
will call the grounds of Religion laid down by way of Catechismes; and use all
other means appointed for the finding out of the truth, then may we be said
to watch in doctrine.

Motives to watch in doctrine.
I do humbly offer unto your considerations diverse motives.

the Ancient of days, yet the devil has been from the beginning: and that
both truth and falsehood got into Paradise: and that the devil has had a
succession of his servants, as well as God of his Ministers: and that it has
been an old trick of the devil, to them that rested in the Scriptures, to
allege Scriptures, Scult. Delit. Euang. cap. 30. page 109.
as to Christ, whether by mutilation or deprauation, as some dispute it, it is
no matter. That we may not be deceived therefore, and drink the poison of
Antichrist in stead of the wholesome liquor of Gods truth, and that without
suspicion, it is necessary that we watch in respect of doctrine.

charge, yet they are so far from passing judgment otherwise than (by the
help of such means as God has appointed) by applying the rule of the Word to
the Doctrine to be ruled, that it breeds unspeakable respect, when the people
shall see that their Teachers teach them no other doctrine than that which is
warranted by the word of God.



Berea in the Scriptures, for those doctrines which we do entertain.

plead first against us, and secondly for themselves. Against us what is more
frequent in their mouths and writings, What the Papists plead for themselves.
Walsingh. search into matters of Religion.
than to urge these two things: Luther was, who, (as they say) besides his
notorious wickedness, received (by his own confession) some of his doctrines
from the devil: and secondly that, as it seems out of the guilt we have in our
consciences, and suspicion of the badnesse of our cause, we refuse disputations
and other public trials. Oh what fair pretenses are here (if they were true)
to draw our hearts to hearken to their Antichristian doctrine! But, as we love
our souls, let us watch, and these things shall not move us.

Jesus Christ, speaking in the Scriptures. We embrace not the Scriptures for
man's sake (as the Papists do so far as the Pope approves) but man and his
opinions for the Scriptures sake, and so far as we find them agreeable to
them, so far we consent unto them.

Luther (and other gracious reformers) should be railed at by his and their
enemies, who felt his privy and powerful blows, to the shaking of the Popish
Monarchy. It is ordinary to faithful Teachers to be subject to the
disgracings of their adversaries both in respect of their persons and
doctrines. Tertullus said of Paul, Acts 24.5. Ierem. 18.18. Se^ for thi^ also
these places: John 8 48. John 10.20. Acts. 6.11. Act 10.20, 21.
Certainly we have found this man a pestilent fellow, a moouer of sedition.
Ieremiahs enemies say of him, Come and let us imagine some mischief against
him, come and let us smite him with the tongue. Why, upon what ground will they
deal thus with Jeremy? Surely, they do not say, because the Pope, for whom
we work, cannot err, and the Church whereof we are members, cannot want the
spirit to guide it, yet they speak something like it when they say, For the
Law shall not perish from the Priest, nor Counsel from the wise, nor the Word
from the Prophet. So that we may not think it a new thing, that learned and
resolute Luther should when he is with God be thus trampled upon by men.

As certain as those things which come unto us by humane relation.
Luther was a reverend and holy man. For though his professed enemies (such as
Coclaeus, Parsons, and the rest of the Jesuits are) do declaime against him,
yet in his days he had the testimony both of God and man: Of God in that
miraculous success which he had in his preaching, for the spreading of the
truth, against the power and policy of the Emperor and Pope, and what ever
other enemies he had, which were neither few nor of small place and respect in
the world: Dr. White his Way. Ca^sa Regia Covent. and Li^hf Episc. cap. 3.
sect. 16. page 119.
Of man, in the testimony of Erasmus, which is often laid on the trencher of
our adversaries, and cannot be wiped off. Notwithstanding which testimony, we
do freely acknowledge, both that his many oppositions and multiplicitie of
troubles made him more pettish and rash in words than he should have been, as
also that he had two other faults (as Erasmus is said wittily to pass his
judgment concerning him to the Duke of Saxony) to wit, That he meddled with
the Popes Crown, and with the Monks bellies.

Luther and the rest of those godly Reformers were wicked, shall we not have
the same liberty which the Church of Rome has? When we object the horrible
and outrageous wickednesses of many Popes, who were for the time Heads of their
Church under Christ to convey spiritual life into the whole body; they do
answer (in effect) that we need not take so much pains as to cast it in their
teeth; for they do of their own accords acknowledge it, and are not ashamed
to make the most brutish and cursed villainies of the Popes, Bellarm. in his
Preface to his Books De Pontif.
a proof of the excellency of that Chair, and of the providence of God over
it. If then they prove the holiness of their Religion from the unholiness of
their Popes; why should they prove the impiety of our Religion from the
impiety of Luther, if it were true?

Luthers learning from the Devil; I answer two things distinctly. First, put
case that Luther had said, that the Devil did preach unto him the true
doctrine of the Sacrament: Is it any news that the Devil should preach the
truth to disgrace it? Does nor Jesus Christ for this cause hinder the Devil
from saying that he knew him, Mark 1.34.
because he needed not his testimony (though he was ready enough to give it)
which could do him no good? And did not the woman, who had the divining
Devil, say of Paul and Silas, Acts 16.17.
That they were the servants of the most high God, showing the way of
salvation? In which the truth was spoke, and yet says the Text, it grieved
Paul: because by this means it might seem that the Devil and the Spirit of
God taught one doctrine. So that we may conclude that the Devil will preach
the truth for his own advantage. But secondly, the truth is, that this is but
the slander of an enemy. For all of us that have been urged with it, as we
cannot think Luther such a fool as to bewray his own secrets, and openly to
profess that the Devil was his master, to the so great disadvantage of his
cause: So upon diligent search, we can find but this to be the vpshot of what
he says in this kind: namely, that he having learned the true doctrine of the
Sacrament in the School of Christ, the Devil urged it strongly against his
former practice of Massing, to draw him to despair, because he had so often
dishonored God.

Lastly, concerning our refusal (as they please to term it) of disputation
with them: First, we see their pride in boasting of their learning among their
blinded disciples, as if it were so great that our side were afraid to look
^h^m in the faces. Secondly, we cannot think ou^ cause to be ^he worse,
because we do not dispute with them for the garland. Who knows not that a
quick wit, a nimble tongue, a confident spirit, and a bold face will go
beyond a good cause at such a time? Do we not see that a wrangler will have
the last word, what ever his cause be? and I am sure it had been better with
Eve if she had never disputed the case with the devil: and it would be better
with all of us, if in arguments against the truth we could attain to Paul's
Logic, Romans 3.4, 5, 6.
to hold the conclusion whatsoever the premises are. Thirdly, the world has
been well acquainted with Popish disputations, and upon what advantages they
have been undertaken. John Hus, and Jerome of Prage, and Luther can witness;
against whom there was more power than arguments: and we cannot forget how
holy Bradford complained that they would dispute with him, Fox his Ma^tyrol.
Abst^. by M^s^^.
to wit, that he should dispute against the things which they had already
determined, whereby it appeared that they sought not the truth, but his
destruction and their own glory: yea and we see still that where the Popish
power reaches, whatsoever be the propositions, the conclusion is, the
Inquisition and the mercy of those holy Fathers by fire and faggot. If it be
thought that yet this need not be feared amongst us; I know it well: yet we
may see by the former considerations what is like to be the success: and we
are not quite without experience in those disputes betwixt Mounsieur de Moulin,
and the Jesuits of France, with whom he had to do, who had still the upper
hand in the report of their faction, when time soon after has brought other
truth to light.

Fourthly, though they dispute not by proclamation, yet they dispute by print,
(for their books do daily fly abroad) and they are occasioned in this kind
to do more than they do, As B. Abbot, D. Whit^, Par^r^, etc.
while they suffer themselves to be beaten back after their first assault, and
leave our champions triumphing in the field.

What the Papists plead for themselves. Walsingh. search out of the defense of
the censure.
holiness, humility, learning, miracles, dangers, and other wonderful
conueniences of their religion. And oh how plausible are these in the sight of
a natural man!

Scriptures.
and we have no express Scripture against them. And how fair does this
appear to him that is willing to rule his conscience by the word of God?
therefore watch I pray you. Concerning the supremacy of Peter, and so of the
Pope, they will tell you that Christ said to Peter, Marth. 16.18.
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church. But these words
are not plain to that end: for he does not say, Thou art rock, and upon thee
rock I will build my Church; but, Thou art Peter, and answerable to thy name
(which signifies a stone) thou have made a confession of Christ, which shall
be and is a rock whereupon I will build my Church. But as for us, we have
plain Scrip^ures against that proud supremacy: 1 Cor. 3.11.
for other foundation can no man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ. And if it be said that Peter and the Pope are successively ministers
and supporters in the same foundation; then the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 12.5.
(...).
that there are diversities of administrations, but the selfsame Lord: and
for matter of ministry, we have it plainly, that the Church of God is built
upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20.
(as well as upon Peter, that is, upon their doctrines and confessions) Jesus
Christ himself being the chief corner stone. For their breaden-god in the
Sacrament, they will tell you that they have expressly the words of Christ,
Matthew. 26.
saying, This is my body. Yet our Savior does not say, This is my natural
body which was borne of the Virgin Marie; or, This is my body as it shall be
when I am glorified; because we know that he had his mortal body sitting at
the table with his Disciples, which had not yet suffered death. But as for us,
though we need not any such fantastical place as should say, This is the
sign of my body, because we do believe that, in those words of promise,
Christ does express his plain meaning according to the nature of the thing
that he has in hand, which is the Sacrament; and that he had not spoken so
plainly and so fitly, if he should have said, This is a sign of my body;
because he was to represent in those words unto his Church, that in the
faithful receiving of those signs and seals, they should have whole Christ
with all his merits conveyed and settled upon them: Yet this we have in plain
words against Christ's corporal presence, that the heaven must contain him
till the time that all things be restored. Act. 3.21.
Again, for their justification by works, they will tell you that they have
expressly the words of James, which say, that of works a man is justified, Iam.
2.24.
and not of faith only. Which yet are not so express as they dream: for by
[works] the Apostle must needs understand the cause with the effect, or a
living and working faith made manifest by works; both because otherwise the
Apostle would never bring in the Scripture which proves justification by
faith, and say, Verse. 23.
that the work of his offering up of his son was the fulfilling of that Text
which speaks of faith: as also, Genesis 15.6.
because otherwise it would be an absurd inference to say, that because Abraham
believed God, Verse. 24.
therefore ye see that man is justified of works, and not of faith only. Any
man may see that the Apostle, to cut the combs of Securitanes, who rested in a
naked, idle, and unprofitable faith, says, that we cannot be saved but by that
faith which works out our salvation, Phil. 2.
or proceeds in the way to heaven, by love: because it is only such a faith
that justifies us, which of necessity goes before salvation. But for us we
have plain words which tell us (even when the Apostle speaks of purpose of
justification) that a man is justified by faith without the works of the Law
(therefore by faith only: Romans 3.28. Romans 4.5.
) and that we must renounce in this case even the works of righteousness which
we have done, Tit. 3.5.
Ephesians. 2.9, 10.
and those works whereunto we are built in Christ Jesus that we should walk
in them. Again, for the keeping of the Law, they will tell you that they have
the plain words of Paul, which say, Romans 2.13.
that the doers of the Law shall be justified, which yet are not so plain as
they pretend; because they speak no other but with us, that the Law contains
a pattern of perfect righteousness, and that if we could do it we should be
justified by the deed. Suppositive.
But for us we hear the Scriptures speak plainly, that in many things we
sin all, Iam. 3.2. 1 John 3.4.
and that if we sin we do transgress the Law. Again, for that proud and
cursed doctrine of merit, they will tell you that the Scripture often says
plainly, Romans 2.6.
that God will reward every man according to his works: Romans 4.4.
yet we see plainly that there is wages counted by favor as well as by debt;
in which respect Gods reward may argue Gods free love, and mercy, and promise,
and not our desert: especially considering what Christ (who teaches us not to
lie) does teach us to say, that when we have done all things, Luke 17.10.
which are commanded us, we are unprofitable servants. Thus in these, and many
other points of their false doctrine, they will make you believe that they have
express Scriptures (as the Devil when he tempted Christ;) but watch, and
believe them not at their words, or first appearance, how diuine-like soever
they appear. There was scarce ever heretic that did not make the like plea
and show for himself. Not as if the Scripture did truly serve every heretics
turn: for as there is but one sense of those Scriptures, Sensus literalis est
quem author precipuc intendit.
which we do call the literal, and is that which the Author of it (to wit,
the Holy Ghost) does principally intend; so the only end is by that one sense
to serve God, and not the Devil by schism or heresy. If therefore heretics
abuse it to their ends, it proceeds from their infatuated judgments and
foolish opin^ons, which makes the Scriptures to appear to speak according to
their fantasies (as a distempered eye deals with colors) and not from any
incertainty that is in the good word of God, which is preserved unto us for the
comfort of our souls.

2 Holiness.
Secondly, they will tell you that they have great holiness in their Church
amongst them, and that we have none but counterfeit stuff that will not
endure the trial. But watch, I pray you, against this deceit, and concern
these four things distinctly.

Luke 5.1, 2, etc.
why so great multitudes pressed upon our blessed Savior: The answer is this;
both by reason of the divine sweetness of his words, John 7.46.
Never man speaking as he spoke, even by the witness of his enemies; as also
by reason of the holiness of his ways, of which they gave testimony that
said, He has done all things well. Mar. 7.37.
And how the holiness of others does gain upon our hearts we see by daily
experience, yea though it be but fained. As when Artimisia knew not how to
conquer Latmum, she did it by performing religious service in a wood, not
far from that City dedicated to Berecynthia, the fained mother of the gods:
so we know the multitudes in many places, which the Pope has drawn and
conquered to himself, by a veil, a Cowle, a triple Crown, a Cardinals Hat,
by a pompous solemnity, and rituall devotion, by Cloisters and titular
Virgins, together with many other the like toys.

wear rough garments to deceive, that is, Zach. 13.4.
untrimmed and undressed skins in a careless manner, as if their lives were as
simple as Adams newly fallen, Heb. 11.37.
or as those that wandered up and down in sheep skins and goats skins. In
which respect Christ says, Matthew. 7.15.
Beware of false prophets which come to you in sheep clothing. Therefore we
ought to be wise, and not believe every one that comes with a show of the
neglect of the world, mortification and holiness.

Cobham, who of old suffered for the truth, Book of Hi^t. (...) by M^^^^ page
133. 1^^
first weepingly cried out against the Popish Church, saying, Lo good people,
for breaking Gods laws they never cursed me; but for their own laws they
most cruelly handle me and others. Afterward in further discourse with Papists,
he did say; I will say before God and man, Before I knew the despised doctrine
of that virtuous man Wickliffe (who was a faithful Preacher of the Gospel) I
never abstained from sin, but since, I trust I have done otherwise: so much
grace could I never find in any of your glorious instructions, says he to
them. (...), page ^^^
Again, that blessed Martyr, Roger Holland made this free confession before
Bonner; My Lord, I was of your blind religion, until the latter end of King
Edwards reign, and having that liberty under your auricular confession, I
made no conscience to sin, but trusted in the Priests absolution, and he for
money did some penance for me: which money after I had given, I cared no more
what offense I had done, than the Priest cared after he had got my money,
whether he fasted with bread and water for me, yea or no: so I accounted
lechery, swearing, and other vices, no offense of danger as long as I could
have them absolved. I so straightly (says he to the Papists) observed your
rules of religion, that I would have ashes upon Ash Wednesday, though I had
used never so much wickedness at night: and albeit I could not of conscience
eat flesh upon Friday, yet in swearing, drinking, or dicing all night long I
made no conscience at all. Thus was I brought up and continued till now of
late, that God of his grace, by the light of the Word, called me to repentance
of my former Idolatry and wicked life. Oh learn we but from these two examples
of dying men, what holiness does arise in the Popish Church even from their
very doctrine. And truly what else can we expect but unholiness from that
doctrine, which does most teach that holiness which is furthest from the
heart, and publish most the merit of those works which are of the outward man,
as pilgrimages, gifts, building of Churches, Monasteries, and the like?

Fourthly, if we have not more holiness in our Church, then they in theirs,
we desire to have no partakers. They themselves confess that there are unholy
persons enough amongst them, as well as amongst us; for thus they stop our
mouths when we object the detestable powder treason. And for our doctrine
(though they have labored long and caught nothing, except we will give them
leave to say that we hold that we do not, or in that sense which we do not;)
yet they cannot justly charge us (if they say truly what we teach) to teach
either against the Belief, the Lords Prayer, or ten Commandments, which they
themselves make the sums of Faith, Hope, and Charity. We would not for a
thousand worlds teach that we are able to keep the commandments, and to do
more than God requires, or that we could merit (as they do) lest we should be
charged to nourish pride of heart. We would not teach the least toleration of
Priests concubines, lest one should say with that blessed Martyr Holland,
Masons abstr. of Mart. p. 358.
I know some Priests very devout that have six or seven children by four or
five several women. See my Sermon. upon Psalm. 27.4.
These and all other doctrines of the like stamp (which I have touched in
another place) we renounce, and press, both in public and private, 2 Cor. 7.1.
the cleansing of our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and
growing up unto full holiness in the fear of God; together with the approving
of our selves to be lively professors of the truth by a living faith, bringing
forth fruits unto God.

Thirdly, they will tell you of the humility of their religion; 3 Humility.
Oh how they reverence their Priests, Altars, and Images! How do they come to
God by Angels and Saints, and how do their sackcloth and ashes appear to the
world! but watch over these things, and think upon these two things.

Roma Irrec.. 9. page 88. Vno ex meritis Christi sibi per gratiam communicatis,
altero ex meritis proprijs. Bellar. lib. 5. de Iustific. cap. 7.
In which respect (if my memory fails me not) Bellarmine is charged to say,
That a just man has a double right to the same glory: the one from the merits
of Christ, communicated to him through grace; and the other from his own
merits. And though he says indeed, that he who would have any confidence in
his own merits, must not be proud, yet (as it is most likely) he espying pride
in their greatest humility, resolves that it is safest for us to put our
trust in the mercy of God. May we not also see pride even in the head of their
religion, the Pope, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
who does exalt himself above all that is called God, and that is worshipped?
Yea, we do see it, and we hate to think, that he that calls himself, The
servant of servants, and should be an humble Father in the Church of God,
should so Lord it over the whole Church, which is a burden unsupportable, and
over the consciences of men, which is Gods prerogative.

Colossians; there were some who brought in worshipping of Angels, and other
traditions, under that pretense: Coloss. 2.18.
but the Apostle says, Let no man bear rule over you by humbleness of mind.
What though it make a great show in the eyes of men? I confess (says the
Apostle) that these things (speaking of the worshipping of Angels and other
traditions) have a show of wisdom in voluntary religion, and humbleness of
mind, and in not sparing the body, Verse. 23.
not having it in any estimation in regard of the flesh, (as the Papists, who
do boast of fasting, sackcloth, and other penances) yet they must never the
sooner be approved or practiced of us.

Learning.
even for Religion sake. But watch distinctly over these things, that they
gain not upon us to entertain that doctrine with which they may infect and
poison us.

As for their learning, remember these things: First, we have heard them of old
cry out against the baseness of our understandings, Rhem. Testam. in Heb. 5.9.
and boast of the deepenesse of their learning, and profoundnesse of the
mysteries of their Religion, as if the feebleness in the Faith, Rhem. Test. in
Heb. 5.11.
and weakness of understanding in the Primitive Church were not able to
comprehend them, and that therefore (belike) they were reserved in sacred
tradition til the more ripe age of the Church. Thus they boast of the deep
mysteries of their Idoll-Masse, that they may the better thrust it upon the
Church without warrant from God in his word.

Secondly, though we hate and abhor all traditionall learning that is against
Gods word, and can call it none other than our blessed Savior called the
learning of that Prophetess Iezabel, namely, The deepenesse of Satan, Apoc.
2.24.
what show soever it carries to outward view: yet we freely acknowledge their
learning, wherein it appears in truth, and wish that they would use it
better, than to make it an instrument to fight against the truth.

Thirdly, put case that their learning were never so great, yet it should not
move us against the truth. I know it was cast as a choake-peare in the teeth of
those officers, who gave good testimony of Jesus Christ, John 7.48.
Do any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees (who are wise and learned men)
believe in him? But when we do remember the thanksgiving of Jesus Christ unto
his Father, Matt. 11.25, 26.
Because he had hid (the mysteries of the Gospel) from the wise and men of
understanding, and opened them unto babes, even because his good pleasure was
such: and when we do withal consider what Paul says, That not many wise men
after the flesh, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27.
not many mighty, not many noble are called, but God has chosen the foolish
things of the world to confound the wise; we cannot think that learning and
religion cannot be divorced, or that we must presently embrace the doctrine of
them who bring learning in their mouths.

Miracles.
To come in the second place to their Miracles, which they so much pretend; we
know that they are powerful to persuade people; yet, when we do consider that
the miracles of the Primitive Church are sufficient to confirm primitive
doctrine, John 10.41.
and that all that John preached may be true, though he did no miracle; and
also that the Church of Rome were not Antichristian if it should not pretend
miracles, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. Apoc. 13.13.
we cannot presently conclude that he is no dreamer or inticer to false gods,
Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2.
who can give a sign or wonder that comes to pass.

Sufferings.
Lastly, as for their sufferings for religion, we know that many Heretics have
died in a stiff maintenance of their cursed conceits; 1 Cor. 13.
and that the Apostle implies that it is possible for a man to give his body
to be burned and not have charity: In which respects, though sometimes we see
Priests and Jesuits, like Pharisees, compassing sea and land, to win a Romish
proselite, and at the last to come to the Gallows justly provided for them,
when they have fallen out of the way of Religion, into the way of Rebellion,
yet we cannot think their doctrine which they teach against us to be more
true. Oh therefore let neither all of these, nor any one or more of them
prevail with us to admit of that doctrine which we have not received in our
Church: but watch we against all false doctrine whatsoever, what pretense
soever the Teachers may make show of. They that serve not the Lord Jesus, but
their own bellies, Romans 16.18.
may with fair speech and flattering deceive the hearts of the simple, like
the Popish shauelings by Benedictions, Absolutions, Sacrifices and the like. By
how much more careful therefore they are to plead against us and for
themselves, and to liquor their speeches with sweet, though deadly, words; by
so much more diligent let us be to watch over doctrine.

But we must not leave here: for as our watchfulness does refer it self to
faith, so likewise to love, and that (it may be) in this place more
principally. Hearken therefore to this second branch of watchfulness, that we
must watch in respect of manners. For the pressing whereof I shall not vary
from my course in the former; first to show you what it is; and secondly, how
we may be stirred up to practice it.

I conceive watchfulness to be a duty which looks to a double object:
namely, to sin and to grace. What watchfulness in manners is.
Ephesians. 5.15. Hebr. 12.13.
So does watchfulness make us walk cicumspectly, and make straight steps to
prevent the plague of sin. Or as if a Wolf were about our houses, even
natural wisdom would make us careful to kill him; so will spiritual
watchfulness make us watchful to crush sin: yea even as if we should see a
Boy creep in at our windows, we would watch him as narrowly as if he were a
man, because though he could not do us much hurt himself, yet he could let in
men which might deprive us of our goods and lives, so, if we apprehend the
least sin gaining upon us, we must be as diligent in watching against it, as if
it were of a greater size, because it does open the soul and prepare it for
the greatest sins that are.

Secondly, watchfulness about grace is a holy care to nourish the spirit, and
to take all good occasions to bring forth and practice grace and godliness. As
a man that does desire and will to be rich, does cherish in himself all
endeavors to that end, and wait all occasions to be fingring the pence: So
watchfulness does work in a man an attendance upon all holy means to
increase grace, with the increasings of God.

Where we must watch.
If now you shall ask me, where this watch must be set? Let me tell you, that
your listening to this will make you the better to conceive and see what it is.
It must be kept in all the parts, powers, and faculties of soul and body.
First, we must watch in our hearts, Prou. 4.23.
as Solomon says, Keep thine heart with all diligence. A negligent watch is
for the most part set in this place, because we walk not as in Gods sight and
presence: but when we do consider that the heart is the principal commander
in this little world, and that according to the charge of the heart the tongue
speaks, Luke 8.45. Matt. 15.18, 19.
the hand works, and the eye sees; by how much more authority the heart has
in us, by so much more careful we must be to watch over the faithfulness of
it. Secondly, we must watch in our minds, that they do not roaue about
unprofitable and unnecessary things. Though we labor to know other things
which are of use in this world, yet we must watch that this be our chief care
to know Jesus Christ and him crucified: 1 Cor. 3.2. Si Christum been scis,
satis est, si caetera nescis: si Christum nescis, nihil est, si caetera discis.
Malum seminatum. Malum innatum. Job 31.1.
For as ignorance in other things can do us little hurt, if we do soundly
know Christ; so knowledge of others can do us little good, if we are ignorant
of Christ. Thirdly, we must watch in our senses: for they are the cinqueports
of the soul, both to let in that evil which the Devil does sow in the
creatures, and to let out that inward corruption in our hearts to strengthen
our outward enemies. Hence is it, that as Job made a covenant with his eyes,
Psalm. 119.37.
so David prayed that God would turn away his eyes from beholding vanity.
Fourthly, we must watch in our tongues; in which point David has given us a
good president, when he said, I will take heed to my ways, Psalm. 39.1.
that I sin not with my tongue. If he was so watchful over his tongue, Psalm.
57.8.
which notwithstanding he calls his glory: much more must we, seeing we may
well call ours our shame. Remember therefore what David says in another place,
Psalm. 34.13.
Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they do speak no guile,
especially considering what James says, If any man amongst you seems
religious, and refraineth not his tongue, but deceives his heart, this man's
religion is vain. Lastly, Iam. 1.26. 2 Timothy 4.5.
we must watch in all things, whether for our souls or bodies, whether in our
spiritual or corporal employments. In our commerce and trading with men, in our
talking, walking, buying, selling, we must be careful that no injustice,
uncharitableness, or deceit do creep in; and then we watch in bodily things.
In our reading, praying, conference, hearing, and receiving the Sacrament, Luke
8.18.
we must take heed how we hear, how we pray, how we receive, and the like,
that no wandering thoughts, either wicked or good, besides the purpose, that no
hypocrisy, dullness, or security do hinder our comfort in these things; and
then we watch in spiritual things.

Now at the length ye may fully conceive what it is to watch. It is to have,
through Gods working, a holy care and diligence in all the parts, powers, and
actions of our souls and bodies against all sin, and for the doing of all
good as in Gods sight and presence.

Motives to watchfulness.
I answer, by a through considering of these four points.

shall fail them for fear and for looking after those things which shall come
on the world; Luke 21.26.
for the heaven shall be shaken. 1 Pet. 4.18.
Oh where then shall the ungodly and sinner appear! We are too easily lulled
asleep with the facility of our attaining to heavenly happiness. And hence
it comes to pass, that sometimes we dream not of entering into the way of
heaven, before we are not able to walk in any other: sometimes again if we
be in the way, we are careless and secure in the use of the holy means of
salvation. Whereas if with fear and trembling we could see the narrowness of
the way, and the difficulties (both through our own weakness and wickedness,
and others malice) through which we must pass, we would keep a constant and a
careful watch.

Cant. 5.2.
I sleep: and Paul found by experience such a fault in the nature of man, Romans
13. Ephesians. 5.
when he said to the Romans, It is now time that we arise; and to the
Ephesians, Awake thou that sleep: yea and the Devil has four cradles
wherein ordinarily he does rock us.

The Devils four cradles.
The first is the ignorance of our selves, when we do not see the danger and
deepnesse of our corruptions. As the darkest places are fittest for us to
sleep in, both because the eye does there want that enlightened means by which
it does gad and is kept waking, as also because no danger can be discerned: so
is the darkness of ignorance a fit cradle to sleep out the time of our
watchfulness.

The second cradle is gross and full feeding of the things of this life. We
say in the proverb, That when our belly is full the bones would be at rest:
and we find it true by experience, that when our hearts are set where God has
set our heels, to wit, upon the earth and earthly things, we are too too apt
to be lulled asleep, and not at all to mind our eternal good.

The third cradle is labor and toil after those things that perish. Even as
weariness by labor does make us apt to sleep: so when the work of this
world does take away the work of a good conscience, our whole bodies and
souls may be stolen from God; for there is no watch kept.

The fourth cradle is the neglect of the means which should keep us waking,
namely, the word of God, prayer, meditation, and the voice of the spirit in
these, which is as the rushing of the wind to shake the houses of our hearts.
As when a man wearied shuts himself up into such a room as keeps him from
the noise of his children, servants, yea and the wind, it is a sign that he
purposes to sleep and take his rest: so when we carelessly use, and separate
our selves from such means as God has appointed to keep us waking, how can
we do other than snort, and so forget that God has set us in a watchtower,
to keep the quarter of our bodies and souls from sudden surprizall by the
enemy. Seeing therefore that we are so apt to sleep, and that the Devil has
so many means to lull us into it, therefore we must watch.

sufferings a little, 2 P^^. 5.1^.
yet what are we that we should not be gained upon, if our fingers do but ache
in Christ's quarrel, without watchfulness? Sometimes prosperity troubles us,
and without this our sobriety will be endangered: 1 P^t. ^.^
therefore be sober and watch, says Peter. Sometimes the Devil does set upon
us, and it shall cost him a fall if he do not draw us either into presumption
or despair: 1 P^^ ^.8
but watch (says Peter) for he goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he
may devour. Yea and always the flesh will be too crafty for us: (...) ^^ca^^
(...) q^^a ^^^astan^ (...) ^am, non in q^nt^^^ianis in^^rst^^bus.
for though we have weakened it and got the better hand of it in the more great
sins which do wound and waste the conscience; yet it has daily inrodes, by
the advantage whereof it still plotteth and practices new treasons, and will
foil us without bridling it, and walking circumspectly by watchfulness.

watchfulness we shall not be so well acquainted with our own weaknesses. It
would be a strange (though no new) thing for us to be well seen in things
abroad, and ignorant of our own affairs: yet without this such will be our
case; and so we shall not be able to watch unto prayer, which is the third and
last Use which we are to make of this Doctrine.

the end of all things is at hand, let us strive to watch unto prayer. Let us
be so careful, in the sober use of all outward things, and in the keeping of
faithful watch both without and within, that, out of the feeling of our own
miserable estates, without Gods special help, in these last times of the
world, we may be driven unto God in prayer to help us. For the pressing of
this forget not that order which I have observed in the former; but consider
first what it is to pray; and secondly, how we may be stirred up to watch unto
prayer.

prayer does consider evil; What it is to pray.
it does acknowledge it, complain to God against it, and seek the remedy of
it. As prayer does consider good; it does beg the being of it, the maintenance
and increase of it, and thanketh God for it. So that, to pray, is upon the
sight of sin to confess it, lament it, and to sue for pardon: and upon the
knowledge of grace humbly to beg at Gods hand that it may be, and be maintained
and increased, and to thank God for it all.

In which description you may perceive that he that would pray must have these
six things in some degree or other to meet in him.

First, he must know his sins. For as no man will beg that does not know his
poverty either in truth or show; and as no man can beg well for himself who
does not know the particular wants which he groaneth under: so neither will
nor can he pray that knows not his spiritual poverty, yea his particular
sins.

Secondly, he must have a spirit of complaint against sin. For as no man will
seek to be rid of that guest whom he cannot in some respect or other with a
free spirit complain against: so neither will we seek to be rid of sin, if
we cannot thus complain to God against it; Alas Lord, my sin; it is
rebellious against thee, against me: it wounds my conscience, robs me of
thine image, blotteth and defaceth grace, and makes me the object of thy heavy
displeasure.

Thirdly, he must be like that poor man who speaks supplications. He must
never give God rest till he have mercy upon him, and seal unto him by the
spirit of adoption and sanctification, the pardon of all his sins to the
comfort of his soul.

Fourthly, he must know the graces which he wants, and which God usually
bestows upon his children, as mercy, peace, love, humility, meekness,
faith, repentance, and the like; and that not only in word, but in their whole
efficiencie and power for the disabling of all our sins. For he that knows
them not, and their virtue, and that God gives them to that end, cannot ask
them as he should.

Fifthly, he must earnestly beg them and their increase and maintenance from him
from whom comes every good gift. The more beggar denying a man's self, and
laying open his sores, the sooner made rich by God. As it is the professed
fashion of some great man (as they will say) rather to make two Gentlemen than
to maintain one: so it is Gods fashion rather to advance many poor humble and
humbled beggars, than to maintain any one that has any wo^th in his own
sight.

Lastly, he must highly prize the graces of God, that so he may be truly
thankful to him for them. He thanks coldly that does not prize highly. Thus
we have considered what it is to pray: notwithstanding which we must remember
that when we have said what we can, it is better felt in the heart than
expressed by the tongue.

2 Motives to watch unto prayer.
Now for the motives which may stir us up to watch unto prayer, do but
consider these that follow.

watch. We have taken sin. There is no man who watches as he should but
catches that thief stealing away his heart from God and godliness, and
lurking in some part of him or other. Even as therefore when a man has taken a
thief committing burglary and stealing away of his goods, he will carry him
to the Justice, accuse him, and desire Law against him: So when a man has
taken sin in the watch, he must carry it before the great Judge of heaven and
earth, accuse it unto him, and humbly desire his mercy to us, his justice to
it, to bring it to naught.



Psalm. 50.
Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will deliver thee. God knows
whereof we stand in need, and he could help us as well without us, or notice
from us, if he would: but he that has said, Ask and ye shall have, will not
be at our right hand to help us, except we power out our souls in prayer.

But is it every prayer that will do us good in the time of misery? No
surely; but that prayer which God in mercy does answer. As it will do us no
good to put up petitions except they be granted: so neither will it do us good
to pray except God hear and answer. How we may know whither God hears our
prayers.
If now then amid our prayers, we would be satisfied how we may know whether
God does hear and answer our prayers? I answer: that we may conceive something
of Gods good will and pleasure in this kind by three signs.

Daniel; Dan. 9.23.
at the beginning of whose supplication the commandemant (concerning
deliverance from Babel) came forth, and the Angel was sent to show him that he
was greatly beloved. Thus sometimes also we find a sweet assurance of his love
in the forgiveness of our sins, and those graces which we sue for.



Hebr. 5.7.
that was able to s^ue him from death; namely, he heard him in what he feared,
not by deliverance, but by ability to undergo it: So he d^aleth with us, not
always by granting what we a^ke, but by giving something proportionable to it,
to enable us to wait and to stay his leisure.

By these and the like signs may we know when and whether God does hear us.
Let us therefore consider them well, that we do not watch unto idle and
unprofitable prayer, but such as may comfort us in these times, wherein the end
of all things is at hand. Thus have you heard the Apostles doctrine and the
exhortations which he has inferred upon it. A more profitable theme, I am
sure, we could not have had in these last ages. Now are the times wherein the
lusts of the flesh abound. For whereas the soul of man is distinguished into
these three powers and faculties, to wit, the Reasonable, Angry, Rationalis.
Irascibilis. Concupiscibilis.
and Lustful faculties: The first may seem to have borne sway in the first
age of the world, when the invention and finding out of Arts and Sciences
flourished. The second, in the second age of the world, (from Ninus to Julius,
as Melancthon has it:) then were the brave Warriors, as David and other
Worthies. The third is all in all in this last age of the world, wherein back
and belly do steal away all our care and observance. If ever, than much more
now does the soul live in her senses. Now we are so far from sobriety, that
Covetousness and Epicurisme do lord it. Now we are so far from
watchfulness, that Security has taken hold of the best. Now we are so far
from praying, that God is not in all our thoughts. What shall I therefore now
say? I will humbly beseech you not to forget that the end of all things is at
hand; that so we may be stirred up to these things, lest God do suddenly come
in flaming fire, to render vengeance unto us before we be aware.

Soli Deo gloria.
THE NEW MAN'S NEW LIFE. UPON GALATH. 2.20. By ROBERT ABBOT.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Nathaniel Butter. 1623.

TO THE Worshipful his worthy friends, Master WALTER ROBERTS Esquire, and
Mistress MARGARET his most loving yoke fellow; Life, Health, and Salvation.
Worshipful and worthy friends:
THIS Sermon has been some years in both your hands. And I see in the
return of it the good entertainment which it has found, by the well-wearing
of the Copy while it was in your custody. It was the request of one of you,
but it was, in the inioyment, common to you both: and I joy that the word of
God delivered plainly, in evidence of spirit, can find such favorers. Psalm.
45.12.
Though the daughters of ^yrus with the rich of the people do homage before
the face of Gods Church with presents, and Egypt do sometimes succor Christ,
Matthew. 2.
yet ordinarily the poor receive the Gospel. Oh how hard is it for a learned
Pharisie, or for a Ruler of the people to yield to the doctrine of a crucified
Savior. Puto multos potuisse ad sapient^m p^rv^n^re nisi putassent se
pervenisse.
Many might have been wiser, if their breeding had not taught them to think
that they had wit enough. To see therefore Heirs of great Houses, and men and
women of quality and fashion (as we say) to renounce their own wisdom, and
to become fools that they may be wise, is a spectacle worthy the beholding.
How glorious an example does History offer unto us in King Alfred, who is
reported to have divided the night and day into three parts. Eight hours he
spent in writing, reading, and praying: eight hours in sleep, and other
bodily provisions: and eight hours in hearing the complaints of his subjects.
Lay before your eyes, I beseech you, such excellent patterns: and by how much
more rare and difficult it is (in the throng of so many temptations both at
home and abroad) for eminent persons to be eminent in grace and goodness, and
to appear above others as the tops of the mountains in the ebbing of that
great Flood, Genesis 8.5.
by so much show your godly cares to strive to enter into the strait gate, and,
as they who are violent, to take the kingdom of heaven by force. There are two
dangerous rocks in the course of Christianity, which I pray God you may still
avoid: the one is fruitless knowledge; the other is the mixture of fleshly
wisdom with the wisdom of the spirit. Many are like to the Athenians, Nummos
habuerunt ad numerandu^, scientiam ad sciendum.
of whom it is said, that they had their money only to tell, and their
knowledge to know. Oh what a butter-flies life is this, who spends her time in
painting of her wings (as some Naturalists have said) even a these men do in
gilding of their brains. Demosthenes was little the better, though when he
went in the streets, the people would say, There goes learned Demosthenes:
neither shall we be ever the happier, except our heads rule our hearts, hands,
and feet, to love and do according to Gods will. If we know these things, we
shall not be blessed except we do them: for the knowledge that brings
blessing is compared to the waters of the Sea, which as they are plentiful,
Es. 11.9.
so they are brackish, yea and are conveyed unto us by the salt of the earth,
to season us, that our obedience may be better than sacrifice in the sight of
God. As for the mixture of worldly wisdom, do ye not see how it choaketh and
smothereth grace? This is that god (Policy) which we worship, and of which we
make more account than of God and Man. In this we hide our selves from simple
honest men and fools; and of this we have so high a conceit, that we flock
to those Idols that most flourish with it as to an Oracle. It is our Purueyour
to get, our Treasurer to keep, and our Steward to spend: so that if we can
get, keep, or spend by policy, we never hearken to the voice of conscience,
we have no feeling what God commands, nor any care what men say. By this, Kain
spoke peaceably to his brother Abel when he meant to murder him. By this, Genesis
4.8.
Exodus 1.10.
Pharaoh dealt wisely (as he thought) in the suppressing of Gods people. By
this, the Politician in the Psalms crowched and bowed, Psalm. 10.10.
when he meant that heaps of poor innocents should fall by his might. O
cursed policy, whither will thou go? How many Christian duties do thou
suppress in others, and hinder in thy owner? Go on (my dear and worthy
friends) to govern your lives by godly wisdom, and to keep out this monster.
I contemn not the gifts of any man; but desire to see God in the meanest of
his creatures: yet (so far as my muddie brain can pierce) the French Charrons
Books of Wisdom, under smooth precepts of wisdom, give too great way to
principles of Atheism; and so magnifieth this Idol, that God loses his
honor, and nature is so lifted up, that it cannot submit it self unto the
cross of Christ. I commend therefore no precepts of wisdom but Gods, and do
humbly desire that Jesus Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. He alone who
is the wisdom of the Father, can make you truly wise: and to follow his
imitable patterns and precepts shall be your wisdom and glory. Sir Walt.
Rawl. hist. l. 1. cap. 9.. 4. out of Charrons chap. of Nobil.
Those that magnify this Humane wisdom, have considered three sorts of
honors; Honor n^turall, which comes by descent, and may fall upon a true
villain: Honor in parchment, which is bought with silver or favor, and
depends upon the favor of Princes: and Honor personal, which depends upon
virtue and well-deseruing: and these men have had so much wisdom given of God,
as to account virtue the form of honor, and that which gives life and being
to it. To the end therefore that ye may be a little furthered by me to this
true Honor, I do offer this Sermon to you again; entreating your perusal
and observation. It was once heard by you with delight; ye may many times
read it with the same affection, if ye find it worthy. The like power ye
cannot expect, God will have this honor in his ordinance, that the lively
voice shall leave a more secret working in the soul than all written scrowles.
This ye shall find, that I have not striued above my ordinary strain,
wherein I aim to speak to the hid man of the heart: for whom I have prepared
such diet, as I may commend, if good meat be not marred in dressing. What ever
they be, the defects are mine; what ever it be, the good is Gods, and for your,
with other of Gods peoples, goods. Let God have your praise, to whom it is due:
let me have your prayers, who need and crave them, that I may still continue

Your faithful Shepherd, wishing and striving for your eternal good, ROBERT
ABBOT.

THE NEW MAN'S New Life.
GALAT. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
faith of the Son of God.


WE read that the tomb wherewith the carcass of proud Sennacherib was
covered had this inscription; Jntuens me aliquis discat ess^ piu^.
Let him that looks upon me learn to be godly. Much more may a spiritual eye
see this engraven upon this golden saying of the Apostle; Let no man dare look
upon me except he resolve to be godly. For the Apostle presents us himself,
and all the children of God in his person, under such an one as is dead unto
the world, and sin, and lives not the life of nature, but of grace and
godliness. Neither is it needless for us to behold such draughts in these
days: we being not only cast asleep through our security, but dead in
sins and tresp^sses, and buried under the clots of this world to the woeful
misery of our souls, and the dishonor of our Maker. How needful therefore
is it for us to use all means for a joyful resurrection: and amongst the
rest, deeply to consider this speaking pattern of Paul in these words, which,
in the natural language of them, do make some such outcry as this, Lift up
your heads ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, that the King
of glory may come in and dwell in your hearts by faith.

To which that we may have the more hearing ears, and from which, that, by the
blessing of God, we may reap the more comfort, let us, with humble hearts,
carry along with us the context, sense, and several observations settled by
application upon our souls.

Context.
As for the context and coherence with the words foregoing, conceive it thus.
The Apostle (being to dispute against the Galatians, Galat. 1.6.
who had made a defection from the doctrine of the Gospel to justification by
works) does plainly set down this proposition, That we are not justified by
the works of the Law, Galat. 2.16.
but by the faith of Jesus Christ. Which being proved by a reason drawn from
the feeling, judgment, and conscience of the best Jews, in these words [we
know;] as also (as it is thought) by this testimony, Psalm. 143.2.
that by the works of the Law no flesh shall be justified in Gods sight: he
(foreseeing that this doctrine of free justification without our works might
by false Apostles be charged with carnal liberty) does propound an objection
to that purpose; Is Christ the minister of sin? and does with a secret
detestation answer it, God forbid: As if he should say, Far be it from the
doctrine of the Gospel to give liberty unto sin: for as I will at no hand
build again justification by works, which I have destroyed, because I can
find no comfort in the Law, I being dead unto it, and it driving me to
Christ: so I do know that Christ is not only my price but my purger: that
Christ does not only say, Thy sins are forgiven thee, but sin no more lest
a worse thing come unto thee. For I account my self crucified with Christ,
nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I
now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God.

Thus I have brought you unto the Text. Sense.
In the consideration whereof, I would next entreat you to stay a while upon
the meaning of the words, lest the hard and difficult phrases thereof, like
Asahels body, 2 Samuel 2.23.
do hinder the passing of the people by.

The hard phrases are five. [I am crucified with Christ:] for how can this be
true, when he was not converted to Christianity before Christ's ascension was
past? For the opening of this, you must know that th^re is a double crucifying
spoken of in the Scriptures. The first is Actual, and so according to a double
custom it may signify two things: for according to the custom of the Jews
it is to be stoned to death, Alsted. in Theol. Catech.
and a^terwards with cords to be bound unto a cross, and to be set up (as upon
a gibbet) for a terrifying example to the like offenders: (but thus neither
Paul nor Christ was crucified, Ioh. 18.31.
for it was nor lawful for the Jews at that time to put any man to death.)
But according to the custom of the Gentiles it is to be racked and fastened to
a cross, with nails driven through the hands and feet of a living man, and so
to continue unto death. Thus Christ was crucified, but not Paul, or we. The
second is a virtuall crucifying; and thus the children of God are said to be
crucified with Christ, when they, by virtue of that communion and fellowship
which they have with him in his sufferings and death, (as the members of him
their head) do behave themselves as those that are dead to their corruptions,
and find no savor in the courses of sin and vanities of this world, but
spend all their liuelihood in denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
living unto God. And of this crucifying does the Apostle speak in this place.

[I live, I live not:] How can both these be true? I answer, they may both be
true in diverse respects; I live the life of grace and godliness, I live not
the life of sin and corrupted nature. As if he should say; It is true
indeed, I have the same natural organs or instruments, the same head, tongue,
hands, and feet: but as there is great difference between a well-tuned
Cymball, and a loud Cymball; so is there between all my parts, when they do
receive actiuitie from God and from nature. As the gracious life is a death, in
respect of the glorious life, (which is the cause that that life which we
shall have in glory is for excellency sake called Life) so the natural life
is no better than a death in respect of the life of grace.

[Christ lives in me:] that is, Christ is my life. If you ask me, how that
can be? I answer, that it is by virtue of that communion and fellowship which
we have with him. For as we have a natural fellowship with him, by his
assuming and sanctifying our natures, and becoming flesh of our flesh, and
bone of our bone: and as we have a sacramental fellowship with him, when in
the Sacrament Christ is exhibited and given to the faithful receiver, as he is
able to receive it for the nourishment of his soul: (which communion does in
this differ from a bare spiritual communion, Signis adhibitis, vel non.
that all sacramental communion is spiritual, but all spiritual is not
sacramental, because this is in the lawful use of Gods signs to this
purpose.) So we have a spiritual fellowship with Chirst, when the spirit of
God does apply Christ unto us by faith, and does so bring home and concorporate
him unto us, that from the fountain of his holiness, in whom all fullness
dwells, we find our selves inclined and quickened to all holy obedience, and
can feelingly say, That in that we forsake sin, it is from the power of
Christ, and in that we purpose and endeavor good, it is by the same power
also. And of this spiritual communion does the Apostle speak in this place.

[I live in the flesh.] He does not say that he lived of the flesh, or after
the flesh, as if he danced after natures pipe, but [In the flesh.] As all are
not Israel, that are in Israel; so all are not of the flesh, or after the
flesh, that are in the flesh: What therefore is it to live in the flesh? It is
to live in the body: for as flesh is taken for corrupted man, when the Apostle
says, That flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven: and for the
corruption of man, as when the holy Ghost says, The flesh lusts against the
spirit: so is flesh taken for the body of man, by an elegancy of speech, when a
member is taken for all the parts integrall, or for the whole. And thus it is
taken in this place; I live in the body.

[I live by the faith of the Son of God:] What does he mean by this? I live
by faith which does its right office to spy out, to run unto, and to receive
the Son of God. For whereas upon the former speech, that Jesus lived in him,
it might be said; Must not the heavens contain him? Yes, says the Apostle,
for he lives in me by faith, not by sight. But you will say, why is it called,
the faith of the Son of God? Not because we should conceive that faith which
Jesus Christ had in himself, but that faith in us, whereby he is had and
possessed of us: and is so called for three reasons.

First, because the Son of God has purchased it for us. The Father would not
have willed it us, the Holy Ghost would not have wrought it in us, if Christ
had not bought it for us.

Secondly, because only the Son of God in Christ does make our faith to be
lawful and laudable. As Christ is man he is a creature, and we must not fly
to any creature for life and salvation, and therefore not believe in him. This
then is it which makes our faith in him to be warrantable, that he is the
only Son of God.

Thirdly, because it is not belief in any other person in the divine nature,
that does conueigh life unto us. As veins, arteries, sinews, muscles, and the
like, do not conueigh life, sense, and motion into the parts of a man's body,
but as they do receive them from their own proper head and heart from whence
they are shot: so faith does not conueigh spiritual life, but as it does
receive it from our spiritual head Christ Jesus. Thus you may see our faith,
Relative Obiective. Instrumentalier.
called the faith of Christ, in respect of that relation which is betwixt him
and it, he being the saving object of it, and that being the instrument to
conueigh life from him to every believer.

Thus we have the several phrases of the Text, which in their total sum make
up the Apostles meaning to be thus much. Sum of the Text.
Do not think that, by the doctrine of Iust^fication by faith alone in
Christ, I do abolish the doctrine of Sanctification by the same Christ: for by
virtue of my union with Christ by faith, I do find that from the fountain of
his holiness (out of whose fullness I do receive grace for grace) my sinful
lusts are crucified, and I perceive my self so quickened in the inner man, and
translated from one glory to another into the Image of God, that I dare say, It
is not I that now live, but my Savior, who lives in me by faith, whereby he
purifieth my heart, to make me a peculiar Christian to himself, chosen unto
good works.

We having now stayed long enough upon the sense, may it please you from the
several deductions to desire further benefit. And to this end in these words
let us consider two things:

Paul his method; which is this: He was first killed, and then he was made
alive.

Paul his matter; in which he does in his own person set down a double estate
of ours.











To come first to Paul's method, we are to observe, that as Paul says, He is
crucified before he lives: So We must die before we can be made alive.

I might here distinguish betwixt death natural, death civil (as it is termed
in Law,) death spiritual, and death eternal, that so I might signify what
death I mean, but that it is plain enough without that labor. Only remember
that it is one thing to die for sin, as malefactors who are put to death;
another thing to die in sin, as finally impenitent sinners; and another thing
to die unto sin, as the godly: In which sense we must die before we can be
made alive. As it is with the body, we must all die, or all be changed, 1 Cor.
15.
before we must live for ever (which the holy Ghost makes plain, by the
similitude of Wheat or some other grain:) so is it with the soul. Hence is it
that God does both exhort unto this death, Coloss. 3.5.
when he says, Mortify your earthly members; and also promises life upon
that death, when he says, Romans 8.13.
If ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, ye shall live. Neither
may we wonder at this truth, whether we consider the goodness of grace, or the
malice of sin.

Resurrection, Apoc. 20.6. John 5.25.
as John says, Blessed are those that have part in the first Resurrection: And
Christ, The dead shall hear the voice of God, and shall arise: Both which
places do speak of a gracious arising from sin. As therefore the holy Ghost
says, All must first die, and then comes the resurrection to judgment: So all
must first die to sin, or they shall never arise to live godlily. Sometimes
again it is called a Quickening; Psalm. 119.25.
as when David says, Quicken me according to thy Word. As therefore the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.
O fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die: So neither are
our souls quickened except they thus die.

AZahel pursued Abner like a swift Roe; so does sin us even unto the grave,
and will never give us rest till it be quite vanquished in the perfect
mortification of the body against the day of the Resurrection. As therefore
we do desire that grace may live; so we must strive that this deadly enemy
of grace may die.

John 11.
As when Lazarus who stunke in his grave, was raised from death to life, there
was a through change in him (a change in his parts essential, and a change in
his parts integrall, in which respect a man might well have said, here is not
the same man:) even so is it with every one of us, when God makes us gracious:
which change that we do not conceive to be substantial, we must mark (as we
are often taught) that as there are three things to be considered in an
instrument, the body, the strings, and the harmony wrought by the skill of
the player: So in man there is the body and soul, the faculties, and the
work of them. Now, touching this change, the body, soul, and faculties
remaining entire, the change is made in the last; when discord through the whole
man is changed into concord, and anomie in all the powers of man into
conformity to Gods will. For this cause sanctification may be compared unto
our sense of touching: If of blind we are made seeing, there is a change but
in the eye: if of deaf we are made hearing, there is a change but in the
ear: if our smelling be restored, there is a change but in the nose: if our
tasting be brought to us again, there is a change but in the pallat: but if
our feeling be lost and restored, there is a change in the whole body. So is
it with this spiritual Resurrection and quickening, which works a change in
the powers of the whole body and soul in putting them over to Gods use. There
must be a new understanding quickened to know Gods will, a new heart quickened to
incline unto it and embrace it, new bodily instruments quickened to be weapons
of righteousness unto holiness, yea and the whole man, 2 Cor. 5.17.
or a new man, or a new creation, both in the whole soul, and body, and
spirit, to be kept blameless until the coming of our Lord Jesus. 1 Thessalonians.
5.23.
Thus in the first place let us take notice of this point, that so we, entering
into our selves and viewing the whole man, may discern by a change or no
change, whether we are sanctified and quickened yea or no.

This my son was dead, and is alive: So I was dead, yea I am dead unto sin,
and am alive. We have no more assurance that we are alive, than we have
certainty that we are dead. If England and Ireland lay claim to one piece of
ground, the trial must be this: Put a snake into it; if it lives, it belongs
to England; if it dies, it is Irish ground. Right so, if there be a
controversy between God and the Devil, whose possession man shall be, the
trial shall be thus: Put the Serpent sin into him; if it live, he is the
Devils; if it pine away and die, he is part of Gods heritage. Will you inquire
then how we shall know whether sin die in us yea or no? I answer, as a man may
know whether another be dead unto nature, by the antecedent of death, to wit,
sickness; by the concomitants of death, namely, the decay of senses and pangs
of death; and by the consequents, which are, coldness and putrefaction: So
answerably we may know whether we are dead unto sin these three ways.

First, by this antecedent which goes before it, namely, See these three more
largely in my Sermon on 2 Cor. 5.17.
if we be sick of sin. If as a man surcharged with gross humors, is never
at ease till he have abated them by vomit or purge; so we oppressed with our
sins can have no rest in our souls, till we have discovered sin to our
selves by examination, opened it to God by confession, executed revenge upon it
by godly sorrow, and purged it by faith in Christ: then sin is in a good
degree to death.

Secondly, by these two concomitants which go with it. First, the sense of
sin must decay: If therefore our eyes do feebly behold vanity, and not with
that vigor and content as before; if our ears cannot endure to hear of it;
if we fly from the garment spotted of the flesh, as from a Serpent; if we
find no relish and savor in it, but with an honest heart can say to it, as
to an unprofitable thing, Get thee hence; then are we in a second degree in
the death of sin. But if secondly we are come to the pangs of this death,
and do find that our sins (through our lothnesse to forsake them) have
striued and struggled as for life, have disturbed the peace of our souls, have
sadded the flesh, as those that mourn for the death of their friends, have
comforted the spirit, as those that rejoice at the death of enemies; and so
have made the pains of the new birth the greater; then are we a degree further
in the death unto sin.

Thirdly, we shall know it by these consequents which follow upon it, to wit,
coldness and putrefaction. If therefore the heat of sin be over, Esaias ^
and the spirit of burning do by degrees take possession of the place to
consume it: and if it rot and stink in our account, and make us a burden to
our selves, so long as it retains liuelihood in any corner of our bodies or
souls: then this is a fourth degree in the death of sin; and that which may
assure us of a good measure of attainment to the crucifying of sin, and
living unto grace and godliness. In the fear of God, let us now return into
our own hearts and examine our selves, when we are still, by these signs, to
see what proceedings we have made in passing from death to life; that so if we
find our selves to have part in the first Resurrection, we may be assured of
our portion in glory to come.

Having thus brought home Paul his method unto our consciences, and knowing
that these two things are special means under God to work it upon us; to
wit, the knowledge of our danger, and the knowledge of our deliverance:
therefore let us go on to consider Paul his matter in this Text. In which,
concerning our misery implied, we are to observe, That without faith we are
but dead men.

If faith in Jesus Christ be our life, then without it we must needs be dead.
That which God said to Abimelech, when he had taken away Sarah, Genesis 20.
Abraham's wife, Thou art but a dead man; may be said of all men before their
conversion to God. Hence is it that Paul tells the Ephesians, That till
Christ came they were dead in sins and trespasses: Ephesians. 2.1.5.
And the Colossians, Col 2 13.
That till God quickened them with Christ, they were dead in sins, and in the
uncircumcision of the flesh. In this respect those Hypocrites, who never cast
their natural hackle, Jude verse. 12.
are said, to be twice dead and plucked up by the roots: yea, and for this
cause Christ accounts such no better than dead, John 8.24.
both when he says, Except ye believe that I am he, ye shall die in your
sins: As also when he charge Sardi to be dead; Apoc. 3.1.
and bids that cold disciple to follow him, Matthew. 8.22.
and let the dead bury the dead; that is, let those who for want of faith are
spiritually dead in sin, attend upon the funerals of those who are corporally
dead for sin.

Neither is this obscurely signified by the Ancients, when they do compare a
sinner, who goes on in his natural course, to Lazarus, who had been dead
four days. The first, by the lust of sin: the second, by consent to sin:
the third, by the practice of sin: and the fourth, by custom in sin,
Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati.
when use in sinning does take away the sense of sin, as in a stark dead man.

We will not wonder that without faith we should be in no better case, if we
shall consider the fit resemblances between faithless and dead men; which may
be set down as so many reasons in forcing this truth.

Nebuchadnezzar heat the furnace seven times hotter; but in the quarrels of God
they are key-cold (as we say) and are frozen upon the dregs of their own
secure hearts as upon the Icie Sea.

Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light, but they hear not the voice of this charmer, charm he never so wisely.

savor of nothing but the earth (according to that of the Prophet, O earth,
earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord) and are carried downward like moles
and muck-wormes, and would be beholding to God if they might always live here
in ease, singing Peter's song upon the Mount, Master, it is good for us to be
here.

Iaacobs case, some Joseph close them:) so faithless men will have an eye to
heaven, and looks to that purpose (as Balaam when he desired to die the death
of the righteous) though they are like the writings of living men upon dead
men's tombs, or a scrole of Scripture going out of the mouth of a man painted
in a Church window, or on a wall.

Augustine, when he beheld Caesar's corpse in his sepulcher at Rome, say to his
mother Monica; Behold Caesar fallen to rottenness, his belly burst with
swarms of worms, in the hollow of his head where his christ all eyes stood,
two hungry toads are feeding, his teeth appear for want of lips to cover them:
and then he cries out, Where is thy magnificence, O Caesar? so the faithless
are corrupt like an apple rotten at the coare, like an old doting tree
perished at the heart, Psalm. 14.
according to that of the Psalmist, Corrupt are they, and are become
abominable in their wickedness, there is none that does good, no not one.



First, what is the reason that so many hear the word, and so few are
benefited? Truly herein lies the cause, because men want faith, and so are
dead. Call, and hollow, and whoope in the ear of a dead man, pinch and pull
him, yet he arises never the sooner; and we do not wonder, because he is
dead: so neither can we wonder that those who are dead in sins and
trespasses, do not hear the voice of God and live; because they are dead.

Jesus Christ the object to be received and rested in, and sanctified our
souls by giving us the spirit of faith, which takes away our natural death,
then we are co-workers with God (according to that old and true saying, The
will being first wrought upon, Voluntas acta agit.
does together work with the first mouer:) but take a man in his first
ability and possibility to help himself, and the body is not less able to
help it self without the soul, than the soul is to help it self without
the living seeds of faith foregoing and fore-planted in the new creation of our
hearts.

2 Cor. 5.1.
If the bodies of Gods children are an earthly house, or a house of mud walls
as well as others, then the bodies of natural men cannot but be loathsome
graves. And what should dead men do with other dwellings? or why should we
think other of dead men's habitations? For do but mark: First, the soul does
annoy the good with many loathsome smells of sin and damps of iniquity, as
out of a grave. As God does (as it were) smell a savor of rest in the
exercises of faith in Jesus Christ, and a sweet perfume in the faithful
prayers of his children; so do the souls of the godly also: and as sins
make many stinks in the nosthrils of God; so likewise in the nosthrils of good
men. Again, the fai^hlesse soul, as if it were pent up in a grave, has no
freedom nor elbow-roome in the body to exercise it self either in natural
or spiritual things In natural things it cannot give a power of growing,
sense, or reason at its pleasure: for how many dwarfish, dumb, deaf, and
foolish men and women are there in the world? how is it with all of us, who can
neither add one cubit to our stature, nor m^ke one hair either black or
white? In spiritu^ll things we are dead, as I have said. Lastly, as a grave
does make that body that is put into it to rot, and turns it for the most
part into its own common nature: so the body (if God do not work by the
miracle of faith, and sustain us by virtue of the covenant) will more corrupt,
and make the blind soul more earthly, sensual, and deuillish. For as he
that cannot work but by a bad instrument, will be brought so out of square,
that custom will breed another nature never to bring forth better fruits: so
the soul being tied unto the body as to its proper instrument (it not being
elevated by the spirit of faith) through custom and long continuance is
brought to rot in bodily exercises and earthly things. Seeing therefore that
our bodies are graves for our natural dead souls, oh that all of us might
take notice of it! All I say, both good and bad: that the good might be weary
of the world, seeing their whole life is but a living in Golgotha among dead
men's graves and skuls: that the bad might content themselves with a mean
grave, except they had more hope of a comfortable resurrection. That dead man
were but possessed with Devils, who having no hope of a joyful resurrection,
should spend all his time in dressing up and adorning his grave: so are all
dead men in sin, who, having no hope of the favor of God, and of Christ's
dwelling in their hearts by faith, do yet spend all their time in provision
for the grave of their body, the very throat whereof is an open sepulcher,
venting the stink of their rotten hearts.

Christ over dead Lazarus, and as thou would mourn over thy dead friend.
Pray to the living God that he would quicken them. And as in the time of
Christ's being upon the earth, they either brought their dead corpse to Christ,
or besought him to come to them: so let us deal with our faithless friends;
that is, let us seek by all means to bring them to Christ in the word and
prayer, to see if yet Christ will meet them in his own ordinances, to raise
them out of their stinking graves of sin. Oh that we would never forget to
deal thus with those to whom we stand nearest in relation, that so at the
length custom, if not conscience, may prevail with us to do it unto others;
especially considering (as I said before) that it is full of discontent and
misery to spend our days among dead men's tombs.

Come we now from this miserable estate of ours by nature, to our estate by
grace. Touching which, the first point which the Text offers to be considered
is this; That we have communion and fellowship in the suffering and death of
Christ.

This is plain from the words of the Apostle [I am crucified with Christ;]
which cannot be but by virtue of our communion with him. It is true, that if
we consider Christ as an individual person, and us as particular branches of
another stock, we have no fellowship with him: For whereas fellowship betwixt
disioyned persons may arise, either Operando.
as in Corporations, brethren of the same Trade; or Cooperando.
as when two men are conversant in one and the selfsame business;
Cons^ntiendo.
or else David had fellowship in the murder of Vriah: whereas (I say) we may
be thought to have fellowship with Christ one of these three ways; yet we
neither being actually crucified, nor crucified with Christ, nor consenting to
his crucifying for us, we cannot be said to have fellowship with him.
Nevertheless if we do consider Christ as the head of his Church, and us as the
members of his body: if we do consider him as set apart and sealed of God
the Father to be a surety for us, and us the parties to whom he is given, and
for whom bound, our communion and fellowship stands firm with him.

Now that we may the better conceive it, we must know that we have fellowship
with Christ in three things.

First, in his Natures: for the Son of God is made partaker of the humane
nature, that he might make us partakers of the divine nature. He became the
son of man, that we might become the sons of God. 2 Pet. ^^
We wanted sonship, and God could not give us that which he had not: therefore
the Son of God alone took the nature of the sons of men, that he might
restore us to the dignity of the sons of God.

Secondly, we have fellowship with Christ in his goods: for (we having nothing
else that may be truly said to be ours) he takes our cursed rags of sin
upon him, and has communicated us the riches of his glory. Thus says the
Apostle, God has made Christ sin for us, to wit, 2 Cor. 5.21.
by imputation; and is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30.
sanctification, and redemption.

Thirdly, we have fellowship with him in his estates. His honorable estate is
ours: for we are risen with Christ, Col. 3.1. Ephesians. 2.6.
and we sit with him in heavenly places. His debased estate also is ours, as
his birth, suffering under Pontius Pilate, his crucifying, his death, his
descension into hell: For hence is it that we are said to be buried with
Christ, Romans 6.4, 5, 6.
and to be grafted with him into the similitude of his death, yea and to have
the old man crucified with him, as in this Text.

If now you will inquire, Why we are said to have fellowship in his death? I
answer: For three causes especially.

Romans 6.
We are baptized into the death of Christ: We are buried with Christ in
Baptism. Baptism does seal unto us and give us interest in that communion
which we have in his death. For as the dipping in the primitive Church; so the
sprinkling of the water now does signify and seal our death and burial with
Christ.

sponsor or surety. Heb. 7.22.
For as the debt which a surety pays, he pays not only for himself
(because he has willingly made himself a debtor) but for the party also for
whom he is bound: so Christ pays for us.

may plead as David, Psalm. 119.
I am thine, save me, for I do put my trust in thee: Esa. 9.6.
so God does make a deed of gift of whole Christ to conueigh him unto us. As
therefore we account to have right to that which is given us, as freely and as
fully as if we had purchased it, or had it by inheritance: even so we
ascertaine and assure our selves of Christ crucified with all his benefits.

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? When his soul was heavy unto
death, and he, being roasted with the fire of Gods wrath, did in a cold season
sweat drops of blood: if we shall account his inv^terable loss to be ours, to
wit, that our sins made God to withdraw his loving countenance from us, good
men to fly from us, our friends to deny us, our enemies to insult over us, the
earth to quake, the sun to hide her light, and the rocks to rent in sunder,
who will not now gnash his teeth at sin, and cry over it with a holy
indignation, as the Edomites over Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it, even
to the ground?

1 Pet. 4.1.
is an excellent means of mortification. For he that has suffered in the
flesh has ceased from sin: and if we are dead to sin, Romans 6.2.
how shall we yet live therein? We know that when a felon is executed, he is
not only freed from the imputation of sin, because he has satisfied the
law, but from the practice of sin also. The same mind must be in us, that
we may mortify the deeds of the flesh by such spiritual reasons as these
are: What? am I not crucified? am I not dead? do I yet work the works of
darkness, as if I lived in sin? what is it that should make me rake together
the dead bones of sin to put new life into them? I know that it is death to
hear of such a dying. Ah it is too true that we love our sins too well to
let them be crucified with Christ. But shall I tell you what we may do to
help all? I remember that it was a law in Israel, D^ut. 21.11, 12.
that if a beautiful woman should be taken captive in war, and any man
should desire her as his wife, he must shave her head, pare her nails, put
off the garment wherein he loved her (that is, take away all her ornaments)
and if he then liked her, let him take her into his house. Oh that we could be
wise to deal thus with sin! It has many ornaments suitable to our corrupt
natures, which do beguile the seduced and deceived eyes of our souls. Some
sins are clad with profit, some with pleasure, some with honor, and other
some with favor; but shave off this alluring hair, fling away these tempting
garments, and then ye shall see that it defaceth Gods image, dishonors God,
grieueth and quenches the spirit, wounds the conscience, and presses to
hell: Now tell me whether ye like sin yea or no? Oh that this might be a
forcible inducement unto us to let our crucifying with Christ have its divine
force.

It may be you will inquire for some plain direction for the crucifying of
sin. If you do, I shall soon say (by Gods blessi^g) much in a little. See
these things more largely in my Sermon on 2 Cor. 5.17.
Mark the degrees of Christ's crucifying for us, and we must imitate it in our
crucifying of sin for Christ. Christ was apprehended, put in hold, indicted,
condemned, and executed: so must we deal with sin. We must apprehend it by
a through examination, put it in hold by godly sorrow, indite it by a hearty
confession, condemn it by a severe judging of our selves, and execute it by
faith and a good conscience. The longer we delay, the stronger sin is, and
the harder to kill. Hear therefore that your souls may live Let not the
devil seduce you with vain hopes of long life, or time enough to repent in.
Fishes will not be caught with a bloody net: why will ye? Remember when one
commended the Popes Legate at the Council of Basil, Tamen Romanus est.
Sigismond the Emperor answered, Yet he is a Roman: So let the flesh commend
Satan in all his sugared allurements never so much, yet let the spirit answer,
Yet he is a devil. Let us never forget (and God give us understanding in all
things) that he is the roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour.

Having thus led you through the fellowship of Christ in his death; we are
come to that pipe, which by the force of this our communion does conueigh life
through this death, and that is Faith. Touching which we ar^ to observe from
hence; That by virtue of this our communion with Christ we live by Faith.

It is not our faith absolutely considered, that is our life, but as it does
unite and knit us unto Jesus Christ. Notwithstanding because without faith we
cannot be knit unto him who is our life, therefore we are said to live by
faith.

Which to conceive, you must know that there is a threefold life of man: First,
that which does consist of being, life, motion, and sense; and thus we are
said to live a sensitive life. Secondly, that which does consist of being,
life, motion, sense, and reason; and thus we live a reasonable life. Thirdly,
that which does consist of being, life, motion, sense, reason, and religion;
and so faith gives us our gracious liuelihood. For therefore is the Church
called, The land of the living, because it is the company of believers: Psalm.
142.5.
and that word which is called the word of faith, is therefore called the word
of life. Hence also Christ says, John 6.47.
that he that believes has life: and Peter calls Christians, 1 Pet. 2.5.
Living stones, because by faith they grow up into a holy building: yea and
they are said, to be begotten to a living hope, 1 Pet. 1.3.
or a lively hope, that is, a hope proceeding from faith our life, and
receiving liuelihood from thence to issue out into the acts of life.

Neither need it seem strange unto us, that faith in Christ should be our
life, if we do consider these three grounds.

John 14.6.
For God has set him forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood:
Romans 3.25.
and we are righteous before God by the faith of Jesus Christ. If therefore we
call that our living, which is the isntrumental cause of our natural living
good; much more faith which is the instrument of our spiritual good.

Hebr. 4.2.
that so they may take it home and apply it as a good plaster to their
infected souls. As to the Sacraments; they do not seal a blanke, Romans 4.11.
but are signs and seals of the righteousness of faith: and when we come
unto them we draw near unto God, which must be done with a true heart in
assurance of faith: Hebr. 10.22.
yea we must be at peace with God (for God does not use to bestow such sauoury
blessings upon his enemies) but no peace without justification by faith. Romans
5.5.
Iam. 1.6.
we must ask in faith, nothing wavering. We therefore having right unto these
things only by faith, it is not unworthily said to be our life. Thirdly, faith
gives unto us a right and title, yea and a comfortable use of all the things
of this life. In faith (that is, having my person in Christ, and my warrant and
allowance from God in his word) I eat my meat, put on my clothes, till my
ground, take profit of my cattle, and whatsoever is not of faith is sin: that
is, whatsoever is done with a trembling, Romans 14.23.
wandering, and gaine-saying conscience, Dubitante, Errante, Repugnante
cons^ient^a.
when we have not both warrant in our hearts that our persons are reconciled
unto God in Jesus Christ, and that our actio^ is agreeable or not repugnant
unto Gods will, is sinful. Seeing therefore that our faith only gives us a
comfortable right both to the principal and isntrumental causes of our
spiritual and natural living good, we may rightly conclude, that the just man
does live by his faith. Hab.
From which doctrine we may learn two profitable lessons: in the knowledge;
for there is something even in the very inlightning of the understanding, which
is of the nature of faith. Therefore the Prophet says, Es. 53.11.
that the knowledge of thy righteous servant (that is, CHRIST) shall justify
many; which yet cannot be wrought without faith. Secondly, in the judgment,
when we being inwardly convinced, do clearly resolve that Christ is the way
to be happy, and therefore the only good tidings which our hearts can rest
upon. This made the Apostle say, Phil. 3.8, 9.
Doubtless I think (that is, this is my resolute judgment) that all things
are loss and dung in respect of Christ. Thirdly, in our memories; when the
greatest care in us is, (among other things) to lay up the words of our blessed
Savior, Luke Psalm. 119.
and to hide his promises in our hearts. Again, faith must show it self in
the heart, when the heart believes, Romans 10.9. Act. 8.39.
yea when we believe with all our hearts: and this it does in three things
also. First, in the appetite and desires; when a man is so far exercised in
the spiritual seeking of Christ, that he desires rather to part with all the
world if he had it, than not to have some comfortable assurance of Gods love in
Jesus Christ. And whosoever shall thus sell all to buy the pearl, has true
faith: for God hears the desires of the poor; Psalm. 10.17.
yet he hears not to our comfort our prayers, except they be faithful.
Matthew. 5.6.
And they are blessed that hunger and thirst after righteousness; yet none are
blessed with Abraham, but they who are of the faith of Abraham. Secondly, in
the affections; when the soul is confident, and rests upon the promises of
God in Christ, as the only ground of happiness. For when there are no
arguments drawn from a man's sense and feeling, which may persuade him of Gods
love in Christ, yet he does confidently rely upon it, then is he said to live
by faith not by sight, as Ioh who professed, that though God killed him, yet
would he trust in him. Job.
Thus also does faith quicken other affections, (as joy, fear, love, and the
like) directing them to their right objects, and bringing them by degrees to
this measure, that they are spent upon Christ without measure. Thirdly, our
faith does show it self in our wills; when the soul having many times a
blessed experience of Gods love is persuaded of it. Thus Paul's faith showed it
self, when he said, I am persuaded that neither life nor death (and so forth)
shall separate us (that is, Romans 8.38, 39.
me and other Christians) from Gods love which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Which persuasion (as I take it) does more naturally belong unto the will, it
being more proper to the understanding to be convicted, and to the will to be
persuaded. So that though the soul be many times tossed with temptations,
fears and terrors, yet more or less it is much refreshed with this
persuasion.

Thus we see how faith quickneth the whole soul of the godly man. In which
respect if we be quickened from the death of our understandings, and not of our
desires; if we perceive the inliuing of our desires, and not of our wills and
affections, we have just cause to suspect that we have no faith. For faith is
in no part of the soul in any measure, where it is not in all parts of the
soul in some measure. For in this does the life of the soul differ from the
life of the body: that the life of the body does begin in the heart, it being
that which first lives, and does end there, it being that which last dies; but
the life of the soul which can never perish (though it may seem not to work
for some time, like a member deaded with a blow) as it is in our first
regeneration (like light in the air) shed abroad through the whole soul; so it
is always to be found in all the powers of the soul, though in some man it be
more predominant in the understanding, in some in the desires, and in some
others in the will and affections. Now therefore let us from henceforth enter
into our own souls, to try whether we have faith yea or no. If we have, it
is our life, and if it be our life, it quickneth both our understandings to
know Christ, our judgments to approve him as our only Savior and Redeemer,
our memories to treasure up the promises, our desires to have an unquenchable
thirst after him, our affections to be spent upon him, our wills in some measure
to be persuaded of his love to us, and our whole souls to droope and mourn in
our Christian joy, because we cannot receive him more fully in the whole to our
endless comfort.

neither life nor death, principality nor power, things present nor things to
come, shall be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus. The
poor man's life is full of discontent and penury; but Faith can want and
abound, and in stead of other dainties does every day feed upon Christ. The
Infants life is full of mourning and crying; but Faith glads the heart in the
midst of heaviness, and makes it many times rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious. The young man's life is full of passion, wavering, and fickle
inconstancy; but Faith does so ballace our souls, that we run a settled
course, and swear to keep Gods righteous judgments. The old man's life is
full of deafness, dullness, decayednesse; but Faith sees through the clouds
life in death, glory in shame, yea it hears the voice of God in every
sentence, and though the outward man perish, yet in the inner and hid man of
the heart, Faith renews us daily. Although therefore we must live other lives
both natural and civil, yet let us make more account of this, That Christ
lives in us by faith, than of all other lives whatsoever.

Thus have I brought you along unto the last thing which I shall observe from
hence, that is, the exercise and expressement of that power which Faith gives
us by our communion with Christ in a virtuous and holy life. For as he has
said, that we have fellowship in his death for our mortification; that we are
quickened by faith in him for our vivification: so, that we, through that
quickening power which we do receive from Christ by faith, are made lively
unto all holy obedience. Therefore is it that the Apostle says, It is not I,
but Christ that quickneth me, concerning the life that we now live, to live
graciously. Whence we must mark: That it is from the virtue and power of
Christ, that we are quickened to all holy obedience.

Though we have faith, yet we must not pride our selves in it; for it is not
faith in it self that quickneth us, but as it is a divine power, whereby we
do receive that life which is in Christ. John 5.21.
Therefore is it said, That the Son quickneth whom he will. Yea, and hence is
it that the Scripture is so exact in setting down our weakness. For whereas
there are seven degrees to be considered for the effecting of a good thing, the
Scriptures show that man is weak in all of them. Psalm.
Can man think good? No: The Lord knows the thoughts of men that they are
but vain: and we are not sufficient of our selves to think a good thought. 2
Cor. 2.14.
Can we understand good? 1 Cor. 2.14. Romans 8.7.
No: The natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God; Yea, the
wisdom of flesh is enmity against God. Can we will and desire good? No: It is
God that works in us both the will and the deed. Phil. 2.13.
Can we speak good? No: Prove. 16.1.
The wife man may purpose a thing in his heart, but the answer of the tongue is
of the Lord: therefore David prays to God that he would open his lips that
his mouth might set forth his praise. Psalm. 51.15.
If he could not tune his tongue, much less could he turn his heart. Can we
begin to do good? No: as Esaias says, The children are come to the birth, and
there is no strength to bring forth: so may we say of our inward good; for it
is God that begins this good work in us. Philip. 1.6.
Can we do or work any good? No: I know that the way of man is not in
himself; Ier. 10.23.
for without Christ we can do nothing. Ioh. 15.5.
Can we perfect any thing that good is? No: To will is present with us (as with
Paul) when we are sanctified, but we have no power to perform. If God should
bring us to the gates of heaven, and there leave us, we should perish. He must
still be with us both as the author and finisher of our faith. Hebr. 12.
It is he that must admonish us of that good which we have to do, Monendo,
Movendo, Removendo.
that must stir us up to do it, and that must remove those, impediments which
hinder us. Now why should the Scripture thus anatomize the parts of our
weakness in good, but to teach us that all our strength and power is from
Christ?

Excellent also to this purpose is that Evangelical outcry: Hoe, every one
that thirsts come ye to the waters, Es. 55.1.
and ye that have no silver come, buy, and eat; come I say, buy wine and milk
without silver and without money. Into which words if we pierce with a
spiritual eye, we shall find that they offer two things to be considered: A
good turn from God, and a duty from us. In the first, he does first
condition with the buyer, and he does allow or license two sorts to buy of
him: Him that is thirsty, that is, he that out of a sight of Christ's worth,
and his own unworthiness does pant after Christ; and him that has no silver,
that is, he that has denied himself, and in his own eyes is nothing:
secondly, he does make his offer; In which, first, he does make known his
warehouse, that is, Christ: and thus much is implied in the nature of the
words, which are a prophecy concerning Christ: secondly, he offers his ware
under three words; water, milk, and wine; implying that in Christ is to be
found matters of conueniencie, necessity, and delight: thirdly, he pitcheth
the price, and sets it down negatiuely, that God keeps an open house for
beggars, and not a shop for buyers; he keeps an hospital not an ordinary:
for it comes without silver and without money. Secondly, he sets down a
duty from us: for he tells us that if we be such buyers and like the price,
we must come, buy, and eat. So that in these words you may plainly perceive
that the Prophet does clearly set down these two things. First, that we have
nothing, we are without spiritual silver and money. Phil.
Secondly, that Christ is all in all things unto us, and that God does bless
us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ. Ephesians. 1.3.
Hence is it that the holy Ghost says, It pleased the Father that in him
should all fullness dwell: Col. 1.19. Ioh. 1.16.
and that out of his fullness we all receive grace for grace; that is, the
free favor of the remission of our sins, and all other spiritual good
depending upon it, for the free favor of God is Christ himself: yea and all
this out of Gods appointment, 1 Cor. 1.30.
who has made him to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption.

our selves, and follow him: and in this doctrine we have a ground for both.
First, for denial of our selves; who does not deny himself, and make
himself nothing in his own eyes, when he duly considers that it is Christ
who quickneth him? I know that naturally we have a great desire to have some
worth in our selves. I remember how it was with Alexander when he went into the
Indies; he caused horse-shooes, and bitts of bridles, and spears, and swords
of an unwonted bigness to be left behind him, and all because men, that came
thither in aftertimes, and should hear that Alexander had been there, might
say, Surely Alexander was a mighty man indeed, a man of great power and worth:
right so is it with us; we are sick of the same disease: we desire with Saul,
to be honored before the people: we would feign be some body, or at least we
would be worth more than nothing. Hence do come the dividing conceits between
God and man's will in the power of conversion, and betwixt faith and works in
the case of justification. Hence also comes in the cursed opinion of merits (at
the least in the gracious works of Gods sons) and of our being saved by our
good belief to God-wards; by loving God above all, and our neighbors as our
selves, and the like. But let us never forget that Christ must increase, and we
must decrease; that it is Christ that lives in us (even when we are at the
best) and gives us all power, and that therefore we have and are nothing:
Christ never helps but in extreme need. As God dealt with the Israelites at
the red Sea, when the Sea was before them, the hill^ upon one hand, the sea on
the other, and the Egyptians behind them, then he says to Moses, Stretch out
thy rod; and to the Sea, Stay thy proud waves, be made into walls for the
defense of my people: so Christ when he brings his disciples to cry out, Save
Master, we perish, then he rebukes the winds: when they cry out with
Iehoshaphat, Lord we know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee; when
they have no power, no worth in themselves and their own eyes, then he makes
them strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. As therefore we love
our own souls, as we desire to have part and fellowship with Christ, to be
made wise by his wisdom, without guilt with his righteousness, without
prevailing filth with his holiness, and without apostacy with his redemption:
so let us be careful to deny our selves, and lay down at his feet the crown
of our glory.

Secondly, for attendance: who will not follow Christ, who is such a bountiful
master, that he puts new life into all his followers? No great men need sue
for attendants; yet their followers many times are compared to fasting days,
which are next unto holy days, but otherwise they are the leanest days in all
the week: much less need those honorable masters sue for any, who do most
for their seruitours, they shall have offerers good store. And shall it be
otherwise with Christ? Shall such a master want followers, Matthew. 11.
who calls out unto us, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden,
and I will refresh you? Oh what an argument is this that we feel not the want
of Christ and his society! It may be you will say, that Christ indeed claddeth
you with mourning and persecution: and is he also the fountain of life and
holiness to them that come unto him? Yea verily: As Adams unrighteousness and
unholiness is the fountain of our guilt and corruption: so Christ's
righteousness and holiness is not only the matter of our righteousness, but
the root of our sanctification also. By faith we are united unto Jesus Christ,
and ingraffed into him, and as the root does send up juice into the branches;
so does Christ shoot in divine spirits, and infuse holiness into his members.
But, says the believer, I have believed in Christ, yet I find not my bloody
issue of sin to be stayed with this touch. Listen therefore a while. It is
possible for us to have spiritual life, and not to discern it. And if yet
further thou do inquire, how this our communion with Christ may so be
advanced, that we may find life derived into our souls from our spiritual
touch of Christ? I answer: In the use of three ordinary means of salvation.
First, in prayer: Ask and I will give. If the spirit of supplication comes
once, then as it binds Gods hands, as when God said, Now Moses let me alone;
so it opens Gods hands, as Elias did when he obtained showers; yea and
opens all the passages betwixt Christ our head and us his members, whereby
spiritual life is derived into us. Which of Gods children have not felt sin
stabbed and dying in this duty, and Christ living to control sin, and to
comfort us against all discouragements.

Secondly, in the word of God preached: Hear and your souls shall live. Where
is he who has heard of conscience, and not of custom, who has not found
Christ in this duty lashing the seared conscience, quickening the dead
affections, inclining the rebellious will, and drawing out resolutions from the
whole man to follow Christ?

Thirdly, in the Sacrament: the bread and cup is the spiritual communion of
the body and blood of Christ. What faithful man has not felt Christ cast an
inward shame upon the soul for entertaining him into so foul an house? Yea,
and how easy is it in that seal of Gods favor to find him pricking the
soul for sin past, and strengthening the weak hands of faith against sin to
come? As thou would have comfort to thy soul, mark^ how Christ deriueth
holiness in these means of salvation, that thou may find it drop by
experience, that so thou, perceiving him to be such a fountain opened to the
house of David for sin and for uncleanness, may run unto him for
cleanness, and follow after for comfort and stabilitie in all thy courses.

Thus we have considered our misery to lament it, and our deliverance to work
in us thankful hearts. As therefore the Jews vowed, If I forget thee, o
Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning: so with an humble resolution
(depending upon the power of Christ for performance) let us determine to write
Christ in red letters in the tables of our hearts, and never forget him to be
the wellspring of life and holiness, that all things may be loss and dung
unto us in respect of that treasure which is in him to our endless joy.

Soli Deo gloria.
THE TRIAL OF True Religion. UPON JAMES 1.27. By ROBERT ABBOT.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Nathaniel Butter. 1623.

TO HIS MVCH RESPECTED FRIENDS, Master PETER CVRTHOPE Gentleman, and Mistress
JANE, his most dear and beloved Wife: Grace in this world, and glory in the
world to come, through Christ our common SAVIOVR.
My right worthy friends:
HOW can I be unmindful of you, who find you still mindful both of me and
mine? My studies are much refreshed by you both: if then amid my studies, I,
acknowledging others kindnesses, should be forgetful of yours, my
thankfulness would be near a wrack. Receive therefore this my poor
Present: and if I cannot show my self in what I would, I hope you will accept
of what I can. Books were never more plentiful; as knowledge, they do abound
as waters of the Sea: yet there was never more need of good ones, as being one
special means to pull down sin and Antichrist. I cannot commend mine to be
such: yet, as Gods gifts, I can commend my desires to be forward (as I am able)
to do God service both by tongue and pen. I see the justice of God giving over
some, who had no love to the truth, to believe the lies of the Man of Sin.
And God having made me a poor Watchman in his Church, I would willingly warn
mine own sheep of the danger, both by word and writing; yet, before it goes
to others, it does come unto you both, acknowledging your furtherances of it,
and craving your favors both to entertain and use it as your own. We poor
Scholars do weary our bodies many ways: by writing amongst the rest. But a
valiant man will not stand upon the breach of his weapon, so he may get the
victory: nor we upon the wearying and wearing of our bodies, if we may gain
what we fight for, to wit, the acceptance of our labors by them to whom we
do intend them, together with the salvation of their souls. How-euer the
success may be, my hope shall lift up my head amid all my faintings. Neither
do I fear, but that good people will give approbation to what I have rather
labored to do, than done. My aim is but to strive for Religion, and for that
Religion which will give us comfort before God. I have considered many times
the danger of Idolatry: as first, that Idolaters are a sottish people, who,
through Gods just judgment, Esaias 46.6, 7, 8. Esaias. 54.9, etc.
withhold the truth in unrighteousness, and will not walk in the light of
reason. Secondly, that they are a cruel people, Dan 3.
like Nebuchadnezzar, who guarded his Idol with a fiery furnace, and heat it
seven times hotter for the true worshippers of God; and like the ancient
persecutors under the Roman Emperors, who put Christians upon crosses and
stakes, who did tear and scratch their sides with nails and claws, who cast
them unto beasts, and burnt and broyled them with fire, and the like. Thirdly,
that they are an alluring people, who have their vermilion Images, like those
that tempted Ierushalem, and their great rewards like the Devil, Matthew. 4.
All this will I give thee (says he to Christ) if thou will fall down and
worship me: In which respects as Images or Idols are called Lovers, so
Idolaters, Whore-mongers, who will spare for no cost or pain to satisfy their
lusts; like Nebuchadnezzar, who made his Image of gold, Dan. 3.
and countenanced it with variety of music, to woo the minds of the simple,
and to stir up superstitious affections. And having laid up these things with
my self, and seeing withal that Popery cannot (with all its subtle
euasions) wash it self from deep stain in this kind; equalling, if not
exceeding even Heathenisme it self in variety of Idolatrous lovers, as we may
see by comparing the multiplicitie of heathenish and Romish Idols. When I have
considered, I say, Vide Wolfgang. Muscul. in Psalm. 16. and Episc. Der. in diat.
de Antichr. cap. 7. l. b. 3. cum multis alijs.
that as the Heathens had protecting Idols for Nations, as Belus for the
Babylonians, Isis and Osyris for the Aegygtians, Neptune for the Africanes, the
Sun for Rhodes, Juno for Samos, Venus for Paphos, Apollo for Delphos,
Quirinus for Rome, Minerua for Athens, and Diana for Ephesus: So Rome has
Saint James for Spain, Saint Dennis for France, Saint Peter and Paul for Rome,
Saint Ambrose for Millane, Saint Mark for Venice, the three Kings for Collen,
Saint Lewis for Pannonia, and Saint Mary for Heluetia. And as the Heathens had
guardians for the Elements, as Jupiter for the Heaven and Fire, Juno for the
Air, Neptune for the Sea, and Pluto for the Earth: So Rome has Saint Agatha
for the Fire, Saint Nicholas for the Sea, and Saint Theodulus for Tempests. And
as the Heathens had guardians for the Fruits of the earth, as Bacchus for Wine,
and Ceres for Fruit: So Rome has Saint Iodocus for Fruits, and Saint Vrbanus
for Wine. And as the Heathens had guardians for their Cattle, as Apollo and
Pan: So Rome has Saint Wendaline for Sheep, Saint Eulogius for Horse, Saint
Pelagius for Oxen, and Saint Anthony for Swine. And as the Heathens had their
protectors for Trades, Arts and Sciences, as Minerua for Learning, Vulcan for
Smiths, Aesculapius for Physicians, Mars for Warriors, Diana for Hunters,
Castor and Pollux for Sea-faring-men, and Flora, Venus and Lupa for Harlots: So
Rome has Saint Catherine and Gregory for Scholars, Saint Luke for Painters,
Saint Cosmas for Physicians, Saint Maurice for Soldiers, Saint Eulogius for
Carpenters, Saint Crispine for Shoo-makers, Saint Gutmane for Tailors, Saint
Magdalen and Afra for Harlots. And lastly, as the Heathens had their guardians
against Diseases, as Apollo against the Plague, Lucina against the pains of
Women's travails, and Hercules against the Falling Sickness: So Rome has
Saint Sebastian against the Plague, Saint Petronel against an Ague, Saint Mark
against sudden Death, Saint Margaret against the pains of Women's labors, S.
Otilia against the diseases of the Eyes, S. Apollonia against the Toothache,
and the like. The consideration of all these and many other objects of
Idolatry (none of which were of Gods making) has made me many times to search
into the cause of Religion, and to strive both with my self and others, that
all insinuating Idolatry being laid aside and abhorred, the truth may take
place both in our heads and hearts. I know that deep decisions of
controversies are not so easily apprehended in our ordinary assemblies. I have
sought therefore to bring the truth unto the easiest trial, in removing such
ordinary exceptions as it is subject unto by the wise men of the world.
Whatsoever it be, I do offer it unto both your hands: desiring God that it may
confirm you in the truth of our true Religion. It shall be my rejoicing to see
you and yours always walking in the truth, and so humbly resigning your selves
to the divine wisdom of Gods word, both for the direction of your souls and
bodies, that God may never have just cause to give you over to Schism,
Heresy, Vanity, or any other wickedness whatsoever. Even so humbly prays
he, who has some few years had experience of your great love, and who
desires to continue

Your faithful Shepherd, ROBERT ABBOT.

THE TRIAL OF True Religion.
JAMES 1.27. Pure Religion and undefiled before God, even the Father, is this,
to visit the fatherless and widows in their adversity, and to keep himself
unspotted of the world.


IT is well observed by Divines, that the Apostles, in planting and watering
the Churches of Christ, labored two things especially. First, the plain and
powerful delivery of the mysteries of Faith, both by word and writing, tha^
so both Jews and Gentiles might be brought to embrace them. Secondly, the
plain and powerful expressing and pressing of the obedience of Faith, and
such a life as becomes the Gospel of Christ Jesus.

In both these kinds Paul was excellent: but in the latter he was more brief
through all his Epistles. The other Apostles were more brief in the doctrine of
Faith, and in the duties of Christian profession more large and plentiful.
Saint Peter principally labors for piety, patience, and constancy against
false apostles. Saint John for the love of God and of the Saints. Saint Jude
against false teachers and hypocrites. And this our Apostle James labors for
patience under the Cross and a Christian life. In the performance whereof (as
D^uines do well agree) we meet with something which does not occur in the
writings of the other Apostles. None does so clearly deliver the cause of
sin: the necessary issue of works from justifying faith: the concatenation
and union of the whole Law: the imperfection of humane righteousness from the
miscariage of the tongue: our dependence upon the providence of God even in
civil things: and the carriage of sick persons in those miraculous times. In
these points (I say) this Apostle carries away the bell from the rest.

The principal point in this Epistle does seem to be this: That with the
faith of Christ Christian works are to be joined: Wherein we must walk to the
end of our Faith, which is the salvation of our souls. The principal reason
whereby he urges it, is this: because the faith of Christ (which in
securitanes is falsely so called) without Christian life is but a dead carcass
or vain shadow of faith, and not a living faith, or that Spirit of Faith,
which the Apostle speaks of. Hence therefore does he take occasion to urge to
diverse parts of Christian life and good conversation. In this Chapter he
treats of three points. First, of the temptations of Christians, both outward
by afflictions, and inward by lusts: Secondly, of the hearing and doing of the
Word of God: and thirdly, in the two last verses, of true and false religion.
In the first of which he shows what religion is in vain: in the second of
which he shows what religion will bear the touch and trial.

We have to do with the second at this time: wherein religion is described;
First, by the affections, properties, or adjuncts of it, when it is said to be
pure and undefiled before God: And secondly, by the fruits and effects of it;
and those both toward others, while it works us to visit the fatherless and
widows in adversity, as also in our selves who have it, while it works us to
keep our selves unspotted of the world.

To conceive aright of these things, for our further use and benefit, I must
open unto you, First, the thing spoken of; and secondly, that which is spoken
of it. The thing spoken of is Religion: and is so called, either from our
reading again the defaced or new written law in our hearts; Relegendo.
of which writing Jeremy speaks, saying, Ier. 31.33.
I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts: or from
our knitting to God again from whom we had made a cursed defection; Religando.
because in our regeneration we are by faith united unto him again in Christ
Jesus: or else from our choosing of God again to be our God and master,
Reeligendo.
when we do renounce the world, the flesh, and the devil. This religion
signifies here that worship and service which is proper to God, (...).
which he will neither have to be given to others, (...). Col. 2.18. (...).
verse. 2
in which respect he does forbid the worship of ^^^els; nor to be invented or
prescribed by others, in which respect he will have us cast away all show of
wisdom in will worship or voluntary religion.

Now touching this religion, the Apostle does first call it pure: thereby
secretly implying that there is an impure religion, as well as that which is
pure (there being a Church of the malignant as well as a company of believers
and faithful ones:) but as for true religion, it is Pure, without the dross
of superstition, and mixture of humane invention: it must be as it were purged
by fire, as happily the English word Pure does signify, if it be lawful for us
to guess that it is, with a little alteration, borrowed from that Greek word
which signifies fire: (...).
which well also answers to the Greek here, (...), a (...), purgo.
which comes of a word that does signify to purge.

Again, he says that this religion is undefiled before God: because it is a
special property of true religion to approve it self to God. False religions
are all for show and for outward pomp, as harlo^s are for garish and immodest
attire to allure lovers, Psalm. 45.
but the Kings daughter is all glorious within, and stands more upon the
uprightness of her heart to God, than the ornaments of her body in the sight
of men and Angels.

Duo (...) v^rae reli^ion^s, unam juvans proximum, alterum s^rv^^^is sei^sum.
But does true religion altogether make us to approve our selves to God?
Principally it does: yet withal it works a helping of our neighbor, and a
saving of our selves from the tainture of a wicked generation. In respect of
others, it does visit the fatherless and widows: signifying thereby thus
much, that it puts us into the honorable employment of works of mercy to
them that are in misery. For though he names only these two objects of mercy,
(both because no works of mercy are more eagerly or more often pressed than the
defense of orphans and widows; as also because such persons are t^^y times
most miserable and most neglected) yet I am not without the judgment of the
learned, if I comprehend all works of mercy under it.

Again, in respect of our selves, it preserves or keeps us safe from the
defilements, or the blots and spots of the world. Signifying thereby, that
religion will keep us from the wilful breaches of the law, which do make us
like spotted Leopards, scandalous in the eyes of others, and covered with
garments spotted of the flesh. in believing and knowing by a comfortable
experience that Jesus is the Christ the Son of the living God. Psalm. 15.1, 2,
etc.
he gives almost all outward notes drawn from the second table, which fall
into other men's apprehensions: even so it is with our blessed Apostle; he
gives visible and palpable notes of religion, which do occur to the senses
of ordinary men, and are the recognizances of pure religion.

Thus I having opened, and (in some measure) cleared the words, we come unto
the doctrine contained in the same, the whole whereof (so far as I shall
touch) I shall strive to refer to these four grounds:









We must have a religion.
As to the first point: We may be sure of this, that God would not learn us to
know religion, if he did not withal require that we should be of it. In that
therefore he marketh it out, he does imply that we must have it, to profess
and cleave unto both in life and death, and to try the truth of it by these
notes which God offers. To press then the having of a religion unto us, do
but consider three grounds.

without God and without Christ, (as if he should say, without religion) is an
aliant from the commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12.
and a stranger from the covenants of promise, and has no hope.

Religion (says James here) will make us do good to others and preserve our
selves. Prou. 1.7.
The fear of God (that is, religion) is the beginning of wisdom. The
religious Proselites followed Paul and Barnabas for heavenly instructions: Act.
13.43.
The religion of Daniel made him to determine in his heart that he would not
defile himself with the Kings meat: Dan. 1.8.
The religion of Shadrach, Dan. 3.
Mesach, and Abednego, made them to refuse to bow to that accursed Idol; And
the religion of Joseph preserved him from unchastity, and made him swallow
down (as it were) without sense the unkindness of his brethren: Genesis 50.19.
Fear not (says he to his timorous brethren) am I in Gods stead, to take
vengeance out of his hand? or am not I under God? Both which speeches do
manifest his religion, and that it was that which brought forth this his
virtuous carriage.

who profess they know God, but by works deny him, Tit. 1.16.
are abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. As
without a counterfeit religion, there could be no civil virtue (in which
respect they who knew not the true God would still feign a religion to restrain
nature:) so without the true religion there will be nothing but colored virtue
or outrageous vice. In the old world religion was corrupted, and therefore it
was no wonder, that the wickedness of man was great in the earth. Genesis 6.5.
Abraham saw that in the court of Abimelech there was no fear of God, that is,
Genesis 20.11.
no true religion, and therefore he thought justly that they would slay him for
his wives sake. The Gentiles turned the glory of the incorruptible God, To.
1.23, 24, etc
to the similitude of an image of a corruptible man, and of birds, and
foure-footed beasts, and creeping things; and therefore we do not wonder though
they were given up in their hearts lusts to uncleanness, and to other
abominable and hateful wickednesses.

Seeing therefore, that religion does assure our hearts of our right in Christ,
does breed virtue, and in the absence of it does leave a fearful gap for all
impiety; it is necessary that we should have a religion.

things. First, there are many and too many in all places, who do not know by
experience in themselves what religion means. 2 Chro. 15.3.
As it was in the days of Asa, Israel had been a long time without the true
God: so is it with many even in these days. They can say with some of old; In
this religion I was borne, In hac fide natus sum, Eutyches olim d^xit; In ha^
fide g^nitus sum; vsque hodie vixi in ea, and opto mori.
and though I have not found it, yet it has found me, and I know none other:
and yet they cannot tell what religion means. To conceive the truth of which
point, take but two meditations concerning religion. First, they who are knit
to God by religion have a kind of sweet violence offered unto their natures,
and are drawn with him into the practice of that which is good in Gods sight.
Ye know that according to that whereunto we are tied, we are carried and swaied
from this to that. If we are linked to wicked men, we are drawn to consent
unto them: if unto good men, we will follow them. Seeing therefore that
according to our natural motion by which we are carried downward to be
earthly, sensual, Iam. 3.15.
and deuillish, we see too many men to cleave unto vain vanities, and so to
forsake their own mercy: Yea, seeing we see a world of men lie in wickedness,
as it were drowned in the dregs of impiety; it is evident that they are not
tied unto God by religion who would pull them another way. Secondly, they who
are knit to God by religion, will with careful hearts pray to God that he
would never cut the cord asunder, nor ever let go his hold, but that he would
ever go with them, and support them from falling into any misery. We have had
experience of our danger when we were knit unto the world and the flesh: and
therefore finding a better and more comfortable band, we will desire it may
never be cracked. As he that hangs by a rope from an high Tower, or over a
Well, knowing himself to be at the mercy of him that holds it, will cry to
him, and entreat him earnestly to hold fast: so they, who are united unto God
by religion, and see their danger if he let go, will never give over to pray,
that he will be entreated for ever to take such hold of them, that they may
with Cornelius be devout men, Act. 10.2.
and religious, Act. 13.43, 50.
as those proselytes and honorable women are called. Seeing therefore that this
heavenly duty of prayer is so much neglected, and for the most part turned
into a lip-labor, and degenerated from the work of the heart to the work of
the knowing head, and voluble tongue: it is a sign that many and many are not
knit to God by religion.

Secondly, consider that the religion of many does not proceed from the
establishment of Gods free spirit: and so, Psalm. 51.12.
it not being free, is as none in truth. Like the mony-changers of old, many
come to the Temple, Ioh. 2.
rather to sell doves than to serve God. Many (I say) seem to be religious,
either because they might gain by others (as that Pope, who in honor of S.
Peter dined upon a net till he had caught the Popedom,) or at the least
because they would not lose (as those who join themselves to the assemblies of
the Saints for fear of penalties.) These are like those who sought Christ, not
because they saw the miracles, Ioh. 6.
but because they ate and were satisfied. The Devil may justly fasten his
unjust accusation of Job upon such, that they fear not God, that is, Job 1.9.
that they are not religious for nothing. In which respect such may justly
doubt that they have as yet no religion as they should.

What shall I say then? Psalm. 110.13.
and to give our names to God for voluntary or willing service. All the while
we are out of this knot, we are a prey to the Devil, and are ready to be wound
about the finger of every seducer, and to be blown about with every wind of
doctrine. For whence is it that men either alter their religion, or stubbornly
persist in their false religion, but in part because they have no religion at
all as they should? They went out from us, (says John) but they were not of
us: for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us. As if he
should say; If these limbs of the seducing Antichrists had ever had true
religion, they would not have forsaken the fellowship of the Church and
communion of the Saints. To prevent this therefore we must be exhorted to have
a religion.

What we must do to have a religion.
But you will ask me: What must we do that we may have a religion? I answer:
first, we must consider, that by nature, as we are in the loins of sinful
Adam, and continue with his guilt and filth, we are of the Devils religion,
even children of wrath. Ephesians. 2.3.
And though, through Gods ordinance and appointment, we do receive an outward
sign and seal of the Christian religion in Baptism; Rom 4.11.
yet so soon as ever we come to crawle, we are so prone to evil, and so
backward unto good, as if we loved the Devils religion best.

Secondly, we must see this our miserable estate, be ashamed of it, and desire
to enter into covenant with God, that he may be our God and we his people. This
is called, a bringing again unto the Lord: 2 Chro. 19.4.
the practice of which we may see in Josiah, who while he was yet a child
began to seek after the God of David his father. 2 Chro. 34.3.
And this example ought to be a monitor from generation to generation of what
every one of us ought to do.

Thirdly, we must with care and conscience attend upon the means of salvation,
as they are offered unto us in the ministry of the Church of God; that so we
may know the virtues and powers of this covenant to do thereafter. 2 Cor. 1.24.
For though we have no dominion over your faith (in which respect the Apostle
says to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10.15.
Judge ye what I say,) yet we are helpers of your joy; and are ministers by
whom ye believe. 1 Cor. 3.5.
As therefore Moses said of the bush which burned and not consumed, Ex. 3.3.
I will turn aside now and see this great sight: So must we say of the Church
which is afflicted, and yet is not quite ouer-borne, I will turn aside now,
and hear what this great message is which it brings to direct me to heaven
and happiness.

Fourthly, we must openly profess our selves to be in covenant with God. Titus
1.1.
This the Apostle calls an acknowledgement of the truth, which is according
to godliness: and every one of us must labor for it, both by increasing our
knowledge in the things of God, as also by laboring for a good and a godly
life, and preparing our selves to give a reason of the hope that is in us, 1
Pet. 3.15.
through the use of such means of knowledge and holiness as God has
appointed. I know that every one of us cannot attain unto the like measure in
this kind. For some of us are so slow of heart and dull of hearing, Luke 24.25.
that when as concerning the time we ought to be teachers, Hebr. 5.11, 12.
yet we have need again to be taught the first principles of the word of God;
and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat: yet, for all
that, we must aim at, and strive that through long custom, in hearing,
meditation, and conference, Hebr. 5.14.
we may have our wits exercised to discern both good and evil, that so we
may with more boldness appear before the greatest enemies of truth and
profession.

Fifthly, we must renew our covenant with God in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper so often as conveniently we can: and with fear and trembling desire God
to assure unto us the comforts of the Gospel, according to the sincerity of
our hearts. Ye know that Sacraments are called seals: and the reason is,
because in their lawful and holy use they have a confirming, conueying and
concluding nature. They do confirm, because they do as pledges visibly
strengthen our faith in the promises. They do convey, because as written
instruments by the ordinations of Princes are conueyances of houses, and lands,
and inheritances unto us, though we are many miles from them: so by the
ordination of God the Sacraments are no natural, but voluntary instruments to
settle and assure Jesus Christ upon and unto us (being fitly prepared according
to his will) though he be ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of
God: They do conclude, because, as sealing and delivering is the latter end of
a bargain, and does shut it up, so the Sacraments do conclude and shut up the
covenant between God and us, to our endless comforts; if, according to those
abilities which God has vouchsafed unto us, we keep touch with him. In this
regard as we do publicly enter covenant with God in Baptism, and manifest our
consciences in the same, when we turn from our wicked ways, to serve the
living God in uprightness and truth: so we do or should renew our covenant in
the Lords Supper, to our more watchful and wary walking in the ways of
piety and godliness.

Per delicta quotidianae incursionis.
Lastly, because through the treachery of the flesh we cannot but fail
through daily errors, in a greater measure than we would; therefore (if we
will be of a religion) we must humbly d^pend upon God by prayer for pardon
against sin past, and for spiritual power against sin to come, and that
every day.

Thus I have taught you what we must do to have a religion. But yet we are
not the nearer to God, if we be not of that religion which is pleasing to him:
and therefore we must now leave this point, and pass along to the next.



We must be of that Religion which does most approve it self to God.

For this is the reason that this Religion, We must have that Religion which
does most approve it self unto God.
which we must have, is described to be pure and undefiled before God: thereby
implying that the true Religion does most labor for that. And that it must be
so, will appear by diverse considerations.

Kain brought an oblation to God of the fruit of the ground. Genesis 4.3.
So likewise in prayer: for the hypocritical Jews stretched out their hands
and made many prayers unto God. Esaias 1.15.
So likewise in preaching: for we have Judas a Preacher as well as Peter, and
many hypocrites will say, Matthew. 7.22.
Have we not by thy name prophesied? So likewise in hearing: for as God says
to hypocrites by Esaias, Ye seek me daily, (to wit, Esaias 58.2.
in the Ministry of the Word) and will know my ways even as a Nation that
did righteously: So by EZ^kiel, My people fit before thee, Ezekiel. 33.31.
and hear thy words, but they will not do them, for with their mouths they
make jests, and their hearts are after covetousness. So likewise in
profession: for even they shall say, Lord, Lord, who shall not enter into the
Kingdom of heaven. Matthew. 7.21.
And the foolish Virgins who received this doom, Matthew 25.
I know you not, h^d lamps of profession, and said, Lord, Lord. So likewise in
fasting: for the Prophet speaks of such dissembling wre^ches, who fasted unto
strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness, that they draw
near to God on the day of their Fast, and say, Esaias 58.2, 3, 4.
Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see it not? We have punished our selves,
and thou regardest not: as if they were the sincerest fasters in the world. So
likewise even in giving of alms; for even the hypocrites of old did give
alms, Matthew. 6.2.
and that with a great grace, when they made the trumpet to be blown before
them. Thus the hypocrites religion in show has been as good as the best.

2 Samuel 15. Matthew. 2.
Absolon will make show of performing a Vow at Hebron: Herod of worshipping
Christ, and of another Herod hearing John gladly: Prou. ^.
yea the Harlot her self has made her peace offerings and paid her vows:
and Christ does so discover the rich Gluttons wickedness, that we may yet see
the religion of his lineage, saying, They have Moses and the Prophets. L^ke 16.
What wicked man does not frame a religion to himself in appearance and show,
to stop the mouth of his conscience, and gloze with the world? None shall bow
lower than he; none shall look more sour in the day of fasting; and in all
the kinds of superstition none shall more glister with devotion in the view of
men, especially in the day of affliction and hour of death.

Apoc. 2.12.
as his Throne in Pergamus, and Antichrist with his apostacy in the Temple of
God. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
If God answer from between the Cherubims, the Devil will have his oracles.
Let him have his Priests, the Devil also will have Arch-flamines and Flamines,
his Druids, Sophists, Sacrificers, and the like. The Devil and his instruments
have still been seen to be Gods apes, to imitate him (so far as it has
been permitted unto them) in the great works of his creation and providence.

of washings, and other ceremonies, which shall go under the name of the
traditions of the Elders. In which respect they who read the exceptions of
Atheists and Heathen against the true religion, shall ^^nde this to be one,
that it was far behind the heathenish religion in the beauty of their
Temples, array of their Priests, gestures, and significant representations in
their devotions.

Thus let us carry with us these four meditations, and conclude from them thus
much: that seeing the religion of hypocrites and wicked men may equal, and
false religion may imitate and outstrip the true religion in shows: therefore
we must judge righteous judgment: we must not choose religion according to
appearance and shows, but strive to be of that which does most approve it
self to God.

These ought ye to have done; Matthew. 23.23.
yet the sincere service and glory of the heart ought not to be left undone;
the principal end of a good religion being to approve the heart unto God. Gods
service does chiefly consist in the holy exercise and usage of the
understanding and affections of the heart according to Gods will. What
hypocrite cannot draw near to God with the lips? What carnal wretch cannot
make a crucifix, or other image, to be a mouer of fleshly devotion, Objectum
motivam, and vehiculum devotionis.
and (as it were) a popish chariot of desires to the persons whom they do
represent? What Idiot, whose understanding is idle, cannot give God a knee and
a knock upon the breast at the Popish Latin service and Mass of humane
inventions? Alas for them whose religion is in shows. If the show and outside
of religion were ordained by God, y^^ as it might sometimes be omitted without
sin (as Circumcision, and the Passover, yea and the feast of Tabernacles,
for a thousand years together, Neh. 8.17.
if my Chronologer deceive me not:) even so also may it be practiced of us
without grace. Oh therefore believe not, neither trust in shows, but cleave
unto that religion, whose grace and glory does stand in inward worship, which
cannot be omitted without sin, nor practiced without grace. We draw near to
God with our hearts; we hear the word with faith, fear, love, and full
assurance; we pray in the Holy Ghost; yea though we use the help of others,
yet we make such prayers our own by a through applying them to our wants and
graces: when we sing Psalms, we make melody to God in our hearts; and when we
do receive the Lords Supper, we do it in remembrance of Christ, and show
forth his death till he come: yea like true worshippers, we are so far from
delighting in shows, that as God said of old, They shall say no more, The Arc
of the covenant of the Lord: Ier. 3.16.
for it shall come no more to mind, neither shall they remember it, neither
shall they visit it: so do we willingly forget all the typical rites and
ceremonies wherewith the Church of Rome did Iewishly and heathenishly abuse our
forefathers, and do strive to build up the hid man of the heart, and to
worship God in spirit and truth, Ioh. 4.
not neglecting such outward expressments, as are warranted either by general
or particular rules and examples out of the holy word.

But as for garish shows, let children and babies delight in such rattles. We
account our selves to have just cause to suspect the religion of Rome, which is
all for shows. They know right well that every man would be accounted godly:
and that the wickedest wretch and wisest politician of the world would feign
go to heaven. To this end therefore (as it may seem) namely, to please the
wise men of the world and desperate sinners, who know by nature that they must
frame a kind of religion to procure Gods favor, they have patched together
(as the secure times of the world and their prevailing faction would give them
leave) an outward service glorious in show, to stop the mouth of conscience for
a time. Their faith is resolved into a glorious and pompous Church for show.
Their repentance stands only in contrition, confession, and satisfaction by
visible penances, which being performed in show, receives an absolute
forgiveness of sin. They boast of their altars, sacrifices, washings, and
anointings: they adorn their altars, images, priests, and temples. They have
their Jubilees, processions, pilgrimages to their ridiculous Ladies, vigils,
trentals, diriges, and requiems, and all for show still. They have music and
chaunting for the ear, without the exercise either of understanding or heart.
They have golden and velvet, silken and taffatie Images for the eye. They have
Incense or other sweet perfumes for the nose. They have iuncates and banquets
on their falsely called fasting days for their pallates, though they will not
ordinarily eat flesh on Fridaies. And that the wise men of the world may be led
up and down, as men without wit, by the nose, they have a glorious Latin
service in an unknown tongue, though it be impossible for him that has the
room of the unlearned to such a service to say Amen. 1 Cor. 14.14, 15, 16, 17.
Here is a gay religion indeed. O let us have our eyes in our heads, and which
of our religions does most approve it self unto God, let every one of us with
care and conscience judge.

This must the rather be observed and taken care of, because to an heart and
eye that is not sanctified and guided by God, these shows are fit allurements.
How do they prevail upon the rotten and putrid members of the Church from
time to time? As Labans sheep did conceive by the eye: so is it with many
Christians also. Hence is it that ye shall hear some plead the Jesuits causes
thus: Do not those reverend men leave country, and kindred, and hazard their
lives for religion, and expose themselves to a thousand dangers? Here is a
great show indeed, yet there is many a thief who can plead so much for
himself before the Judge: My Lord, have not I broke my sleep to be upon the
high way, left the embracings of my loving wife, and hazarded my life and
estate? and yet (I hope) the Judge likes not his cause the better, nor
thinks him the more honest man.

Some again plead the Popish cause thus: Do not they show you thousands of
religious persons who do renounce the world, and give themselves wholly to
prayer and contemplation? They have a show of such indeed; but all is not gold
that glistereth. We can show them thousands of true Christian Nazarites, who
are Recluses from the world in Universities and Colleges, where they do
wholly give themselves to prayer, study, and conference, with other good
exercises, that they may be further fitted for the service of the Church of
God. But as for their religious persons, as, when they are shut up, their light
does not shine before men to the glory of God their Father as it should; so
they are blasphemers of the Gospel in seeking perfections out of Christ, and
are cloakes of a foul deal of hypocrisy, Humiles sine desp^ct^, pa^p^^^s
sine defectu, ^^vites sine labor.
while they are humble without deiection, poor without want, rich without
labor: or that I may use the words of the Duke of Saxony of old, (as
Melancthon has them:) There are three things, says he, in the City of
Lypsia, which are worthy of admiration; and they are three kinds of Monks. The
first, who had much corn, and no possessions. The second, who had much money,
and no revenues. The third, who had many children, and no wives. Lo these are
they who do renounce the world, and give themselves to prayer, as they are
discovered by those who have lived amongst them.

Others again plead for them thus: Do not they canonize Saints, and give good
works and workers due honors? These things indeed have a great show amongst
them. If we had been but at Madrid this last year, Merc. Gallob. in anno
1622. lib. 2. tom. 14.
and seen the canonization of Ignatius Loyola, the ancient founder of the
Jesuits order; in the solemnizing whereof all the Churches glittered with gold
and precious hangings; the statue of their dead Saint was bedecked with gold
and precious stones by no mean hands; it was carried in a glorious procession,
with a wonderful troop and train of many degrees, with music for the
ears, and for the eyes, with thirty banners, and fourscore silver crosses.
If (I say) that we had seen this show of honor of works and workers, how
could we have done less in reason than to have said with that French Dame,
when she saw a stately procession to pass by the streets, O what a fine
religion is ours, meaning Popery? Quo vadis, sect. 4. page 15.
yet in truth we do not envy them this finenesse. Our Saints are in this
world, many times in ragged coats, and when God has taken them to heaven, they
need none of our pictures and solemnities, neither do we need such Advocates;
We have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and care for no
other particular Advocates in heaven. 1 Ioh. 2.1.
And for our works, though in the doctrine of Justification we hate to give
them any honor, because our well-doing extends not to God, Psalm. 16.2. Job
22.3.
and what is it to God that we are righteous? yet in the doctrine of
sanctification we do humbly acknowledge the honor which God does give unto
them, 1 Pet. 1.22. Prove. 16.6.
in making of them means, as contrary acts, to mortify and repress sin, in
making them qualifications to sit us for Gods residence, Apoc. 3.20.
and to be that sanctified way wherein we must walk unto glory, Heb. 12.14.
and the like: yet we must add this, that we have most comfort of those
works which are least seen; as of confidence, love, fear, humility, mercy,
compassion, etc. which yet will manifest themselves in such fit fruits as God
requires. Thus is our religion a walking in simplicity and godly pureness, 2
Cor. 1.12.
and not in fleshly wisdom, and teaches us principally to approve our selves
to God, and to abandon that religion which stands in shows and outward pomp.
I will say but three things more, and so I shall pass to the next ground.

hypocritical fasters to such. Es. 58.5.


adorning is not outward, but in the hid man of the heart. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.


Euah saw that the tree was good for meat, and she took it and did eat. David
saw Bathsheba, and you know what follows. Ierushalem saw vermilion Images,
and she affected them. God does usually call us unto him by the ear: he that
desires to lodge among the wise, must prepare his Ear to hearken to the
instruction of life. Prou. 15.31.
But the Devil does usually call men by the eye: it is the eye which is his
ordinary broker, and strikes the bargain for him.

My conclusion is this: that seeing fair shows in Religion may be without
sincerity, and that those may make greater shows than ordinary, who are
furthest from God, and that yet the Devil does seek to abuse us, and draw us
to his part by shows: we must not choose our religion by shows, but cleave
unto our own which we shall find most to approve it self to God.

The third ground whereto the doctrine of this Text is referred, is this: that
True Religion is a merciful Religion.

It makes us (says James here) to visit the fatherless and widows in their
adversities. Religion is (as it were) an order and service after Gods own
heart, who is a God of love and mercy. When God promises to give his people
Priests who should pity them and have a merciful care of them, he calls
them Priests after his own heart, that is, Ierem.
who shall be merciful as he is merciful. Religion therefore being an issue
of Gods will and nature, it must needs savor of mercy and compassion. Again,
the fruits of Religion are Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Galath. 5.22.
Goodness, which all are either mother, daughter, members or companions of
that which we call Mercy. And how can Religion be other, which is the
exercise of a mother? The Church is called the Mother of us all: and we know,
Galath. 4.
from that ancient judgment of Solomon, that she who had most affection to
the child, was the true mother, that the exercise of a mother is mercy.

Now, from this ground I would enforce two things: our heavenly Father is
merciful. This is that which will assure us that we are truly religious. No
mercy, no religion. God is immediately merciful to us himself, when he sends
his Spirit into our hearts to teach us, correct, and comfort us according to
our necessities: and he makes all the creatures of heaven and earth to be
liberal unto us, and helpful in some kind or other; and all to this end,
that we being knit unto him by true religion, may be provoked to be merciful
also: yea, we must be so even unto the enemies of religion. We see many times
that no civil cause makes a more severe and cruel war than Religion does.
When the Reubenites, Gadites, and Manassites had set up an Altar by Jordan,
their brethren, thinking that it had been to separate religion, presently
mustered their forces against them. The Jews and Samaritanes being of diverse
religions, even Peter could smell of this natural cruelty, saying, Master,
call for fire from heaven to consume the Samaritanes: but Christ crushed it,
saying, Ye know not of what Spirit you are. Yea says Christ, speaking of them
who shall take his Disciples to task for religion sake, They shall
excommunicate you, and kill you, and in so doing they shall think that they
do God good service. But we must strive against this cruelty, and exercise
mercy as the proper fruit of religion.

If we shall believe the declamations of the Jesuits, they will tell us that
yet we are not merciful: and therefore they cry out against our cruelty
exercised upon the Pope-holy Catholics, in tearing, chopping and burning of
them, together with the making of their members a prey to the fowls of heaven,
and the like. Is this mercy, say they? No surely, as it is barely looked upon,
without searching into the cause. Yet when we do see many known Papists in
the Land, and none capitally punished but Traitors: and when we do see that
such are punished no otherwise than traitors were punished when Popery usurped
upon us: and when withal we do consider, that we have no law to put any
Papist to death for his conscience sake; or if we have a law in that ancient
Statute of their own, concerning the burning of Heretics, by virtue whereof
they consumed us; that yet none of their bodies ever felt those flames: when we
do see (I say) and consider these things, we do rejoice in our religion,
finding mercy in it; and do encourage our selves to go on still, both to
proceed mildly against them, to pity, and to pray for them, and by walking
holily before them, to try if yet God will have mercy on them, and bring them
to know the Truth.

Rome is not the true Religion. We know that Rome is spiritual Egypt, Apoc.
11.
and that she lets the corpses of the Saints lie dead in the streets: We
see that her instruments are fire and sword, and that her means are power and
policy, by hook and crook, as we say. Every time the fifth of November
returns, it calls to our mind enough of this kind, if we could forget the
Popes practices against the Emperors. We know that their party would have
destroyed our whole State (even the breath of our nostrils and cream of our
Land) at one blow. We see also (so far as their close policy will give us
leave) the cruelty of their Inquisitions. They ask us where is our religion
save in little nookes and corners of the world? We answer, that they might
soon see if they would: for it would burst out as the noone day in the midst
of their darkest darkness, if their Holy-houses (as they wrongfully call them)
did not devour the professors of it so soon as ever they look out. We see
also how many men, women, young men and maids were by the cursed Idol of the
Mass brought to their burial in their own ashes. They dare not for their
lives lay this their cruelty aside, lest (living so like open and innocent
Doves as we do, in respect of their Iesuited Papists) they should soon bring
their multitudes into a bunch or two after the Vintage, or a gleaning after the
harvest. As therefore Iaacob said of Simeon and Leui, Genesis 49.6, 7.
in whose habitations were the instruments of cruelty: so let us say to
Popery; Into their secret let not my soul come: my glory be not thou joined
with their assembly. Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage,
for it was cruel.



First, If we should never so much abound in them: if we should exhaust our
goods, estates, lands, and livings, yet it would be nothing in their eyes. They
account them but moral, and not religious works, even such as Heathens do
work, and all because we are not Papists. No marvel therefore though they
cannot see what good we do.

See Doctor Will. Cat. of good W. in the end of his Synop. Heb. 6.10.
Secondly, Blessed be God, there are thousands amongst us, of whom (according to
their abilities) we may say, as the Apostle to the Hebrews, God is not
unrighteous that he should forget their work and labor of love, which they
have showed toward his name, in that they have ministered to the Saints and yet
minister. There are many (I say) whose bowels of mercy do carry them to
counsel the giddy, Consule, cast^ga, solare, remitte, f^r, ora.
correct the obstinate, forgive the penitent, comfort the wounded, bear with
the weak, and pray for all to be prayed for. Visito, poto, ^ibo, redimo, tego,
colligo, condo.
There are many who do visit the sick, give drink to the thirsty, feed the
hungry, redeem the captives, cloth the naked, reduce the wandering, and build
houses of relief for the aged and impotent. There are many, and many such (I
say;) and I pray God that there may be more knowledge of the Lord, Es. 11.6,
7, 8, 9.
even as the waters that cover that sea, that the Lions may eat straw, (that
is, that the cruel oppressors may not live upon rapine but innocently) and
that the Wolf, the Lion, the Leopard, and the Bear may be lead by the little
child, (that is, that the meanest of Gods Ministers may find those that are
most cruel by nature so obedient to the doctrine of Jesus Christ, that they
may be altered and lead to works of mercy in such kinds as the Gospel
requires:) that so the mouths of them of Gath and Ashkalon may be stopped,
and they may ever be ashamed to bark against us again.

Thirdly, who are these that except against us? I am sure we have more just
cause to except against the Popish works of mercy: because whatsoever they do,
it is in pride and vainglory to merit an eternal estate. Their works proceed
not from faith, neither are they sanctified by faith; because they tend to
maintain idleness and pride against God and Christ in Monasteries of
perfection, (as they dream) which God does not allow.





To the persons that plead thus, I answer two things: That such are either
idle, unprofitable, and alehouse drones, who could be content for the most
part to live upon other men's costs, and to be maintained at other men's tables:
or else that they measure God and religion by the belly; like the unbelieving
Israelites, who because they had not plenty in the wilderness, where they were
in the way to liberty, would return into Egypt again to their fleshpots
with Idolatry.

To the objection it self I say: Put case that there were better housekeeping
and greater plenty of all things, is this a note of the true religion, or of
the mercy of it? No surely. For first, plenty of all things is given to
godless persons. Psalm. 73.3, 4, 5.
It was David's temptation, that the foolish had no bands in their death, but
were lusty and strong, and were not in trouble like others, neither plagued
like other men. It was Jobs trouble, Job 21.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc.
that the wicked did grow in wealth, that their houses were peaceable without
fear, that their bullock gendred and failed not, that they sent forth their
children like sheep (well clad) and their sons danced, etc. It was Ieremies
grief, Ier. 12.1, 2, etc.
that the way of the wicked did prosper, and that they were in wealth who did
rebelliously transgress.

Secondly, greater plenty may be in the times of Idolatry than when true
Religion is practiced and embraced. Never forget that of the Prophet Jeremy:
Ier. 44.16, 17, 18, 19. Full. Mis^e^^. lib. 1. cap. 13.
He brings in the Idolaters (who had gone a whoring after Ashteroth, the
queen of heaven, that is, the Moon) pleading thus, that they would burn
incense to the queen of heaven, and power out drinke-offerings unto her:
because when they did so, they were well and had plenty of all things, and felt
none evil, but since they left it they had scarceness of all things, and were
consumed with the sword and with famine.

Thirdly, they who are void of love may be good housekeepers and liberal
persons. This Paul seems to imply when he says, 1 Cor. 13.3.
Though I feed the poor with all my goods, and have not love, it profits me
nothing: and we know that vainglory, and the praise of men do ordinarily
produce these effects even in Pharisees. Matthew. 6.1, 2.


Lastly, we may not wonder that there should be worse housekeeping now than in
former times of Idolatry. For the poor receive the Gospel, and the things of
this world, which are the matter of hospitality, are more generally given, as
the rewards of this life, to them that have no assurance of a reward in heaven.
There are many convinced of the truth of the Gospel, but few are converted,
and so they are not filled with mercy and compassion as they should be. And yet
we are not to blame our religion, which is merciful, but such hard-hearted
persons, that do not make that use of it which they should; but had rather
spend their estates in garish pomp, pride, and prodigality, than in releeuing
the Saints of God. Lo thus does it still stand good, that our Religion rather
than Popery has this mark of mercy upon it, notwithstanding these shows.

The last ground which I propounded to be considered from hence is this, that
Pure religion will keep us from open and professed tainture. This is that
which the Apostle implies, when he says, that it keeps our selves unspotted
of the world; to wit, if we hearken, and yield unto it, for the ruling of our
hearts. For otherwise it will do us no more good than physic, which is
presently vomited up again. Religion, in the very essence of it, is a doctrine
of living well, called, 1 Timothy 3.16.
The mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3.
and the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the doctrine which is
according to godliness. The knowledge of it is of the truth which is according
to godliness; Tit. 1.1.
Tit. 3.8.
and the fruit of it is a carfulness to show forth good works: all which do
imply, that where true religion is, it will keep us from open and professed
tainture. So long as Nicholas and Iezabel were ruled and swayed by true
religion, they were not spotted of the world; but when they fell from that,
then was the one the founder, and the other the protector of that cursed sect
of the Nicolaitanes. Psalm. 45.8.
All Christ's garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, says the Psalmist.
It may be he would signify thus much unto us, from the nature and use of these
three things named, that those garments or ornaments wherewith he covers us
his body in the sight of his Father, are Comfortatiue, Compurgatiue, and
Conseruatiue: that is, that the riches of Gods glorious grace, which are
communicated to us from Christ, will comfort us against the guilt of sin,
will purge us from the filth of sin, and will preserve us from the dominion and
power of sin. In which respect God speaks unto the religious, not only as
to those that are comforted, 1 Ioh. 5.21.
but to those that are purged; Fly from Idols, 2 Cor. 6.17.
and go out from amongst them, and separate your selves, and the like: as if
he should say, being made whole, sin no more lest a worse thing come unto you.





First, it is true that where God sows his seed, the devil that evil one
sows tares. For besides his malice to good, he seeks to disgrace the
generation of the just so much as possibly he can. He knew what line Jesus
Christ should come of, and therefore we see what blots he threw in the way, in
David, Judah, Tamar, and the like. Yea in this regard, as sometimes he has
drawn professors of religion by his cunning sophistry to be fearfully
scandalous in the way of God, to the wounding of their souls: so he has
thrust in hypocrites amongst them (such as Simon Magus) who, for sinister
respects of profit, glory, fellowship, and the like, have made show of
godliness and religion.

Secondly, though wickedness may be found amongst them who profess themselves
to be of the true Church, yet not to be defended, (for cursed be such members.)
There may be controuertible things, which seem to be sins to some, and to
others not so, which may find defenses on both sides: but none which are
clearly judged to be so by all sound members of the true Church.

Thirdly, In vera ecclesia peccatum cu^ improbatione and emendatione: in falsa
cum excusatione and defensione.
there may be sin in the true Church with the grief, reproof, and amendment
of the true members of it: whereas in a false Church it domineereth with
excuse, defense, and approbation.

How should I now apply this point, but first unto our selves, and secondly to
the Church of Rome? 2 Cor. 7.1. Jude verse. 23.
to grow up to full holiness, and to hate even the garment spotted by the
flesh: that so we may be assured that true religion does rule in our hearts.
You have heard that pure religion will keep us from open and professed
tainture. Carry we it therefore not only in our heads, but in our hearts, that
it may make us do so. Oh what a shame it is that we should profess our
selves to be of the pure religion, and yet live in impuritie and profaneness.
What good will physic do to us if we do not take it? So neither will pure
Religion, if it do not dwell in us for our amendment.

I confess, that as there were three parts of Salomons Temple; the outer
Court, the Holy place, and the Holy of Holies: so, like to these, there is a
threefold holiness corruptly so accounted. The first is outward joined with
outward profaneness, like the outer court where good and bad came. Such
holiness is among the multitude, who think it holiness enough to live
amongst holy people, to hear holy Sermons, and now and then to cast out a holy
word, how wicked soever their life be. Of this cursed holiness even all
assemblies will witness that there is enough. The second is outward holiness,
joined with a pretense of holiness in heart; like the holy place where wicked
Priests came, such as Ely his sons were; who had Holiness to the Lord
engraven on their foreheads, 1 Samuel ^.22.
yet would lie with the women assembled at the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation. Of this holiness also there is the Devils plenty. The third is
outward, joined with inward holiness; like the Holy of Holies, where God spoke
from between the Cherubims. Of this holiness give me leave to speak a word
to your consciences. O ye consciences, that one day shall be as books opened,
to accuse and condemn before God, speak and speak truly, where is this
holiness? Genesis 5.22. Genesis 6.9. Genesis 24 40. Psalm. 116 9.
Were Enoch, Noah, Abraham or David now alive, who walked with God, and before
God in the Land of the living, they would shame and grieve to see our
profaneness. There is little dying unto sin, or living unto grace and
godliness, to be found in the world. Holiness is the end of our redemption,
Luke 1.75.
and yet as Aulus Fuluius slew his son, when he found him in the conspiracy
of Catiline, Non Catilinae t^ genui, s^d pat^iae.
and said, I begat thee not for Catiline, but for thy Country: so may God
justly deal with many and many of us, who are in head against him with his
enemies, and say, I redeemed thee not for mine enemies, but for my self. I
pray God make it otherwise with us, and give us hearts to endeavor otherwise:
especially considering that holiness makes us to be the preseruers of the
Country, City, Town or house where we live. Had there been but ten holy men
in Sodom, it had been spared. Had not God ordained holy Moses to stand in the
gap, when the Israelites played the Calves in worshipping that cursed Idol,
they had perished in their sin. Yea, the Lord sought for a man in Jerusalem
that should make up the hedge and stand in the gap in the Land, that he might
not destroy it: Ezekiel. 22.30, 31.
And because he found none, therefore he poured out his wrath, and consumed
them with the fire of his indignation. True it is, Ex. 10.7.
that Pharaoh accounted Moses an offense to his Egypt; and Ahab thought Elyas
to be a troubler of Israel: 1 King. 18.17.
But in truth, as Laban was the better for Jacob, and Pharaohs Court for
Joseph: so Abraham was to be a blessing, Genesis 12.2.
and all the Seed of Abraham, that is, Holy people are as the horsemen of Israel
and the Chariots of the same, to defend and guard the places where they live.

If then you will ask me, How we may procure holiness.
how we may procure this holiness that we may not be spotted of the World? I
answer: Look what course a neat man does take that he may be cleanly, the same
course in a spiritual sense must we take that we may be holy.

Paul says, Romans 1.14.
We are debtors both to the Grecians and to the Barbarians) so you must be
ready to ask it to this end, even to discover and rifle the closets of your
hearts. Here is an excellent difference between those who are in the way to
cleanness, and uncleanness: These cannot endure to take notice of their
filthiness; their guilty hearts will endure no sounding: those have a purpose
to be cleanly, and would have the least filthiness to be discovered.

Ezekiel. 36.
he diggeth out the quarry of stones from the heart: So must we look to that
principally, and say with David, Psalm. 51.
Create in me a clean heart, O Lord, and renew a right spirit within me. Those
that mean never to be clean, begin at the feet and hand, that is, the outer
man: and if in outward conversation they do abstain from rebellion,
whoredom, murder, and the like, they think all is well, when they are but
painted sepulchers, full of rotten stuff and stink.

1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
and that the new man be cleansed from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2
Cor. ^.1.
and grow up in full holiness in the fear of God.



he wash us not we have no part in him; we must fall down before him in
faithful prayer, saying, O blessed Savior wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sins. Oh wash my feet, my head, my hands, my
affections, my imaginations, and my actions, that I may be unspotted of the
world. Thus we have heard the means of holiness, God give us grace to use
them to Gods glory and our eternal comfort.

Rome: and seeing it is natural to pure religion to keep us from open and
professed tainture, we learn that the religion of Rome is a false and
counterfeit religion. True religion is (as you have heard) according to
godliness, whereas the religion of Rome is the mystery of iniquity: and, 2
These. 2.7.
if we will be but careful to mark, we shall see, that they teach and
profess sins against all the grounds of religion. Epis. Derens. Diatrib. de
Antich. l. 3. c. 6, 7. Thomps. Antich. arra^g. page 96, 97, etc. Perk aduertis.
Willet. Synopsis, and others.
Some of our side do open it one way, some another, as they do abound in
their own sense: but I open it as it follows, as plainly as I can. As Adam
in his cursed apostasy from God, brake the whole law of nature in that one
sin of eating the forbidden fruit: sixth, by bringing death upon himself and
all the children of men: Doctor Carier, considerat. p. 7.
It is poorly blanched of them that say, that the Papists do use images for no
other purpose but only for a devout memory, and representation of the Church
triumphant, which is most fit to be made in the time and place of prayer, where
after a special manner we should with all reverence have our conuersations
amongst the Saints in heaven. This (I say) is a poor shift of those that
wilfully will not see that they will have images worshipped properly and for
their own sake, Bell^r. de Imag. l. 2. c. 21. and ^. 23. and Azor. Iustit.
mor. p^r. 1. l. 9. c. 6. 7, etc.
yea and some images (by the help of some nice distinction) with the same
worship which is due to God, as even their conscience men, or casuists do offer
it unto us. Constance. parents in pulling and exempting their children, who
have taken upon them Monkish vows, from their paternall power: yea by abusing
Kings in exempting the Clergy or Churchmen (as they are called) from the power
of their sword, and so robbing them of a great part of their subjects: as also
by blanching such execrable treason as has been committed against them, with
their seeming to abhor the fact, Doctor Car. consid. p. 8.
and their not doubting but that our Sovereign might have the powder plot
iudicially condemned, if complaint were made in a judicial proceeding: whereas
any man may see that this were to yoke a free Prince under the girdle of
Antichrist, in seeking to him to condemn that which so holy a Father should be
ready to condemn out of his own disposition, but that he would feign be
fingring of a Judges power and authority, in businesses between Princes and
their subjects. Principes a Papa exco^municatos e medio tollere non solum
licitum opus esse, sed etiam meritorium.
and by accounting it not only lawful, but meritorious to kill such Princes as
the Pope shall excommunicate. Doctor Car. consid. p. 9.
but either the pleasure of the Prince and Parliament, or the common cry and
voice of the people; whereas we accurse all parts of religion, which are not
grounded upon the holy Scriptures. They bear false witness also in canonizing
them for Saints which are none, yea and them for Saints which are rebels, as
their Thomas Becket. lusts, provided we consent not: as if he were not a knave
that did evil, though he be an honest man that consents not but reproves
rather; both these being in the same man.

Thus I have showed you that the Romish religion is not the true, because it
keeps not her professors from the spots of the world. I know (as they say)
that there are many corruptions in all states, and that God has no wheat field
in this world, where the devil has no tares growing: but for wickedness to
arise out of the doctrine that is taught, and out of the profession of it, is a
certain sign of no pure religion. Oh therefore, as the wise man has his eyes
in his head, so let us. Let us see the impuritie of their profession: and as
we love our souls, let us take heed of their mystery of iniquity in a
golden cup.

I might also show you how they sin against the belief by their high Priest
and King the Pope, multitude of mediators, merits, Catholic particular Church,
Justification, Priestly absolute absolution, and the like: so also how they sin
against the Lords prayer, by invocation of Saints, implicit faith, freewill,
merit of works, and the like: so likewise against the Sacraments by humane
mixtures, the sacrifice of the Mass, corporal presence, and so adoration. But
it will be enough to an honest heart to see day at a little hole, and to learn
by the paw to know and hate the whole body of Popery.

To end in a word therefore: I have taught you to have a religion, and to have
that religion which does most approve it self to God. I pray God therefore
that we may be wise to discern it by the mercifulness of it, and by its
freedom from spots, that we, renouncing all false religions and worships, may
cleave unto God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him ours, even in
truth and faithfulness: Even so, Amen.

Soli Deo Gloria.

