The Hellish and horribble Council, practiced and used by the Jesuits, (in
their private Consultations) when they would have a man to murder a KING.

According to those damnable instructions, given (by them) to that bloody
villain FRANCIS RAVILLIACKE, who murdered HENRY the fourth, the late French
King.

Sent to the Queen Regent, in answer of that impudent Pamphlet, published by
PETER COTTON Jesuit, in defense of the Jesuits, and their doctrine; which
also is hereunto annexed.

Translated out of French.

JOHN 8. VER. 44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the desires of your
father ye will do: he has been a murderer from the beginning. LONDON,
Printed for T. B. and are to be sold by John Wright at his shop by
Christs-Church-gate. 1610.

TO THE QVEENE, MOTHER OF OUR KING, AND REGENT OF FRANCE.
MADAME,
THE combat of spirits is so jealous, as there is not any kind of error, how
clear and evident so ever it be, but it shall find a defender, rather then
any way to yield or give place to truth: because opinion, in such minds as
pride will never permit, to humble themselves under the victorious arm of the
strongest wrastler, bears them out (with no mean courage) in all apparent and
impudent shame. The Jesuits do hereof give sufficient testimony, whose
doctrine, both justifying and defending the killing of Princes, they dare yet
put on such shameless vizardes; as, to persuade your Highness, that they are
no such men, neither do deserve any such taxation.

Upon this our late lamentable disaster in France, by such a bloody, fatal,
and parricide hand, as has bereft us of the most remarkable King, that ever
this flourishing Kingdom enjoyed; the Jesuits, to excuse their hellish hearts,
and palpable bloody intentions (having been so highly favored from you, as to
have the burial of the Kings heart, at the College of La Flesche) have
published a little pamphlet, called; A dedicatorie Letter, of the doctrine of
the Fathers Jesuits, conformable to the decrees in the Council of Constance;
directing it also to your Majesty, that you might remain fully assured, of
their harmless innocence and honest inclination.

But, as it becomes any true hearted Frenchman, (so much as in him lies) to
discover truth from falsehood, and verity from lying; I have sent unto your
sacred view, the same book of Peter Cottons, without altering or adding
thereunto any the very least syllable. And when your Highness shall have read
it over, that you would be pleased, to read likewise a much shorter discourse
following, to give you a true taste of the Jesuits doctrine, and whereby you
may discern them in their kind. So may you rest fully persuaded, how near
their hollow hearts and equiuocating souls do agree together, and how studious
they are, in employing their pains and uttermost endeavor, to nurse up such
villains as must become the murderers of Kings.

Withal, if it might please you, but to remember him, to whom (that monster of
men) Rauilliack, that robde you of your richest jewel, and us of our dearest
Lord; had shown the fatal instrument, wherewith he did the deed, and the man
commending the beautiful workmanship of the knife, seeing withal, that he
kept it curiously, and made no use thereof in his feeding; was answered by the
said Rauilliack: That that fair knife, was to perform a fair deed, yea,
that it was to kill a King. Which words, whether he understood not, or
guiltily concealed them, he paid the price of his life for: And with that, as
also these other serious considerations, I humbly entreat your Highness, to
take an entire apprehension of these dangerous men, how smooth soever Cottons
discourse shall appear unto you. (*)

THE SECRET AND hidden Mystery, which the Jesuits do use, when they resolve
to have a King murdered.
WHen they would have a man to undertake the resolution of murdering his King,
this is their order: After such a wicked person shall be entered into their
Meditation, or Chamber appointed for such prayers; then this infernal offspring
do give their attendance, and lay before him a knife foulded up in a Skarffe,
and closed in a little Casket of Iuorie, covered with an Agnus Dei, written
round about with many sweet and perfumed Characters. And taking the knife
forth of the said Casket, they bedew it with diverse sprincklings of holy water,
and sastening to the have or handle thereof, sundry little beads of Corrall, to
the number of five or six, blessed and hallowed with their holy water; they do
give thereby to understand, that he giving so many stabbes or wounds with that
knife, shall (by that act) release as many souls out of the fire of Purgatory.

Then, delivering it into the hand of the murderer; they utter these words: Go
thou forth like Iephtah; the sword of Sampson; the sword whereby David did cut
off the head of Goliath; the sword of Gedeon; the sword wherewith Judith did cut
off the head of Holofernes; and the same wherewith Saint Peter did smite off
the ear of Malchus, and the sword of Pope Julius the second, whereby he brake
the power of Princes, and (with great effusion of blood) got out of their
hands the Cities of Setusa, Imola, Fayenza, Furlie, Bologna, and many other
Cities: Go thou forth (I say) be virtuous, and God will strengthen thine arm.

After this, the hellish company do all fall down upon their knees, and the
most renouned among them, or he that is the chief Priest, makes the
coniuration, saying these words that follow: come Cherubins, come Seraphins,
Thrones and Dominations; come most blessed Angels, Angels of charity; come and
fill this holy vessel of glory and eternity, and carry him forthwith to the
crown of the Virgin Mary, of Patriarchs and of Martyrs: for he is no more one
of ours, but he is yours.

And thou, O great and powerful God, that have revealed unto him, in his
prayer and Meditation that he must (of necessity) be the murderer of a Tyrant
and Heretic, to give his crown to a Catholic King, and he being (by us)
made apt and disposed unto this murder: do thou fortefie his senses, and make
bold his courage, to the end, that he may accomplish thy will. Arm him with a
complete Armor of thy providence, to escape from them that would apprehend
him. Give him wings, that the foul hands of the barbarous may not touch his
sanctified members. Spread the beams of thy joys upon his soul, to the end
that thereby his body may be so encouraged, that cheerfully he may dispose
himself to this fight, without any fear.

This coniuration being thus ended, they bring him before an Altar, and there
they show him a goodly picture, wherein the Angels do bear the body of James
Clement the Iacobine Friar, who murdered HENRY the third, King of France, and
present it before the Throne of God, saying: O Lord, behold thy scholar; see
the defender and accomplisher of thy justice, and all the Saints arise out of
their rooms, to give him place.

When all these things are thus done and finished, then is there no more but
four Jesuits, that may be allowed to speak unto him, and when they draw
near unto him, they tell him, that it appears that there is some Diety
dwelling in him, and they are so affraide of the splendour shining in him, as
falling down, and kissing his hands and feet, they hold him no more for a
mortal man, but stand by him, as half unworthy of the great glory and
happiness, whereunto he has already attained, and breathing forth many sighs,
they say unto him. I would to God, that he had elected and called me into your
estate and condition: for then should I be certainly assured, to go really and
presently into Paradise, without ever coming into Purgatory.

FINIS.
A Declaratorie Letter, to the Queen, Mother of the King, Regent in France.
MADAME,
GOD ordained in the old Testament, that no man should seethe the Kidde in the
Milk of her Damme or Mother; to instruct thereby, according to the exposition
of Philo the Jew, that he should not be charged with new affliction, who in
other cases is oppressed. According to this rule dictated of the same nature,
these men of our Society should hope, that, by this lamentable accident which
has shaken with dreadfulnesse the two Poles of Christendom; they might (at
least) have a free breathing, to sigh after their incomparable loss: a loss
which to them is as much in particular, as it is to all in general and common.
But they pay the same price, as happens to them who meeting under the ruins of
a crazed building, where one stone stays not for another, do cover and
ouerwhelme them altogether upon whom they fall: we being with heart and body
busied, for translation of that precious pawn and remarkable gage, which it
pleased your Majesty to have consigned into our hands, by them of my Lord the
Prince de Conty, and whereunto the principal Lords of France rendered their
latest honors: when there were some, slenderly affected to Catholic
Religion, and to them that are of our profession; to discredit us, and make
benefit of our absence; who sowed abroad such bruites, so far off from true
resemblance and probability, as a man would never have imagined, that such
calumnies could enter, (especially in railing) into the opinion of any
reasonable soul.

This came by the occasion of a very badde book, the doctrine whereof has
been (by good right) condemned, by the Court of Parliament: some maintaining,
that the doctrine contained in that book, was common to all the Jesuits:
Others, that it was in such sort particular to the Author, as that many of the
self same company had written to the contrary, and altogether had condemned
it, in the body of the Provincial congregation, some few years since. A
difference, which the least passionate might determine, concluding, that
disallowance should be the reason, and that it must be attended, what we should
say thereof.

Whereupon, I having been named in particular, this is the cause, Madame, that
instantly made me set hand to pen, to represent unto you, (as to her that is
equally affected to the true Religion, the most interessed in the good of this
State, and the very safest Sanctuary that innocence can have) that which the
Doctors of our company have written upon this subject. Knowing, that the
greatness of affairs will not easily permit you, to look into this case your
self, nor the little love which those detractors do bear us, make any true
report unto you.

After all this, I will declare with the self same breuity, what is the common
sense, and what is the opinion of our Society, dispersed through the world
concerning the matter whereof question is made. They all presupposing one
verity, which cannot be called into controversy, no, not even by the hateful
and envious of this flourishing Crown: To wit, that the subject which was
debated in the Council of Constance, and which (since then) has been
declared more amply by our Catholic Doctors, concerning the expulsion of
Tyrants: does not any way touch the happy renown and most honorable memory,
of him whose death we deeply deplore, his life having been so far from the
detection of tyranny; as it has been, and for ever shall be to all the
Monarchs in the world: the model of Piety, Justice, Clemency, Valor,
Debonaritie, and Fatherly affection toward all his Subjects.

In the first place, the most Illustrous Cardinal Tolet presents himself to
our eyes, a personage of rare knowledge, a Spaniard by Nation, and a Frenchman
in affection. In the first Book of his Sum, the sixth Chapter, there he
teaches in express terms that it is not lawful to attempt on the life of a
Prince although he do abuse his power. And adds, that to maintain the
contrary, is an heretical doctrine, condemned in the Council of Constance.

The most Illustrous and most learned Bellarmine, answering to the self same
objection, in the third Chapter of his Apologeticall answer to the book of
the King of great Britain speaks thus. I have never read, nor heard it
said, that eternal life should be promised, to them that attempt on the life
of Kings. But contrariwise I have read, that the Article which says: Every
Tyrant may and ought lawfully be slain: was long since condemned in the first
Session of the Council of Constance. Very true it is, that John Wickliffe an
Englishman, he whom the Protestants do praise so much, and of whose
commendations they have made a Placarde in the frontispice of their Histories,
teaches: That he is no longer a Lord, either Ecclesiastical or Civil, after
the one or other is fallen into any deadly sin. An error which the said
Council condemned in the eight Session.

Gregory of Valencia, a man of eminent knowledge, as public testimony makes
proof, which is delivered of him in Italy, Spain, and Germany; he writing on
the second part of Saint Thomas, Question 64 and conforming himself to the
Doctrine of other School Divines, determines: that it is no way permitted to
attempt upon the life of a Prince, although he should abuse his authority.

Alphonsus Salmeron, in the thirteenth Tome of his works, expounding the
thirteenth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, instructs the very same, he
cites the Council of Constance, and declares the fact of Aod on Eglon King
of the Moabites, Or Ehud.
by the express and manifest commandment of God, of whom no man ought to be
Judge, in his particular case.

Martin del Rio, who is in like manner famous in all kind of good writings, in
his Commentaries upon Hercules Furens in Seneca, number 920. says: That the
sentence of the Poet is perilous, and alleges to the contrary, the decree of
the Council of Constance, which cannot be too often inculcated, reiterated,
and declared to the people in this matter.

Sebastian Heissius, in his Apologeticall declaration of Aphorisms, attributed
to the Jesuits doctrine, shows by the very words of Mariana, that he spoke
out of his own head, and that he himself, perceiving that he had exceeded the
limits of the common doctrine, did acknowledge, that he was subject to error,
and he should be submitted to the censure of whomsoever would accept it,
immediately after, his opinion was brought, and the common censure of all the
Divines of our company, that he counterpointed that of the said Mariana.

Martin Becanus, in his Answer to the ninth Aphorism, sends the Reader to
the Council of Constance, showing, that a lawful Prince cannot loose his
superiority, although he should become a Tyrant.

Jacques Gretserus, Reader in Divinity at Ingolstad, in his Book entitled
vespertilio haereticopolicus, answering to some objections that had been made
unto him concerning the opinion of Mariana; says with Heissius: That he ought
to hold with the common consent, leaving the particular judgment of Mariana,
and that he himself had submitted to that of others.

Leonard Lessius Reader in Divinity at Louaine, in his second book De
iusticia and iure, the ninth Chapter, and fourth doubt; gives his consent
likewise to the common sentence, That it is not lawful to enterprise on the
person of a Prince, although he should abuse his power; grounding his saying
on the advertisement of the Prince of the Apostles, Servants, be ye subject to
your Masters, and not only to the good and modest, but also to the sharp and
troublesome, and then he alleges the above named Decree of the Council.

Nicholas Serier, writing on the third Chapter of the book of Judges, in the
first question, declares, that the Act of Aod, neither can, or ought to serve,
for fore-iudging or example to detestable Assassinates, Parricides, and
murderers of their Kings.

John Azor, in the second part of his moral Institutions, the first book,
fifth Chapter, and tenth Question, shows himself a much greater enemy of the
audacious and sacrilegious attentates, of such as shall enterprise upon the
lives of Princes, Instructing, that it is not lawful, to attempt on the lives
of them that do unjustly possess themselves of ane State, Grounding his
saying principally upon this; that no man ought to be condemned, before he be
heard, and without knowledge of the cause, in which case, any one particular is
no competent Judge.

As for Jews Richeome, his Apologies do make peremptory proof of the
unreconcilable hatred, which he bears to the doctrine of such, as dogmatise
against the authority of Kings, And that in such manner, as the Lord Pasquire
himself, a critic censurer of his works, after he has reported his words
in the third book and first Chapter, he commends him, and says, that he
cannot choose but love him, adding these words, I cannot choose but honor thee,
beholding thee, to portraite the Idea of obedience, which the Subject owes to
his King. A praise which he might give to many other of the same Society,
who, after they had examined this matter with Saint Thomas and the whole
School, concluded all conformably to the Sorbonne, and to that which has
been determined in the Council of Constance.

Such then being the sense, and such the sentences of these Doctors, very grave
and signal men of our company, what prejudice can the particular opinion of
Mariana bring to the reputation of a whole Order? which Order being (according
to her Institution) extremely jealous, for the manutention of those holy
ordinances of the Church, and respecting the power and authority of Kings, who,
for their temporal estate, do depend only upon God: have (of long time)
disallowed the legertie of a dry pen, and namely in the Provincial
congregation of France, held in this City of Paris the year 1606. where
moreover, the reverend Father Claudius Aquanina, General of our Company, was
required, that such as had written to the prejudice of the Crown of France,
might be reproved, and their Books suppressed, which the said Reverend
Father (afterward) did very seriously and exactly: being very sorry, that by
ouer-sight or negligence in his absence, and without sight of the work; any
one should presume upon his admittance. The words which he uses in his
answer, are these. We have approved the judgment and care of your
congregation, and have been greatly grieved, that no man will look after the
impressions of such Books: which Books nevertheless, we have suddenly
commanded to be corrected, and shall have most exact care hence-forwarde, that
such things shall not happen any more.

So that very hardly now is to be found one only Copy of Mariana, except it be
by the pernicious liberality, of the inheritours of Wechell, who are known to
be of the pretended reformed Religion: and have caused the said Book to be
imprinted at their own proper charges, not so much excited (as is easy to be
presumed) by desire to the public service, as particularly to hurt our
Company. Some are of the mind, that they have added thereto somewhat of their
own: Others say, that those Books of the first impression were much worse, a
controversy serving to no purpose: for albeit it were so, and that no man had
lent any charity, to this ill-handled pen: yet is there no reason why it
should rather incommodate the body of our Society; then the writings of John
Petit, and others, the Uniuersities and Orders whereof they were Scholars,
Batchelers, Masters, and Doctors.

But forasmuch, Madame, as I made promise in the beginning, to expose clearly
and distinctly what our opinion and credence is, touching the matter proposed,
I come now to the point, which shall make up the last part of this declaration.

1. All the Jesuits in general and particural, will sign, yea, even with
their proper blood; that they do not hold, either in this matter, or any other
whatsoever, any other faith, doctrine, or opinion, then that of the whole
universal Church.

2. In the second place, that among all the kinds of government, and public
administration, Monarchy only is the best.

3. That such is the spiritual government of the Church, as it came to the
Vicar of Jesus Christ the successor of Saint Peter, and such the temporal of
the State and Kingdom of France, as it holds in the person of the King, her
sovereign Lord and Master.

4. That Kings are, as Homer calls them, the children, and darlings of God, or
rather his souls image, as Meander says.

5. That they are anointed, and thereby surnamed Christ's of the Lord, to the
end, says Simon Archbishop of Thessalonica, that each one may understand, that
they are inviolable, and ought to be respected, as things holy and sacred.

6. That it is a damnable heresy (even as Saint Ireneus noted it fourteen
hundred years ago) to believe, that Kings are given to men by chance or hap,
S. Iren lib. 5. Cap 24.
considering that all power comes of God. And because, says Saint Isidore of
Damieta, in the most ancient paintings, we behold a hand coming out of
heaven, that sets a Crown upon their head.

7. That whosoever resists Kings, or rebelleth against them, Romans 13. 2.
begets his own damnation according to the doc^rine of the Apostle.

8. That obedience is due unto them, not because they are virtuous, wise,
potent, or endued with other commendable qualities: but because they are Kings,
established by God.

9. That our Kings in France, are the eldest in the Church, endowed with rare
and signal privileges, above the common condition of other Kings in the world.

10. That it is not lawful to deny them obedience, much less then to revolt
or turn against them: although they were vicious, hard to endure, and froward,
according as the same Apostle speaks. 1. Pet. 2. 11.


11. That in such case, we ought to pray for them, as the Prophet willed it to
be done, for the prosperity of Nabuchodonozer, and Balthazar his son. And
that afflictions, loss of goods, persecutions, and other discommodities, are
to be endured patiently: without rebelling (for any of these) against
superiors, because such things are most acceptable to God, and conformable to
the praise, which (in the like case) S. Paul gave to the Hebrews, and to the
ordinance which he had published in the Church, Heb. 10. 34.
saying, Let every soul be subject to the superior powers.

12. And therefore, that not only it is unlawful, to attempt upon their
persons; but also, that it is an execrable paricide, a prodigious offense, and
a detestable sacrilege.

13. That the Decree in the Council of Constance in the fifteenth Session,
ought to be received of all men, and also to be maintained inuiolably.

14. That the declaration of Sorbonne, in the year 141^. and that of June this
present year, is good, holy and wholesome.

15. What every one is to be advertised, to take heed of diverse Books, which
go against the Edicts, the reading whereof is not only in this matter greatly
dangerous: but much more to be feared, that their Authors being (to our
extreme greef) themselves divided from the Catholic Church, do hold (as
nothing) the Council of Constance, all Catholic censures, and the Doctors
before mentioned: but that which is to be deplored, they do fortify
themselves the stronger in their opinions, by their opposition, and seem to
render themselves so much the more recommendable unto their admirers.

I would note down the places, specify the passages, and allege the very
words: were it not, that it is much better, they should remain buried in the
bottomless depth of oblivion: and fitteth more conveniently, to make known,
that innocence has better arms, then this recrimination.

And for this reason also, I could wholly have abstained from this
advertisement, had it not been my desire to show, that the body of our
company, can no more be infected by the opinion of one man, then those of the
pretended reformed Religion, do find themselves any way interessed, by the
erroneous doctrine of some of their own rank: whom they reject, disallowe,
and condemn, as willing to live (with us) under the laws of the Kingdom, and
with the obedience and voluntary submission, which we render to the Scepter
of our Kings. And I am persuaded, that if they had the pen in hand, as I
have, they would say with us, and thunder out a curse (even in common voice)
against such infamous Authors.

Which being maturely and wisely considered, as well by the Court of
Parliament, as by the sacred College of Sorbonne: they have made no mention at
all in their Arrest and Decree, of the doctrine of the Jesuits. Knowing very
well, like just Judges and Doctors, that faults are personal; that there would
be no innocence in the world, if the offense of one man should be imputed to
another, and that it has been a deplorable and incommunicable property of
sin, which was committed by the first man, to have his extendure over others,
because his posterity was represented in his person. Knowing also elsewhere,
by the reiterated disposition of the wicked, that Mariana had not in any thing
contributed to this execrable parricide, neither could he do it: considering,
that the villain had not sufficient intelligence, of the tongue, wherein the
said book was written.

Wherein is discovered, the scarce charitable intention of such as stick not
to say, that he had it all by heart, to the end, to throw the public hatred of
this mishappe, on others, then on the culpable himself. It is then in this
case, Madame, that you are most humbly entreated, to employ your supreme
authority, and to ordain, that all those writings, which, in the beginning are
small glimpses of rebellion, and (in few hours) will become flaming Beacons of
sedition; may be taken from the instant view of the French: you are our
Sovereign Lady, endued by God, with a high understanding, and with virtues no
way to be equalled, you can clearly discern, how much it imports, that we
should live united, which seeing it cannot be, in one and the same faith, by
reason of the iniquity of time, at least let it be in fidelity, obedience and
mutual affection, for conservation of our peace.

We have a King, who in his young age represents to us, the spirit and
substance of great Henry, his Father, your husband, and who with the increasing
of his years, will have, (while it pleases God to continue upon him his
benign influences) his valor, his wisdom, his good fortune, and his
experience. It is for us, to cherish this treasure, to serve (with good hearts)
this great and little Master: And willingly to obey you his most-honoured
Mother, our Regent and Mistress.

And to the end, that nothing may trouble the union, which only can (next
under God) preserve this puissant Monarchy, and render it evermore dreadful to
her enemies, how much were it to be desired, Madam, that (among us) there could
no false speakers be found? If the imposture were banished, his fraternity
should receive the wages due to their calumny; rancours would be rooted up, and
when any sinister report is brought us, then judgment would be susspended: And
in a word, according to the Council of the Apostle, each one would maintain
inuiolably the band of charity.

Those Otaconstes and Prosagogides of these times, are greatly to be feared,
and some do hold assuredly, that if it so liked your Majesty, such tongues
should receive the recompense of the ancient Quadruplatores. But if they have
it not from men, let them attend the inevitable justice of him, who is the
Author, protector, and (in the end) the rewarder of innocence.

Our small company is entered, and (above al other Religious families) most
exposed to the hatred and calumny of such, as will not take the pains to know
them. And you do know, Madam, how many times the deceased King our good
Master, did himself do us the favor, to defend and make us known: you can
witness it, and no body knows it better then you, that wheresoever that great
Prince was, we had in him a King, a Father, and a Defender. But alas, it can no
more be so, great Henry is taken away from us.

O France, the eye of Christendom, Rose of Empires, and Pearl of the world,
how great is this loss for thee, and how horrible this ship-wracke? France,
the favorite of heaven, and well-beloved of God; who has taken away the Mantle
of glory, that covered thee, and the crown of honor, that exalted it self so
highly upon thy head? who has dealt with thee so, thou chosen of God? who has
thus afflicted thee?

But thou poor society, that could not subsist, but by the blessings of
that Monarch, who has made thee so desolate? so deplorably abased, and so
miserably enthralled? the misfortune is common to all, but it is singularly
particular to thee, this blow has smitten the whole body of the Kingdom, but
it has wounded thee (almost) mortally. O how approuedly is it true, and how
sensibly do thou feel it; that grief if it had a tongue, could not call it
self grief? And I, that write these things, how just reason have I, yea, more
then all others, to leave my self to the sad accents of a teares-drowned
voice, and to say, Adieu O thou wonder of Kings, Adieu thou ornament of this
age, our joy, our glory, and our honor, Adieu thou father of the weal
public, restorer of the state, second founder and cheifest benefactor of our
company.

Adieu my King, my Prince and my defender, thou have given us in this vale of
tears, the rest that is here to be had: rest thee then in peace, live for ever
among the Lillies and the Roses, delivered from the thorny charge of this
Monarchy, and enjoy the blessedness, not of earth, but of heaven. Here thou
have bin the most eminent subject of the grace of God, be there now on high,
and for ever so continue, the object of his mercies. The laurels of this base
earth, do wither very easily, let thy head wear them that are always
verdant: Those victories, triumphs, and Empires, which thou beheldest here
below; are now changed into a more eminent glory, live then for ever rejoicing
in that possession (of all men) most desired.

Thy happiness gives us leave to respire, thy absence justly compels us to
suspire, and the place where we make no doubt thou art, makes us thither to
aspire: for leaning on the mercy of God, the sorrowful circumstances of thy
decease, cannot deprive us of hope, to meet thee in the goodly great day, even
there, where we shall find thy principal, and the wished arrival, after so
grievous a divorce.

And during the sadness of this expectation, you Madam, with the King his
lively Image, shall wipe away part of our tears. We do acknowledge his person
in your persons, his Crown, in your Crowns, and his authority Royal, in yours:
and though all your subjects are bound thereto, by all kinds of duties; yet
our company, being thereto extraordinarily obliged: have charged me to present
at the feet of your Majesty, the most sincerest vows of their fidelity, and
affectuous offers of their most humble service, which I do, Madam, and so much
the*more willingly, because I am tied thereto by a very singular taste of grace,

From your Majesty, Your most humble servant, most obedient and faithful
subject, Peter Cotton, of the company of Jesus.


