A SHORT VIEW OF THE Long Life and Reign of HENRY the Third, King of ENGLAND.

Presented to King JAMES.

Printed. MDcxxvII.

portrait of Henry III

Henricus III D. G. Rex Ang: Dux Aquit: etc Dom: Hib:


A Short view of the long Reign of Henry the third.
WEaried with the lingering calamities of Civil Arms, and afrighted at the
sudden fall of a licencious Sovereign, all men stood at gaze expecting the
event of their long desires (Peace) and issue of their new hopes (Benefit.) For
in every shift of Princes there are few either so mean or modest that please
not themselves with some probable object of preferment. To satisfy all, Hist.
minor Math. Paris.
a child ascends the throne, mild and gracious, but easy of nature, whose
Innocence and natural goodness led him safe along the various dangers of his
fathers Reign: Happy was he in his Uncle the Earl of Pembrook, the guide of
his infancy, and no less then for thirty years after whilst De Burgo, that
fast servant of his Fathers against the French, both in Normandy and England
with Bygod Earl of Norffolke and others of like gravity and experience did
manage the Affairs. Few and no other were the distempers then in State, but
such as are incident to all, the Commons greedy of liberty, and the Nobility of
Rule, Math. Paris Hist. mayor.
and but one violent storm raised by some old and constant followers of his
Father, Fulco de Brent de Fortibus and others, men that could only thrive by
the wars, misliking those days of sloth* (for so they termed that calm of
King Henry's government;) and the rather because the Justice of quiet times
urged from them to the lawful owners, such Lands and Castles as the fury of
war had unjustly given them, for finding in the uprightness of the King, that
power of protection should not be made a wrong doer, they fell out into that
rebellion, that with it, Hist. Sancti. Albani.
ended their lives and competitors, professing that those their swords that had
set the Crown upon their Sovereigns head, when neither Majesty nor Law
could, should now secure those small pittances to their Masters, when Majesty
or Law would not. Dangerous are too great benefits of Subjects to their
Princes, when it makes the mind only capable of merit, nothing of duty* No
other disquiet did the State after this feel, but such as is incident in all,
the malice to Authority: Good and great men may secure themselves from guilt,
but not from envy: for the greatest in trust of public affairs are still
shot at by the aspiring of those that deem themselves less in employment then
they are in merit. These vapors did ever and easily vanish so long as the
helm was guided by temperate spirits, and the King tied his Actions to the
rule of good Counsel, and not to young passionate or single advise.

Thirty years now passed, Chro. de Dunst* Joan. de Wallingford.
and all the old guides of his youth now dead, but de Burgo, (a man in whom
nothing of worth was wanting but moderation,) whose length of days giving him
the advantage of sole power, his own Ambition and Age gave him desire, and
Art, to keep out others, which wrought him into the fatal envy of most, and
that increased in the Title of Earl, and great Offices the King then gave him.
Time by this, had wrought, as in it self, so in the hearts of the people, a
Revolution, the afflictions of their fathers forgotten, and the surfeit of long
peace; perchance having let in some abuses, from hence, the Commons to whom
days present seem ever worst, commend the foregone ages they never remembered,
and condemn the present, though they knew neither the disease thereof, nor the
remedy.

Chro. de Litchfield.
To these idle and usual humors, fell in some of the young and noble spirits,
warm and over-weaning (who being as truly ignorant as the rest) first by
sullying the wisdom of the present and greatest rulers, (making each casual
mishap their Errors:) seem to decypher every blemish in Government, and then
by holding certain imaginary and fantastic forms of Common wealths, flatter
their own belief and ability, that they can mold any State, to these general
rules, which in particular application will prove idle and gross absurdities.

Next confirmed in their own worth by Sommery and Spencer, Gual. de Coue^.
they take it a fit time to work themselves into action, and employment, a
thing they had long desired, and now (though unwilling to seem so) do sue
for, and doubtless the furthest of their aim was yet, to become quiet
instruments in serving the State, if they had been then held fit and worthy.

But the King taught by the new Earl, That Consilia senum hastas juvenum esse;
and that such wits, (for so they would be styled) were Nouandis quam gerendis
rebus aptiores, fitter in being factious to disorder, then to settle affairs,
either denied or delayed their desires; for wise Princes will ever choose their
Instruments Parnegotijs, and not supra, Creatures out of mere election, that
are only theirs, otherwise, without friends or power.

Amongst this unequal medly, there were of the Nobility, Math. Paris. Hist.
minor.
Richard Earl of Pembrook, Gloucester, and Hartford, darlings of the multitude;
some for the merit of their Fathers, whose memories they held Sacred, as
Pillars of public liberty and opposers of encroaching Monarchy: at Runemeed
the Armies met. And of the Gentry, Gron. Petri Pe^^auien.
Fitz-Geffe^ry, Bardolph, Grisley, Maunsell and Fitz-Iohn, spirits of as much
Acrimony and Arrogant spleen, as the places from whence they were elected
Camp, Court, or Country, could afford any: These by force would effect what
the other did affect by cunning; but all impatient, to see their ends thus
frustrate, and that so long as the King followed the direction of the Earl of
Kent, they had small hope of their desires, they made often meetings; Ma(...)
Paris.
and as one says of them, Clam and nocturnis colloqujs aut flexum in vesperum
die.

In the end, Sommery and Spencer, two that were far in opinion with the rest,
Gentlemen, by Foreign education and employment, more quallified then usually
men of these Times; and that set upon their own deserts, the best places when
the Stream should turn, (which one of them, Spencer, did unworthily obtain,
for he dyed in actual Rebellion, Iusticiarius Angliae, against his master)
advised that the best means to remove that great and good obstackle, the
Earl of Kent, out of the way of their advancement, was by sifting into his
actions, and siding with his opposite, Peter Bishop of Winchester, (an ill man,
but gracious with the King) making still their ends, that the worthiest being
driven out by the worst, they shall either be able to mate him with his own
vice, which will be ever more visible, as he is more potent, and so remove
him at pleasure; or else give over the King to such Ministers, to their bad
desires, as loosing him the hearts of his people, might smooth them away to
their bad desires, Honores quos quieta Republica desperant, Acero in Cattalline
Orat. prima.
perturbata consequi se posse arbitrantur. This Counsel heard, approved and
put in practice, the corrupt and ambitious Bishop is easily ensnared to their
part, by money and opinion, of increase of power.

Articles are in all have forged, and urged against the Earl, Lib. Bermondsey
Vita abbati sancti alban^
as sale of Crown land; wast of the Kings Treasure; and lastly, (that which
these doubtful times held capital) his giving allowance to any thing that
might breed a rupture between the Sovereign and the Subjects, as he had done
in making way with the King, to annihilate all Patents granted in his nonage,
Lib. Bermondsey vita abbatis sancti albani.
and enforced the subject to pay as the Record says, Non juxta singulorum
facultatem, sed quicquid Iusticiarius estimabat.

Well? he cleared himself of all, but the last, and did worthily perish by
it, for arts that fill Princes Coffers, are ever the ruins of their first
Inventors; bad times corrupt good Counsels, and make the best Ministers,
yield to the lust of Princes, therefore this King cannot pass blameless,
that would so easily blemish all former merrits, of so good a servant, for that
wherein himself was chief in fault.

But Princes natures are more variable, and sooner cloyd then others, more
transitory their favors, and as their minds are large, so they easily over
look their first election, tying their affections, no further then their own
satisfactions.

The Bishop now alone manageth the State, chooses his chief Instrument, Peter
De Riuallis, a man like himself, displaceth the natives, and draws Poictoins
and Brittons into Offices of best trust, and benefit; and the King into an
evil opinion of his people. For nothing is more against the nature of the
English, then to have strangers rule over them, of this man's time, Wendouer, an
Author then living, says, Iuditia committunter injustis, Leges ex*legibus, Pax
discordantibus, justitia iniuriosis. Thus the plot of the tumultuous Barons
went clear, and had not the discreeter Bishops calmed all by dutiful
persuasions, Regis Roffen.
Annalis de Ely.
and informing the King that the support of this bold man's power (whose
carriage before had lost his Father* Normandy, the love of his people, and in
that his Crown) would by teaching the son to reject in passion the just
petitions of his loyal Subjects, (as of late the Earl of Pembrooke his Earl
Marshall of England the due of his Office) drive all the State into discontent
by his bad advise, and corrupt manners; doubtless the rebellious Lords had
ended this distemper, as their design was, in a civil War.

Denials from Princes must be supplied with gracious usage, that though they
cure not the sore, yet they may abate the sense of it; but best it is, that all
favors come directly from themselves; denialls and things of bitterness from
their Ministers.

Thus are the strangers all displaced and banished, Riuallis extortions
ransackt, Claus. anno 37 H. 3. M. 26. Chron. Hall.
by many strict Commissions of enquiry; the Bishop sent away disgraced, finds
now that Nulla quae sita scelere potentia diuturna; and that in Princes favors
there is no subsistence between the highest of all, and precipitation. The
Lords still frustrate of their malicious ends, began to sow of these late
grounds of the peoples discontent, Querelas and ambiguos de principe sermones
and quaeque alia turbamenta vulgi, and took it up a fashion to endeare and
glorify themselves with the senseless multitude, by depraving the Kings
discretion, and Government, whose nature too gentle for such insolent spirits,
was forced (as Treuet says) to seek as he presently did, advise and love
amongst strangers, seeing no desert could purchase it at home, all bore
themselves like Tutors and Controllers, few like subjects and Councillors. God
we see holds the hearts of Princes, and sends them such Counselors as the
quality of the subject merriteth.

Chron. Litchf.
For Mountford a Frenchman became the next Object of the Kings Delight, a
Gentleman of choice blood, education, and feature, on this man's content, the
heady affection of the Sovereign did so much Doat, that at his first entrance
of Grace, in envy of the Nobility, he made him Earl of Leicester; and in no
less offense of the Clergy, Math. Paris. Roger VVendouer
by violating the rites of the holy Church, gave him his vowed, veiled, sister
to wife. More of Art then usual some have deemed this act of the Kings,
making the tie of his dependancy, the strength of his assurance, so both at his
will.

Chron. Joan. Sulgraue.
Mountford made wanton thus with dalliance of his Master, forgets
moderation, for seldom discretion in youth attends great and sudden
fortunes, he draws all public affairs into his own hands, all favors
must pass from him, all preferments by him, all suites addressed to him, the
King but as a cipher set to add to this figure, the more of number. Great is
the Sovereigns error, when the hope of subjects must recognize it self
bee-holden to the servant, which ought immediately to be acknowledged, from
the goodness and good election of himself: Though Princes may take above
others some reposefull friend, with whom they may participate their nearest
passions; yet ought they so to temper the affairs of their favor, that they
corrupt not the effects of their principallities.

At this the great and grauest men began to grieve, knowing the unworthy
without honor, or merit, thus to deal alone in that which should pass
through their hands, and to leap over all their heads, to the greatest Honor
and Offices, and therefore run along with the then rising grace of the Kings
half brethren, (though strangers) hoping thereby to divide that power, which
otherwise they saw impossible to break.

Leicester confident of his Masters love, and impatient to bear either rival
in favor, Chron. Reading.
or partner in rule, opposes them all, but finds in his ebb of favor, the
Fortune of others, and that this King could ever as easily transfer his fancy
as he had settled his affection. Great we see must be the art and cunning of
that man, that keeps himself a floate in the stream of Sovereigns favor,
since the change of Princes wills, which for the most part are full of fancy and
soon satiate are hardly arrested: Who so would effect this, must only attend
the honor and service of his Master, and dispoyled of all other respects,
transform himself into his inward inclination and work into necessity of
employment, by undergoing the Offices of most secrecy, either of public
service, or princes pleasures, he must also beat down Competitors of worth by
the hands of others, conceal his own greatness in public, with a fained
humility, and what impotency or government he affects, let it rather seem
the work of others, out of convenience, then any appetite of his own.

Now were the raynes of rule, by this advantage, taken by the rebellious Lords,
Hen. Knighto(...) Mon. Leicest.
and put alone into the hands of the Kings half brethren: Adam, Guido,
Godfray, and William, himself as before; Et magna Fortuna licentiam tantum
vsurpans: For to act his own part, he was ever wyer-drawne when he had such
worthy servants as would often for his Honor urge it. For these Masters, (as
Wallingford terms them) Tanta elati jactantia quod nec superiorem sibi
intelligunt, nec parem mellitis and mollitis adulationibus animum Regis pro
libito voluntatis a ratione tramite declinantes, do alone what they list. They
fill up the place of Justice and Trust, with their Countrymen, strangers,
exact of whom, how and what they they please; waste the Treasure and Crown
Lands on themselves, and their followers, set prices on all offices, and rain
the Law within the rule of their own Breasts. Will. de Rishanger.
The usual reply of their servants, to the playnts of the Kings subjects,
being Quis tibi rectum faciet? Dominus rex vult; quod Dominus meus vult; these
strangers seemed in their Lawless carriage not to have bin invited, Lib.
Monastery Ramsey.
but to have entered the state by Conquest: The great men they enforced not to
obey, but to serve, and the mean to live so as they might justly say, they had
nothing, yet least the King should hear the groans of his people, and the
wickedness of his Ministers, which good and able men would tell him, they
bar all such access: Suspicion being the best preserver of her own
deserts, aymeth at these, who has more of virtue then themselves, as fearing
them most. Thus is the incapacity of government in a King, when it falls to
be prey to such Lawless Minious, the ground of infinite corruption in all the
members of the State, all take warrant generally from Princes weaknesses, of
licencious liberty, and greatness makes profit particularly by it, and
therefore give way to increase ill, to increase their gaynes.

A Famine accompanies these corruptions, and that so violent, Claus. anno 42
Hen. 3.
that the King is enforced to direct Writes to all the Shires, Ad pauperes
mortuos sepeliendos famis media deficientes: Chron. London.
Famine proceeds, Fames praecessit and secutus est gladius tam terribilis vt
nemo inermis secure possit, provincia^ peruagare: For all the Villages of the
Kingdom were left a prey to the Lawless Multitude: Who Per diuersas parts
itinerantes velut per Consensum aliorum, (as the Record says) did imply that
the factious Lords suspected by the King, had given some heat to that
commotion. Seditious Peers bringing ever fuel to such popular fires.

Neither was the Church without a busy part in this Tragic work for Walter
Bishop of Worcester, Will. de Rishanger.
and Robert of Lincoln, to whom Mountford and his faction, Prae-cordialiter
adhaerebant were far engaged. In such designs, Churchmen are never wanting,
and the distaste of the present government, (as well in the Church as in the
Commonwealth,) will ever be a knot of strength for such unquiet spirits, who
as well frame to themselves some other form of government; then the present in
the Church, as in the temporal state, as that which with the giddy multitude
wins best opinion, and did at this time fitly suite the peoples humors, so
much distasting the new Courts of the Clergy, their pomp, their greedines and
the Popes extortions.

A fair pretext was it to those factious Bishops, to use their bitter pens and
speeches, so far against Religious Orders, Ceremonies, and State of the
Church, that one of them incurred the sentence of Excommunication at Rome, and
Treason at home; Math. Paris.
for he enjoined the Earl of L^^cester in Remissione peccatorum vt causam
illam (meaning his Rebellions) vsquae ad mortem assumeret, Will. de Rishanger*
asserens pacem Ecclesiae Anglicanae numquam sine gladio materiali posse
firmari. It was not the best Doctrine that this man could plant, by liberty or
war when the first Church rose by fasting and prayer.

True Piety binds the Subject to desire a good Sovereign, but to bear with a
bad one, and to take up the burden of Princes with a bended knee, rather in
time so to deserve abatement, then resist authority.

Churchmen therefore ought not always to lead us in the rule of Loyalty, but
a knowledge of our own duties, in difficult points of Religion, where an
humble ignorance, is a safe and secure knowledge, we may rely upon them.

To suppress these troubles, and supply the kings extremity, a Parliament was
called, ^arth. Co^on.
much to the liking of those Lords, who as little meant to relieve the King as
they did to acquiet the State, Chro. Norwie.
Chro. Worc.
their end at that time being only to open at home the poverty of their
Master, to lessen his reputation abroad, and to brave out their own passions
freely, whilst those times of liberty permit.

Here they began to tell him he had wronged the public State in taking to
his private election the Justice, Chancellor and Treasurer, M. Paris.
that should be only by the Common Council of the Realm, Wendouer.
commending much the Bishop of Chicester for denying delivery of the great
Seal but in Parliament where he received it.

They blame him to have bestowed the best places of trust and benefit in his
gift on strangers, Wallingford.
Paris.
and to leave the English unrewarded, to have undone the trade of Merchants by
bringing in Maletosts and heavy customs, Will. de Rishanger.
and to have hurt the common liberty by non obstantes in his Patents, to make
good Monopolies for private favorites.

That he has taken from his Subjects quicquid habuerunt in esculentis and
poculentis. Rusticorum enim equos, bigas, vina, Chron. Sancti. Albani.
victualia ad libitum caepit.

That his Judges were sent in Circuits under pretext of Justice to fleece the
people, Causis fictitijs quoscunque poterant diripuerunt.

And that Sir Robert de Purslowe had wrung from the Borderers of his Forest
under pretense of encrochments or assarts, great sums of money.

And therefore they wonder that he should now demand relief from his so
pilled and polled Commons, Gual. de Couentry.
who by their former extremities and per auxilia prius data ita depauperantur
vt nihil aut parum habeant in bonu^. And therefore advised him, that since his
needless expense, Postquam regni caepit ass dilapidator, was summed up by
them to above 800000 l. Will. de Rishanger
It were fitting to pull from his favorites, who had gleaned the Treasure of
his Kingdom, and shared the old Lands of the Crown, seeing one of them there
whom the Lords described to be Miles litteratus, or Clericus militaris, who
had in short space from the inheritance of an acre, grown to the Possession of
an Earledom; Chron. Litchf.
and Mansel another inferior Clearke that (besides 50. Hist. minor Will. de
Rishanger
promotions with the cure of souls) rose to dispend in annual revenue 4000.
marks, Epist. Robert Lincoln.
whereas more moderate Fees would have become a penman, no better quallified
then with the ordinary fruits of a Writing School; yet if a moderate supply
would suite with the Kings occasions, they were content to perform so far
relief in Obedience, as the desert of his carriage should merit toward them:
And so as the Record says, Math. Paris.
Dies datus fuit in tres septimanas vt interim Rex excessu^s suos corrigeret,
and Magnates voluntati ejus obtemperarent.

At which day upon new grant of the great Charter, Math. Paris.
Regis Roffen.
admittance to his Council of some persons elected by the Commons, Joan. de
Wallingford.
and promise to rely upon his Natives, and not Strangers; for advise
hereafter; they spare him such a pittance as must tie him to their Devotion,
for a new supply.

Thus Parliaments that before were ever a medicine to heal up any rupture in
Princes fortunes, are now grown worse then the mallady, since from thence more
mallignant humors began to reign in them, then well composed tempers.

The King by this, Chron. de L^i^.
experienced of the intents of his rebellious Lords, and finding that the want
of Treasure was the way whereby they enthralled his Majesty, begins now to play
the good husband, closes his hand of wast, and resolves himself (too late) to
stand alone; such experience is pernicious to the private, and dangerous to the
public good of a state, when it never learnes to do, but by undoing, and
never sees order, but when disorder shows it. Yet still alas, such was his
flexibillity when he came to be pressed by his French Minions, that he could
not hold his hand any longer, from their vaste desires, and endless waste. So
that an Author then living, says, it became a by word, our Inheritance is
converted to Alliens, and our Houses to Strangers. Followers to a King
excessive in gifts, are excessive in demands, and cut them not out by reason,
but by example: Favors past are not accounted, we love no bounty but what is
merely future, the more that a Prince weakeneth himself in giving, the poorer
he is of friends: For such prodigallity in a Sovereign, ever ends in the
rapine and spoil of his subjects.

Yet before the King would again submit himself, as he had the last
Parliament, to so many braues and strict inquiries of his disloyal subjects,
he means to pass through all the shifts, that extremity of need, with
greatness of mind could lay upon him. Claus. anno 46 and 47. Henry 3.
He begins first with sale of Lands, and then of Jewels, pawneth Gascoyne,
and after that, his Imperial Crown; and when he had neither credit to
borrow, (having so often failed, the trust he had made,) nor pawnes of his
own, Claus. anno 37 Henry 3.
he then lays to pawn the Jewels and Ornaments of St. Edwards Shrine; and
in the end, not having means to defray the diet of his Court, was enforced to
break up House, (and as Paris says) with his Queen and Children, Cum
Abbatibus and Prioribus satis humiliter Hospitia quae siuit and prandia.

This low ebb which again the Kings improuidence had brought him to, gave
great assurance to the Rebellious Lords, that they should now at the last, have
the Sovereign power, left a prey to their ambitious designs, and to bring it
faster on, they desire nothing more, then to see the Kings extremity*
Constrayne a Parliament, for at such times, Princes are ever less then they
should be, subjects more.

To hasten on the time, and adapt the the means, Will. de Rishanger.
there are sown certain seditious rumors, that the Kings necessity must
repair itself upon the fortunes and blessings of his people, that having
nothing of his own left, he might and meant to take of others: For Kings may
not want, as long as the Subjects have means to supplye.

This took fire just to their minds, and wrought a little moving in the
State, which doubtless had flamed higher, if the King had not asswadged it by
Proclamations, wherein he declared, Quod quidam malivoli sinistra
praedicantes, Claus. anno 49 (...) 3.
illis falso suggesserant illum velle eos indebite gravari, ac jura and
libertates Regni subuertere, and per suggestiones illas dolosas and omnina
falsas eorum corda a sua malidictione, and fidelitate auerterent, but desires,
that Hujusmodi animorum suorum perturbationibus ne fidem adhiberent, for that
he was ever ready to defend them from the oppression of the great Lords, Et
omnia jura and Consuetudines eorum debitas bonas, and Consuetas, in omnibus and
per omnia before obseruare, and that they may rest of this secure: De
voluntate sua libera, litteras suas fecit patentes. But seeing still that
Majesty and right subsist not without means and power, and himself had of
neither, so much as would stop the present breach in his own wants, or his
subjects loyalties, he flies to the bosom of his people, for relief and
Council.

At Oxford they met in Parliament, Parl. Oxon^.
where his necessity, met so many undutiful demands, that he was forced to
render up to their Rebellious will, his Royal power.

Here the Commons knowing that, Quum eligere inceperunt, they were Loco
libertatis, stood with the King to have the managing of the State, Math. Paris.
put to the care of twenty four, whereof twelve by their election, Chro. Worc.
(whereto they look strictly) and the other by him, who in all things else,
was left a Cipher, and in this, Chron. Liechf.
whether by fear, or remissenes, filled up his number with Mountford,
Gloucester, and Spencer, which besides the weakening of his own part, won to
those his late opposites, an opinion of great interest they had got in his
favor, he now has left neither election of public office, nor private
attendants, his half brethren and their followers, he must dispoyle of all
fortune, and exile by prescription under his own hand, commanding his Writs,
Pro transportatione fratrum suorum, to be directed to the Earls of Hartford
and Surrey, and not to pass either their Money, Arms, or Ornaments, Nisi in
forma quam dicti Committes iniunxerent, and after their departure enjoined the
men of Bristoll, Claus. anno 4^ Hen. 3.
that they should not permit any strangers, Sieve propinquos Regis applicare in
portu, but so to behave themselves therein, that as well the King, Quam Magnates
sui eos merito debeant commendare.

Thus we see how easily men's estates do change in a moment, and how hard it
is to make use of things ill gotten.

Richard Elect of the Empire, the Kings full Brother, and then beyond Sea;
Chron. Sancti Albani.
must be wrought by Letter, as his free desire to confirm by Oath those
former restrictions of regal power, which though performed, yet would the
Lords suffer neither the one or the other, Reg. Roffen.
to enter Dover Castle (the Key of the Kingdom) which they had furnished, as
most of the other Fortes of reputation in the Realm with Guardians of their
own, sworn respectively to the State; and then taking the like assurance of
all the Shrieffes, Bayliffes, Coroners, and other public Ministers, Rot. in
Scrio.
searching the behavior of many by strict Commission upon oath, to win
opinion in show among the Vulgar, Will. de Rishanger.
who groaned under their late Extortions, whereas their end was truly, as it
after proved, by displacing the faithful Servants of the King, to open away,
to their own dependants.

Thus changing sole power into the rule of many, and those by popular election,
made the State believe, that this form of limited policy, they had utterly
suppressed the mind of man, for ever dreaming more upon the imaginary humors
or lycencious Soveraignity: But it fell out nothing so, for now every man
began to estimate his own worth, and to hammer his head on every design,
that might enlarge his power and command.

Then began the great men to rent from the body of the Crowns, and regal
signiories, all such royal suitors as neighboured any of their own seats,
Rot. Parlia in Scacar.
whereto they enforce their service, and so (as the Record says) Ad sectas
indebitas, and seruitutes intollerabiles subditos Regis compulerunt: Thus
raising mean manners to become great Honors, and renting asunder the regal
Justice, they made themselves of so many subjects whilst they lived in duty,
Totidem Tiranni (as the Book of Saint Albans says) when they had left their
loyalty, Rot. Regis in Scaca. 56 H. 3
Magnas induxerunt Magnates Regni, super subditos Regis seruitutes and
oppressiones, which they bore patiently; for excess of misery having no ease
but Custom, made men willing to lay the foundation of servitude by the length
of sufferance, which found no ease nor end, until the quiet of this Kings
Reign.

Mountford, Gloucester, and Dispencer, Wallingford.
the Heads of this Rebellious design, having by the late provisions drawn to
the hands of the twenty four Tribunes of the people, the entire managing of
the Royal State, and finding that power too much disperced to work the end of
their desires, forced again the King to call a Parliament, where they delivered
over the authority of the twenty four unto themselves, and Create a
Triumvirate, Will. de Rishanger.
non Constituenda Republicae causa, as they first pretended, for their own
ends, Chro. de Dunst.
and so in the interest of some private contented, the public was stayed; but
to make a speedier way to one of them as it fatally did, to become Dictator
perpetuus: Ambition is never so high, but she thinks still to mount, that
station which seemed lately the top, is but a step to her now, and what
before was great in desiring, seems little, being once in power.

These three elect nine Councillors, and appoint Quod tres ad minus alternatim
semper in curia sint, Ordinat. inter Re^: Land.
to dispose of the custody of Castles, and de alijs Regni negotijs, the chief
Justice, Chancellor and Treasurer with all Offices, Maiores and minores, they
reserve the choice of to themselves, and bind the King to this hard bargayne
upon such strong security; that he is contented under the great Seal, and
Oath, to loose to them the knot of Regal duty, whenever he assumeth to
himself his Regal dignity, Chran. Origin. sub sigillo.
Liceat omnibus de Regno nostro contra nos* in surgere, and ad grauamen nostrum
opem and operam dare ac si nobis in nullo tenerentur. This prodigy of fortune
on whom she had set a pitiful example of her inconstancy, finding no part of
his Sovereignty left, but the bare Title, and that at their leave, beggeth
succor from Vrbane the fourth, against his disloyal subjects.

The Pope by his Bull cancelleth his Oath, and contract, and armeth him with
Excommunications against all those that return not with speed, to their due
and old Obedience, since promises made by men, which cannot say they are at
liberty, are weak, and force has no power to make just interest.

The Lords on the other side that had imped their wings with Eagles feathers,
Chron. Liech. Will. de Rishanger.
and liked no game now, but what was raked out of the ashes of Monarchy, made
head against their Sovereign, and to mate him the better, called in aid, some
French forces: Thus the Commonwealth turned again her sword into her own
bowels, Chro. Brettaniae.
and invited her ancient enemy, to the funeral of her liberty; so that it was
a wonder she should not at this time pass under a forrayne servitude. Chron.
Dunst.
And though these men were more truly sensible of their own disgrace, then of
others misery: Yet found they no better pretext for private interest then that
of the public.

And therefore at the entry of this war, they cried liberty, although when they
came near to an end, they never spoke word of it.

At Lewis the Armies met, where the King endeauours a reconciliation, but in
vain, Will. de Rishager.
for persuasions are ever unprofitable* when Justice is inferior to force.

The sword decides the difference, and gave the two Kings, and their eldest
Sons Prisoners: The person now as well as the regal power; thus in the hands
of Mountford and Gloucester, found neither bond of security, nor expectation of
liberty, but what the emulous competition of greatness (which now began to
break out between these mighty Riualls,) gave hope of, for Leicester meaning
by engrossing from his partner, to himself, the person of the King, and to his
followers the best portion of the spoil, to draw more fruit from this
advantage, then it should in fellowship yield, disolved the knot of all their
amity.

Thus equal Authority with the same power, is ever fatal (we see) to all
great actions: For to fit minds to so even a temper, that they should not have
some motions of dissenting is impossible.

Mountford having thus broken all faith with his Confederates, and duty to his
Sovereign, left the path of moderation so wisdom to come to the King by that
of pride and distrust. To him he tells that his Arms and ends had no other
object ever but order of the State, and ease of the people, that he did not in
this, carry affection against duty, but well knew how to reyne his desires, to
his just power, and so no less to his Majesty's content, if he would be
ruled; which was to command the Fortes and Castles of his now opposite
Gloucester, and the rest into his hands. It was hard to this King thus to take a
Law from his inferior, but necessity in Sovereign affairs does often force
away all formallity; and therefore this poor Prince, who now at the Victors
discretion, seemed to have been only raised to show the inconstancy of
fortune and vanity of man; suited himself with incomparable wisdom,
according to the necessity of the time. Neither did humillity wrong Majesty,
when there was no other means to contain spirits so insolent but dissembling.
He therefore summoneth in his own person the forts of his fastest friends, to
yield to his greatest enemies. This he enters in show as his lodging, but in
effect his Prison, and saw himself forced to arm against his friends, and to
receive now Law from him, to whom he lately thought to give it. Thus
Leicester is become a darling of the common rout, who easily change to every
new Master, but the best durst not sail along his Fortune, by the light of
his glory: Crystal that fairly glistereth does easily break and as the
ascent of usurping royalty is slippery, so the top is shaking, and the fall
fearful. To hold this man then at the entry of his false felicity fully
happy, was but to give the name of the Image, to the mettle that was not yet
molten, for by this the imprisoned Prince was escaped, and fast assured of
Gloucester, by the knot of his great mind, and discontent, and both with the
torn remainder of the loyal Army united, and by speedy march arrived unlooked
for, near Euesham, to the unarmed troops of the secure Rebels, whom they
instantly assailed, for it* was no fit season to give time, when no time did
assure so much, as expedition did promise.

Dispencer and other Lords of that faction, made toward the King, with the
best speed for mercy, but could not break out, being hurried along the
storm of the giddy multitude.

Public motions depends on the Conduct of Fortune; private on our own
carriage, we must beware of running down steep hills, with weighty bodies,
they once in motion, Suo feruntur pondere, stoppes are not then voluntary; but
Leicester at that instant with the King, and out of the storm might have
escaped, if his courage and hope had not made him more resolute by misfortune,
so that he could neither forsake his followers, nor his ambition; thus making
adversity the exercise of his virtue, he came, and fell.

The King by this blessed fortune freed, and obeyed, began to search the ground
of his former misery, and why that virtue and fortune that had so long settled
and maintained under his ancesters the glory of his Empire, had cast her in his
time off, and conspired with her Enemies to her almost ruin, as if they Genius
of the state had quite forsook her; Here he finds his wastfull hand had been
too quick both over the fortunes and the blessings of his people, the griping
Avarice of his civil Ministers and lawless liberty of his Martial followers,
Rot pa^. 53. H. 3. M. 51. Rishanger.
the neglect of grace, and breach of his word, to have lost his nobility at
home, and necessity, his Reputation abroad, by making Merchandise of peace,
and war as his last refuge, so leaving his old Allies became enforced to
betake himself to persons doubtful, or injured, and that by giving over
himself to a sensual security and referring all to base, greedy, and unworthy
Ministers, whose counsels were ever more subtle then substantial, he had
thrown down those pillars of sovereignty, and safety, Reputation abroad, and
Reverence at home.

Io. Tuxerer, Mon. Bury.
He now therefore making sweetness and clemency the entrances of his regayned
Rule for the faults of most of the late rebels he forgot a gracious kind of
pardoning not to take knowledge of offenses, others he forgot, that they might
live but to the glory of his goodness, for the fewer killed, Rot. Cart. 51.52.
H. 3.
the more remains to adorn the Trophee.

Tyrants shed blood for pleasure Kings for necessity, yet least his Justice and
power might to much suffer in his grace and mercy, some few he punished by
small fines some by banishment, as the two guiltless yet vnpittied sonns of
the Archtraytor. Claus. 52. H. 3. M. 29.
Treason so hateful is to the head, that it draws (we see in this) the
carriage of the innocent children into an everlasting suspect, and what is
suspicion in others is guilt in them: Upon the constant followers of his broken
fortunes he bestows, but with a more wary hand then before the forfeiture of
his Enemies: Immoderate liberality he had found but a weak means to win love,
for it lost more in the gathering then it gained in the giving. This bounty
bestowed without respect, was taken without grace, discredited the receiver and
detracteth from the judgment of the giver, and blunted the Appetites of such,
as carried their hopes out of virtue and service: Chro, Dunst*
Thus at last he learned that reward and reprehension justly laid do balance
government, and that it much imports a Prince the hand to be equal that
holds the scale.

In himself he reformed his natural Errors, Princes manners though a mute
law, have more of life and vigor then those of letters, and though he did
sometimes touch upon the verge of vice he forbore ever after to enter the
circle.

His court where in at this time the faults of great men did not only by
approbation, but Imitation receive true comfort, and authority, for their
crimes now became examples, and customs, he purged very iudiciously and
severely, since from thence proceeds either the regular or irregular condition
of the common state.

Ordinat author. Reg. aulae. Claus. 53. H. 3. R^shanger.
Expense of house he measures by the just Rule of his proper reuenew and was
heard often to say, that his excess of wast before had been an issue of his
Subjects blood, the insolency of his Soldiers made lawless by the late
liberties of Civil arms he spends in foreign expedition. Having seen
that the quiet Spirits underwent all the former Calamities, and the other never
were satisfied but in the misery of Innocents, and would if they had no enemies
abroad seek out at home as they had done before.

Pat. 53. and 54. H. 3.
The rigor and corruption of his judicial Officers he examineth, Comment. de
Trail^aston.
and redresseth by strict Commission; For the sense of their severity, became
a murmr of his own cruelty.

The seats of Judgment and Council he filled up with men nobly borne. For
such attract with less offense, the generous spirits to respect and reverence.
Their Abilities he measures not by favor or by private Information as before,
but by public voice for every man in particular may deceive and be deceived,
but no man can deceive all, nor all one.

And to discover now his own Capacity and what part he means to bear
hereafter in all deliberate Expeditions he sits himself in Council daily,
and disposes Affairs of most weight in his own person. For Counselors be
they never so wise or worthy are but as accessaries, not principals, in
sustentation of the State; their Office must be subjection, not fellowship in
considerations of moment, and to have ability to advise, not authority to
resolve.

For as to live the Prince must have a particular soul so to rule his proper
and interne Council, without the one he can never be truly man, without the
other he shall never be securely a Prince, for it offends as well the minister
(of merit) as the people to force obedience to one incapable of his own
greatness, or unworthy of his fortunes. This wonderful Change to the general
State (so hopeless lately to recover her former liberty, they sought now for
nothing but the mildest servitude) brought them home again with admiration to
his devotion and their own duty.

He that will lay (we see) the foundation of Greatness upon popular love, must
give them ease and Justice, for they measure the bond of their obedience, by
the good always that they receive.

^arth. Coton Chro. No^^.
This peace attended ever after his Age and hearse and he happily lived to
fashion his son and successor, and to make him partner of his own experience
and authority; whose own hard education trayning him from that intemperance,
which makes men inferior to beasts: framed him to affect glory, and virtue;
which made him superior to men. So that all the Actions of his future Reign
were exact grounds of Discipline, and policy; for his best successor to rule
by after, who as he was the first of his name since the Conquest, so was he the
first that settled the law and state, deserving the Style of Englands Justinian,
and freed this Kingdom from the wardship of the Peers, showing himself in
all his Actions after, capable to Command not the Realm only, but the whole
world.

Thus do the wrongs of our Enemies more then our own discretions, make us
sometimes both wise and fortunate.

FINIS.

