THE Country-mans Recreation, or the Art of Planting, Graffing, and Gardening,
in three Books.

The first declaring diverse ways of Planting, and Graffing, and the best times
of the Year, with diverse Commodities and secrets herein, how to Set or Plant
with the Root and without the Root, how to sow or set Pepins or Curnels with
the ordering thereof, also how to cleanse your Grafts and Cions, how to help
barren and sick Trees, how to kill Worms and Vermin and to preserve and keep
Fruit, how to plant and proyne your Vines, and to gather and press your Grape,
how to cleanse and Moss your Trees, how to make your Cider and Perry, with many
other secret Practices which shall appear in the Table following.

The second treats of the Hop-Garden, with necessary Instructions for the
making and the maintenance thereof, as the Situation, quantity, charge and
benefit, preparation, time to cut and set, with Rules for the choice and
preparation of Roots, and also diverse Instruments useful for the Hop-Garden.

Whereunto is added, The Expert Gardener, containing diverse necessary and rare
Secrets belonging to that Art, with Directions to know the time and season to
sow and plant all manner of Seeds; with diverse new Inventions and Garden-knots,
and also present Remedies to destroy Snailes, Canker-wormes, Moths,
Garden-fleas, Earth-wormes, Moles, and all other Vermin which commonly breed in
Gardens.

LONDON. Printed by B. ALLSOP and T. FAUCET for MICHAEL YOUNG, and are to be
sold at his Shop in Bedford-street in Coven-garden near the New Exchange. 1640.

An Exhortation to the Planter and Graffer.
REgard always before ye do intend to plant or graffe, it shall be meet to
have good experience in things meet for this Art, as in knowing the natures of
all fruits and the differences of Climates, which be contrary in every Land:
also to understand the East and West winds, with Aspects and Stars, to the
end ye may begin nothing that the Wind or Rain may oppress, that your labor
be not lost, and to mark also and consider the dispositions of the Elements
that present year, for all years be not of like operation, nor yer after one
sort; the Summer and Winter do not bear one face on the Earth, nor the
Springtime always rain, or Autumn always moist* of this none have
understanding, without a good and lively marking Spirit, few or none without
learning may discern of the varieties and qualities of the earth, and what he
does ask or refuse. Therefore it shall be good to have understanding of the
Ground where ye do plant either Orchard or Garden with fruit, first it
behooves to make a sure Defense, to the end that not only rude Persons and
Children may be kept ou^, but all kind of hurtful Cattle endamaging your
Plants or Trees, as Oxen, Kine, Calves, Horses, Hogs, and Sheep, as the
rubbing of sheep does greatly burn the sap, and often does kill young Trees
and Plants, and where they are broken or bruised with Cattle, it is doubtful
to grow after. It shall be good also to Set, Plant, or Graffe Trees all of like
nature and strength together, that the great and high trees may not overcome
the low and weak, for when they be not like of height, they grow no^ ripe not
your fruit so well at one time, but the one before the other. That earth which
is good for Vines, is good also for other fruit.

Ye must dig your holes a year before ye Plant, that the earth may be the
better seasoned, mortified and wax tender, both by Rain in Winter, and heat
on Summer, that thereby your Plants may take root the sooner, if ye will make
your holes and plant both in a year: at the least ye ought to make your holes
two months before ye plant, and as soon as they be made, then it shall be
good to burn straw or such l^ke therein, to make the^ ground warm. The further
ye make them asunder, the better your trees shall bear. Make your holes like
unto a furnace, that is, more straight in the mouth then beneath, whereby the
roots may have the more room, and by straightness of the mouth, the less
rainer cold shall enter by in Winter, and so less heat to the root in Summer.

Look also that the earth ye put to the roots, be neither wet no^ laid in
water: they do commonly leave a good space betwixt every tree, for the hanging
boughs, for being nigh together, ye cannot set roots, nor sow nothing so well
under your trees, nor they will not bear fruit so well Some loves forty foot,
some thirty between every tree: your Plants ought to be greater then the
handle of a shovell, and the lesser the better. See they be straight without
knots or knobs, having a long straight grain or bark, which shall the sooner
be apt to take Graffes, and when ye set branches or boughs of old trees,
choose the straightest branch thereof, and those trees which have borne yearly
good fruit before, take of those which be on the Sunny-side, sooner than those
that grow in the cover or shadow, and when ye take up or alter your Plants, ye
shall note to what your plant is subject, and so let them be set again, but
those which have grown in dry Grounds, let them be set in moist Grounds, your
Plants ought to be cut of three foot long. If ye will set two or three Plants
together in a hole, ye must take heed the root of one touch not another, for
then the one will perish and rot the other, or dye by Worms of other Vermen,
and when yon have placed your Plants in the earth, it shall be good to strike
down to the bottom of every hole, two short stakes as great as your arm, on
either side your hole one, and let them appear but a little above the earth
that ye may thereby in Summer give water unto the roots if need be. Your young
Plants and rooted Trees are commonly set in Autumn, from the first unto the
fifteenth of October, yet some opinion is, better after Alhallontide until
Christmas, then in the Spring, because the earth will dye too soon after, and
also to set Plants without root after Michaelmasse, that they may be the better
mollified and gather root against the Spring, whereof ye shall find hereafter
more at larger Thus much have I thought meet to declare unto the Planters,
Graffers, and Gardeners, whereby they may the better avoid the occasions and
dangers of Planting, Graffing, and Gardening, which may come often times
through ignorance.

A Table of all the principal things contained in this Book. Of the seven
Chapters following.
CHAP. I. Treats of the setting of Curnels, of Apple Trees, Plum-trees,
Peare-trees, and Service-trees.
HOw to choose your Pepins at the first pressing. Means to use the Earth to
sow your Pepins on. Seeing unto the Poultry for marring your beds, and how to
weed or cleanse your beds or quarters. Wild Cions how to pluck them up.
CHAP. II. Treats how to set your wild Trees which come of Pepins, when they
be first plucked up.
VVIld trees that come of Pepins how to dung them. Principal Roots how to cut
them in setting again. Young trees, how to set them in a rank. Spaces from
one rank to another, and how to make them. Plants being dry, how to water
them. Removing your trees, how to plant them again. Removing, how to know the
fittest time for it. Negligence and forgetfulness, and the hurt of it. Not so
good to graffe the Service-tree, as to set him. Some trees without Graffing
have good fruit, and other being graffed, have but evil fruit. For to augment
and multiply your trees. The manner to change the fruit of the Pepin-tree. How
to make good Cider. To make an Orchard in few years.
CHAP. III. Is of the setting of Trees which come of Nuts.
HOw to set trees that do come of Nuts, and the time to plant or set them. To
set them in the Spring. Dunging and deep digging thereof. Stones and Nuts like
the trees they come of. Planting the said Nuts. Why fruit shall not have so
good savor. To set the Pine Tree. To set Cherry-trees. Trees of bastard or
wild Nuts. To set Filberds and Hasell wands. To set Damsons and Plum-trees. To
graffe Cions of Plums on the like. To set all sorts of Cherry-trees. How to
order Plum-trees and Cherry trees. How to graffe Plum-trees and Cherry-trees.
How to proyne or cut trees. How to cleanse and dress the roots of trees. To
keep the stock being greater then the graffes. The remedy when a bough is
broken. How to enlarge the hole about the roots. To set small staves to stay
your Cions. What tree to proyne. Why the sower Cherry dureth not so long as the
great Helm Cherry. To graffe one great Cherry with another. Of deep setting
or shallow.
CHAP. IV. Shows how to set other Trees of great Cions pricked in the earth
without Roots, with the proyning of lesser Cions.
BRanches being pricked giving roots to trees. How to set them. How to bind
them that be weak. Huw to dig the Earth to set them in. Cions without
roots. Planting of the Fig tree. Setting of Quinces. Setting of
Mulberry-trees. Cutting-time for Cions. Setting Bush-trees, as Gooseberries and
small Reisons. A Note thereof.
CHAP. V. Treats of four manner of Graffings.
Diverse ways of Graffing. Graffing of all sorts of trees. Graffing of Apple
trees, Peare-trees, Quince-rrees, and Medlar-trees. Graffing of great Cherries.
Graffing Medlars on other Medlars. Diverse kinds of Graffes on one tree.
Graffing of the Fig Tree. Graffing the great Abricockes. Graffing the
Service-tree. Setting the Service-tree. Trees hard to graffe in the Shield, How
to see to Trees charged with fruit. Choosing of trees to choose your Cions in
Cions on the East part are best. Choosing of your tree for Graffes. To keep
Graffes a long time. To keep Graffes ere they bud. How you ought to begin to
graffe. When is good Graffing the wild Stocks. To mark if the tree be
forward or not. When ye Graffe, what to be furnished withal. Of Graffes not
prospering the first year. For to Graffe well and sure. How to trim your
Graffes. How to cut Graffes for Cherries and Plums. A Note of your incision. To
be heedfull in Graffing least you raise the bark. How to cut your stock. If
your wild stock be great or slender. Trees as great as a man's Arm. Great
trees as big as ones Leg. The Graffes being pinched in the Stocks. How you
ought to cleave your stocks. To graffe the branches of great trees. How to cut
great old branches. How to bind your Graffes against winds. To set many Graffes
in one cleft. To saw your stock before ye leave him. If the stock cleave too
much, or the bark open. How Graffes never lightly take. How to set Graffes
right in the stock. Setting in of the Graffes. A note of the same. How to draw
forth the wedge. How to cover your clifts on the head. How ye ought to see well
to the close binding up of your Graffes. How ye ought to temper your clay. How
to bush your Graffe-heads. The second stay to Graffe high Branches. The third
manner of Graffing, is betwixt the bark and the Tree. Dressing the head, to
place your Graffes betwixt the bark and the Tree. Covering the head of your
stock. The manner of graffing in the Shield. To graffe in Summer, so long as
the Trees be leaved. Big Cions are best to graffe. Manner to take of the
Shield. If your Scutchion or Shield be good or bad, how to know it. Graffing on
young Trees. Setting or placing your Shield. A Note on the same. Raising up the
bark to set the Shield on. Binding on your Shield. A Tree will bear the
graffing of two or three Shields Unbinding time for your Shield. Cutting the
Branches grafted on Trees.
CHAP. VI. Is of transplanting or altering the Trees.
BEst to transplant or set them timely. To plant or set toward the South.
Cutting the Branches before ye set. Apple Trees commonly must be disbranched
before ye set them again. All wild stocks must be disbranched. What Trees
do love the Sun, and what the cold air. Many sorts and manners of Trees.
Planting or setting Trees at large. Right ordering your Trees. The best manner
to enlarge the holes when you plant your Trees. Dung and good Earth for your
Trees. If Worms be in the earth at your roots of Trees. Digging the Earth
well about the roots. Nature of the places. Goodness of the Earth. With what
ye ought to bind your Trees.
CHAP. VII. Is of Medicining and keeping the Trees, when they ^e Planted and
Set.
FIrst our council is, when your Trees are but Plants (in dry weather) they
must be watered. With what Dung ye ought to dung your Trees. When ye ought in
Summer to uncover your Trees. When to cut or proine your Trees. Cutting off
great Branches, and when. Leaving great Branches cut. Great Branches, and of
the trees that bear them. Barrenness of trees, of cutting ill branches, and
uncovering the roots. Which Trees ye must break or pluck up the roots. What
does make a good Nut. Cattle eating and destroying trees, how to graft them
again. Wild stocks ought not hastily to be removed. When to cut naughty Cions
from the head. Sometime how to cut the principal members. How to guide and
govern the said Trees. A kind of Sickness in Trees. Worms in the barks of
trees. Snailes, Antes, and Worms that mar trees. How to take those strange
creeping Worms. Keeping Antes from the trees. A Note of ill airs and
weathers. Defense from the Caterpiller.
Here follows the Table of Graffing strange and subile ways, in using of
Fruits and Trees.
GRaffing one Vine upon another. To help a tree long without fruit. To have
Peaches two months before others. To have Damsons unto Alhallontide. To have
Medlers, Cherries, and Peaches, in eating to taste like spice. How to make a
Muscadell taste. To have Apples and Pears to come without blossoming. To have
Apples and Chestnuts rath, and long on the trees to remain. To have good
Cherries unto Alhallontide. To have rath Medlers two months before others. To
have Pears timely. To have Misplers and Medlars without stones. How to have
other Pears betimes. Mulberries how to ripen them very soon, and dure long.
Keeping of Pears a year. To have fruit taste half an Apple and half a Pear.
Graffing time. Graffing the Quine-Apple. Manner to destroy Pismires or Ants
about the Tree. Another way of the same. Nuts, Plums, and Almonds, how to have
them greater and fairer then others. How to make an Oak or other Tree as green
in Winter as Summer. Planting with Roots, and without Roots. Keeping fruit
from the Frost. Choice days to Plant and Graffe. Green Roses all the year.
Reisons or Grapes good a year long. Laxative fruit from the tree, how to make
it. A Note for all Planters and Graffers.
Here follows a Table of certain Dutch practisce.
TO Graffe one Vine upon another. Chosen days to graffe in, and to choose your
Cions, How to gather your Cions. Of Worms in the Trees or fruit. The setting
of stones, and the ordering thereof. How to gather Gum of any tree. To set a
whole Apple. The setting of Almonds. The watring of Pepins. To Plant or set
Vines. To set or plant the Cherry tree. To keep Cherries good a year. Remedy
against Pismires or Ants. The Setting of Chestnuts. To make all stone fruit
taste, as ye shall devise good. The Graffing of the Medlar or Misple. The
bearing of fruit of the Fig Tree. The Planting of the Mulberry and Fig Tree.
The tree that bears bitter fruit. To help barren trees. Another way for the
same. To keep fruit after they be gathered. The Mulberry-tree liking his
earth. Of Moss on your trees. To keep Nuts long. To cut or proyne the
Peach-tree. To color Peach-stones. If Peaches be troubled with Worms. Peaches
without stones. Another way for the same. Which way to help trees that do not
prosper. Graffing Apples to last on the tree till Alhallontide. Making Cherries
and Peaches smell like spice. Graffing an Apple Tree half sweet and half
sower. Graffing the Rose on the Holly-tree. Keeping of Plums. Altering of
Pears. Making of Cider and Perry. How to help frozen Apples. How to make
Apples fall from the tree. Watring trees in Summer, if they wax dry about the
root. How to cherish Apple Trees. How to make an Apple grow in a Glass. How to
graffe many sorts of Apples on one tree. How to color Apple; of what color ye
list. How to graffe and to have Apples without Core. Setting of Vine Plants.
How to proine or cut a Vine in Winter. Grape and Vine how to order them. How to
have Grapes without stones. Making a Vine to bring a Grape to taste like Claret.
Gathering of your Grapes. How to know if your Grapes be ripe enough. How to
prove or taste Wine. Setting, Planting, and ordering of Hops. How to choose your
Hops. How to sow the Seeds. Setting your Poles. How to proine the Hop. How to
gather your Hops. What Poles are best for your purpose. How to order and dress
your Hills. Best Ground for your Hop. A note or all the rest abovesaid.
Packing and keeping your Hops.
The Authors Conclusion of this Table.
TO God be praises on hie
in all our Worldly Planting,
And let us thank the Romans also,
for the Art of Graffing, and Gardening.
A Table for the Hop-Garden.
A Perfect Platform of a Hop-Garden. Of unapt and apt ground for Hops. Of the
Situation. Of the quantity. A proportion of the charge and benefit of a
Hop-Garden. Of the preparation of a Hop Garden. The time to cut and set Hop
Roots. Rules for the choice and preparation of Roots. Of the good Hoppe. Of
the unkindly Hoppe. Of the wild Hoppe. Of setting of Hop Roots. The distance
of the Hills. A description of the Line. Abuses and Disorders in Setting.
Provision against annoyance, and spoil of your Garden. Of Poles. Of the
erection of Poles. Of ramming of Poles. Of Reparation of Poles. Of pulling up
Poles. The way to make the Instrument wherewith to pull up the Hop Poles. The
manner of pulling up the Hop Poles. Of the preservation of Poles. Of tying of
Hops to the Poles. Of hilling and hills. Abuses in hilling. Of the gathering of
Hoppes. What there is to be done in Winter herein. When and where to lay Dung.
The order for reforming your Ground. The order of cutting Hoppe Roots. Of
diverse men's follies. Of Disorders and maintainers thereof. Of an Oste. Of the
several rooms for an Oste. Of the Furnace or Keele. Of the bed or upper
floor of the Oste, whereon the Hoppes must be dried. The orderly drying of
Hops. Other manners of Dryings not so good. The very worst way of drying Hops.
Of not Drying. Of the packing of Hops. The Reformation of a Garden of wild
Hops. The Reformation of a disordered Garden. Needless Curiosities used by the
unskilful.
The end of the Table.
THE COVNTRY-MANS Recreation, or the Art of Planting, Graffing, and Gardening.
CHAP. I. This Chapter treats of the setting of Curnels, young Plum-trees,
and Peare-trees, of Damsons, and Service-trees.
FOR to make young trees of the Pepins of Apples, Pears, Plums, and Service.
First, ye must prepare and make a great bed or quarter well replenished, blend
or mixed with good fat earth, and placed well in the Sun, and to be well
labored and dug a good time before you do occupy it: and if ye can by any
means, let it be dug very deep the winter before, in blending or mixing it
well together with good fat earth, or else to be mixed almost the half with
good dung: and so let it rot and ripe together with the earth. And see always
that plot be clean unto the pressing of Syder, that no wild Cions or Plants
do spring or grow thereon. Then in the month of September, December or
there-abouts, take of the Pepins, or Pomes of the said fruit at the first
pressing out of your licour, before the Curnels be marred or bruised: then take
out of them and rub a few at once in a cloth, and dry them betwixt your hands,
and take so many thereof as you shall think good: then make your bed square,
fair and plain, and sow your seeds thereon, then take and cover them with a
rake lightly, or with earth, not putting too much upon them. This done, devide
your beds into quadrants or squares, of four foot broad or thereabout, that
when ye list ye may cleanse them from the one side to the other, without
treading thereon. Then shall ye cover your Seeds, or Pepins with fine earth, so
sifting all over them, that then they may take the deeper and farer root, and
will keep them the better in Winter following, and if ye list ye may rake them
a little all over, so that ye raise not your Pepins above the earth.

Another way, how one may take the Pepins at the first coming of the licour or
pressing.
Which is, ye shall choose the greatest and fairest Curnels or Pepins, and
take them forth at the first brusing of your fruit, then dry them with a cloth,
and keep them all the winters until St. Andrews tide: then a little after
sow them in good earth, as thin as ye do Peason, and then rake them over as
the other.

How one ought to use his earth to sow Pepins without dunging.
But in this manner of doing (in the Spring) it is not so great need for to
raise or dig the earth so deep as that which is dunged in winter: but to
devide your quarters, in covering your Pepins not so much with earth, as those
which be sown with good dung, but when ye have sown them, a little rake all
them over.

How ye ought to take heed of Poultrey for scraping of your beds or quarters.
AS soon after as your Pepins be sown upon your beds or quarters, let this be
done one way or other, that is, take good heed that your Hens do not scrape
your beds or quarters: therefore stick them all over light and thin with
boughs, or thorns, and take good heed also to Swine, and other Cattle.

How to weed or cleanse your Beds and quarters.
AND when the winter is past and gone, and that ye see your Pepins rise and
grow, so let them increase the space of one year, but see to cleanse weeds, or
other things which may hurt them as you shall see cause. And in the Summer when
it shall wax dry, water them well in the evenings.

How one ought to pluck up the wild Cions,
AND when these wild Cions shall be great, as of the growth of one year, ye
must then pluck them up all in Winter following, before they do begin to
spring again. Then shall ye set them and make of them a wild Orchard as
follows.

CHAP. II. Treats how one shall set again the small wild trees, which come
of Pepins, when they be first plucked up.
FOr the Bastard or little wild Trees incontinent as soon as they be plucked
up, ye must have of other good earth well trimmed and dunged and to be well in
the Sun, and well prepared and dressed, as it is said in the other part before
of the Pepins.

How to dung your Bastard or wild young Trees which come of Pepins.
ABout Advent before Christmas, ye must dig and dung well the place whereas
ye will set them, and make your square of earth even and plain, so large as ye
shall think good, then set your wild trees so far one from another as ye
think meet to be graft, so that they may be set in even ranks and in good
order, that when need shall require, ye may remove or renew any of them or any
part thereof.

How ye ought in replanting or setting to cut off in the midst the principal
great roots.
IN what part soever ye do set any Trees, ye must cut off the great master
root, within a foot of the stock, and all other big roots, so that ye
leave a foot long thereof, and so let them be set, and make your ranks
crosse-wise one from another half a foot, or thereabouts, and ye must also
see that there be of good dung more deep and lower then ye do set your Trees,
to comfort the said roots withal.

How you ought to set your Trees in rank.
YE shall leave between your ranckes, from one rank to another, one foot,
or thereabouts, so that ye may set them with good fat earth all over the
roots.

How to make the space from one rank to another.
YE shall leave between your ranks, from one rank to another, one foot, or
thereabouts, so that ye may pass between every rank for to cleanse them if
need require, and also for to graffe any part or parcel thereof when time
shall be meet. But ye must note, in making thus your ranks, ye shall make as
many allies as ranks. And if ye think it not good to make as many allies,
then devide those into quarters of five foot broad, or thereabouts, and make
and set four ranks (in each quarter of the same) one foot from another as ye
use to set great Cabbage, and as soon after as ye have set them in ranks and
in good order as is aforesaid, then shall ye cut off all the setts even by the
ground. But in this doing, see that ye do not pluck up or loose the earth
what is about them: or if you will ye may cut them before ye do set them in
ranks. If ye do so, see that ye set them in such good order, and even with
the earth, as is aforesaid And it shall suffice also to make your ranks as ye
shall see cause. And look that ye furnish the earth all over with good dung,
without mingling of it in the earth, nor yet to cover the said Plants withal,
but strowed betwixt; and ye must also look well to the cleansing of weeds,
grass, or other such things which will be a hurt to the growth of the Plants.

How to water Plants when they wax dry.
IT shall be good to water them when the time is dry: in the first Year. Then
when they have put forth of new Cions, leave no more growing but that Cion
which is the principal and fairest, upon every stock one: all the other cut
off hard by the stock, and ever as they do grow small twigges about the
stock, ye shall (in the Month of March and April) cut them all of hard by
the stock. And if ye then stick by every Plant a pretty wand, and so bind
them with Willow bark, Bryer, or Osiers, it shall profit them much in their
grows. Then after five or six years grows, when they be so big as your
finger, or there abouts, ye may then remove any of them whereas ye will have
them grow and remain.

How one ought to remove Trees, and to plant them again
THe manner how ye ought to remove trees, is showed in the sixth Chapter
following: then about two or three years after their removing, ye shall graffe
them* for then they will be the better rooted. As for the others which ye leave
still in ranks, ye may also graffe them where as they stand, as ye shall see
cause good. When ye have plucked up the fairest to plant in either places (as
is aforesaid) also the manner how to Graffe them, is showed in the fifth Chapter
following But after they shall be so graft, in what place soever it be, ye
shall not remove or set them in of her places again* vn^ill the Graffes be
well closed upon the head of the wild stock.

When the best time is to replant, or remove.
When the head of the stock shall be all over closed about the graffes, then
ye may when ye will transplant and remove them (at a due time) where they shall
continue, For with often removing, ye shall do them great hurt in their
roots, and be in danger to make them dye.

Of negligence and forgetfulness.
IF peradventure ye forget (through negligence) and have let small Cions two or
three years grow about the roots of your stocks vnplucked up, then if you
have so done, ye may well pluck them up and set them in ranks, as the other of
the Pepins. But ye must set the ranks more larger that they may be removed
without hurting of each others roots: and cut off all the small twigges about
as need shall require, though they be set or graffed. Order them also in all
things as those small Cions of a years growth.

It is not so convenient to Graffe the Service Tree, as to set
Whereas ye shall see young Service Trees, it shall be most profit in setting
them, for if ye do graffe them, I believe ye shall win nothing thereby.

The best is only to pluck up the young Bastard trees when they are as great
as a good walking-staffe: then Proyne or cut off their branches and carry them
to set whereas they may be no more removed: and they shall profit more in
setting then graffing.

Some trees without graffing bring forth good fruit, and some other being
graffed be better to make Syder of.
IT is here to be marked, that though the Pepins be sown of the pomes of Pares
and good Apples, yet ye shall find that some of them do love the tree whereof
they came: and those be right, which have also a smooth bark, and as fair as
those which be graffed: the which if ye plant or set them thus growing from
the master root without graffing, they shall bring as good fruit, even like
unto the Pepin whereof he first came. But there be other new sorts commonly
good to eat, which be as good to make Syder of, as those which shall be
graffed for that purpose.

When you list to augment and multiply your trees.
AFter this sort ye may multiply them, being of diverse sorts and diversities,
as of Pears, or Apples, or such like. Notwithstanding, whenever ye shall
find a good Tree thus come of the Pepin as is aforesaid, so shall ye use him.
But if ye will augment trees of themselves, ye must take Graffes and so graffe
them.

Of the manner and changing of the fruit of the Pepin-tree.
Whensoever ye do replant or change your Pepin trees from place to place, in
so removing often the stock, the fruit thereof shall also change; but fruit
which does come of graffing, does always keep the form and nature of the
tree whereof he is taken: for as I have said, as often as the Pepin trees be
removed to a better ground, the fruit thereof shall be so much amended.

How one ought to make good Syder.
HEre is to be noted, if ye will make good Syder of what fruit soever it be,
bearing Pears or Apples, but specially of good Apples, and wild fruit, have
always a regard unto the ryping thereof, so gathered dry, then put them in dry
places, on boardes in heaps, covered with dry straw, and whenever ye will
make Syder thereof, choose out all those which are black bruised, and rotten
Apples, and throw them away, then take and use the rest for Syder: But here to
give you understanding, do not as they do in the Country of Mentz, which do
put their fruit gathered, into the midst of their Garden, in the rain and
mistings, upon the ba^e earth, which will make them to leese their force and
virtue, and does make them also withered and rough, and lightly a man shall
never make good Syder that shall never come to any purpose or good profit
thereof.

To make an Orchard in few Years.
SOme do take young straight slippes, which do grow from the roots, or of the
sides of the Apple Trees, about Michaelmasse, and do so plant or set them
(with Otes) in good ground, whereas they shall not be removed, and so graffe
(being well rooted) thereon. Othersome do take and set them in the Spring
time, after Christmas, in likewise, and do graffe thereon when they be well
rooted: and both do spring well. And this manner of way is counted to have an
Orchard the soonest. But these Trees will not endure past twenty or thirty
years.

CHAP. III. Is of setting Trees of Nuttes.
How one ought to set Trees which come of Nuttes.
FOr to set trees which come of Nuttes: when ye have eaten the fruit, look
that ye keep the Stones and Curnels thereof, then let them be dried in the
wind, without the vehemence of the Sun, to reserve them in a box and use
them as before.

Of the time when ye ought to Plant or Set them.
YE shall plant or set them in the beginning of Winter, or before Michaelmasse,
whereby they may the sooner spring out of the earth. But this manner of setting
is dangerous: for the Winter then coming in, and they being young and tender
in coming up, the cold will kill them. Therefore it shall be best to stay and
reserve them till after winter. And then before ye do set them, ye shall soke
or steep them in Milk, or in Milk and water, so long till they do stincke
therein: then shall ye dry them and set them in good earth, in the change or
increase of the Moon, with the small end upward, four fingers deep, ihen put
some stick thereby to mark the place.

For to set them in the Spring time.
IF ye will plant or set your Nuttes in the Spring time, where ye will have
them still to remain and not to be remooved, the best and most easy way is,
to set in every such place (as ye think good) three or four Nuttes nigh
together, and when they do all spring up, leave none standing but the fairest.

Of the Dunging and deep digging thereof.
ALso whereas ye shall think good, ye may plant or set all your Nuttes in one
square or quarter together in good earth and dung, in such place and time as
they use to plant. But see that it be well dunged, and also dug good and
deep and to be well meddled with good dung throughout, then set your Nuttes
three fingers deep in the earth, and half a foot one from another: ye shall
water them often in the Summer when there is dry weather, and see to weed them,
and dig it as ye shall see need.

Of Nuttes and Stones like to the Trees they came of.
IT is here to be noted, that certain kind of Nuttes and Curnels which do
love the Trees whereof the fruit is like unto the Tree they came of, when they
be planted in good ground, and set well in the Sun, which be, the Walnuts,
Chestnuts, all kind of Peaches, Figs, Almonds and Apricocks all these do love
the Trees they came of.

Of Planting the said Nuttes in good earth, and in the Sun.
ALL the said Trees do bring as good fruit of the said Nuttes, if they be well
planted, and set in good earth, and well in the Sun, as the fruit and Trees
they first came of.

Why fruit shall not have so good savor.
FOr if ye plant good Nuttes, good Peaches, or Figs in a Garden full of shadow,
the which has before loved the Sun, as the Vine does, for lack thereof their
fruit shall not h^ve so good savor, although it be all of one fruit: and
likewise so it is with all other fruit and Trees, for the goodness of the
earth, and the fair Sun does preserve them much.

For to set the Pine-trees.
FOr to set the Pine Tree, ye must see or plant them of Nuts, in March, or
about the shoot of the sap, not lightly after, ye must also set them where
they may not be removed after, in holes well dug, and well Dunged, not to be
transplanted or removed again, for very hardly they will shoot forth Cions,
being removed, specially if ye hurt the master root thereof.

For to set Cherry-trees.
FOr to set sour Cherries which do grow commonly in gardens, ye shall
understand they may well grow of stones, but better it shall be to take off the
small Cions which do come from the great roots: then plant them, and sooner
shall they grow then the stones, and those Cions must be set when they are
small, young and tender: as of two, or three years grows, for when they are
great, they profit not so well: and when ye set them, ye must see to cut off
all the boughs.

Trees of bastard and wild Nuts.
THere be other sorts of Nuttes, although they be well set in good ground, and
also in the Sun, yet will they not bring half so good fruit as the other,
nor commonly like unto those Nuttes they came of, but to be a bastard wild
sour fruit, which is the Filberd, small Nuts, of Plums, of Cherries, and he
great Apricocks: therefore if ye will have them good fruit, ye must set them in
manner and form following.

How to set Filberds or Hasell-trees.
FOr to set Filbirds or Hasels, and to have them good, take the small wands
that grow out from the root of the Filbird or Hasell-tree, (with short hary
twigs) and set them, and they shall bring as good fruit as the Tree they came
of: ^t shall not be needful to proin, or cut off the branches thereof when ye
set them, if they be not great, but those that ye do set, let them be but of
two or three years growth, and if ye shall see those Cions which ye have
planted, not to be fair and good, or do grow and prosper not well, then in
the Spring time, cut them off hard by the root, that other small Cions may
grow thereof.

To set Damsons or Plum-trees.
IN setting Damsons or Plum-trees, which fruit ye would have like to the Trees
they came of: if the said Trees be not grafted before, ye shall take only the
Cions that grow from the root of the old stock, which grows with small
twigs, and plant or set them: and their fruit shall be like unto the Trees they
were taken of.

To take Plum Graffes, and graffe them on other Plum-trees.
ANd if your Plum-trees be grafted already, and have the like fruit that you
desire, ye may take your graffes thereof, and Graffe them on your Plum-trees,
and the fruit that shall come thereof, shall be as good as the fruit of the
Cion, which is taken from the root, because they are much of like effect.

To set all sorts of Cherries.
TO set all sorts of great Cherries, and others: ye must have the Graffes of
the same Trees, and graffe them on other Cherrie trees, although they be of
sour fruit, and when they are so graffed, they will be as good as the fruit of
the Tree whereof the graffe was taken: for the stones are good, but to set to
make wild Cions, or Plants to graffe on.

The manner how one may order both Plum-trees, and Cherrie-trees.
FOr so much as these are two kind of Trees, that is, to understand, the
Cherry, and the Plum-tree, for when they be so grafted, their Roots be not so
good, nor so free as the Branches above, wherefore the Cions that do come from
the roots, shall not make so good and frank trees of. It is therefore to be
understood, how this manner and sort is to make frank trees, that may put
forth good Cions in time to come, which is; when they be great and good, then
if ye will take those Cions, or young springs from the roots, ye may make good
trees thereof, and then it shall not need to graffe them any more after: but to
augment one by the other, as ye do the Cions from the root of the Nut, as is
aforesaid, and ye shall do as follows.

How to graft Plum-trees and Cherry-trees.
YE may well graffe Plum-trees and great Cherry-trees, in such good order as ye
list to have them, and as hereafter shall be declared in the fifth Chapter
following: for these would be graffed while they are young and small, and also
graft in the ground, for thereby one may dress and trim them the better, and
put but one graffe in each stock of the same. Cleave not the heart, but a
little on the one side, nor yet deep or long open.

How you must proine or cut your Trees.
FOr when your graffes be well taken on the stock, and that the graffes do put
forth fair and long, about one years growth, ye must proine, or cut the
branch off commonly in Winter, (when they proine their Vines) a foot lower, to
make them spread the better: then shall ye mingle all through with good fat
earth, the which will draw the better to the place, which ye have so proined or
cut.

The convenientest way to cleanse and proine, or dress the roots of Trees.
ANd for the better cleansing and proining Trees beneath, is thus: ye shall
take away all the weeds, and graft about the Roots, then shall ye dig them
so round about, as ye would seem to pluck them up, and shall make them half
bare, then shall ye enlarge the earth about the Roots, and whereas ye shall
see them grow fair and long, place or couch them in the said hole and earth
again: then shall ye put the cut end of the Tree where it is graft, somewhat
more lower then his roots were, whereby his Cions so grafted, shall spring so
much the better.

When the Stocks is greater then the Graffes.
When as the tree waxes, and swells greater beneath the Graffing, then
above; then shall ye cleave the roots beneath and wreath them round, and so
cover them again: But see ye break no root thereof, so will he come to
perfection. But most m^n do use this way: if the Stock wax greater then the
Graffes, they do slit down the bark of the Graffes above, in two or three
parts, or as they shall see cause thereof: and so likewise, if the Graffes wax
greater above then the stock, ye shall slit down the stock accordingly, with
the edge of a sharp knife. This may well be done at any time in March, April,
and May, in the increase of the Moon, and not lightly after.

The Remedy when any Bough or Member of a Tree is broken.
IF ye shall chance to have Boughs, or Members of Trees broken, the best
remedy shall be, to place those Boughs or Members right soon again, (then
shall ye comfort the roots with good new earth) and bind fast those broken
boughs or members, both above and beneath, and so let them remain unto
another year, until they may close and put forth new Cions.

When a Member or Bough is broken how to proyne them.
Whereas ye shall see under or above superfluous boughs, ye may cut or proine
off, (as ye shall see cause) all such boughs hard by the Tree, at a due time,
in the winter following. But leave all the principal branches, and whereas any
are broken, let them be cut off beneath, or else by the ground, and cast them
away: thus must ye do yearly, or as ye shall see cause, if ye will keep your
Trees well and fair.

How one ought to enlarge the hole about the Tree roots.
IN proyning your Trees, if there be many roots, ye must enlarge them in the
hole, and so to wreath them as it is aforesaid, and to use them without
breaking, then cover them again with good fat earth, which ye shall mingle in
the said hole, and it shall be best to be dug all over a little before, and
see that no branch or root be left uncovered, and when you have thus dressed
your Trees, if any root shall put forth, or spring hereafter out of the said
holes, in growing, ye may so proine them as ye shall see cause, in letting them
so remain two or three years after, unto such time as the said Graffes be
sprung up and well branched.

How to set small Staves by, to strengthen your Cions.
TO avoid danger, ye shall set or stick small staves about your Cions, for
fear of breaking, and then after three or four years, when they be well
branched: ye may then set or plant them in good earth, (at the beginning of
Winter) but see that ye cut off all their small branches hard by the stock,
then ye may plant them where ye think good, so as they may remain.

In taking up Trees, note.
YE may well leave the master root in the hole (when ye dig him up) if the
removed place be good for him, cut of the master roots by the stub, but pare
not off all the small roots, and so plant him, and he shall profit more thus,
then others with all their master roots. When as Trees be great, they must be
disbranched, or boughs cut off, before they be set again, or else they will
hardly prosper. If the Trees be great, having great branches or boughs, when
ye shall dig them up, ye must disbranch them before ye set them again, for
when Trees shall be thus proined, they shall bring great Cions from their
Roots, which shall be frank and good to replant, or set in other places, and
shall have also good branches and roots, so that after it shall not need to
graffe them any more, but shall continue one after another to be free and good.

How to couch the Roots when they are proyned.
IN setting your Trees again, if ye will dress the roots of such as ye have
proined, or cut off the branches before, ye shall leave all such small roots
which grow on the great root, and ye shall so place those roots in replanting
again, not deep in the earth so that they may soon grow, and put forth
Cions: which being well used, ye may have fruit so good as the other
aforementioned, being of three or four years growth, as before is declared.

What Trees to proyne.
THis way of proyning is more harder for the great Chery (called Healmier) then
for the Plum-tree. Also it is very requisite and meet for those Cions or Trees,
which be graft on the wild sour Cherry-tree, to be proined also, for diverse
and sundry causes.

Why the sower Chery dureth not so long as the Healmier or great Cherry.
THe wild and sower Cherry, of his own nature will not so long time endure,
(as the great Healme Cherry) neither can have sufficient sap to nourish the
Graffes, as the great Healme Chery is graft; therefore when ye have proined the
branches beneath, and the roots also, so that ye leave roots sufficient to
nourish the Tree, then set him.

If ye cut not off the under roots, the Tree will profit more easier, and
also lighter to be known, when they put forth Cions, from the root of the
same, the which ye may take hereafter.

To graffe one great Cherry upon another.
YE must have respect unto the Healme Cherrie, which is Graft on the wild
Gomire (which is another kind of great Cherrie) and whether you do proine them
or not, it is not material: for they dure a long time. But ye must see to take
away the Cions, that do grow from the root of the wild Gomire, or wild
Plum-tree: because they are of nature wild, and do draw the sap from the
said Tree.

Of deep Setting or shallow.
TO set your Stocks or Trees somewhat deeper on the high grounds, then in the
Valleys; because the Sun in Summer shall not dry the root: and in the low
ground more shallow, because the water in Winter shall not drown or annoy the
Roots. Some do mark the stock in taking it up, and to set him again the
same way, because he will not alter his nature: so likewise the Graffes in
Graffing.

CHAP. IV. This Chapter does show how to set other Trees which come of wild
Cions, pricked in the earth without roots: and also of proining the meaner
Cions.
Trees take root pricked of Branches.
THere be certain which take root, being pricked of Branches proined of other
Trees, which be, the Mulberrie, the Fig Tree, the Quince-Tree, the
Seruice-tree, the Pomgranad-tree, the Apple Tree, the Damson-tree, and diverse
sorts of other Plumtrees, as the Plum-tree of Paradise, etc.

How one ought to set them.
FOr to set these sorts of Trees, ye must cut off the Cions, twigges, or
boughs, betwixt Alhallontide and Christmas, not lightly after. Ye shall choose
them which be as great as a little staff or more, and look whereas ye can
find them, fair, smooth, and straight, and full of sap withal, growing of
young trees, as of the age of three or four years growth or thereabouts, and
look that ye take them so from the Tree with a broad Chizell, that ye break
not or loose any part of the bark thereof, more then half a foot beneath,
neither of one side or other: then proine or cut off the branches, and prick
them one foot deep in the earth, well dug and ordered before.

How to bind them that be Weak.
TH^se Plants which be slender, ye must proyne or cut off the branches, then
bind them to some stake or such like to be set in good earth, and well mingled
with good dung, and also to be well and deeply dug, and to be set in a
moist place, or else to be well watered in Summer.

How one ought to dig the Earth for to set them in.
ANd when that ye would set them in the earth, ye must first prepare to dig
it, and dung it well throughout a large foot deep in the earth. And when as
ye will set them every one in his place made (before) with a crow of Iron, and
for to make them take root the better, ye shall put with your Plants, watered
Otes, or Barley, and so ye shall let them grow the space of three or four
years, or when they shall be well branched, then ye may remove them, and if ye
break off the old stubby root and set them lower, they will last a long time
the more. If some of those Plants do chance to put forth Cions from the root,
and being so rooted, ye must pluck them up though they be tender, and set them
in other places:

Of Cions without Roots.
IF that the said Plants have Cions without any Roots, but which come from the
tree root beneath, then cut them not of till they be of two or three years
growth, by that time they will gather roots to be replanted in other places.

To Plant the Fig Tree.
THe said Plants taken of Fig Trees graffed, be the best. Ye may likewise take
other sorts of Fig Trees, and graffe one upon the other, for like as upon the
wild Trees do come the Pepins, even so the Fig, but not so soon to prosper
and grow.

How to set Quinces.
LIkewise the nature of Quinces, is to spring, if they be pricked (as
aforesaid) in the earth, but sometimes J have grafted with great difficulty,
says mine Author, upon a white Thorn, and it has taken and borne fruit to
look on, fair, but in taste more weaker then the other.

The way to set Mulberries.
THere is also another way to set Mulberries as follows, which is, if you do
cut in Winter certain great Mulberry boughs or stocks asunder in the body
(with a Saw) in troncheons a foot long or more, then ye shall make a great
furrow in good earth well and deep, so that ye may cover well again your
Troncheons, in setting them an end half a foot one from another, then cover
them again, that the earth may be above those ends, three or four fingers
high, so let them remain, and water them in Summer, if need be sometimes, and
cleanse them from all hurtful weeds and roots.

Note one of the same.
THat then within a space of time after, the said tronchions will put forth
Cions, the which when they be somewhat sprigged, having two or three small
twigs, then ye may transplant or remove them where ye list, but leave your
troncheons still in the earth, for they will put forth many motions, the which
if they shall have scanty of root, then dung your troncheons within with good
earth, and likewise above also, and they shall do well.

The time meet to cut Cions.
Understand also, that all trees the which commonly do put forth Cions, if ye
cut them in Winter, they will put forth and spring more abundantly, for then
they be all good to Set and Plant.

To set Bush-trees, or Gooseberries, or small Raisons.
THere be many other kind of Bush-trees, which will grow of Cions pricked in
the ground, as the Gooseberry-tree, the small Raison-tree, the Barberry-tree,
the Black Thorne-tree, these with many others to be planted in Winter, will
grow without roots: ye must also proine them and they will take well enough,
so likewise ye may prick, in March, of Oziers in moist grounds, and they will
grow, and serve to many purposes for your Garden.

CHAP. V. Treats of four manner of Graffings.
IT is to be understood that there be many ways of Graffings, whereof I have
here only put four sorts, the which be good, both sure and well proved, and
easy to do, the which ye may use well in two parts of the year and more, for
I have (says he) graffed in our house, in every month, except October and
November, and they have taken well, which J have (says he) in the Winter begun
to graffe, and in the Summer grafted in the Scutchine or shield according to
the time, forward or slow; for certain Trees, specially young fair Cions have
enough or more of their sap unto the middle of August, then other some had at
Midsommer before.

The first way to graffe all sorts of Trees.
ANd first of all it is to be noted, that all sorts of francke Trees, as also
wild Trees of nature, may be grafted with grafts, and in the Scutchion, and
both do well take, but specially those Trees which be of like nature:
therefore it is better so to graffe. Howbeit they may well grow and take of
other sorts of trees, but certain trees be not so good, nor will prosper so
well in the end.

How to graffe Apple Trees, Peare-trees, Quince-trees, and Medlar-trees.
THey graffe the Peare-graffe, on other Peare-stockes, and Apple, upon Apple
stock, Crab or Wilding stock, the Quince and Medlar, upon the white Thorn,
but most commonly they use to graft one Apple upon another; and both Pears and
Quinces, they graft on Hawthorne and Crab-stocke. And other kind of fruit
called in French Saulfey, they use to graft on the Willow stock, the manner
thereof is hard to do, which I have not seen, therefore J will let it pass
at this present.

The Graffing of great Cherries.
THey graffe the great Cherry, called in French Heaulmiers, upon the Crabbe
Stock, and another long Cherry called Guiniers, upon the wild or sour
Cherry-tree, and likewise one Cherry upon another.

To graffe Medlars.
THe Misple or Medlar, they may be grafted on other Medlars, or on white
Thorn, the Quince is grafted on the white or black Thorn, and they do
prosper well. I have grafted (says he) the Quince upon a wild Pear Stock,
and it has taken and borne fruit well and good, but they will not long endure.
I believe (says he) it was because the graft was not able enough to draw the
sap from the Pear stock. Some graft the Medlar on the Quince, to be great.
And it is to be noted, although the Stock and the Graft be of contrary
natures: yet notwithstanding, neither the Graft nor Scutchion, shall take any
part of the nature of the wild stock so grafted, though it be Pear, Apple, or
Quince, which is contrary against many which have written, that if ye graft the
Medlar upon the Quince-tree, they shall be without stones, which is abusive and
mockery. For J have (says he) proved the contrary my self.

Of diverse kind of Graffes.
IT is very true, that one may set a Tree, which shall bear diverse sorts of
fruit at once, if he be grafted with diverse kind of grafts, as the black,
white, and green Cherry, togegether, and also Apples of other Trees, as Apples
and Pears together, and in the Scutchion (ye may graft) likewise of diverse
kinds also, as on Pears, Apricocks, and Plums together, and of others also.

Of the graffing of the Fig.
YE may graft the Fig Tree upon the Peach tree or Apricock, but leave a branch
on the stock, and there must be according for the space of years, for the one
shall change sooner then the other. All Trees abovesaid, do take very well
being grafted one with the other. And I have not known, or found of any
others; howbeit (says he) I have curiously sought and proved, because they say
one may graft on Coleworts or on Elmes, the which I think are but Jests.

Of the great Apricocke.
THe great Apricocke they graft in Summer, in the Scutchion or Shield, in the
sap or bark of the lesser Apricock, and be grafted on Peach-trees, Fig Trees,
and principally on Damson or Plum trees, for there they will prosper the better,

Of the Service-trees.
OF the Service tree, they say and write, that they may hardly be grafted on
other Service-trees, either on Apple Trees, Pear, or Quince-trees: and I
believe this to be very hard to do, for I have tried (says he) and they
would not prove.

The Setting of Service-trees.
THerefore it is much better to set them of Curnels, as it is aforesaid, as
also in the second Chapter of planting of Cions, or other great Trees, which
must be cut in Winter, as such as shall be most meet for that purpose.

Trees which be very hard to be grafted in the Shield or Scutchion.
ALL other manner of Trees aforesaid, do take very well to be graffed with
Cions, and also in the Shield, except Apricocks on Peaches, Almonds,
Percigniers, the Peach-tree do take hardly to be graffed, but in the shield in
Summer, as shall be more largely hereafter declared. As for the Almond,
Percigniers and Peaches, ye may better set them of Curnels and Nuts, whereby
they shall the sooner come to perfection to be graffed.

How a man ought to consider those Trees, which be commonly charged with fruit.
YE shall understand, that in the beginning of graffing, ye must consider what
sorts of Trees, do most charge the stock with branch and fruit, or that do
love the Country or Ground whereas you intend to plant or graffe them: for
better it were to have abundance of fruit, then to have very few or none.

Of Trees whereon to choose your Graffes.
OF such Trees as ye will gather your Graffes to graffe with, ye must take them
at the ends of the principal Branches, which be also fair and greatest of
Sap, having two or three fingers length of the old wood, with the new, and
those Cions which eyes somewhat nigh together, are the best; for those which be
long, are far one from another, and not so good to bring fruit.

The Cions toward the East are best.
YE shall understand, that those Cions which do grow on the East, or Orient
part of the Tree, are best: ye must not lightly gather of the evil and slender
graffes which grow in the midst of the Trees, nor any graffes which do grow
within on the branches, or that do spring from the stock of the Tree, nor yet
graftes which be on very old Trees, for thereby ye shall not lightly profit to
any purpose.

To choose your Tree for Graffes.
ANd when the Trees whereas you intend to gather your graftes, be small and
young, as of five or six years growth, do not take of the highest grafts
thereof, nor the greatest, except it be of a small Tree of two or three years,
the which commonly has too much of top or wood, otherwise not, for you shall
but mar your graffing.

How to keep Graffes a long time.
YE may keep graftes a long time good, as from Alhallontide (so that the
leaves be fallen) unto the time of graffing, if that they be well covered in
the earth half a foot deep therein, and so that none of them do appear
without the earth.

How to keep Graffes before they are budded.
ALso do not gather them, except ye have great need, until Christmas or
there-abouts, and put them not in the ground nigh any walls for fear of
Moles, Mice, and water, marring the place and graftes. It shall be good to
keep graftes in the earth before they begin to bud, when that ye will graft
betwixt the bark and the Tree, and when the Trees begin to enter into their
sap.

How one ought to begin to Graffe.
ALso ye must begin to graft (in cleaving the stock) at Christmas, or before,
according to the coldness of the time, and principally the Healme or great
Cherry, Pears, Wardens, or forward fruit of Apples: and for Medlars it is good
to tarry until the end of January and February, until March, or until such
time as ye shall see Trees begin to bud or spring.

When it is good Graffing the wild Stocks.
IN the Spring time it is good Graffing of wild Stocks, (which be great)
betwixt the bark and the tree, such stocks as are to be of later Spring, and
kept in the earth before. The Damson or Plum tarrieth longest to be grafted:
for they do not show or put forth sap, as soon as the other.

Mark if the Tree be forward or not.
ALso consider you always, whether the Tree be forward or not, or to be
grafted soon or lateward, and to give him also a graffe of the like have or
slownesse: even so ye must mark the time, whether it be slow or forward.

When one will graffe, what necessaries he ought to be furnished withal.
Whensoever ye go to graffing, see ye be first furnished with grafts, clay
and moss, clothes or barks of sallow to bind likewise withal. Also ye must
have a small Saw, and a sharp knife, to cleave and cut Graffes withal. But it
were much better if ye should cut your grafts with a great Penknife or some
other like sharp knife, having also a small wedge of hard wood, or of Iron,
with a hooked knife, and also a small Mallet. And your wild stocks must be
well rooted before ye do graffe them: and be not so quick to deceive your
selves, as those which do graffe and plant all at one time, yet they shall not
profit so well, for where the wild stock has not substance in himself, much
less to give unto the other grafts, for when a man thinks sometimes to
forward himself, he does hinder himself.

Of Graffes not prospering the first year.
YE shall understand, that very hardly your Graffes shall prosper after, if
they do not profit or prosper well in the first year, for whenever (in the
first year) they profit well, it were better to graft them somewhat lower then
to let them so remain and grow.

For to graffe well and sound.
ANd for the best understanding of Graffing in the cleft, ye shall first cut
away all the small Cions about the body of the stock beneath, and before ye
begin to cleave your stock, dress and cut your graffes somewhat thick and
ready, then cleave your stock, and as the cleft is small or great (if need be)
part it smooth within, then cut your incision of your grafts accordingly, and
set them in the clefts as even and as close as ye can possible.

How to trim your Graffes.
ALso ye may graft your Graffes full as long as two or three trunchions or cut
Grafts, which ye may likewise graffe withal very well, and will be as good as
those which do come of old wood, and often times better, as to graffe a bough,
for often it so happens, a man shall find of Oylets or eyes hard by the old
slender wood, yet better it were to cut them of with the old wood, and choose a
better and fair place at some other eye in the same Graffe, and to make your
incision there under, as aforesaid, and cut your grafts in making the incision
on the one side narrow, and on the other side broad, and the inner-side thin,
and the outside thick, because the outside (of your Graffe) must join
within the cleft, with the Sap of bark of the wild Stock, and it shall so
be set in. See also that ye cut it smooth as your clefts are in the Stock^, in
joining at every place both even and close, and especially the joints or
corners of the graffes on the head of the stock, which must be well and clean
pared before, and then set fast thereon.

How to cut Graffes for Cherries and Plums.
IT is not much requisite in the Healme Cherry, for to join the Grafts (in the
stock) wholly throughout, as it is in others, or to cut the grafts of great
Cherries, Damsons, or Plums, so thin and plain as ye may other graffes, for
these sorts have a more greater sap or pithe within, the which ye must
always take heed in cutting it too nigh on the one side or on the other, but
at the end thereof chiefly, to be thin cut and flat.

Note also.
ANd yet if the said incision be more straighter and closer on the one side
then on the other side, part it where it is most meet, and where it is too
straight open it with a wedge of Iron, and put in a wedge of the same wood
above in the cleft, and thus may ye moderate your graffes as ye shall see cause.

How in graffing to take heed that the Bark do not rise.
IN all kind of cutting your Graffes, take heed to the bark of your grafts,
that it do not rise (from the wood) on no side thereof, and specially on the
out side, therefore ye shall leave it more thicker then the inner-side: Also ye
must take heed when as the stocks do wreath in cleaving, that ye may join the
graffe therein accordingly: the best remedy therefore is to cut it smooth
within, that the graffe may join the better: ye shall also unto the most
greatest Stocks, choose for them the most greatest Graffes.

How to cut your Stock.
HOw much the more your stock is thin and slender, so much more ye ought to
cut him lower, and if your stock be as great as your finger, or there-abouts,
ye may cut him a foot or half a foot from the earth, and dig him about, and
dung him with Goats dung, to help him withal, and graft him but with one
Graffe or Cion.

If the wild Stock be great and slender.
IF your wild Stock be great, or as big as a good staff, ye shall cut him
round of, a foot or there-abouts above the earth, then set in two good graffes
in the head or cleft thereof.

Trees as great as ones Arm.
BUt when your Stock is as great as your arm, ye shall saw him clean off and
round, three or four foot, or there abouts from the earth, for to defend him,
and set in the head three graffes, two in the cleft, and one betwixt the bark
and the Tree, on that side which ye have most space.

Great Trees as big as your Leg.
IF the Stock be as big as your leg, or there-abouts, ye shall saw him
fair and clean of, four or five foot high from the earth, and cleave him a
cross (if ye will) and set in four grafts in the clefts thereof, or else one
cleft only, and set two grafts in both the sides thereof, and other two grafts
betwixt the bark and the Tree.

When the Graffes be pinched with the Stock.
YE must for the better understanding, mark to graffe betwixt the Bark and
the Tree, for when the sap is full in the wood of wild Stocks being great,
then they do commonly pinch or wring the grafts too sore, if ye do not put a
small wedge of green wood in the cleft thereof, to help them withal against
such danger.

How ye ought to cleave your Stocks.
Whensoever ye shall cleave your wild Stocks, take heed that ye cleave them
not in the midst of the heart or pith, but a little on the one side, which ye
shall think good.

How to graffe the branch of great Trees.
IF ye would graft great Trees, as great as your thigh, or greater, it were
much better to graft only the branches thereof, then the stock or body, for
the stock will rot before the grafts shall cover the head.

How to cut Branches old and great.
BUt if the Branches be too rude, and without order (the best shall be) to cut
them all off, and within three or four years after they will bring fair
young Cions again, and then it shall be best to graft them, and cut off all
the superfluous and ill branches thereof.

How ye ought to bind your Graffes throughout for fear of Winds.
ANd when your grafts shall be grown, ye must bind them, for fear of shaking
of the wind, and if the Tree be free and good of himself, let the Cions grow
still, and ye may graft any part or branch ye will in the cleft, or betwixt the
bark and the Tree, or in the Scutchion, and if your bark be fair and loose.

To set many Graffes in one cleft.
EVer when ye will put many grafts in one cleft, see that one incision (of your
Graft) be as large as the other, not to be put into the cleft so slightly and
rashly, and that one side thereof be not more open then the other, and that
these Grafts be all of one length: it shall suffice also if they have three
eyes on each graft without the joint thereof.

How to saw your stock before you leave him.
IN sawing your stock, see that you tear not the bark about the head
thereof, then cleave his head with a long sharp knife, or such like, and
knock your wedge in the midst thereof, (then pare him on the head round
about) and knock your wedge in so deep till it open meet for your grafts but
not so wide, then holding in one hand your graft and in the other hand your
Stock, set your Graft in close, bark to bark, and let your wedge be great
above at the head, that ye may knock him out fair and easily again,

If the Stock cleave too much, or the bark do open.
IF the Stock do cleave too much, or open the bark with the wood too low,
then softly open your stock with your wedge, and see if your incision of your
Graft, be all meet, and just, according to the cleft, if not, make it until
it be meet, or else saw him off lower.

How Graffes never lightly take.
ABove all things ye must consider the meeting of the two saps, betwixt the
graft and the wild stock, which must be set in just one with another: for ye
shall understand, if they do not join, and the one delight with the other,
being even set, they shall never take together, for there is nothing only to
join their increase, but the Sap, recounting the one against the other.

How to set the Graffes right in the cleft.
When the bark of the Stock, is more thicker then the graft, ye must take
good heed, of the setting it in of the graft in the cleft, to the end that his
sap may join right with the sap of the stock, on the inside, and ye ought
likewise to consider of the sap of the stock, if he do surmount the grafts
in the outsides of the cleft too much or not.

Of setting in the Graffes.
ALso ye must take good heed, that the grafts be well and clean set in, and
join close upon the head of the stock. Likewise then the incision which is set
in the cleft, do join very well within on both sides, not to join so even,
but some times it may do service, when as the Grafts do draw too much from
the Stock, or the stock also on the Grafts do put forth.

Note also.
ANd therefore, when the stock is rightly cloven, there is no danger in cutting
the incision of the graft, but a little straight rebated to the end thereof,
that the sap may join one with the other, the better and closer together.

How ye ought to draw out your wedge.
When your Graffes shall be well joined with your stock, draw your wedge
fair and softly forth, for fear of displacing your graffes, ye may leave
within the cleft a small wedge of such green wood as is aforesaid, and ye
shall cut it of close by the head of your stock, and so cover it with a bark
as follows.

To cover your clefts on the head.
When your wedge is drawn forth, put a green pill of thick bark of Willow,
Crab, or Apple, upon your clefts of the stock, that nothing may fall between:
then cover all about the clefts on the stock head, two fingers thick with
good clay, or nigh about that thickness, that no Wind nor Rain may enter.
Then cover it round with good Moss, and then wreath it over with clothes, or
pills of Willow, Bryar, or Oziars, or such like, then bind them fast, and
stick certain long pricks on the grafts head amongst your Cions, to defend
the Crows, Iayes, or such like.

How ye ought to see to the binding of your Graffes.
BUt always take good heed to the binding of your heads, that they wax
slack, or shagge, neither on the one side or other, but remains fast upon the
clay, which clay remains fast (likewise on the stock head) under the binding
thereof, wherefore the said clay must be moderated in such sort as follows.

How ye ought to temper your Clay.
THe best way is therefore, to try your clay betwixt your hands, for stones and
such like, and so to temper it as ye shall think good, if so it require of
moystnesse or dryness and to temper it with the hair of beasts: for when it
dries, it holds not (otherwise) so well on the stock, or if ye knead of
Moss therewith, or mingle Hay thin therewith: some do judge that the Moss
does make the trees mossie. But I think (says he) that comes of the
disposition of places.

To bush your graffe heads.
When ye shall bind or wrap your Graffe heads with band, take small Thorns,
and bind them within, for to defend your Graffes from Kites, or Crows, or
other danger of other Fowls, or prick of sharp white sticks thereon.

The second way to graffe high Branches on Trees.
THe second manner to Graffe, is strange enough to many: This kind of Graffing
is on the tops of branches of Trees, which thing to make them grow lightly, is
not so soon obtained: wheresoever they be grafted, they do only require a
fair young wood, a great Cion or twig, growing highest in the Tree top, which
Cions ye shall choose to graffe on, of many sorts of fruits if ye will, or as
ye shall think good, which order follows.

TAke grafts of other sorts of Trees, which ye would graffe in the top thereof,
then mount to the top of the tree which ye would graft, and cut off the tops of
all such branches, or as many as ye would graft on, and if they be greater then
the grafts, which ye would graft, ye shall cut and graft them lower as ye do
the small wild stock aforesaid. But if the Cions that you cut be as great as
your graft that you graft on, ye shall cut them lower betwixt the old wood and
the new, or a little more higher, or lower: then cleave a little, and choose
your grafts in the like sort, which ye would plant, whereof ye shall make the
incision short, with the bark on both sides a like, and as thick on the one
side as the other, and set so just in the cleft, that the bark may be even and
close, as well above as beneath, on the one side as the other, and so bind him
as is aforesaid. It shall suffice that every graft have an oylet, or eye, or
two at the most, without the joint, for to leave them too long it shall not be
good, and ye must dress it with Clay and Moss, and bind it as it is
aforesaid. And likewise ye may graffe these, as ye do the little wild Stocks,
which should be as great as your Graffes, and to graft them, as ye do those
with Sap like on both sides, but then you must graffe them in the earth, as
three fingers of, or there-abouts.

The manner of Graffing, is of Graffes which may be set betwixt the Bark and
the Tree.
To graffe betwixt the Bark and the Tree.
THis manner of graffing is good, when Trees do begin to enter into their Sap,
which is, about the end of February unto the end of April, and specially on
great wild stocks which be hard to cleave, ye may set in four or five grafts
in the head thereof, which grafts ought to be gathered before, and kept close in
the earth till then, for by that time aforesaid, ye shall scantly find a Tree,
but that he does put forth or bud, as the Apple called Capendu, or such like.

Ye must therefore saw these wild stocks more charily, and more higher, so
they be great, and then cut the Graffes, which ye would set together, so as you
would set them upon the wild stock that is cleft, as is before rehearsed. And
the incision of your grafts must not be so long, nor so thick, and the bark a
little at the end thereof must be taken away, and made in manner as a Launcet
of Iron, and as thick on the one side as the other.

How to dress the head, to place the graffes betwixt the Bark and the Tree.
ANd when your grafts be ready cut, then shall ye cleanse the head of your
stock, and pare it with a sharp knife round about the bark thereof, to the
end your grafts may join the better thereon, then by and by take a sharp
penknife, or other sharp pointed knife, and thrust it down betwixt the bark
and the stock, so long as the incision of your graffes be, then put your
graffes softly down therein to the hard joint, and see that it do sit close
upon the stock head.

How to cover the head of your stock.
When as ye have set in your graffes, ye must then cover it well about with
good tough Clay and Moss, as is said of the others, and then ye must
incontinent enuiron or compass your head with small thorny bushes, and bind
them fast thereon all about, for fear of great Birds, and likewise the wind.

Of the manner and graffing in the Shield or Scutchion.
THe fourth manner to graffe, which is the last, is to graffe in the Scutchion,
in the sap, in Summer, from about the end of the month of May until August,
when as trees be yet strong in sap and leaves, for otherwise it cannot be
done; the best time is in June and July, some years when the time is very dry,
and that some trees do hold their sap very long; therefore ye must tarry till
it return.

For to graffe in Summer so long as the trees be full leaved.
FOr to begin this manner of graffing well, ye must in Summer when the trees be
almost full of sap, and when they have sprung forth of new shootes being
somewhat hardened, then shall ye take a branch thereof in the top of the tree,
the which ye will have grafted, and choose the highest and the principallest
branches, without cutting it from the old wood, and choose thereof the
principallest oylet or eye, or budding place, of each branch one, with which
oylet or eye, ye shall begin to graft as follows.

The big Cions are best to graffe.
CHiefly ye must understand, that the smallest and naughty oylets or buds of
the said Cions be not so good to graffe; therefore choose the greatest and best
you can find, first cut of the leaf hard by the oylet, then ye shall trench or
cut the length of a barley corn beneath the oylet round about the bark, hard
to the wood, and so likewise above: then with a sharp point of a knife, slit
it down half an inch beside the oylet or bud, and with the point of a sharp
knife softly raise the said Shield or Scutchion round about, with the oylet in
the midst, and all the sap belonging thereunto.

How to take of the Shield from the wood.
ANd for the better raising the said Shield or Scutchion from the wood, after
that ye have cut him round about, and then slit him down, without cutting any
part of the wood within, ye must then raise the side next you that is slit, and
then take the same Shield betwixt your finger and thum, and pluck or raise it
softly of, without breaking or brusing any part thereof, and in the opening or
plucking it off, hold it with your finger hard to the wood, to the end the sap
of the oylet may remain in the Shield, for if it go off (in plucking it) from
the barks, and stick to the wood, your Scutchions is nothing worth.

To know your Scutchion or Shield when he is good or bad.
ANd for the more easier understanding, if it be good or bad, when it is taken
from the wood, look within the said shield, and if ye shall see it crack, or
open within, then it is of no value, for the chief Sap does yet remain
behind with the wood, which should be in the ^hield, and therefore ye must
choose and cut another Shield, which must be good and sound as aforesaid, and
when your Scutchion shall be well taken of from the wood, then hold it dry by
the oylet or eye betwix your lips, until ye have cut and taken of the bark
from tht other Cion or branch, and set him in that place, and look that ye do
not foul or wet it in your mouth.

Of young Trees to graffe on.
BUt ye must graffe on such Trees, as be from the bigness of your little
finger, unto as great as your arm, having their bark thin and slender, for
great Trees commonly have their bark hard and thick, which ye cannot well
graffe this way, except they have some branches with a thin smooth bark,
meet for this way to be done.

How to set or place your Shield.
YE must quickly cut of round the bark of the Tree that ye will graffe on, a
little more longer then the Shield that ye set on, because it may join the
sooner and easier, but take heed that in cutting of bark, ye cut not the wood
within.

Note also.
AFter the incision once done, ye must then cover both the sides or ends well
and softly withal, with a little bone or horn, made in manner like a thin
skin, which ye shall lay it all over the joints or closings of the said
shield, somewhat longer and larger, but take heed for hurting or crushing the
bark thereof.

How to lift up the bark and te set your Shield on.
THis done take your Shield or Scutchion, by the oylet or eye that he has, and
open him fair and softly by the two sides, and put them straight way on the
other tree, whereas the bark is taken off, and join him close bark to bark
thereon, then plain it softly above, and at both the ends with the thin
bone, and that they join above and beneath bark to bark, so that he may feed
well the branch of that Tree.

moist place, the which then it were best for to tarry until January, or
February, to plant in the Frost is not good.

To Plant or Set toward the South, or Sunny place is best.
Before you do pluck up your trees for to plant them, if ye will mark the
South Side of each tree, that when ye shall replant them, ye may set them
again as they stood before, which is the best way as some do say. And if ye
keep them a certain time, after they be taken out of the Earth, before ye
replant them again, they will rather recover there in the earth, so they be
not wet with Rain, nor otherwise, for that shall be more contrary to them then
the great Heat or Drought.

How to cut the Branches of Trees before they be Set.
Whensoever ye shall set or replant your Trees, first ye must cut of the
boughs, and specially those which are great branches, in such sort that ye
shall leave the small twigs or sprigs, on the stocks of your branch, which
must be but a shaftment long, or somewhat more, or less according as the Tree
shall require, which ye do set.

Apple Trees commonly must be disbranched before they be replanted or set.
ANd chiefly the Apple Trees, being Graffed ot not Graffed, do require to be
disbranched before they be set again, for they shall prosper thereby, much the
better: the other sorts of Trees may well pass unbranched, if they have not
too great or large branches, and therefore it shall be good to transplant or
set, as soon after as the graffes are closed, on the head of the wild Stock,
as for small Trees which have but one Cion or twig, it needs not to cut them
above, when they be replanted or removed.

All wild Stocks must be disbranched when they are replanted or set.
ALL wild ttees or stocks, which ye think for to graffe on ye must first cut
off all their Branches before ye set them again: also it shall he good,
always to take heed in replanting your Trees, that ye do set them again, in
as good or better Earth, then they were in before, and so every Tree, according
as his nature does require.

What Trees love the fair Sun, what Trees the cold Air.
COmmonly the most part of Trees, do love the Sun at Noone, and yet the
South Wind (or vent d'aval) is very contrary against their nature, and
specially the Almond-tree, the Apricocke, the Mulberry-tree, the Fig Tree, and
the Pomgranade-tree. Certain other Trees there be which love cold Air, as
these: the Chesnut-tree, the wild and eager Cherry-tree, the Quince-tree, and
the Damson or Plum-tree, the Walnut loves cold Air, and a stony white ground.
Peare-trees love not greatly plain places, they prosper well enough in places
closed with walls, or high Hedges, and specially the Pear called bon
Christien.

Of many sorts and manner of Trees following their nature.
THe Damson or Plum-tree does love a cold fat earth, and clay withal, the
(Healme) great Cherry does love to be, set or planted upon Clay. The Pine Tree
loves light earth* stony and sandy. The Medlar comes well enough in all kind
of grounds, and does not hinder his fruit, to be in the shadow and moist
places. Hasell-nut-trees love the place to be cold, lean, moist and sandy. Ye
shall understand, that every kind of fruitful Tree does love, and is more
fruitful in one place then another, as according unto their nature.
Nevertheless, yet we ought to nourish them (all that we may) in the place
where we set them in, in taking them from the place and ground they were in.
And ye must also consider when one does plant them of the great and largest
kind of Trees, that every kind of Tree may prosper and grow, and it is to be
considered also, if the Trees have commonly grown before so large in the ground
or not, for in good earth the Trees may well prosper and grow, having a good
space one from another, more then if the ground were lean and naught.

How to place or set Trees at large.
IN this thing ye shall consider, ye must give a competent space, from one Tree
to another, when as ye make the holes to set them in, not nigh, nor the one
tree touch another. For a good Tree planted, or set well at large, it profits
oftentimes more of fruit then three or four Trees, set too nigh together. The
most greatest and largest Trees commonly are Walnuts and Chestnuts, if ye plant
them severally in rank, as they do commonly grow upon high ways, besides
hedges and Fields, they must be set xxxv. foot asunder, one from another, or
there-abouts, but if ye will plant many ranks in one place together, ye must
set them the space of xiv. foot one from another, or thereabouts, and so far
ye must set your ranks one from another. For the Peare-trees and Apple Trees,
and of other sorts of Trees, which may be set of this largeness one from the
other, if ye do plant only in ranks by hedges in the Fields, or otherwise,
it shall be sufficient of xx. foot from another. But if ye will set two ranks
upon the sides of your great Allies in Gardens, which be of ten or twelve
foot broad, it shall be then best to give them more space, the one from the
other in each rank, as about xxv. foot, also ye must not set your Trees right
one against the other, but entermedling or between every space, as they may
best grow at large, that if need be, ye may plant of other smaller Trees
between, but see that ye set them not too thick. If ye list to set or plant
all your Trees of one bigness, as of young Trees like rods, being Peare-trees,
or Apple Trees, they must be set a good space one from another, as of twenty or
thirty foot in square, as to say, from one rank to another. For to plant or
set of smaller trees, as Plum-trees, and Apple Trees, of the like bigness, it
shall be sufficient for them fourteen or fifteen foot space in quarters.
But if ye will plant or set two tankes in your Allies in Gardens, ye must
devise for to proportion it after the largeness of your said Allies. For to
plant or set eager or sower Cherry-trees, this space shall be sufficient enough
the one from the other, that is, of x. or xii. foot, and therefore if you make
of great or large Allies in your Garden, as of x. foot wide, or thereabouts,
they shall come well to pass, and shall be sufficient to plant your trees, of
ix. or x. foot space and for the other lesser sorts of trees, as of
Quince-trees, Fig Trees, Nut-trees, and such like, which be not commonly
planted, but in one rank together.

Ordering your Trees.
When that ye plant or set ranks, or every kind of trees together, ye shall
set or plant the most smallest toward the Sun, and the greatest in the shade,
that they may not annoy or hurt the small, nor the small the great. Also
whenever ye will plant or set of Peare-trees, and Plumtrees, (in any place)
the one with another, better it were to set the Plum-trees next the Sun, for
the Pears will dure better in the shade. Also ye must understand, when ye set
or plant any ranks of trees together, ye must have more space betwixt your
ranks and trees, (then when ye set but one rank) that they may have room
sufficient on every side.

Ye shall also scarcely set or plant Peare-trees, or Apple Trees, or other
great Trees, upon dead or mossie Barren ground unstirred; for they increase
(thereon) to no purpose. But other lesser Trees very well may grow, as Plum
trees, and such like: now when all the said things above be considered, ye
shall make your holes according to the space that shall be required of every
Tree that ye shall plant or set, and also the place meet for the same, so much
as ye may convenient, ye shall make your holes large enough, for ye must
suppose the tree ye do set, has not the half of his roots he shall have
hereafter; therefore ye must help him and give him of good fat earth, (or
dung) all about the roots when as ye plant him. And if any of the same roots
be too long and bruised or hurt, ye shall cut them clean off a slope-wise, so
that the upper side (of each root) so cut, may be longest in setting, and for
the small Roots which come forth all about thereof, ye may not cut them off as
the great roots.

How ye ought to enlarge the holes for your Trees when ye Plant them.
FOr when as ye set the Trees in the holes, ye must then enlarge the roots in
placing them, and see that they take all downe-wards, without turning any
roots the end upward, and ye must not plant or set them too deep in the
earth, but as ye shall see cause. It shall be sufficient for them to be planted
or set (half a foot, or there-abouts) in the earth, so that the earth be
above all the roots half a foot or more, if the place be not very burning
and stony.

Of Dung and good Earth, for your Plants and Trees.
ANd when as ye would replant or set, ye must have of good fat Earth or Dung,
well mingled with a part of the same earth whereas ye took your plants out of,
with all the upper crests of the earth, as thick as ye can have it: the said
earth which ye shall put about the roots, must not be put too nigh the roots,
for doubt of the dung being laid too nigh, which will put the said roots in a
heat, but let it be well mingled with the other earth, and well tempered in
the holes, and the smallest and slenderest Cions that turns up among those
Roots, ye may plant there very well.

If ye have worms amongst the Earth of your Roots.
IF there be worms in the fat Earth or Dung, that ye put about your roots, ye
must mingle it well also with the dung of Oxen or Kine, or slekt Sope-ashes
about the Root, which will make the worms to dye, for otherwise they will
hurt greatly the Roots.

To dig well the earth about the Tree Roots.
ALso ye must dig well the earth, principally all round over the roots, and
more oftener if they be dry, then if they be wet, ye must not plant or set Trees
when it raineth, nor the earth to be very moist about the roots. The Trees
that be planted or set in Valleys, commonly prosper well by Drought, and when
it raineth, they that be on the Hills are better by watering with drops, then
others, but if the place or ground be moist of nature, ye must plant or set
your Trees not so deep thereon.

The nature of Places.
ON high and dry places, ye must plant or set your Trees a little more deeper,
then in the Valleys, and ye must not fill the holes in high places, so full as
the other, to the end that the Rain may better moysten them.

Of good Earth.
Understand also, that of good earth, commonly comes good fruit, but in
certain places (if they might be suffered to grow) they would season the Tree
the better. Otherwise they shall not come to proof, nor yet have a good taste.

With what ye ought to bind your Trees.
Whensoever your Trees shall be replanted or set, ye must knock by the root,
a stake, and bind your Trees thereto for fear of the wind: and when they do
spring ye shall dress them and bind them with bands that may not break, which
bands may be of strong soft herbs, as Bulrushes or such like, or of old
linen clouts, if the other be not strong enough, or else ye may bind them with
Oziers, or such like, for fear of fretting or hurting your Trees.

CHAP. VII. Of medicining and keeping the Trees when they are planted.
The first council is, when your Trees be but Plants, in dry weather, they
must be watered.
THe young trees which be newly Planted, must sometimes (in Summer) be watered
when the time waxes dry, at the least the first year after they be planted or
set. But as for the greater trees which are well taken and rooted a good time,
ye must dig them all over the roots after Alhallontide, and uncover them four
or five foot compass about the roof of the tree: and let them so lie
uncovered until the latter end of Winter. And if ye do, then mingle about
each tree of good fat earth or dung, to heat and comfort the earth withal, it
shall be good.

With what Dung, ye ought to Dung your Trees.
ANd principally unto Mossie trees, dung them with Hogs dung mingled with other
earth of the same ground, and let the dung of Oxen be next about the roots, and
ye shall also abate the Moss of the Trees with a great knife of wood, or such
like, so that ye hurt not the bark thereof.

When ye ought to uncover your Trees in Summer.
IN the time of Summer, when the earth is scantly half moist, it shall be good
to dig at the foot of the Trees, all about on the root, such as not have
been uncovered in the Winter before, and to mingle it with good fat earth: and
so fill it again, and they shall do well.

When ye ought to cut or proyne your Trees.
ANd if there be in your Trees certain Branches of superfluous wood, that ye
will cut off, tarry until the time of the entering in of the Sap, that is,
when they begin to bud, as in March and April: Then cut off as ye shall see
cause, all such superfluous Branches hard by the Tree, that thereby the other
Branches may prosper the better, for then they shall sooner close their sap
upon the cut places then in the Winter, which should not do so well to cut
them, as certain do teach, which have not good experience. But for so much as
in this time the Trees be entering into the Sap, as is aforesaid. Take heed
therefore in cutting then off your great Branches hastily, that through their
great weight, they do not cleave or separate the Bark from the Tree, in any
part thereof.

How to cut your great Branches, and when.
ANd for the better remedy: first you shall cut the same great Branches, half
a foot from the tree, and after to saw the rest clean hard by the body of the
Tree, then with a broad Chizell, cut all clean, and smooth upon that place,
then cover it with Ox Dung. Ye may also cut them well in Winter so that ye
leave the trunk or branch somewhat longer, so as ye may dress and cut them
again in March and April, as is before mentioned.

How ye ought to leave these great Branches cut.
OTher things here are to be showed, of certain grafts and old Trees only,
which in cutting the great branches thereof truncheon-wise, do renew again,
as Walnuts, Mulberry-trees, Plum-trees, Cherry-trees, with others, which ye
must disbranch the boughs thereof, even after Alhallontide, or as soon as
their leaves be fallen off, and likewise before they begin to enter into Sap.

Of Trees having great Branches.
THe said great Branches, when ye shall disbranch them ye shall so cut them off
in such Truncheons, to lengthen the Trees, that the one may be longer then the
other, that when the Cions be grown good and long thereon, ye may graffe on
them again as ye shall see cause, according as every arm shall require.

Of barrenness of trees, the time of cutting all branches, and of uncovering
the Roots.
SOmetimes a man has certain old Trees, which be almost spent, as of the
Peare-trees, and Plum-trees, and other great Trees, the which bear scant of
fruit: but when as ye shall see some Branches well charged therewith, then ye
ought to cut off all the other ill Branches and Boughs, to the end that those
that remain, may have the more Sap, to nourish their fruit, and also to
uncover their roots after Alhallontide, and to cleave the most greatest roots
thereof (a foot from the trunk) and put into the said clefts, a thin state of
hard stone, there let it remain, to the end that the humor of the Tree may
enter out thereby, and at the end of Winter, ye shall cover him again, with as
good fat earth as ye can get, and let the stone alone.

Trees which ye must help, or pluck up by the Roots.
ALL sorts of Trees which spring Cions from the Roots, as Plum-trees, all kind
of Cherry-trees, and small Nut-trees, ye must help in plucking their Cions
from their roots in Winter, as soon as conveniently ye can, after the leaf is
fallen. For they do greatly pluck down and weaken the said trees, in drawing
to them the substance of the earth.

What does make a good Nut.
BUt chiefly to plant these Cions, the best way is to let them grow, and be
nourished two or three years from the root, and then to transplant them, or
set them in the Winter, as is aforesaid. The Cions which be taken from the
foot of the Hasell-trees, make good Nuts, and to be of much strength and
virtue, when they are not suffered to grow too long from the Root, or foot
aforesaid.

Trees eaten with Beasts must be graffed again.
When certain graffes being well in Sap, of three or four years or
thereabouts, be broken or greatly endamaged with beasts, which have broked
thereof, it shall little profit to leave those Graffes so, but it were better
to cut them, and to graffe them higher, or lower then they were before. For the
Graffes shall take as well upon the new as old Cion being graffed, as on the
wild stock: But it shall not so soon close: as upon the wild stocke-head.

How your wild Stocks ought not hastily to be removed.
IN the beginning when ye have graffed your Graffes on the wild Stock, do not
then hastily pluck up those Cions or wild stocks so graffed, until ye shall
see the graffes put forth a new sheute, the which remaining still ye may graffe
thereon again, so that your graffes in hasty removing, may chance to dye.

When ye cut off the naughty Cions from the Wood.
When your Graffes on the stocks shall put forth of new wood, or a new
sheute, as of two or three foot long, and if they put forth also of other small
superfluous Cions (about the said members or branches that ye would nourish)
cut off all such ill Cions, hard by the head, in the same year they are
graffed in, but not so long as the wood is in Sap, till the Winter after.

How sometimes to cut the principal Members.
ALso it is good to cut some of the principal Members or Branches in the first
Year, if they have too many, and then again, within two or three years
after, when they shall be well sprung up, and the graffes well closed on the
head of the stock: ye may trim and dress them again, in taking away the
superfluous branches, if any there remain, for it is sufficient enough to
nourish a young Tree, to leave him one principal Member on the head, so that
he may be one of those, that has been grafted on the Tree before, yea, and
the Tree shall be fairer and better in the end, then if he had two or three
branches, or precidence at the foot. But if the Tree have been graffed with
many great Cions, then you must leave him more largely, according as ye shall
see cause or need to recover the clefts on the head of the said graffe or
stock.

How to guide and govern the said Trees.
When that your Trees do begin to spring, ye must order and see to them well,
the space of three or four years or more, until they be well and strongly
grown, in helping them above, in cutting the small twigs, and superfluous wood,
until they be so high without branches, as a man, or more if it may be, and
then see to them well, in placing the principal branches if need be, with
forkes or wands pricked right, and well about them at the foot, and to proine
them, so that one branch do not approach too nigh the other, nor yet fret the
one the other, when as they do enlarge and grow, and ye must also cut off
certain branches in the Tree, where as they are too thick.

A kind of Sickness in Trees.
LIkewise when certain Trees are sick of the Gall, which is a kind of
Sickness that does eat the Bark, therefore ye must cut it, and take out all
the same infection with a little Chizell, or such like thing. This must be done
at the end of Winter, then put on that infected place of Ox Dung, or Hogs Dung
and bind it fast thereon with Cloutes, and wrap it with Oziers, so let it
remain a long time, till it shall recover again.

Trees which have Worms in the Bark.
OF Trees which have Worms within their Barks, is where as ye shall see a
swelling or rising therein, therefore ye must cut or cleave the said bark unto
the wood, to the end the humor may also distill out thereat, and with a little
hook ye must pluck or draw out the said worms, withal the rotten wood ye
can see, then shall ye put upon the said place, a Plaster made of Ox Dung, or
Hogs Dung, mingled and beaten with Sage, and a little of unsleckt Lime, then
let it be all well boild together, and wrap it on a cloth, and bind it fast and
close thereon so long as it will hold. The Lees of Wine shed or powered upon the
Roots of Trees (the which be somewhat sick through the coldness of the
Earth) which Lees does them much good.

Snayles, Ants, and Worms, does mar Trees.
ALso ye must take heed of all manner of young trees, and specially of those
graffes, the which many Worms and Flies, do endamage and hurt in the time of
Summer, those are the Snailes, the Pismires, or Ants: the field Snaile, which
hurts also all other sorts of Trees that be great, principally in the time
that the Cuckoo does sing, and betwixt April and Midsommer, while they be
tender. There be little Beasts called Sowes, which have many Legs, and some of
them be gray, some black, and some has a long sharp snowt, which be very
noisome, and great hurters of young Graffes, and other young Trees also, for
they cut them off in eating the tender top (of the young Cions) as long as ones
finger.

How ye ought to take the said Worms.
FOr to take them well, ye must take heed and watch in the heat of the day
(your young Trees) and where ye shall see any, put your hand softly underneath,
without shaking the tree, for they will suddenly fall when one thinks to take
them: therefore so soon as you can (that they fly not away nor fall) take
them (quickly on the Cion) with your other hand.

To keep Ants from young Trees.
FOr to keep the young Trees from Snails and Ants, it shall be good to take
Ashes, and to mingle unsleckt Lime, beaten in powder therewith, then lay it all
about the root of the tree, and when it raineth, they shall be beaten down
into the Ashes and dye: but ye must renew your Ashes after every Rain from
time to time: also to keep them moist, ye must put certain small Vessels full
of water, at the foot of your said Trees, and also the Lees of Wine, to be
spread on the ground there all abouts. For the best destroying of the small
Snailes on Trees, ye must take good heed in the Spring time before the Trees be
leaved, then if ye shall see as it were small warts, knobs or branches on the
Trees, the same will be Snailes. Provide to take them away fair and softly,
before they be full closed, and take heed that ye hurt not the wood or bark of
the said Tree, as little as ye can, then burn those Branches on the Earth, and
all to tread them under your feet, and then if any do remain or renew, look
in the heat of the day, and if ye can see any, which will commonly be on the
clefts or forkes of the Branches, and also upon the branches lying like tostes
or Troops together, then wrap your hands all over with old clothes, and bind
of leaves beneath them, and above them, and with your two hands rub them down
therein, and straight way fire it, if ye do not quickly with diligence they
will fall, and if they fall on the Earth, ye cannot lightly kill them, but they
will renew again: these kind of Worms are noisome Flies which be very
strange, therefore take heed that they do not cast a certain redness on your
face and body, for where as they be many of them, they be dangerous: it is
strange to tell of these kind of Worms, if ye come under or among the Trees
whereas be many, they will cast your face and hands, your covered body (as your
neck, breast, and arms) full of small spots, some red, some black, some
bluish, which will so tingle and trouble you like Nettles, sometimes for a
day, or a day and a night after: they be most on Plum-trees, and Apple Trees,
nigh unto moist places, and ill airs: yet nevertheless, by the grace of God
there is no danger, that I understand, to be taken by them. Ye shall
understand, that if it be in the evening, or in the morning, when it raineth,
they will remain about the graffing place of the Tree, therefore it will be
hard to find them, because they are so small: Moreover, if such branches do
remain in the upper part of the boughs all under, then with a wispe on a
Poles end, set fire on all, and burn them.

A Note in Spring time of Fumigations.
HEre is to be understood and noted, that in the Spring time only, when trees
do begin to put forth leaves and Blossoms, ye must then always take heed
unto them, for to defend them from the Frost, if there come any, with
Fumigations or smokes, made on the windy side of your Orchards, or under your
Trees, with straw, Hay, dry Chafe, dry Ox dung, of Saw dust dried in an Oven,
of Tanners Ox dried likewise, of galbanum, of old shoes, thatch of Houses, of
hair and such like, one of these to be blend with another: all these be good
against the Frost in the Spring time, and specially good against the East wind,
which breeds (as some say) the Caterpiller worm.

To defend the Caterpiller.
ANd some do defend their Trees from the Caterpiller when the blossoming time
is dried (if there be no Frost) by casting of Water, or salt Water, every
second or third day upon their Trees, (with Instruments for the same, as with
Squires of Wood or Brass or such like) for in keeping of them moist, the
Caterpiller cannot breed thereon; this experience have J known proved of late
to be good. For to conclude, he that will Set or Plant Trees, must not pass
for any pains, but have a pleasure and delight therein, in remembering the
great profit that comes thereby: Against scarceness of Corn, fruit is a
good stay for the Poor, and often it has been seen, one Aker of Orchard
ground, worth four Akers of Wheat Ground.

FJNJS.
HERE FOLLOWS A LITTLE TREAtise how one may Graffe, Plant, and Garden,
subtle or artificially, and to make many things in Gardens very strange.
FOr to Graffe a subtle way, take one oylet or eye of a Graffe, slit it round,
above and beneath, and then behind down right, then wreath him of, and set him
upon another Cion, as great as he is, then dress him, as is aforesaid, and he
shall grow and bear.

To graffe one Vine upon another.
BUt for to graffe one Vine upon another, ye shall cleave him as ye do other
Trees, and then put the Vine graffe in the cleft, then stop him close and well
with Wax, and so bind him, and he shall grow.

YE shall uncover his root, and make a hole with a Piercer, or small Auger in
the greatest root he has, without piercing through the root, then put in a
pin (in the said hole) of dry Wood, as Oak or Ash, and so let it remain in the
said hole, and stop it close again with wax and then cast earth and cover him
again, and he shall bear the same year.

For to have Peaches two Months before other.
TAke your Cions of a Peach-tree that does soon blossom in the Spring time,
and graft them upon a frank Mulberry-tree, and he shall bring of Peaches two
months before others.

To have Damsons or other Plums unto Alhallontide.
FOr to have Damsons all the Summer long, unto Alhallontide, and of many other
kind of sorts likewise, ye shall graft them upon the Gooseberry-tree, upon the
frank Mulberry-tree, and upon the Cherry-tree, and they shall endure on the
Trees till Alhallontide.

To make Medlars, Cherries, and Peaches in eating to taste like spice.
TO make Medlars, Cherries and Pears, to taste in the eating pleasant like
spice, the which may also keep until the new come again: ye shall graffe
them upon the frank Mulberry-tree, as J have before declared, and in the
graffing, ye shall wet them in Honey, and put a little of the Powder of some good
spices, as the Powder of Cloves, of Cinnamon, or Ginger.

To make a Muscadell taste.
TO make a Muscadell taste, take a Gouge or Chezill of Iron (and cut your Sap
round about) then put in your Gouge or Chesill under your Sap on your Cion,
and raise three eyes or oylets round about, and so take off fair and softly
your bark round about, and when he is so taken off, do anoint it all over
within the bark, with powder of Cloves, or Nutmegs, then for it on again, and
stop it close with Wax round about, that no water may enter in, and with
within thrice bearing, they shall bring a fair Muscadell Reison, which ye may
after both graffe and plant, and they shall be all after a Muscadell fruit:
some slits the bark down, and so put in of Spice.

To set Apples and Pears to come without blossoming.
FOr to make Apples and Pears, and other sorts of fruit to come without
blossoming, that is, ye shall graft them (as ye do other kind of fruit) upon
the Fig Tree.

To have Apples and Chestnuts rath and also long on Trees.
FOr to have Apples called (in French) de blanc Durell, or de Yroall, and of
Chestnuts very rath, and long (as until Alballontide) on the trees; and make
such fruit also to endure, the space of two years, ye shall graft them on a
laterward fruit, as Pome-Richard, or upon a Peare-tree, or Apple Tree of
Dangoisse.

To have good Cherries on the trees at Alhallontide.
TO have Cherries on many trees, good for to eat until Alhallontide, ye shall
graft them upon a frank Mulberry Tree, and likewise to graft them upon a
Willow or Sallow-tree, and they shall endure unto Alhallontide on the Trees.

To have rath Medlars two Months before others.
FOr to have Medlars two months sooner then others and the one shall be better
far then the other, ye shall graft them upon a Gooseberry-tree, and also a
frank Mulberry-tree, and before ye do graft them, ye shall wet them in Honey,
and then so graffe them.

For to have rath or timely Pears.
FOr to have a rath Pear, the which is in France, as the Pear Cailonet, and
the Pear Hastimean. For to have them rath or soon, ye shall graft them on the
Pine Tree: And for to have them late, ye shall graft them on the Pear called
in French Dangoisse, or on other like hard Pears.

To have Misples or Medlars without Stones.
FOr to have Medlars without Stones, the which shall taste sweet as Honey, ye
shall graffe them as the other, upon an Eglentine, or sweet Bryer-tree, and ye
shall wet the grafts (before ye graft them in Honey,

To have Pears betimes.
ALso to have the Pear Anguisse, or Permai^, or Satigle, (which be of certain
places so called) a Month or two before others, the which shall endure and be
good until the new come again, ye shall graft them upon a Quince-tree, and
likewise upon the frank Mulberry-tree.

To have ripe or frank Mulberries very soon and late.
FOr to have frank or ripe Mulberries very soon, ye shall graffe them upon a
rath Pear tree, and upon the Gooseberry-tree, and to have very late, and to
endure unto Alhallontide, ye shall graft them upon the Medlar-tree.

To keep Pears a Year.
HOw for to keep Pears a year, ye shall take of fine salt very dry, and put
thereof with your Pears into a barrel, in such sort that one Pear do not
touch another, so fill the barrel if ye list, then stop it, and let it be set
in some dry place that the Salt do not wax moist, thus ye may keep them long
and good.

To have your fruit taste half Apples, half Pears.
IF ye will have your fruit taste half a Pear, and half an Apple, ye shall in
the Spring take Graffes, the one a Pear and the other an Apple, ye shall
cleave or pare them in the Graffing joint or place, and join half the Pear
Cion, and to set them into your stock, and see well that no rain do enter
therein upon your joint, and that fruit shall bring thee half a Pear, and the
other half an Apple in taste.

Times of Graffing.
IT is good also to graffe one or two days before the change, and no more, for
look so many more days, as ye shall Graffe before them, so many more years
it will be ere your Trees shall bring fruit: also it is good graffing all the
increase of the Moon, but the sooner after the change, the better.

To Graffe the Quine Apple.
IF ye graffe the Quine Apple, upon an Apple stock, he shall not long continue
without the Canker, but to graffe him on a knotty young Crabstocke, he shall
endure long without the Canker.

To destroy Pismires or Ants about a Tree.
TO destroy Emets or Ants, which be about a Tree, if ye remove and stir the
earth all about the root of the said Tree, then put thereon all about, a great
quantity of the foot of a Chimney, and the Ants of Pismires will either away
or else shortly dye.

Another for the same.
TO destroy Ants another way, ye shall take of the Saw-dust of Oak wood only,
and strew that all about the Tree root and the next rain that does come, all
the Pismires or Ants shall dye there: For Earewigs, shoots stopped with Hay, and
hanged on the Tree one night, they come all in.

To have Nuts, Plummes, and Almonds.
Nuts greater then other.
TO have great Nuts, Plums, and Almonds greater then others, ye shall take
four Nuts, or of any of this fruit abovesaid, and put them into a pot of
earth, joining the one to the other as near as ye can, then make a hole in the
bottom of the pot, through the which holes, these Nuts shall be constrained to
issue, and being so constrained shall come to perfection and grow together as
in one Tree, the which in time shall bring his fruit more greater and larger
then others.

To make an Oak or other tree green in Winter as in Summer.
ALso to make an Oak or other Tree to be green as well in Winter as in Summer,
ye shall take the Graffe of an Oak tree, or other Tree, and graffe it upon the
Holly Tree; the best and most surest way is, to graffe one through the other.
And who so will edify or make an Orchard, he ought (if he can) to make it in a
moist place, where as the South winds, or Sea winds may have recourse unto them.

The time of Planting without Roots, and with Roots.
ALso the best time to plant or set without roots as with branches or
steverings of all sorts of Trees which has a great pith, as Fig trees,
Hasell-ttees, Mulberry-trees, and Vines* with other like Trees, all which ought
to be set from the midst of September (if the leaves be of) unto
Alhallontide, and all other Trees with roots, ought to be set in Advent until
Christmas, or anon after, if the time be not very cold and dangerous.

To keep fruit from the Frost.
ALso to keep fruit from the Frost, and in good color, until the new come
again, ye ought so for to gather them when the time is fair and dry and the
Moon in her decreasing, and that they lie also in very dry places by night,
covered thin with Wheat straw, and if the time of Winter be cold and very
hard, then put of Hay above them in your straw, and take it away when as a
fair time comes, and thus ye shall keep your fruit fair and good.

The days to Plant and Graffe.
ALso (as some say) from the first day of the new Moon, unto the xiii. day
thereof, is good for to plant, or Graffe, or sow, and for great need, some do
take unto the xvii, or xviii. day thereof, and not after, neither graffe nor
sow, but as is aforementioned, a day or two days before the change, the best
signs are, Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn.

To have green Roses all the year.
FOr to have green Roses, ye shall (as some say) take your Rose buds in the
Spring time, and then graffe them upon the Holly-stocke, and they shall be
green all the year.

To keep Raisons or Grapes good a year.
FOr to keep Raisons or Grapes good all a whole year, ye shall take of fine
dry Sand, and then lay your Raisons or Grapes therein, and it shall keep them
good a whole year. Some keep them in a close Glass from the air.

To make fruit laxitive from the Tree.
FOr to make any fruit laxitive from the Tree, what fruit soever it be, make a
hole in the stock, or in the master root of the Tree, (with a great Piercer
slope-wise) not through, but unto the pith, or somewhat further, then fill the
said hole with the juice of Elder, of Centory, of Seny, or of Turnith, or such
like laxitives, then fill the said hole therewith of which of them ye will, or
else ye may take three of them together, and fill the said hole therewith, and
then stop the said hole close with soft Wax, then lay it thereon, and put
moss very well over all, so that nothing may issue or fall out, and all the
fruit of the said Tree shall be from thence-forth laxitive.

A Note for all Grafters and Planters.
ALso whenever ye shall Plant or Graffe, it shall be meet and good for you to
say as follows. In the name of God the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost,
Amen.

Increase and multiply, and replenish the earth: and say the Lords Prayer, then
say: Lord God hear my prayer, and let this my desire of thee be heard. The
holy Spirit of God which has created all things for Man, and has given them
for our comfort, in thy name O LORD we set, Plant and Graffe, desiring that by
thy mighty power they may increase and multiply upon the earth, in bearing
plenty of fruit, to the profit and comfort of all the faithful people, through
Christ our Lord, Amen.

a man grafting a tree Here follows certain ways of Planting and Graffing,
with other necessaries herein meet to be known.
Translated out of Dutch, by L. M.
To graffe one Vine on another.
YOu that will Graffe one Vine upon another, ye shall (in January) cleave the
head of the Vines, as ye do other stocks, and then put in your Vine, Graffe
or Cion, but first ye must pare him thin ere ye set him in the head, then Clay
and Moss him as the other.

Chosen days to Graffe in and to choose your Cions.
ALso whenever that ye will Graffe, the best chosen time is on the last day
before the Change, and also in the Change, and on the second day after the
change (...) if ye Graffe (as some say) on the third, fourth, and fifth day
after the change, it will be so many years ere those Trees bring forth fruit.
Which thing ye may believe if ye will, but I will not. For some do hold
opinion, that it is good graffing from the change unto the xviii. day thereof,
which J think to be good in all the increasing of the Moon, but the sooner
the better.

To gather your Cions.
ALso such Cions or Graffes, which ye do get on the other Trees, the young
Trees of three or four years, or five or six years are best to have
Graffes. Take them of no under boughs, but in the top upon the East side, if
ye can, and of the fairest and greatest. Ye shall cut them two inches long of
the old Wood, beneath the joint. And whenever ye will graffe, cut or pare
your Graffes taper-wise from the joint, two inches or more of length, which ye
shall set into the stock; and before ye set it in, ye shall open your stock
with a wedge of Iron, or hard wood, fair, and softly; then if the sides of
your clefts be ragged ye shall pare them with the point of a sharp knife on
both sides within and above, then set in your Graffes close on the outsides,
and also above; but let your stock be as little while open as ye can, and when
your grafts be well set in, pluck forth your wedge, and if your stocks do
pinch your grafts much, then ye must put in a wedge of the same wood to help
your Graffes: Then ye shall lay a thick bark or pill over the cleft, from the
one Graft to the other, to keep out the clay and rain, and so clay them two
fingers thick round about the cliffes, and then lay on Moss, but wool is
better next to your clay, or else to temper your Clay with wool or hair, for
it shall make it bide closer, and also stronger on the stock-head, some take
wool next the clay and wrappeth it all over with linen clouts, for the wool
being once moist will keep the clay so a long time. And other some take Woollen
clouts, that have been laid in the juice of Worme-wood, or such like bitter
thing, to keep creeping Worms from coming under to the Grafts. If ye graffe in
Winter, put your clay uppermost, for Summer, your Moss. For in Winter the
Moss is warm, and your clay will not cleave. In Summer your clay is cold, and
your Moss keeps him from cleaving or chapping. To bind them take of Willow
pills, of cloven Briers, of Oziers, or such like. To gather your Graffes of the
East part of the tree is counted best; if ye gather them below on the under
boughs, they will grow ^^^ggie, and spreading abroad: If ye take them in the
top of the tree, they will grow upright. Yet some do gather there Cions or
Graffes on the sides of the trees and so graffe them again on the like sides
of the stocks, the which is of some men not counted so good for fruit. It is
not good to graft a great stock, for they will be long ere they cover the head
thereof.

Of Worms in Trees or fruit.
IF ye have any trees eaten with Worms, or do bring Wormy fruit, ye shall use
to wash all his body and great branches, with two parts of Gowpisse and one
part of Vinegar, or else if ye can get no Vinegar, with Cowpisse alone,
tempered with common Ashes, then wash your trees therewith before the Spring,
and in the Spring or in Summer. Anniseeds sown about the tree roots, drive
away worms, and the fruit shall be the sweeter.

The setting of Stones and ordering thereof
AS for Almond-trees, Peach-trees, Cherry-trees, Plum-trees, or others, ye shall
thus plant or set them. Lay first the stones in water, three days and four
nights until they sink therein, then take them betwixt your finger and your
thumb, with the small end upward, and so set them two fingers deep in good
earth. And when ye have so done, ye shall rake them all over, and so cover
them: and when they begin to grow or spring, keep them from weeds and they
shall prosper the better, specially in the first year. And within two or three
years after, ye shall set or remove them where ye list, then if ye do remove
them again after that, ye must proine of all his twigs, as ye shall see cause,
nigh the stock: this ye may do of all kind of Trees, but specially those
which have the great Sap, as the Mulberry or Fig Trees, or such like.

To gather Gum of any Tree.
IF ye list to have the Gum of an Almond-tree, ye shall stick a great nail
into the Tree, a good way, and so let him rest, and the Gum (of the Tree)
shall issue thereat, thus do men gather Gum of all sorts of Trees: yea, the
common Gum that men do use and occupy.

To set a whole Apple.
ALso some say, that if ye set a whole Apple four fingers in the earth, all
the Pepins or Curnels in the same Apple, will grow up together in one whole
stock or Cion, and all those Apples shall be much fairer and greater then
others: but ye must take heed, how ye do set those Apples, which do come in
Leape-yeare, for in a Leape-yeare (as some do so) the Curnels or Pepins, are
turned contrary, for if ye should so set as commonly a man does, ye shall set
them contrary.

Of setting the Almond.
ALmonds do come forth and grow commonly well if they be set without the shell
or husk, in good earth or in rotten Hogs dung: Jf ye lay Almonds one day in
Vinegar, then shall they (as some say) be very good to plant or lay him in
milk and water, until he do sink, it shall be the better to set, or any
other Nut.

Of Pepins watered.
THe Pepins and Curnels of those Trees, which have a thick or rough bark, if
ye lay them three days in water, or else until they sink therein, they shall
be the better, then ^et them, or sow them, as is aforementioned, and then
remove them, when they be well rooted, or three or four years growth and they
shall have a thin bark.

To Plant or set Vines.
IF ye Plant or set Vines in the first or second year, they will bring no
fruit, but in the third year they will bear, if they be well kept: ye shall
cut them in January, and set them soon after they be cut from the Vine, and ye
shall set two together the one with the old wood, and the other without, and so
let them grow, plucking away all weeds from about them, and when ye shall
remove them in the second and third year, being well rooted, ye shall set them
well a foot deep, (in good fat earth) with good dung, as of one foot deep or
thereabouts, and keep them clean from weeds, for then they will prosper the
better, and in Summer when the Grape is knit, then ye shall break off his top
or branch, at one or two joints after the Grape, and so the Grape shall be the
greater, and in the Winter when ye cut them, ye shall not leave past two or
three leaders on each branch, on some branch but one leader, which must be cut
betwixt two joints, and ye shall leave the young Vine to be the leader. Also ye
shall leave thereof three or four joints at all times, if a young Cion do
come forth of the old branch, or side thereof, if ye do cut him ye shall cut
him hard by the old branch, and if ye will have him to bring the Grape next
year, ye shall leave two or three joints thereof; for the young Cion always
brings the Grape: ye may at all times so that the Grape be once taken and
knit, ever as the superfluous Cions do grow, ye may break them of at a joint,
or hard by the old branch, and the Grapes will be the greater: thus ye may
order your Vine all the Summer long without any hurt.

To Set or Plant the Cherry.
CHerry-trees, and all the trees of stonefruit, would be planred or set of
Cions, in cold grounds and places of good earth, and likewise in high or hilly
places, dry and well in the shade: if ye do remove, ye ought to remove them in
November and January, if ye shall see your Cherry-tree wax rotten, then shall
ye make a hole in the midst of the body two foot above the ground, with a big
Piercer, that the humor may pass forth thereby, then before the Spring shut
him up again with a pin of the same Tree: thus ye may do unto all other
sorts of trees when they begin to rot, and is also good for them which bear
scant of fruit or none.

To keep Cheries good a year.
FOr to keep Cheries good a year, ye shall cut off the stalks, and then lay
them in a well leaded pot, and fill the said pot therewith, then put into them
of good thin Honey, and fill the said pot therewith, then stop it with Clay that
no air enter in, then set them in some fair Seller, and put of Sand under and
all about it, and cover the Pot well withal, so let it stand or remain; thus
ye may keep them a year, as fresh as though they came from the Tree, and
after this sort ye may keep Pears or other fruit.

Against Pismires.
IF ye have Cherry-trees laded or troubled with Pismires or Ants, ye shall rub
the body of the Tree, and all about the root with the juice of Purslane mingled
half with Vinegar. Some do use to anoint the Tree beneath all about the body
with taro and Birds lime, with wool, oil boiled together, and anoint the tree
beneath therewith, and do lay the Chalk stones all about the Tree root, some
say it is good therefore.

The Setting of Chestnuts.
THe Chesnut-tree, men do use to plant like unto the Fig Tree. They may be
both planted and graffed well, they wax well in fresh and fat earth, for in
sand they like not. If ye will set the Curnels, ye shall lay them in water
until they do sink, and those that do sink to the bottom of the water be
best to set, which ye shall set in the Month of November and December, four
fingers deep, a foot one from another, for when they be in these two Months
set or planted they shall endure long and bear also good fruit, yet some there
be that plant or set them first in dung, like Beans, which will be sweeter
then the other sort, but those which be set in these two Months aforesaid,
shall first bear their fruit, men may prove which is b^st, experience does
teach.

This is another way to prove and know, which Chestnuts be best to plant or set,
that is, ye shall take a quantity of nuts, then lay them in Sand the space of
thirty days, then take and wash them in water fair and clean, and throw them
into water again and those which do sink to the bottom, are good to plant
or set, and the other that swim are naught; thus may ye do with all other
Curnels or Nuts.

To have all stone fruit taste, at ye shall think good.
IF ye will have all stone fruit taste as ye shall fancy or think good, ye
shall first lay your stones to soke in such licour or moisture, as ye will have
the fruit taste of, and then set them, as for the Date tree (as some say) he
brings no fruit except he be a hundred year old, and the Date-stone must
soke one Month in the water before he be set, then shall ye set him with the
small end upward in good fat earth, in hot Sandy ground four fingers deep,
and when the boughs do begin to spring, then shall ye every night sprinckle
them with rain water, (or other if ye have none) so long till they be come
forth and grown.

Of Graffing the Medler and Misple.
FOr to graffe the Medler or Misple: men do use to Graffe them on the White
Hathorne Tree, they will prove well, but yet small and sower fruit, to graffe
one Medlar upon another is the better, some men do graffe first the Wilding
Cion upon the Medlar stock, and so when he is well taken and grown, then they
graffe thereon the Medlar again, the which does make them more sweet, very
great and fair.

Of the Fig Tree.
THe Fig Tree in some Country, bears his fruit four times a Year, the
Black Figs are the best being dried in the Sun, and then laid in a
Vessel in beds one by another, and then sprinkled or strawed all over,
every lay with fine Meal, then stop it up, and so it is sent out of that Land.
If the Fig Tree will not bear, ye shall dig him all about, and under the
roots in February, and take out then all his earth, and put unto him the dung
of a Privy, for that he likes best: ye may mingle with it of other fat earth,
as Pigeons dung mingled with Oil and Pepper stamped, which shall forward him
much to anoint his roots therewith: ye shall not plant the Fig Tree in cold
times, he loves hot, stony, or gravelly ground, and to be planted in Autumn
is best.

Of the Mulberry-tree.
IF ye will plant the Mulberry-tree, the Fig Tree, or others which bring no
seed, ye shall cut a twig or branch (from the tree root) of a years growth,
with the old wood or bark, about a cubit long, which ye shall plant or set all
in the earth. save a shaftment long to it, and so let it grow, watering it as
ye shall see need. This must be done before the leaves begin to Spring, but
take heed that ye cut not the end or top above, for then it shall wither and
dry.

Of Trees that bear bitter fruit.
OF all such trees as bear bitter fruit, to make them bring sweeter, ye shall
uncover all the roots in January, and take out all that earth, then put unto
them of Hogs dung great plenty, and then after put unto them of other good
earth and so cover them therewithal well again, and their fruit shall have a
sweeter taste. Thus men may do with other trees which bring bitter fruit.

To help barren Trees.
HEre is another way to help barren Trees, that they may bring fruit, if you
see your Tree not bear scantly in three or four years good plenty, ye shall
bore an hole with an Auger or Piercer, in the greatest place of the body,
(within a yard of the ground) but not through, but unto or past the heart, ye
shall bore him a slope: then take honey and water mingled together a night
before, then put the said Honey and water into the hole and fill it therewith,
then stop it close with a short pin made of the same Tree, not stricken in
too far for piercing the licour.

An other way.
IN the beginning of Winter, ye shall dig those Trees round about the roots,
and let them so rest a day and a night, and then put unto them of good earth,
mingled well with good store of watered Otes, or with watered Barley or Wheat,
laid next unto the roots, then fill it with other good earth, and he shall
bear fruit; even as the boring of a hole in the master root, and striking in
a pin, and so fill him again, shall help him to bear, as before is
declared.

To keep your Fruit.
ALL fruit may be the better kept if ye lay them in dry places, in dry straw or
Hay, but Hay ripeth too sore, or in a Barley-mow, not touching one the other,
or in Chafe, or in vessels of Juniper or Cipers wood: ye may so keep them
well in dry Salt or Honey, and upon boardes, whereas fire is nigh all the
Winter, also hanging nigh fire in the Winter, in Nets of yarne.

The Mulberry-tree.
THe Mulberry-tree, is planted or set by the Fig Tree: his fruit is first
sower, and then sweet, he likes neither Dew nor Rain, for they hurt him, he
is well pleased with foul e^rth and dung: His branches will wax dry within
every six years, then must ye cut them off, as for other Trees they ought to
be proined every year, as ye shall see cause, and they will be the better, and
to plant them from the midst of February, to the midst of March is best.

Of Moss of the Tree.
OF the Moss on your Trees, ye must not let it too long be unclensed, ye must
rub it off with a grate of wood, or a rough Hair, or such like, in Winter when
they be moist

To have the Peach without stones.
FOr to make the Peach grow without stones, ye shall take a Peach-tree newly
planted, then set a Willow hard by, which ye shall bore a hole through, then
put the Peach-tree through the said hole, and so close him on both sides
thereof, Sap to Sap, and let him so grow one year, then the next year ye
shall cut off the Peach stock, and let the Willow feed him, and cut off the
upper part of the Willow also three fingers high: and the next Winter saw him
off nigh the Peach, so that the Willow shall feed but the Peach only: and this
way ye may have Peaches without stones.

Another way for the same.
YE shall take the Graffes of Peaches, and Graffe them upon the Willow stock,
and so shall your Peaches be likewise without stones.

If Trees do not prosper.
IF ye see that your Trees do not wax nor prosper, take and open the roots
in the beginning of January or before, and in the biggest root thereof, make an
hole with an Auger to the pith or more, then strike therein a pin of Oak and
so stop it again close, and let it be well waxt all about the pin, then
cover him again with good earth, and he shall do well, some do use to cleave
the root.

How to graffe Apples, to last on the Tree till Ahallontide.
HOw ye may have many sorts of Apples upon your Trees until Alhallontide, that
is, ye shall graft your Apples upon the Mulberry-tree, and upon the Cherry-tree.

To make Cherries and Peaches smell and taste like spice.
HOw to make that Cherries and Pears, shall be pleasant and shall smell and
taste like spice, and that ye may keep them well, till the new do come again,
ye shall graffe them on the Mulberry-tree, as is aforesaid: But first ye shall
soake them in Honey and Water, wherein ye shall put of the powder of Cloves,
Ginger, and Cinnamon.

To graffe an Apple which shall he half sweet and half sower.
TO graffe that your Apples shall be the one half sweet, and the other half
sower, ye shall take two Cions, the one sweet and the other ^ower, some do put
the one Cion through the other, and so gr^ffes them between the bark and the
Tree; and some again do p^re both the Cions finely, and so sets them joyni^g
into the stock, enclosing Sap to Sap, on both the out-side^ of the graffes,
unto the outsides of the stock, and so sets them into the head as the other,
and they shall bring fruit, the one half sweet and the other half sower.

To graffe a Rose on the Holly.
FOr to graffe the Holly, that his l^aves shall keep all the year green;
Some do take and cleave the Holly, and so graffes in a white or red Rose bud,
and then put clay and ^^osse to him, and lets him grow, and some do put the
Rose bud into a slitte of the bark, and so patteth Clay and Moss and binds
him featly therein, and lets him grow, and he shall carry his leaf all the
year.

Of keeping of Plummes.
OF Plums there be many sorts, as Damsons, which be all black and counted the
best: All manner of other Plum: a man may keep well a year, if they be
gathered ripe, and then dried, and put into Vessels of Gl^^^^. If ye c^^not dry
them well in the Sun, ye shall dry them on hu^dels of Oziers made like
Lattice Windows, in a hot Oven after Bread is drawn forth, and so reserve
them. If a Plum-tree like not, open his roots, and power in all about the
dregs of Wine mixed with Water, and so cover him well again, or power on them
stale Urine or old piss of old men, mixed with two parts of water, and so cover
him as before.

Of altering of Pears, or stony fruit.
IF a Pear do taste hard or gravelly about the core, like small stones, ye
shall uncover his roots (in the Winter, or before the Spring) and take out all
the earth thereof, and prick out all the stones as clean from the earth as ye
can about his root, then sift that earth, or else take of other good fat earth
without stones, and fill all his roots again therewith, and he shall bring a
so^t and gentle Pear to eat, but ye must see well to the watering of him
often.

The making of Cider and Perrie.
OF Apples and Pears, men do make Cider and Perry, and because the use
thereof in most places is known, I will here let pass to speak any furthet
thereof, but this (in the pressing your Cider) I will counsel you to keep
clean your vessels, and the places where as your fruit does lie, and specially
after it is bruised or broken, for then they draw filthy air unto them, and if
it be nigh the Cider shall be infected therewith, and also bear, the taste
after the infection thereof, therefore as soon as you can, tun it into clean
and sweet vessels, as into vessels of white Wine, or of Sack, or of Cl^ret,
and such like, for these shall keep your Cider the better and the stronger a
long time after: ye may hang a small bag of linen b^ a thread down into the
lower part of your Vessel, with Powder of Cloves, Mace, Cinamond, and Ginger,
and such like, which will make your Cider to have a pleasant taste.

To help frozen Apples.
OF Apples that be froz^n in the cold and extreme Winter. The remedy to have
the Ise out of them, is this. Ye shall lay them first in cold water a while,
and then lay them before the fire, or other heat, and they shall come to
themselves again.

To make Apples fall from the Tree.
IF ye put of fiery coals under an Apple Tree, and then cast of the powder of
Brimstone therein and the fume thereof ascend up, and to^ch any Apple that is
wet, that Apple shall fall incontinent.

To water Trees in Summer if they wax dry about the Root.
WHereas Apple Trees be set in dry Ground and not dead in the Ground, in Summer
if they want moisture ye shall take of Wheat straw, or other, and every evening
(or as ye shall see cause) cast thereon water all about, and it will keep the
Trees moist from time to time.

To cherish Apple Trees.
IF ye use to throw (in Winter) all about your Apple Trees or the roots
thereof, the Urine of old men, or stale piss long kept, they shall bring fruit
much better, which is good for the Vine also, or if ye do sprinckle or anoint
your Apple Tree roots with the Gall of a Bull, they shall bear the better.

To make an Apple grow in a Glass.
TO make an Apple grow within a Glass, take a Glass what fashion ye list, and
put your Apple therein when he is but small, and bind him fast to the Glass,
and the Glass also to the Tree, and let him grow, thus ye may have Apples of
diverse proportions, according to the fashion of your Glass. Thus may ye make
of Cucumbers, Gourdes, or Pomecitrons the like fashion.

tree

THese three branches and figure of graffing in the shield in Summer is, the
first branch shows how the bark is taken of, the middle place shows, how
it is set too, and the last branch shows how to bind him on, in saving the
oylet or eye from bruising.

To graffe many sorts of Apples on one Tree.
YE may graffe on one Apple Tree at once, many kind of Apples, as on ever,
branch a contrary fruit, as is before decl^red, and of Pears the like; but see
as nigh as you (...), that all your Cions be of like springing, for else the
one will not grow and shadow the other.

To color Apples.
TO have c^^oured Apples, with what color ye shall think good, ye shall bore
slope a hole with an Auger, in the big-Tree part o^ the body of the Tree, unto
the midst thereof, or there-abouts, and then look what color ye will have
them of. First ye shall take water, and mingle your color therewith, then stop
it up gain with a short pin made of the same wood or tree, then wax it
round about; ye may mingle with the said color what space ye list, to make
them taste thereafter: thus may ye change the color and t^st of any Apple. Your
colors may be of S^ffron (...) soul, Bra^ell ^^^unders, or other what ye
shall see goo^. This must be done before the Spring do come: So^e do ^^ay,
(...) graffe on the Olive stock, or on the Alder stock, they (...). Apples.
Also they say, to graffe to have (...) shall graffe in both the ends of your
Cion into the (...) when they be fast grow^e to the stock^ ^e shall (...)
midst, and let the smaller e d grow upward, or else (...) Cion and graffe the
small end of the stock downward, (...) so shall ye have your Apple Tree on
St. L^^berts day (wh^^^ is the xvii of September) they shall never wast,
consume, ^or wax d^y, which I doubt.

The setting of Vine Plants.
diagram of setting vine plants

THese figures do show how ye ought to plant and set your Vines, in two and
two together, the one to have a p^r^ of the old Tree, and the other may be all
of the last Cion, but when ye plant him with a part of the old tree, he shall
commonly take root sooner then the new Cion; ye must weed them every month,
and let not the earth be too (...) above their roots at the first, but now and
then lose it with (...) as ye shall see a rain past, for then they shall
enlarg^ (...) forth better. Further herein ye shall (...).

How to proyne or cut a Vine in Winter.
diagram of pruning a vine

THis Figure shows, how all Vines should be proined and cut, in a convenient
time after Christmas, that when ye cut them, ye shall leave his branches very
thin, as ye see by this figure, ye shall never leave above two or three
leaders at the head of any principal branch, ye must also cut them off in the
midst between the knots of the young Cions, for those be the leaders which
will bring the Grape, the rest and order ye shall understand as follows.

Of the Vine and Grape.
SOmewhat I intend to speak of the ordering of the Vine and Grape, to plant or
set the Vine: the Plants or Sets which be gathered from the Vine (and so
planted) are best, they must not be old gathered nor lie long unplanted after
they be cut, for then they will soon gather corruption, and when ye do gather
your Plants ye must take heed to cut and chose them, where as ye may with the
young Cion, a joint of the old wood with the new, for the old wood will soonet
take root then the new, and better to grow then if it were all young Cion, ye
shall leave the old wood to the young Cion, a foot or half a foot, or a
shaftment long, the young Cion ye shall cut the length of three quarters of a
yard or thereabouts, and ye shall choose of those young Cions that be thickest
joynter, or nigh joints together, and when ye shall Plant or set them, look
that your ground be well dug in the winter before, then in January ye may
both cut and plant, but cut not in the Frost, for that is danger of all kind of
trees, or ye may plant in the beginning of February, and when ye do plant, ye
shall take two of those plants, and set or lay them together, a foot deep in
the earth, for two plants set together will not ^o soon fall, as one alone,
and lay them a foot longwise in the earth, so that there may be above the
earth three or four joints: ye may plant a young Cion with the old, so that it
be thick or nigh joynted, for then he is the better to root, and also to
bring fruit: then when ye have set or laid them in the earth, then cover them
well therewith, in treading it fast down unto the plants, but let the ends of
your Cions or Plants be turned upright, above the earth, three or four joints,
if there shall be more when they be set, ye shall cut them off, and ye shall
cut them always in the midst between the two joints, and then let them so
grow, and see that ye weed them always clean, and once a month loose the
earth round about them and they shall prove the better, If it be very dry and
hot in the Summer after, ye may water them, in making a hole with a crow of
Iron to the root and there ye shall power in water in the evening. As for the
proyning of them is, when the Grape is taken and clustered, then ye may brake
the next joint or two frer the Grape, of all such sup rfluous Cions as ye shall
see cause, which will cause the Grape to wax bigger: Ye may also break away
all supe^fluous buddes or slender branches, which comes about the root, or
on the under branches, which ye think will have no Grape, and when ye proi^t
or (...) them in Winter following, ye shall not cut the young Cion ^ight the
old, by three or four joints, ye shall not cut them like (...), to leave a
sort of heads together on the branch, which does kill your Vine, ye shall leave
but one head, or two at the most of the young Cions upon the old branch, and to
cut those young Cions three or four knots or joints of, for the yo^g Cion does
carry the Grape always, and when ye leave upon a great branch many Cions, they
cannot be well nourished, and (...) ye (...) ^o cut them in Winter, ye shall
bind (...) Oziers, in placing those young branches as ye shall (...) vine, when
the branches are tender, ye shall bind them so, that the stormy tempest or wind
do not hurt the^ (...) to bind them withal, the best is, great ^oft Rushes and
when the Grape is clustered, then ye may break of all such branches as is
before declared, upon one old branch three or four heads be enough, for the
more heads your branch ^^th, the worse your Grape shall be nourished, and when
ye cut off a^y branch, cut him of hard by or nigh the old branch; if your Vine
wax old, the best remedy is, if there grow any young ^ion about the root, ye
shall in the Winter cut off the old Vine h^rd by the ground, or as nigh as ye
can and let the young Vine lead, and he will continue a long time, if ye cover
(...) about the root with good Earth again. There is also upon or by every
cluster of Grapes, a small ^ion like a Pigs T^ile, turning about, which does
take away the Sap from the Grape, if ye pinch it of hard by the st^lke of your
Grape, your fruit shall be the greater. If your Vine w^xe too ra^ke and thick
of branches, ye shall dig the root in Winter and open the earth, and fill it
up again with Sand and Ashes mingle together, and whereas a Vine is
unfruitful and does not bear ye shall bore a hole (with an Auger) unto the
heart or pith, in the body or thickest part thereof, then p^^ in the said hole
a small stone, but fill not the hole close therewit^, but so that the sickness
of the Vine may pass thereby. Then lay all about the root of good earth
mingled w th good Dung, and so shall he not be unfruitful, but bear well ever
after: or also, to taste of old men's urine or piss, all about the root of the
barren Vine, and if he were half lost or mard he should grow again and wax
fruitful as before: This is to be done in Winter.

To have Grapes without stones.
FOr to have Grapes without stones, ye shall take young Plants or Branches, and
shall set or plant the top or small end downward in the earth, and so ye may
set two of them together for failing, as I have before declared of the others,
and those branches shall bring Grapes without stones.

To make your Vine to bring a Grape to taste like Claret.
TO make your Vine to have a Grape, to taste like Claret Wine, and pleasant
withal: ye shall bore a hole in the stock unto the heart, or pith thereof, then
shall ye make a Lectuary with the Powder of Cloves, of Cinamond mingled with a
little Fountain or running water, and fill the said hole therewith and stop it
fast and close with wax, and so bind it fast thereon with a Linen cloth, and
those Grapes shall taste like Claret Wine.

Of gathering your Grapes.
ALL Grapes that men do cut, before they are through ripe, the Wine shall not
be natural, nor yet shall long endure good: But if ye will cut or gather
Grapes, to have them good, and to have good Wine thereof, ye shall cut them in
the Full, or soon after the full of the Moon, when she is in Cancer; in Leo,
in Scorpio, and in Aquarius the Moon being in the waine and under the earth.

To know if your Grape be ripe enough.
FOr to know if your Grape be ripe enough, or not, which ye shall not only
know in the taste, but in sight and taste together, as in taste if they be sweet,
and full in eating, and in sight, if the stone will soon fall out being chafed
or bruised which is the b^st knowledge, and also whether they be white or blew,
it is all one matter: The good Grape is he, which comes out all watery, or
those which be all clammie as Bird-lime: by these signs ye shall know when to
cut, being through ripe or not, and whereas you do press your Wine, ye must
make your place sweet and clean and your Vessels within to be clean also, and
see that they have strong heads, and those persons which do press the Grape,
must look their hands, feet and body be clean washed, when as they go to
press the Grape, and that no woman be there having her terms: And also ye
shall eat of no Chebols, Scalions, On^ons, or G^rlike, Annisceds, or such like:
For all strong savours your Wine will draw the infection thereof, and as soon
as your Grape is cut and gathered, you shall press your Wine after, as soon
as ye may, which will make your Wine to be more pleasant and stronger, for the
Grapes which tarrieth long unprest, makes the Wine to be small and ill; ye
must see that your vessels be new, and sweet within, and to be washed with
sweet water, and then well dried again, and to perfume them with M^sticke, and
such sweet vapor, and if your Vessel chance not to be sweet, then shall ye
pitch him on the sides, which pitch will take away all evil, and such stinking
savor therein.

To prove or taste Wine.
ANd whenever ye will prove or taste any Wine, the best time is, early in the
Morning, and take with you three or four sops of bread, then dippe one after
another into the Wine, for therein ye shall find (if there be any) sharp taste
of the Wine. Thus I leave (at this present) to speak any further hereof the
Wine and Grape.

If this my simple labor be taken in good part (Gentle Reader) it shall the
more hereafter encourage me, to set forth another Book more at large, touching
the Art of Planting and Graffing, with other things necessary to be known.

Here follows the best times how to order or choose, and to Set or Plant
Hoppes.
diagram of setting hop plants

IN this figure ye shall understand, the placing and making of Hoppe hills, by
every Sipher over his head, the first place is showed, but one Pole set in the
midst, and the Hop beneath: The second shows, how some does chop down a
Spade in the midst of the Hills, and therein lays his Hop roots. The third
place shows, how other some do set out one Pole in the midst, and the Hop
roots at holes put in round about. The fourth place shows, how some chops in
a Spade cross in the top, and there lays in his roots. The fifth place
shows, how some do set four Poles therein, and puts the Hop round about the
Hill. The sixth place shows, that some use to make crosse-holes in the sides,
and there lays in the Hop roots. Thus many practices have been proved good:
Proved always, that your Hills be of good fat earth, specially in the midst
down unto the bottom. This I thought sufficient to show by this figure, the
diversity in setting, whereof the laying of the Hop is counted the surest way.

THe best and common setting time of Hoppes, is from the midst of November,
to the midst of February, then must ye dig and cleanse the ground of weeds, and
mix it well with good mould and fat earth. Then devide your Hills a yard one
form another orderly, in making them a yard a sunder, and two foot and a half
broad in the bottom, and when that ye plant them, ye shall lay in every Hill
three or four roots: Some do in setting of them lay them crosse-wise in the
midst of the Hill, and so covers them again: some sets the roots in four
parts of the Hill, other some do make holes round about the hills, and puts of
the roots therein, and so covers them again light with earth; of one short
root in a year ye may have many plants, to set and lay as ye shall see it
good, and it shall be sufficient for every plant, to have two knots within the
ground, and one without: then some do chop a Spade cross into the Hill, and
lays in cross Hop, and so covers it.

To choose your Hoppe.
YE shall choose your roots best for your Hop, in the Summer before ye shall
plant them, for then ye shall see which bears the Hop, for some there is that
brings none, but that which bears, choose for your plants, and set of those in
your Hills, for so shall ye not be deceived and they shall prosper well.

To sow the Seeds.
SOme do hold, that ye may sow among other Seeds, the Seeds of Hops, and they
will increase and be good to set, or else to make beds, and sow them alone,
whereby they may increase to be set, and when they be strong, ye may remove and
set them in your Hills, and plant them as the other before mentioned.

The Setting your Poles.
THe best time is in April, or when your roots be sprung h^l^^ a yard long or
more, then by every Plant or Hop in your hills, ye shall set up a Pole of xiii.
or xiiii. foot long, or thereabouts, as cause shall require. Some do use to
set but four Poles in every Hill, which is thought sufficient, and when ye
shall set them, see that ye set them so fast that great Winds do not cast them
down.

How to proyne the Hop-tree.
YE shall mark when the Hop does blossom, and knit in the top, which shall be
perceived to be the Hop, then take and cut up all the rest growing thereabouts
(not having Hop thereon) hatd by the earth, that all those which carry the Hop
might be the better nourished: thus shall ye do in Summer as ye shall see them
increase and grow, until the time of gathering.

To gather the Hoppe.
AT such time before Michaelmasse, as ye shall see your hop wax brown, or
somewhat yellow, then he is best to be gathered in a dry day, in cutting your
hop by the ground, then pluck up your Pole therewith for shaking of your hop,
so carry them into some dry house and when ye have so plucked them, ye shall lay
them on boarded lofts, or on hurdels of clothes, that the wind may dry them,
and the air, but not in the Sun, for the same will take away the strength
thereof, nor with fire, for that will do likewise, and ye shall daily toss
and turn them till they be dry: to try them when they are dry, hold them in
your hand a space, and if they cleave together when ye open your hand, they are
not then dry; but if they shatter a sunder in opening your hand, then ye may be
sure they are dry enough. It not let them remain, and use ye them as is before
said. Ye shall understand the dryness of them is to preserve them and long to
last, but if need be, ye may occupy them well und^yed with less portion to sow.

What Poles are best.
YE shall prepare your Poles of such Wood as is light and stiff, and which
will not bow with every Wind, the best and meetest time to get them is in
Winter, when the Sap is gone down, and as soon as ye have taken of your Hop,
lay your Poles in sundry places until the next Spring, whereby they may endure
the longer.

How to order and dress your Hills.
AFter the first year is past, your Hop being increased to more plenty of
roots in your Hills, ye shall after Michaelmasse every year open your Hills,
and cast down the tops unto the roots, uncovering them, and cut away all the
superfluous roots, some does pluck away all the roots that spreades abroad
without the Hills, then opens the Hills and puts of good new earth unto them,
and so covers them again, which shall keep them from the Frost, and also make
the ground fat, so shall ye let them remain unto the Spring of the year in
February or March, then again if ye shall see any superfluous roots, ye may
take them away, and cut them up and your Hop shall be the better, then again
cast up the earth about your Hills, and cleansing them from all weeds and other
roots, which will take away their strength, if the herbs remain, so let
them rest till your Poles may be set therein.

Of ground best for your Hoppe.
THe Hop delights and loves a good and reasonable fat ground, not very cold,
nor yet too moist, for J have seen them prove well in Flanders, in dry Sandy
fields, the Hop-hills being of good fat earth, ye may (as some say) for great
need make your Hop grow and bear on any kind of Rockie ground, so that your
Hills be great and fat earth, but the lower ground commonly proves best, so
that it stand well and hot in the Sun.

A Note of the rest abovesaid.
YE shall mark and understand, all this order above said, is to have many Hops
and good, with a few roots and Plants placed in a small plot of ground. Ye
shall understand, that wild Hoppe that grows in the hedges is as good to
occupy as the other to set or plant, in any other places but look that ye take
not the barren Hoppe to plant, some Hoppe will be barren for want of good
earth, and lack of good dressing which ye shall perceive (as I have told you)
in the Summer before, that when they should bear they will be barren, which is
for want of good fat earth, or an v^kind year, or lack of weeding and good
ordering. Therefore such as are minded to bestow labor on the ground, may have
as good Hoppe growing in this country, as is in other countries: but if ye will
not go to that cost to make Hoppe yards, ye may with a light charge have hops
grow in your hedge-rowes, to serve as well as the other, and shall be as good
for the quantity as the other in all respects: ye may (for lack of ground)
plant Hoppe roots in Hedge-rowes, when ye do quick set, set up Poles by them
when time shall require in the Spring and to bestow every winter after the
gathering your Hoppe, on every hill head, a shovell full of dung to comfort the
earth for then will they bear the more plenty of Hoppes the next year
following. To conclude, you that have Grounds may well practice in all things
afore-men^io^ed, and specially to have Hops in this ordering, for your selves,
and others: also ye shall give encouragement for others to follow hereafter, J
have heard by credible persons, which have known a hundred Hills, (which is a
small plot of Ground) to bear three hundred pound of Hoppes, so that the
commodity is much and the gains great: and one pound of our Hops dried and
ordere^, will go as far as two pound of the best Hops that comes from
beyond the Seas. Thus much I thought meet, and necessary to write, of the
ordering and planting of the Hoppe.

How to pack your Hoppes.
When your Hops be well tossed and turned on borded flowers, and well dried
(as I before have showed) ye shall put them into great Sackes, according to the
quantity of your Hoppes, and let them be trodden down hard together, which will
keep their strength longer, and so ye may reserve them, and take at your
pleasure. Some do use (which have but small store) to tread them into dry
Fattes, and so serve them for their use, which is counted the better way, and
the less portion does serve, and will longer kee^pe their virtue and strength.

Wishing long life and prosperous Health,
To all furtherers of this Commonwealth.

FJNJS.
A PERFECT PLATFORM OF A HOPPE-GARDEN.

And necessary Instructions for the making and maintenance thereof, with Notes
and Rules for reformation of all abuses, commonly practiced therein, very
necessary and expedient for all men to have, which in any wise have to do with
Hoppes.

PROVERB. II. Who so labors after goodness, finds his desire.

LONDON. Printed by B. ALLSOP and T. FAUCET, and are to be sold by MICHAEL
YOUNG, at his Shop in Bedford-street in Coven-garden near the New Exchange.
1640.

A PERFECT PLATFORM OF A HOPPE Garden.
AT what time necessity, or any other good consideration shall move you to
devise for a Hop Garden, you are to consider of these three things.

First, whether you have, or can procure unto your self any Ground good fot
that purpose.

Secondly, of the convenient standing thereof.

Thirdly, of the quantity.

And this I say by the way, if the ground that you deal withal, be not your
own inheritance, procure unto your self some certain term therein, least
another man reap the fruit of your travail and charge.

Of apt and unapt Ground for Hoppes.
SOme hold at this day (and ancient Writers witness the same) that earth being
salt and bitter of taste, Virgilius.
is neither good, nor apt to be made good.

It is also often written, and generally received, that such earth as you shall
see white and bare (that is to say) wholly chalk, or all sand lacking a
mixture of perfect earth, or if it be clay, Didymus. Plinius.
or so dry, as thereby it shall gape or coane in the Summer, is naught for this
or any like purpose.

It is further said, that if you shall feel a clod (being dissolved with
water) to be very clammy, or cleaving like Wax to your fingers in kneading it,
the same to be profitable land, etc.

J for my part rely not upon other men's opinions, neither mean to dispute with
any man herein, J like not to make my mouth an arbitrater in this matter, mine
eye may be deceived and my feeling may err in the precise distinction of good
or bad land, but mine experience has never failed in this thing (that is to
say) that a barren, a moory, or wet soil (though it perhaps do content a wild
Hoppe) shall never please nor maintain a good Hoppe.

I will not say with Varro, that a good ground yields Walwoorts, nor with
Collumella, that where Crabs or slowes grow, there the ground is rich. J can
say nothing of Florentines experience in digging a hole, and filling it up
again, and by the swelling to judge the strength, or by the gaping to define
the weakness thereof; but J can say again by sure experience, that a dry
ground, if it be rich, mellow, and gentle, is the soil that serves best for
this purpose, and such a mould must either be sought out, or else by cost and
labor be provoked.

If it be a very shallow rock (except you raise it with greet or good earth)
you shall not set your Poles deep, steady and fast enough, to withstand the
force of the wind.

But to redress the convenience hereof, you shall be taught in the title of
Poales.

A light mould (though it be very rich) is not very apt for this purpose, for
it is a received and a proved rule, that the heaviest ground will bear the
most weight of Hops, I say, so as it be a ground apt for this purpose.

Of the Situation.
IT were good to place your Garden so as the Sun may have free recourse into
it, either the whole day, or the greatest and warmest part thereof, so also as
it may be armed against the violence and contagion of the wind; but thus I
would wish to be considered rather in the situation of the place, naturally
defended with hills, then artificially be set and guarded with Trees. Howbeit,
if you be driven hereunto, provide so (if you can) that your trees may stand
aloof, even that the shadow of them, reach not into your Garden, but in any
wise that they drop not upon the hills.

There be many which (to purchase the favor and benefit of the Sun) lay
their Gardens very open and bleake to the South, the which J would not wish to
be done, for as the forepart of the year admits into your Garden the cold
Easterly winds, whereby ensue frosts, the which ingenders Blasts, etc. So the
latter part of the year makes it subject to Southerly storms, the which do
much annoy a Hoppe Garden when the Poles are laden with Hops, and then
commonly no other wind hurts.

It should also be placed near to your house, except you be able to warrant
the fruit thereof from such fingers as put no difference between their own
and other men's goods.

Also your Garden being thus placed, there may be made thereunto the more
speedy and continual recourse, besides that, that the Masters eye shall many
times withstand and prevent the Servants negligence.

By this means it may be with most ease and least charge helped with Dung.

Finally (if it may be) let it not stand bleake to the East, West, North, or
specially to the South.

Of the quantity.
THe quantity of your Garden, must either be measured by the proportion of your
yearly expenses of Hoppes in your house, or by the cost you mean to bestow in
the preparation and keeping thereof, or by the pains and business that you
are disposed, or able to employ upon it, or else according to the profit and
gains, that you mean to levy and win by it, which later consideration
pleases and flattereth much a covetous man's conceit, whose vain or humor,
(or rather vain humor) is so resisted in the rules appertaining hereunto, as
many times the greediness of his desire is the overthrow of his purpose, as
shall hereafter appear.

A proportion of the charge and benefit of a Hoppe-Garden.
BUt to be resolved in all these points that concern the quantity of your
Garden, you must make your account in this wise. One man may well keep two
thousand hills, and yet reserve his Winters labor for any other purpose.

Upon every Acre you may erect seven, eight, or nine hundredth hills, as
hereafter shall be declared.

Upon every hill well ordered, you shall have three pounds of Hops at the least.

Two pounds and a half of these Hops will largely serve for the bruing of one
quarter of Malt.

One hundredth pounds of these Hops, are commonly worth xxvi. shillens viii.
pence. So as one Acre of Ground, and the third part of one man's labor, with
small cost besides, shall yield unto him that orders the same well, forty
Marks yearly, and that for ever.

And here is to be noted, that ground orderly used, does not only yield the
more, the greater, the harder, and the weightier Hops, but also they shall go
further, they shall endure longer, they shall be holesomer for the body, and
pleasanter of verdure or taste, then such as be disorderly handled. And in the
savor of the Hop thus much more I say, that whereas you cannot make above
eight or nine gallons of indifferent Ale out of one bushel of Malt, you may
draw xviii. or xx. gallons of very good Beer, neither is the Hoppe more
profitable to enlarge the quantity of your drink, then necessary to prolong
the continuance thereof For if your Ale may endure a fortnight, your Beer
through the benefit of the Hop shall continue a Month, and what grace it
yields to the taste, all men may judge that have sense in their mouths, and
if the controversy be betwixt Beer and Ale, which of them two shall have the
place of pre-eminence: it suffices for the glory and commendation of the
Beer, that here in our own country, Ale gives place unto it, and that most
part of our Countrymen do abhor and abandon Ale, as a loathsome drink,
whereas in other Nations Beer is of great estimation, and of strangers
entertained as their moist choice and delicate drink Finally, that Ale which
is most delicate and of best account, boroweth the Hoppe, as without the which
it wants his chief grace and best verdure.

These things considered, you may proceed to the making of your Garden, wherein
you are yet to have counsel, for the laying out thereof, for the due season
and the right trade to cut and set Hoppe roots, what choice ye shall make of
them, what charge you shall be at for them, you are yet also to learn the time,
when, and the way how to prepare your ground, and to make it able to entertain
and nourish them, to frame your hills, to maintain them, and to pull them
down to cut, to fashion, to erect, to pull up, and to preserve your Poales, to
gather, to dry, and to pack your Hops, with many other circumstances
necessarily appertaining hereunto. Finally, ye must be taught the reformation
of many enormities and abuses which are received in most places for good rules,
the which (God willing) I will set forth truly according to the notes of
experience, although not learnedly after the Rules of Rhetoric.

Of the preparation of a Hoppe Garden.
YOu must lay forth the ground which you determine to employ this way, in as
level, square, and uniforme wise as you may.

If your ground be grassie, rough, or stiff, it should be first ^owne with
Hemp, or Beans, which naturally makes the ground mellow, destroys weeds,
and nevertheless leaves the same in good season for this purpose.

But in what plight or state soever your ground be, till it in the beginning of
Winter with the Plough, if it be great, or with the Spade if it be small, and
this do, not only the year before you plant it, but also every year after,
even so long as you mean to receive the uttermost commodity of your Garden,
assuring your self that the more pains you take, and the more cost you bestow
hereupon, the more you do double your profit, and the nearer you resemble the
trade of the Flemming.

Howbeit in some cases these pains may be spared (that is to say) where the
mould is not deep, and the hill made both good and great, in this case (I say)
the hills being pulled down, the earth contained in them, will cover the whole
Garden, and all the weeds growing therein, and the same shall with help of
dung maintain your hills for ever.

The time to cut and set Hoppe Roots.
IN the end of March, or in the beginning of April, repair to some good
Garden orderly kept, as wherein the Hops are all of a good kind, all yearly
cut, and wherein all the Hills are raised very high, (for there the roots will
be greatest) then compound with the owner or keeper thereof for choice roots,
which in some places will cost six pence an hundredth, but commonly they shall
be given unto you, so as you cut them your self, and leave every hill orderly
and fully dressed, but what order you shall use herein, I will hereafter show.

Rules for the choice and preparation of Roots.
ANd now you must choose the biggest roots you can find (that is to say) such
as are in bigness three or four inches about.

And let every root which you shall provide to set, be nine or ten inches
long.

Let there be contained in every such Root, three joints.

Let all your roots be but the Springs of the year last past.

You must have great regard that you cumber not your Garden with wild Hops, the
which are not to be discerned from the good, by the roots, but either by the
fruit, or by the stalk.

Of the good Hoppe.
THe good and the kindly Hoppe bears a great and a green stalk, a large, a
hard and a green bell, it appears out of the ground naked without leaves,
until it be half a foot long.

Of the unkindly Hoppe.
THe Hoppe that likes not his entertainment, namely his seat, his ground, his
keeper, his dung, or the manner of his setting, etc. comes up green and
small in stalk, thick and rough in leaves, very like unto a Nettle, which
will be commonly devoured, or much bitten with a little black fly, who also
will do harm unto good Hops where the Garden stands bleake, or the Hop
springs rath, but be not discomforted herewith, for the heat of the Summer
will reform this matter, and the latter springs will be little annoyed with
this Fly, who (though she leave the leaf as full of holes as a Net) yet she
seldom proceeds to the utter destruction of the Hoppe.

Of the wild Hoppe.
OF the wild Hop, the fruit is either altogether seed, or else loose and red
light bells, the stalk is red, howbeit, herein the difference between the
good and the bad Hop is not to be discerned, until the stalk be two or three
yards high, for at their first coming up, the one as well as the other
appears red, and the best Hoppe is then the reddest.

Provide your roots therefore, where you are beforehand assured of their
goodness.

Of setting of Hoppe Roots.
HAving made your provision of roots in this wise, return therewith to your
Garden speedily, and either set them immediately, or lay them in some Puddle
near thereunto, or bury them in the ground until convenience of wind,
weather, and leisure (the want whereof may sometimes prevent good expedition)
shall serve. Provided always that you leave them not in water or puddle above
xxiiii. hours, but in the earth you may leave them as long as the time of
setting endures, that is to say, till the midst of April.

Your Garden being dressed, as before I advise you, it shall be easy for you
to direct your hills aright, and that in equal distance with a Poale, or
rather with a line (that will not stretch) tying thereupon short threads, or
placing in it pinnes, according to the proportion of space which you mean to
leave between your hills, whereof if one be placed out of order, it shall
blemish and hurt a great part of your Garden.

The distance of the Hills.
IF your Garden be one Acre in bigness, and lie square, leave between every
hole three yards, or eight foot at the least in space, as well that the hills
may be made the greater, and that the Hops of one Pole reach not to another, as
also that the Sun may the more freely and universally pass through your
Garden, which by this means may yearly be ploughed betwixt the Hills, whereas
otherwise it must be dug, which is a more tedious and costly business.

If your Garden be very little, you may set the hills somewhat nearer together,
namely, seven foot asunder.

A Description of the Line.
diagram of a level line or rope

YOur line being laid level, you must dig underneath every thread or pin
placed upon the same, a hole like a Pitfall, one foot square, and one foot
deep.

When you have made twenty or thirty holes, take up so many roots; from where
you bestowed them, as ought to be set therein, and go to work on this wise,
always watching a time (if you may) that the wind be in some part pf the South
or West, but be not so scrupulous herein, that you overslip the month of
April, least Salomons saying, be spoken of you: He that regards the Wind
shall not sow, and he that has respect to the Clouds shall not reap. For he
that neglects the Month of April, shall have a bad season to cut or plant
Hops.

diagram of a line or rope used as to measure planting

Take two or three of your roots (which by this time will yield forth green
sciences or white buds, and will also have small roots or beards growing out
of them, the which must be, all saving the smaller sort of white buds, pared
away by the old root) join them close together, so as (in any wise) they may
be even in the tops: set them also together bolt upright, directly under the
foresaid thread or pin, holding them hard together with one hand, while you
fill the hole with the other with fine mould prepared and made ready before
hand, regarding that the tops of the roots be level with the face or
uppermost part of the ground.

Take good heed also that you set not that end downward, that grew before
upward, which you shall know by the buds that appear in the knots of each
root, and let no part of the dead remain upon the uppermost part of the joint
thereof.

And when you have thus done, press down the earth with your foot hard to
the roots, not treading upon them, but driving the loose earth close to the
corner where the roots are set.

And here is to be noted, that the readiest and evenest way, is always to set
your roots at one certain corner of the hole, which corner should always be
right underneath the said pin or thread, as is before showed.

At this time you must make no hill at all, but only cover the tops of your
roots about two inches thick, with the finest mould you can get.

When you are driven to set your roots late, if there be any green springs
upon them, you may take the advantage thereof, leaving the same spring
uncovered, otherwise you both destroy the spring, and endanger the root.

Abuses and Disorders in Setting.
SOme use to set at every corner of the hole one root, but this is a naughty
and a tedious trade, because a man shall be longer in dressing one of these,
then about four other. To be short, you shall this way so cumber both your
self and your Garden, that you will soon be weary with working, and your
Garden as soon weary of bearing.

Some wind them, and set both ends upward, and herein both the cunning of the
workman, and the goodness of the roots, are together very lively expressed,
for if the roots were good, they could not be so wound, or if the workman were
skillful, he would not be so fond to set them in that order.

Some use to lay them thwart or flat, but I say flatly that the same is an
overthwart and preposterous way, for they can neither prosper well, (as being
set contrary to their nature and kind of growing) nor be kept as they ought to
be.

Some use to make hills, and then set their roots therein, but these conclude
themselves from ministering succor unto them at any time after, besides many
inco^veniences hereby ensuing.

Some set their roots, and then bury them with a great hill made upon them,
and this is all one with the other, saving that the hill so choketh these, as
most commonly they grow not at all*

Finally, there be as many evil ways to set, as there be ignorant men to
devise.

Provision against annoyance, and spoil of your Garden.
IF your Garden be small, and very nigh to your house, you may arm every hill
with a few thorns to defend them from the annoyance of Poultry, which many
times will scope and bath among the hills, and so discover and hurt the
springs, but a Goose is the most noisome vermin that can enter into this
Garden, for (besides the Allegory that may be applied in this case) a Goose
will knabble upon every young science or Hop bud, that appears out of the
ground, which never will grow afterward, and therefore as well to avoid the
Goose, as other noisome cattle, let your closure be made strong, and kept
tight.

Of Poles.
IT remains that I speak now of Poles, because Poaling is the next work now
to be done.

If your hills be distant three yards asunder, provide for every hill four
Poles, if you will make your hills nearer together, three Poles shall suffice.

And note that in the first year you may occupy as many Poles as in any year
after, the reason whereof I will delare in the title of Hills.

Alder Poles are best for this purpose, as whereunto the Hops seem most
willingly and naturally to incline, because both the fashion of these Poles
being as a Taper, small above, and great below, and also the roughness of the
Alder-ryne, stays the Hop stalk more firmly from sliding down, than either
Ash or Oak, which for continuance be somewhat better, howbeit, these with the
order that I shall prescribe, will endure six or seven years.

These are also best cheap, and easiest to be gotten in most places, and
soonest grown ready for this purpose.

There is in the Springs of these, least danger in growing, or in being
destroyed, or bi^ten by cattle.

Finally, by the expense of these, there ensues the least annoyance to the
Commonwealth, as well for the causes aforesaid, as also because they grow not
in so great quantity, to so good timber, nor for so many purposes as either Oak
or Ash.

The best time to out your Poles, is between Alhallontide and Christmas, but
you must pile them up immediately after they are cut, sharped, reformed in
length, and smoothed, least they rot before you occupy them.

You may not leave any scrags upon them, the reason whereof you shall conceive
in the title of gathering Hops.

Your Poles may not be above xv. or xvi. foot long at the most, except your
ground be very rich, or that you added thereunto great labor in raising up
your hills, or else except your hills stand too near together: if any of these
chance to be, or if all these three things meet in one Garden, the best way of
reformation, is to set the fewer Poles to a hill, or to let them remain the
longer. Otherwise the Hops will grow from one Pole to another, and so
over-shadow your Garden, the fault thereof being especially to be imputed to
the nearenesse of the hills. Therefore chiefly you must measure your Poles by
the goodness of your ground.

The Hoppe never stocketh kindly, until it reach higher then the Pole, and
return from it a yard or two, for whilst it tends clyming upward, the
branches which grow out of the principal stalk (wherein consists the
abundance of increase) grow little or nothing.

Let the quantity of your Poles be great (that is to say) nine, or ten inches
about the lower end, so shall they endure the longer, and withstand the wind
the better.

To describe the price of Poles, or what it will cost you to furnish a Garden
containing o^e Acre of ground, it were a hard matter, because the place
alters the price of Wood. But in a Wayne you may carry a hundredth and fifty
Poles, and (...) small cause why a load of these should be much dearer then
(...) of any other Wood.

After the first year, Poles will be nothing chargeable unto you, for you may
either pick them out of your own provision of Fuel, or buy them of your
Neighbors that have no occasion to apply them this way. For the yearly supply
of two loades of Poles, will maintain one Acre continually.

Your rotten and broken Poles will do you good service, for the kindling of
your fires in the Oste, whereupon you should dry your Hops, and they should be
preserved chiefly for that purpose.

At Poppering (where both scarcity and experience has taught them to make
careful provision hereof) they do commonly at the East and North side of
their Gardens, set and preserve Alders, wherewith they continually maintain
them.

Before you set up your Poles, lay them all along your Garden between every
row of hills by three or four together, I mean beside every Hill so many
Poles as you determine to set thereon, so shall you make the more speed in your
work.

Of the erection of Poles.
When your Hops appear above the ground, so as you may discern where the
principal roots stand, set up your Poles, preparing their way with a Crow of
Iron, or a forked wooden tool, with a point of Iron, somewhat iron-tipped
wooden forked tool like unto these. For if you stay till the Hops be grown to
a greater length, one inconvenience is, that either in making the holes, or in
erecting the poles, or else in ramming the earth to the fastening of them, you
shall hazard the bruising or breaking of your Hops: another is, that you shall
be feign to tie every stalk to the Pole, whereas otherwise the most part of
them will clime up of their own accord: the third is, that it will hinder the
growth of the Hop, if it remain unstay'd so long.

You must set every Pole a foot and a half deep, and within two or three
inches at the most of the principal root.

If your ground be rockie and shallow, tarry the longer before you set up your
Poles, so as your Hops may be grown two or three foot high, that you may
adventure to make a hill or bank at every pole to stay and uphold the same,
without burying any of the younger Springs, which may afterward be covered with
less danger and annoyance of the principal root.

Let the Poles of every hill lean a little outward one from another.

Of Ramming of Poles.
THen with a piece of wood as big below as the great end of one of your Poles,
ram the earth that lies at the outside of the Pole thereunto, but meddle not
within the compass of your Poles, as they are placed, lost you spoil the
Springs.

Of Reparation of Poles.
IF any of the Poles chance to break in many pieces when the Hop is grown up,
undo and pull away the same broken Pole, and tie the top of those Hops to the
top of a new pole, then winding it a turn or two about according to the course
of the Sun, set it in the hole, or besides the hole where the broken Pole
stood, but some being loath to take so much pains, turn it about the other
Poles that stand upon the same hill, and so leave it. But if it be not broken
above the midst, the best way is, to set a new Pole or stalk beside the
broken pole to the same, which may uphold the said broken pole, and preserve
the Hop. If the pole be only broken at the nether end, you may shove the said
pole again into the hill, and so leave it.

Of pulling up Poles.
ANd because, when the hills are made great, and raised high, you can neither
easily pull up any, nor possible pull up all your poles except you break them,
etc. especially if the wether or the ground be dry, or else the Poles old or
small, J thought good to show you an Instrument wherewith you shall pull them
up without disease to your self, destruction to your poles, or expense of your
money the charge being pincers or tongs only fourteen or fifteen pound of
Iron, wherewith the Smith shall make you a pair of tongs, (or rather you may
call them) a pair of pinsers, of the fashion here set down, the which may
also be made with wood if you thiake good.

The way to make the Instrument wherewith to pull up the Hoppe Poles.
THey must be one yard in length, whereof six or seven inches may be allowed
for the mouth or lower end of them, which serves to claspe or catch hold on
the Pole, the same nether end should be the strongest part thereof, and the
mouth somewhat hollow in the midst, and there also bending downward, whereby
the extreme point may rise a little upward.

Upon the upper edges of the inside thereof, the Smith should hacke or raise a
few small teeth, whereby your tool may take the surer hold upon the Pole.

He must also fasten upon every side of this Instrument a ryding hook, the
which may claspe and stay both sides together when they have caught hold on the
pole.

The manner of pulling up the Hoppe Poles.
YOu shall lay a little square block upon the top of the hill, and the better
to remove the same from hill to hill, you may thrust therein a pin. Upon the
same block you may rest your pinsers when they have clasped the very lowest
part of your Pole, and then holding the upper part of each side in your hands,
the hook being clasped, and pulled up hard toward you^ you shall easily weigh
up your Poles.

Of the preservation of Poles.
ANd although we are not yet come to the laying up of Poles, I am bold herein,
as I began too late, so to make an end too quickly, because J would touch the
whole matter of Poles together, laying them by themselves, (I mean)
comprehending under one title, the business appertaining unto them.

For the preservation and better continuance of Poles, some make houses of
purpose, and lay them up therein.

Some set them upright to a Tree, and over them make a penthouse of boughs or
boords.

Some lay a great heap of Hopstalkes upon the ground, and upon them a great
heap of Poles, and upon the Poles again lay another heap of stalks, etc.

These men do hereby express no great experience, although by their diligence
they signify a good desire.

You shall need to do no more but thus. At the ends or sides of your Garden,
take three Poles standing upon three hills placed directly one by another, and
three like Poles upon three other hills of the next row right over against
them, constrain them to meet together by two and two in the tops, and so hold
them till one with a forked wand may put three Withes (like unto three Broom
bands, which may be made of the stalks of Hops) upon each couple of the said
six Poles, so shall the same six Poles being so bound by two and two
together, stand like the roof or rafters of an house.

To keep the Poles that shall lie nethermost from rotting, by the moystnesse
of the ground: within the compass of your said six hills, (underneath the
Poles that you have fastened together in the tops,) raise three little banks
cross or thwart from hill to hill, as though you would make your six hills to
be but three.

Upon those banks lay a few Hopstalkes, and upon them your Poles, observing
that one stand at one end of the room, and another at the other end, ordering
the matter so, as the tops of the Poles lie not all one way, but may be equally
and orderly divided: otherwise one end of the room would be full before the
other, whereas now they shall lie even and sharp above, like an Haystacke, or
the ridge of an house, and sufficiently defend themselves from the weather.

If you think that you have not Poles enough to fill the room, pull down the
Withs or bands lower, and your room will be less, and this do before you lay
in your Poles.

Of tying of Hoppes to the Poles.
When your Hops are grown about one or two foot high, bind up (with a Rush
or a Grass) such as decline from the Poles, winding them as often about the
same Poles as you can, and directing them always according to the course of
the Sun, but if your leisure may serve (to do it at any other time of the
day) do it not in the morning when the dew remains upon them.

If you lay soft green Rushes abroad in the dew and the Sun, within two or
three days, they will be lythie, tough, and handsome for this purpose of
tying, which may not be fore-stowed, for it is most certain that the Hop that
lies long upon the ground before he be tied to the Pole, prospers nothing so
well as it which sooner attaineth thereunto.

Of Hilling and Hills.
NOw you must begin to make your Hills, and for the better doing thereof, you
must prepare a tool of Iron fashioned somewhat like to a Coopers Adds, but
not so much bowing, neither so narrow at the head, and therefore likest to the
nether part of a shovell, the powle whereof must be made with a round hole to
receive a helve, like to the helve of a Mattock, and in the powle also a nail
hole must be made, to fasten it to the helve.

This helve should bow somewhat like to a Sith, or to the steal of a Sith,
and it must be little more then a yard long.

cutting and digging tool, similar to a cooper's adze, hoe, mattock or brush
hook The helve hereof should be straight at the upper end.
With this tool you may pare away the Grass which grows in the spaces
betwixt the hills, and with the same also you may raise your hills, and pull
them down when time requires.

Some think it impertinent and not necessary to make hills the first year,
partly because their distrust of this years profit quallifieth their
diligence in this behalf, and partly for that they think that the principal
root prospers best, when there be no new roots of them forced and
maintained. But experience confuteth both these conjectures, for by industry,
the first years profit will be great, and thereby also the principal sets
much amended, as their prosperity in the second year will plainly declare.

But in this work you must be both painful and curious, as wherein
consists the hope of your gains, and the success of your work. For the
greater in quantity you make your hills, the more in number you shall have of
your Hops, and the fewer weeds you shall have on your ground, the more Hops you
shall have upon your Poles.

In consideration whereof I say, your labor must be continual from this time
almost till the time of gathering, in raising your hills and clearing ground
from weeds.

In the first year that you plant your Hop garden, suppress not one science,
but suffer them all to clime up to the Poles, for if you should bury or cover
all the springs of any one of your three roots, which you did lately set, the
root thereof perishes, and perhaps out of some one root there will not
proceed above one or two springs, which being buried, that root I say dies,
and therefore the more poles are at this time requisite.

After the first year you must not suffer above two or three stalks at the
most to grow up to one Pole, but put down and bury all the rest.

Howbeit, you may let them all grow till they be four or five foot high at the
least, whereby you shall make the better choice of them which you mean to
attain, whereby also the principal root will be the better, etc.

Some suffer their Hops to clime up to the tops of the Poles, and then make the
hills at one instant in such quantity as they mean to leave them, which is
neither the best nor the second way.

But if (for expedition) you be driven hereunto, begin sooner (that is to say)
when the Hops be four or five foot long, and afterward if leisure shall
serve, refresh them again with more earth.

But to make them well, and as they ought to be made, you must immediately
after your poles are set, make a little bank or circle round about the outside
of them, as a mention how wide your hill shall be, and as a receptacle to
retain and keep moisture, whereof there cannot lightly come too much, so it
come from above.

Jf your Garden be great, by that time that you have made an end of these
circles or banks, it will be time to proceed further toward the building up
of your hills.

Now therefore return again to the place where you began, or else where you
see the Hops highest, and with your tool pare off the uppermost earth from the
Allies or spaces between the hills, and lay the same in your Hops, upon and
within the circle that you made before, always leaving the same highest of any
part of the hill, and so pass through your Garden again and again, till you
have raised your hills by little and little, to so great a quantity as is
before declared, and look how high your hill is, so long are your new roots,
and the greater your new roots or springs be, the more larger and better your
Hops will be.

Great and overgrowne weeds should not be laid upon the hills, as to raise them
to their due quantity, but when with diligence and expedition you pass through
your Garden, continually paring away each green thing as soon as it appears,
you shall do well, with the same, and the uppermost mould of your Garden
together, to maintain and increase the substance of your hills, even till they
be almost a yard high.

In the first year nake not your hill too rath, least in the doing thereof you
oppress some of those springs which would otherwise have appeared out of the
ground.

It shall not be amiss now and then to pass through your Garden, having in
each hand a forked wand, directing aright such Hops as decline from the poles,
but some in stead of the said forked wands, use to stand upon a stool, and do
it with their hands.

Abuses in Hilling.
SOme observe no time, and some no measure in making their hills, but (having
hard say that hills are necessary) they make them they care not when nor how.

Some make hills once for all, and never after pluck down the same, but better
it were to make no hill, then so to do, for after the first year it does
derogate, and not add any comfort to the root, except the same be every year
new made and dressed, etc.

Some use to break off the tops of the Hops when they are grown a xi. or xii.
foot high, because thereby they burnish and stock exceedingly, wherein though
I cannot commend their doings, yet do they much better then such as will have
their Poles as long as their Hops.

But if your Pole be very long, and that the Hop have not attained to the top
thereof before the midst of July, you shall do well then to break or cut
off the top of the same Hop, for so shall the residue of the growing time serve
to the maintenance and increase of the branches, which otherwise would expire
without doing any good in that matter, because that whole time would then be
employed to the lengthening of the stalk, which little prevails (I say) to
the stocking or increase of the Hoppe,

And here is to be noted that many covetous men thinking (in have) to enlarge
their lucre, do find (at leisure) their commodity diminished, whilst they
make their hills too thick, their Poles too long, and suffer too many stalks
to grow upon one Pole, wherein (I say) while they run away flattering
themselves with the imagination of double gains, they are overtaken with
trebble damage (that is to say) with the loss of their time, their labor,
and their cost.

Of the gathering of Hoppes.
NOte that commonly at St. Margarets day, Hops blow, and at Lammas they bell,
but what time your Hops begin to change color (that is to say) somewhat before
Michaelmas (for then you shall perceive the seed to change color, and wax
brown) you must gather them, and for the speedier dispatch thereof, procure as
much help as you can, taking the advantage of fair weather, and note that you
were better to gather them too rath then too late.

To do the same in the readiest and best order, you must pull down four
hills standing together in the midst of your Garden, cut the roots of all
those hills, as you shall be taught in the title of Cutting, etc. Then pare the
plot small, level it, throw water on it, tread it, and sweep it, so shall it
be a fair floor, whereon the Hoppes must lie to be picked.

Then beginning near unto the same, cut the stalks asunder close by the tops
of the hills, and if the Hops of one Pole be grown fast unto another, cut them
also asunder with a sharp hook, and with a forked staff take them from the
Poles.

You may make the Forke and Hook (which cutteth asunder the Hops that grow
together) one apt instrument to serve both these turns.

Then may you with the forked end, thrust up, or shove off, all such stalks as
remain upon each Hop pole, and carry them to the floor prepared for that
purpose.

For the better doing hereof, it is very necessary that your Poles be straight
without scrags or knobs.

In any wise cut no more stalks then you shall carry away within one hour or
two at the most, for if in the mean time the Sun shine hot, or it happen to
rain, the Hops remaining cut in that sort) will be much impaired thereby.

Let all such as help you, stand round about the floor, and suffer them not
to pingle in picking one by one, but let them speedily strip them into Baskets
prepared ready therefore.

It is not hurtful greatly though the smaller leaves be. mingled with the
Hops, for in them is retained great virtue, insomuch as in Flanders they were
sold, Anno Domini 1566. for xxvi shillins viii. pence the hundredth, no one Hop
being mingled with them.

Remember always to clear your floor twice or thrice every day, and sweep
it clean at every such time, before you go to work again.

If the weather be unlike to be fair, you may carry these Hoppes into your
house in Blankets or Baskets, etc. and there accomplish this work. Use no
linen hereabouts, for the Hops will stain it so, as it can never be washed
out.

Jf your Poles be scraggie, so as you cannot strip the stalks from them in
this order, you must pull them up with maine force before the Hops be gathered,
and this is painful to your self, hurtful to your Hops, and a delay to your
work.

Then must you lay these poles upon a couple of forked stalks driven into the
ground, being two or three yards distant one from another, as Spits upon
Ranges, and so dispatch this business if the weather be fair, if it be like
to be foul, you must be feign to carry the Hops together with the Pole into
your Barn or house.

In any wise let not the Hops be wet when you cut them from the hills, neither
make any delay of gathering after the same time of cutting, for in standing
abroad they will shed their seed, wherein consists the chief virtue of the
Hop, and hereof I cannot warn you too often, nor too earnestly.

Now by order I should declare unto you the manner of drying your Hops, but
because I must therewithal describe the places meet for that purpose, with
many circumstances appertaining thereunto, I will be bold first to finish the
work within your Hop-garden, and then to lead you out of the same, into the
place where you must dry your Hops, etc.

When your Hops are gathered, as soon as you have leisure, take up your poles
and pise them (that remain good) as I have showed you in the title of Poles.

Then carry out your broken Poles, and the Hop-straw to the fire.

Now may you depart out of your Garden, till the March following, except in the
mean time you will bring in dung or good earth to the maintenance thereof,
toward the heightning of your hills, or else will plough it, etc.

What there is to be done in Winter hereen.
TO be curious in laying Dung upon the hills in Winter, as to comfort or warm
the roots (as some do) it shall be needless, rather pluck down the hills,
and let the roots lie bare all the Winter season, and this is usually done
where Hops are best ordered, especially to restrain them from too rath
springing, which is the cause of Blasts and many other Inconveniences.

If the ground be great that you keep, you shall be driven so to do,
otherwise you shall not be able to overcome your work in due time.

In any case you must avoid new horse-dung as a very noisome and pernicious
thing for your Hops.

Stall dung is the best that can be wished for to serve this turn, so it be
thoroughly rotten.

Rather use no dung than unrotten dung about the dressing of your Hops, but
omit not to bring into your Garden dung that may there be preserved till it be
good or needful to be used.

When and where to lay Dung.
ABout the end of April (if your ground be not rich enough) you must help
every hill with a handful or two of good earth, not when you cut your roots,
for then it will rather do harm then good, but when the Hop is wound about
the Pole, then should you do it.

The order for reforming your Ground.
IM March you shall return to your Garden, and find it replenished with
weeds, except by tillage, etc. you have prevented that matter already. It must
(as well therefore, as because the earth may be more fine, rich, and easy to
be delivered unto the hills) be dug over or plowed, except in the case
mentioned.

The order of cutting Hoppe-rootes.
When you pull down your hills, (which if you have not already done, you must
now of necessity go about to do) you should (with your Garden tool)
undermine them round about, till you come near to the principal roots, and
then take the upper or younger roots in your hand, and shake of the earth,
which e^rth being again removed away with your said tool you shall discern
where the new roots grow out of the old Sets.

In the doing hereof, be careful that you spoil not the old Sets, as for the
other roots which are to be cut aw^y, you shall not need to spare them to the
delay of your work, except such as you mean to set.

Take heed that you uncover not any more then the tops of the old sets in the
first year of cutting.

At what time soever you pull down your hills, cut not your roots before the
end of March, or in the begy^ning of April, and then remember the wind.

In the first year (I mean) at the first time of cutting and dressing of your
roots, you must (with a ^^^rpe knife) cut away all such roots or springs as
grew the year before out of your sets, within one inch of the same.

Every year after you must cut them as close as you can to the old roots,
even as you see an O^^e^s head cut.

There grows out of the old sets certain Roots, right downwards not joynted
at all, which serve only for the nourishing and comfort of those sets or
principal roots which are not to be cut off. There be other like unto them
growing outward at the sides of the sets. If these be not met withal, and cut
asunder, they will encumber your whole Garden.

Because it may seem hard to discern the old sets from the new Springs, I
thought good to advertise you how easy a thing it is to see the difference
thereof; for first you shall be sure to find your Sets where you did set them,
nothing increased in length, but somewhat in bigness enlarged, and in few
years all your Sets will be grown into one, so as by the quantity that thing
shall plainly appear: and lastly, the difference is seen by the color, the
old root being red, the other white, but if the hills be not yearly pulled
down, and the roots yearly cut, then indeed the old sets shall not be
perceived from the other roots.

If your Sets be small, and placed in good ground, and the hill well
maintained, the new roots will be greater then the old.

If there grow in any hill a wild Hop, or whenever the stalk waxes red, or
when the Hop in any wise decays, pull up every root in that hill, and set
new in their places, at the usual time of cutting and setting, or if you list,
you may do it when you gather Hops, with the roots which you cut away, when
you make your picking place.

Of diverse men's follies.
MAny men seeing the springs so forward, as they will be by this time, are loath
to loose the advantage thereof, and more unwilling to cut away so many goodly
Roots, but they that are timorous in this behalf, take pity upon their own
profit, and are like unto them that refrain to lay dung upon their Corn land,
because they would not betray it with so uncleanly a thing.

And some that take upon them great skill herein, think that for the first
year they may be left unhilled and uncut, etc. deceiving themselves with this
conceit, that then the Sets prosper best within the ground when they send least
of their nature and state out of the ground. In this respect also they pull
away or suppress all such Springs (as soon as they appear) which grow more,
and besides them which they mean to assign to each Pole, as though when a
man's fingers were cut off, his hand would grow the greater. Indeed if there be
no hill maintained, then the more Springs are suffered to grow from out of the
principal root, the more burden and punishment it will be to the same. But
when the Springs are maintained with a hill, so much as remains within the
same is converted into roots, which rather add then take away any state from
the principal root, in consideration hereof, the suppressing of the Springs
may not be too rath, for whatsoever opinion be hereof received, the many
Springs never hurt the principal root, if the hills be well maintained, but
it is the cumbring and shadowing of one to another that works the annoyance.

When you have cut your Hops you must cover them as you were taught in the
title of Setting, and proceeding according to the order already set down,

Of Disorders and Maintainers thereof.
SOme there be that despise good order, being deceived with a show of increase,
which sometime appears in a disordered ground, to them I say, and say it
truly, that the same is a bad and a small increase in respect of the other.

I say also that although disorderly doings at the first may have a countenance
of good success, yet in few years the same, and all hope thereof will
certainly decay.

Some other there be that despise good order, satisfying themselves with this,
that they have sufficiently to serve their own turn, without all these
troubles, and surely it were pity that these should be troubled with any great
abundance, that in contempt of their own profit, and of the Commonwealth,
neglect such a benefit proferred unto them.

Of an Oste.
NOw have I showed unto you the perfect Platform of a Hop-Garden, out of the
which J led you for a time, and brought you in again when time required, and
there would I leave you about your business, were it not to show you by
description such an Oste as they dry their Hops upon at Poppering, with the
order thereof, etc. Which for the small charges and trouble in drying, for the
speedy and well drying, and for the handsome and easy doing thereof, may be a
profitable pattern, and a necessary instruction for as many as have, or shall
have to do herein.

Of the several Rooms for an Oste.
FIrst a little house must be built, of length xviii. or xix. foot, of
wideness eight, wherein must be comprehended three several rooms.

The middle and principal room must be for your Oste, eight foot square. The
forepart which is to contain your green Hops, and the hinder part which must
receive your dried Hops, will fall out to be five foot long, and eight foot
wide a piece.

The chief matters that are to be by me described herein, are the Furnace
below, wherein the fire is to be made, and the bed above whereon the Hops must
lie to be dried: this I have chiefly to advise you of, that you build the whole
house and every part thereof as close as you can, and to place it near to your
Garden for the better expedition of your work, and somewhat distant from your
house to avoid the danger of fire.

Of the Furnace or Keele.
THe floor or nether part of your Furnace must be above thirteen inches wide.

The depth or height thereof must be thirty inches,

The length of it must be about six or seven foot (that is to say) reaching
from the forepart of the Oste almost to the further end thereof, so as there be
left no more room but as a man may pass between the wall and the end of it.

It must be made wide below and narrow above, fashioned in outward shape
somewhat like to the roof of an house.

It must have three rows of holes at each side, the length of one Brick
asunder, and the bigness of half a Brick, placed checkerwise. Before you
begin to make your holes, you should lay two rows of Brick, and when your
three ranks of holes are pl^ced upon them, you must lay again over them
another row of Brick, and upon the same you must place your last and highest
course, and they must stand long-wise (as it were a tiptoe) the tops of the
Bricks meeting together above (the nether part of them resting upon the
uppermost course) and note that till then, each side must be built along
directly upward.

You should leave almost a foot space between the mouth of your Furnace, and
your rows of holes, especially of that row which is nethermost.

The further or hinder end of your Furnace the which is opposite to the mouth
thereof, must be built flat with an upright wall, and there must also be left
holes as at the sides.

The Furnace in the top (J mean from the upper course of h^les) must be dawbed
very well with mortar.

And so upon the top of your Furnace there will remain a gutter, (whereupon
the Flemmins use to bake Apples, etc.) and the highest part thereof will reach
within two foot and less of the Oste.

Finally, it must be placed upon the ground in the midst of the lower floor
of the Oste, the which floor must be made The hindermost part or further end
of the Furnace.



One side of the Furnace.



The mouth and forepart of the Furnace.



diagram of a furnace very perfect, fine, and level, the reason whereof you
shall perceive in the title of Drying.

Of the bed or upper floor of the Oste, wherein the Hops must be dried.
THe bed or upper floor whereon the Hops shall lie to be dried, must be placed
almost five foot above the nether floor, whereon the Furnace stands.

The two walls at each side of the house, serve for the bed to rest upon two
ways.

Now must two other walls be built at each end of your Oste, whereon the other
two parts of the bed must rest, and by this means shall you have a close
square room beneath, betwixt the lower floor and the bed, so as the floor
below shall be as wide as the bed above.

These two walls must also be made four foot above the bed (that is to say)
about nine foot high.

At the one end below, besides the mouth of the furnace, you must make a little
door into the room beneath the bed. At the other end above the bed you must
make a Window to shove off from the bed the dried Hops, down into the room^
below prepared for them.

The bed should be made as the bed of any other Oste, saving that the Railes or
Laths which serve therefore must be sawne very even one inch square, and laid
one quarter of an inch asunder. But there may be no more beams to stay the
Laths but one, and the same must be laid flat and not on edge, in the midst
from one end of that room to the other, and the Laths must be let into the
same beam, so as the upper side of the beam and all the Laths may lie even.

If your Garden be very great, you may build your house somewhat larger, namely
xxii. foot long, and ten foot broad, and then you must make in this Oste two
Furnaces, three or four foot asunder, placing the door betwixt them both,
otherwise in all points like to that which J first described, and The Window
printed unto may not s^and below in the nether row but above as is before
declared.


plan of an oasthouse the groundwork hereof is so set out here, that any
Carpenter will easily frame the whole house by the same figure.

And now once again wishing you to make every door, Window, and joint of this
house close, I will leave building, and proceed to the drying of Hops, saving
that I may not omit to tell you, that you should either build all the walls of
this room with Brick^, or else with Lime and Hair pargit them over: and at
the least that wall wherein the mouth of the Furnace stands be made of Brick.

And although I have delayed you from time to time; and brought you from place
to place, and tediously led you in and out, and too and fro in the
demonstration hereof, yet must J be bold to bring you round about again, even
to the place where I left you picking, from whence you must speedily convey
your picked Hops to the place built and prepared for them, and with as much
speed hasten the drying of them.

The orderly Drying of Hoppes.
THe first business that is to be done herein, is to go up to the bed of the
Oste, and there to receive Baskets filled with Hops, at the hands of one that
stands below.

Then beginning at the further end (least you should tread on them) lay down
Basketfull by Basketfull, till the floor or bed be all covered, always
stirring them even and level, with a Cudgel, so as they may lie about a foot
and a half thick, and note that upon this Oste, there is no Oste-cloth to be
used.

Now must you come down to make your fire in the Furnace, for the kindling
whereof your old broken Poles are very good, howbeit, for the continuance and
maintenance of this fire, that wood is best which is not too dry, and somewhat
great.

Your Hop stalks or any other straw is not to be used herein.

You shall not need to lay the wood through to the farther end of your Furnace,
for the fire made in the fore-pare thereof, will bend that way, so as the heat
will universally and indifferently ascend and proceed out of every hole.

You must keep herein a continual and hot fire, howbeit, you must stir it
as little as you can.

Neither may you stir the Hops that lie upon the Oste, until they be
thoroughly dried.

When they are dry above, then are they ready to be removed away, and yet
sometimes it happens (that through the disorderly laying of them) they are
not so soon dry in one place, as they are in another.

The way to help that matter, is to take a little Pole (wherewith you shall
sensibly feel and perceive which be, and which be not dry, by the rattling of
the Hops which you shall therewith touch) and with the same Pole of turn aside
such Hops as be not dry, abating the thickness to the moist place.

When your Hops are dry, rake up the fire in such sort as there may be no delay
in the renewing thereof.

Then with expedition shove them out of the window before mentioned into the
room prepared to receive them, with a Rake fashioned like a Cole-rake, having
in stead of teeth a board, etc.

This being done, go down into the lower floor, and sweep together such
Hops and Seeds as are fallen thereinto, and lay them up among the dried Hops,
and then without delay cover the bed again with green Hops, and kindle your
fire.

Lay your dried Hops on a heap together till they be cold, and by this means
such as were not perfectly dried through some disorder upon the Oste, shall now
be reformed.

If they have been well ordered, they will now be thrown, and yet bright.

If they be black and dark, it is a note that they are disordered.

The Flemmings pack them not up before they sell them to the Merchant, but lay
them in some corner of a Loft where they tread them close together.

Other manners of Dryings not so good.
SOme use to dry their Hops upon a common Oste, but that way there can be no
great speed in your work, nor small expense of your wood, besides the danger
of fire and ill success of your doings.

On this Oste you must have an Oste cloth, otherwise the Seed and Hops that
fall down shall not only perish, but endanger the burning of your Oste.

Upon this Oste you may not lay your Hops above eight or nine inches thick,
which nevertheless shall not be so soon dry as they which lie upon the other
Oste almost two foot thick, and therefore this way you shall make more toil
in your work, more spoil in your Hops, and more expense in your wood.

Some use to dry their Hops in a Garret, or upon the floor of a Loft or
Chamber, in the reproof whereof I must say, that as few men have room enough
in their houses to contain any great quantity or multitude of Hops, so the
dust that will arise, shall empaire them, the chinkes, crevises, and open
joints of your Lofts being not close byrthed, will devour the seed^ of them,
in the end the leaves will endanger them with heating, when they are packt, as
being not so soon dry as the Hops, which thereby shall be utterly spoiled in
color, in scent, and in verdure.

As for any low rooms or earthen floores, they are yet worse for this purpose
then the other, for either they yield dust in dryness or moisture in wet
weather.

And therefore if you have no Oste, dry them in a Loft as open to the air as
may be: sweep, wash, and rub the boords, and let your Broom reach to the
walls, and even to the roof of your Loft, for I can teach you no way to devide
the dust from your Hops, but so to prevent the inconvenience hereof.

Stop the holes and chinkes of your floor, lay them not above half a foot
thick, and turn them once a day at the least, by the space of two or three
weeks.

This being done, sweep them up into a corner of your Loft, and there let them
lie as long more, for yet there remains peril in packing of them.

If the year prove very wet, your Hops ask the longer time of drying, and
without an Oste will never be well dried.

The very worst way of drying Hops.
SOme lay their Hops in the Sun to dry, and this takes away the state of the
Hops, and nevertheless leaves the purpose of drying undone.

Of not Drying.
SOme gather them, and brew with them being green and undryed, supposing that
in drying, the virtue and state of the Hop decays and fades away, wherein
they are deceived: for the verdure is worse, the strength less, and the
quantity must be more of green Hops that are to be brewed in this sort.

In the first Woort which the Brewers call the Hopwort (because the time of
seething thereof is short) there goes out of these Hops almost no virtue at
all, and therefore experience has taught them that are driven to brew with
these green Hops, to sees them again in the Woort, which they call the Ney
beer, where after long seething they will leave the state which remains in
them, and that is not much.

Of the Packing of Hops.
IN the making of your Hop-sackes, use your own cunning or invention, for I
have small skill therein, howbeit, I can tell you that the Hop-sackes that are
brought out of Flanders, may be good samplers for you to work by, the stuff
is not dainty wherewith they are made, the Loome is not costly wherein they are
woven, the cunning not curious whereby they are fashioned, but when you have
them, and are ready to pack your Hops, do thus.

Thrust into the mouth of your Sack (which must be doubled and turned in
strongly least it break) four strong pinnes, a foot long a piece, placed in
equal distance the one from the other, then lay two Bats or big Poles cross
or thwart two Beams or Couplings of your house, which two Bats must lie no
farther asunder then the wideness of the Sackes mouth. Fasten upon each pin
a roape, and knit two of those roapes upon each cross Batte, so as the bottom
of the Sack being empty, may hang within half a foot of the floor, then
stand within the Sack, and receive the Hops, treading down very hard, and
before the Sack be half full, it will rest upon the ground, whereby you shall
be able to press them the harder together.

But the handsommer way were to make a square hole (as wide as the Sackes
mouth) in the floor of the Loft, where your Hops lie, and to hang down your
Sack at that hole, and with a Scuppet or shovell to shove down your Hops
thereinto, and to receive them as is aforesaid: when the Sack is almost full,
undo the roapes, and wind those pinnes about for the harder shutting of the
Sack, and fasten them therein.

If you list, you may sow (over the mouth of this Sack) another piece of
Sackcloth, whereof you must leave a little unsowed, until you have thrust as
many Hops as you can between the Sack and the same, but in beholding the
Hopsackes sent from Poppering, you shall better understand and learn the
doings hereof.

For your own provision you may preserve them in Dry-fats, Barrels, or such
like Vessels, for want of room to leave them in, or Sackes to pack them in.

There is according to the Proverb, much falsehood in packing, I am unskilful
in that Art, if I were otherwise, I would be loath to teach such doctrine.

But to avoid such deceit, and to make the more perfect and better choice, it
is usual and lawful in most places where Hops are sold, to cut the Sack that
you mean to buy, in seven or eight places, and to search at each place whether
the Hops be of like goodness.

Such places as you shall feel with your hand to be softer then the rest, you
should specially cut, where perhaps you shall find Hops of another kind, elder
or worse then the rest.

The reformation of a Garden of wild Hops.
TO reform a Garden where the Hops be wild, the work is tedious, and none
other way remains, but to dig over the same with a Spade, so deep as you
may search out and throw out every root and piece of root that may be found
in, or near thereunto, and then to plant according to the order before
declared.

The reformation of a disordered Garden.
TO repair a ruinous Garden, which through ignorance was disorderly set, and
through sloth suffered to overrun and decay, where nevertheless the Hops
remain of a good kind (though somewhat empaired, as needs they must be, by
this means) the very best way were to do as to the wild Hoppe.

The second way is to forget that it is disordered at all, imagining that all
were well, and to set your Poles in such order, and so far asunder as is
prescribed in that title, always directing them right with a line, so as a
stranger beholding them, may suppose that your Garden is kept after the best
manner, then lead unto each Pole two or three stalks which you shall find
nearest thereunto, and there erect a hill which you may ever after cut and
dress according to the rules before declared, and so by continual digging,
paring, and diligence, you shall at leisute bring it to some reasonable
perfection.

If your Garden be very much matted with roots, so as it be too tedious to
dig, set your Poles as you are already taught, and bring into your Garden,
and lay near to every such place where you mean to make a hill, one Cart lode
of good earth, with the which, after your Hops are tied to your Poles, begin to
make your hill, and proceed as in the title of Hills, always cutting down
such Hops or weeds as grow between the said hills.

If your roots be set orderly, and your hills made accordingly, and yet left
undressed by the space of two or three years, it will be very hard (I say) to
discern the Sets from the other later roots: nevertheless, if your geound be
good, you may yet reform the inconvenience thereof, namely, by pulling down
the hill, and cutting away all the roots contained therein, even with the face
or upper part of the earth, searching also each side, and digging yet lower,
and round about the root which remains, and to take away from the same all
such roots as appear out thereof.

Needless curiosities used by the unskilful.
TO water your Garden, as to make the roots grow the better, it were more
tedious then needful, for the hilling thereof serves for that purpose, and
there is time of growing sufficient for them betwixt the midst of April and
August, and yet it never hurts, but rather does good, if it be before the
hill be made.

To pluck of the leaves, to the end that the Hops may prosper the better, is
also needless, and to no purpose, and rather hinders then helps the growth
of the Hops, for they are hereby deprived of that garment which Nature has
necessarily provided for them, and clothed them with.

To flaw the Poles, thereby to prolong their continuance, is more then needs
to be done in this behalf, for it is too tedious to your self, and hurtful
to your Hop, and little avails to the purpose aforesaid.

To burn the nether part or great end of your Poles, as some do, to the end
they should last or endure the longer, as also endure the longer, is also an
unnecessary trouble, only Willow Poles you may so use, to keep them from
growing.

So is it to weed the Hills with the hand, whereas the same weeds shall be
buried by the raising of the Hill.

FJNJS.
The expert Gardener: OR, A Treatise containing certain necessary, secret, and
ordinary knowledges in Grafting and Gardening: with diverse proper new Plots for
the Garden.

Also sundry expert Directions to know the time and season when to sow and
replant all manner of Seeds. With diverse remedies to destroy Snails,
Canker-wormes, Moths, Garden-Fleas, Earth-wormes, Moles, and other Vermin.

Faithfully collected out of sundry Dutch and French Authors.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Herne. 1640.

Certain common Instructions how the Stumpe must be chosen, whereupon you will
graffe or plant.
EVery diligent Householder who will plant, should use thereto a convenient
place, to the end that the wild beast chaw not, nor pair the Plants; or if
they be young, wholly eat in pieces: which to avoid, is needful to be in a
town or closed Orchard where there is not too much shadow, but a sweet ground
well muckt, tilled and turned.

Every Plant will have four things:
First moistness, so that the seeds or stumpe be moist or green.

Secondly a convenient place, which has such earth as will lightly be rubbed
to ponder, and that Sun may come to it: for where there is filthy lome, a lean
ground, or sandy, dry, burnt, or salt ground, there is nothing good to be
planted, to have any continuance: nevertheless where the ground is lean, there
you must give more dung; in a fat ground not so much. Take heed the ground be
not too moist nor too dry: and muck the trees with hogs dung.

Thirdly, a mediate water or nourishing moystnesse, therefore be those Orchards
best which are situated between two waters, for those that are placed by a
water side remain still young and fruitful, and have commonly the bark
smoother and thinner than the others. And those trees are more fruitful than
others which are planted in a valley, or in the lower part of a deep hill: for
from those hills may come to them nourishment and moistness, and the ground
which is so situated is very fruitful. But he that cannot get for his trees
such a ground, must with all diligence seek to bring to his trees a little
spring or pond, of which the trees may sometimes find some reviving, and if
you may not have any of those, and have a garden who by it self is naught, the
trees will grow with thick roots, which hinders the growing of them, and
dries them at length.

Fourthly, The air is required, which must be agreeable to them, and of
complexion to bear; for there be some trees that do prosper in all aires, to
wit, apple and pear, cherry and plum-trees. Some will have a cold air, to wit
Chessenut trees; and some a very warm air, as the palm and pepper trees:
therefore they be rare with us. That plant which has these four things shall
prosper: and if they want one or more of these four things, they will decay,
and their prospering perish.

At what time trees ought to be planted and set.
ALL kind of trees may be planted, transported, and cut in March, but it is
better to turn them in October, for then the frost hurts them not so much as
at other times: for learned men say, that in dry towns and warm countries they
plant in October or November, and that in moist towns and cold valleys they
plant in February or March: in none other time may you plant or graffe. When
you will plant or set again wild stumps, if there be any thing broken at the
root, cut it off. Every plant must be set two foot one from another, or at the
least one foot, especially when they should bear strong fruits: likewise when
thou will set strong seeds, as nuts, almonds and peaches. When a man will plant
two stumps, so must they be of two year old, except the uine.

These things you must understand of those plants or stumps which are planted
with roots.

How the stumps and plants must be prepared and dressed, which you will plant.
THe plant or sprout you must cut round about, so that you leave the very end
of it, and put it then into an hole, but if the stump be great, cut it clean
off, and then put only the undermost part into a hole, long or short as you
will: but if you find two stumps grown together, you may cut the lesser away.
And above all things you must take heed that the sprout grow upright, and if it
will not, you must constrain it, and tie it to a stick.

Here follow certain instructions how the trees must be kept and how you must
labor them.
SOme trees will have a fat ground, as Fig trees and Mulberrie trees, and
some lean ground, but all trees be in that point equal, that they will have
in the top dry ground, and in the bottom moist earth.

2 In harvest you must uncover the roots of the trees so deep, that they may
partly be seen, and lay dung upon them, which dung must be dissolved of rain
in the ground, that it may come to the roots, which mucking gives good
increase to the roots.

3 If the ground wherein the trees stand be too sandy, then mix among it
fair and new lome: and if it be too lomy then mix amongst it sand in place of
mucke, the which you must not only do hard by the tree, but also four or five
foot off from it round about the tree, according as the tree is in bigness, or
that the roots are large and great.

Such diligence gives to the trees great help, for their nourishment and
strength is thereby renewed. Hereafter you shall understand, whereby to know
the fruitful soil.

4 In the fat ground the stumps whereupon you will graf, must be left long, but
in lean ground short.

5 The plants of trees from their youth, till three years must not be cut nor
shred, but they may be transported, and if they be too weak you may prick
sticks next unto them.

6 Diligent regard must be taken, that no sprouts spring out of the stump,
which might take the nourishment from the tree sprouts, and those boughs which
spring from the root of the tree at the first planting.

7 When thou perceiuest the young trees to wax weak, then uncover the roots
and put other fresh ground to them.

8 If the ground be neither too soft nor too hard, then may you choose all kind
of stumps in February for to plant, when the green juice is dispersed in the
bark, but when the ground is too hard, then the swet holes or pores of the root
do remain closed and stopped, so that they cannot draw to them their
nourishment, such hardness of the ground or earth, hinders the air and
moistnes which comes from beneath upward, for it cannot be pearsed of the
sofr sprouts, with the small heat which is beneath, therefore you must come to
help them with a spade, for with a plough you will never come to an end,
because of the root.

9 There is great diligence to be taken for preserving of the trees, when they
begin to grow great, to scrape from the bark all rudeness, which is don, when
you take from them all superfluity, and sprouts which come out of the tree.
You may cut them in February.

10 It is good for the trees to mucke them often, and moderatively to water
their roots.

Also to cleave the roots, and lay stones into them, to the end they may revive
again of the dryness which they have suffered, or of the barrennes of the
ground, or when the young planted trees for the great heat will perish. Also
when immoderate heat is, then you must help them with turning of the ground,
and, with watering, but the water wherewith you should water them, must not be
altogether fresh nor cold, or newly drawn out of the spring: but out of a
ditch, pond, or well, or any other foul ditch water, or with spring water,
which has stood long in the sun, or put a little dung in the water, and
stir it once or twice well about, and the water will be fat, wherewith water
your trees. You may also keep them with shadows and straw from the heat: or
else put (in great heat) fat green herbs at the stump, tempred with loame: some
anoint the stumpe (toward the South or Midday) with chalk, some with oil, or
with any other ointment that cools.

11 When you would transpose a plant, or have wild stumps dug out to plant
again, then mark the part which stands toward the South of midday, and put
it so again when you graffe it.

How to keep plants, stumps, or trees, from the wild beasts, that they hurt
them not.
WHere the path of the beast is free and remediless, there must be put poles,
and with thorns the same young trees must be enclosed.

That the Deeres spoil them not.
TAke the piss of a Dear and anoint the Tree therewith.

That the Hares do not hurt them.
SPet in thy hand, and anoint the sprouts therewith, and no Hare will hurt them.

Here follow some instructions of graffing.
a man up a ladder, pruning a tree

FIrst you must know that imping, graffing, and setting, is all one thing.

The imping sprous must be young and new, with great bodies, and many eyes: for
where many and great buds be, that is a token, that is of a strong fruit.

2 The imping sprouts must be broken off at the sun rising, although that those
of the other side broken off grow likewise: yet those of the other side are
most natural and temperate of heat: Some country clownes believe, that if you
in cutting the sprouts turn them upside down, that they will never grow right,
but be crooked.

3 All graffing and imping is don by putting one into another by a fast
binding, that the little sprout may spread his boughs to the stump or tree,
wherein it is graffed, that so it may become one tree.

4 Over, young imps (which are so weak that they will break before they be put
into the earth, or into the stump) are naught, and therefore they may not be
imped or set.

5 When you impe upon a house, or fruit tree, the fruit will be far better: But
if you cut of a Garden tree a branch, and imp into it one of his own sprouts,
it will bring forth fruit of another taste, form and bigness: for imping
makes all the diversities in pears, apples, and other fruits.

6 It is far better to impe low in the stumpe, than in the top in the high
branches: yet nevertheless if you will make of wild apple trees garden trees,
you may impe them upon the top.

7 In great trees which have a great bark, it is not so good to impe, for they
take not to them so easily the veins of the roots which grow out of the young
sprouts, because of their hardness, and especially when the imping sprouts are
too weak. Wherefore they which graffe trees must seek small and young stumps,
wherein they find much liquor and little hardness, and which may endure the
binding.

8 It is best imping or graffing when the liquor is in the bark, if you have a
great tree upon the which you would impe, and has many branches, you may cut
them all off, and impe into the stumps all kind of boughs, such as you please:
but if the tree be over old, so that her boughs be ranckled, and her
moistness consumed, then cut the tree clean off, and let the stump stand a
whole year: afterward take the sprouts which are sprung out of that stumpe,
and graffe them, and cast the others away. Such a stump is like to bear, and
therefore nourish as many sprouts as you please: but if it be a wild stump,
graft garden sprouts upon it.

9 If you graffe a sprout or bough upon a Hawthorne tree, that same bough will
grow great, and the stumpe will remain small, therefore he that will impe upon
such a tree, see he cut it off by the root, then will the imped sprout and the
stumpe grow all of one thickness: but you must have still regard that you Impe
kind upon kind, as apples upon apples, pears upon pears: for he that
graffeth strange upon strange, as pears upon apples, and apples on pears, and
such like, although it be don often for pleasures sake, yet will it not last:
for the natural nourishment is so, that it will hardly nourish a strange kind
of fruit.

10 The tree which is graffed in February, in his fruits grow no worms nor
maggots.

11 When the imping sprouts begin to prosper, and will not grow straight and
level, then you must constrain them perforce, that they may grow orderly.
Furthermore you must have a care to keep the prospering sprouts well with
sticks from the wind, if they stand any thing high, and especially when they
have stood a year or two, and where they are pricked in the stump, it is most
needful, as shall after appear. And because there be many and diverse ways to
graffe and know how wild stumps and trees are to be made garden trees, we
thought it good to set some of them here down.

Diverse fashions and ways of graffing there be.
HE that will extraordinarily graffe all manner of trees, he must know that the
more one tree is liker another, the better it will prosper.

The first sort of graffing is, when the sprout is pricked between the bark and
the wood of the stump; which must be don in May or April, when the bark may
easily be loosed from the tree, and is done after this sort.

First take a stump or tree, and cut him off with a sharp Saw, knife, or such
like instrument, where he is smoothest and cleerest, and full of juice, and
polish the place with the bark of the same tree which was cut off. Afterward
tie the stump with a piece of bark, and then prick a hole between the bark of
the tree with a prick of bone, elder wood, or iron, so that it cleave not, and
then put in the place of the prick, the sprout, which you must have broken off
a plain and even tree, of a good kind, and one year old, which you shall
know by this: every branch have rinckled knots like the joint of a man's finger,
cut it at one side under the knot, so that you touch not the heart of the tree:
and at the other side you must softly loose the bark, that the sprout may
join very close to the stump, then pull out the prick, and take the sprout,
and turn the green bark to the bark of the stump, so that it may stand
strait.

The sprout may be four or five fingers, or eight at the most, high above the
stump.

Of this sort of imping, you may see two, three, or more, according to the
bigness of the stump, or as he can bear, provided always that they stand at
the least the length of a finger one from another.

Afterward tie it fast (with bark) together, and put over it good mucke, and
tie over it a cloth, that no rain or air may come between it and hurt it.
This sort of imping is commonly used in stumps, which are great and old trees,
whose bark is thick and strong as apple trees, pear trees, cherry trees, and
willow trees, on which are imped oftentimes apples, also on fig trees, and
chestnut trees.

Such grafting is also done in high stumps, and branches, which be great, but
they must be well kept from the wind, that it do not break them.

After this sort you may graft many sorts and kinds of pears upon one tree, but
if you bring pears upon apples, or apples upon pears stumps, it will not last
long, as before is said.

The first way of grafting prospers best, and has a good continuance, there
be many other sorts of grafting, as follows.

Another way of grafting is, when the stumps are cloven, and the sprouts
afterward are put in, the which do as follows.
Take a young tree which is scant of the bigness of a finger, and cut it smooth
and even, and cleave it in the midst, then take the sprout which you will impe,
and cut it three square, and at the one side leave the bark uncut, and then
turn the same bark outward at the stump, and tie it fast as I have taught,
that the wind nor rain hurt him not.

Otherwise.
When the stump is uncovered and clean burnisht at the soft place, then tie him
fast, that he cleave no further than to the length of your sprout, which you
must graffe upon him, and then leave the prick in it, then make your sprout
pointed like a prick, so that the middle be not touched, then put it into the
cleft, having cleansed the hole first with the point of a knife, so that one
bark may touch the other, and outward one wood another, to the end the moisture
may have the more easier his course, then pull out the prick, and that which
remains open and bare between the cleft and the sprout, that bind well every
where with the bark of the tree, or with hard pressing with a little sand, or
with dung of an ox, or with wax, or with a linen cloth washed in wax, that
no rain, wind, or worms may hurt it. This helps much to keep the moistnes
in, which comes from the root, that it cannot break out, but nourishes the
better the new plant: but when the stumps are great, they be cleaved after two
ways. The first is, that you cut or cleave the tree with a knife at one side
only, even to the heart, and that you graft into it but one sprout. The other
is, that you cleave it all over, and that you prick or graft on every side one
sprout, or one alone, and leave the other side without.

When the stumpe is but a little bigger, then the sprout must necessarily be
cloven in two, and you must graft but one sprout into it, as is said in the
beginning.

This cleaving may be done in February, March, and April, then it is good to
cut them before they be green, for to keep them the better under the ground,
in cold or moist places.

The third way of grafting.
THis sort of grafting is very subtle, witty, and ready; and is done as
follows.

Go to a smooth apple or pear tree, in April, when the trees get liquor, and
seek a branch which has green eyes, and see that the same be less than your
little finger, and tear it from the tree, and where you see that the green
sprouts will come off, there cut them off wholly, and cleanse the middle
thereof, that the little red at the wood may turn about, and draw it not off,
until you come unto another good pear or apple tree, and seek there another
branch of the same bigness that the other was, and cut it off, and take from
it likewise the red, as far as you will put them again, and look where the
branches join, that they may well sit together upon the top, and tie the same
place gently and well with a little bark, behind and before, that the water
may not hurt them: in the first year it brings forth leaves and branches, in
the second, flowers, which you may break off, for the sprout is yet too tender,
so that it may bear no fruit, and in the third year it brings flowers and
fruit, and by this means you may graft diverse kinds of pears and apples upon
one tree. I have likewise set such sprouts upon wild stumps, and they have
prospered.

The fourth way of grafting is,
HOw buds are transported and bound upon another tree, like as a plaster is
tied to a man's body: this sort of grafting is called in Latin Emplastrum. We
read of such a sort of grafting which is called in Latin Abducellum, and it is
much like unto this sort, wherefore we will only speak of it, being done after
this sort.

When you see upon a great fruitful bough, a bud which will prosper without
doubt, and would feign plant it upon another tree, take a sharp knife, and
lift the bark up two fingers breadth, that the bud be not hurt, then go to
another tree, upon the which you will graft, and put into a convenient place, a
like hole into the bark, and put the same bud with the bark into it, and tie
it with dung (or with a clout which has lien in a dunghill) over the cut, that
it may be kept from the outward damage of weather, and for an especial
nourishment and keeping of the inner juice: then cut off the branches round
about it, that the mother may the better nourish the new son: within twenty
days after take away the band, so that you see that the strange bud has
prospered and joined himself with the tree. This may be done in March when the
bark comes easily from the tree. Also in April, May, and June, and yet she
prospers both before and after a time, when you may conveniently find such
buds.

This sort of planting prospers best in a willow tree or such like, which is
pierced through, and is done after this sort.

The fifth way.
When you pierce a willow stick with a sharp piercer, see that between every
hole be left the space of one foot, and prick therein branches a little
scraped, and put the stick into a ditch, so that the branches stand upright,
one part of the stick remaining over the earth; and within a year after take
it out of the ditch, and cut the stick asunder, so find you the branches full
of roots, and put every one into a hole in the ground, and it is fit the holes
were stopped with lome, or with wax.

Some do take in March a fresh Beech tree, which is of a man's thickness, and
pierce him overthwart with maine and great holes and small holes till unto the
lowermost bark, or quite through: then take sprouts or boughs, which be as
big and small, that they may fit into the holes: and when you will put them
into the Beech stump, you must scrape the uppermost bark off, until the
green, and no further: then the bough must remain into the beech, the sprouts
must stand a foot or somewhat less asunder, then keep your beech stump with the
sprouts in a fresh ground, and skant a foot deep, you must first maime the
sprouts, that they may not flourish; then the next March ensuing, dig it out
with the sprouts, and cut it asunder with a saw, and every block which is cut
off with his branch, you must set in a fresh ground, and so they will bring
forth the fruit the same year.

The sixth Way.
This way teaches how to graffe, that they may bring forth fruit the first
year, which do as follows.

Pare an old stumpe of what kind soever it be, the uppermost bark till to the
lower green bark, a span long or somewhat less, which do in harvest in the
wane of the Moon, and anoint it with Ox dung and earth, and tie it with
bark, and after in March when trees are transposed from one place to another
then cut the same branch from the tree, and put it into the ground, and it will
bring fruit the same year. I have seen that one has pricked sticks on Alhallow
eve, in the earth, and has pulled them out again upon Christmas eve, and put
boughs in the holes, and they have prospered and come out.

The (...) that the fruit be without (...) sp^^ut and graffe it into a great
stump* (...) thicke^ and lower part of the sprout, then take the upper or
thinner end o the sprout, and cut it al^o fit to be graffed, and turn it
downward, and ^raffe it into the said stump; and when the sprout of both sides
prospers, cut it in the midst asunder, so that which is grown right upward
with the tree, the fruit of it has stones, but that which was the top of the
sprout that grows contrary, brings forth fruit without stones. And if so be
the turn^^ sprout prosper, you must break off the other* to the end that the
turned sprout do not perish, which you may try a^^er this sort: for oftentimes
it comes and prospe^eth, and many times it is perished and spoiled.

How Cherries are to be graffed, that they may come without stones.
WIll you make that Cherries grow without stones? pare a little Cherry tree of
one year old at the stump, and cleave it asunder from the top to the root,
which do in May, and make an Iron fit to ^raw the heart or marow from both
sides of the tree; then tie it fast ^^^^ther and anoint (...)

H^ (...)
PLant a V^^e tree next unto a Ch^ (...) when it grows ^igh, then pierce a^
(...) Cherry tree right above it, that the ho^ (...) than the Vine is thick,
and pare the up^^^ bar^ of the Vine branch till unto the green (...) must go
through the tree, and look well to it tha^ (...) branch of the Vine be not
bruised, and well anointed. You must not suffer any sprouts to come out o^ the
vine from the ground up, but unto the tree only* that which comes out of the
other side, let that same grow and bring fruit. Then the next March following,
if the Vine prosper and grow fast into the tree, then cut the Vine from the
tree off, and anoint the place with diligence, and it will bring fruit.

How a grape of a Vine may be brought into a glass.
WIll you make that a grape grow into a narrow glass? take the glass before
the grape cast her blood, or while she is little, and put her into the glass,
and she will ripen in the glass.

To graffe Medlers on a Pear tree.
IF you graffe a branch of a Medler upon a Pear tree, the Medlers will be
sweet and durable, so that you may keep them longer than otherwise.

How apples or other fruits may be made red.
IF you will graft upon a wild stump, put the sprouts in Pikes blood, and then
graft them, and the fruit will be red.

Otherwise.
Take an apple branch, and graft it upon an alder stump, and the apples will be
red. Likewise if you graft them upon cherry trees.

Of the Quince tree.
THe Quince tree comes not of any grafting, but you must pluck him out by
the roots, and plant him again into a good ground or earth.

Otherwise.
The Quince tree requires a dry and sweet ground, and he prospers therein.

How to make that Quinces become great.
TAke a branch of a Quince tree when it has cast his blood where a Quince
grows at, and put it into a pot, and set it into the ground, and let the
Quince grow in it, and it will be very great.

And if you will show some cunning therewith, cause to be made a pot which
has a man's face in the bottom of it, or any other picture whatsoever, and
when the quinces have blossomed, then bow the branch, and put the quince into
the pot, and she will grow very big, in the shape of a man, which may also be
done in pompons, mellons, cucumbers, and other earthly fruits.

The conclusion of graffing.
OVt of all the forewritten causes (gentle reader) is evidently shown, that
although every planting or grafting be better from like to like, and from kind
to kind, yet nevertheless it agrees also with contrary kinds, as now is said,
wherefore he that will exercise and use the same, and try diverse kinds, he may
see and make many wonders.

What ^oy and fruit comes of trees. The first.
THe first is, that you plant diverse and many kinds: for every householder who
has care to his nourishment, with all diligence causes oftentimes, such trees
to be brought from foreign countries.

The second.
The second is, when the trees be planted and set orderly and pleasantly, they
give no small pleasure to a man, therefore every one should cut his trees
orderly, and he that cannot, should procure other men to do it, which know how
to do it.

The third is of well smelling and spited fruit.
Cleave a tree asunder, or a branch of a fruitful tree, to the heart or pith,
and cut a piece out of it, and put therein poudred spices, or what spice soever
you will, or what color you will desire, and tie a bark hard about it, and
anoint it with lome and ox dung, and the fruit will get both the savor and
color according to the spice you have put in it.

How sower fruits be made sweet.
WHich tree bears sower fruits, in the same pierce a hole a foot or somewhat
less above the root, and fill that with honey, and stop the hole with a
haw-thorne branch, and the fruit will be sweet.

How trees ought to be kept when they wax old.
WHen trees lose their strength and virtue for age, and the branches break off
for the weight of the fruit, or when they wax barren for lack of moisture, that
they bear not fruit every year, but scant every other or third year, you
must cut some of his heavy branches, which he can little nourish, which is done
to the end he might keep some moistness to himself for his nourishment, for
else the moistness would go all into his branches.

Wheteby you may mark whether you must give them, or take away from them
branches, according to their nourishment, and as the earth where she stands
can abide, that is, you must leave them so much as will nourish them, and no
more, which if you do not, the trees will bring so little fruit; that your
labor will not be recompensed.

Which cutting of trees may be done from the beginning of November till to the
end of March, in warm countries. But it is more natural to be done from the
time that the leaves fall, till the time that they begin to grow green again,
except where the frost is very great and sharp.

How trees must be kept from diverse sicknesses, and first how to keep them from
the Canker.
WHen the Canker comes in any tree, he becomes barren and dry, for it
mounteth from the stumps into the top, and when it takes a pear or apple
tree, the bark will be black and barren thereabouts, which must be cut off with
a knife, to the fresh wood, and then the place must be anointed with Ox dung,
and tied with bark, so that neither wind nor rain may hurt it.

Against worms which must be driven out of the tree.
IT happens oftentimes, that the superfluities of moistness in the trees
breaks out like as sometimes to a man or beast between the flesh and skin^
and when that begins to rot, worms grow out of it, which takes his strength
away: wherefore mark.

When the bark of a tree at any time swells, cut it presently open that the
poison may run out, and if you find already worms in it, draw them out with
a little iron hook.

How the worms are to be killed, if they be already grown into the tree.
IF you will kill the worms which grow in the tree, take pepper, laurel, and
incense, and mingle all well together with good wine, and pierce a hole into
the tree downward, to the pith or heart of the tree, and pour this mixture
into it, and stop it with a hawthorne, and the worms will die.

Otherwise.
Take ashes or dust and mingle it with sallet oil, anoint the trees therewith,
and the worms will die.

Otherwise.
Take poudred incense when you graffe, and bring it between the bark of the
stump, which you will graffe, and no worms will eat the fruit.

When a tree in many places becomes changable because of worms, or
superfluous humors. Cleave the tree at some end from the top of the stump to
the earth, that all the foul liquors may come out and dry. Also when a tree
becomes sick because of evil humors or fault of ground, so that he becomes
worme-eaten, or brings no fruit, take the earth away from the root, and put
other sweeter in the place, and pierce a great hole in the stump, and put
therein a pin of Oak, and it helps.

A remedy against Caterpillars.
ALl kind of Caterpillars which eat the green, and blossoms of the tree, do
hurt them very much, so that thereafter may come no fruit.

Therefore their eggs which lie hidden, as it were in a cobwebbe, must
diligently be searched, and burned from the boughs, before they bring forth
other Caterpillars, which do in December, January, and February.

Some were wont to break them off, and tread them with their feet, but
therewith they be not wholly killed. The fire consumes all things, and therefore
it is best to burn them.

Against the Pismires or Ants, when they will hurt the young trees.
CVt the leaves off which are eaten or poisoned of the Ants or Pismires, and
where there is any thing made unclean in the top of the tree, of those little
worms, that rub in pieces with your hands, that it may not stain the other
leaves, and that the young sprouts may grow up without any hinderance.

How to keep the Pismires from the trees.
FIrst make a juice of an herb, called Portabaca, and mix it with vinegar, and
sprinckle the stump therewith, or anoint the stumpe with wine dregs. Some take
a little weak pitch, but very thin, that it may not hurt the tree.

Another instruction.
Take a little bundle of cotton, wool, flax, or towe, and lay it about the
stump, and tie likewise a bundle above, about the stump, and draw it out a
little, and the Pismires can do no hurt: or put about the stump bird-lime.

In what time of the harvest the fruit must be gathered.
THe fruits are not altogether at one time gathered, for they are not ripe all
at once, as some pears which show the ripeness by the color, those should be
gathered in Summer, and if you let them stand too long, they will not last.

Pears which are ripe in harvest, those may be gathered in October, when the
weather is clear and dry: in harvest in the increase of the moon, fruits may
be gathered.

A short instruction very profitable and necessary for all those that delight
in gardening, to know the times and seasons when it is good to sow and replant
all manner of seeds.
CAbbages must be sown in February, March, or April, at the waning of the
Moon, and replanted also in the decrease thereof.

Cabbage Lettuce, in February, March, or July, in an old Moon.

Onions and Leeks must be sown in February or March, at the waning of the
moon.

Beets must be sown in February, or March, in a full moon.

Coleworts white and green in February, or March, in an old moon, it is good
to replant them.

Parsneps must be sown in February, April, or June, also in an old moon.

Radish must be sown in February, March, or June, in a new moon.

Pompions must be sown in February, March, or June, also in a new moon.

Cucumbers and Mellons must be sown in February, March or June, in an old moon.

Spinach must be sown in February or March, in an old moon.

Parsley must be sown in February or March, in a full moon.

Fennel and Annisseed must be sown in February or March, in a full moon.

White Cycory must be sown in February, March, July or August, in a full moon.

Cardus Benedictus must be sown in February, March or May, when the moon is
old.

Basil must be sown in March, when the moon is old.

Purslane must be sown in February or March, in a new moon.

Margeram, Violets and Time, must be sown in February, March or April, in a
new moon.

Floure-gentle, Rosemary and Lavander, must be sown in February or April, in
a new moon.

Rocket and Garden cresses, must be sown in February in a new moon.

Savell must be sown in February or March, (...) new moon.

Saffron must be sown in March, when the moon is old.

Coriander and Borage must be sown in February or March, in a new moon.

Hart^horne and Samphire must be sown in February, March or April, when the
moon is old.

Gilly-floures, Harts-ease, and Wall-floures, must be sown in March or April,
when the moon is old.

Cardons and Artochokes must be sown in April or March, when the moon is old.

Chickweed must be sown in February or March, in the full of the moon.

Burnet must be sown in in February or March, when the moon is old.

Double Marigolds must be sown in February or March, in a new moon.

Isop and Savorie must be sown in March, when the moon is old.

White Poppey must be sown in February or March, in a new moon.

Palma Christi must be sown in February, in a new moon.

Sparages and Sperage is to be sown in February, when the moon is old.

Larks foot must be sown in February, when the moon is old.

Note that at all times and seasons, Lettuce, Radish, Spinach and Parsneps may
be sown.

Note also, from cold are to be kept Coleworts, Cabbage, Lettuce, Basil,
Cardons, Artochokes, and Colefloures.

Worthy remedies and secrets availing against the stroying of Snailes,
Cankerwormes, the long bodied moths, garden fleas, earth-wormes, and Moles.
AFricanus, singular among the Greek writers of husbandry, reports, that
Garden plants and roots may well be purged and rid of the harmefull worms, if
their dens or deep holes be smoaked, the wind aiding, with the dung of the
Cow or Ox burned.

That worthy Pliny in his first book of histories writes, that if the owner
or Gardener sprinckleth the pure mother of the oil Olive, without any salt in
it, does also drive the worms away, and defend the plants and herbs from
being gnawne of them. And if they shall cleave to the roots of the plants,
through malice or breeding of the dung, yet this weedeth them clean away. The
plants or herbs will not after be gnawne or harmed by garden-fleas, if with the
natural remedy, as with the herb Rocket, the Gardener shall bestow his beds
in many places.

The Coleworts and all pot herbs are greatly defended from the gnawing of the
garden-fleas, by Radish growing among them. The eager or sharp vinegar does
also prevail, tempered with the juice of Henbane, and sprinkled on the
garden-fleas. To these, the water in which the herb Nigella Romana shall be
steeped for a night, and sprinkled on the plants, as the Greek Pamphilus
reports, does alike prevail against the garden-fleas.

Paladius Rutilius reports, that the noisome vermin or creeping things will
not breed of the Pot Herbs, if the Gardener shall before the committing to the
earth, dry all the seeds in the skin of the Tortoise, or sow the herb Mint in
many places of the garden, especially among the Coleworts. The bitter Fitch and
Rocket (as I before uttered) bestowed among the pot herbs, so that the seeds be
sown in the first quarter of the Moon, do greatly avail us. Also the Canker
and Palmer worms, which in many places work great injury both to the gardens
and vines, may the owner or gardener drive away with the fig tree ashes
sprinkled on them and the herbs.

There be some which sprinckle the plants and herbs made with the lee of the
fig tree ashes, but it destroies the worms, to strew (as experience reports)
the ashes alone on them.

There be others which rather will to plant or sow that big onion, named in
Latin Scilla or Squilla here and there in beds, or hang them in sundry places
of the garden.

Others also will to fix river Cresses with nails in many places of the
garden, which if they shall yet withstand or contend with all these remedies,
then may the Gardener apply to exercise this devise, in taking the Ox or Cow
urine, and the mother of oil Olive, which after the well mixing together, and
heating over the fire, the same be stirred about until it be hot, and when
through cold, this mixture shall be sprinkled on the pot herbs and trees, does
marvellously prevail, as the skillful Anatolius of experience reports.

The worthy Paladius Rutilius reports, that if the owner or Gardener burn
great bundles of the Garlic blades (without heads) dried, through all the
allies of the Garden, and unto these the dung of Backs added, that the savor
of the smoke (by the help of the wind) may be driven to many places,
especially to those where they most abound and swarm, and the Gardener shall
see so speedy a destruction, as is to be wondered at.

The worthy Pliny of great knowledge reports, that these may be driven from
the pot-herbes, if the bitter Fitch seeds be mixed and sown together with them,
or the branches of the trees, Crevises hanged up by the horns in many places,
does like prevail. These also are let from increasing, yea they in heaps
presently gathred are destroyed, as the Greeks report of observation, if the
Gardener by taking certain Palmer or Canker-wormes out of the Garden next
joining, shall sees them in water with Dill, and the same being through cold,
shall sprinckle on the herbs and trees, that the mixture may wet and soke
through the nests, even unto the young ones, cleaving together, that they may
taste thereof, will fpeedily dispatch them. But in this doing, the Gardener
must be very wary, and have an attentive eye, that none of the mixture fall on
his face or hands.

Besides these, the owner or Gardener may use this remedy certain, and easily
prepared, if about the big arms of trees, or stums of the herbs, he kindle
and burn the stronger lime and brimstone together. Or if the owner make a
smoke with the Mushromes, growing under the Nut tree, or burn the hoofes of
Goats, or the gum Galbanum, or else make a smoke with the Hearts horn, the
wind aiding, by blowing toward them.

The husbandmen and gardeners in our tune have found out this easy practice,
being now common every where: which is on this wise, that when these after
showers of rain are cropen into the warm sun, or into places standing against
the sun, early in the morning shake either their fruits and leaves of the
pot herbs, or the boughs of the trees, for these being yet stiff, through the
cold of the night, are procured of the same, the lighter and sooner to fall,
not able after to recover up again, so that the Palmer worms thus lying on the
ground, are then in a readiness to be killed of the Gardener.

If the owner mind to destroy any other creeping things noyous to herbs and
trees, (which Paladius and Rutilius name, both herb and Leek wasters) then let
him hearken to this invention and devise of the Greek Dyophanes, who wills
to purchase the maw of a Weather sheep new killed, and the same as yet full of
his excrementall filth, which lightly cover with the earth in the same place,
where these most haunt in the Garden, and after two days shall the Gardener
find there, that the mothes with long bodies, and other creeping things will
be gathered in diverse companies to the place right over it, which the owner
shall either remove and carry further, or dig and bury very deep in the same
place, that they may not after arise and come forth, which when the Gardener
shall have exercised the same but twice or thrice, he shall utterly extinguish,
and quite destroy all the kinds of creeping things that annoy and spoil the
Garden plants.

The husbandmen in Flanders arm the stocks, and compass the bigger arms of
their trees, with wisps of straw handsomely made and fastened or bound about,
by which the Palmer worms are constrained to creep up to the tops of the
trees, and there staid, so that, (as it were by snares and engines laid) these
in the end are driven away, or thus in their way begun, are speedily or soon
after procured to turn back again. As unto the remedies of the Snailes
particularly belongs. These may the Gardener likewise chase from the kitchen
herbs, if he either sprinckle the new mother of the oil olive, or soot of the
chimney on the herbs, as if he bestowed the bitter sitch in beds among them,
which also avails against other noisome worms, and creeping things, as I before
uttered, that if the Gardener would possess a green and delectable garden,
let him then sprinkle diligently all the quarters, beds, and borders of the
Garden, with the mixture of water and powder of Fenny-greeke tempered together,
or set upright in the middle of the garden, the whole bare head without the
flesh of the unchaste Ass, as I before wrote.

Excellent inventions and helps against the garden Moles.
THe skillful Paxanus has left in writing, that if the Gardener shall make
hollow a big nut, or bore a hollow hole into some sound piece of wood being
narrow, in filling the one or the other with Rosin, Pitch, Chafe and
Brimstone, of each so much as shall suffice to the filling of the Nut, or
hollow hole in the wood, which thus prepared in a readiness, stop every where
with diligence, all the goings forth, and breathing holes of the mole, that by
those the fuming smoke in no manner may issue out, yet so handle the matter,
that one mouth and hole be only left open, and the same so large, that well
the nut or vessel kindled within, may be laid within the mouth of it, whereby it
may take the wind of the one side, which may so send in the savor both of the
rosin and brimstone into the hollow tomb, or resting place of the Mole: by the
same practice so workemanly handled, by filling the holes with the smoke, shall
the owner or Gardener either drive quite away all the Moles in the ground, or
find them in short time dead.

There be some that take the white Neesewort, or the rind of Cynocrambes
beaten and farced, and with Barley meal and eggs finely tempered together,
they make both Cakes and Pasties wrought with wine and milk, and those they
lay within the Moles de^ne or hole.

Albertus of worthy memory reports, that if the owner or Gardener closes or
diligently stops the mouths of the Moleholes, with the garlic, onion, or
leeke, it shall either drive the Moles away, or kill them, through the strong
savor stinking or breathing into them.

Many there be, that to drive away these harmefull Moles, do bring up young Cats
in their Garden ground, and make tame Weasels, to the end, that either of these
through the hunting of them, may so drive away this pestiferous annoyance,
being taught to watch at their streit passages, and mouths of the holes
coming forth.

Others there be also which diligently fill and stop up their holes with the
red Okare or Ruddell, and juice of the wild Cucumber, or sow the seeds of Palma
Christi, being a kind of Satyrion, in beds, through which they will not after
cast up, nor tarry thereabout.

But some exercise this easy practice, in taking a live Mole, and burning the
powder of brimstone about him, being in a deep earthen pot, through which he is
procured to cry, all others in the mean time as they report, are moved to
resort thither.

There are some besides, which lay silk snares at the mouth of their holes.

To the simple husbandmen may this easy practice of no cost suffice, in
setting down into the earth a stiff rod or green branch of the Elder tree.

FINIS.
a man grafts a tree decorative motif of an orchard trees

garden tools

A Direction to set or lay your lines or thread to make or draw a simple Knot,
without a border.
You must leave your Lines as they be first set, until your Knot be altogethet
finished or done.

diagram of rope-fastening to aid in planning a garden

The Manner or Ordering to set the thread or line upon another manner of Knot.
diagram of a knot garden laid out with beds and paths

A Direction to fasten your Lines to make another manner of Knot.
diagram of a knot garden laid out with beds and paths

A plain Knot without Lines.
diagram of a knot garden laid out with beds and paths

A plain Knot without Lines.
diagram of a knot garden laid out with beds and paths

Another plain Knot without Lines.
diagram of a knot garden laid out with beds and paths

Another.
diagram of a knot garden laid out with beds and paths

Another.
diagram of a knot garden laid out with beds and paths

Another.
diagram of a knot garden laid out with beds and paths

Another.
diagram of a garden laid out with beds and paths

Another.
diagram of a garden laid out with beds and paths

Another.
diagram of a garden laid out with beds and paths

A Direction to fasten Cords or Lines to draw a Knot with a Border; as also to
make a Border of Beds parted in the midst.
diagram of rope-fastening to aid in planning a garden

A Direction of the Cords fastened upon the Border, with a Knot in the midst
diagram of a knot garden laid out with beds and paths

A Border with a Knot in the midst thereof.
diagram of a knot garden laid out with beds and paths

A Border or Knot divided or parted, containing five small Knots.
diagram of a knot garden laid out with beds and paths

The form of the Lines set upon the Knot, whose squares or beds are parted.
diagram of a knot garden laid out with beds and paths

A Border of Beds or Squares parted; and the midst thereof
diagram of a knot garden laid out with paths and beds

A Maze.
diagram of a maze

fish and eels swim in a pond surrounded by plants


