FATHER COTTON A IESVITE, THE KINGS CONFESSOVR, His two and thirty Demands, to
the MINISTERS of France, with the Answers added at the end of every DEMAND.
Also threescore and four Demands proposed to Father COTTON, by way of
Counter-change. By PETER MOVLIN, Minister of the word of God in the Church of
Paris.

Printed according to the French Copy, printed in PARIS.

Also a new late Challenge, by a learned Divine, to all Papists, in 24. other
Popish ARTICLES.

MATTHEW. 22. VERSE. 23. and 29. The Saduces came to Jesus, and asked him, etc.
But Jesus answered and said unto them; ye err, not knowing the Scriptures.

LONDON: Printed for John Barnes, and are to be sold at his shop, over against
S. Sepulchers Church, without Newgate. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY VERY GOOD LORD, SIR THOMAS EDMVNDS, Knight,
Ambassador for his Majesty, Resident with the French KING.
IT was the saying of wise Solomon, long since: that there is no end of making
Books, and much reading is a weariness of the flesh, Eccles. 12.12. which was
never more verified, then in these days of vanity, when unlearned as well as
learned, will be writing, whereby the Press is even oppressed with
multiplicitie of such Treatises, (as being balanced by the weights of Gods
Sanctuary) will be found more light then vanity it self. but for such
Treatises as this, which afford direction to the Church and Spouse of God,
travailing to heavenly Jerusalem, through the Wilderness of this world,
nothing more necessary; being fit to resolve her of doubts in matters of
Controversy, when she stands in biuio, doubtful which way to take this her
journey, and therefore meeting with this skillful Guide, in that Nation where
your Honor has long had very Honorable employment from the State of this
Land, where this Stranger is now arrived: I have attired him in our English
habit, and do present him unto your Honor, whose favorable protection he
seems silently to crave, and solemnly promises his best directions to Gods
Church, by this and such like Treatises, which he has in his Native Country
divulged, so deuoting my best endeavors in this kind, to my Country, and
humbly desiring to shelter my self under your Honorable favor: I humbly rest
at your Honors command.

I. B.

PETER MOVLIN his Advertisement to the READER.
OUR Lord Jesus being tempted by the Scribes and Pharisees with captious
questions, satisfied them by the holy Scriptures. We in the like cause and
kind, are questioned, and incombred. But we easily come out, and free our
selves by the same means. For, we cut off with the sword of the Word these
knots of intricate Questions, wreathed of purpose to entangle men's minds. A
far off, they seem Guardian knots, but at hand no better then Spiders webs,
not able to endure the least wind or breath of Truth. They catch nothing but
Flies, but light and giddy spirits, carried away with every first blast of
wordly hopes. Master Cotton, a man full of questions, has proposed them in
diverse fashions to sundry sorts of spirits. We have had our part: For he
having oftentimes showed his dexterity in his subtilly-conceiued, and
finely-filed questions, they to whom he has proposed them, have brought them
unto me, and desired my answer unto them. I have always satisfied them: but
he suppressing my Answers, has still gone on to make new Questions, pleasing
himself only in the Office of an Inquisitor.

There is good sufficiency required in making good and fit Demands, but more
in giving them apt Answers. To move difficulties, without adding any Answers
or Solutions, is like the Sun in March, which draws humors, but dissolues
them not. It may be because he is pearched in so high a place (as to be the
Kings Confessor) he thinks he may securely spit on every Passenger without any
return of such a wrong. Or happily he takes delight to cut out work for idle
joke. But it is easier to tie then untie a knot. Or it may be that the stream
and torrent of his worldly or civil affairs do draw his mind some other
ways, and that the interposition of the earth does eclipse the clearenesse
and brightness of his spirit. These are the causes of his silence as far as
I am able to divine: He then following his questioning course to put impediment
to Ministers in their better employments has lately put into the hands of some
Honorable Personages, Mounsieur de la Forse.
32. Questions, unanswerable as he accounts them. I have readily and speedily
answered them; and to return him double pay, I have sent him 64. other
Demands, to see whether he has as good dexterity and facility in answering
as he has edge and itch in asking and questioning. He shall much deceive me,
if he make any answer. He should also be the first, that has undertaken to
do it. At the least, this profit I shall receive by it, that if he answer not
my Demands, I shall be for ever hereafter freed from answering his: and he
shall no longer vaunt (as he has often done) that we have nothing to answer
him.

The Answers to the 22. and 29. Demands are corrected, and much enlarged.

Farewell.

TWO AND THIRTY DEMANDS, PROPOVNDED BY Father COTTON.
1 FIRST, let those of the pretended Religion show us where it is written that
there are but two Sacraments, to wit, Baptism and the Supper, and in what
place in the Scripture they be called Sacraments.

2 That Children may be saved by the sole faith of their Parents, without being
baptized: and that therefore Baptism is not of absolute necessity.

3 That Baptism must not be administered without a Sermon.

4 That it is not lawful to make the sign of the Cross.

5 That we may not hallow water, and being hallowed, that we ought not to use
it.

6 That the Bread of the Supper is only the figure of the body of Jesus Christ.

7 That the Church may err.

8 That we must not receive Traditions.

9 That the Saints in glory cannot hear our prayers.

10 That Priests and religious persons may break their vow of Obedience,
Chastity, and Poverty, which they have made unto God.

11 That the estate of Marriage is more acceptable to God, then single life.

12 That the Books of the Machabees, of Wisdom, of Ecclesiasticus, of Tobias,
of Baruch, are Apocriphall.

13 That Jesus Christ descended not into hell for the souls of the Fathers
that attended his coming, or rather that before the Ascension of Jesus Christ,
the souls of the Saints were received into heaven, not into Limbus, or into
any other third place.

14 That we ought not to confess our sins but to God only.

15 That Faith only does Justify.

16 That the punishment of sin is taken away, together with the fault.

17 That God created not all men of like condition; but that he created some
to salvation, and others to eternal damnation.

18 That every man in particular has not his particular Angel to his guardian.

19 That it is not lawful to salute this Angel, or others, either in general
or in particular.

20 That God permits not sin, but wills it, as Calvin writes in his
Institutions, Lib. 1 cap. 17.. 8. and cap. 18.. 1. and 2.

21 That in the Church we ought not to use lights, or Ecclesiastical Ornaments
distinguished from secular.

22 That the Bishop is inferior to the Priest, and the Deacon superior to the
Priest; that is to say, that the Watchman or Superintendent over the Church, is
no more then an Elder in the Church, and that the Minister is more then the
Elder.

23 That the Scripture is easy to be understood, and that the intelligence
thereof is granted unto all: these be Caluins words in his Institut. lib. 3.
cap. 21.. 5.

24 That all sins are mortal.

25 That a man with the grace of God cannot merit any thing.

26 That it is not possible to keep all Gods commandments, no not with his
grace.

27 That God will not recompense good works, which is as much as to say there
be no merits.

28 That there is no distinction of beatitude among the blessed, and that they
are all equal in glory.

29 That we ought not to use that imposition of hands which the Apostles used
upon the Samaritanes and, Ephesians, Act. 8. v. 14. and cap. 19. v. 5. and that
the said confirmation was not one of the Articles of the Apostles Catechism
mentioned in the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 6. verse. 2.

30 That the precept of the annoynting of the sick with oil, contained in S.
James, cap. 5. v. 14. is not to be put in practice in the Church, although the
Apostles used it, Mar. 6. v. 12.

31 That Prayer for the dead was not in use, no not in the time of the
Machabees.

32 That S. Peter was not chief of the Apostles, notwithstanding S. Matthew
cap. 10. v. 2. does say; The names of the twelve Apostles are these: The first,
Simon, surnamed Peter.

THE ANSWER.
Whosoever requires of any man an account of his faith, must first demand an
account of that he does believe, and not of that which he does not believe. If
a man should require a Jesuit to prove unto him, that there be many Gods,
either that Jesus Christ never suffered death, he would say that such demands
were injurious and that they did wrongfully go about to make him a defender of
impieties and absurdities: and yet such is their demeanor toward us; for of
these 32. demands only one quarter does in truth represent our Belief, the
other 24. are slanderous: how then shall they make true report to their people
of that which we believe, since even unto our selves they would add to our
belief? and have undertaken to make us to believe that which we believe not.
These Questions therefore we might reject, desiring them first to prove unto us
that we do believe these points, before they bind us to defend them. But that
we make not two labors of it, let us hear what they demand.

I. DEMAND. LEt those of the pretended Religion show us where it is written
that there are but two Sacraments, that is, Baptism and the Lords Supper, and
in what place of the Scripture they be called Sacraments.
THE ANSWER.
IN the Gospel we find the institution of Baptism, and of the holy Supper.
And reading over the whole Testament, we do not find that Jesus Christ
instituted any other Sacrament. If there be any other, it belongs to our
Adversaries to show it unto us, for we are not to prove that there is no
mention of any other; for to prove this unto them, we must read unto them all
the new Testament. As for the word Sacrament, we are not tied unto it, neither
do we by that word understand any other thing then the same is which by Jesus
Christ called a Commemoration or Remembrance. Luke 22.19 and by S. Paul, a
Seal or Sign, Romans 4.11. We say not that all the words that may be used, but
all that the doctine necessary to salvation is contained in the holy Scripture.
And we do willingly apply and frame our selves to the usual words, always
provided that the doctrine do still remain pure and undefiled.

II. DEMAND. That Children may be saved by the faith of the Parents only,
without Baptism, and therefore that Baptism is not of absolute necessity.
ANSWER.
Here begin the slanders, The Author of these questions has not fully
conceived what we hold in the points. God says to Abraham that he will be his
God and the God of his seed, Genesis 17. And S. Paul. 1 Cor. 7. speaking of
Children borne of faithful Fathers and Mothers, says, that they be holy. By
the strength of this Covenant it comes to pass that the Children of the
faithful so soon as they be borne do belong to God. As for this absolute
necessity of Baptism, we acknowledge that it is absolutely necessary to
celebrate Baptism in the Church, since God that so commanded: as also according
to the saying of Jesus Christ, John 3. That, whosoever is not borne of water
and the spirit cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: we believe that whosoever
voluntarily does deprive himself of Baptism and contemns it, cannot be
saved. For it is the contempt, not the want or deprivation of Baptism that
brings condemnation. But to say that God cannot, or will not save a child
without Baptism, or to believe that a child being carried toward Baptism
and dying by the way, is excluded from eternal salvation. 1. It is a cruel
and rash sentence. 2. It is a tying of the grace of God to the water. 3. It is
the committing of the salvation of a child into the power of a man, or of a
Midwife: for if they list to baptize the dying child it shall pass into
Paradise; if not, it shall not come there. 4. It is an accusing of God, that he
did provide but badly for the salvation of Children borne under the old
Testament, in that they might not be circumcised before the eight day. 4. Even
our adversaries themselves do hold that many are saved without Baptism of
water, as sundry Martyrs that were never baptized. They are much to blame
therefore so to urge this passage or Text of the third of John, wherein
themselves do say there is no speech but of the Baptism of water. Council.
Trid. Sess. 7. c. 11.
6. This Baptism likewise of blood is contrary to their Canons, which hold
that the Sacrament is none, if he that baptiseth has not an intent to baptize:
for dare they auow that the executioners conferred Baptism, or that ever they
had any intent to baptize? 7. How many people also died there by Martyrdom
without effusion of blood? 8. Also since Baptism is irreiterable (that is, not
to be twice administered to one and the same person) what reason have they, that
Martyrdom of a person baptized should not be a Sacrament, but the Martyrdom
of a person not baptized should be a Sacrament? 9. Do not our adversaries make
themselves, mention of a Baptism of the Spirit, which they call Baptismum
flaminis, which supplieth the default of the Baptism of water? and what else
do we say? 10. But if we crave formal examples out of the holy Scriptures,
every man knows that to the Israelites Circumcision was the same which at
this day Baptism is to us, and that the necessity was alike: and yet infinite
people were saved under the old Testament without Circumcision, as all the
faithful women, and such as truly repented among the Ninevites. 11. But what a
presumption was it in them to build for children dying without Baptism, a
several Chamber under the earth, which they term the Childrens Limb;
whereof we find not any mention either throughout the Scriptures, or in all
the antiquity of the Church? 12. This do they place under the earth, yet tell
they us not where it shall be when the earth shall not be: nor whether these
infants shall undergo the judgment in the latter day, and what sentence the
Judge shall give: neither do they show us the reason wherefore the bodies of
these children are thrown headlong into a bottomless pit, which is in the
Hospital called Hostel Dieu, at Paris, as unworthy of Burial.

III. DEMAND. That we ought not to baptize but when there is a Sermon.
ANSWER.
THis do not we believe. A Sermon is seemly, but not of absolute necessity.
None of us does believe that Baptism administered without a Sermon is no
Baptism; or that it ought to be reiterated. True it is that we say, that the
Scales without writings are unprofitable, so the Sacraments without the Word
are unfruitful. But, by the Word, we understand the promises of the Gospel,
and the form of Baptism, instituted by Jesus Christ, and not a Sermon, as
this Inquisitor weeneth.

IIII. DEMAND. That it is not lawful to make the sign of the cross.
ANSWER.
SO do not we say: yea, we could willingly be content to be enjoined to make a
million of signs of the Cross, so it might tend no further then to reduce our
Adversaries into the right way. Indeed we do say, that the making of the sign
of the Cross upon the Host, Innocent. 3. lib. 2. de Mist. Missae cap. 58.
Efficit super ea Crueis signaculum vt per crucis virtutem omnes conatus
Diabolica malignitatis effugiat, ne contra Sacerdotem vel Sacrificium aliquo
modo praeualeat.
to expel the force of the wicked Spirits [as Pope Innocent saith] is as much
as to seek to succor Jesus Christ without necessity. Also that the making of
the sign of the Cross upon a man's mouth when he yawneth, is not the way to
stop the Devils passage, who enters into man's heart, not by the mouth, but by
the eyes and ears, that is to say, by the objects and speeches whereby God is
offended. It were therefore more requisite at the hearing of a filthy word, or
of a Jesuits Sermon, to make the sign of the Cross upon the ear. We also
say, that when that thing which in the Primitive Church was a mark of
Christian profession, grew to be an action of Superstition, it was expedient to
take it away for the abuse sake: the same not being in its own nature
necessary, neither practiced by Jesus Christ, neither by his Apostles or
Disciples. Especially, the making of the sign of the Cross upon the Singing
bread, as they call it, or upon the consecrated Host is in all antiquity
without example: for the Liturgies of S. James, and of Chrysostom are
manifestly false, and forged of late, as making mention of persons that lived
not of a long time after, and to all antiquity were utterly unknown.

V. DEMAND. That we may not hallow or consecrate water, and being hallowed,
that we ought not to use it.
ANSWER.
WE say not so: only we say that we do indeed find that the Heathen did
use holy or lustrall water; but that we find not that ever the Apostles used
any. And because we are not so light of belief, we demand of our adversaries
whether the word of God does teach them that water consecrated by either words
or signs, be of any force against the Devils: for the Gospel shows us the
means whereby the Apostles cast them out; namely, by Faith, by Prayer, and by
Fasting, Mat. 17.21. but never by holy water.

VI. DEMAND. That the bread of the Supper is only the figure of the body of
Jesus Christ.
ANSWER.
THis is likewise a slander. We do indeed believe that the bread of the
Supper is the figure of the body of Christ: by this figure meaning no other
then the same which Jesus Christ called Commemoration. But that it is only a
figure we say not, Romans 4.
considering that Saint Paul calls the Sacrament of Circumcision, not only a
sign, but also a seal: thereby teaching us that the Sacraments do not only
signify, but also do seal Gods promises. We do also believe the saying of
Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 10. Romans 4.
That the bread which we break is the Communion of the body of Christ: For
the Sacraments are not only significatiue of the grace of God, but also
exhibitiue, and do not only represent them, but also do present them unto us.

VII. DEMAND. That the Church may err.
ANSWER.
THis is likewise slanderous: for, I believe, that by Church he means the
same that is spoken of in the Creed: also, that he means that we should
say that she may err in the decision of doubts, or matters of Religion,
wherein he would make us believe that we do not. For we hold that the Church
cannot err in the decision of doubts, because it was never assembled to decide
them, neither did ever make any decision at all. For, this Church, being the
Communion of Saints, and the assembly of all the elect that are, were, or shall
be upon the earth, as the Apostle to the Hebrews, cap. 12. verse. 23. does
define it, that it is the assembly and Church of the first borne that are
written in heaven, it appears that this body of the Elect was never assembled
for the deciding of any matter. It therefore never erred in such decisions.

VIII. DEMAND. That we are not to receive Traditions.
ANSWER.
THis is even such another, and disguiseth our belief. We do not reject all
manner of Traditions, but only such as are repugnant to the holy Scriptures,
or that men do forgo at their pleasures without necessity, by them to impose
such a yoke upon consciences, as God never imposed.

IX. DEMAND. That the Saints in glory cannot hear our Prayers.
ASVVERRE.
BY Prayers we mean not the sound of words, but the conception of his heart
that prays. 1 This the Saints do not know: for the holy Scripture says,
that God only knows the hearts of men, 1 Reg. 8. v. 99 and 2. Chron. 6. v.
30. And this is one property of God, whereby the holy Scripture honors God,
viz. by knowing the hearts, Acts. 1. v. 24.2. Moreover there needs a divine
power to know the thoughts of an hundred thousand persons different in places,
that pour out their prayers at one time. 3. That if in seeing God, they did
see all things, (as they would persuade us) they should also see things to
come, and consequently should know the day of judgment, which nevertheless
Jesus Christ says, the very Angels are ignorant it of, and that none knows
it, Mar. 13. v. 32.4. If any man tell us that God can give them this virtue or
power, we answer that here the question is not what God can do, but what God
will do. And require our Adversaries to make proof of his will herein. 5. We
also know that God will not have the Saints to be Gods, or equal with God, as
they should be if they had an infinite knowledge: and if in seeing God they
should know all that God knows. 6. Furthermore the thing which does most
especially distinguish the Creator from the most excellent Creatures, is this,
that God both knows and works infinite things in one and the same moment,
but the continuance and actions of Creatures are successiue, and the one is
done after the other. Therefore the Saints neither know, nor can conceive
infinite things in one instant. 7. This demand does also make a false report of
our Belief. For, we do not say that the Saints either can or cannot hear our
prayers, but only that they do not hear them.

X. DEMAND. That Priests and Monks may break the vows of Obedience, Poverty
and Chastity that they have made to God.
ANSWER.
THE Inquisitor would persuade us that we believe this, albeit we believe the
contrary: for we do hold that Priests ought to observe the vow that they
have made to obey God; and we complain, that they having vowed obedience to
God, do obey the Pope more then God. We also hold that Priests ought to keep
Chastity: but if a Priest, burning with incontinencie, have made a vow that
he will never marry, such a vow as being repugnant to the vow of Chastity,
and to the vow of obeying God, ought not to be kept. The commandment of God is
laid down in 1 Cor. 7. verse. 9. If they cannot contain, let them marry, for
it is better to marry, then to burn. Whosoever makes a vow to obey God, he
makes a vow to keep this commandment, yea, had he made no vow, yet is he
bound to keep it. As for the vow of poverty, we understand not how this word
is meant: for the words have at this day altered their signification:
considering that we find none so well fed, or living so much at ease, or
gathering more pence under the pretense of Pardons, then those that make
profession of poverty. The poverty of the Jesuits is more abundant then the
riches of others: Poverty, which in time passed was an affliction, is now a
profession. In like manner Ignorance, which in others was a Vice, is in the
ignorant Friars a virtue: wherefore these our Masters must have a new Calepine.

XI. DEMAND. That the state of Marriage is more pleasing to God, then single
life.
ANSWER.
THis is one of the greatest slanders: For contrariwise, we do acknowledge,
that a chaste and continent single life has advantages above marriage. Only
we say, that the chaste marriage is more acceptable to God, then incontinent
and whorish single life: we refer men to Rome, and to the Cloisters both of
men and women, Romans 3. Bellarmin, lib 2 De Amiss. Gratia, cap. 18.. dicet. Non
peccat Magistratus si meretricibus certam locum vrbis incolendum attribuat,
quamnis certo sciat eo loco ipsas non been vsuras. Potest enim permittere minus
malum vt maiora impediantur.
there to behold the fruits of Romish single life: for we, who observe the rule
of Gods word; namely, That we must not do evil, that good may come of it.
cannot in any wise approve the cause of Cardinal Bellarmine, who being not
able to deny, that at Rome the most holy Father suffers public Stews, for
excuse, says, That it is lawful for the Magistrate to permit a less evil,
to hinder a greater: and does show, that God may justly suffer sin in the
world by the example of the Magistrates, who do grant harlots a certain part
or quarter of the City to dwell in. Was it possible to find a more honest
comparison, for to represent unto us the Justice of God, then the example of
Magistrates, establishing the Stews?

XII. DEMAND. That the Books of the Macchabees, of Ecclesiasticus, of
Wisdom, of Toby, and of Baruch are Apocriphall.
ANSWER.
AFter ten slanderous demands, he has bethought himself to propound one
that is not so: For indeed such is our belief, grounded first upon this
principle of S. Paul, Romans 3. That God is true: whereof it does follow, that
the Scripture divinely inspired ought to be free from untruth: but in these
Books we find many untruths, which our Adversaries could never yet excuse,
and whereof there be sundry Books written expressly: 2. Again, these Books
are not contained in the original of the old Testament, which is the Hebrew
Bible. 3. Also, Jesus Christ and the Apostles, who upon all occasions do
allege the passages of the old Testament, did never name any of these
Books, or out of them cite any one passage. 4. Particularly the Author of the
Macchabees in his second Chapter, verse. 19. does tell us, that his intent was
to abridge into one volume the five Books of Jason: how then can the
abridgement of a profane Book be a Canonical Book? 5. And this, that
himself toward the end does doubt whether he has spoken well, and as it
appertains to the History: also soon after he excuses the baseness of
his style: all which, is far from the dignity of the spirit of God, who
gives eloquence enough to those whom he inspireth, and reaping no profit by
being believed of men, never excuses himself unto men.

XIII. DEMAND. That Jesus Christ descended not into hell, to deliver the souls
of the Fathers that attended his coming: or at the least, that before the
ascension of Jesus Christ, the souls of the Saints were received into heaven,
not into any Limbus, or any other third place.
ANSWER.
WE find this evidently in the Scriptures: for we find that the Thief dyed
forty three days before the ascension of Jesus Christ; also, that upon the
day of his death, Jesus Christ said unto him, This day thou shall be with me
in Paradise: Bellarmine in his fourth Book of Christ, Cap. 11. Also the
Catechism of the last Council of Trent, in the Article of the descention into
Hell. Page 63.
For we are not so subtle, as by this word Paradise to understand hell, or
Limbus, as our adversaries do: principally considering, that S. Paul, 2 Cor.
12. having said in the second verse, that he was ravished into the third
Heaven, does soon after call this third heaven Paradise. 2. Hereunto how
Moses and Elias talked with Jesus Christ upon the Mountain, Mat. 17.3. They
were not therefore in some den under the ground. 3. Also, if the death of Jesus
Christ were of power sufficient to deliver the Fathers of the old Testament out
of hell, why not out of Limbus, which is said to be a more easy prison? 4. If
Jesus Christ his rising, drew these souls out of Limbus, yet brought them not
into heaven before his ascension, what became of them all the forty days
between? 5. Finally, this so bold a fiction and hidden den of souls, which
is now said to be unprofitable, cannot we admit, because we find no proof
thereof in the word of God.

XIIII. DEMAND. That we must not confess our sins to any other, but to God
only,
ANSWER.
HEre begin the slanders again. We say not so. But that we must confess our
faults one to another, that is, reciprocally, as says S. James. James 5.16.
Whereof it follows, (forsooth) that if a woman prostituting her self to her
Curate, confesses her sin unto him, her Curate ought reciprocally to
confess his sin to her, and so to obey the commandment of S. James; who in
this place speaks not of the peoples confessing in the ear of the Priest,
but of that confession that every man ought to make to his neighbor, after he
has offended him. And this is evident by that which he has added. Confess
(says he) your offenses one to another, and pray ye one for another. For as we
are not to pray for the Priests only, but for every one that stands in
need, so must we not confess our selves to the Priests only: but to every
one of the people whom we have offended. Thus is the commandment of S. James
equal as well for Prayer as for Confession.

XV. DEMAND. That faith only justifies.
ANSWER.
THis demand is fraudulent and doubtful, or ambiguous. First, he ought to have
expounded, whether he means of justification before God, or before men: for
we do not deny, but that in the sight of men we are justified by works: but
before God, having but two means to be justified, either by our own
righteousness [which is Justification by the works of the Law] or by the
righteousness of another (namely by the righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is
by faith) we find in the Apostle S. Paul. Ephesians. 2. verse. 8. and 9. That we
are saved by grace, through faith, not by works: And Galat. 2. verse. 9. That
we are justified by faith in Jesus Christ, and not by the works of the Law.
Now that by the works of the 1 Law, he also understands the works of the
morrall Law, the whole course of the Epistle does show? for in the next Chapter
he says, Cursed is he that continues not in the words of this Law: which is a
passage alleged out of the end of the 27. Chapter of Deuteromie, wherein we
have no mention but of the transgressions against the Morrall Law. And in the
fifth Chapter he says, that the whole Law is fulfilled in this only word. Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Some Jesuits do say, that faith
justifies, because it is the beginning of our regeneration: as if I should
say, that a man's knowledge consists in knowing an A. and a B. because he
begins by them. But S. Paul. Phil. 3.9. and in many other places, opposing
the righteousness by the Law to the righteousness by faith, cutteth off this
shift: for as the righteousness by the Law is the same which consists wholly
in the obedience to the Law, even so the righteousness by faith is the same
which consists wholly in faith: otherwise there were no opposition. And in
the fourth to the Romans, he maintains, that Abraham and David were not
justified by works: yet he speaks of them, not as when they began, or before
they began to be regenerate: but when they were well forward in godliness:
namely, when Abraham offered his Son: and when David writ the 32. Psalm: In
which Psalm David (says S. Paul) declares, that man's beatitude consists in
this, that God imputes unto him righteousness without works. Faith therefore
cannot be without works, yet does it justify alone, and without works: as
our eyes are not without our ears, yet do they only see, and that without
any help of the ears.

XVI. DEMAND. That when the fault of sin is taken away, the punishment also
is taken away.
ANSWER.
THis is likewise slanderous: for we do not say, that when God has pardoned
the fault, all punishment is necessarily taken away, but only that punishment
which is satisfactorie to Gods justice. For there be punishments which serve to
amend man, yet not to pay God: to correct our injustice, yet not to satisfy
Gods justice: and these are Exercises and Trials, not Payments, which cannot be
made after the fault is forgiven: and this do we prove: 1. Because God is no
mocker, neither does he contradict himself. But it is a mockery to forgive a
man his sin, and not the punishment of his sin: to tell him, I forgive thee
thy debt, not the payment of thy debt: our sins are debts, as it is said in the
Lords Prayer, the payment whereof is punishment. 2. Again, because Jesus
Christ paid not otherwise for our fault, but by bearing the pain, he therefore
paid for the pain, and there was but one payment for both: It is therefore
the forging of a new Gospel, to imagine that he paid more for the one then for
the other: for if he has fully paid for the fault, then also for the pain.
And if he has fully paid for our pain, the same was for our acquittall, and
to discharge us. 3. Likewise because God is just, it were injustice to punish a
man with satisfactory pain, that has no fault, and so consequently is not
faulty. The fault therefore being taken away, the pain is also taken away.

XVII. DEMAND. That God created not all men to a like estate, but that he
created some to be saved, and some to be perpetually damned.
ANSWER.
THese words thus rawly propounded, may be mistaken, and otherwise understood
then we do believe. In this sense they be true, That God has predestinate some
to salvation in his son: and others he has preordained to damnation for
their sins, which he foresaw: for God damneth none but for their sins,
neither does he delight in the destruction of his creature: as also he has not
chosen some rather then other some in regard they are better; but to the end to
make them better: neither does he foresee any other goodness in that
creature, then the same which he will infuse into him. For he is the spring of
all the goodness that is in the creature. The Apostle S. Paul. is expressly of
our minds in the ninth of his Epistle to the Romans, and in the first to the
Ephesians, verse, 4. as also the Jesuits do confess the same having of late
herein ranked themselves with us, Non elegit Deus homines quia vidit se
eligendum ab eis, ipsoque boni operis fructum allaturos, and in bono
perseueraturos, sed elegit vt faciat been operantes and in bono perseuerantes.
as being forced by the truth. For whereas the common opinion of others is,
That God elected to salvation these whom he foresaw should be good men, and
that should do good works, so to merit salvation, Bellarmine on the other
side disputes tooth and nail against it in the tenth Chapter of the second
Book of Grace and Free Will, saying, God chose not men because they should
bring forth the fruits of good works, and persevere in good works: but he
chose them to make them doers of good works, and perseuerers in goodness: and
toward the end of the 12. Chap. he says thus. If God predestined men,
because he foresaw that they should make good use of free will, why did he not
predestinate the Tyrians and Sidonians, of whom Jesus Christ spoke, Matthew. 11.
and of whom the truth does testify, that they could well have used their
free will, and yet says he, Out of all question they were never predestinate,
but with the other vessels of dishonor, left in the corrupted lump. Wherein
he follows Thomas and S. Augustine, who were so instructed by the word of God.

XVIII. DEMAND. That every one in his own particular has not his
Angell-Guardian.
ANSWER.
YEt one slander more. For we affirm not any thing herein. True it is, that
as concerning the faithful, we say with David, Psalm. 34. The Angel of the
Lord taryeth round about them that fear him: And with the Apostle, Heb. 1. The
Angels are ministering Spirits, sent for their sakes that shall be heirs of
salvation. And Jesus Christ, Matthew. 18. says, that the Angels of little
children do behold the face of the heavenly Father. But that every one (that
is to say, both the good and the bad) as the Questionarie says, has an
Angell-Guardian, we find not in the Scripture. Considering withal, that we
see some Jesuits ask counsel of the Devils concerning things to come, and
concerning Questions of Divinity, which surely they would never do, if they
had any one good Angel Guardian, for they would rather ask counsel of him.

XIX. DEMAND. That it is not lawful to salute or to invoke or crave aid of
this Angel, or any other either in general or in particular.
ANSWER.
TO salute an Angel or a Saint is a mocking of them: to invoke a Saint or an
Angel is an offense to God. The reasons are evident. To salute one, is to say,
God keep you, or Good Morrow: also, to salute, is to desire ones health, which
is a kind of prayer that we make for him. But our Adversaries do acknowledge
it to be a wrong to a Saint to pray for him. And it is a gross abuse, even at
this day, to say to the Virgin Mary, Aue Maria, that is to say, God keep thee
Mary: this is no inuocating or calling upon, but a praying for her. As for
inuocating an Angel or Saint, it is repugnant to the rules and examples of
Gods word. 1. Saint Paul says, that we cannot invoke any, but him in whom
we believe: How shall they (says he) invoke him on whom they have not
believed? Romans 10. But we are taught both by the Scripture, and by our Belief,
to say, I believe in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ, and in the holy
Ghost: but in no wise, I believe in any Creature. 2. It is also requisite, that
he, whom a man does invoke, should know his heart that does invoke him,
and be assured whether he be an Hypocrite. 2 Chronicles. 6.30.
But Gods word does testify, that God only knows the hearts of men. 3.
Neither can we have any better Advocate then Jesus Christ, who (says Saint
Paul, 1 Timothy 2.) is our only Mediator. 4. Since also it is God himself that
inspireth our hearts to pray, and stirs up in us those groaning sighs that
S. Paul, Romans 8.25. speaks of, what need we any intercessors to commend unto
God that prayer which God himself has inspired into us? or to cause the voice
of the Spirit of God to be acceptable unto God? 5. Neither do we find any
example or commandment to invoke Creatures, throughout all the holy
Scripture: but one express example we have of an Angel rejecting the
adoration of S. John, who did not adore this Angel, as thinking him to be God:
for in the Reuelat. cap. 21. v. 9. he says directly, that it was one of the
seven Angels that had the seven Vials, who soon after forbad S. John, when
he would have worshipped him, cap. 21. v. 9. 6. To be brief, our Adversaries
are in this cause so perplexed that they begin openly to teach that invocation
of Saints is not necessary, and that we may be saved without it,
notwithstanding, Pope Innocent the third affirms the contrary in his third
Book of the Mysteries of the Mass, cap. 9. Quorum meritis precibusque rogamus.
Necessarium nobis est in via Sanctorum suffragium, etc. And that the Mass is
not content with their intercessions only, but also craves of God salvation
through their merits, even so far forth that Bellarmine says, Lib. 1.
Indulgen. cap. 4. in the end of the Chapter.
that they be in some sort our Redeemers. And indeed it is holden, that they
pay for us, since the Pope does convert their supererogatory satisfactions into
payments for other men. All this is taken out of the unwritten word.

XX. DEMAND. That God permits not sin, but wills it, as Calvin says in
his Institutions, lib. 1. cap. 17.. 8. and cap. 18.. 1. and. 2.
ANSWER.
WE hear that our Adversaries have printed Caluins Institutions, wherein
they have altered whatsoever they list: if it be so, it must needs be that the
author of these questions has thereout taken all that he imputes unto Calvin.
For so far is Calvin in the eight Section of the seventeenth Chapter of his
first Book, from saying that God wills sin, that even throughout all that
Section there is not one word of sin; neither does he there speak of the
evil of the fault, but of the evil of the punishment, and afflictions. As
concerning the first and second Sect. of the 18. Chapter, the Author takes
this word ( to will) in a contrary sense. For it does not import that God is
the author of sin, but it only excludes the naked and idle permission:
Because the wicked, doing evil, (as Judas and the Jews, when they betrayed
and crucified Jesus Christ) do it voluntarily and of their own motion: and
yet nevertheless for all this do no more but what the counsel of God had
before determined should be done, as says S. Peter, Acts 4.8. Thus you see in
one Demand two slanders, here follows the third: that is, that this Demand
presupposes that we are grounded upon Calvin, or bound to defend him, whom
nevertheless we knew to be a man and subject to error, who also does still
refer us to the Scriptures, to the end we should not build upon him. The
slanders of our Adversaries do more bind us to read him then his own
authority. But our Adversaries do not rank the Popes in this degree: for,
they hold that the Popes cannot err in Faith, and therefore they are bound to
defend all their sayings: as the saying of Pope Clement, 1. who in Causa 12.
Can. Dilectissimis, approves the opinion of Plato, who says that Goods and
Wives ought to be common: and calls him the wisest of all the Greeks. Also,
the opinion of John the 24. who taught, that the souls of men do dye with the
souls of beasts: and for the same was condemned in the Council of Constance,
Sess. 11. Also the Canon Christiano, in the 34. Distinction, which says, that
A Christian ought to have but one Wife, and for want of a Wife a Concubine.
Also the Canon Hac ratione, etc. Apostoli praeceperant secundas adire nuptias
propter incontinentiam hominum. Nam secundam quidem accipere, secundum
praeceptum Apostoli licitum est, secundum autem rationem veritatis vere
fornicatio est, etc.
Hacratione, cause. 31. qu. 1. which says that the Apostle S. Paul spoke
against both truth and reason. In this Demand there is yet a fourth trick of
bad meaning. He requires a proof of that which Calvin says in such and such
places, and yet in the same places he might have found the proofs added by
Calvin himself: would he wish us to copy him out the Chapters? or can he
better read our writing then the Impression of the Institution? Let him then
seek the places if he list: and if they content him not, let him refute them.

XXI. DEMAND. That we must use no Lights in the Church, neither any
Ecclesiastical Ornaments, distinguished from the seculers.
ANSWER.
Who ever said so? Do not we our selves light up Candles in our Churches,
when we cannot well see? Have not the Pastors habits convenient for the Action
or service, in the Churches, where they may go on foot to For the places
oft-times appointed to the Protestants for exercise of their religion are some
miles distant from their habitation.

Cir. Offic. 3. Omnibus viris statuae and ad eas Thus and Cerei. Ovid. Ep.
Medeae. Ardet vt ad magnos pinaea taeda deos.

Cereos non clara luce accendimus, vt tu frustra calumniaris sed vt tenebras
noctis hoc solatio temperemus.


serve God without riding on horseback? But to ask whether we may light up
Candles at high-noone, is a question out of the compass of Divinity, and may
be decided by common sense. For, it is as much as to ask whether we must walk
through the town with Lantern at high-noone, or whether we shall need a
comb to a bald head. We know that the Gentiles used Tapers in broad daylight,
and lighted them about the Images of their Gods and great Personages: but we
are not their Disciples, And upon this quarrel does S. Hierome confute the
slander of Nigilantius who complained that we light up Candles in the broad
daylight. We light not up (says S. Hierome) any Tapers in broad daylight, as
thou vainly do slander us: but only by this remedy to qualify the
darkness of the night.

XXII. DEMAND. That a Bishop is inferior to a Priest, and that a Deacon is
above a Priest; that is to say, that the Superintendent is no more then an
Elder in the Church, and that the Minister is above the Elder.
ANSWER.
A Slander. We say not that the Bishop is inferior to the Priest: but only
that in the new Testament the same persons are called Priests and Bishops. 1.
Saint Paul to the Phil. 1. v. 1. salutes the Bishops and Deacons of Philippi,
omitting the Priests, and naming many Bishops in a heathen town, where the
Church was small, it is evident that he terms the Priests, Bishops. 2. In
the 20. of the Acts. verse. 17. the same Apostle assembleth the Priests and
Elders of the Church of Ephesus: but in the 28. verse he terms the
selfsame persons Bishops. 3. Likewise, in the Epistle to Titus, cap. 2. ver.
5. he says, I have left thee in Creete, that thou might establish (...),
Priests or elders from town to town; namely, if there be any that is
unreprovable, the Husband of one Wife only, having faithful Children, not
accused of dissoluteness: For, a Bishop must be unreprovable, etc. Who
perceives not, that here he names him a Bishop whom a little before he called
a Priest?

Now the reason why Presbyters or Priests are called Bishops or ouer-seers, is,
because the power of Priestly Order. 1. Of dispensing the Word and the
Sacraments (wherein that ouer-sight of theirs essentially consists) is equally
in Presbyters or Priests, and in those whom now by an excellency we call
Bishops or Ouer-seers: I mean Ouer-seers not only for their power of
dispensing the Word and Sacraments, but also for their power of Jurisdiction
and government in their own Churches.

For, the Apostles ordayning many coassistant Presbyters or Priests, for the
edification of the newly converted Cities, V. Hier. ad Euag.

Cyprian. lib. 1. Epist. 3.

Hier. aduersus Lucifer.


with their neighboring places (which they called Churches) for the avoiding
of Schism and confusion, and preservation of unity, peace and order
established a Fatherly pre-eminence or prioritie (not a Princely as Bellarmine
contends) of one Presbyter above the rest, not in the power of order, wherein I
said they were all equal: but in the execution or exercise of diverse
particulars that belong to that power; as Dedicating of Churches, Confirming of
the Baptized, but especially ordination of Ministers, which things only in
case of necessity (that is, in defect of Orthodoxe Bishops) were and might be
performed by Presbyters, as appears they were by Saint Ambrose, on the fourth
to the Ephesians. Whereas otherwise in the presence of Orthodoxe Bishops, the
Presbyters were not to meddle with these things which were reserved only to
the Bishops. Without whose leave (say Ignatius and Tertullian) they may neither
preach, baptize, Ignat. ad Magnesia. Epist. 3. Tert. de Baptismo.
minister Sacraments, or do any ministerial acts. And as one Presbyter ever
from the time of the Apostles, had this eminent and Bishoply power above the
rest, in the execution or exercise of ministerial acts, least, Aduersus
Luciferianos.
(as Jerome speaks) there should be as many Schisms as there are Priests: so
for the avoiding of like Schism and Confusion, Bishops have ever had a
preeminent power of Jurisdiction and government in their own Churches, by
Ecclesiastical censures.

As for the word Deacon, the Scriptures apply it to every Ecclesiastical
Function, yea, even to Jesus Christ, who was often called (...), that is,
Deacon, or Minister. The Apostle to the Hebrews, cap. 8. v. 2. terms him,
The Minister of the Santuary. And Romans 15. v. 8. The Minister of Circumcision.
And in the same Chapter, S. t Paul calls himself The Minister of Jesus
Christ, Likewise to the Collossians four times. Thus does he exhort Timothy to
be a good Minister of Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 4.6. yet in the Subscription of the
second Epistle he is called a Bishop. Thus you see that in the phrase of
Scriptures, the same persons are called sometimes Priests or Presbyters,
sometimes Bishops or Overseers, sometimes Deacons or Ministers.

Though we will not deny, that the word Deacon in a more restrained
acception, was usually applied to him that administered the goods or money of the
poor, and the Church-Treasure, even in the Apostles time, to ease them of that
care. But when the Treasury of the Church increasing, was committed to
certain Stewards, and the poor otherwise provided for, they were more
specially used for the assisting of the Bishop and Presbyters in things
pertaining to Gods Service and worship. Tert. lib. de Baptismo. Cyp. l. 3. ep.
17. Greg. Epist. lib. 4. cap. 88. Cyp. sermon. 6. de Lapsis.
Whereupon Tertullian witnesses, that in some cases they might baptize: Saint
Cyprian, that they might reconcile penitents: Saint Gregory, that they might
preach: and again Saint Cyprian, that they assisted the Bishop and Presbyters
in ministering the Sacrament of the Lords body and blood, and ministered the Cup.
Out of the society and company of Deacons in each Church, there was one
anciently chosen, says Saint Hierome, Ad Rusticum Nouachum.
who was not only to perform the things pertaining to the Deacons Office, but
also to prescribe unto others what they should do: and such were called
Archdeacons. Council. Carth. 4. Can. 37.39.
These in process of time (notwithstanding all Canons to the contrary, and the
violent opposition of Saint Hierome and other worthies of those times) were
lifted up, Ad Euagrium.
not only above Presbyters, but Arch-presbiters also, for these reasons.

Ad Euagrium.
1 Because the number of Presbyters (as Hierome notes) made them less esteemed,
and the fewness of Deacons made them the more honored.

2 Because they were busied in the Church-Treasure, and in money matters, which
are usually more regarded employments.

3 Because being Ministers unto the Bishop, they were used by him for the
viewing of such parts of his Diocese, as he could not conveniently come unto
himself; the dispatch of things for him; and in the end, for reformation of
the lesser and smaller faults, which upon such view they should find.
Whereupon at last, they obtained a kind of Jurisdiction, and power of
correction by prescription and custom. But this makes nothing against the
Archdeacons in the Church of England, who under that name exercise
Jurisdiction. For, by the Canons of our Church they are Presbiters, chosen to
assist the Bishop in his government, and not mere Deacons, as sometimes they
were.

XXIII. DEMAND. That the Scripture is easy to be understood, and that the
understanding thereof is granted to all. They be the words of Calvin in the 3.
of his Institutions, Cap. 21.. 5.
ANSWER.
IN this passage of Calvin, we find not one word of this matter: neither does
any man deny, but that in the holy Scripture there be dark places. Only we
say, that all that is in the Scripture is not obscure, and that, that which is
apparent, is sufficient to salvation. The ten Commandments, and the Articles
of faith, contained in the Creed, are there plainly laid down and expounded.
The Fathers in the old Testament knew not so much, and yet were saved:
besides, that there are infinite more matters clear in the Scriptures: If
therefore Calvin in any place have so said, he means that in the holy
Scripture every man may understand enough for his salvation. But he never
termed the Scripture Theramenes buskin, A Sword for all hands: a Forest of
Forragers: he never said that it makes a man an Atheist, and that he that
believes because he has read the Scripture, is no Christian, as says Charron
in his 3. truth, cap. 4. Thou beleeuest that thou read, then art thou not a
Christian, read the 3. and 4. Chapter.
Charron. Neither did he call it, as Bellarmin. lib. de verba Dei non scripto.
cap. 12.. Dico secundo Scripturam, and si non est facta precipue vt sit Regula
fidei esse tamen Regulam fidei, non totalem sed partialem.
Bellarmine does, a piece of a Rule; neither does he say: That the holy
Scripture (saying of it self that it is Divine) cannot herein be certainly
believed, if we have no other testimony: for (says he) Mahumets Alcaron says
as much of Mahomet, in whom we do not believe, lib. 4. De verbo Dei non
scripto, cap. 4.. Quarto necesse.

XXIIII. DEMAND. That all sins are mortal.
ANSWER.
WE do not simply say so: But our Adversaries making two sorts of sin,
some mortal, and some venial, that is to say, pardonable: 1. We say, that to
the faithful repenting him of his sins, all sins are venial and
pardonable: also that the same sins which our adversaries do hold to be
mortal, as Murder and Whoredom, do grow pardonable in the faithful that
do amend, as appears by the example of David. But as for the wicked and
impenitent, in them all sins are mortal: that is to say, in that they abide
in them to death, and that God punishes them all by death everlasting. 2. We
also say, that it is rashness in our Adversaries to define that there be but
seven mortal sins, and that all other sins are not so: for it belongs
to the Judge, not to the Offender, to judge what punishment every sin does
deserve: but we are all guilty, and have need of remission in the sight of
God. 3. But among their mortal sins, why have they not put Herefie,
Atheism, Superstition, Slandering, etc. Be these small sins, and pardonable
in the judgment of his Holiness? 4. To call a man's brother Fool, or to
speak evil of him, are they mortal sins in the judgment of the Church of
Rome? No, say they: yet does Jesus Christ in the fifth of Matthew, say, That
whosoever does call his brother Fool, is in danger of hell fire: And S. Paul,
1 Cor. 6. verse. 10. says, That slanderers shall not enter into the Kingdom of
heaven.

XXV. DEMAND. That with the grace of God we can merit nothing.
ANSWER.
THis Demand answers it self: For whatsoever is of Grace, is not of merit,
says S. Paul, Romans 11. verse. 6. If it be of grace, it is no more of works, or
else were grace no more grace. To merit by grace, agrees as well as to be
frozen with heat: or to be wet with drougth. 1. For how may we merit by grace,
considering that it is grace that keeps our good works from being
meritorious? that is to say, that they proceed from the grace of God. 2.
Again: Salvation is a gift, Romans 6. verse. 23. Ephesians. 2. verse. 8. and 9. Then
is it not obtained by merits. 3. And Salvation is an Inheritance belonging to
the faithful, for as much as they be the children of God, as says Saint Paul,
Romans 8. The spirit of God bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God: and if we be children, says he, then are we heirs: Here upon
let us hear Bellarmines Confession, lib. 2 de Gratia, cap. 14. Deus constituit
in predestinatione regnum dare certis hominibus quos absque vlla operum
praeuisione dilexit: tamen simul constituit vt quo ad executionem via
perueniendi ad Regnum essent bona opera.
But no man by merits purchases that inheritance which belongs unto him as a
Son. Moreover, Jesus Christ says, Luke 17.10. When we have done all that we
are commanded, yet are we unprofitable servants: but what can be the merit of
an unprofitable servant? Admit also that our good works were as perfect, as
they be mixed with infirmity, and that we were more righteous then the
Angels: what goodness were there in all this, which also were not the gift
of God? and what merit can there be in offering to God that which is already
his, and from him? We confess that GOD rewards good works: but there be
rewards that are not deserved. The Father will give his Son a new coat,
because he made an A. or a B. yet not in regard of his Sons merit, but of his
own promise, or for that he is his Son. But by the way we are to note, that
this inquirer does disguise our opinion, and alters the Controversy: for our
difference is not, whether it be possible to merit with the grace of God; but
whether the holy Scripture does teach us that we must merit, or purchase
salvation by our merits.

XXVI. DEMAND. That it is impossible to keep Gods Commandments, even with his
grace.
ANSWER.
THis must be asked of them that believe it. We doubt not but God can give
some man grace to keep his Commandments.

XXVII. DEMAND. That God will give no recompense to good works, which is all
one, as to say, that there be no meritorious works.
ANSWER.
A Slander. We hold that God does recompense good works: but that hereof it
does not ensue that good works are meritorious, and between these two there
is a great deal of difference. This have we showed in the answer to the 25.
demand.

XXVIII. DEMAND. That there is no distinction of beatitude between the
blessed, and that they are all equal in glory.
ANSWER.
THe Inquisitor is much deceived, if he think us to be of that belief. In
these curious things we suffer every man to think what he list. It is the
property of the Popes and Church of Rome, not only to place in the rank of
Saints whom they please, after the Imitation of the Pagan Apotheosis, or
Deifying of the Roman Senate, but also to ascribe to every one his office: to
one the charge of horses: to another the charge over women with child, to
another over France, to another over Spain, etc. and over them all to appoint
the Queen of heaven, with extreme injury to the holy and blessed Virgin, who
takes no pleasure in that honor wherein God is dishonored, whose Celestial
Royalty is incommunicable with the creature. Also that men should attribute
titles and dignities celestial unto Saints, without any testimony of Gods
word, is a matter no less ridiculous and rash, then if the Ants or Pismires
should hold a counsel to conserve the offices of the Crown of France, and the
charge of the privy Council to such men as they list.

XXIX. DEMAND. That we must not use the like Imposition of hands, as the
Apostles used over those of Samaria and of Ephesus. Act. 8. verse. 14. and cap.
19. verse. 5. And that the said Confirmation was not one of the Articles of the
Apostles Catechism, mentioned in the Epistle to the Hebrews. cap 6. verse. 2.
ANSWER.
HEre is a double slander, and an imposture. For 1. where you say, we deny you
may use the like Imposition of hands, as did the Apostles; we deny not but you
may if you can bestow the like miraculous gifts as did the Apostles upon the
Samaritanes, by laying on of your hands. Secondly, you imply that we deny all
Imposition of hands: whereas we will grant you the like form (though not
altogether the like effect) of imposition of hands, as was used by the
Apostles. For as after Philip had catechized the Samaritanes, and taught them
the chief points of Christian Doctrine the Apostles came and prayed for them,
and laid their hands on them: So after children or youth in their own persons,
have made public and particular profession of the sum of their faith, or
Christian Catechism (which others in their name did summarily profess for
them, at their Baptism) we deny not but Prayer may be made for them, that
strength and increase of the Grace of the holy Ghost may be given them, to live
and die in that Christian faith, and newness of life, whereof they have made
profession. And that to those prayers may well be added that ancient and
Apostolic ceremony of Imposition of hands, betokening our restrained desires
to the parties whom we present to God by our prayers.

But herein is a notable Imposture: that you would persuade us, that the
Confirmation or Imposition of hands, Bell. lib de Confirmatione cap. 8 and 13.

See the Rhemists on Act. 8 Sect. 6.


used by your Popish Bishops, is like that of the Apostles. Did they consecrate
Oil mixed with Balm? did they cross it, breath upon it, salute it, Aue
sanctum Chysma. Hail, holy Chrysme? Did they annoint the Samaritanes with such
Oil? Make crosses in their foreheads, give them kisses, and claps in their
ears, bind their foreheads with Fillets, and enjoin them not to wash their
faces or heads for seven days, as the Popish Bishops do, in their
Confirmation? which being more like a May Game (as they use it) then a
Sacrament (as they make it, Nichol. Papa. Did. 4. de Consecrat. Can. A quodam
Indao.
though Christ did not institute it) yet does the Church of Rome hold it, in
greater estimation then Baptism. The administration whereof they permit to
Priests, to Women, yea, even to the Jews and Heathen: always reserving to the
Bishops only the power of Confirmation. Can. de his.
Pope Melchiades in the second distinction of consecration, comparing Baptism
with Confirmation, says that the Sacrament or Confirmation ought to be held in
greater honor. And Bellarmine in his Book of Confirmation, and eleauenth
Chapter, says it is great power to strengthen the soul against the Devil.

It would make a man laugh to hear this Inquisitour enquire whether in the
Apostles Catechism there was ever an Article of Confirmation. For it were his
part to prove that there was one, not ours to prove there was none. It is his
part that affirms, to prove. The rather for that, we dare not assuredly auow,
that the Apostles had any ordinary form of Catechism. And the sixth Chapter
to the Hebrews, in the judgment of our learned Divines, Calvin, Beza,
Piscator.
does prove Confirmation to have been used by the Apostles, or by their
approbation, yet does it not prove Confirmation was an Article of their
Catechism.

XXX. DEMAND. That the precept of annoynting the sick with Oil, laid down in
the 5. of James. verse. 14. ought not to be put in practice in the Church,
albeit it was used by the Apostles. Mark. 6. ver. 13.
ANSWER.
THe Inquisitour alleging S. Mark. 6. verse. 13. answers himself, for S.
Mark says, They cast out many Devils, and anointed many that were sick with
Oil, and healed them. The Apostles and Disciples were therefore commanded to
annoint the sick, to heal them: If any one has this miraculous gift of
healing, we do very well like that he should annoint the sick: But at these
days they annoint those whose diseases are desperate, and the miracles are all
reduced to one only kind, which is the coniuring of Devils: Thus of a
Medicine it is made a Sacrament: and a miraculous Unction which healed the
bodies, is now grown to be an Unction unprofitable both to the body, and to
the soul. After the loss of the virtue, they labor to preserve the Ceremony,
and yet so altered, and diversely changed by an artificial kind of trouble
that it will ask at the least a good half hours work to confer extreme
Unction.

XXXI. DEMAND. That Prayer for the dead was not in use, even in the time of the
Machabees.
ANSWER.
Whether it were then used or not used, it imports not much: For we live not
now by the example of the Machabees, but by the rule of the Gospel, we
therefore affirm nothing upon the point. For the Author of the Book of the
Machabees, having reported many things contrary to the truth of the Story,
might well do the like in the 12. Chapter of the second book thereof. The
principal matter is, that he there speaks of Prayer for the dead, which
nothing pertayneth to the controversy of these days: for the Author says,
that Judas in that prayer remembered the resurrection, and that otherwise it had
been a folly to pray for the dead. Where shall we find that Mass Priest, who
if you demand of him wherefore he recommendeth the deceased in his memento, will
answer, that it is to the end he may rise again in glory, or that he
regards the resurrection?

XXXII. DEMAND. That S. Peter was not the first of the Apostles, albeit S.
Matthew. cap. 10. v. 2. says, The names of the twelve Apostles are these: The
first, Simon, called Peter, etc.
ANSWER.
THis likewise is calumnious as well as the former, and almost all the rest.
We deny not but Saint Peter was the first among the Apostles; for it is of no
importance. He might be the first in age, in eloquence, in virtues, or
miracles, or in knowledge. All this is possible, without having power or
jurisdiction over the rest of the Apostles, which is that kind of Primacie for
the which they plead so hard in these days.

1 For had the Apostles known that Jesus Christ had given the superiority and
command over the rest unto Saint Peter, they would never after have contended
among themselves about Primacie, and that even the day before the death of
JESUS CHRIST, Luke 22.24.

2 And S. John, cap. 1. and S. Paul, Gal. 2. would never have named Saint Peter
after Saint Andrew and Saint James.

3 Neither would the Apostles have undertaken to have sent S. Peter to
Samaria, Acts 8.15.

4 Neither would S. Paul have said of himself that in nothing he was
inferior to the most excellent Apostles, 2 Cor. 11. and 12. where he says,
IN NOTHING, he takes away all exception.

5 Besides that, say that S. Peter had superiority of Jurisdiction over the
other Apostles, does it therefore ensue that the same ought to be perpetual in
the Church? also, that if one man have command over a few, that therefore one
man must govern all the Church throughout the world?

6 Does it also follow that the Bishop or Rome should be his Successor in this
Primacie? But, say these Doctors, Saint Peter dyed at Rome. Admit it were so:
but Jesus Christ dyed at Jerusalem, shall the death of Saint Peter at Rome be
of greater force to derive the Primacie to the Bishop of Rome, then the death
of Jesus Christ in Jerusalem, to derive the Primacie to the Bishop of
Jerusalem?

7 Again, admit the Pope were Saint Peter's Successor; does it follow that he
must succeed him in his Apostleship: for others will say that he is not his
Successor but in quality of Bishop of Rome: and thereof there is far greater
appearance: for, likewise the Bishop of Jerusalem was Successor to Saint
James; and the Bishop of Ephesus succeeded Saint John and Saint Paul, in that
these Apostles were Bishops of Jerusalem and Ephesus; yet were they not their
Successors in the function of Apostles.

8 Finally, were the Pope Saint Peter's Successor in quality of an Apostle, and
of the head of the Church; had he not long since lost this Succession by
reuersing the doctrine of Saint Peter, and living in the estate of a temporal
Monarch, not of a spiritual Pastor? If then he be Successor to Saint Peter,
it is in like manner as sickness succeeds health, and as an usurper
succeeds in place of him whom he has expelled. To what purpose are the
keys, which serve only but to shut up heaven? or Simons Bark, which has no
other use then to traffic withal? or his Net, which at this day is employed
only in fishing for Dukedomes, and to entangle Commonwealths?

THREE SCORE and four Demands, propounded to the Jesuits of the COURT.
1. WHether the Doctrine of the Gospel be sufficient to salvation: also
whether the Gospel be wholly contained in the new Testament: or if there be but
a part thereof, where we may find the rest.

2 When the The Prohibition is to be seen in the Index of Books prohibited by
the Council of Trent, printed at Cologne by Gosuin Cholin, by authority from
Pius the 4 and Clement the 8.
Prohibition, in these days made to the Lay People, that they shall not read
the holy Scripture without especial permission, did first begin.

3 Whether in the holy Scripture there be either example or commandment to
pray unto Saints: we ask not whether they pray for the faithful that are
upon earth, but whether the faithful that are upon earth ought to pray unto
them, and where God commands it.

4 Since we should offend the King, if at his hands we should crave any gift
through the merits of some other subject of his: how dare they in the Romish
Church speak unto God in such manner as they dare not speak to man for fear
of offending him, in craving at Gods hand salvation through the merits of
Saints, Quorum meritis precibusque regamus.
as the Priest does in his Mass.

5 What assurance have we that the blessed Virgin Mary was in body rapt up
into Heaven, and there crowned Queen of Heaven? For since she is so protrayted
in all your Churches, and the people so taught, there ought to be some very
assured testimony of the same.

6 Whether the Saints in Paradise have their distinct charges. One over France,
as S. Denise: another over Spain, as S. James: another over Women with child,
as S. Margaret: another over Hunters, as S. Eustace, etc. Who gave them those
offices: also when this opinion first began.

Innoc. 3. lib. 3. de mist. Missae, cap. 9.

Necessarium nobis est in via Sanctorum suffragium.


7 Whether praying unto Saints be necessary to salvation: also, whether by
praying unto GOD only through Jesus Christ, we cannot be saved.

8 Whether God has commanded to pray in such a tongue, as even he that prays
does not understand: and when this custom began.

9 Whether throughout the holy Scripture we have either commandment or
example to have in Temples the Image of God, or of the Trinity, represented in
stone or in painting. Also whereas God in the 4. of Deuteronomy, verse. 15. and
16. prohibiteth the representing of him in any graven similitude or Image, be
it of male or female: whether he has since changed this ordinance: or if he
have not changed it, wherefore does the Romish Church dispense therewith.

10 Whether in the holy Scripture there be either Commandment or example, that
we ought to kneel before the Images of Saints, to kiss, cloathe, light, or
sense them, etc.

11 Whether we ought to adore the Cross with like adoration as God; as Thomas
in his 3. Part. quest. 25. and Cardinal Caietane upon the same place, and many
other Doctors of the Romish Church do teach. Also, when the Priest speaking to
the Wood, says, Aue lignum triumphale, I salute thee triumphant Wood, whether
this Wood understands what he says: if they answer that they do it in the
honor of Jesus Christ, yet ought the Wood whereto they speak in the honor of
Jesus Christ, to understand what is said unto it; considering also, that to
speak to the Wood of the of the Kings Chair in honor of the King, is rather
a mockage then an honor to the King: and indeed where did God ever command it?

12 Whether Jesus Christ has not paid enough to exempt souls out of the fire
of Purgatory: and if he has paid enough, why should any man pay again that
which is already fully paid? Why should they again satisfy Gods justice for
that wherein it is already satsfied? what a presumption is it, to teach that
Jesus Christ has not satisfied for the pain due to sins committed after
Baptism, and so to impare the virtue of the death of our Savior? and in a
matter of greatest importance to forgo a new Article of faith, without any
testimony of the holy Scripture?

13 Since also, that Jesus Christ is yet an Intercessor and Mediator for those
souls which they say are yet in Purgatory, why do they not immediately come
forth at his Intercession, but do still abide there, some hundreds or
thousands of years, as appears by the Pardons for five or six hundred
thousand years granted by the Pope.

14 Again, inasmuch as other Orders of Friars are at this time of small
esteem in regard of the Jesuits, how comes it to pass, that in privileges
of the Jesuits are inferior to the Carmelites, The Carmelites have published
certain Theses containing this privilege: and Caheir in his Book entitled
The furnace of the Reuerberate, maintayneth this privilege. Also, the
Carmelite Doctors have to the end of the Book set and subsigned their
approbation.
and to the Fraternity of Minorites or Franciscans? For, the Popes have
granted to the Carmelites this privilege, That they shall remain no longer in
Purgatory but until the next Saturday after their decease. And the Fraternity
of the Franciscans have also this privilege that they may fetch a soul out of
Purgatory Pope Sextus the 5. in the year 1586. the 7. of May granted to the
Fraternity of the Cordelies this Privilege inserted into the Book of
Indulgences, conferred to that Fraternity, printed at Paris by John le Bouc.
upon Mount S. Hillary, at the sign of Diligence, in the year 1597.
by saying five Paters; and as many Auees upon the Saturday before
Palme-Sunday: how, I say comes it to pass that the Jesuits have no such
privilege?

15 In as much as the Church of Rome does hold that Purgatory shall continue
no longer but until the day of Judgment, whereof it follows that none of
the faithful that shall then live, shall go into Purgatory: we demand how it
comes, that Gods Justice requires of them no satisfaction by Purgatory, and
yet it is now said that they go into Purgatory to satisfy Gods Justice? Is
it not an heavy misfortune that a man dying at this day, and going into
Purgatory, there to be tormented certain hundreds of years, was not borne in
that latter age? for then albeit he had merited ten times more punishment,
yet should he have been exempt from the fire of Purgatory.

16 Again, in as much as in the Roman Church they hold that Infants dying
soon after Baptism do go straight into Paradise, what is the reason that
Priests do take money to pray and to say Masses for them; and what benefit do
these Infants reap by the the same?

17 Again, let them tell us whether in the holy Scripture there be any
Commandment that we shall eat no flesh upon Fridayes or Saturdayes,
considering that even the ordinary day wherein Jesus Christ eat the
Passover, was the Friday, and that Saint Paul wills us, 1 Cor. 10. that if
we be invited to the houses of Infidels, we should eat of all that is set
before us without enquiring for conscience sake.

18 Let them also show us where God forbids Bishops or Priests to marry:
also whether when Saint Paul writ to Timothy, saying, 1 Timothy 3 v. 2.
Let the Bishop be unreprovable, the Husband of one only Wife, the law of
single life were already established.

19 Where Jesus Christ commanded to sacrifice a propitiatory Sacrifice for
the quick and for the dead. And because their Priests vocation is, that they
are established to sacrifice Jesus Christ, where is their pass or warrant? or
where did God establish them Sacrificers? considering that Jesus Christ gave
not this quality to his Disciples, and that the new Testament does not in any
place term the Pastors of the Church Sacrificers?

20 Whether Jesus Christ or his Apostles did ever minister the Supper without
Communicants: also who instituted the first private Masses: likewise, the
Masses for Corn, for Herds, for finding things lost, etc.

21 How it comes to pass that the Masses for Obits and anniuersaries are not
founded but for those that have given to the Church: and that the four Orders
of begging Friars are not present at the deaths or Funerals of the needy or
poor Artificers.

22 Let them tell us whether the Priest in his Mass breaks the same things
that Jesus Christ brake in his Supper: for the Evangelists do testify that
our Lord made his breaking before the words, which they term Consecrating,
whereof it follows that he brake but bread, but the Priest at this day
breaks, after the consecration, and which is worse, says that in breaking he
does sacrifice: which is as much as evidently to say that Jesus Christ
sacrificed bread because he brake it before consecration.

Can. Poenitentialis 39 in calce Decreti. Quando mus comedit vel corredit
corpus Christi etc. 2. de consecrat Si quis. Vide ibidem Glossam. Tum Cautelas
Missae and Thomam. 3. quest. 8 Art. 3.
23 Also because every reproach that befell to Jesus Christ during his
infirmity, befell him for our Salvation: we demand what this reproach wherein
the Doctors, Canons, and Cauteles of the Romish Church do say, that the body
of the Lord is sometimes devoured by Mice and Rats, and sometime by Worms,
even now that he is in his glory, does help our salvation?

24 Wherefore, since the Apostles adored not that which Jesus Christ gave them
in the Eucharist: also, that whereas Jesus spoke not of sacrifice, neither made
any elevation of the Host, having communicated to all that were present, and
spoken in a language that all understood: the Priest at this day does every
thing contrary.

25 Also, in as much as the body of Jesus Christ, when he celebrated the
Eucharist was frail, passible, and mortal: but that this body which the
Apostles received of him, was impassible, and could suffer nothing, according
to the doctrine of our Adversaries, let them tell us whether this opinion be
receiueable, which gives to Jesus Christ at one time two bodies of contrary
nature, or at the least one body contrary to it self.

26 Since also, that soon after that the Apostles had received the Sacrament
into their stomachs, Jesus Christ sweat drops of blood, was apprehended,
buffeted, etc. we demand whether this body of Jesus Christ, which was in the
Apostles stomachs sweat any drops of blood, either was by the Soldiers
apprehended and buffeted: for, if he sweat, was apprehended and buffeted under
the forms, and in the stomachs of the Apostles, he was already passible
under them; yea, and we must also place under the same forms, the Soldiers
that buffeted him: but if under those forms he sweat not, neither was
apprehended nor buffeted, then was there at the self same time one Jesus
Christ suffering, and one Jesus Christ not suffering: and consequently which
was not our Savior. For it was by his sufferings that he was our Savior.

27 How does this saying of the Church of Rome agree: Pope Innocent. 3. lib. 4.
de Mister. Missae. cap. 11. Est enim hic color and sapor: quantitas and
qualitas, cum nihil altervtro sit coloratum and sapidum, quantum aut quale.

Stella. Fascicuius. Tempor. Na^^ler, Genebrard. 4. Auenturus, lib. 7. Page 598
Platinam Clem. 5.


That between the Priests hands there is roundnesse, and nothing round:
color, and not colored: quantity, and nothing that has quantity? And
indeed if the Consecrated Host be round, and this Host be the body of Jesus
Christ, it follows in good Sylogisme, that some body of Jesus Christ is
round. But if the Conclusion be false, so must also one of the propositions be.
We therefore demand which of the two it is.

28 Also when Victor the third was poisoned in a Challice: and Henry the
seventh, Emperor, in an Host, we demand what it was that was poisoned: Saying
that it was Bread and Wine, you deny the Transubstantiation: Saying, it was the
body of Jesus Christ that was poisoned, you do profane it: Saying, that it
was the accidents, the color and measures that were impoysoned, it were not
only to mock at it, but also to make the accidents Subjects of the substance:
And all this miracle is only to kill a Pope and a good Emperor.

29 Since also the Church of Rome does hold, that the body of the Lord is fully
whole in every part of the consecrate Host: does she not by consequent say,
This is represented at Paris in the forefront of the Church of Billettes.
that the point of the holy Penknife that pricked the Host, where-out sprang
drops of blood, pricked Jesus Christ in all parts of his body? For, that Jesus
Christ glorified can yet receive wounds, is but a small matter in regard of
believing that a Penknife could at one only blow hit in 10. thousand places
of one selfe-body.

30 We also demand, since the Church of Rome does hold that it is no
consecration, unless the Priest have an intent to consecrate, how the people
that is there to adore the Host, may know whether the Priest had an intent to
consecrate, or to do as the Church of Rome does, for fear of Idolatry in
adoring the Bread that is not consecrated?

Quod libetica, question supposito secundo Concilium Constantiense excusat
simplices adorantes hostiam non consecrata^ si sic adorent. Ad^^^te si tu es
(...)
31 Also whether the advice of Pope Adrian, supported by the Council of
Constance, ought herein to be followed, which wills not that they should
adore the Host simply, but conditionally, in saying to himself: I do adore
thee, if thou be Christ, for that is to adore at all adventures.

32 Again, if Jesus Christ after the Eucharist had reserved some Hosts (for
he might, and it is not credible, but that if a loaf broken into so many
pieces, there yet remained some crummes) we demand therefore whether these
reserved Hosts were also crucified the next day: or else whether Jesus Christ
at one and the same time were suffering upon the Cross, and not suffering
under the forms: on the Cross in one place, and without the Cross in
another: dead in the Sepulcher, and alive in the Pixe: for if he had been
crucified in the Pixe, they must also have laid in the same Pixe, the Cross,
the Soldiers, the Spear, and the Crown, etc. Now if this Cross be not under
the Host, and yet Jesus Christ is there crucified, it follows that he shall
be there crucified without a Cross, and smitten without a stroke.

33 Whether in the sixth Chapter of John, in these words, If you drink not my
blood, you shall have no life, the Eucharist be spoken of. For if it be not
there spoken of, how comes it that the Doctors of the Romish Church do
allege this Chapter and this verse for their realtie and corporal eating?
but if it be there spoken of, why do they deprive the people of life by taking
away the Cup? It is to no purpose here to allege the concomitance, for he
that takes the blood in the Host drinks not: now Jesus Christ says
expressly, that if we drink not his blood, we shall not have life.

34 Again, in as much as it is manifest impiety to oppose our selves against
Gods ordinance, we demand how the Council of Constance can excuse it self:
which in the 13. Session confesses, Quod licet Christus post coenam
instituerit and suis discipulis administrauerit sub vtraque specie panis and
vini hoc venerabile Sacramentum, tamen hoc non obstante etc.
that Jesus Christ instituted and administered the Sacrament under both kinds:
and that in the Primitue Church the faithful received both kinds: and yet
nevertheless complayneth, that in some parts of the world some did rashly
presume that the Christian people ought to receive the Sacrament under both
kinds. That is to say, that it is rashness to desire to imitate Jesus Christ.
And it says, that Ca^^ in nonnullis mundi partibus quidam temerarie praesumant
populum Christianum debere Sacramentum Eucharistiae sub vtraque specie
suscipere, consuetudo rationabiliter introducta habenda est pro lege
pertinanter asserentes, oppositum tanquam heretici arcendi sunt and grauiter
puniendi, Inuocato etiam auxilio brachij secularis.
the custom to deliver it under but one kind, being by reason brought in,
ought to be holden for a Law: It also declares all such as shall contradict it
to be Heretics, and grievously punishable, but by the Secular power. Do they
not here confess, that the Gospel and the Primitive Church, are opposite to
the Church of Rome at this day? and presume to be wiser then Jesus Christ, and
rank him among Heretics and men punishable?

35 Whether the Popes pretended power to give and to take away Kingdoms, and
to dispense with Subjects for their Oath of Allegiance, be by Divine right,
or whether it be but an humane order or policy only.

36 We also demand, whether the Pardons that the Pope gives upon condition to
commit some notable wickedness, be available: as when in the years 1588. and
1589. he granted seven years of Pardon to all that would join with the holy
Union, and band themselves against their Prince, yet he a Catholic Roman.

37 Wherefore the people are so forward in going to the Iubile at Rome, to
purchase the great Pardons, considering that at all times they may obtain full
pardon, and six or seven hundred thousand years of Indulgences to spare.

38 If a man, needing but ten thousand years of Pardon, purchases an
hundred thousand, what shall become of the fourscore and ten thousand that
remain? for this cause there are at This is to be seen in the Book of Roman
Indulgences, printed at Rome, Anno. 1570. by Giulio Ac^^lto nelia Chie ^ di
Pietro in Vaticano la prima Dominica della quinquagesima vie Indulgentia
plenaria and ottodieci milla anni and tante quarentene.
Rome some Churches, where a man may in one day purchase full pardon for all
sin, and eighteen or twenty thousand years of Pardons ouer-plus: what
shall become of this surplussage and ouer-plus of Indulgences, besides the full
remission? Does the Pope pardon the pain of future sins, and give
Indulgences of provision?

39 Above all the rest, since the Pope vaunteth himself to have in the
Treasury of the Church all the sufferings and super-aboundant labors of the
Saints, Monks and Martyrs which he conuerteth into payment, for the
punishment due to others, distributing them by his Indulgences; we demand: 1.
Who laid up these sufferings of the Saints in the Popes Treasury? 2. When
began this distribution? 3. How shall we be assured that God will receive them
in payment for us? 4. And wherefore receive other payments, considering that
the death of Christ Jesus is a payment sufficient? 5. Does Jesus Christ give to
any man power to pay a debt already fully acquitted? 6. Has the Pope also in
the Treasury of the Church, the pains and labors of Noah, of Abraham, of
Jacob, etc. 7. And upon what consideration did not the high Priests under the
Law distribute them to the faithful in their days? or why neither Jesus
Christ, nor his Apostles, neither their Disciples in all the first ages after
Jesus Christ never distributed any Indulgences to the dead? 9. Neither
celebrated any Iubile. 10. Neither established any privileged Altars,
whereupon whosoever can procure the saying of certain Masses, shall fetch one
soul which so ever he will out of Purgatory. 11. Neither granted Bulls to
free any souls out of purgatory? 12. Neither tied Remission of sins to a
certain place, where the Pardons are laid up. 13. Neither gave out hallowed
grains, or Agnus Dei, serving for the remission of sins. Is all this now
done, because the Popes are more full of Inventions then the Apostles? or that
God is now more liberal then heretofore?

40 Whether the Pope has power to give to some a higher degree of glory in
heaven then to other some? If he have this power we demand where, or when God
gave it him? If he have it not, why does he attribute it to himself, In
retributione iustorum salutis aeternae pollicemur augmentum.
as Innocent the third in his Bull Ad liberandam, which is in the end of the
Counsel of Lateran, where he pomiseth an augmentation or increase of glory to
those that will go to the holy war: but to such as will not go in person,
but send a man at their own charge, he gives them no more but Remission of
all their sins. As likewise the last Council of Lateran, in the ninth and
tenth Sessions, attributes to Leo the tenth, that he has all power in heaven
and in earth: as also does the Book of sacred Ceremonies, lib. 1. Sect. 7.
cap. 6.

41 Whether the Pope and Church of Rome can at this day make any Articles of
faith: Certum est non esse in manu Ecclesiae aut Papa statuere articulos fidei.
If they can, where is the authority that God has given them? If they cannot,
wherefore did Leo the tenth in the Bull Exurge Domine, joined to the last
Council of Lateran, insert this among the Heresies of Luther, That he said,
that the Pope and Church of Rome can make no Articles of faith?

Sess 4 and 6.
42 Whether the second Council of Nice spoke well in saying, that Images were
equivalent with the Gospel, and that we must worship them. Also that we may
paint Angels, because they be corporal: that a Temple without Images is naught
worth: and that of all Heresies it is the greatest to be an enemy to Images.

43 Whether the six and seven Councels, condemning Pope Honorius of Heresy,
and the Council of Constance condemning Pope John, the 23. for denying heaven
and Hell, and teaching that the souls are mortal; did believe that the Pope
cannot err in faith: It skilleth not whether these Councels were well or ill
informed: only we demand whether they did believe that the Pope cannot err
in faith, as they teach at this day.

44 1. When the Pope began to wear three Crowns. 2. Did. 6. Can. Satis est.
In the Gloss of the Clementin. Cum inter Dominus Deus noster, etc.

1. Book of sacred Ceremonies. Sect. 7 c. 6 Council of Lateran Sess. 1. and
3. and 9. and 10.

As lately against the Venitian Commonwealth.


To preach no more. 3. To be called God upon earth, and the Divine Majesty. 4.
And King and Prince of all the earth. 5. To dispense with oaths and vows made
unto God. 6. To permit marriages within the degrees prohibited by the word of
God, as of the first with the second degree. 7. Not to drink the Wine out of
the Challice, but to suck it out with a Reed. 8. To be adored. 9. To put whom
he list into the rank of Saints, appointing them their feasts, etc.

45 Whether the Popes Excommunications, cast out against a whole estate for
pecuniary matters, and civil pretensions, are of any force: and whether they
that die in such estate, during their Excommunication, be for ever damned. Also
what is the meaning of those words spoken to Saint Peter, kill and eat: and
whether the same be also spoken to the Pope.

46 For how much were the voices of the Cardinals bought in the election of a
new Pope, in the first age after Jesus Christ? Also whether a Prince that has
spent three or four hundred thousand Crowns to procure a favorable Pope, may
presume that all this corruption and these mercenary suffrages, were guided by
the Spirit of God: or whether a Pope thus purchased cannot err in faith?

47 To what a rate are the taxes of absolutions and dispensations of the
Chancerie and Penitentiarie of Rome now raised. For we have the Tax printed at
Paris, by authority of the Court, in the year 1520. when all this Merchandise
was far better cheap: Absolutio pro eo qui matrem, sororem, etc iut
commatrem carnaliter cognouit, gros 5. Sed hic tantum pro qualificatis and
huiusmodi gratiae non conceduntur pauperibus.
for he that had lain with his Mother, or with his Gossip, paid for his
Letters of Absolution five grosses. He that had slain his Father or Mother
seven grosses: and he that had falsified the Apostolical Letters eighteen
grosses. And a Priest that had cut off his own priuities seauenteene grosses:
But now they pay all in Duccats of the Chamber. And the dispensations for the
nearest degrees in marriage are not granted but to people of calling, and such
as are of ability: as the same Tax does set it down, fol. 23.

48 Whether is it greater offense in a Priest to be married, or to commit
whoredom secretly, and which of the two should we most mislike?

49 Upon what sins does the Priest impose greatest penance, upon the
blaspheamer of God, or upon him that miscalleth the Pope? upon the Adulterer or
upon him that eats flesh upon Good Friday? And what is the reason that every
Bishop may absolve sins committed against the Law of God: but trespasses
committed against the Papal Sea, as hindering such as go to Rome for Pardons;
or intrusion into a benefice, are matters past the Bishops reach, and reserved
to his Holiness. Has the Popes authority now gotten the upper hand of the
Law of God?

Sac. Cerem. lib. 1. Sect. 2. cap. 3. Dicitur ad Marmoream sedem quae
Stercorata appellatur.

And soon after, Sunt duae seeds P^rphyretice perforatae and ibi sedet
Pontife^.


50 Whereof grew the Custom, practiced even to this time, upon the day of the
Popes Coronation, to make him sit on a hollow Chair [called the Chair of
Easement] and when ceased the custom of handling his Holiness priuities upon
that day?

51 Whether the Pope did well in establishing the public Stews at Rome,
whereinto the Prelates repair openly and with all liberty?

52 Where remained the souls of the Fathers of the old Testament from Christ's
Resurrection until his Ascension?

53 And since the Church of Rome places the Infants Limb under the earth,
where shall it be when the earth shall have no more being?

54 Whether we must keep faith given to Heretics?

Sect. de oratione p. 483.
55 Whether it be well done to say, Our Father which art in Heaven, before the
Image of a Saint, as now adays they do: and the Catechism of the Tridentine
Council, does allow it.

56 Again, in that there were diverse Popes at one time, and that the strongest
bare it away: how can they prove that the strongest was the most lawful? for
if he were not so, then their succession must have been often interrupted: and
those that followed were the Successors of usurping Popes, being chosen by
Cardinals, created by the Pope that went before, who being no lawful Pope,
had no just authority to create Cardinals.

57 Since Jesus Christ speaking of the time that shall go before the Judgments
says that then there shall be no Faith upon earth: we demand whether then the
Church of Rome shall be pure in the Faith, and shall not err in any point, but
shall yield a visible luster.

57 Again, since the Pope may, whether by Jurisdiction (as some do hold) or in
manner of suffrage, fetch souls out of Purgatory, why does he not fetch them
all out? wherefore does he permit Infants to linger many hundred years in a
burning fire, though he be able to pull them out?

58 Whether it be to be found in the Word of God that the Bishop may absolve
some certain sins which the Priest cannot absolve: and whether there be any
sins which the Pope only may absolve, and are termed Cases reserved: also
when this custom began.

59 We also demand, upon what authority the Church of Rome is founded: and
how we may be assured that there is one Church in the world, and that the
Church of Rome is this true Church. For the proof hereof, the Doctors of the
Romish Church cannot produce any testimony out of the holy Scripture. For, in
as much as they say that it is the Church that gives authority to the
Scripture, it appears, that this Church cannot be founded upon the Scripture,
and that the Scripture cannot confer any authority unto it. The foundation
and support of a house cannot be founded upon the house.

60 Whether it stands with the Holiness of him that terms himself the
Vicar of Jesus Christ, to suffer the Jews at Rome, which believe that Jesus
Christ was a seducer and deceiuer, and there to permit them the free exercise
of their Religion; and yet to condemn to the fire those that say there is no
other Mediator but Jesus Christ, neither any other propitiatory Sacrifice but
his death.

61 Also, since in the Church of Rome there are many relics evidently false
and ridiculous: As at Saint John Lateran in Rome, the fore-skinne of Jesus
Christ. At Court-Chiuernie near Bloys, the breath of Joseph. At Burgos in
Spain, the hair and nails of a wodden Crucifixe, etc. We demand what mark
they can give us, whereby to discern the true from the false, and what moved
these our Masters thus to abuse the poor people.

62 Whether we may believe the Monks which make their vaunts to do more then
God commands: considering that God will be served with all our heart and all
our strength: is there any man that can do more then that which he does with
all his strength?

63 Again, in as much as the Pope permits no man to preach, without his
vocation from him, either mediately or immediately: We would gladly know,
whether for the reproving of the Popes abuses, it be requisite to be authorized
by the Pope himself: also whether we may hope that ever the Pope will give any
man charge to reprove him.

64 How does this opinion of the Church of Rome, that Infidels and Heathen do
work meritorie deeds, which they term merits of Congruitie, agree with this
of Saint Paul, Romans 24. v. 23. That all that is not of faith is sin: Be
there, in the judgment of the Church of Rome, meritory sins? Can people,
destitute of the Spirit of God, do any good work, considering that the
Apostle Saint Paul witnesses, that our selves cannot so much as think a good
thought: and that it is God that works within us both the will and the deed
at his good pleasure, 2 Cor. 3. Phil. 2.13.

FINIS.
A NEW CHALLENGE to all Papists, in four and twenty Popish Articles, by a
learned Divine now living, and ready to justify the same, if any Papist shall
accept the Condition.
1 IF any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council before Saint
Augustines days, which testifies, that the Books of Tobith, Judith, Wisdom,
Ecclesiasticus; the first and second of Maccabees are Canonical Scripture, I
yield to Popery: If on the contrary he will promise to become Protestant, if
I can show him an approved Father or Council, before S. Augustines days,
which testifies that they are not Canonical.

2 If any Papish can show me any approved Father or Council within 1000.
years after Christ, which testifies, that any Latin translation is to be
preferred before, or equalled with the Hebrew and the Greek, I yield to
Popery: if on the contrary he will promise to become Protestant, if I can
show him any approved Father or Council, within that time, which teaches,
that the Hebrew and the Greek are to be preferred before whatsoever Latin
translation.

3 If any Papist can show me any approved Father, or Council, within 1000.
years after Christ, which taught; that it was unlawful to translate the
Bible into the known languages of the common people, I yield to Popery: if on
the contrary he will promise to become Protestant, if I can show him by
approved Fathers or Councels, that in the best ages of the Church it was
thought profitable and commendable to have the Scripture so translated.

4 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 1000.
years after Christ, which held it unlawful for the people of God to read the
Scriptures in their Mother tongue, I yield to Popery: If on the contrary he
will promise to become Protestant, if I can show him out of approved Fathers or
Councels, that in the best ages of the Church they might lawfully have read
them.

5 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 600.
years after Christ, which teaches; that common prayers ought to be made in a
language unknown to the common people, I yield to Popery: if on the contrary,
he will become Protestant, if I can show him by approved Fathers or councels,
that common prayer should be made in a known language.

6 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 1000.
years after Christ, (except Saint Augustine only) which teaches; that there
are but three commandments in the former Table, seven in the latter, I yield
to Popery: If on the contrary he will promise to become Protestant, if I can
show him by Fathers or Councels, that there are four Commandments in the
former Table, and six in the latter.

7 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 1000.
years after Christ, that it was lawful to picture God the Father, I yield to
Popery: if on the contrary he will promise to become Protestant, if I can show
him approved Fathers or Councels which thought it unlawful to picture him.

8 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 1000.
years after Christ, which taught that Latria might be given to Images, I yield
to Popery: If on the contrary he will promise to become Protestant, if I can
show him an approved Father or Council, within that time, which taught that
Latria should not be given to Images.

9 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 1000.
years after Christ, which speaking of Sacraments, named seven only, and
neither more or fewer, I yield to Popery: if on the contrary, he will promise
to become Protestant, if I can show him an approved Father or Council, within
that time, who names no more but two, to wit, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

10 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 1000.
years after Christ, which teaches that women may baptize, I yield to
Popery, if on the contrary he will promise to become Protestant, if I can show
him an approved Father or Council, which absolutely forbad women to baptize.

11 If any Papist can show me any approved Father, or Council, within 1000.
years after Christ, which teaches; that it is unlawful for any, save the
Minister or Priest, who consecrates, to drink of the Sacramental Cup, I yield
to Popery: If on the contrary he will promise to become Protestant, if I can
show him an approved Father or Council, within that time, which held it
sacrilege not to drink of the Cup, having eaten before of the Bread.

12 If any Papist can show me any approved Father, or Council, within 1000.
years after Christ, which forbad Communicants to receive with their hands the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, I yield to Popery: If on the contrary he will
promise to become Protestant, if I can show him out of approved Fathers or
Councels, that within that time, it was usually delivered into their hands.

13 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 600.
years after Christ, which called the Sacrament, their Lord and their God, I
yield to Popery: If on the contrary, he will promise to become Protestant, if I
can show him an approved Father or Council, which speaking hereof, calls it
panem Domini, not panem Dominum, the bread of the Lord, not, Bread, his Lord.

14 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 600.
years after Christ, which held it lawful for a Christian at Communion time to
stand by, and look on, though he partaked not thereof, I yield to Popery: If
on the contrary he will promise to become Protestant, if I can show him out of
approved Fathers or Councels, within that time, that slanders by were required
to depart, or else, to draw near and communicate.

15 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 1000.
years after Christ, which taught, that a man may dine of a fasting day, I
yield to popery: If on the contrary he will promise to become Protestant, if I
can show him out of approved Fathers Councels, that the constant practice of
the Church was, to fast till night.

16 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 1000.
years after Christ, which taught, that a Minister, or Priest (as they call
him) sins more grievously if he marry, then if he play the fornicator abroad,
or if he keep a whore at home, I yield to Popery: If on the contrary he will
promise to become Protestant, if I can show him out of an approved Father, or
Council within that time, that it was held much worse for a Minister or
Priest, to play the whoremaster, then to marry.

17 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 1000.
years after Christ, which was of opinion, that a man who had vowed chastity,
was not guilty of breaking his vow by whoring, but only by marrying, I yield
to popery. If on the contrary he will promise to become Protestant, if I can
show him out of an approved Father or Council, that by whoring, Votaries were
guilty of breaking their vow of chastity, as well as if they married.

18 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 1000.
years after Christ, which taught that a notorious offender might be absolved
from his fault before some penance was enjoined and performed by him, I yield
to Popery: If on the contrary he will promise to become Protestant, if I can
show him out of approved Fathers or Councels, within that time, that before
absolution they always enjoined some penance, and ordinarily saw it performed.

19 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 1000.
years after Christ, which held it unseemly for men and women to sing Psalms
together in their public assemblies, I yield to popery: If on the contrary he
will promise to become Protestant, if I can show him an approved Father or
Council, within that compass of time, which approved of such singing.

20 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 100.
yerees after Christ, which ^aught, that men might vow to go on pilgrimage,
especially to Jerusalem, without their Wives consent, and go according to
their vow, I yield to Popery: If on the contrary, he will promise to become
Protestant if I can show him, that such vows are flat contrary to the
Scripture.

21 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 500.
years after Christ, which writes, that the Pope by his command called all, or
any of the first four general Councels, I yield to Popery: If on the
contrary, he will promise to turn Protestant, if I can show him out of
approved Fathers or Councels, within that time, that the Emperors called all
those four, by virtue of their authority.

22 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 500.
years after Christ, which writes, that the Bishop of Rome was president in all
those four general Councels, either in his own person, or by his deputies, I
yield to Popery: If on the contrary, he will promise to become Protestant, if I
can show him out of approved Fathers or Councels within that time, that other
Bishops sat as presidents, in some of those four, and in other general
Councels following, and that in their own right.

23 If any Papist can show me out of any approved Father or Council, within
600. years after Christ, that the Pope was not subject unto the Emperor, I
yield to Popery: If on the contrary he will promise to become Protestant, if I
can show him out of approved Fathers or Councels, within that time, that the
Pope was subject unto the Emperor, and that the Christians acknowledged none
but God himself to be above the Emperor.

24 If any Papist can show me any approved Father or Council, within 1000.
years after Christ, which appropriated the name Pope to the Bishop of Rome
only, I yield to Popery: If on the contrary, he will promise to become
Protestant, if I can show him out of approved Fathers or Councels, that all
Bishops generally, and some Elders in ancient time, were called Popes.

FINIS.

