THE BISHOP OF GALLOVVAY HIS DIKAIOLOGIE: Containing a just Defense of his
former APOLOGY.

Against the iniust Imputations of Mr. DAVID HVME.

O what a grief; that having to do with Enemies, we are forced to fight with
Friends! LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham for John Budge, and are to be sold
at the great South-dore of Paul's, and at Brittaines-Bursse. 1614.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
AS I was on my journey from LONDON homeward, in the Month of May last, I was
overtaken not far from Darnetoune, by our Countryman, Mr. David Hume,
Goodman of Gods-croft. After we had saluted one another, we fell incontinent to
a conference of Church-gouernment: he excused himself, that his leisure
served him not at that time to stay in our company, his urgent affairs
forcing him to post before, but he promised to send me his doubts in writing,
and I promised him (if it pleased the Lord) an answer. The point I took in
hand to prove, was, that no substanciall point of Discipline was changed in our
Church. For, Ecclesiasticke Synods used before, are retained still, the
censures of Admonition, Suspension, Excommunication; yea, the Admission and
Deposition of Pastors, or what ever else pertaynes to the matter of Discipline;
these are not removed but rectified and roborated: in that the power to
moderate and exercise these censures, is not left free to every one, but
restored again to the Bishop, to be used with advise of his Brethren: thus
keep we still the same Discipline, but more orderly used.

(...) dined at Darneroune, and parted in loving manner, with all brotherly
kindness: we ouertooke him again at Dunbar, where not finding his former
humanity, I marvelled what it could be, or from whom it come, that so small a
change of the soil; should make so great a change of the affection; for in the
one he was most kind, where with reason he might have been more strange; and
in the other most strange, where of duty he both might and should have been
more kindly. Since that time I fore-gathered not with him, and I expected
nothing, but kindness from him, and that the question should have been
quietly and peaceably disputed by writing among our selves, till now that he
has begun the public war. He had sent me some missiue Letters written by
him to some others, craving resolution of his doubts concerning Church
government. And as I was dispatching an Answer to him, I was forced to plead
for my Conscience by APOLOGY against a lying Libeller, which here Mr. David
against all duty and reason has publickely impugned. First, because I stood
^ound by promise to give an answer to himself, and reason would he should
have expected it: yea doubtless he had gotten it long ere now, in more quiet
and loving manner, if he had not interrupted me. Secondly, I had written
nothing against Mr. David, I touched him not in my Apology, and no other way
gave I him any cause to write against me. Thirdly, he being a private man, it
cannot be but a great Presumption to condemn by public writing a
Church-gouernment established by Law and that without knowledge (if himself be
true) for he professes to seek instruction concerning it, yea, without either
calling or lawful commission. Fourthly, before ever he sent this Refutation of
this Apology to me, or had discharged with me, he published sundry Copies of
it to be seen and read of others, which in our Proverb we call Treason under
trusting. Fifthly, his whole Admonitorie Treatise is full of Inuectiues in
personam, without regard of modesty, yea, of that fear of God which becomes
a Christian, bringing nothing, or else very little ad propositum.

Thus has Mr. David kept no fair war with me, but has very far
ouer-seene himself, and wronged me, which that the indifferent may know, I
have here published his Admonition in his own words and mine answers. I have
omitted no material thing in it; only words of needless repetition wherein
he abounds. If he had contented himself to justify the Libeller, in
tramping my Name, my Conscience, my Ministry under his feet, it had been a
proof of my patience great enough. But where without reason or truth, he will
bear down a common cause, and increase offenses in the hearts of simple
people, I cannot of conscience suffer it unanswered: specially, seeing under
pretense of impugning me, he directly impugneth it. If my heart in this had
reproved me of my ways, I might have lurked in secret, and past over the
Libeller, and him also with silence; but an honest conscience fears not the
light, but rather rejoices in it. Only I crave of the modest minded
Christian, that if my speeches in the Answer at any time be sharper then
becomes, it be imputed to humane infirmity, whereunto the love of the cause,
and knowledge of mine own innocence has carried me, not want of love toward
him or others. It is no pleasure to me to offend any man: if any such have
escaped me, I will not excuse my self in that which the wise, godly, and
indifferent Reader shall think may justly be reprehended.

Thine in the Lord, W. B. of Galleway.

THE BISHOP OF GALLOWAY HIS APOLOGY.
THere are two things requisite in a man, that would do good in a public
calling, the one is a good Conscience, the other a good Name; the first
commends him to God, and obtaines a blessing to his labors; the next commends
him to men, and procures him the greater credit to effectuate the good which
he has intended, for the which (said Philo) Sicut bonum ac honestum esse,
Philo de migratione Abraham^.
ita and videri a^ haberi pr^dest. As it is a good thing to be good and honest,
so is it also good that we should be esteemed good, Nonitaque est ^^gligenda
fama restum ad custodian tu^^ ad dignitatem vitae vtilissim^: A good name
therefore is not to be neglected, considering it is a singular help both for
the custody and dignity of our life: for this cause has it always been one
of Satan's customable policies, who stands at the right hand of Ieh^shuah, to
resist him in well doing, Zach. 3.
to stain the Name where he cannot corrupt the Conscience, that by disgra^ing
the instruments, he may destroy, at least diminish the good which feign they
would do: Hoc est Diaboli (...) seruos Dei mendacio laceret, Cyprian ad Anton.
and falsis (...) qui conscientiae su^ luce clarescunt falsis ru^oribus
sordidentur: This is the work of the Devil, to strike the servants of God
with the scourge of a lying tongue, to abase their honest name in the hearts of
others, by wrongful conceptions, and by false reports to defile them, who are
honest in regard of their own consciences.

2 It is a difficult thing to live in a public calling, and not to be
calumniated. So long as our Savior lived a private life, we read not that he
was either tempted by Satan, or traduced by men, but from the time that by
Baptism he was consecrate to do the great work of the promised Messiah, then
Satan set upon him, and the mouths of all his cursed instruments were opened
to blaspheme him. Now we know that the servant is not above the master: H^^^^n
Prolog. 2. (...) Job.
Si aut (...) aut palmarom folia complicarem, vt ins^dore vultus mei panem
comederem, and ventris opus sollicita mente pertrectarem ^^^lus morderet, (...)
reprehenderet, nunc autem iuxta sententiam Saluatoris volo operari cibum qui
non perit, and geminus mihi error infigitur: If were set (said Hierome) to
weaue a basket of twigs, with the bull-rush, or to twist the leaves of
I'alme-trees, or by any such base occupation, I had no more ado, but to care
for my belly, that I might eat my bread in the sweat of my brow, I might do
it all my days, and no man bite me or reprove me for it, but now because,
according to the saying of our Savior, I labor in a spiritual calling, to
nourish my self and others with that bread of life which perishes not, a
double error is enforced upon me, Virum egregium sequitur proximorum inuidia,
Envy always follows virtue: where it can hurt no otherway, it impugnes by
calumny: Nazian.
this is, as Nazianzen calls it, Malum grauissimum, generosam enim (...) um
virorum constautiam labefactere nititur: A most heavy evil, for by it Satan
seeks to weaken the constancy of good men, and so much the greater evil is
it, Ambros.
Quia non solum falsa componit, sed etiam quae pi^gesta sunt decolorat,
Because, faies Ambrose, it not only forges false things, but falsifies true
things, deforming and defacing that with her uncouth colors, which is done
sincerely, and out of a good affi^ction.

3 With the like of these weapons has Satan fought against me in his peevish
instruments, ever since the Lord called me to be a Preacher, and no marvel,
Shall a man trample on a Serpent, and not look to be stinged? I have professed
my self, by the grace of my Lord, a disquieter of Satan's Kingdom, I think
it not strange if he do what he can to disquiet me, disquiet he may,
dishearten he shall not. Shall I be moved at his lying Libellers? Tertul.
No: Absit a seruo Christi tale inquinamentum, vt patientia maioribus
praeparata, in minimis excid at: Far be that spot from the servants of
Christ, that their patience prepared for greater, should fail in so small
tentations, Qu^ cito iniuria mouetur, Amb. Off. lib. 1. to. 5.
facit se dignum videri contumelia, He that is hastily moved with a contumely,
makes it to seem that he is worthy of it. What then, shall I utterly neglect
his false accusations? No, least by them any credit I have to do good unto
others be stolen from me. I will neither suffer an Absalom nor an Achitophel,
A Friend nor a Foe, to steal away from me the hearts of any of Gods people,
if I may stay it. To such therefore as fear God I speak, August. ad Frat. in
Erem.
as Augustine did to his brethren, Mihi sufficit conscientia mea, vobis
necessaria est fama mea, To me my conscience is sufficient, but for you my
good name is necessary. Of such as are mine Enemies either of weakness or
wickedness, I demand as Jacob did of Laban. Now when ye have searched all my
stuff, what have ye found? bring it forth, that we may see it.

4 O, forsooth, ye were once otherwise minded concerning Church-gouernement.
In some things, I confess, I was, in others not. Paritie in Church-gouernment
I ever thought the Mother of confusion, neither can, I see that God has been
the Author of it in any of his works, yea by the diversity of his gifts he
declares that he allows not equality in government, where here, if any
strife be about comparison of gifts, I have no more to say, but that he who in
humility of mind cannot submit himself to obey any other, was never meet to
be a Ruler of others, how great so ever has gifts be.

(...). And that Preachers should have place in Parliament, to give light out
of the holy Oracle, to the Prince and States of the Kingdom, I ever thought it
both reasonable and necessary, and did by my public voice approve it in that
general assembly holden at Dundie, wherein this matter was first motioned. And
in these public Lectures which once in the month we had in our Presbyteriall
exercise, for clearing the Controversies of this time: I did in my course
openly declare, how in Church-gouernment a happy mean were to be wished
between Anarchie and Monarchy, two fearful evils in the Church, the one
proceeding from paritie, wrought confusion, as might be seen in the pitiful
state of the Churches of Flanders: the other breeding tyranny and all sort of
oppression: a lamentable proof whereof we might see in the Churches of Italy,
and other parts under the dominion of that Romish Usurper: thus is there not so
great a cause to charge me with a change, as is alleged.

5 But in that wherein before I misliked Episcopal government, fearing least
tyranny* liberty, and other evils should follow it, if now, perceiving a
Christian King most careful out of his rare piety and wisdom, to see it
used unto the right end, I have changed my mind, as many others, both worthy
Fathers, and brethren in our Church have done, to whom the world cannot deny
an honest testimony: what imputation should this be unto me, Ambros in Psalm.
119.
Cum mentem in melius mutare non leuit as sit sed virtus, since for a man to
change his mind to the better, it is no leuitie nor inconstancy, (as the
lying Libeller terms it) but virtue? Episcopal government was embraced of
this Church ere I was borne, and with it we enjoyed the Gospel for many
years, and some that were worthy and faithful men in this same Ministry of
Perth, wherein I have now labored by the grace of God almost this twenty
years, did discharge (in effect) the same office of a Bishop in the bounds of
Galloway, yea by imposition of their own hands did ordain Bishops of other
Dioces. If there were then a reason, why the Episcopal government once
embraced, being fallen in decay, the Presbyteriall should be established, is it
not now possible (think ye) to get a reason why both of them should be
reunited, the one of them being ordained to honor and strengthen the other,
and being reduced to that order and use, for which anciently it did serve in
the Primitive Church. Especially seeing it is done by the fatherly forecast
and provident care, (not without warrant of Gods word, example of the Primitive
Church, nor advice of the present Church) of such a King as God has given us,
a Professor, a Confessor, a Semi-martyt, a Protector, a Preacher, a Propagator
of the Gospel with us, whose power, for any thing I can yet learn, is greater
in the external government of the Church, then we have well considered of.

6 O but, say you, by this change, the people are made uncertain of their
Religion? This cannot be but the bolt of some enemy, or the birth of the
brain of some friend ouer-farre miscarried with opinion. If it has done evil
to any, it is an argument, their light is weak: for why? does diuersiue of
external government import a difference in Religion? Are there not many famous
Churches in Europe, flourishing this day under the Episcopal government? have
not many Bishops themselves been honored with the honor of Martyrdom, and
sealed the truth of the Gospel with their blood, since the reformation of
Religion: Latmer, Ridley, Cranmer, and many more in our neighbor Church may
stand for examples. I will beseech all such weak Christians to take none
offense, Aug. Confess. Art. 7.
where it is not given. Ad v^itate^ fidei sufficit vt ^adem sit doctrina
Euangelij and Sacramentorum administratio: It is sufficient for the unity of
faith, that the Doctrine of the Gospel and Sacraments be one and the same: in
other external things, there may be diversity, yea often times the diversity
of times, and states of people will require a diversity of external things,
for the furtherance of the work of edification.

7 The Apostles did all teach one, and the selfsame Doctrine, but did not all
govern their Churches in one and the selfsame manner: for James and Peter
among the Jews tolerated Circumcision, which Paul among the Gentiles would not
do; yea, the Disciples of S. Peter and S. John, testify how these blessed
Apostles kept the Feast of the Pass^ouer on diverse days, as both Eusebius and
Socrates do write: yet was this diversity no impediment to the propagation of
the Gospel by them both. It is ever to be considered, what the work of
edification requires. For that kind of external government which some
Churches of Christ has, and others has not: shall there be entertained a
Schism in our Church? and an unnecessary and unkindly contention, between a
Christian people, and their most Christian King. Since to speak in most modest
terms, to give contentment to such as are not contentious, there is no
question of Faith in the Church of Scotland (Christian people might be ignorant
of this disputation about Discipline, and come to heaven nevertheless, if so
it might please some of their Pastors) neither is there a question between
good and evil, but between good and better; between two, whereof either of
them have had their course to be, when the other was not; even in this same
Church, I doubt not, the judicious Reader will consider this, and Wisdom
shall be justified of her children.

8 But here I know it is objected by men, even of moderate minds, if such
government were better used, and these who have received it, did more good with
it, then it would soon purchase credit to it self, and be the better liked.
These men I see have nothing against the thing it self, but against the use of
it, by which kind of argument now commonly it is impugned. To these it were
sufficient to answer, that Artisicum errata, artibus attribu^^^ mon sunt, the
errors of Artisans are not to be ascribed to the Arts themselves, or to such as
more wilfully reason in this manner, to answer, as Nazi^^zen did the
Eunomians, Nazian.
Cum in se ^ihil pr^^^^ij habeant, in nostra illud (...) Where in themselves
they have no strength, they seek it in our imbecillitie: Et de malorum in
(...) sciutilla flammam ex^^tant and ad (...) affland^ tollunt, vt long (...)
Babilo^^^^ superet: Of a little spark of evil in us, they kindle a great
fire, by blowing upon it with their secret surmisings, and public reproaches,
till they make the flame, which they have raised out of a spark, to mount up
higher then the furnace of Babel: thus is it the manner of men to blame readily
where they love not.

9 But to go further with them, as with all reason I require, that the faults
of persons be not imputed to their Offices; so with my heart do I wish in all
that are employed with Ecclesiastical authority, so moderate a behavior,
that no offense should be given to the weak, nor cause of contradiction to the
contrary minded: but that as Joseph's preferment, tending to the good of all his
brethren, forced them, who envied it at the first, to thank God for it at the
last: even so, credit may be conquest to us in the hearts of them that fear
God, by fervent and faithful advancement of the Gospel of Christ Jesus. We
should never forget that warning which Jerome gave to a certain Bishop;
Rusticus Narbonensis, vide ne minor inueni ar is in Chris^^ (...) in hoe
seculo: Take heed that thou be not found less in Christ, then thou art named
in this world; thou art called a Bishop, so live, that Christ that great
Archbishop may approve thee for one.

10 But yet by some carnal and contentious spirits, who live as if they were
Demigods, and in their tongues God had set his tribunal, or had made them
Judges of the consciences of their brethren, it is objected, published, and
carried from hand to hand, in a Libell, as full of lies as lines, that^ corrupt
respects of gain and glory has moved me to embrace it: a fearful
crimination, if I were as guilty of it, as they are bold to affirm it. I know
it is a horrible sin to abuse an holy calling to filthy luere: the Apostle
said, that godl^nesse is great gain, that is to say, that great gain is
godliness; Questum (...) pi^tatem. It is a perverse order: Beza.
Terrena coelestibus ^ercari, to buy earthly things with heavenly, where the
spiritual Ministri^ teaches us to exchange earthly things for heavenly, such
impiety as this will be punished with a worse leprosy, then that of Gehazi.
And no loss abominable is it, to abuse it to vainglory and affectation of
honor: it is a grosser idolattie then that of the Israelites, who of the gold
and silver which they reserved from the Lord, Hosea, 2. 8.
made a Baal to themselves.

11 To such I will answer, as Augustine did to Petilian, I am a man
appertaining to the floor of Christ, if I be good, August.
I am there as corn, if I be evil, I am there as chafe, Sed non est huius
areae ventilabrum lingua Petitiani, But your Petulant tongue, like the tongue
of Petilian, is not the fan of this floor. If any man think he knows me
better then I do my self, let him give judgment as he pleases, and others
believe him as they list: if they will credit me of my self, my witness is in
heaven, and my conscience within me bears me record, that I was not moved
with gain or glory, and I trust to declare it by Gods grace. Amb. Off.
But what? Been sibi conscius non debet falsis moueri, nec putare plus esse
Ponderis in alieno co^^itio, quam in suo testimonis: He that has in himself
a good conscience, should not be moved with false conceptions in others, nor
esteem that there is greater weight in other men's traducing, then in his own
testimony.

12 Now here I know it is expected, that as I have declined the causes falsely
imputed to me, so I should declare the true causes that moved me, which now
shortly are these.

13 First, I perceived a Christian King, by all means possible, seeking the
advancement of the Gospel, for the which it is grief enough that his Majesty
sustaineth the greatest hatred and contradiction of the adversaries, but more
then enough, his Highness should want the comfort of his subjects, professors
also: which when I considered, I thought it a matter of conscience to refuse to
serve and follow his Majesty in so good a course.

14 Secondly, I saw the weak hearts of many well affected Christians, through
misconception, offended at the very name of a Bishop, not able out of light and
knowledge to give any reason of their misliking, notwithstanding, though it be
so highly honored by the Apostle, and commended by the famous lights of the
Primitive Church, who not only accepted the name, but exercised the office
thereof, to the great good of the Church: and that this offense might be
removed, at least so far as my credit may carry me, I have embraced it.

15 Thirdly, I perceived a perilous Schism, and unnecessary division in our
Church, for this matter of government, to the great advantage of the common
Adversary, which gap I resolved, for my own part, not to enlarge by
contention, but so far as my weakness may to close it up, at least to make
it the less.

16 Fourthly, I considered, that the same reason, that of old forced the
Fathers of the Primitive Church, in the judgment of Jerome, to induce this
government in the Church, that is, in Remedium Schismatis, did more then
manifestly require that it should be restored unto us: but of this the less I
speak for duties sake, the more I leave to be considered of them, who know the
truth hereof.

17 Fifthly, the question among us when I searched as narrowly as I could, is
about Ierusalems wall, whether it should be circular or quadrangular, round or
foure-squared: so the City be well, is this a matter for which we should make
contention, it being better for the good of the Church, that any one of them
should be, then that thus they should strive together, to the great hinderance
of the Gospel.

18 Sixthly, and I do verily think that the most famous and reformed Churches
in Europe, who want this government, would be glad to accept it, upon this
condition, that with it they might enjoy the purity of the Gospel, which they
have with us, together with that liberty, favor and protection of a Christian
reformed King, which we have, and they want.

19 For these reasons, as I was determined before, in the private calling of a
Preacher, to reverence and obey others my brethren, clad with the office of
Bishops, the proof whereof I gave in these Provincial assemblies, moderated
by Bishops, whereat I was bound to be present, so have I at length embraced it
in my own person, being called thereunto by the most Christian King, and
Church of this Kingdom, without any motion, affection, or petition of mine
own (if there be so much charity in my adversaries as to believe me) I could
with greater contentment and willingness of mind, have given obedience in all
dutiful submission to any of my brethren, nor to have had any more public
charge in the Church (if the matter had been in my choice.) And this do I
witness out of the very truth and simplicity of mine heart.

20 If Shimei still will rail, and charge me with a corrupt affection, let
him be doing till his own iniquity reprove him, I am sure no well advised
Christian will fight with any such armor, for the weapons of our warfare are
not carnal, but spiritual. As for others, who like barking Dogs and Birds
of the night, chatter to themselves in secret confused sounds, which can bide
no trial, backbiting those whom they dare not look in the face, for such as
these, why shall a man turn out of the way? It is a sufficient punishment to
such as this way with their will would hurt me, that against their will they
shall help me, Aug. cont. liter. Petil. lib. 3. c. 7.
Qui volens detrahit same me, nolens additmer^^^^ meae, For he that with his
will empaites my name, against his will, shall increase my reward.

21 But if such busy idle-bodies will come and labor with me in the work of
God, I hope to teach them to bestow their time more profitably, not to
disquiet, as they do, their unsettled brains with such vanities, as vanish so
soon as they are conceived, and brought forth, leaving nothing behind them
but a guiltiness to themselves, for mine own part I have determined not to be
contentious, for that is not the custom of the Church of Christ, but have
resolved to spend my time and talent I have saved to the vantage of my Master,
and good of my Brethren, after my weak measure, Aur^us vtluteas minuat sic
malleus vrnas.

22 As for others my Brethren, whom I love in the Lord, and will always
reverence for the graces of God in them, I wish from my heart that precept of
the Apostle were fulfilled in us. 1 Cor. 1.
That we did all speak one thing, and there were no dissension among us, but
that we were knit together in one mind, and one judgment, for since the first
beginning of this question, I ever thought it a lamentable thing, that they
whose hearts are joined in one resolution to die for Christ, if so the Lord
should call them unto it, cannot live together in the unity of one mind. But
this has in all ages been Satan's policy, where he cannot disturb the
peace of the Church with external evasion, he creepes in like a subtle
Serpent, to disquiet it with internal perturbation, and that oft-times upon
unnecessary or small occasions: whereupon has proceeded this great rupture
in Ierusalems wall here among us, which as it is seen of us all, and more
then enough talked of by many, so would to God, our hearts did pity it, and
all of us endeavored by humbled hearts toward our God, by meekness of mind,
every one of us toward another, to repair and close it up again. And seeing
such in the condition of our humane infirmity, that our knowledge in this life
is but in part, and so our judgments in all things cannot be uniform, let us
take heed to the next, that difference of judgments work not distraction of
affections, remembering that the wisdom which is from above, is peaceable, and
that the zeal of God fights not with the weapons of flesh, such as hatred,
debate, Iam. 1.
emulations, wrath, contentions. I^ we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in
the Spirit, expressing the fruits of it in our lives, which are, love, joy,
peace, long suffering, meekness, goodness, wherewith the Lord more and more
endue us all for Christ's sake, AMEN.

Yours in the Lord, WILLIAM COOPER, B. of Galloway.

FINIS.
A DEFENSE OF THE BISHOP OF Galloway his Apology, against the Paralogie of Mr.
D. H.
PSALM. 7. 10. My defense is in God, who preserves the upright in heart.
I Received from Master David a Gentleman of sundry good qualities (if they
were seasoned with greater soberness, piety, and love) An admonitorie letter;
(as he calls it) intending thereby to make mine Apology Anapologeticke; but
indeed, as it will show it self, An Accusatorie libell, dentata Charta,
(...), written in defense of those falsehoods, which the former shameless, and
namelesse Libeller had forged against me, and which now I am forced again to
improve, that all honest men may see mine Apology Euapolegeticke, my defense
easily defended, and with reason.

inanis, and inanimis oration, a vain declamation, void of spirit, life, truth
and love; stored with such carnal boastings, contemptible reproaches,
raylings, false lyings, and iterate criminations, as ministered unto me manifest
proofs, that the Spirit which has stirred him up to this unchristian and
contentious dealing, proceeds from the father of lies, who has so far
miscarried him out of the compass of Christian modesty, Aug de. verb. Dom
as to show himself Non correctorm, sed traditorem, non correptorem, sed
corrosorem, Not a corrector, Ber. epist. 78.
but a betrayer, not a reprouer, but a biting deuourer: for which I went again
the second time, and upon the knees of mine heart, spread it out before God, as
good Ezekiah did the railing of Rabsache.

possessing (as our Savior counsels) my soul in patience, which the
admonent out of his impatience, wrongfully, and vainly had besieged without,
remembering that of Nazianzene, Nazian. lib. cyg. Carm.
In irae praelio risus optima est armatura, in a battle ^f warth, foughten
with words, Chrysoft in Joan. cap. 7.
laughter is best armor, Quid enim, an non dives, si pauper appellatur, ridet,
quia fal^um id nouit? For why, will not a rich man if he be called poor, laugh
in himself, because he knows it is false, which is said of him? Howsoever
mine opponent please himself, in saying what he will, it is notorious to me,
he has said what he should not, to him it is truth (as he says) by
appearance, to me it is certainly known to be an untruth.

In this testimony as I have said, I would willingly arietem in nos
immisisset, yea by displayed banner had made known unto others, that he
intended battle against me, before he had given up, or made any signification
unto me, and there-after when his admonition came to me, he warnes me by his
letter sent with it, that I should not receive it, as private, but public,
because (forsooth) a public matter must be publicly handled, with many other
pert probations to trial, giving out great brags, that he has sought many,
but can find none to encounter with him, Et calum territat armis, nec minus
gloriatur, quam si argiuum abstul^sset clypeum. Beside, that his particular
imputations are so shameless, as to charge me plainly for a Teacher of false
Doctrine, and a man of corrupt conscience. And I know this Treatise of his is
carried from hand to hand among those of his own humor, like an Idol, in a
procession of triumph, admired, yea adored, as if it were some new Apollinis
oraculum. That duty also which I own to my brethren, and all honest,
peaceable, and well affected Christians, binds me to give them just
satisfaction for removing such offenses as this adversary has laid before
them. Cler. Romans Cyp. epist. 31.
Quamuis enim animus been sibi conscius Deo solo contentus esse soleat, nec
alterius, aut lauds petere, aut accusationes pertimescere geminata tamen laud
sunt condigni, qui cum consci^ntiam sciant se soli Deo debere iudici actus
tamen suos desiderant, ab ipsis etiam fratribus comprobari. For albeit, an
honest conscience contents it self with God, and neither seeks the praise,
nor fears the accusation of another, yet are they worthy of double praise,
who knowing that God is the only Judge of their conscience, desires never the
less, their actions may be approved of their brethren. In all these respects I
hope it shall be none offense to modest men, that I have broken my determinate
silence, and resolved once for all to answer, I will not say a Fool, yet
certainly an inconsiderate man, Pro. 26. 5.
least he seem to be wise in his own conceit.

David his whole Treatise consists of raylings, and reasonings: the forefront,
or vantgard of his battle he commits to raylings, and these disordered and
confused, altogether: wherein I must excuse him, it being hard to keep such
wild Warriors in rule, as here he has hired against me. I have gone through
them with order, and reduced them to four ranckes: raylings, first against my
Name. 2. against my Conscience. 3. against my Ministry. 4. against my
Brethren clothed with the office of Bishops. In the end, he comes more
modestly to enquire of the cause, and there by Gods grace, he shall find me,
as modest as he seeks me, ready with words of soberness and truth, to
resolve him, if he be ready with like affection to receive it. But as to his
behavior in the beginning: I would truly have dealt with him in the Spirit
of meekness, 1 Cor. 4.
I love it best, but he has forced me to come with a rod; yea, it is good
for him and others, I should so do: Since I am a Pastor, and he a Sheep of
the Flock: since he has showed me the sore, and protests in word he is
content I should cure it: Since I see his corruption so gross, and that the
canker thereof is like to eat him up, I cannot of duty but apply the
greatest, the sharpest salt I can get to rectify it. Excuse me Master David,
though it should bite you, better so, that you may be mended, then otherwise,
that this cankred corruption should consume you, which it will not fail to
do, if it be not in time prevented.

For, believe, me, you have come forth, not like a David, but an old
Diogenes: Canis and tuba conuitiorum, Not with the gentle oil of admonition,
nor with the sharper wine of compunction, both which are necessary in
correcting offenses by rebukes, and used by the sweet Samaritane in curing the
wounds of his own, Ber.
Vngendo sanat Christus Iehouae, non vrendo, But you are a Physician of another
quality, you have propined a Cup full of the gall of your bitterness, it is
returned back to your self, Psalm. 37. 14.
and you must drink it, You have drawn your sword to slay such as be of
upright conversation, and it is entered into your own bowels: You would kindle
a hellish fire in an heavenly fellowshippe, and pester the Paradise of GOD
with the pest and poison of Satan. You bring in works of the flesh, hatred,
emulation, wrath, contention, sedition, envy, lying, railing, heresy: (for
you are the first Father of this calumny, that in our Church are Teachers of
false Doctrine) to defend, as you think a Spiritual cause. This is
intolerable in the Church, this is to shame the Church (so far as you may.)

It were but a just recompense of your presumption, to pay you home with your
own money. Neither is it always reproueable (said Nazian.) Radentem vicissim
radere; I know he commends Hero the Martyr, that he came out against the
Cynicks of his time, Canis aduersus veros canes: but where the injury
concerns my self, I will not so requi^e you. You have judged my conscience to
be corrupt, and done what you could to defame me, I will not do the like to
you. I am bound by the Apostles precept, Romans 12. 17.
recompense to no man evil for evil. And again, Be not overcome of evil,
but overcome evil with goodness. Ver. 21. I remember mine own lesson in the
Alphabet for Sions Scholars, it is dangerous to fight against Satan with his
own armor, to give rebuke for rebuke, Turtul.
and pay home one calumny with another: for I know there is no difference
inter prouocantem et prouocatum, Nazian. Eustochio. epist. 55.
nisi quod ille prior in maleficio depraehenditur. I esteem it neither
wisdom then manhood, Cum virtute vincere liceat vitio superari, aut etiam
superare, quod multo sceleratius est: When a man may overcome by virtue, to
suffer himself be overcome by vice in another, or which is much worse, to
strive by it to overcome others.

But where your reproaches are not private, nor personal only, but public,
concerning the whole Church, I cannot of duty but speak of them as they are
under, such names and styles as they deserve: for the cause is common, and the
Ministry of a public Office-bearer in the Church, is for the benefit of
others, where it is good, and honest, the defaming of it, is not without the
prejudice of many, that should receive good by it. In this you have degressed
so inordinately out of the compass of Christian duty, that I am forced to
come to you with a fire from God, to burn up, extinguish and undo your
uncouth fire, and with an holy anger, as the hammer of God, to beat down the
horn of your pride. That same holy Spirit, which at one time descended in the
likeness of a Dove, at another descended in the similitude of Fire. Meekness
always is not to be used: there is a time when it becomes Moses, the meekest
man of the earth, to be angry. I dare not say I can rule anger, as he did, but
shall do what I may to restrain it. I know then only is anger good, when it
is a servant to reason, Basil. Ser. de ira.
and a Soldier fighting for the truth, Tunc neruus quidam animae est
indignatio, fortitudinem ad res been gerendas praebens. And here if any shame
of this conflict arise unto you, it is not by my deed, you have drawn it upon
your self. As the dirt which the Sea foames and casts up in her flowing,
returns back again without difficulty into her own bosom in the ebbing:
so is it, believe me, with you; you have here but foamed out your own shame,
your reproaches and calumnies, which you have here heaped up, and dawbed
together with untempered mortar, so soon as they are touched, fall back upon
your self, and it is not my rebuke, but your own, returning unto you.

You have drawn me from mine accustomed course 2 Samuel 2^.
like another Bichraean Sheba, that I am forced to do as I have done.

Yet by Gods grace two things I shall keep, Patience and Love, the one in my
self, Aug. Marcel. Epist. 5.
Cauendum enim est ne vindictae cupiditate amittatur ipsa patientia, quae
pluris est habenda, quam omne quod potest inimicus etiam inuito auferre. The
other toward you, I have, and I will love you, whether you will or not, neither
shall your raging in this Fever, alienate mine affection from you. But indeed,
I looked for better fruits from you, and expected you should have been
answerable to your style, Theagrius. The husbandry of God should abound in
fruits of the Spirit, which are love, peace, gentleness, goodness,
meekness: but how far you have digressed from these, I hope you will see
better, when you come to your self again? Psalm. 55. 12.
Surely if mine enemy had defamed me, I could have borne it, or if mine
adversary had exalted himself against me, I would have hid my self from
him: but it was thou, O man, even my familiar, and my companion, who delighted
to consult together, and go to the house of God as companions: What can the
most professed enemy of the Gospel do more then you have done. You have
rewarded me evil for good, and so have brought your self under the danger of
that fearful sentence: Psalm. 35. 12.
He that rewards evil for good, evil shall never depart from his house: I
wish your eyes may be opened to see it, and God may give you grace in time to
repent of it. But now to come to the matter.



THE ADMONENT.
RIght loved brother, while I am in expectation of the answer you promised to
my Letters, I received by euenture your Apology written in defense of your
fame, as you give it out in your Preface, and proves you should so do by
diverse authorities of diverse Doctors, yet as good will think Fame should be
despised, or procured, and retained by good actions, etc.

THE ANSWER.
HVmano capiti ceruicem pictor equinam, etc.

Mr. David begins at right loved brother; but that this agrees no better with
the progress of his Paralogie, then a man's head set upon a beasts body, will
be manifest in the own place. Revel. 9.
The Locusts that came out of the bottomless pit, had a face like a man's face,
but their teeth were as the teeth of Lions, and their tails like unto the
Scorpion, it becomes not a professed Christian to be like one of them. Do you
not here come to me, as Ioab did to Amasa, he took him by the beard with the
right hand, to kiss him, and said, Art thou in health my brother? Pro. 26. 23.
and smote him with the left hand. As silver dross ouer-laied upon a
pot-shard, so are burning lips, and a false heart: if a loving heart had moved
your lips in loving manner, to call me Right loved brother, you would have
spared to spew out such raylings as after follows, but you have bewrayed your
self: Solomon here has found you out, to be but a guilt Pot-shard,
pretending by one word Christian brotherhood, when all the rest of your words
and deeds, proves the contrary, as concerning me.

What euenture carried mine Apology to you, I care Libeller, I did it with such
moderation of words, as I cannot think it offended any man, if I were in the
wrong to any, it was to my Brethren, who stand for Episcopal government, in
that I set it lower, to procure peace, then I should have done; yet it offends
Mr. David, though it no way concern him, he will be a busic-bodie, and meddle
with other men's matters, whereunto he has neither calling nor commission.

Philo, Tertullian, Jerome, Ambrose, Nazianzene, Augustine: These men are small
in Mr. David's conceit, here in the very entry giving us a taste of that humor,
wherein you continue and increase in the rest, liberal enough in your (as
good) a word frequently used of them who are scant of matter, and yet feign
would be contending: but this chair is too high for you, to be the Palemon of
Doctors past, and present; can you tell their value, can you match them
rightly? you still usurp it, but will be found to take too much upon you.

A name, says your Doctors, should be despised, or else say you obtained, and
retained by good actions, not by Apologies. The first is true, no man denies
it, a good name should be procured by good deeds, but why seclude you the
second? Are not Apologies lawful, yea needful, to conserve a good name,
begotten of good actions, when an evil tongue would destroy it? For why? will
good actions stop the mouths of backbiters? Will innocence it self fence a
man against the strife of tongues? No, it kept not Jesus the just from the
scourge of the tongue. Was not Samuel an unrebukable man among men, yet forced
to use Apology: 1 Samuel 12. 3.
Behold, here am I, bear record of me before the Lord, whose Ox have I taken?
or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I done wrong to? or whom have I hurt?
or at whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? Mr.
David, many a time in your admonitorie, you charge me for a corrupt lover of
gain: but I adhere to Samuels protestation before the Lord against you, and
against all creatures. I could tell at how many hands I have refused gain,
even for a show of ungodliness, but that creature was not, is not, that can
convict me of receiving it. And was not Saint Paul, a faithful servant of God,
a painful man in the work of the Ministry, yet compelled to plead his cause
by Apologies before men. What shall I say, the Christians of the primitive
Church were men of a godly life, yet so sore oppressed with calumnies that
Justin, Tertullian, and other Fathers of the Church were forced to defend them
by Apologies? A worthy, constant, and courageous man of God was Athanasius: was
he not without cause accused as a Murderer and Sorcerer, that he had slain
Arsenius, and cut off his right arm, to use it in witchcraft, and so forced to
purge himself by Apology?

And is not this it, which I told you so clearly in committed to me, though
least, and unworthiest of all his servants: But my Lord prayed for me, and his
grace preserved me, that Satan got no vantage against me, to the disadvantage
of the Gospel: but now he has changed his battle,
and here is the point; what Satan could never obtain of me by inward
tentation, he would make the world believe by outward calumny, that he had
obtained it, and that he had made me a man of a corrupt conscience, and of an
dishonest heart toward God and man. Before he fought against me with inward
tentations, and I resisted him by instant prayer; now he impugnes me by outward
calumnies, he has not, I thank God, corrupted my conscience, but he would
make men believe that he had done it: and here it offends Mr. David, I should
resist the enemy, and defend my self by Apologies: Since he has changed the
manner of his onset, why may not I change the manner of my Defense? for in all
this I take him for my principal party.

wind and a fiery Chariot to carry Elijah into heaven. Since there must be an
Angel of Satan to buffet Paul, and keep him from pride: Since there must be a
fire to purge the sons of Leui, I mean of affliction, which unto the godly
is (...), the Purgatory fire of Pisida, since gold cannot be fined but by
Lead, which consumes and finishes it self in the fining of it: let it come by
any instrument, by you, or any other the Lord pleases to stir up, so it
bring forward his work in me, I care not.

THE ADMONENT.
Moreover, I am sure ye know it is with the oppugning of the Discipline of
Scotland, the defense of the office of Bishops: This is more then any man's
fame, the fame of the whole Church of Scotland these many years, the fame of
the best reformed Church in Europe. It is yet more, a matter touching the
Church in lawfulness or unlawfulness, in obedience or disobedience to their
God, to their Prince, as you would make men believe. Also of the estate of the
Church in profit, flourishing, or not flourishing, and many such things of
great importance, of what weight should fame be here? And again, If fame be
joined with the truth, and that which is right in the sight of God, let that
truth and that right have the sway in our hearts, let it appear in our
profession. In our pretenses, in our actions, let us auow it before the Sun
and Moon, not because of our fame, but because of it self, we shall have no
loss thereby, our fame shall be cleared, by clearing of it. If our fame be
joined* with error, or what is wrong in the eyes of that divine Majesty, so
that it cannot be borne out, but by bearing out of error, let us not seek to
maintain our fame by maintaining that error; let us stoop to him, and
renounce that foolish fame, and count it our honor so to confess our shame.

THE ANSWER.
HE that is first in his own cause (says Saloman) is Pro. 18. 17.
then comes his neighbor, and makes inquiry of him. You have heaped up
here a multitude of words, huing a fair show, not unlike the words of the
friends of Job, good enough in themselves, but wrongfully applied, as will be
seen by mine answer. Far be it from me Mr. David, to seek honor with the
dishonor of my good God: I will still use the words of those forty Martyrs
mentioned of Basile, Nolo honorem vnde nascetur ignominia, Basil. Ser. in 4.
Mar. 1.
Neither will I maintain my Name by impairing his Truth: Nay, nay, God forbid
I should so do, but it is for his truth, and for the honor of his name that I
contend to maintain my poor name. Since the Lord has counted me faithful,
and put me in his service; since he has called me to be a witness of his
truth, and since he has blessed my Ministry to do good by it; will you not
suffer me to defend the honesty of it against a lying Libeller that has
sought to dishonor it? But I know where you are, Satan would have me a
witness of no value, nor credit, because through grace I stand under the
banner of Christ against him, and so would you, because I am against you in
this question of Church-gouernement: you seek so far as you may to disgrace
the man, that his testimony may be the less regarded. Here is your policy,
but it will not be for you. I thank God, among men I have more to stand with
me, witnesses of the honesty and effcacie of my weak Ministry, then you are
able to bring against me: neither am I in doubt, but the same also who for the
present are with you, if it pleased God I were known to them, as I am to
others, who have felt the comfort of my Ministry, would stand up to justify
me against you. But to leave men, and come before the Lord, Mr. David, I dare
not speak presumptuously, since our Lord in the weakness of one, have
pointed out the infirmity of all, yet in some measure I may say, I have name,
and life, and all that I have to give unto the Lord for the glory of his name,
and fealing up of his truth, if his Majesty require it, I trust he will give
grace to perform it. Neither care I what shame befall me, so it may serve to
hold up the honor of my God. If this inward testimony of mine own heart
sustained me not, it had been impossible for me to have borne the manifold
contempts of flesh I have suffered, and this of yours among the rest, but to
go from my self.

The discipline of the Church of Scotland, is not

The Church of Scotland,
with the purity of Doctrine, not stained with any blot of Heresy, has also
kept a sound, and constant form of government, without alteration of any
point of Discipline in substance, mending only some circumstances, as time
required, to make them serve for the greater edification of the Church.

This is the point I promised to clear unto you, I Katagoric Pamphlet had not
distracted me. This Mr. David is the state of the controversy: This is a
truth, which neither you, nor your Trident Fathers, nor your Sorbon Doctors,
none with you, none by West you, none by East you, none about you will ever be
able to impugn. And if you, or they have any compassion of this Church, if you
be her Son, a Christian, borne again in her bosom, if you have sucked out
of her breasts the milk of consolation, then I am sure you will fear to
impugn it: Since as I said it is a truth, it is the honor of your Mother, who
in all times has kept one constant tenor of Doctrine and Discipline, since it
procures peace in her bowels, since it stops the adversaries mouth, and remoues
offenses from the weaker ones.

THE ADMONENT.
I Am sure you know that this defense of your name, is with the touch of many
men's fame, even all those who are of a contrary mind in matter of Discipline:
but you think you care not for that, it is lawful for you to defend your
own, though with the interest of theirs. And again you say: That such as
shall be liberal to speak against you, appearingly you call them carnal
contentious Spirits, Demigods, as if God had set his tribunal in their
tongue, or made them Judges of men's Consciences, Libellers of lies, Shemeis,
Raylers, Busybodies, Night-birds, etc.

THE ANSWER.
of the children of men set on fire, Psalm. 57.
whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword? Are you
not here blowing at the coal, to kindle if you can a fire among brethren. To
strengthen your feeble cause* you cry for a party* and goes about, not with
the godly policy of S. Paul, to divide Pharisees and Sadduces, but with the
godless impiety of the Serpent, to sow the seed of dissension among
brethren. That euill-one does it in the night, when men are sleeping, and you
are not afraid to do it in the day, Psalm. 58.
and all men looking upon you. Is it true which you have said, speak you
justly, and have you judged uprightly? Will you throw these words of mine
against my brethren? are you become so brazen-faced? have you shaken off all
shame, and taken liberty to say what you like, yea even against your own
light? for you dare not say plainly to it, but appearingly, say you, I call
them so. Are not my words plain? said I not in mine Apology, I am sure no
well advised Christian will fight with such armor? if I think no Christian
will do it, far less will any brother of the Ministry do it. Are they who
are contrary minded in Church-gouernment, otherwise styled by me, then
Reverend Fathers, or Brethren? God knows they are so in my heart, as I have
termed them in speech. Yet you say I have injured them in their name.

My speech was then against a lying Libeller, and Epithets rehearsed by you are
competent, a few only excepted, Carnally contentious a railing busie-bodie, a
Dem^god; usurping Gods tribunal, you have here declared your self but of
others I clear you, that you are not a night-bird, a chatterer in secret; a
biter behind backs: For the height of your pride, and stoutnesse of your
conceit carries you so far, that you think it too little for the greatness
of your reputation to be a Pestilence walking in darkness. Psalm. 91. 6.
Nay, for the honor of your name, you must be daemonum meridianum, a plague
that destroys at noone, and an arrowe that flies by day, to slay the innocent.
This is wickedness more then enough; and yet, Vt sit supra modum peccans
peccatum, you will add drunkenness to thirst, and not content to slay one,
you will (as I said) be a firebrand in the Church to burn all, kindling,
continuing, increasing fiery contention among brethren.

et sic oleum camino addere. Think you Mr. David to go between us and our
brethren; believe me, they need not your patrocinie at our hands, nor we
yours, or any man's at theirs, even the Lord knows how we have tendered their
names, they are our brethren, we dare go nearer them then you, to live with
them, to die with them: where discrepance of judgment is about things
external, God knows it is with our mutual grief: where consonance is, as
blessed be the Lord it is in all points of Faith, it is with our mutual joy.
And since the beginning of this Controversy, I did ever think it a lamentable
thing, to see such as agree in unity of faith, disagree in a matter of
Discipline, and that those who could happily have concorded on a scaffold, to
scale the truth of God, professed by them both; if so the Lord had called them
unto it, should thus unnecessarily discord for a question of external
Church-gouernement, in it self not absolutely requisite to Salvation.

But this (as I said in mine Apology) is the pitiful he would set peace in
Ierusalems borders, and unite the hearts of his servants into one. Neither will
I despair of it, but will pray the Lord to stir up in this Church such a man
as Athanasius was, and bless the work of this Union in his hands. A powerful
instrument of the Lord was he to conserve purity of Doctrine by his singular
constancy, with peace among Preachers by his godly wisdom: for this was he
renowned, as Columen Ecclesiae in his time. Many times was he banished by
deceit, and oftentimes forced to fly, to eschew the fury of his enemy: but
none of all his sufferings purchased him such commendation as this, that when
he came home, and found a Schism among the Fathers of the Church, for a
greater cause then any that is among us (praised be God) yet he happily
composed it, Nazian* de laud Athan.
Vtraque enim part leniter and humane accersita verborumque sententia
diligenter, and accurrate perpensa postaquam Concordes reperit, nec quantum ad
doctrinam quicquam inter se dissidentes, ita negotium transegit, vt nominum
vsum ipsis concedens, rebus ipsos constringeret* For calling both the parties
with meekness and love unto him, and iudiciously pondering either of their
opinions, he perceived that concerning Doctrine there was no difference, the
diversity was about words, the matter which either of them believed, one and
the same, he did therefore so compose this discord, that leaving unto them
free the use of the words and names, he bound them both with necessity of the
matter it self. I wish again that such an Athanasius were among us, for I can
see nothing but strife about words and persons (there being otherwise agreement
both in the matter of Doctrine and Discipline.) The same power of government
that now is in our Church, was always in it, now under the name of a Bishop,
before under a name equivalent to it. And when both the names were silent; yet
the power of them both ever exercised by some: When the name was not, the
matter remained, the power I mean in substance: But now contention is grown
to such heat, that an Office toll^rably lawful, needful in it self, is
thought intolerable under such a name, and for such persons as are with it, or
against it. A lamentable matter, for the which I sigh within my self, and do
yet the third time cry for an Athanas^us.

Paralogie containing raylings against my name, you conclude this way.

THE ADMONENT.
Lo, Brother, what I think right concerning your name.

THE ANSWER.
THis is the second, and yet the last time that you Pro. 26. 28.
As he that faigneth himself mad casts firebrands, arrows, and mortal
things, so deals the deceitful man with his friend, and says, am not I in
sport? Mr. David in a fury, without rithme or reason, strikes all that are
about him, friend or foe, as you will hear, and then will mend all with a
word, I am but in sport, and am your brother. Solomon says, that this is to
play the deceiuer.

THE ADMONENT.
YOur fame is in a hard case, Sect. 2.
very hard to be cleared from some blemish, etc.

Thus stands it with your fame, Sect. 4.
which I cannot see, how it shall be remedied. And again: Chiefly that Idol
Fame, which you travail so to maintain: believe me there is no remedy, down
it must, and best by your self, your own hand may pull it down more easily,
others must more rudely. Think not; your Apologies will do the turn,
Palmodies must do it.

THE ANSWER.
David, be not so sudden* be appeased but a little, and I will pay you to the
uttermost farthing; if I do not, then pull all down at your pleasure. A
righteous man (says Solomon) has compassion over his beast, but the mercies
of the wicked are cruelty. Mr. David, why will you be so cruel as at one
stroke to slay both my self and my name, yea to bury my name, ere I be dead
my self* and that without any pity or compassion? If you had any love, you
would have mourned at least a little over it, because once it did good, once it
smelled well. Though there be not a Tribe cut off from Israel (and even they
were sorry for it, Judge. 21. 6.
which had done it) yet is there a man in your conceit cut off from Israel, and
you insult in the doing of it, yea, and have triumphed with your accomplices
during this interim of a none answer, neither can you keep it close, but in
your pride proclaim it, that you have slain a man. 1 Samuel 30. 16.
Yet it is but the Amalekites dance: your pray will quickly be taken from you;
what you thought you had done, you will find it undone. It but fares with
you, as Philo says it did with Cain: Then Cain arose against his brother Abel,
and slew him, (...), Phil.
whom slew he? not Abel, no: he slew himself. It seems, says he, (...), an
incredible Paradoxe, yet is it true (...). Abel is taken away in the foolish
mind of Cain, but he lives in God a blessed life; and my name which in your
conceit is past remedy, I suppose with you it is perished clean in Preston,
and you have buried it there, never to rise again: yet I am a man that
believes the resurrection of the dead, even of them who are dead, and buried in
Preston also. Athan. cont. gent.
But Mr. David, know you not that the Sun shines clearly in some parts, even
when it is obscured in others? I am sure you cannot be ignorant of this, that
when the Sun is obscured by clouds or smoke in Preston, yet other parts of
the Kingdom sees it clearly enough, and there also where it is obscured for a
time, it will shine again. Who sent a wind, and drove the Locusts of Egypt
into the red Sea? Who scattered the smoke that came from the bottomless pit,
to darken the Sun? Is it not the Lord who sows light for the righteous? he
brings to light things that are hid in darkness. I will still walk in the
innocence and simplicity of mine heart, and not spare to speak to men, what
I have been taught of God, nothing moved either with your calumnies, or other
men's contempt. 2 Samuel 6. 22. Mich. 7. 9.
And of these men that have despised me, shall I be had in honor: when God
shall plead my cause, execute judgment for me, and bring me forth into the
light.

But now as Satan in the tempting of Job, proceeded David not content to
trample my name under foot at his pleasure, makes corruption also upon my
conscience. He iustifies the former Libeller in plain terms, and will needs
have me guilty of a corrupt love unto gain and glory, for these are his
words.

THE ADMONENT.
MEn searching what should have moved you to change your mind, Sect. 3.
lights only on these two, Gain, and Glory, as the only appearant: for what
could you even say your self, if you saw diverse Hammers hammering a vessel,
and it endured them all, and broke not, till the golden Hammer come, and so
soon as it hits, the vessel leapes asunder at the first stroke: what would
you think but that the golden Hammer had broken it? etc.

THE ANSWER.
AS athorne in the hand of a drunkard, so is a Parable in the mouth of a fool
(says Solomon) for a drunkard taking a thorn in his hand to strike others,
Pro. 26. 9.
hurts himself with it, and a fool pierces himself with the Parable
wherewith he thinks to prick another. Mr. David, this false supposition of
yours is answered by another, which is true: what if the vessel was broken, or
ever the golden Hammer touched it? if they who could best see, being nearest
unto it, saw that it was so: if the change was made, or ever the Bishopric
came, is he not a liar that will say the golden Hammer did it? What ever you
had said of the cause it self, or of my name might have been somewhat
excusable, these are things external; but how take you this boldness to judge
another man's conscience? Job. 28. 15. 3.
Who art thou that iudgest another man's servant? he stands, or falls to
his Master. My cause you think you know perfectly to be evil, my name it
pleases you to term a vain Idol, which you will have pulled down, though
the smoke of your pride darken your mind, so that you know none of them as
they are: but as for my conscience, I am sure you know it not at all. The
judgment of conscience belongs to him who judges the highest things, Who
searches the r^ines and the heart, it is the Lord that makes the weight of the
wind, and weighes the waters by measure, he tries the perfection of all
things? How then usurp you the Lords room, to judge things that are secret?
Will you sit down on his tribunal? or otherwise. Cum iudicare nescias cur vis
calumniari? Ambros.
Why will you calumniate, where you cannot judge? why speak you evil of that,
which you know not.

Now even the God of truth, who has the eyes of Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 10.
ca. 4.
Deus font est omnis beatitudinis meae, ipse finis omnis appetitionis meae, As
the Lord is the fountain of my felicity, so is he the end of my desires:
Psalm. 37.
Whom have I in the heaven but thee? and I have desired none in the earth with
thee: my flesh fails, mine heart also, but God is the strength of mine heart,
and my portion for ever. Nazian.
Quem stercoribus animum adijciam, Shall I set mine heart upon dung? Was ever
it so Lord since I knew thee? This false accuser would foul the face of my
soul with it; look upon it O Lord, and consider it.

Perceive you not how like you are to the Devil in Job, the man of God: Does
Job serve God for nothing? He accuses him not of any corrupt action, he could
not, he accuses him of a corrupt affection, that he was but a hireling, and a
mercenarie worshipper of God, one that served God, not for love of God, but for
love of gain which he got from God: this is the voice of the accuser, he is
(...), and how is this, that you will be like him; will you also be a false
accuser of your Brethren, imputing crimes to them, which you, nor no flesh can
know, far less qualify? May it not content you to examine their actions?
how presume you to enter into their affections? See you not how Satanicall this
is to leave the action, and to judge the affection? Persuade your self, Mr.
David, the sin in the world that has had least credit or commandment of
mine heart, is Covetousness, and love of gain; Psalm. 119.
it had never force to incline mine heart after it, I thank the Lord: and yet
you would blot me with it, you have done me great wrong: the Lord lay it not
to your charge.

THE ADMONENT.
ANd to what effect serves such and so many words? One only argument had been
better then them all, but you bring never a one, only for all arguments you
appeal to the testimony of your conscience, which as it is the best comfort
inwardly, so the worst probation outwardly, for may not any man purge himself
of ambition and covetousness, and whatsoever can be seen outward? Men think
all makes against you.

THE ANSWER.
ad domesticum tribunal, to the internal testimony of anvncorrupt conscience?
Any equitable man may see how your prejudice blinds you to deny a principal,
when S. Paul retired to this defense, Rom 9. 1.
I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness in the
holy Ghost. Might not his adversaries have answered him, as you do me, The
testimony of conscience is the worst probation outwardly? yet he uses it. My
Apology stands Apologetique for any thing you have said; and I marvel not
you do what you may to make mine Apology no Apology: Since you are so pert
to do what you should not, to make my conscience no conscience. It is more
high then that you can reach unto it, more secret then that you can see it: Tu
vides in facie, Deus in cord, Man looks into the countenance, but God beholds
the heart.

And if we shall compare man with man, it is certain Ber. ad Og^r. Epist. 87.
Certum est quod eo ipso mihi notior sim, quam tibi, quo propinquior ideoque
magis credo mihi de me videnti me, quam tibi o^inanti de me, quod non vides in
me. Sure it is, I know my self better then you can know me, I am nearer mine
own heart then you, and am privy to my conscience, which you cannot be, and
therefore have reason to believe my self of that which I know, and see in my
self, rather then you who are but an Opinator, not a Spectator of mine heart,
and think you see that in me, which I know you see not. But since you are of
this humor, void of love, which believes all things, that you will not
credit a Brothers declaration of his conscience, I must in this leave you to
your own conceit, which I credit very well, to be such as here you have
declared it, that is, both lawless, louelesse, and truthlesse, as will better
appear in that which follows, wherein to strengthen your calumny, that the
love of gain and glory moved me to accept a Bishopric, you would make us
believe that most part of honest men are as deep in this contumely as you are:
for these are your words.

THE ADMONNET.
ANd howbeit, some will indeed be sober, and not so bold to affirm any thing
precisely, setting themselves, as you plain that Libeller does, judge of you,
or any other man's conscience, yet you may be sure the most modest, knowing of
no change come till the Bishopric come, thinking that, the most, yea the
only likely cause of the change, can but suspend their judgment, and what
they incline, incline to that, as most apparent. Again, whatsoever can be
seen outward, men think all makes against you; then a little after, Who can
say that will say any thing at all, but that it is the golden Hammer has done
the turn?

THE ANSWER.
David, believe me, you are now like a man out of his own element, confused,
and perturbed in your thoughts, if they be according to your words. It were
best you should hold you at your old tune of cauilling talk. There you speak
like your self, and it flows best with you: now you would come to speak
words of modesty, and they will not mouth for you; for what language is this,
I pray, though sober men be not bold to affirm it, yet the most modest will
incline to it? Perceive you not how you reele, and roue, and knows not what
you say? Does not one of your words dash and destroy another? They suspend
their judgment (say you) and yet they incline to this as most apparent. Sober
men will not affirm it (say you) yet the most modest will: and why forsooth?
Because (says Mr. David) It is most appearant. I pray you, do sober and
modest men incline their judgment to and fro by appearance: and since as you
say, Most modest men suspends their judgment, why are you not one of those
most modest men? why praecipate you, and gives out rash judgment? O but s^y
you, you knew no change till the Bishopric came: What of that? you knew it
not, nor your accomplices, therefore it was not. It was known clearelie enough
to such as were familiar with me, it was known openly in the Synods of
Fyffe, yea unto many that desired not to know it: it was made known every
day in the Presbytery of Perth, from the time that once the Episcopal
government was received again by order of the Church, by act of general
assembly, with approbation of his Majesty, I resolved to conform my self,
and from that time declared it in communing, reasoning, disputing: honoring
Bishops privately, publicly, all that I could, and willingly would have
lived content all my days, to have given honor to any Brother of the
Ministry, advanced to that office, rather then received it. This is the very
truth, though it was not published in Preston, nor known to Mr. David.

And where you say, that Gain and Glory are the judgment by appearance. Will
Christian Religion teach you to judge by appearance? Is not this the praise of
our Lord, who as he is a Prince of Salvation, so stands he also for a Pattern
of righteousness unto us, He shall bring out judgment in truth: why bring
you out judgment in untruth? he judges not by the hearing of the ear: why do
you give judgment upon report? he judges not by appearance, and you spare not
to condemn the conscience of your brother, having no reason for you, but
appearance. Is not this too weak a probation for so strong a calumny? Who may
not see, malice has moved you, no light has led you: you have bewrayed by
your speech the weakness of your cause, the wickedness of your heart, which
God forgive you. Now you conclude this point.

THE ADMONENT.
Who can say, that will say any thing at all, but it is the golden Hammer has
done the turn?

THE ANSWER.
HOw long will you vex my soul, and torment me with words? Job. 19. 2.
you have now ten times reproached me, and are not ashamed: you are impudent
toward me. Have you forgotten what you said even now? Were not these your
words: Sober men will not say it, modest men enclines to it but by appearance?
Yet now you will make us believe, that such as will say any thing, can say no
otherwise, but as you say. Mr. David, Mendacem oport^it esse memorem.
Frequently you brag of this, that all men, whom you know, think as you
think, and so with the terrible show of your associates, like an Army of the
stuffed skins of Indian Elephants, you would afray us. I am sure when your
great multitude, mustred under general titles, comes to be viewed, they will
be found, as I have said. For doubtless, godly, modest, and learned men,
howsoever they be minded concerning the cause it self, will no way approve
your carnal debating of it, nor yet allow that which you have said: they will
be loath, I warrant you, to come under your standard, neither will they think
their cause strengthened, but dishonored by your Patrocinie. Thus will you be
found but like Chaucers Cook, busy where you need not, taking pains, for
which no side will give you thanks. And these being removed from you, who with
their judgment in Church-gouernement, retain inward sobriety and brotherly
love with meekness; the remanent that will stand up with you, to maintain
your carnal, and contentio^s raylings, will try as I have said. Your great
Universality will be reduced to a small fellowship of strait-shod Gentlemen,
and to speak as it is, A Diocie of Donatists, of whom you may read what has
been the judgment of the godly, Horum spiritus homicida and mendax: Who
think there is no Church, no Religion, no Conscience but with the men of their
opinion: and if any man be otherwise minded, then forsooth he is not a
Brother, you must keep no company with him, you must not salute him, (...),
nor walk in the street or way with them. Fie upon this pride, what should
such wickedness do in Sion? away with it to Shinar, meeter for Barbarians of
Moroco, then for Christians of the beloved I Will. In Africa it dwelt of old, I
would wish (if I might lawfully) it were there again, and this Church were
quit of it.

Now in the third room, Mr. David in most furious manner, inuades my
Ministry, not unlike that fourth, fearful, and terrible beast which Daniel
saw in the vision, with iron teeth, devouring, breaking in pieces, stamping
under feet all ^^at is before him. Now he speweth out the superfluity of his
malitiousnesse, and with most false and horrible calumnies he charge me.

THE ADMONENT.
Error must be confessed. 2. Erroneous Doctrine, yea false Doctrine. 3. Rash
affirming of uncertainties. 4. Inconsiderateness, temeritie, headiness. 5.
Inconstancy. 6. Papisticall implicit faith. 7. Falsefying of Gods message,
speaking that whereof he had no warrant from him. 8. Profaning the chair of
verity. 9. Carelessness and sloth in your calling, that in a great, high, and
special question of it, being so long a Past^r, you never searched to know the
truth of that point.

THE ANSWER.
O Lord, false witnesses are risen up against me, they charge me with things
which I know not. Psalm. 35. 11.
O righteous God, Psalm. 7. 9.
who tries the hearts and the reins, and have proved and visited mine heart
in the night, Psalm. 17. 3.
plead thou my cause, and let the lying lips be made dumb, which cruelly,
spightfully, and proudly speak against the righteous.

The answer which our Savior gave his Disciples, when they willed him to
bring fire from heaven upon the Samaritanes, is not improper here for Mr.
David: for he has here multiplied against me so many grievous imputations, as
(if they were true) might justly make me worthy both of fiery wrath from God,
and of all indignation from man. But M. David, you know not of what spirit
these railings have proceeded. Saint James says, James 3. 17.
that the wisdom which is from above is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated (no oath of conscience can entreat Mr. David.) It is full of mercy,
he is so full of malice that he runs over: for who will say but that the
house is full of smoke when it comes out at the door and window? It is
without judging: he is bold to judge the most secret things. It is without
H^pocrisie: he at one time kisseth and kills, with Ioab. The same man whom
at one word he calls A beloved Brother, at the next word he calls An
abominable man, a false Teacher, etc. His mouth is full of bitter envy and
strife, his tongue set on fire of Hell would set on fire the course of Nature;
yea, the whole Church if he could; this wisdom descends not from above, but
is earthly, sensual and devilish, says S. James. Lo where you are Mr.
David, see by what Decree you are condemned in this doing; not mine but the
Apostles. Is not this the monstrous birth of your Viperous mind? Look back
to it again, and see if it be well faced or not? Think you not shame of it?
or otherwise will nothing content you, except ye be the Basiliske, king of
Serpents, and crowned as chief of railers?

But let us examine more narrowly, and see what Psalm. 19. 12
You will first have me to confess an error: why not? I daily do it, who
knows the errors of his life? Errare possum, Haereticus esse nol^. We are
men and may fall into error, from Heresy Grace will keep us, and mine heart
abhorres it. But are you Mr. David and your fellows free from error? Aug.
Homo, just sanct^le, tune sine macula? N^z. orat. 39. in sancta luminaria*
Holy one, tell me, are you without blemish? Dic mihi noue Pharisae and
nomine duntaxat pure: Is it so? I hope you will think shame to be a new
Pharisie, Ambros.
pure in name only. Audes tu mundum te dicere, qui etsi operibus mundus esses
hoc solo verbo immundus fieres? Dare the Catharan, Nouatian, Donatist, say he
is clean? albeit in regard of his works he were clean, yet this same proud
word would make him unclean. But I think Mr. David will confess error also;
why then casts he the first stone at me? O forsooth Mr. David is a common
Christian, and I am a Preacher; But may not a good and faithful Preacher
commit an error? To cite a testimony of Scripture not out of the right place
is an error: to draw a sense out of the words, not consonant to the course of
the Text, suppose agreeable to the Analogy of Faith, is an error: to say that
Timothy placed in Ephesus was an extraordinary Evangelist, seeing it is
plain he was settled there as an ordinary Bishop, may be an error but no
Heresy: to say that Papal Hierarchy came out of Episcopal authority, is an
error, for it is not the proper cause of the other; but who will call it
Haeresie or falsifying of Gods message? And many other ways (not needful to
be repeated) may Preachers commit error, which yet are not Heresies. God
forbid they so were.

this Legate from the Legion, has brought against me. He is to accuse me of
many points of Treason against the most high God, for so he reckens them out:
You have taught erroneous doctrine false doctrine, and deceived others. Avoid
Satan, thou art shameless in lying. You have falsified Gods Message. Go
behind me Satan, you are devilish in railing. You have profaned the chair
of verity. The Lord rebuke thee Satan. Mr. David, this is not you; I will
never think the good man of Gods-Croft has said this: no, it is but subtle
Satan, abusing the silly Serpent. Aug.
Vas es, alius te vtitur; organum es, alius te tangit. The Apostle leads us to
this consideration, Ephesians. 6.
We wrestle not with ^lesh and blood, but with Principalities, Powers, and
spiritual Wickednesses. In this you are but Satan's Sergeant: Is est qui omnia
peccata nostra rimatur diligentia inuidi^; It is he that searches all our
sins with the watchful eye of Envy. I am only sorry that you are thus
abused by him, and have learned Ex vno multa facere, so cunningly to
calumniate, and to employ your engine to make a mountain of a mote if you could
find it; yet you would seem modest, and profess you are loath to touch; but
can you be more malicious, and if ye can I defy you. For I must tell you,
many a time has Satan troubled me with his grievous accusations, so much more
fearful then yours, in that they were internal: I have appealed and drawn
him before the highest Tribunal, and there sundry absoluitorie Decrees has
my God given me against his false imputations, by many glorious victories has
the God of peace trampled Satan under my feet. Romans 16.
And now you come in, as it were upon a new factorie from him, to charge me
again with the same criminations, and pursue me before the Iudicatorie of
men. Silly man, why have ye done this? Seeing I have endured the roaring of a
Lion, think you that I will be commoned for the biting of a Flea?

Even Satan himself, as false as he is, knows, and who charge me as a
prophaner of the Chair of Verity.

Spiritus Prophetarum subijcitur Prophetis; You are no Prophet nor Preacher,
God called you not to that honor, yet your pride causes you to stretch your
self beyond your line, and to give out against a Preacher a decree of false
Doctrine.

You would have it a matter of Faith, least it should seem that ye strive for
nothing; but it will not be for you: Is not this the confession of the reformed
Churches, Aug. confess. Art. 7.
Ad vnitatem fideisufficit, si consentiatur de doctrina Euangelij, and
administratione Sacramentorum; It is sufficient for the unity of Faith, that
we agree in the doctrine of the Euangell, and ministration of the Sacraments.
Dare ye say that in these among us there is any disagreement? will you ^eclude
them all from the unity of Faith, who are not partakers of this Discipline?
What then will you say to Beza; Exijs quaem Ecclesia Christi requiruntur vt
partibus suis omnibus constet, Beza do presb. and ex^om.
solam doctrinam videri nobis absolute and si^e omni exceptione necessariam; Of
those things which are required to make up a complete Church, perfect in all
her parts, it seems to me that the word only absolutely, and without all
exception is necessary. Hear you this Mr. David, no word here of Discipline,
nor external Church-gouernement as absolutely necessary to make up a Church,
yet you will have it a matter of faith: and again, Beza de gradibus
ministrorum.
Ordo est diuinitus praescriptus, ordinis ratio arbitraria and pro
circumstantijs temporum and locorum mutari potest, quia positi^i est iuris:
Order is prescribed by God, the manner or form of order is arbitrarie, and may
be changed according to the circumstances of times and places, because it is of
humane constitution.

Praised be the Lord again, there is no question of a diuider of brethren; a
seditious firebrand in the Church, and a disturber of Christian peace, if it
lay in your power.

In your other criminations you are still like your implicit faith,
inconstancy, rashness, temeritie, negligence, and sloth in my calling. Mr.
David humum, haec sapiunt, non Theagrium, imo nec (...) quidem, sed (...),
Argiua enim haec insectatio: you were wiser to forbear this language of
Ashdod, and speak in Canaans tongue, and out of the new generation. But since
you have cast your self loose, to speak what you should not, Sine iugo,
statera, aut mensura, Without a yoke, Amb offi* lib. 1. ca. 2.
a balance, or a measure, which three Ambrose requires in the speech of a
moderate man, you must even hear again that which you would not, that these
criminations though they be not of such weight, yet are they of no less
falsehood then the former.

Papists implicit faith. Would you persuade them that I am become a Proselite
of theirs, tell me, think you so your self, or would you have others to
think it? At that same time when mine Apology was published, there came forth
also a Treatise of mine against Papists, in defense of the antiquity of the
Church of Scotland, proving that we received not Christian Religion from the
Church of Rome, might not that serve to clear me, if you were not malicious to
speak against clear light, of all Papisticke implicit faith? What should
have moved you to this calumny, I know not, except that in my young years, as
other modest men of the Ministry did, I employed my study to Doctrine, and as
for Discipline, I embraced that which I found for the time, not making any
inquiry of it. But M. David, this will not prove me guilty of a Papists
implicit faith, but rather convince you of an Apists explicit evil will, who
had rather giuevantage to an enemy, or the Idol of your conceit be not
honored in all points, suppose to the disgrace of a friend.

change: and here you have collected many things together of my speeches,
Sermons, subscriptions, most part of them false, as will be showed when we
come to them: but I pray you to what purpose bring you probations, of that
whereof in mine Apology I have made a plain confession, because say you, I
have not been clear in that point to declare from what, and unto what I had
changed: but Mr. David, I supposed I had spoken more clearelie then you desired
me; and if yet you will have it more plainly explained to you, here it is. In
my younger years I misliked Episcopal government, not having studied the
question of Church-gouernement. Now after better consideration of it, I approve
it, as best for the Church, and having the best warrants of all other
government. You have cried for a Palinodie, advise how this will please you,
for I have none other to give you.

This is it which Mr. David will have inconstancy, Amb.
Quod mentem in melius mutare non leuitas sit, sed virtus: But let us consider
of this change, Basil. Asc^^.
Vniformis est Christianorum vita vnicum habens scopum gloriam Dei: Since mine
heart is the same, and the mark whereat I aim, to wit, the glory of God, and
good of his Church, remains the same: if I have changed the means, and made
choice of that which is more effectual for my proposed end; what blame is
this? May not a wise man change his course, and continue his purpose? may he
not alter the means for the better furtherance of his intention? If you can
blame a Mariner for changing his sail, to take vantage of the wind, or call
him for that, inconstant, he being still constant in his purpose, and course
toward his intended harborie, Philo. lib. de Joseph.
then may you blame me also: this is the truth, wherein mine own heart
allows me, condemn you it as you please.

David, it is the glory of Angels, Nazian ^rat. 2. de Th^olog.
that they are (...), propter gratiam, (...), unchangeable through the grace
that is given them, being otherwise of their own nature (...), mutable of
will. With their first creation they received full understanding of all truth,
which their Creator thought needful to communicate to them, and in it by
grace they abide without change, not subject to any error: but is it so with
man upon earth? attain we at the first to perfection of knowledge? must we
not learn, and come to it by degrees? I pray you whose words are these, when I
was a child, I spoke as a child, I thought as a child. Now I have put
childish things from me? Is it with every one as it was with the Baptist: he
was Renatus prius quam natus, Gregor. moral.
Regenerate ere he was borne; he had not yet come into the world by the first
birth, and he is made partaker of the second? Were we all with Jeremy
sanctified in the womb? Get we all, with Solomon, knowledge of right and wrong
in our younger years? he was wonderful wise before he was twelve years
old. Is it with all Preachers as with the Apostles, who within fifty days
after that they were sent out by Christ, his Ambassadors to the world, they
received the Spirit to lead them in all truth? Thanks be to God when he entered
us into his holy Ministry, he gave us such measure of his Spirit, as did teach
us all substantial points of faith, needful to salvation, and gave us gifts
profitable in their measure, for edification of the Church. But Mr. David, it
was spoken to one, and it stands for all: Attend lectioni, intentus esto tibi
ipsi and doctrinae. Take heed unto learning. Timothy had learned the holy
Scriptures from his youth, yet the Apostle will have him to learn still, for
so says he to him, (...), that it may be manifest to all men how thou
profitest: and shall it then be a blame to me to profess I have learned that
which I knew not? Correct your self M. David, what you call inconstancy, will
be found (...), not (...), not inconstancy, but increase of knowledge.

O, but this Inquisitour will not take this for an answer, That in so great,
so high, so special a question as it, yet never searched to know the truth of
that matter, till now of late. Mr. David, my calling is to be a Preacher: my
commission is the whole word of God, whereof I acknowledge with Augustine,
Tantam esse profunditatem, etc. The depth to be so great, that the quickest
Engine, though he should live Methusalems years, and do no other thing but
read it continually, yet were not able to plum it, nor to learn all the
great, and high, and special questions concerning it. There are many points in
holy Scripture, which most excellent Preachers know not, and will you for that
convince them, either for false Teachers, or careless Students. Know you not
that Jacob at the first was called Israel, the one (...), the other (...):
Philo de Temulentia.
the one a name of learning and profiting, the other of perfection and
prevailing? Now is the time of our wrestling, a time wherein we should learn
and grow in knowledge, Increasing with the encreasings of GOD, stepping forward
every day a new step, and so walking till we appear before the face of our God
in Sion. The time is at hand, when we shall come to the measure of perfect men
in Christ: No darkness, no error shall then be left in our minds, but we
shall then know even as we are known.

David, I do verily think, that a man may prove both a faithful and
fruitful Minister in the Church all his days, and neither busy himself, nor
his people with any question of external Church-gouernement that is amongst
us. I thank God, being now a man neere-by of forty and six years, I have
lived in the Church twenty and four years a Pastor, without rebuke of any
till the Libeller, and you yoaked against me, and believe me, if this matter of
Church-gouernement had not been wakened to mine hand, and the compassion I
carry to this Church, wherein I was borne a Christian, and honored to be a
Pastor, whose bowels are unnaturally rent by unnecessary contention of some of
her unkindly children: If these reasons, I say, had not moved me, I thought
all my days few enough to spend in the matter of Doctrine, as being of
greatest importance for edification of the Church, and wherein I have found
greatest comfort to mine own heart, remembering that warning of Hippocrates,
(...), Vita breuis ars longa, And in this, though I have not come with such
speed as I would, yet that I have neither been sloathfull nor careless, I
have some works for my witnesses, which how weak so ever they be in
themselves, or little worth in your eyes, yet are they the increase of my
talent, wherein I have found comfort to mine own heart, and others of the
Saints of God in all parts of the I Will, have found comfort also. Seneca.
Ab homine exigitur, vt prosit hominibus, si fieri potest multis, siminus,
paucis, si minus, proximis, si minus, sibi.

And where you tell me, I could not but know this This is like all the rest of
your bold and rash assertions, for they were both dead ere ever I was called
to be a Preacher, and what you would have me to learn at them, I can hardly
conjecture: for if the equity of their cause was obscured, either by the
iniquity of their actions (which I know not) or the violent course of that
time, what is this to the matter now in hand. The one of them I never saw that
I know, the other I heard when I was very young at School in St. Andrews,
and now must tell you, that if you were either so learned, or such a lover of
learning as you pretend, you would have spared to rake the ashes of the one,
for the honor of his learning. There were sundry other Bishops in this
Church beside them, who lived and died honest men, and unrebukable; but you
pass by them, still like the venomous Fly that lights upon the sore part, as
if the faults of one or two were sufficient to discredit all the rest of the
fellowship. And I cannot marvel how still you object the example of two, as
undoubted proofs in your consistory, to improve the honesty of all the rest.
Since in mine Apology, I remitted you to three renowned Bishops in our
neighbor Church, Latimer, Ridley, Cranmer, lately, even in our Fathers days
honored with the honor of martyrdom, that you who cannot endure to see any
honor upon a Bishops head, may lay down your comb of contempt, and think
more honorably of them. This cannot be but an evil affection in you, that you
have an eye to see the evil of the one, and not an eye to see the goodness of
the other: Nay, you will not suffer it to be thought, that such grace, or
godliness, or conscience can be in a Bishop, as to make him a worthy Martyr
of Christ; but rather, which I told you before, as the ignorant Gentiles were
seduced of old, to esteem it a just cause of persecution of a man, if he had
once been named a Christian: so are the simple people abused by you, and such
as you, to disdain a Preacher, were he never so honest otherwise, if once he
be named a Bishop. And because your horn cannot reach unto all, you think to
try your manhood in the killing of o^e, and when you have loadned me with your
contumelies, then you lay on this, as one ouer-laid upon it: That I am an
abominable man, for if so be not, you have done me wrong to conceive so
abhominably of me, as you have confessed you do.

Anger is cruel, wrath is raging, but who can stand before envy? Pro. 27. 4.
But Mr. David, you are not the first Egyptian, who has esteemed an Israelite
an abomination, nor the first Pharisie that has abhorred a Publican. Are you
the great Chamberlain of the house of God? Are all the vessels of honor in it
committed to your custody? Are ^ou keeper of the Book of life, wherein the
names of the he^es of grace are registered? Have you the balance of the
Sanctuary? or is the fan put into your hand to separate Chafe and Corn:
Speak no more presumptuously, and let not such arrogancy come out of your
mouth, leas^it prove true upon you which Augustine has to Parmenian, Aug
(...). Epist. Parm. ^ib. 1. ca. 4
Quon^am patientiam miseri isti perd^derunt, and festinant se ante tempus velut
a palea separare, leuissimam paleam vento de area ablatam seipsos
demonstrar^nt, Because you have lost patience, and make have before the time to
separate the Chafe and Corn, counting at your pleasure some men abominable,
and some men approved; you have declared your self to be but chafe, and most
light chafe, carried out of the compass of charity, by the wind of your
own pride.

Try your self M^. David, and see what spirit does John Chrisos^ome, and
others who allowed it not, that the one would not communicate with the other?
And again to see such a pride in some Catharans of Ierusalems Church, as to
separate themselves from the fellowship of other Christians, as unworthy of
their company; and all through a vain conceit of their own purity and
sanctity beyond others? wherein they proceeded so far that they would not
keep company with Gregory Nyssen, a worthy Bishop and excellent teacher,
the Brother of Basil the great, who having come upon the expenses of the
Emperor Theodose, for reformation of some Churches in Arabia, and afterward
visiting by this occasion Jerusalem, he found a miserable Schism in it, and
because the Schismatickes sought to strengthen their faction by drawing
Ambrosia and Basilissa, women reputed notable for piety among the people, unto
their opinion, he prevented it by his Letter to them, dissuading them from
fostering any division in the Church: his reasons I wish were pondered by you;
I bring but one of them, Vnum odium sanxit cum Serpente vitae nostrae
Legislator, at ^athari isti foedus cum Serpente faciunt, odium mutuum in
seip^os conuer^unt: There is but one hatred which the Lawgiver of our life
has allowed; namely, that Christians should hate the Serpent, but these
Catharans make a covenant with the Serpent, while they turn their hatred
against Christians.

Nyssen, will prove you to stand with the Serpent against Christ, not with
Christ against the Serpent. Turn you, turn you Mr. David, turn the pen,
and edge of your sword, turn the hatre^ of your abhorring heart against the
Devil, Pisid.
not against any that stand for Christ: Angues vorando, sana fit Ciconia;
suffer not, foster not, nourish not such Serpents in your bosom, worrie them,
devour, destroy them with the Stroke, so may you happily recover of this
evil. But now you proceed.

THE ADMONENT.
AND if you will needs delight in learning, Sect. 4.
we may by your learning learn to speak learnedly, and shall not despise to
take any good lesson from you, concerning learned writing, either of Grammar,
Rhethoricke or Logic, or any point of Philologie. Shortly I lay open my
stuff, and permits it to your cen^uring, and I shall consider, and correct at
your admonition.

THE ANSWER.
COnsider I pray you whether it be your shame or Hagar be with child, Nazian.
Cyg. Carm.
let her not despise her Dame; she is but a servant, and will never get that
honor as to bring out an heir of the promise. God has learned me that which
all the Grammar and Rhetoric of East-Lowthan could not have learned me, has
not learned you, nor many others that brag with you, though even there in my
young years I was trained up also, and profited in those studies no way
inferior to any that were with me. But seeing (as I said) you offer your
self to be a Disciple, how are you so bold as to control your Master, not in
a point whereof you have skill, but in a matter of preaching whereof you are
but an ignorant? Your hypocrisy is evil covered, and your proud humor under
humilities shadow is palpable. This verbal submission of your self to learn,
it is but (...), is but a false show of an humble man that would seem in
glorious, being indeed vainglorious. It proves true in you which was said
by the Ancient, falsa humilitas, veram inducit superbiam; false humility
draws on true pride. Now you speak out of counterfeit humility, no marvel
you forget your self, and shortly return to speak out of vncounterfeit
pride.

Aquila and Priscilla: they could not preach themselves, yet because they
assisted S. Paul with their countenance and comfort, they receive this praise
in the heavenly Oracle, that they were the Apostles Fellow-helpers. Or else as
it is written of Flauianus an honorable man, Histor. Tripart. lib. 8.
Non concionabatur inter ecclesiasticos, sed hoc agentibus multa Consilio^um
conferebat subsidi^, illi tendebant arcus, iste vero quasi ex quibusdam
Pharetris suae mentis congruas offerebat Sagittas: But if still ye will be
like Alexander the Copper-smith, of whom S. Paul complained that he resisted
his Ministry sore; see to it, and foresee what will be the end of it. I am
far deceived if you have done, or be able to do while you live, so great
good, as that Ministry has done, which so earnestly you seek to disgrace if
it lay in your power. Now Mr. David proceeds to the improbation of mine
Apology, and intermixeth throughout it, Railings against my Brethren, which I
placed in the fourth room, and now occurres to be considered of us. Thus he
begins.

THE ADMONENT.
FIrst then, concerning this stuff, you demand what is found in it; but you
demand before ever the search be made: Jacob of whom you speak, did not so;
he was silent till all was searched, and saw that nothing was found; then
only, and not till then, he demanded the question: he was wise, he knew there
might be something which he saw not, or if h^e were sure enough of that, yet
he thought it ouer-soone to brag of it, till the searcher had seen also that
there was nothing. Then he triumphs, but after victory, which is the just time
of triumphing.

THE ANSWER.
A Word spoken in his place is like Apples of Gold, and Pictures says Solomon:
Prou 25. 11.
such are not Mr. David, your words here, they come out, somewhat painted-like,
but not in their place, nor yet for this purpose. Look to them I pray you and
see: did I purge before I was accused? Was not inquiry made of me before I
did answer? Did not the Libeller then, whom you have justified now, search my
stuff? And was it not lawful for me to tell him (without your rebuke) that
he had done me wrong in charging me with a fault which he had not found in
me. See you not how your pretty words are nothing to the purpose? But, say
you, the first Inquisitour searched not well enough, and what he left undone,
you are come to do, and you doubt nothing to find Idols, and truly if any be,
I think indeed you may best do it. The Libeller with his six Lines, being
but young and inexpert, beat me with rods, but you come in with your six
Sheets of Paper^ as an old Soldier, experimented with inuectiues, to scourge
me with Scorpions; and as if you were another Iambres, you think to turn your
Libellers Rod into a Serpent; yet you will prove but a deceived deceiuer; your
Serpent is dead, has but a show, and your accusation liuelesse, fectlesse, and
nothing worth.

Alexanders Army was afraid at the hissing and noise of a S^rpent, ere ever
they saw it, you would terrify me. It is easy to do it I grant, yet is not,
nor shall not my fear be without hope, when they come: if their inquisition be
about Episcopal government, they will find it no stolen nor hidden Idol: It
will not fall to be covered by Rahell, Jacob will maintain it, as his own
just and lawful possession. And they shall see a Bishop, a grave
Ecclesiastique Senator, standing in the chief and most public place of Jacobs
Tent, compassed with a guard invincible of ancient and recent Fathers, ready
to maintain him, with his eyes looking up to God, and the hand of God
upholding him in his Word. Deceive not your self, to think that in this
question you have to do with an Idol. And if it be the person they mean to
come and search, come their way, he whom Satan has sought to winnow fears
not to be searched or sifted by flesh: Thou have wrastled with God, and thou
shall prevail with man. Now you proceed.

THE ADMONENT.
But if Rahels theft had been found, what would he have said, trow ye, he
might have excused himself justly, but triumphed at leisure. Alas, how blind
are we oftentimes, not ^eeing the faults either of us, or of our selves? how
poor are our triumphs, how slender our victories, if the cause of our triumph
be solidly searched? It was not her^ the innocence of Jacobs house that gave
him matter of triumph, but Labans ill searching, etc.

THE ANSWER.
MAster David, let your skill in Grammar, or Rethoricke, If Rahels theft had
been found (say you) he might have triumphed at leisure. And why? Is it any
reason that Rahels fault should have been imputed to Jacob? Laban accused
Jacob that he had stolen his Idols: the question is not here of the honesty
of Jacobs house, but of Jacobs self, he is the party accused; the accusation
was false, Jacob was free of it; and albeit Laban had found out Rahels theft,
he had found out but his own shame: but it stands with no reason that the
fault of Labans Daughter should be sufficient to improve the honesty of Jacobs
heart, or yet to impair his triumph. No, though it had been found, Jacob with
a very good reason might glory in his own innocence, and told Laban
nevertheless, that his accusation was false.

To clear the matter, and set it down (...). David be Laban (seeing he will
be so,) let my heart be Jacob, let my corruption be Rahell, let the Idols be
Gain and Glory: If corruption in me has had any secret respect to these
Idols, believe me, my heart is not privy unto it. I know there is no man in
whom the seed of all sin is not. If I come to be examined before God, I will
protest with David, Lord enter not into judgment with me, for in thy sight
shall no flesh be justified. Job. 9. 20.
I know not mine own soul, many evils are in it which are hid from me; for
God is greater then the conscience, and knows many things of us which our
own conscience knows not. But so far forth as a man can know himself, in
this whereof I am accused, I may answer you boldly, My lips have spoken no
wickedness, and my tongue has uttered no deceit. It was not the love of Gain
or Glory that has wrought this change of my mind. In this you have
wrongfully, and now after mine Apology and oath of Conscience, wickedly,
accused me. Job. 27. 4.
God forbid I should justify you until I die, I will never take mine
innocence from my self, I will keep my righteousness, and will not forsake
it: mine heart shall not reprove me of my days. This is Mr. David, the right
application of this example. But now you proceed.

THE ADMONENT.
NOW to look back but even a little upon this that we have already said,
what is this we see standing at the very entry? Is it not Fame? and is not
that a great Idol, as ever was in the World, the cause of huge Idolatry; and
yet have you reared it up here openly, in a public place.

THE ANSWER.
Alas we are blind: and truly you are much blinder then I supposed you had
been: and now you say you see an Idol, and what an Idol? Fame. Mr. David, it
is but your dim sight which causes you to take one thing for another: you
are like that blind man, of whom we read in the Gospel, when he saw men
he thought he had seen trees, for his eyes were not yet well opened. Stay a
little, judge not out of your dark sight: Pray JESUS to touch your eyes
again, and you shall see more clearly: what you thought to have been an
Idol, and called so, it is not so indeed; it is a more excellent, yea, a most
necessary thing: for a good name is as a precious Ointment, it is to be chosen
above all riches. Solomon said so, he saw as well as you; and S. Paul will
have a Bishop well reported of, even of them which are without: but if a good
name had been an Idol, he would not have so necessarily required it. Now
you return again to your former blasphemous railings, refuted by me,
repeated now by you: for so well is Mr. David pleased with the tune of this
Song, that he must sing it over oftener then once.

THE ADMONENT.
ANd that inconstancy with how blushfull things is it shielded? how too like
to Rahels Idols in her blushfull confession? seeing for the eschewing thereof,
1. Error must be confessed; 2. Erroneous Doctrine; 3. Rash affirming of
uncertainties; 4. Headiness; 5. Papisticke implicit faith; 6. Falsifying of
Gods Message; 7. Profaning the Chair of Verity; 8. Carelessness of Calling.

THE ANSWER.
AND a mighty strong wind rent the Mountains and 1 Kings 19. 9
and after the wind came an earthquake, but God was not in the earthquake:
and after the earthquake came fire, but God was not in the fire. Mr. David now
again gathers his breath, bends up his bowels, to bring out a mighty blast of
wind out of the Desert and Wilderness of a a barren heart against me, not
unlike the wind wherewith Satan ouer-threw Jobs house and children, at one
blow: so would this Reuiler ouer-turne my Name, Ministry, Conscience, and all,
with this one stroke and violent charge. Many furious, fiery, and mighty
boistering words of wind has he blasted out upon me, but God is not in
them. I will abide with Elijah till the Lord come in a soft and peaceable
voice, he speaks peace to the hearts of his Saints: The Lord will look on
mine affliction, and do me good for his cursing this day. The refutation of
them see Sect. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. etc.

Qui Angeli and sily Dei esse debeant, ne hoc quidem vt homines esse videantur
sibi reseruarunt, who should be Angels and Sons of God reserve not so much
modesty to themselves; as whereby they may seem to be men, or to put
difference between them and beasts; yea rather worse then beasts: every beast
has some one evil quality of the own, but you will find a man so beastly,
that in him they are all collected in one; Chris. (...) Mat. hom* 22.
Irascitur vt Serpens, pungit vt Scorpio, insidiatur vt Vulpes, imo quasi
Diabolus atrocia suscipit bella in fratrem: And this hating, abhorring,
devouring one of another, argues it not (says the Apostle) a carnal man? yea
truly. Non humanae mansuetudinis, sed immanitatis est belluarum; it is beastly
barbaritie and not that mansuetude which becomes men. The Lord who is (...)
Pisid.
manure by his grace the heart of Theagrius, and all our hearts, that these
thorns and briars may be rooted out of them, and like a ground blessed of the
Lord, they may bring forth the spiritual fruit of Meekness, Truth, and Love.
Now you proceed to improve my Reasons, and ere ever you do it, you take a
Decree to your self to call them ridiculous and fectlesse: but what is it
which may not be labefacted by words?

THE ADMONENT.
THE first is to comfort the King, for that you insinuate that his Majesty may
have the comfort of his Subjects. Alas, what say you? take you on a Bishopric
to comfort the King? who will believe you, and that it is not rather to comfort
your self?

THE ANSWER.
YOU dispute with words not comely, Job 15. 1.
and with talk that how unlike your words are unto mine the judicious Reader
will consider by reading mine Apology. My reason I doubt not will be thought
weighty of all honest hearts: this it is. Seeing we have a Christian King
sustaining contradiction of the Adversary for the Gospels sake, it is no
reason his Highness should be grieved with the contradiction of his people
also, specially for a matter not so material as you would make it; for a point
of Discipline, not of Faith, wherein his Majesty doubtless has the best end
of the cause also. Is there no pity nor compassion to such a Father of the
Church and Commonwealth? Shall his Majesty be loadned with burdens at all
hands, grieved with enemies, and grieved with Subjects also? This is my reason,
it moved me then, it moves me yet, and made me to resolve that I would not
be contradictorie to his Majesty in any cause for the which I dare not give my
life; and I trust such a cause shall never fall into the heart nor hand of the
Lords anointed. This was my resolution long ere any motion of a Bishopric
was made to me. God knows it, men know it, think you and yours what ye
like to the contrary. Now, this reason you answer this way; Who believes you
that you took on a Bishopric to comfort the King, and not rather to comfort
your self? Is not this think you a just confutation? yet we must take this
for a sufficient proof that Mr. David says the contrary? who may not see
that in stead of reasoning you rail; you shame your self, you answer not me.

It is very well known I sought not a Bishopric, I think in this I shall
have no accuser to charge me with Ambitus, and after that his Majesty
unrequired, unknown, or unlooked for of me, had out of his Majesty's own
free pleasure presented me unto it, there interceeded more then eighteen
weeks before that I accepted it: I would not have done so, but griped more
greedily at it, if I had so far regarded my self as you allege. Mr. David,
I ought you no quittance, neither make I any unto you, but of the very truth of
mine heart, I declare to such as fear God, that if the respects of duty I owe
to his Majesty and this Church had not been stronger in me, then any respect
I had to my self, I should never have accepted it. This is the truth,
calumniate as you will. You go yet on.

THE ADMONENT.
BUT here you all commonly insult, and run out upon it, and have ever the
King, the Kings Majesty in your mouth, whom we all reverence.

THE ANSWER.
ANd does this offend you Mr. David? is it not good

THE ADMONENT.
TOuching his Majesty, whom the GOD of Heaven bless in his own person and
posterity to the worlds end, and send him better comforters then any of you
Bishops be.

THE ANSWER.
A Man that boasts of false liberality is like unto Clouds Prou. 25. 14.
What your affection to his Majesty is, we are not to examine, his Majesty
can best discern it of any man; but as for your prayer we say Amen to it. Even
the God of heaven send his Majesty better comforters; for his Highness is
worthy of better then the best of us are indeed. Yet this is some good, that
there is no want of good will in us, we wish from our hearts we were better
then we are, more able to glorify God, t edify his Church, to serve his
Majesty then we are. And albeit we cannot do the good which we would, yet his
Majesty shall not want the good which we may; and of his Princely equity we
doubt not but his Highness will accept good will in part of payment. And as
for you Mr. David, if your affection to his Majesty be so sincere as you
pretend, 2 Samuel 19.
then let me demand of you in these words which Zadok and Abiathar got in
commission to ask the Elders of Israel, Why are ye behind to bring the King
again to his own house? or in plainer terms and meeter for our purpose, Why
render you not his Majesty all the comfort and contentment you may? Or, if the
light of your mind in this question permit you not, seeing it is but your
private judgment, and your self but a private man, why take ye up a public
banner against his Majesty? why show ye your self an open contradictor and a
party special, seeing this is not your calling, and you have no commission
for it. It would fit you better to be more sparing of your words, and more
liberal in your deeds, to prove your affection to your Sovereign, which now
by your needless meddling, you have called more in doubt then it was before.
And now to declare what you mean by better comforters, you fall out into a
commendation of our brethren contrary minded in Church-gouernment.

THE ADMONENT.
Go you beyond them who stand for our Discipline, either in affection, or in
action, or in praying, or in praising, by word, by writ, by tongue, by pen, to
honor him to the world within his own country, without to foreign Nations?
you know you have not done it, not can any Bishop of Scotland do it beyond
them.

THE ANSWER.
PRoud, hautie, and scornful is his name that works Prou. 21* 24.
What need you to take this pains out of your pride, to work wrath among
Brethren: it will not be for you Mr. David, you shall long commend them before
you offend us. If so be the change of Court could content you, I wish it were,
good comforters, good counselors may they be to his Majesty; you will find
no Bishop of Scotland to hinder it, but by all means willing to procure it:
but more impertinent are your comparisons which follow.

THE ADMONENT.
Will you enter into comparison with them in any thing? or can you prefer
your selves? Come let us see, and let us try it but a little. What can you say?
you love him, so do they: you pray for him, so do they, etc.

THE ANSWER.
AS the coal or wood makes fire, Prou* 26. 21.
so is a contentious man apt to kindle strife. Prou. 6, 19.
A false witness that speaks lies, and him that raises up contentions among
brethren does the soul of the Lord abhor. What needs I pray you such words,
or how are they for the purpose of our argument? Do any of us disesteeme of
their gifts? in my judgment you had commended them better and forborne
comparisons. You derogate from them when you compare them with others inferior
to them in good. Is there no way to advance them but to set them on the backs
of their brethren? Is not this higher pride then to ride on a beast at
Parliament? I doubt not, it is against their will, but you have mounted them so
in the conceit of your vain mind. Why do you not consider that there is in
the Church diversity of gifts but the same spirit? The Lord is a wise
dispenser of his gifts, who has not given all unto any one. If there be one
endued with a gift which another wants, look again when ye will, and you
shall see he wants some gift that another has. David an excellent Prophet,
yet he needed a Nathan to waken him. Paul a worthy Apostle yet Agabus told him
what he knew not. This diversity of gifts makes the sweeter harmony in the
Church, and you would wickedly abuse it, to foster a cursed jealousy: for
still you insist.

THE ADMONENT.
YOu will not deny, I hope, they all auow him their Prince, loved by the good,
hated by the enemy, and persecuted; yea, they will go beyond you in all that
you have yet said, as who affectedly confess, and profess him, their only
hope on earth, their only delight, and contentment, their only second mean,
and effectual instrument for advancement of the Gospel, their greatest care,
their only hope on whom they set their eyes under God, whom they daily pray
for on the knees of their heart, sighs, and sobs for him to their God, whom
they honor, whom they affect, whom they serve, and will serve, with their
goods, with their means, with their lands, with their blood, with their lives,
and so forth. What deerenesse the tongue of man can speak, or the Pen
describe, or the heart conceive, if words may make it, they know the figures of
Rhetoric as well as you, and if deeds may make it, goes far beyond you in
all gracious action.

THE ANSWER.
HIther to Master David have the streams of your Ars male conuitiandi, and in
very deed as the Proverb has it, Canina facundia, flows most freely with
you: for there you know a declaiming Conuitiator without stamme^ing; but your
Encom^astick style goes somewhat more hardly with you; as not so agreeable to
your Cynick humor: for you have here gathered many fectlesse flowers of What Is
and whom's, unmeet for a royal Majesty, sundry silly figures without
substance of truth: Doubled Affectings, but simple effects, shadows without
bodies: but when all is done, though they were even as good as they seem, to
what end I pray you serve they? Would you persuade us of the good affection of
our Brethren toward his Highness person and posterity? We doubt not their
heart is more honest in that, then that you are mee^e to express it. God
forbid, it were otherwise in any Preacher of the Euangell, or have you so
spoken, because you would persuade his Majesty of it. Remember Mr. David, the
King of Britain is a prudent Prince, his Majesty can best tell, who grieves
him, who comforts: who affects his Highness, and who not. This matter must
depend upon his Highness own testimony, your idle discourse will not decide
it: and you may be sure, a man of your humor, will never be found good for
UNION; nay, not of a brother with a brother, far less of a subject with a
King.

Conference between a Catholic Christian, and a Catholic Roman: but if
this be all the rancour your heart can think, your tongue speak, and your Pen
write, you may boast at leisure, for you will find that said before you,
whereunto as yet you have not attained. Of deeds we speak in the own place.
But truly if you were as wise as old, you would leave this bragging of words
to children: and since you will not, remember what I said of you, He that
boasts of false liberality, is a cloud without rain; let it stand you for an
answer, Validior vox operis, quam oris, The voice of the work is stronger
then the voice of the word: yea, dicta factis deficientibus erubescunt: Words
where deeds are not to second them, do but blush and think shame of themselves.

But howsoever your former speeches be childish, mercenarie hirelings, not
worthy to be ranked in the fellowship of honest and sincere men: For these are
your words.

THE ADMONENT.
THey love him for himself without gain, you for your self with gain, they
taking nothing from him, whereby to diminish his revenues, or impouerish his
Crown: You taking daily from him, to the great impa^ing of it: you pray, but
prays for your self, and maintenance of your estate, they pray, and prays
for him only: no maintenance of their estate, or any particular, save that
which is general to all the Church and Country. Judge then who likes, who may
be mercenarie, who cannot be mercenarie, but must be known sincere, who loves
best, who is ablest, and best minded to comfort.

THE ANSWER.
David call for another Judge: Is there any in the land, that will be found
more pert, and presumptuous in giving out rash judgment of things secret,
which falls not under the iudicatorie of man, then your self? Is it possible
that any will come after you, who is able to go before you in this impiety?
Is this good Divinity, or rather is it not Satan's Sophistry? Job had great
riches given him of God, which many poor ones beside him had not, therefore
he was a mercenarie. The Good Man of Gods Croft has a Lammer mure, Melene,
and many beside him that loves God more then he, has not so good, therefore
the Good Man of Gods-Croft is not a sincere man, he loves not God for
himself, he is a mercenarie, or at least may be a mercenarie, which they
cannot be, who have not received so much from God. Are you not ashamed of this
stuff? And where you say the Kings revenues are diminished, and his Crown
impouerished, bewray you not your poor envy? Covetousness, says St. Paul,
is the root of all evil: Anger and wrath are cruel, says Solomon, but who
can stand before envy? The most covetous man, though he will not give of his
own, yet can be content that another give beside him. But Mr. David, his eye
is evil, because the King is good, like another Constantine, giving more, then
some perhaps are worthy to receive, yet no more then a Prince of his qualities
is worthy to give: and still you complain that the Crown is impouerished; a
care, I warrant you, that troubles you sore: Certainly, it were a pity you
were not his Highness Treasurer; no doubt you would increase his revenue: but
through this mask of spacious words, may not men perceive you? this is but
Sepiae Atramentum, hides you not, but lays you open, that all men may see
you. If your Crown had not returned from Court so clipped as it did, but some
streams of his royal liberality flowed over it, to water it, and make it
increase, then should not the Crown be impouerished. But what Crown I told
you not.

And now that it may be manifest, how unrighteous David is in this imputation:
we will look back a little to the state of our Church of old, how often did
our Fathers seek maintenance of Superintendents and Ministers? how often craved
they that the Patrimony of the Church, which sacrilegious men had taken away,
might be restored again. They sought it, and could not obtain it. Now a
Christian King freely offers it, and Mr. David contradicts it: leaving other
probations, I will only present to you a view of Mr. Knoxe his last Letter
that he wrote to our general assembly.

The mighty Spirit of Comfort, Wisdom and Concord in God, remain with you.
Dear brethren, if ability of body would have suffered, heed unto your
selves, and to the Flock over the which God has placed you Pastors. To
discourse of your own behavior, I may not; but to command you to be
faithful to the Flock, I dare not cease. Unfaithful and Traitors to the
Flock shall you be before the Lord Jesus, if that with your consent, directly
or indirectly, you suffer unworthy men to be thrust into the Ministry of the
Church, under whatsoever pretense it be. Remember the Judge, before whom you
must make account, and resist that tyranny as you would avoid hells fire. This
battle I grant will be hard, but the second part will be harder; that is,
that with the like uprightness and strength in God, you gaine-stand the
merciless deuourers of the Patrimony of the Church. If men will spoil, let
them do it to their own peril and condemnation, but communicate you not with
their sins, of whatsoever estate they be, neither by consent, nor yet by
silence, but by public protestation make this known unto the world, that you
are innocent of such robbery: which will ere it be long provoke Gods vengeance
upon the committers thereof, whereof you will seek redress from God and man.
God give you wisdom and courage in so just a cause, and me a happy end.

S. Andrews. Aug. 3. 1571. Your Brother in Christ Jesus, JOHN KNOXE.


Our first Fathers knew, that robbery of Church-liuing was a Julian
persecution, and foresaw it would bring on a decay of Religion, if it were not
prevented: but now Mr. David grudges, that honor, credit, or maintenance
should be given to the Church by a Christian King.

THE ADMONENT.
Never a one of you that are Bishops, can be said, to have done any good, or
gracious action.

THE ANSWER.
A Sore calumny, a grievous imputation doubtless none of you has done any
good. All their persons, all their actions (none excepted) condemned by you in
one sentence. It is written of Nero, that Monster of Nature, that he wished all
the people of Rome had but one neck, that he might at one stroke cut off all
their heads. There is little more favor, I see, to be expected at M. David's
hands, if he might as easily dispatch Bishops by the sword, as he has done
here at one word: such is his zeal, you may be sure they should trouble Israel
no longer. Think it not strange, that I say this, none of my words are above
the wickedness of your deeds: you have slain us all in our name, you have
taken conscience and honesty away, and without these, life is worse then
death. But, I pray you, tell us what angers you? whereat are you offended? Is
it at the Office or the persons of Bishops? your own speech will lead us ere
it be long. You grudge at the persons, it will be found so; yet you pretend it
is at the Office: you would persuade the people, that Bishoprie is a noisome
weed, a barren tree, that never bare good fruit, and never will: but that it
has done good in the Church, will easily be showed: Many famous Bishops have
been fruitful trees in the Lords Vineyard, and admit that now they are not so
fruitful as they should be, or had done no good, wherein you will be disproued
also, yet it agrees with no reason, that the calling it self should be
discredited for the infirmity of persons that bear it: you might rather do
as they did in Lacedaemon, when an eloquent man, but an evil man, had given
ou^ a good decree in a doubtful matter, the decree, most equitable in it
self, was misliked by many, for the iniquity of him that gave it; such is the
humor of people, that they look rather to the person then to the cause: to
remedy this evil, they caused the same decree to be pronounced by a good man,
so was neither sentence taken from the mouth of an evil man, nor a good decree
iniustly rejected.


If God has astricted ruling to gifts, and to greatest gifts, for you will not
say it is to smallest, then ought these greatest gifts to rule, and where they
rule not, be it in Bishops or whatsoever, there is confusion and plain
contrariety to the ordinance of God, which should not be suffered in the
Church, neither is it pride to the greater gifts, if they claim the higher
place, but justice in claiming their own place. Mr. David, you have once told
out the truth plainly, and honestly, and truly, I wish it were even as you
say, suppose I see not by what rule this trial of greatest gifts, shall be
made to content all, you will find some that have gifts for the Schools,
unmeet for the Pulpit: and by the contrary, some again, godly and zealous,
but not learned: others, learned, but without that experience and wisdom
which may make them meet for government: and it will not be so easy to place
every gift in the own room as you suppose; yet for my part I could agree with
Nazianzen, to be cast over board as Jonas was, deprived of all preferment in
the Church, if this might stay the storm of strife, which as may be seen by
your words, contention for the greatest gifts has raised in it. Though in this
also I rather think you speak out of your own conceit, not out of sound
judgment, as wherein others will allow you.

But howeuer it be, till a better reformation come, Never one of you have done
any good, say you. What if I should say you are in the wrong to some of them,
requiring fruit ere ever the tree be fastened: to others very malicious, that
cannot see fruit even where it abounds, having still an eye to see evil, not
to see good? Mr. David, tell me; who planted the Churches of Annandail, and
other countries in the South border? who made the Gospel to be preached there
where it was not heard in our days, nor in the days of our Fathers? was it
any Presbytery? I doubt not they would but could not: you will find it was
the diligence and fidelity of a Bishop. I may say further that in sundry
parts of the high Land, the name of Christ is brought in reverence, by the care
of Bishops, where it was not known before, in such bounds as have not been
visited by any Superintendent, Bishop, Commissioner, nor Presbiterie before
this. I could tell you of a mean Bishop, who has made a constant provision of
three thousand Marks by year to his Ministers, more then their former
stipends: and this care of the continuance of the Gospel after us, you cannot
deny to be a good action. Besides that, many professed enemies have rendered
themselves professed friends, by the care and diligence of such as under God,
and his Majesty, have special charge in the Church. None of the rest want
their own witnesses, some more, some less, wherein I could be particular, but
before we, with the Pharisees, would proclaim by Trumpet our good deeds, we
will rather keep silence, contented to let this blast of yours blow by us
also: yet the wind increases and blustereth out these mighty blasts which
follow.

THE ADMONENT:
AND is any man so impudent as to say that his Majesty's good course against
Papists is deerer to you then to them, better favored by you? or are you more
earnest in it? Do any of you? dare any of you do more for it, or for his
Majesty in it? Alas how poor a power is that of Bishops in that case, but
that it is underpropped by them.

THE ANSWER.
or reuniting to be made between them, and rage at a mixture, as you call it
your self, between Bishops and their brethren of the Ministry? and here and
every where throughout this Eristic Libell of yours, do what you can to stir
up the one against the other, and set them by the ears together: for what
language is this of yours? Do you? dare you? Know you what spirit leads you
to speak so? if you know not, look to your self in this glass: And there
came out a man whose height was six cubits and an hand breadth, and he had an
helmet of brass on his head, and a Brigandine upon him which weighed five
thousand Shekels of brass, and he had boots of brass, and a shield of
brass, and a spear like a weauers beam, and he stood and cried; Do you?
dare you? Is any of you able to fight against me? And so also railed Rabsache;
Are you able to ride the horses of my Master? Thus did these Infidels in their
pride despise the people of God, and vilify them sore. And with no less
carnal confidence does this great Giant come out against us, as if with his
threatening voice of Do, dare ye, he would afray us all. But Rabsache, stay
your railing: glorious Goliath get you back again to your Tent, lay down your
Spear and weighty Brigandine: put off your carnal armor of vain, windy,
and bragging words, and under pretense of love to some of Isreal's army,
reproach not the rest. Through grace we both do and dare do to the glory of
our God, when you, if you continue in this Phar^saicall boasting, will prove
but a fantastical phraser. Take you therefore in time to a more wise and
sober mind, or doubtless some stone out of the River of God will beat out
your brains.

And this for your intended confutation of my first reason, in effect no other
but a digression from it, I absolved it in six lines, and you have heaped up a
multitude of words, Commendations, Comparisons, impertinent to the purpose, and
no way touching my reason: but you go on in your own conceit as follows.

THE ADMONENT.
HAd you said, you had laid down a Bishopric for his Majesty's comfort and
obedience, you had said something, but to take it on for that end, is a
pretended excuse, which no man will approve; for who will not take it on that
thinks it lawful?

THE ANSWER.
David, if for obedience of a Christian King you think it good a man should
lay down a Bishopric, why think you it evil that for his obedience he
should accept it. Believe me, if the Church shall think it expedient, and his
Majesty shall declare it to be his pleasure, and in this require a proof of
mine obedience, I shall do the one more speedily, more willingly, then ever I
did the other, not for any unlawfulness or misliking of it, but for the love I
have to a more quiet life my self. And think you Mr. David, that no man has,
or does accept a Bishopric, being rather willing to want it? So you speak
out of your carnal mind of things which ye know not, measuring other men
with your spanne, but I am sure the mind of an honest Bishop or Pastor is a
more high and divine thing then that you G. are able to judge it. How many
worthy men of the Primitive Church, notwithstanding that they thought the
office lawful, yet have fled it, and denied it, till they have been forced by
the Church to accept it: yea, some have dismembered themselves that they might
eschew it. I know their preposterous zeal is not commendable, yet good enough
to improve you, that every one who allows a Bishoprie is not ever willing to
accept it. But you think these men are not now adays; and seeing it is so,
that such as like it will make no scruple to accept it, you might soon do
worse then fall to and study the lawfulness of Episcopal Government your
self. Believe me, if you lay aside your preiudicate mind, you will easily
learn it, and then without difficulty I see you will accept it your self (if
you may get it.) Poesy prospers not with you, I mean, it renders you not
wished contentment; though you have skill in it, yet you know there is one
before you that has the praise of Prince of Poets: but if once you could be
content to be a Bishop, who does know what good you might do to your self and
the whole Church? There is no impediment, but that you are not a Pastor; yet
the consideration of your learning, wherein you excel many Pastors, might
purchase to you some special privilege, and be a motive to others to draw you
out in public like another Ambrose, who for his singular learning and piety
was taken from the Bar, and placed in the Pulpit, and of a civil Judge
incontinent ordained to be a Bishop: only you must be remembered that the
motive which moved the people to elect Ambrose, was an Orison of concord, which
he, being then Governor of Liguria, had made to pacify a tumult that was
raised in Medeolanum about their Bishop; and you, if you would come to the like
honor, must not, as you have done, blow the bellows of Sedition: the subject
of your eloquent Oration must be concord, no more discord. And truly for all
your con^ending, this is the worst I wish you, neither do I despair that you
may change your mind, if not to be a Bishop, yet at least a Bishops favorer.
But whether this be or not, boast me no more with a dismission of my
Bishopric, Quem nulla cupidit as traxit ad ambiendum, is ab eo soli^ non
formidat deturbart; He will never be afraid to be cast down from his dignity,
who by no ambition of his own was advanced unto it. Now you proceed to
improve my second Reason, but with no better success then you had in the
former.

THE ADMONENT.
THE second is like unto this, to remove (say ye) the offense the people have
conceived against the honorable name of a Bishop. If this be worth the
answering even in your own eyes, I trow I shall answer it.

THE ANSWER.
Ornamentum Ecclesie. Elias in Naz. de compositu d^ffer* ration^.
And now you will have our Church so far degenerate from them, that what they
thought honorable, you will have it abominable, and so a stumbling block is
laid before simple people, and they are made to contemn that which they should
honor. Is not this an evil? or rather manifold evils craving remedy, that an
innocent man under a misliked name be not condemned, that people be not abused
to persecute that which they know not, and if they knew, would certainly
honor it, and that the Church be not defrauded of an office, received in all
ages, of all Orthodoxe Churches, good and profitable for conservation of the
Gospel, with peace and order. Now let us see what you answer to this.

THE ADMONENT.
ALas, are we so careful of names? and if we should, have we not a better way?
Explicate it only, and let it be used rightly, let them be called Bishops,
that the Scripture so calls: Every Pastor a Bishop, so shall all men honor the
name, who now offends at this abuse of it, and think you to honor this abuse
of it?

THE ANSWER.
MAster David, why talk you so idly? when I David, we know that in a
general sense, all Pastors comes under the name of Bishops, Prophets, etc.
Which for all that derogates nothing to the distinction of their places, and
offices, and powers in government. This is a common argument, used against
Episcopal authority, but in truth of no strength: for why? Does Communion of
names take away proprieties of things? The blessed Spirits in heaven are called
Angels, the faithful Bishops of the Church in earth, called Angels also. Will
you infer of this an equality among them? All Christians are called Kings
and Priests to their God, will it therefore follow that there is not a peculiar
kingly and priestly Office, proper to some, not common to all?

Bishop, when it is given unto one Pastor, (it being his calling to ouersee the
rest) and not unto all, is abused? know you not that the name of a Bishop and
Superintendent, are one in the pith of signification, the one being but a
Latin word, expressing the equivalent of it in Greek? and as their names are
one, so their powers also are one; as you will find hereafter declared by act
of general assembly. Was the name then abused, when some Pastors were called
Superintendents, and all Pastors not so called? I hope you will not affirm it,
you will be loath to condemn your Fathers so lightly, how ever beyond duty
you be liberal in setting light by us that are your brethren.

Policarp, Martyr, and Bishop of Smyrna, by Ignatius Martyr, and Bishop of
Antiochia, by Ph^tin^s, Irenaeus Bishops of Lions, by Ambrose Bishop of
Millane, by Chryfostame Bishop of Constantinople: by Athanasius Bishop of
Alexandria, by Cyprian, Martyr, and Bishop of Carthage, by Augustine Bishop of
Hippon, with innumerable more whom I cannot rehearse, were they all abusers
that received this name? and was the whole Church abus^rs of that name, when
they gave it unto some Pastors, and not unto all, calling them Bishops, that
is, Superintendents, and ouer-seers, not only of their Flocks, but of their
Brethren of the Ministry within the bounds of their Diocese: Will you pull
out the eyes of all these men? Did they see nothing? Or will you make them all
abusers of that holy name? Advise better good man, and be not so sudden, as
with one dash of your private Pen, to condemn all the worthy lights of the
ancient Churches.

And where you would draw us up to be judged by That is the Fort of Sion, it
defends both the City and the vvalls: but how vainly you brag of this, your
self will make manifest to your own shame, when we come to the question it
self: you will be found to deny it then, and even presently you deny it,
forsaking to reason the matter, and turning you to your wonted inuectiues in
personam.

THE ADMONENT.
ANd think you to honor this abuse of it, and for that cause takes it on your
self? Strange you should think s^, and is it not arrogancy so to think? you
mix a word like modesty, (as far as your credit might carry you, you would
remove the offense) but might you not know, that would be no way off, not half
an inch doubtless, your credit might not serve you to honor it, it might well
impair your credit, etc.

THE ANSWER.
Alas, alas, such bitter inuection, such complaint of the great triumph made be
my example? you are an unmeet man to dwell in the borders, if you waken the
Country, and all your friends for half an inch. But Mr. David, be as
troublesome as you like, you shall know for a certain, that I care nothing to
be disesteemed of you, it contents me to know that I have removed that offense
out of the hearts of sundry that fears God, not in a part, but utterly: which
Mr. David, if you be not crabbed, is more then any one of your inches, though
you were as great even in stature of body, as you are in stateliness of
mind, and then I am sure you should prove like one of the sons of Anak, or
that Giant, the son of Haraphath, whose fingers were by sixes, four and
twenty in number. Yet when he reviled Israel, Jonathan, David's brother did
slay him.

THE ADMONENT.
THe third is never a whit better, but worse if worse can be. To eschew Schism
and close it up: Eschew Schism? In a Schism by going to the wrong side, was
the like ever heard? Or if you mean that all should do so, go to the
Schismaticke side, and then there should be no Schism, it may be true by that
mean: there should be no Schism, but it should be far worse, all should be
in an error, yet better a Schism in the Church be, then the whole Church
erring.

THE ANSWER.
MY third reason was, that I perceived in our David, and he professes
plainly, he had rather Minister should be against Minister, Pulpit against
Pulpit; Preachers against the King, King against Preachers: then he lay down
his conceit of government, or suffer others to do it.

And to cover his nakedness, he has shapen a large cloak for it, but it is
of Fig Tree leaves, Better a Schism be in the Church, then that the whole
Church be in an error: but why abuse you the people? Is there any man, or any
Church on earth without error: and are there not sundry errors not so
pernicious to the Church as Schism? Speak plainly to the people, if any
false Doctrine be in the Church, warn them that they may beware of it, but
where under the name of error in general, you would make the people believe,
that they were seduced in the faith. Mr. David, you are but a Master-deceiuer,
and since you profess you will defend a Schism, and perturbe the peace of the
Church, you are worthy of a Schismatickes punishment, that is to be cut off
from the Church.

John Knoxe, for all that time it had no government, but Episcopal: all that
time, there was not such a thing as a Presbytery in the Church of Scotland:
and if any truth be in you, all that time was our Church in error? Beside
this, you are blasphemous against the Church present, and would make simple
people believe, that an error is enforced upon them, by the King, by
Preachers, by the general assembly, wherein you do most wickedly, and falsely
gaine-stand the truth, since no such thing is done, but only a government
restored, which the Primitive Church had, which Orthodoxe Churches of all times
have had, which our own Church in her purest state had: here is the point:
here is all the error, and for out-holding of this, you profess a Schism and
division between a King, and Church, between Pastors and Pastors.

Mr. David, is not Jerusalem besieged without by Romans? Are not here both
King and people in like peril? And the King impugned by the adversary beyond
the rest, for the supereminence of his place? Is there any Israelite within:
either Pastor or people, whose blood is not sought by the enemy? Is it time
then it should be divided within the self? Shall Shimeon, Iochanan, and
Ele^zer, draw the City into factions? Who will not fail to strive for
superiority among themselves, if Romans relent to trouble them? Have we not
a Christian King going before us, to fight the Lords battle, hazarding all
that he has for the welfare of Jerusalem? has he not advanced himself
before the Army, and with his own hands wounded the adversaries head? Are not
the servants of the Lord with his Majesty, to cry alarm in the name of the
Lord, and blow the trumpet? Have they not with them the holy Oracle of the word
of GOD? is any point of that truth impaired by them? Stand they not in defense
of it against the Army of Antichrist? This Mr. David is the side whereunto I
have taken me, I wish I had known it sooner, that I might have joined unto
it, and to this side are you bound by all reason to render your self: which if
you will do, and move others by your example to do the like: in so doing, you
might declare your affection, your duty, your service, your dearest estimation
of his Majesty, whereof you vaunted so greatly before in word: you might now
make it known by your deeds. But now my fourth reason you gainsay in this
manner.

THE ADMONENT.
THe fourth: to enduce Bishops ad remedium Schismatis, that is to say, the
Authors of Schism for the remedy of Schism: if this be not mockery, I know
not what is mockery; for are not Bishops the only Authors of Schism in our
Church? Were they not the first occasion, formers, mouers, forgers, ftirrers
up, and yet entertainers of it? It was not till they came, put them away, and
it is gone; lo, the right remedy of our Schism, etc. M^tter not therefore
these suspicious words, which you profess to speak less of for duties sake.

THE ANSWER.
SHall men hold their peace at thy lies? and when thou mockest others, Job. 11.
3.
shall none make thee ashamed? It was Ieromes judgment, that Episcopal
government was brought into the Church, inremedium Schismatis, and I said,
the like rupture now required the like remedy. This argument you unloose not
with your tongue, but your teeth, biting at that (after the manner of beasts)
which offends you, not answering it with reason. What is mockery, say you, if
this be not mockery? Is it mockery to say, that a Bishop was brought in
inremedium Schismatis? since it is Ieromes saying, charge him as a mocker, and
not me, and after your own manner, trample all men under your feet, be they
ancients or recents that agrees not with your humor: this was Ieromes
Judgment, but when we come to the point, Episcopal government, will be
found elder then Ieromes days, and maintained by greater authority,
whereunto also that I do him no wrong, I think his own words shall lead
us. But say you, there was no Schism, till Bishops came, they have made it,
not remedied it: This double calumny is answered very well, by affirmation of
the contrary, and where you urge me not to utter such suspicious words, as to
say, the less I speak for duties sake, the more I leave to be considered of
them, who know the truth hereof. Mr. David, you may provoke as you please, and
tempt as you will; but you shall never prevail to make me uncover nakedness
which should rather be concealed and covered. And if of weakness I were moved
so to do, yet as Calanus the Indian Philosopher said to Alexander, what praise
were it to you to force me to do that which I like not? Where Bishops are
reverenced, there is a comely unity, pleasant to see, such as should be in the
Family of God, mutual love among brethren, and of them all love and reverence
to their Bishop as unto their Father. This have I seen, and have rejoiced in
it. What needless division has been before is known also, but shall not be
known for me to them who know it not. Now you proceed to the improbation of
my first Reason by six Interrogatories.

THE ADMONENT.
NOw of the fifth, what shall I say? when you have searched all, the question is
about Ierusalems wall, whether it should be round or foure-squared, evil
searched certainly, who searches well will find more: to-wit, the first
question is, whether the walls that are built already should be pulled down and
built in another fashion? Secondly, which are strong, built with stone and lime
at the least, I might say with brass and Iron bands already, if they should be
pulled down and built with sand and grummell?

THE ANSWER.
BOth these questions are resolved with one answer. and make them but like the
Spiders Web, having some strength to hedge in the weaker, but easily broken
through by the stronger. And this the Adversary finds in experience, that the
wall which they have besieged so long is stronger now then ever it was;
where-through, many of their chief Captains are moved to forsake their Camp,
and enter themselves into the City. And if our good Ezechia had not thus
carefully repaired the wall, doubtless you had felt the weakness of it long
ere now, the charge being so great that was given by the enemy, and I may well
say, that all those who are not bewitched with some sinister conceit, find
peace procured to the City in her own bowels, and greater strength against
the common enemy, so that others also of the meaner sort, who often before
contemned our greatest censure of Excommunication in all parts of the Kingdom,
are feign now to render themselves obedient to Discipline: this is a known
truth, howsoever Mr. David would obscure it.

THE ADMONENT.
BUT if the question be light, and of so small importance as you would make it
seem by that fashion of speaking, as a difference only between round and
square; why is so much trouble, so much strife, such travel, such charges,
^^ugre the indwellers, with such compulsion of the work men? better let it
stand as it stands, then trouble all the Country, or hurt a simple Labourer,
if there were no more, etc.

THE ANSWER.
Indeed because you are the people, only Wisdom must Job 12. 2.
If the good man of Gods-Croft counsel had been craved, and his consent
obtained, all should have gone well. But Mr. David, for all your
malecontentment it is better then you apprehend it: your error proceeds from
the wrong vptaking of the question: if you had to do with your companion, or
the Controversy were only among the workmen themselves, then to speak as
you have done, were somewhat tolerable, suppose-not absolutely best. But here
Mr. David, you have to do with your Master, with your Sovereign Lord, with
whom it becomes you not to stand upon as good. And here the question is, feeing
the great Master of the work under God with advise of many skillful and
worthy workmen, will have the walls repaired, and of circular made
quadrangular, knowing this to be best for the safety of the City, and that
upon his own expenses, not troubling the whole country, unless you and your
Diocie be the whole, not maugre the indwellers, but with consent and
approbation of the most wise and ancient inhabitants in it. Whether is it
meeter that the rest of the Worke-men here should follow him, or otherwise
resist him, and tell him to his face, they will not do it for him, and not
content only to withdraw their own service in this work, and obedience from
him, will not suffer, (if they may stay it) any of their fellow-workemen to
serve him in that work; or if any will, do murmr and grudge against them,
speak evil of them, and esteem them for enemies, and so make a fearful
division in the City for a needless cause?

David think shame that you profess to have so great respect to a simple
Labourer, but no respect to a singular King, no more then if he had not to do
with the work at all: rather then a simple Labourer be hurt say you, let the
building stand: rather then a singular King be offended say I, let the wall be
renewed. Where pride is, where fectlesse and needless contention is, whether
with you or us, I leave it to the consideration of the Christian and judicious
Reader. What regard the ancient Fathers of our Church had to his Majesty in
his minority; how loath any way to make his Highness regent, and the Lords of
Counsel their party, by giving them any cause of offense, the monuments of
our Church can witness. But now the pleasure or displeasure of a Christian
King in his old age is nothing regarded: yea, it is maintained for an Axiom,
that Christ his Kingdom is dishonored, when help is sought from the arm of
a Christian King. I thank God what ever my mind was in Church-gouernment, I
knew not, I loved not, such foolish pride. Then I thought out of simplicity,
that every man's mind had been like mine own: seeing I see it is otherwise,
and far otherwise, they must excuse me to mislike in them, that which I never
loved in my self, that is, a proud conceit of singular sincerity, a disdain
of others, a delight in needless contention, and a misregard of a Christian
King, of whom we have never esteemed as we should, and as time will force other
ages to acknowledge. Your third interrogatorie now follows.

THE ADMONENT:
Whether the walls should be retained in that estate wherein they are built,
and as they are, after the direction of him who is both Lord and chief
builder, a cunning master of the work: or if we should cast them down and
build them again, after the pleasure of the Prentises and conceit of the
Laborers?

THE ANSWER.
MAster David is so forward in his own purpose, David came never to this
honor, as to be a Labourer in Gods house; yet he dishonours it so far,
that where in the former Section he said he will rather have the Master of
the work, albeit he were a King, offended, then a Labourer be offended; now
he says the Master of the work his word should be a Law; and a Labors
conceit should not be regarded. Do you not here proclaim your inconfiderate
folly? But now to your Interrogatorie, take this for an answer; Your question
is out of question, to use your own words, in this you are your own
Antigonist, you shall have none of us your contradictor: turn your question
into an Assertion, we assent to it. Let the Tabernacle be built after the
pattern which God showed Moses in the Mount; let the form of
Church-gouernment be learned from Christ and his Apostles; let the ancient
Fathers of the primitive Church be followed where they are followers of Christ,
and such as will do otherwise, let them be accounted Nouices, Prentises,
ignorant Builders, whose conceit may not, should not be a warrant in so great a
workmanship. Your fourth Question follows.

THE ADMONENT.
IF we should pull down the walls quite with our own hands, and dismantle the
town wholly.

THE ANSWER.
now if any truth Mr. David remain in you, concerning this matter, tell me,
does this City want any wall that ever it had, or rather are not the Towers
and strengths of the wall fortified, that the Samaritanes, Tobie, Sanballat,
and their accomplices grudge and murmr to see Ophell Mariamne, Phaselus built
up again? To be plain with you, wants there any Ecclesiastique Session? want
we Synods Provincial or National? Is any censure of Admonition, Suspention
or Excommunication taken away? they are rectified, roborated, but not removed:
how then say you the town is dismantled? Your fifth Interrogatorie follows.

THE ADMONENT.
YEa, in effect, if we should receive in the Plague that has proved so, that
has been cast out, and cut off for corruption.

THE ANSWER.
Speak more sparingly, if you mean not to prove a a pestilence, so you say,
but you prove it not. Much take you in this Treatise upon your tongue, as if it
were a sufficient warrant for all your Assertion; The goodman said it: for if
you come to probation, how has it, as you say, proved a Pestilence? the common
argument you think is known well enough, that the Episcopal degree was a
step to Antichrist, then must you grant it was in the Church before
Antichrist; yea truly, long before Papal tyranny was hatched, which is the
worldly and wicked Hierarchy our Church has abiured, Episcopal government
was in the Church; and you have no more reason to condemn Episcopal
superiority, although (as you allege) Papal primacie had come of it, then
you have to condemn Verity because Heresy came of it, per accidens. If man
had never been ordained, sin by man had not come into the world; if the word
of truth had not been preached, the people of heresy had not followed; if
there were not a body, there should not be a shadow; if there had never been
a Bishop, there should never have been a Pope, as you say. What then? because
sin is evil, is the man made by God not good? because Heresy is
abominable, is not Verity approuable? because the shadow is a vain thing is
the body so? because the Pope is a Plague in the Church, is the Bishop so
also? If this be a proof of your best Logic, what will the rest be?

it has been cast out of the Church, and cut off for corruption. I know you
mean out of our Church, and that by act of Assembly. It might serve you for an
answer, that the first Ecclesiastique government which our Church ever allowed
by act of general assembly, was Episcopal government, as shall be cleared by
Gods grace. The last Ecclesiastique government approved by act of our general
Assembly, is Episcopal government also: neither shall you find in the mean
time between these two, any Act of Assembly disallowing the office of Bishops,
but only the corruptions thereof: and being forced for removing the corruption
to suspend the office for a time, they never simply rejected it, but by plain
act left a power of reuocation thereof to their Successors, to bring it in
again when they should see the good of the Church required it. The probation
of this follows hereafter.

This is it, which according to your mind, you call a cutting off for
corruption; but our Fathers were never so inconsiderate as you have affirmed.
Mr. David it is no good Chirurgie to cut off the hand for corruption, where the
corruption may be cured, and the hand preserved; it may be unable for the
present, and yet able afterward to do good. Cut not away an Office from the
Church for corruption thereof, but cut away the corruption, and conserve the
Office, that it may do good again: So has our Fathers done, like wise
Physicians, but you in your fury will cut all away, and make the simple
believe that our Church had done it. So undutiful are you, that you spare not,
without all respect of reverence, to rip up again the bowels of your Mother,
that you may lay open her nakedness to the opprobrie of the adversary, and
where you can find none, you feign lies. Your last Interrogatorie is to the
same purpose.

THE ADMONENT.
SHould we receive the plain aspiring Tyrant and enemy, known and proved
so, in the midst of the City, place him in the Citadell, give him the Keys
in custody, give him all credit to open and shut the Ports, let in and thrust
out at his pleasure, give him a command of the watch, the Sentinels; to
command, control, that they mute not, stir not; do what he list, yea, even
bind up all the Dogs, and mussell their mouths, that they bite not, bark
not, but at his pleasure. No light matter, etc.

THE ANSWER.
SHall there be none end of the words of wind? What have we here? the same
tale told over in new words: he still calls Episcopal authority a Tyranny,
an Enemy, knowns, proved so; but he proves nothing. The Bishop of Rome became
a tyrant, shall the fault of one be a sufficient reason to impute tyranny to
all? Did all the remanent famous Churches and Orthodoxe Bishops in Christendom
reject the paternall gubernation of Bishops, because the Bishop of Rome had
turned his into tyranny? Mr. David would have it, but be not so inconsiderate
as to hold your Father at the door for fear of a tyrant.



In the end of this section, you have another question

THE ADMONENT:
I Verily think this is but a bad reason, why a man should change his mind,
in so great a matter, and for my part I easily think, that assertion is as
easily denied, as auowed; and I have more for me to deny it, then you have, to
auow it, as I believe, their own profession and declaration of their minds
against Bishops: But what do you mean by that word (Condition) have we that
purity, liberty, and Christian King by Condition? I hope we have them simply
and purely without condition, etc.

THE ANSWER.
MY reason is better, then you consider: If we had pleased God to turn the
heart of the Emperor, and King, not only to protect us, but to profess the
Gospel with us; we would have been loath to have discorded with them for such
a matter. You ponder not this benefit, but wax insolent, and think it nothing
to entertain a division between a Church, and a Christian King, for a matter,
without which, true faith in Christ, in all the articles thereof may be
retained. In my judgment, the Church of France, or ancient Churches sore
bitten with affliction, would never have discorded with their Christian Rulers
in such a cause. You allege you have a declaration of their mind in the
contrary: but you must remember private letters are not sufficient to prove
the mind of a Church.

upon condition, and you demand, Have we purity, liberty, and a Christian
King, on condition: What needs you pervert my words? I am sure it can be no
ignorance, only malice caries you to this cauilling, know you not that his
Majesty will not be drawn into your opinion of Church-gouernement? you speak
as if the King were of your mind; or at least would make the simple believe
so, or that I had ouer-seene my self so far, as to say, that we had a King
by condition. You know his Majesty will not be drawn that way for you: it
were more agreeable to reason, you should quit your conceit, and go after your
Sovereign Lord: but if still you will stand in contradictorie terms, yet blow
us not all so blind, as to make us believe, that his Majesty is on your side
of this argument. And as to my words, are they not plain, that upon condition
they had a Christian King, professing the Gospel with them, they would be
loath to discord with him for this matter of external government, though
indeed M. David, you plainly declare a contrary disposition in you: that ere
your opinion of Church-gouernement stand not out, you had rather stand at
debate with a Christian King all your days. This is the point, but after your
fashion, you fly it. Then you conclude.

THE ADMONENT.
THus are these causes no causes, the six not making one sufficient: The
former which you call falsly-imputed causes, remain vnconuict of falsehood,
vnrefuted for these, and evil declined: what will follow therefore, and what
must, on the pretending of them, I leave to be considered, not listing to diue
any further. And in the end of your answer to my second reason to this same
purpose (say you) Believe me in this, I cannot believe, that ever you were that
child, to take on a Bishopric for these causes, if you had not another cause,
I think it should have laid long in the dunghill, before you had put out your
finger to take it up, etc.

THE ANSWER.
FAlse balance are an abomination to the Lord, but a perfect Pro. 11. 1.
he that condemns the just, and absolues the guilty, are both alike
abomination to the Lord. M. David now takes a decree to himself, but upon
such false premises, as makes it a decree of no strength nor value: He
iustifies again the lying Libeller, and imputes to me Gain and Glory, he
renewes the former-confuted calumnies to show himself, (...), ac
Hyperivertigine laborare: He wills me to believe him, that he believes not
that such causes moved me. He craves to be believed, and will not believe an
other. But M. David, I will not stand with you, I believe you that you can
hardly believe any good of me, your faith may well be strong, but your charity
is cold: your love little, if you had any: since it believes all things you
would believe me in one thing. You tell me over again, that all men whom you
know, think as you think, I told you also, I know you are all men: but as
honest, godly, and conscientious, as you or they either, believe me, and know
I have spoken the words of truth.

No man gathers Grapes of thorns, nor Figs of thistles, your words void of
love, your raylings full of spite, your judging without warrant, your pert
affirming without truth, witnesses clear enough, though you were the best of
your band, you are but a Brier: no Fig Tree, no Vine-tree in the Lords
Vineyard, if in these you continue. And you know that Briers and pricking
Thistles are the curse of the earth. God make you better.

THE ADMONENT.
Always this same weakness of reason, to say no further,

THE ANSWER.
IN the remanent Sections of this Inuectiue, we have less order (I find none)
but more falsehood manifest: for now Mr. David casts himself loose, reeling up
and down at his pleasure, beating the air; fighting against his own shadow,
or else carping at my words, and misconstruing them to his own mind. He
complains, I make my self mine own Antagonist, albeit the contrary be
evident: my first adversary was a lying Libeller, I gave my defenses according
to his accusations; and now Mr. David comes in to make all good that he has
said, and he will be my party no way provoked thereunto by me, nor urged by
any necessity, except that Erostratus some way must be renowned. He will be a
busie-bodie, Pro. 23. 3.
Fedem in alieno choro ponere, meddling with other men's matters, Not unlike one
that takes a Dog by the ear, so is he that meddles with strife that belongs
not to him: but I hope his own wickedness shall reprove him.

He entreates me not to reject his admonitorie, but not so much time with so
little vantage to my self (except that it may do good unto others.) I have
been seeking fruit in horto Tantali, for in all his admonitorie I cannot find
a line to make a man either more godly, or more learned. And this part of it,
whereunto now we enter, contains no other but fiery in^ectiues in personam:
needless repetitions, idle discourses, (for matter many of them false) all of
them fectlesse, for order nothing else but a confused Chaos, and in a word a
building of small sticks, standing upon rotten posts: In the examination
whereof, since he prouokes me to it, I will not insist as in the former: only
in the by-going, will strike the post, and let the building fall.

Sect. 14. 15. 17. 20. An answer to them all, see out of this Treatise. In
your 16. Section, you lay down a ground, as granted by me, which I never
gave you, that I thought our Church-gouernement. 1. Anarchie. 2. Confusion. 3.
Not allowed by God. 4. Disallowed by God. And here you have heaped up a heap
of words upon a dream, and false conception of your own brain: you have
begotten it, and you would father it upon me, the ground being false, that
cannot stand which you have built upon it. I know there was order in our
Church, but such as needed help to hold out carnal division; the mother of
confusion, the beginnings whereof in many parts were more then evident, but
then say you.

THE ADMONENT.
Where was the duty of a Preacher, your courage, your boldness? why cried
you not an Alarm against such an enemy?

THE ANSWER.
TRuly Mr. David, there were so many false Alarums Cyp. Epist. 26.
then mended with untimely remedies. Ne dum volumus importune ruimis subuenire,
alias maiores multo videamur parare. Mr. David, we have had more then enough of
this stuff among us: Men that will suffer no Bishops, and yet in Presbyteries
will either govern all, or else nothing goes right: yea some, as if they were
Episcopi Episcoporum, sit in their land-ward Pulpits, as in chaires of censure,
giving out judgment, of King, State, Church, Country, and all ranks of men,
condemning them in the hearts of their hearers, with iniust and untimely
rebukes, that never come to the knowledge of them, unto whom they are directed,
this is a proud usurpation, cover it with the cloak of zeal who will, which
for my part I never approved: yet this is one of the Alarums Mr. David cries
for.

THE ADMONENT.
TO take up things then in grossest and simplest manner: Sect. 18.
you misliked Episcopal government, say you, because you feared tyranny,
liberty, and other evils should follow on it, what is this to say, that you
misliked it not for it self, but for the consequences of it.

THE ANSWER.


THE ADMONENT.
Whether you behaved your self so or not, let it be weighed by this little
survey of your speech first private, then public: in private I will cite but
one, said to have been in Perth at their first riding there. Let us go (said
you to your friend) and see these proud Prelates ride, which friend of yours
afterward as is reported, at your first riding in Parliament, being come to
Edinburgh; and demanded of you wherefore he was come, in detestation of you
answered you with your own words, he was come to see the proud prelates ride.
I know others report this somewhat otherwise, and that it was a Bishop that
repeated your words in Edinburgh to that same your friend concerning you, to
give you a meeting, for that you said of him in Perth.

THE ANSWER.
NOW Mr. David comes in to give the Reader a spoke it to a friend in Perth, and
a Bishop heard it; was I so inconsiderate as to speak that in my private house
(that time I was not out of it) that a Bishop might hear in the streets? Why
name you not the friend? under generals you may say what you list: yet you
distrust your self, for you say, the tale which you bring here was said to
have been in Perth (said to have been) what certainty is here? is this
ground good enough? say your self, and indeed in the next word you shame your
self, It is, say you, otherwise reported: yet you make them both all one in
effect, that is, in truth, both of them false and fectlesse. Is this solid
reasoning think you?

Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici. Without wood the fire is quenched, and
without a talebearer strife cease. Prou. 26. 20.
Have you no matter wherewith to fill up your paper, but a tale of he said and
she said? and you cannot tell who said it. You will be (...), a Judge, to judge
me, and is ignorant of the Law, for it stands in all ages a Law to a Judge
(...), that he should not judge by hearing, and yet he will receive against me
(...), a vain report. Thou painted wall, Acts 23. 3.
thou sit to judge me according to the Law, and smitest me against the
Law? yet we must understand that Mr. David is a learned man (who will deny
this that knows him?) and how ever this subject seem small, yet his skill is
the greater to make such a long and learned Commentary upon so little a
matter, and seeing he has taken this pains upon it, we must all think it
worthy of the reading, or else we do him great wrong, for so he says
himself.

THE ADMONENT.
THe words (of the fable) are short, and seem to import little, but let us
consider them, they may give us light perhaps (and perhaps no) sufficient to
this matter concerning all these chief points, whether it was fear of evil
to come, or evils present, you spoke of, whether uncertain fear or certain
sight, etc,

THE ANSWER.
HItherto have we heard Mr. David his (...), David warnes you he can make it
much, Nouit tenuiter diducere, and can out of it draw many pretty Quiddities
and Illatiues, upon whethers and what ifs, and can show himself a Rhethorician
upon Niff naffes. Mr. David is no gross spinster, give him the grossest stuff
you may get, he can twine it small, so skilled (...) that of little he can
make much; yea, and could if need required secare cuminum: not unmeet to be
Steward to some Italian Lord that would have many dishes upon small allowance,
but that it were a loss to take such a good engine from the Schools, wherein
if he continue the world will see that Scotus subtilis is revived in him
again. But howeuer it be, I pity you that you should not have some better
subject to try your wits upon; for you shall believe me, who ever reported
this tale unto you, in speaking of it was but a liar, the thing it self is a
false fiction: you have not done Christianly to receive it into your care, but
much more undutifully to publish it in writing, and spend so many words vainly
upon it: for you have made up here a Commentary of six score and sixteen
lines upon a false narration. Now you intermixe a discourse against the riding
of Bishops at Parliament, no less foolish then the former, for so you reason
out of the Fable.

THE ADMONENT.
THat they were proud is argued by the effect (riding) now riding is not a
fault in the person, nor for the person in it self, all the Lords rode, and
you call them not proud for that, it became them, it is of their place and due,
then it was the fault of the office you marked thereby, for we must take heed
that the word (ride) is not taken nakedly, for a simple action of riding, that
had been no fault, and as little wonder; for so they had done when they were
simple Ministers, but imports all circumstances, riding in Parliament, riding
in pomp of horse, of harnessing, of apparel, etc.

THE ANSWER.
David of a South-land Gentleman you are the worst rider that ever I heard of,
for you ride your self clean out of the Saddle, and casts your self to be
dirided of all men. I told you already your narratiue whereupon you build this
is false; and albeit it were true, fectlesse to be used in such a purpose,
except you would show your self ridiculous: for why is riding, and riding in
pomp and fine apparel, an effect of pride? tell me Good man, is it so with
your self? are you always proud when you are mounted upon your Courser, and
your courting garments upon you? or if it be not so with your self, why will
you not think of another as you find it in your self? May there not be an
humble heart under an honorable garment? Read you ever of Eligius,
Nouiomagensis Episcopus, Cent. 7. lib. 2. ^ea. 20.
it is recorded of him, Cum vestibus holosericis externe amictus esset, intra
vestimenta ad nudam cutem cilicio indutus erat: when he was clothed with Silk
without, he had Sacke-cloath within nearest his body: and yet out of an
outward garment you will gather pride; and as your own words bear, such a
pride as is not referred to the countenance but to the heart. But in all this
Mr. David, you have said nothing to prove Bishops proud Prelates, and proud not
in countenance only, but in heart also; but have still proclaimed your self a
proud pratler, pu^t up with highest pride that can be, in that you will not
rest in the countenance, which is Man's part, but you will judge the heart,
which is reserved to God. And now Mr. David if you were there that day walking
on foot in the street, and other two with you, whom I might name, there are
many deceived but three were more pride going on foot with you there, then was
riding on horseback with all the thirteen, though they had been there.

Your second argument, is from a public speech Perth, there say ye, I taught
that the very style of Bishops was to be abhorred, with many other imputations
of yours, which admit they were as true as you would have them, yet are they
but (...), a figgie Sword, a weak weapon, that neither helps you, nor hurts
me. Doubtless if your cause were as strong as you suppose, you would bring
stronger arguments to defend it, then to leave the purpose, and fall upon the
person, but your allegation is false; I had, as I declared, mine own
misconceptions of that estate, but never thought, far less taught, that the
style and name of Bishops was to be abhorred. And albeit you think I taught
much in that Sermon against Bishops, yet I remember more judicious hearers then
you, who were familiar with me, marvelled I had spoken so little; the just
copy of the Sermon is yet extant, and when I look unto it, I marvel at it,
and reverence the Lords providence, who then directed me to a conclusion,
wherein yet I remain, for so were my words. That we may epsy the cause of
this division, let us see what part of the wall has gagged from the foundation
whereupon the building stands, and from that policy we have received from our
Fathers, let that be drawn in to the rest again, then shall arise an happy
union which shall assure us of the continuance and increase of Gods work in
the midst of us. These are the words whereunto the Lord led me, and I yet
stand to them. And again, to this same purpose serves the words of my
exhortation, directed to such as stood for Episcopal government, that if they
had nay new light which they had not before, they would communicate it to their
brethren, that we also might follow them, etc. This makes the matter clear,
that I was not so far miscarryed as to condemn either the name or office of
Bishops, as you allege, but offered my self ready and willing to follow
better light if they would bring it, or God otherwise should send it. And these
words as being mine own, you use to my self in the end of this Treatise,
desiring that if I have any new light I should communicate it to you, which
here I have freely and truly done, wishing it may move your heart, as it moved
mine. Your third Reason follows.

THE ADMONENT.
I Might add the admonition given in by you subscribed to this same
Parliament, where that office is called a slander to the Gospel, a defection,
etc.

THE ANSWER.
YOur third argument is taken from an admonition that the office of a Bishop is
slanderous in the Church, which I can hardly think that any learned or well
adu^sed Preacher will affirm, then I make it known unto you it neither had
nor has any approbation of mine. This being the simple truth I doubt not but
the indifferent Reader will think any ouer-sight, that has escaped me, very
easily excused. Your fourth Argument now follows.

THE ADMONENT.
MIght I not add also the Assemblies of Dundie 1580. at which it is likely you
were, as being within your twenty years that you have been a Pastor, where
(the office of a Bishop) is called folly, corruption, man's invention,
unlawful, etc.

THE ANSWER.
Andrews. With many such false lies as these fights your Fellowship against
me, which yet are current for truth in your College of Do^atists, whose
Spirit I justly called alying Spirit: for noto^ious ^alshoods are carried among
you in secret, from tongue to tongue, and received in your meetings for
undoubted truths. This I could qualify by s^tting down a particular catalogue
of your ^alumnies, but I will not at this time. I have only to ^raue of suc^
as fear God, that howsoever many spare not to carry Satan in their tongue by
false reports: that they also lodge him not in their ear by hearing, and
receiving a false accusation: for this is required of them, who shall dwell in
the tabernacle of God, and rest in his holy mountain, that they receive not a
false report against their neighbor; and therefore rests assured that they
will reserve an ear to hear me, before they condemn me.

These are the four pillars of your great building, Bullatae nugae. bellering
bablings, watrie bells, easily dissipate by the smallest wind, or rather
euanishes of their own accord?

THE ADMONENT.
HOw is your change then? and what causes are of it? This had need to have
been clearly showed, decl^red, and proved, etc.

THE ANSWER.
IN this Section you return again improbitate muscae, Ea^^em semper canen^^
Cantilenam: Still demanding how is your change: It were more time you should
bethink you how to change your talk, or if still you will multiply words in
vain, I contend no more in that which I have answered already: There be four
things (says Solomon) which cannot be satisfied, the grave, the barren womb,
the earth, and the fire. Whether you be the fourth of these for your fiery
humor, or a fifth to be joined to them for a hunger you have, and I cannot
satisfy, I rest resolved to take no more pains upon you for this part of our
question. Two things only you have here which must be answered. In the first
you would prove, that I have much more cause to fear the evils may follow
Episcopal government now then I had before: and your reason is.

THE ADMONENT.
CAn any humane carfulness suffice unto that care? it is true, Princes have
long ears, but other men's ears, they have many eyes as Argus, yet are they
the eyes of others: and these others may be brought a sleep by some cunning
Mercurius: Can his Majesty in such distance see the whole proceedings of
Prelates, the whole and naked truth of things by such informers? by themselves,
or their agents? does he now know the deepenesse of mysteries? even the scurfe
of many actions? shall he hereafter? The pride that may be? that tyranny,
liberty, as it happens to grow, their neglects, sloathes, bribes,
partialities, how much less foresee how they shall be eschewed? etc.

THE ANSWER.
David, you should have advised with your warrant, before you had reviled your
Rulers, you have opened your mouth, and given out false accusations: Are you
able to qualify them? Psalm. 52. 4.
but thou love all words that may destroy, O deceitful tongue, if you were
put to probation under pain of suffering punishment due to these sins, it
would go hard with you. Neither can it be well, when every man takes liberty
to accuse such as are in authority, either in Commonwealth or Church, and is
not able to make it good, that yet they go away not the less without
controlement: what you s^eake concerning fear, I confess (if that may please
you) I am never without fear. Even the most pure Doctrine, the most perfect
Discipline, who can secure himself that none evil shall follow it: Since in
Paradise in the state of innocence, a Serpent followed Adam and Euah, and
corrupted them, We are upon earth, like Passengers on the Sea, were the wind
and weather never so fair, yet are they not without fear, till they come to
their harbourie, because they know there may be a change: and shall we get
upon earth a state exempetd from fear? or is it possible to set down that
form of government in the Church, of the which we may be sure, without all
fear, none evil shall follow it? Is none evil to be feared, to follow
Presbyteriall government? what you have enquired of the one, let me ask of
you the other: can all the faults, offenses, sloaths of Presbyteries, in not
assembling to the weekly exercise, with divisions, disobediences, be known to
his Majesty? it is more apparent, the faults of one, are sooner known, sooner
dilated, sooner corrected, then the ouer-sights of many: neither is it likely,
that Bishops shall escape with their smallest offenses, so long as you and such
as you, are their captors and inspectors, dogging them at the heels, treading
after them in all their footsteps, glad when you may hear or see any
weakness in them, that you lay hold upon greedily, making much of little,
that you may disgrace them. Is not this to imitate Satan's nature? is it not
contrary to the conditions of elect Angels? they rejoice at the conversion of
a sinner, you with Satan rejoice at their fall: it does you more good then your
meat or drink, to hear any blame you may impute to a Bishop. God forgive you.

A Wolf, say you, will be a Wolf, and all the world had sworn it; and will
worrie too when the Shepherds back is turned: you but speak of your own,
either ignorance, or evil set affection, considering how many famous Bishops,
without the reverence of a Christian King, lived as Fathers to the Church,
faithful Preachers of the Gospel, and died constant Martyrs for the testimony
of Jesus; but Mr. David will have all these ravening Wolfes. The other cause
why my fear should be greater follows.

THE ADMONENT.
THe Office of Bishops then pretended no pre-eminence, now it does* then it was
subject to Presbyteries, now it is freed from them: then it was bound with
caueats, now it is let loose. Then every Preacher might speak against it, now
none reproues, then were all alike friend and good fellow with their Pastors,
now his Lordship, etc.

THE ANSWER.
MAster David, we know better what was wont to Aristocratick, for albeit by
constitution for that time paritie was allowed, yet was it not practiced; there
was ever some leaders, rulers honored and reverenced by other Pastors, and
good reason so should be: what else see you now, if the persons liked you, the
purpose is the same? Since the beginning of our Church, Bishops,
Superintendents, were never subject to the judgment of their brethren, in the
matter of their office; nay, not to their Synods, but were reserved to be
judged only by the general assembly; but you affirm the contrary pertly
enough, looking for no controlement. Bishops are not let loose, suppose they be
not left to your teddering.

But this offends you, that they are called Lords: let me enquire at you, Is
honor given to any in the Church, but for the honor of all? if they could
look to it with love and humility, every one might say, Honoris vestri
participes et nos sumus? Will any member of the body grudge to see another
honored; or rather in the honor of one, do they not all rejoice, and esteem
themselves to be honored? Mr. David, there is a pride which loves honor and
preferment: Our Lord condemns it, there is another pride that disdaines to
give it, and I may well say, it is the worst pride of the two, I will not
think that either Elijah or Samuel were vainglorious, when the one was
styled by Obadiah, and the other by Anna, My Lord: Surely it is a weak and
vain mind, that is puffed up with so small a wind, and yet I am sure both Anna
and Obadiah in giving them this honor, did but their duty. But I think M.
David in this will not be contentious; for in the back of his Letter directed
to Bishops, he writes, To his very good Lord: And then in the subscription
within, Your L. or wisdoms: What he means by this, I know not: he will give
his own reason; he says, it is a nouation and corruption to call one Pastor
a Bishop more then the rest, yet he does it, and here he practices in secret,
that which he impugnes in public, and so dec^iues his accomplices, giving honor
himself to Bishops, which he says, should not be given them: they have cause
to fear, least sometime he forsake them. Now you proceed.

THE ADMONENT.
YOu make a fair show by bragges to corroborate all by the word of God, and
example of the Church Primitive, jolly words, sooner said then proved, strings
much harped on by diverse, but to little use, and wherein the more men diue, the
more they clear the contrary; it may be easily seen through all the
subtilties, clouds, and colors that they cast on it, who have busied
themselves in that matter, even your Sarauia, even whosoever, whom the more men
reads, the less effect they see in him: they, I say, who have not their eyes
blinded with some other thing, such as blindes not the eyes of the wise.

THE ANSWER.
Whether it be a fair show or a solid substance Subterfuge, and a large field
whereunto we run to eschew the chocke of the question; which say you is this,
Whether these Bishops that now are, and as they are now, be lawful in the
Church of Scotland: or if the oath hinder? But provoke at leisure, ere we part
you will find us (by Gods grace) at the chocke of the Question, and your self
chocked with it for all your boast; but I must first go through this hedge of
Briars and Brambles which you have laid in my way.

You set light by our Sarauia as you call him, but you Sarauia: for mine own
part, I never read him so much as I have done you, and of that which I have
read, I see Sarauia will stand for himself for all you are able to say; your
little Dagger will not reach to him, and it were shame for you now, though you
might, to strike at a dead man, as I hear he is: it were greater manhood to
encounter with Downame, you dissemble that you know him, but if you do and
mislike him, he is ready to fight with you in that cause, till your Logic
pan be clean dried up or the cause renounced.

One thing you have, that no man can see any thing Sarauia, but Sophistry and
falsehood, except those whose eyes are blinded with some other thing, such as
blindes the eyes of the wise: you would seem here to be modest, yet of purpose
as mordent as you may be, whom you would insimulate of briberie. Advise with
your self, if you be seeking any such here, as the Byword is, You are in the
wrong Close. I told you before, you were acquainted with the Muses, only the
Dorit Muse has been strange unto you: you were capable enough of her
instruction, but she took no pains upon you: it is meetest you should mean
you to Melpomene, her mourning moodes might procure you pity, but out of your
pride and male contentment to blot such as you are bound to honor, and secretly
to insinuate that they were (...), such as gave judgment for gifts, is
intolerable presumption. I protest before God, I know none such in the Church,
I would not say it for all the world. If any such be, of all men they are the
most miserable: if they be not, Mr. David declares what manner of man he is,
and woe will be to him that would bring such a shame upon Israel without a
cause, if he repent not. As for me I thank God, I was never stained with
covetousness nor filthy lucre, Psalm. 26. 9.
I defy all flesh. Lord, gather not thou my soul with the sinners, nor my
life with bloody men, in whose hand is wickedness, and their right hand is
full of bribes: but I will walk in mine innocence, redeem me and be
merciful to me, my foot stands in uprightness, therefore will I praise thee
O Lord, in the Congregation. Now you go on.

THE ADMONENT.
TOuching our Church and Bishops being in it before you were borne, Sect. 22.
if so be, so is Popple among Wheat before it be shorn, of great
auncientnesse, Co^uall springing up with it, and in the ground perhaps before
it. And incontinent. You will find it difficult enough to prove that Bishops
were receuied in our Church wittingly, willingly, by choice, and free consent.
etc.

THE ANSWER.
IF I prove it not without difficulty, and make it plain Ignatius calls (...),
the Consistory of a Bishop, subordinate to him, afterward called his Chapter,
because they were instar Capituli Episcopo, which serve for assistance of him
in weighty matters, as also to take care that the possessions of the
Bishopric should not have been dilapidated. Then is it well when they both
go together, every one in their own place to do the work of God. But no
marvel Mr. David denies that Bishops were in the Primitive church, or that our
own church once allowed them; for he is bold to deny that any Father, or
Brother of our present Church, approves the Office of Bishops, but esteems it
as follows.

THE ADMONENT.
1 THe Office of a Bishop is unlawful in it self; 2. More unlawful in this
Church of Scotland; 3. Unprofitable in it importing tyranny, and is it self
tyranny; 4. Does and shall import more liberty and looseness of life in it
self, and in the Country, with Papistry, senslessenes, Atheism: some that
thought well of it in the beginning, think worse of it now. Consider the
experience in boldning Papists in so unlooked for manner, so many witnesses in
our chief Town since Bishops got government, as was not nor durst not be in
all Scotland when Presbyteries had government. Now Corruption flows and
ouer-flowes the whole Country, and defaceth the face of a most beautiful
Church.

THE ANSWER.
David continues yet in his humor, and adhuc in Aegiptum euagatur, Nazianz.
orat. ad Eu^om.
and patitur se in Assyriam pertrahi, framing himself to the manners and
fashions of Egypt and Assure, he raileth against Israel, forgetting all
piety, and modesty, and truth that becomes the holy people, whereof he
professes himself to be one. He denies that any either Father or Brother of
the Ministry in Scotland allows the office of Bishops, except it be Bishops
themselves: this is a notorious untruth, he still affirms it is unlawful and
unprofitable, but upon what reason we will see when we come to the Question.
If ye had spoken this out of knowledge that the Episcopal Office in it self,
is unlawful and tyrannical, you would have given some reason for it, but when
you come to the point, you show your self a coward, turns your shield on your
shoulder, and farely flies the combat. You would seem a great Captain, and
make your fellows believe that you were matchless, but strike not one stroke
to defend their cause, or hurt the contrary; but if crying may win the field,
then should be bear away the victory, for still he cries it is unlawful,
tyrannical, and what not? the reason is, Mr. David says so, and any silly
wife could say as much to a cause as you do here: for you bring but words, and
so could she, suppose hardly so many as you.

In your other speeches you show your self so full Is not the whole Church
ouerflowed with Papistrie? God forbid, but rather the deluge of waters which
was before is begun to fall. See you not the tops of many mountains
discovered? and by all appearance, if the Lord by the care of a prudent Prince,
had not provided this remedy of Episcopal authority, it might well have
fallen out, as you say, that the spawne of Papistry would have ouer-flowed all.
Otherwise tell me what would you have done to prevent it? Excommunicate them?
so might you quickly have equalled the sick wi^^ the whole, or (...) have
infected the whole with the sick* What else could you do, unless it had
been to draw the matter to the needless hazard of a battle, as seems by you
words, They durst not, say you: what is it to keep a man that he dare not?
The Ecclesiastique sword you know was contemned; the (...) sword, that is the
last remedy; praised be God we have a better: all your Physic is violent.
Cut off* cut off* but a prudent Prince in more moderate manner can effectuate
peace, give authority to truth, and falsehood falls to the ground.

David to the Church of Edinburgh? Is it not still a Mother Church? Is not the
way of God truly taught in it? Has it not learned and famous Preachers of
whom you are unworthy? Is there any defection in it from any point of truth?
How then defaced? By Masses (say you) said in it. Were they public? You dare
not affirm it. Were they stolen in secret? You cannot deny it, and yet
discovered by the vigilant care of their Bishop and Pastors. Thanks to God,
such abomination dare not be avouched there. Is this a defacing of that
Church? No: it is a detracting of yours, no defacing of them; yea, rather it is
their great commendation, that in so populous a City scarce twelve are found
miscarried by seducers, and those also of no credit nor countenance; who, when
they are tried and examined, profess they had done it of simple ignorance, and
that they abhor the Mass so much the more, because they have seen it,
offering themselves most willing to declare their public Repentance, to
remove all offenses given by them, out of the hearts of others: and among them
seeing there was not one Burgess of Edinburgh deprehended in this fault, why
blame you the town^ for it?

Tell me, I pray you, was the Church of Ephesus defaced, because some false
Apostles did creep into it? find you not the contrary? that the Bishop of
Ephesus, called there the Angel, is commended, for that he had examined them,
and found them to be liars. If the Church of Edinburgh had fallen away (which
GOD auert) as the Church of Thyatyra did, and suffered Iezabell a false
Prophetess to teach and deceive the Servants of God; there then you might say
it were a defaced Church, I suppose (which I hope in God shall never fall out)
that Satan had a Throne there, as he had in Pergamus, yet seeing there is a
Church that will not deny the faith, no though Antipas should be slain, how
say you the face of the Church is defaced? But the contrary is manifest, Satan
may creep in there like a thief (thanks be to God) he has no throne there:
what villainy can he work, which they punish not? Can you say any of their
Magistrates, Counselors, Ministers, Elders, Deacons, or any honorable man of
the body of their City, is stained with that Heresy? How then is the face of
their Church defaced? And truly, though that many such were among them (as you
have said) which yet is not, it were no marvel to me, when I remember the
Apostles saying; There must be Heresies, that such as are approved may be
tried? Where there is no wind to carry chafe away, how shall the Corn be
discerned? where there is no Heresy how shall they be known who are confirmed
in verity, rooted and grounded so in Christ, stablished and built upon the
rock, that no wind of contrary doctrine can carry them away? Traduce as you
will, this is the truth, for many reasons is that Church worthy to be
commended; but in my judgment, this is the greatest commendation that ever it
got, that subtle Heretics with the seed of false doctrine, creeping in into
her bosom, to seek an advantage, can find either none at all or very
little. Yet your other Assertions are more impudent: it contents you not most
wrongfully to have defaced a chief Church in the Kingdom, now you proceed to
do the like unto all other Pastors and Professors in our Church.

THE ADMONENT.
I Know many do countenance Bishops, because they have to do with them, and
give them obedience as a man would give his goods to arobber (let not the
comparison seem odious, for in this they are alike) that he take not his life
also; because he is not able to resist him. I know, some fear their menaces
of Deposition, Suspending, Silencing, putting them from their flocks, takes it
for a just fear, and so a compulsion, so themselves to be excused: but that
from their hearts like of that Office, I know none, such as you speak of.

THE ANSWER.
THE words of the righteous are steadfast, and what is it, that you can justly
reprove in them? Job 6. 25.
I have spoken it, I speak it over again, and I know it, that many worthy
Fathers and Brethren of our Church, are of that same mind concerning
Church-gouernment, that I have here declared. As for those whom you say you
know to be otherwise minded, look what a miserable Patron you are unto them
(if any such be, for in this you have lost credit) you make them all
temporizers, dissemblers, silly timorous bodies that countenance Bishops not
from their hearts, but for fear and for compulsion. Mr. David, I suffer you
with the greater patience miscalling me at your pleasure, since I see your
tongue spares none; nay, not those whose hearts you grant your self are with
you: you spare not to call them dissemblers, etc. Since so it is that you take
liberty to speak of all men as you please; neither sparing those who are in
heart with you, nor yet those that in heart are against you in your opinion,
what remains, but that it be publickely proclaimed, The Good man of Gods Croft
his tongue is no slander.

THE ADMONENT.
AND that which you pretend of the advice of this present Church, comes under
the same count, nothing voluntary nor by ^hoyse, but forced by such fears,
just or apprehended for just, neither by the Church customably assembled, but
by a number propped out, for the most part by Bishops, to that effect.

THE ANSWER.
THat Mr. David may be known for a complete debacchatur in supremam Ecclesiae
Synodum, binding up all his former railings in one bundle. The Assembly was
conuocated by his Majesty's will and authority, a part of his Christian and
Kingly power; the Bishops of the Church present in it. Pastors having
commission to vote from their Presbiteries, many Noble men honestly affected to
religion, unspotted, yea, unsuspected in it; many Commissioners from the most
famous Churches and Towns of the Kingdom. All these assembled together, Mr.
David not with powder, but with his pen, blows up into the air as a corrupt
assembly, compelled, budded, bribed, not rightly assembled, and wherein nothing
was rightly done: yet was there some aged Fathers who subscribed plainly to the
Episcopal government, now after better aduisement; of whom it is known that
before, they suffered imprisoning for impugning of it: whereof I do but warn
him by the way.

Actum agere. Your misconstruction of Joseph's preferment for the good of his
Brethren, as if I had so spoken of my self, confirms me in that which I
perceived before, that you are but a vain discourser, pleasing your self in
Argutijs, silly, fectlesse, and impertinent conceptions and speeches. And
therefore being loath to weary the Reader and my self both any longer with
your Batt^log-Tautol^gies, I presently commit them to the South wind to be
carried away from your Peele-house at Preston, with the rema^ent smoke of your
pannes, to the water of Forth, and so bid farewell to Mr. David in his fury,
and now turn me to speak with him in his more sober mind.

THE ADMONENT.
What is there then to be done here will you say? even this certainly as you
said sometime your self, If you have gotten new light which you had not
before, communicate it to others your Brethren, that they also may follow you
in their hearts, and know they yield to you in a good conscience, etc. Let
bitterness be removed, let the cause with calmnesse and meekness be
considered.

THE ANSWER.
NOw at length M. David, the evil blood begins to ^buijs vlnis, any light I
have I will willingly communicate, bitterness ^ agree be removed; Perit enim
iudicium, vbires transit in affectum: I wish therefore perturbate and
preiudicat affection may be laid by: 1 Timothy 17.
It is only these two (...) and (...), that fights against Episcopal
government. To be short, I embrace all your conclusion, and every condition of
it, except only where you will me, not to disguise my speech by sought out
sentences* and o^tentation of reading, to iuggle the judgment of the simple, I
must warn you, that whether your word stand for a i^gulator, or a deceiving
Iugler, your deed comes too soon* against your protestation, even now you
craved bitterness may be removed, and you cannot leave it, but to use your
own Proverb, A Wolf will be a Wolf. Naturam expellas furcalicet vsque
recurret; And as to my manner of writing, I cannot change it: I want not my
own reasons, neither have you any cause to complain of it. Now we go to the
question.

THE ADMONENT.
I Go from all that long disputation. 1. Whether Bishops be lawful. 2.
Whether they were, and how they were in the Primitive Church, which you claim
to. 3. How they were in our own Church at the beginning, or leaves it to a
fitter time, and alleges how ever these things were, they are not lawful now
to us; 1. In respect of our oath, since our oath; 2. in respect of our
Discipline more profitable for us.

THE ANSWER.
David having of a long time traveled with wickedness, and conceived
mischief, at length brings forth a lie. Psalm. 7. 14.
When all is reckoned and counted the matter comes to just nothing: Et magno
conatu murem tandem peperisse videtur. Who could have looked but that Mr. David
who so largely and liberally has condemned Bishops in word, would have brought
at least one argument against them? he does it not, but rather destroys all
that he has said before. You cannot eschew this; you have multiplied words,
and by most sharp Inuectiues have condemned Episcopal government: you have
called it tyranny, and unlawful in it self; and now you remit the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of it to be disputed. Truly good man you have
wronged the party, and abused the Reader: for, according to reason, you should
have disproued Episcopal government before you had condemned it; but after
that you have condemned it, is it not your shame to remit it to further
reasoning? In the one you have showed superfluity of malice, moving you to
speak evil of it* in the other penury of knowledge, that you have no reason
to justify you in the condemning of it. Thus have you showed your self, in
initio confident em, in facto timidum; one that fears to fight, but is bold
to brag. You will not simply give over the combat, but declines it farely
for this time, and puts it off to a better time: but in my mind a better time
could you never have had then this, seeing you have gathered your friends, and
have mustered you Army, and ordered it out of your ripest wits in six sheets
of paper before you; what a shame is it, that in so feeble manner you should
turn your back, and leave all that you have sent and said before? You have
braued a Bishop in presence of your friends, now he stands before you, and you
dare not look him in the face, nor strike one stroke at him in this quarrel,
that the office of a Bishop is unlawful in it self.

But to pursue you even to the uttermost point, Howsoever Episcopal Government
in it self be lawful or vnlawfall to other Churches, or sometime lawful in
our own Church, yet it is not lawful now. A Paradoxe indeed: I think Mr.
David speaks not simply, but grants it by concession. But taking it as he
gives it, let us hear it over again, Though Episcopal government in it
self were lawful, lawful to other Churches, lawful once to our own Church,
yet now it is not lawful. To prove this, Mr. David brings two Reasons, which
had need to be very strong, it being a strange Position they have to defend:
but the Reader shall by Gods grace see it made plain, that there is no more
truth, worth, nor value in his two Reasons, then in the rest of his Assertions.
And since the whole weight of the Controversy stands upon these two Reasons, I
set them down truly to you, as Mr. David has set them down to me.

The first REASON.
We may not receive Bishops, because the oath in conceived word is against
Hierarchy.

The second REASON.
In respect of our received Discipline more profitable for our Church.

The Confutation of these reasons.
abiured the Popes wicked and worldly Hierarchy. Mr. David leaving out the
differences of Papal, wicked, worldly, makes mention only of Hierarchy:
which, in it self, signifies an authority or imperative power in things
sacred: Who will abjure this? but to declare their meaning, they added these
three differences, Papal, worldly, wicked: but Mr. David to declare how he
distrusts his own cause, deceives the simple, by putting in into his Reason
the Word Hierarchy only. By this, any indifferent Reader may see that Mr.
David deals not truly, nor faithfully, nor like a man defending a good cause,
but foreseeing that these words would destroy his Assertion, of purpose he
leaves them out.

His second Reason is without reason, and against the very rules of reasoning.
This is Petitio principij, he begs the question, and takes it for a principle,
which is the Controversy it self, as shall appear in our improbation. I will
not be presumptuous to dispute that which is concluded already, and past in a
Law. Only to clear the proceedings of our Church from the wrongful
imputations of malcontents, I give an Answer to all their Objections in these
Positions following.

1
Episcopal government in it self is lawful, and of David has declined this
question, yet will I give to him and others such light in it as God has given
me.

2
No Church since the days of Christ unto our Fathers David cannot show one
instance to the contrary: for, howsoever in some reformed Churches
Superintendents were placed, the name being only changed, the matter remained.

3
The Church of Scotland in her purest estate, enjoyed An. 1561.
Ministers ordained to be subject to Superintendents. An. 1561.
A Law craved from the Lords of secret Counsel, for punishment of such as
disobeyed Superintendents. Power to hold Assemblies twice in the year, given
to Superintendents. An. 1562.
Power to transport Ministers given to Superintendents. An. 1562.
Power of diuorcements taken from Ministers and given to Superintendents. An.
1573.
Power to admit ^inisters, and depose them, given to Superintendents. No
religious Books to be printed but by ad^ise of Superintendents. An. 1563.
This was the order of our Church all the days of John Knox, etc.

Anno 1573. what power a Superintendent had by the law of our Church, that same
power a Bishop had by the same Law: And those Countries which had Bishops of
the reformed Religion, president over them were never committed to the care of
Superintendents: but the Bishops exercised all points of Jurisdiction
partaining to them, without any contradiction made to them by our Assemblies.

To ^ay yet further, there was appointed by the general Assembly, some
Commissioners, to be assembled with other Commissioners appointed by the
Regent, and Lords of Council, to entreat of Ecclesiastique Jurisdiction, and
establish it. Commissioners for the church, beside sundry Superintendents,
were Mr. John Knox, M. John Craig, M. John Row, M. David Lindsay, with others
that were in the year 1564. The same Commission renewed again by the Church,
Anno 1567. and again, 1568. a Supplication from the As^emblie to the Regent,
M. John Willok, Superintendent of the West, being then Moderator, was directed,
desiring that such as were appointed by the Lords of his Highness Council,
and by the Church, might meet, for settling church-Iurisdiction. After this, in
every assembly the same suit is renewed, till at length, An. 1571. the
gouer^ment of Bishops is ratified by act of assem^lie. Thus M. David, you see
Bishops willingly rec^iued into our Church.

Your other Objection is, Superintendents had their An. 1562. Again,
Superintendents did by advise; good reason: see the Law prescribed to Bishops
of old, An. 1573. that no Bishop admit any Minister, without adu^se of three
well qualified Ministers of the bounds. The same stands now, and can you say
that any Bishop in our Church stands against this, except only that where the
Law binds them to use the advice of three, they use the advice of six, or
ten, or thirteen if they may get them? What can you say against this Mr.
David? See you not here a constant form of government in our Church? See you
any other Bishops now then were in the days of John Knox? Here say you,
Superintendents were changeable? but you should have cleared your self, not
deceived the simple people under ambiguitie of words. Tell the truth, were any
of them changed in their time, or was there any cause might have taken from
them the office of a Superintendent, but such as might have also deprived of
the Office of Preaching and all other offices in the Church? In which case
Superintendents, Bishops, and Pastors, both might and should lawfully be
deposed; but God be praised such examples feil not out in our Church.

Oh but Superintendents were subject to their Brethren. Here also you lu^ke
under the shadow of doubtful speeches. Will you say that Superintendents were
subject to the censure of Ministers, over whom they had the inspection? The
contrary is true, our Fathers foresaw the peril of that, and exempted them
from it; reserving them to be judged by the general Assembly, as I have
cleared before: and doubtless there could be no order where such as should
correct the faults of others, are put under the censure of thos^ that should be
corrected by them.

You still reply, there is now (say you) no general Assembly to censure them:
but you may know that the same Law which restores the Jurisdiction of Bishops,
ratifieth also general Assemblies, howbeit in a reformed State, the power to
call it belongs to the Christian Magistrate, and seeing it is the Parliament of
the Church, the great Ecclesiastique Council of the Church, the calling of it,
except upon very urgent occasions, proves often more hurtful then helpful,
but where great and weighty causes require it, you may be sure the Prince will
not refuse it.

But your great grudge is here, that Bishops are not under the power of
Ministers to be cast out of their places by plurality of voices You dream of
an assembly that would find the authority unlawful, and depose them all:
but you are deceived; our Ministry are not so affected, they see the
necessity and utility of this calling: they who disliked it at the first, are
now brought by reason and experience to allow it, and where you will find one
discontented with it, I warrant you twenty who are pleased with it, and thank
Go^ for it.

Speak no more then of the exemption of Bishops from censure, there is a
Christian King, there is a Council of Bishops, till necessity require a
National Assembly, and it is not denied to any in the Church or Kingdom to
complain, accuse, delate, Bishop or Archbishop, that he may be brought to his
answer, and tried; yea some that have complained, have been answered with
Justice, to their satisfaction.

In a word, let it be told you in name of all the Bishops of our Church, our
Calling is of God, allowed by the general Assembly, ratified by our most
Christian King and States of the Kingdom. Our care is to discharge it in the
best sort we can, when we have done all that is possible for us, there are
many of you ready so far as you may to undo it, out of an evil humor, more
narrowly looking to negligences then to observe pains and good diligence: we
are men, and may fall as others, but our faults should not be abused to
condemn our function, more then the faults of Ministers condemn their
Ministry. We claim no liberty, but are ready by Gods grace, to answer all
our Superiors, and be censured by them as the meanest in the Church. And we
carry this humble mind, that if you, or any other, in love and good
affection, will signify to us wherein we offend, we will either satisfy you
by reason, or willingly amend it: yet so that we will maintain the honor of
our charge and calling, and not leave it free for every man to rail against
lawful authorities, whereof I pray you consider in time, and be more sparing
to spread such inuectiue Libels: for, it will be thought a contempt of them
whom you are bound to honor, and if you suffer punishment for it, you will not
suffer as a Martyr, but as a malefactor, which I wish may no befall you.

4
So long as this Episcopal government stood in Church, Fathers honored as
Fathers, Ministers agreeing in pleasant Unity, without any Schi^me among them,
singular peace between the King his Majesty and the Church, they going
together like Moses and Aaron, to do the work of God, without grudging,
anger, or division, then the Gospel flourished, and no professed Papist was in
the land, but with decay of the one ensewed a lamentable change of the other,
which cannot be mentioned without grief, and I wish for ever may be buried in
silence. Always at this door of unhappy division, Papistrie creeped in again
into our Church; it was sown then, it took root then, it buddeth now; and by
a false kind of reasoning, A non causa pro causa, it is imputed to Bishops
now, but as with the decrease of Episcopal government it entered: so I hope in
God with the credit, and author^tie thereof, it shall go to the door again,
Only the Lord cloth his servants with his righteousness and salvation, let
his Vrim and Thummim be with his holy ones. The Lord set our hearts rightly to
seek his glory, then shall his helping hand be with us. There is no fault in
the cause, God grant it be not found in our persons.

5
An. 1575. This is the first time that Commissioners for eschewing of alleged
ambition, are appointed to be changed yearly. The same time authority of
Bishops is called in question: some with it, some against it, the matter is
referred to the aduisement of three for every opinion, whose names are
inserted in the act: they resolve on these conclusions. It is not thought
expedient, the question be answered at this time, but if any Bishop be chosen,
who has not such qualities as Gods word requires, let him be tried by the
general assembly, and so deposed. 2. That the name of a Bishop is common to
all Preachers, whose chief function is to preach the Word, minister the
Sacraments, and execute Discipline. Yet of this number some may be chosen to
ouer-see and visit other bounds beside his own Flock, with power to ordain
and depose Ministers, with advise of the brethren of the bounds. Perceive here
how loath wise men in our Church were to quit all grip of Episcopal
government.

6
And again, the Office it self coming in contempt for the evil qualities of
them that had it, whereof some were professed enemies of Religion: it was laid
by and suspended, An. 1580. But not simply abrogate, as will appear by this
threefold consideration: First not the Office, but corruption of the Office in
Bishops is impugned, so bears act, An. 1578. For as much as there is great
corruption in the estate of Bishops, as they are presently made in this Realm,
whereunto the Church would provide remedy in time coming, therefore further
admission of Bishops is discharged till the next assembly. An argument by the
way to Mr. David, that they were before in the Church, and had their ordinary
admission of the Church. Then in the next assembly holden that same year. June
11. Sect. 3. It is concluded, that the former act shall be extended for all
time to come, aye, and while the corruption of the estate of Bishops be
removed, and that all Bishops already elected be enquired particularly to
submit themselves to the general assembly concerning the reformation of the
corruption of that estate of Bishops. Nothing here you see against the Office,
but against the corruptions.

Secondly, alb^it anno 1580. Episcopal government will consider, he shall
find procured by the wisdom and foresight of some wise and honest men of
the Ministry, who contenting to submit themselves to the present government,
and loath to trouble the Church for that matter with Schisms, and divisions,
(which you and yours cannot do) did notwithstanding leave an open door to
their posterity, to bring in again Episcopal government, when they should
see it expedient for the Church. See the act. An. 1583. Sess^. Concerning the
question moved to the assembly, if the general Church have power to provoke,
whatsoever things done by them, or any particular member of the same, to the
hurt and prejudice of the Church, or not. The brethren after reasoning and
disputing, at length voted affirmative in the question, that the Church had
power to do the same: No exception here of any act, made either for Bishops,
or against them.

An. 1571. Whereat were present Commissioners from the Regents grace, and
Lords of secret Counsel, in his Highness name, being also required specially,
and to this same purpose by the Church: there it was agreed to stand during the
Kings minority; and therefore when first his Majesty perceived an intended
nouation in Church-gouernement: his Highness discharged it, and protested
against it by his letter registered in the Books of general assembly, An.
1579. ^ul. 7. What can you find out of all this, why Episcopal authority
should not be restored again? or rather see you not many reasons that should
move us to receive it?

7
As for your alleged oath, whereby you make the

For first of all, an Oath should be defended by the

Secondly, since the most part of Preachers in our

Thirdly, when it was appointed by act of Parliament, An. 1572. Ianuar. 26.
that the confession of faith which therein at length is expressed, should be
sworn and subscribed by all Churchmen, the government which then was in our
Church was Episcopal, for the Oath and subscription is ordained to be made in
presence of the Archbishop, Superintendent, or Commissioner of the Diocie, as
the words of the Act plainly imports, so that this Oath makes no renunciation
of Episcopal authority, but rather ratefies and approues it.

Fourthly, concerning the latter Negative confession, Hierarchy. Mr. David,
speak as the truth is. (Now Rahel takes the Idols, and hides them in Cammels
litter) Now Rachel blushes for shame. Now Mr. David steals away the chief
words of the confession, and hides them for fear they should tell the truth,
and shame him: will you say M. David? Has our Church renounced Hierarchy
simply, all sacred authority, all order, all (...), all (...)? say it not for
shame, there are the words: look what we have renounced, these are the very
words of the Oath, We detest and refuse, the usurped authority of that Roman
Antichrist, his worldly Monarchy, and wicked Hierarchy: Therefore says
Master David, we detest all Hierarchy: Why mutilate you the words? and why
falsify you the words which you bring by a corrupt sense of your own? which I
will prove was not the Subscribers mind. Will you condemn Episcopal
government under the name of Papal, usurped, worldly, wicked Hierarchy? Is
it ignorance has moved you? who would think you were so ignorant? or if you
know better, what malice is this to bear down a good thing under an evil
name? Were not Bishops in the Church before a Pope was in Rome, at least
before Antichrist was hatched in it? Have any sort of men in the Church done
more, suffered more, to destroy Antichrists Kingdom then Bishops? yet you will
have all Bishops Antichristian.

David's, it may be he will reverence them, and think shame of his own folly:
when M. John Knox got license from our general assembly to go into England,
they wrote a Letter with him of this tenor: The Superintendents, and
Commissioners of the Church of Scotland, to their brethren the Bishops and
Pastors in England, that have renounced the Romish Antichrist, and do profess
the Lord Jesus with them in sincerity, the perpetual increase of the holy
Spirit. See it registered in our assembly Books, An. 1566. M. David, did our
Fathers esteem Episcopal government Antichristian Hierarchy? Do they not
plainly disioyne them, writing to Bishops that had renounced the Romish
Antichrist? O, but it will be said, Our Church was then in her infancy; it may
be you make them all Infants: all the worthy, learned, and unspotted
Superintendents of our Church, John Willok Superintendent of the West, John
Winram of Fyfe, John Spotswood of Lowthian, John Erskin of Din Superintendent
of Angus, John Row Superintendent of Galloway: make Infants also of M. Knox, M.
Craig, M. Lyndsay, M. Hay, with many more I cannot name, present at the writing
of that Letter: all these may well be Infants, where a man of your experience
comes out: but believe me, we have not seen many such old men in our Church
since.

Now as this sense, which you make of the word Hierarchy, Hierarchy? Will you
infer upon this, that his Majesty therefore abiured Episcopal government?
I dare appeal to your own knowledge, has not his Majesty kept one constant
judgment concerning Church-gouernement ever from his young years? does not
the inhibition of nouation in Church-gouernement clear this? does not the
public printed Declaration of his Highness intention prove it? does not all
his Highness speeches, and actions, before the subscription, since the
subscription, declare his Highness approbation of Episcopal government? and
yet you would make it to be believed of the people, that his Highness
renounced Episcopal government, when his Majesty renounced Hierarchy,
usurped, Papal, wicked: this, or else a worse, must be the drift of your
language. Truly you may thank God you have to do with a clement and gracious
king. And that this same which is his Highness mind of that Article, is also
the mind of most part of the ancient teachers, and other brethren, learned,
godly, unspotted, who have well deserved of the Church present, by fidelity in
their ministry, will be cleared also: I will not go about in any inordinate
manner to seek subscriptions to this purpose, but when it shall be required by
order in the Church, you will find a cloud of witnesses standing against you,
to improve this calumny of yours: yea, many times in my younger years have I
heard famous and ancient Fathers of our Church, who have seen the first
beginnings thereof, affirm, that our Church could not consist unless
Episcopal government were restored again: this they spoke when there was no
appearance of it, and when Episcopal government was in greatest disdain, and
at that time being unacquainted with Church discipline, I thought strange to
hear it.

David, I am in doubt with my self, what to think of you, seeing I know no
other oath you mean of, and you have touched none other in your Treat^se
admonitorie: what has carried you to t^is absurd affirmation, that the oath
conceived against Papal, usurped* wicked, wordly Monarchy, and Hierarchy, is
against Episcopal authority? shall I think ignorance has done it? You are
given out, and bragged of for a learned man, and a Writer. Or shall I think
malice has done it? you are counted for a Christian, and so I think you be:
what ever has moved you, sure I am, it has miscarryed you: for let me tell
you, when Zorimus Bishop of Rome, sent over his Legates to the council of
Afric, wherein were assembled two hundred and seauenteene Bishops, among whom
it is thought Augustine was one, to prove that it was lawful to appeal unto
him from all Bishops in the world, alleging this power was given by the
Council of Nice: after long deliberation and inquisition of the most ancient
Copies of the Council of Nice, his fraudulent usurpation was discovered, and
he warmed by these Fathers never to attempt any such thing in time to come.
Many reasons they gave him (as indeed they had all reason for it) specially
this, that the grace of the holy Ghost, had not with-drawne it self from all
other Provinces to rest in one alone, to discern there the right of all
causes: wherefore they willed him to abstain from such ambition, Ne fum^sum
saeculi typhum inducere in Ecclesiam Dei videatur. Here Mr. David, you see a
solemn reiection of the wicked Hierarchy of the Bishop of Rome: Did these
Fathers by so doing reject Episcopal authority exercised by themselves
allowed, accepted, embraced, and reverenced in their Churches. Thus have I made
clear that you have fained a sense of that article contrary to his Majesty's
mind, contrary to the mind of the first Fathers of our Church, contrary to
the mind of the present Fathers of our Church, and contrary to the mind of the
ancient Fathers of the Church primitive in the four hundredth year.

And if I should draw you up higher, are you able to before that Romish
Hierarchy was hatched out of the the shell? What has the one of them to do^
with the other? Has the Romish Church been more impugned by any then
Orthodoxe Bishops? Or has any sort of men been more persecuted by the Romish
Hierarchy, then reformed Bishops? Why are you so unrighteous as to oppress
the one under the name of the other? Were all the Bishops who suffered
Martyrdom in the first three hundred years, guilty of that Hierarchy which
you have condemned? And if I should draw you yet up higher, I see as much light
in the word of God, as gives warrant to me of the lawfulness of Episcopal
Government, and I doubt not will serve to content reasonable men when they
shall hear it. You provoked me to this point; but you turn your back and
fly from it, and I have not any leisure to pursue a flying man, having better
studies I would more gladly ouer-take: yet something will I subioyne for
discharge at least of my duty.

8
queritur, whether if or not, a Christian King in his maioritie, requiring a
restitution of it, the present Church has done well to receive it in again;
especially, seeing it is done without destruction of that policy so long
advised, and added at length by the Fathers of the middle age of our Church,
for strengthening of our Discipline.

To contract then all the matter which you have
There is no new Discipline brought into the Church, but the ancient restored
to the former strength, no point of later policy abolished, but established,
and an happy union made every way between them who should agree in one, to do
the work of God. This is my judgment, and I esteem by it the name of the
Church of Scotland honored, a Christian King in his most reasonable desire
satisfied, the peace of the Church happily procured, the mouths of adversaries
stopped, offense from weak and simple ones removed, and much more good easily
effected, if contentious and vain spirits would not hinder it.

Thus is the very state of the question cleared unto Who should teach us but
Bishops? and if they will not, our blood be upon their heads. You seem to be
very earnest here, but all men may see it is but your Orpit or Ironic conceit:
so like as M. David will be taught of Bishops, a sort of profane men without
either learning or grace, in your account. But you need not make the half of
this stir; you might be ignorant of Church-gouernement, and your blood in no
danger for all that: but if indeed you stand in fear least you loose your
soul, follow our counsel, and we shall lay our life for yours, Repent of your
sins, Believe in Jesus the Savior of the world, Amend your life, Deck the
hid man of your heart with a meek and qui^t spirit, which before God is a
thing much set by; Put on love and meekness, leave off strife and contention,
be content with your own calling, meddle not with things without your
compass, whereunto albeit you might reach, yet are they not so profitable as
to repay your pains, nor yet absolutely necessary for your salvation: do
this, and it shall be well with you; if not, your blood shall be upon your own
head, and none of the Bishops of Scotland shall be guilty of it.

Augustine has uttered in his two and twenty Books de Ciuitate Dei: or if
for Eloquence you esteem them like the works of some new Cicero; or else for
undoubted Rules of Church-gouernement that are in them, you mean to make them
up as the body of some new Canon Law, whereunto in reasoning you will remit
men as unto Rules and Decrees; or at least, will have other men take pains to
make glosses and Notes upon them: then I pray you Mr. David, seek some Aldus
Manutius, or Ludouicus Viues, or some new Gratianus, you will get of these
right good on that side of the water: but Mr. David, for me, I think them not
worthy of that pains, neither have I any time to spare upon them; the pains
I have taken are for your satisfaction if reason may do it; to pleasure you I
have lost much good time, which I intended to bestow another way. At the midst
of September I received your Admonitorie, as your Letter will show, though many
saw it before you sent it to me. In the end of October I absolved this answer
to it; what time has ouerpast since, has been spent in writing it over and
over again for the Press, for you will have it public, and it is best so,
for others and me also, to ease me of much pains of private writing, wherein I
cannot give every man contentment. If my pains profit not you, I have great
loss, beside my instant labor, being forced, all this time to intermit mine
ordinary exercise of teaching at Evening Prayer: wherein I know you have done
more evil to this people, then I think you have done good to any Congregation
in the Land: but if either my pains or their loss (for this time) may serve
to gain you, the one I will think pleasure, the other I think they will
esteem vantage; if not, yet I hope it shall do good unto others.

And now in the end, albeit M. David do shun the Question it self, yet
seeing he desires I should communicate to him such light as I have, I will
not refuse to do it, partly for his satisfaction, and partly also for
satisfaction of others, who are not contentious of purpose about this question.

There are some godly and learned men in the Church, who maintain Episcopal
government to be iuris diuini, of divine authority: there are others, worthy
Light of the Church also, who albeit they think it not to be iuris diuini, but
humani or Ecclesiastici, and sees not that it is a divine ordinance, but
humane, or Ecclesiastique, yet they reverence it as a good, and a lawful, and
a profitable policy for the Church.

If Mr. David will not adioyne himself to the first, I wish at least, he
would betake himself to the modest judgment of the second; and consider what
a grievous sin it is to nourish a Schism in the Church, for such a matter,
and how far the famous Lights of our time mislike them who spare not to divide
the Church, for their opinion in the contrary.

The Arguments used by the first sort, the Reader will find at length in the
learned Treatises of D. Whytgift, Bilson, Douname: The reasons moving me to
incline to Episcopal government, and by which I found greatest light and
contentment to mine own mind, occurred to me in the handling of the Epistles
to Timothy, I have shortly subioyned them, and submit them to the censure of
the Church.

A view of Church-gouernment, best warranted by the Word, proponed in these few
POSITIONS.
1
AS other Books of holy Scripture, are written chiefly for the institution of
a Christian, to teach him what he must believe and do, that he may be saved,
so the Epistles to Timothy and Titus are especially written for the institution
of Ecclesiastique Office-bearers, teaching them how to behave themselves in the
government of Gods house. 1 Timothy 3. 15. So that as the Tabernacle was build
according to the pattern showed to Moses in the Mount: so the right plat-forme
of Discipline must be learned from the pattern prescribed by God in his Word,
and most clearly in these Epistles.

2
And as no man can be so far miscarryed as to think that the Epistles
directed to the Romans, Corinthians, etc. containing rules of Faith and
Manners, belonged to them only, but to all Christians till the worlds end: So
is there no reason why a man should think that the Epistles written to them,
containing rules of Discipline and Church-gouernment were for them only, but
for their successors also.

3
So that the power given to Timothy and Titus was not personal, to endure
only during their days, or to dye in the Church when they by death were taken
from the Church, but it is perpetual to continue in the Church to the worlds
end: for why? the precepts are given for government of Gods house, and we know
his house is not for one age, but for all ages till the worlds end. And again,
Timothy is commanded to keep this rule to the second appearance of Christ, 1 Timothy 6. 14. which by himself is impossible to do, but in his successors.

4
Now, this power given to Timothy and his successors is the power of a Bishop,
not only in respect of preaching: for, in this general sense all Pastors are
Bishops, having the ouer-sight of their flocks: but also in regard of their
special government and power over other Pastors committed to their inspection;
in which sense the name of a Bishop is proper to some Preachers of the word,
not common unto all, as is evident out of the points of power, by divine
authority given them.

5
As first, a power to command Pastors that they teach no otherwise then
according to the rule of the word, 1 Timothy 1. 3. Secondly, a power to depose and
stop the mouths of them who teach otherwise, 2 Timothy 2. 16. Tit. 1. 11.
Thirdly, a power to lay hands upon Pastors, to ordain and admit them to their
Callings, 1 Timothy 5. 23. Lastly, a power to judge Pastors, and to receive or
repel accusatious given in against them, 1 Timothy 5. 19. So that his power is
not only over his flock, but over other preaching Pastors also, according to
this rule.

6
This power aforesaid we find by divine authority established in the person
of one: let any man contrary minded, show as clear a warrant, to prove that
this power is taken from one, and given unto many.

7
And as here we have this power given to one, for government of Gods house in
the precept, so is this same power established in the person of one, by the
practice of the Son of God, for in his seven Epistles to the Churches of Asia,
he writes unto one, as bearing the burden of all, both Pastors and people in
those Cities. And Beza confesses, that when S. John directed his Epistle to
the Angel of the Church, under that name he directed it (...), to the
President of the Brethren. There we have a Pastor President, both of Pastors
and people.

8
And here, because the custom of some is, to create envy to Episcopal
government, by stirring up other Pastors to grudge and mislike it, as being
prejudicial to their liberty. Let them know, that no tyranny with contempt,
yea, or neglect of other Pastors is here allowed: Neither yet are other Pastors
debarred from the participation of this same power, when by authority and
order of the Church they shall be called unto it.

9
Neither are here condemned other Churches, who through necessity of time,
cannot have Episcopal government; for howsoever it be the best, yet God
forbid we should think, but that without it there may be a true Church, whole
and sound, in all substantial points of Faith.

10
These grounds being so clear, it is evident out of them that to have one in
the Church, clothed with the power aforesaid, to exercise it for the benefit of
the rest, is an Apostolic ordinance.

11
The common objection against this, is, that Timothy was not a Bishop, but an
Evangelist, because the Apostle exhorts him to do the work of an Evangelist,
2 Timothy 4. 5. but it is known, that the name Evangelist is common to all that
are employed in the propagation of the Gospel: whether it be by them penned, as
the four Evangelists, who were by the Spirit to write the History of the
Gospel: or else by preaching it from place to place, as extraordinary
Evangelists did; or preaching it in a certain place, as ordinary Evangelists
then did, and yet do.

12
In the judgment of Calvin, it is uncertain whether S. Paul call Timothy an
ordinary or extraordinary Evangelist; he thinks that he was above vulgar
Pastors, yet so, that he was a Pastor.

13
And truly, whatsoever Timothy was before he traveled through sundry
Countries, to water Churches planted by the Apostles; yet now, by reasons
furnished out of the Text, it appears; That Timothy is settled at Ephesus, a
resident ordinary Office-bearer, and not an extraordinary: I pass by many, and
touch but one.

14
The Apostle warnes Timothy, that he neglect not the gift given him by
imposition of the hands of the Presbytery: either this place renders no
warrant for a Presbytery (as ye take it) or else it must prove that Timothy
was an ordinary, and not an extraordinary Office-bearer in the Church of
Ephesus.

15
For, by a Presbyteric here, you must understand either the Office it self, of
a Preacher, whereunto Calvin enclines, or else the Office-bearers, as most part
of ancients and recents thinks. And then, whether you take a Presbytery (in
your sense) for a fellowship of equal Pastors, or for a College of Bishops,
as consent of Doctors takes it, the Argument is still against you.

16
For, seeing you affirm, that a Presbytery is an ordinary Indicatorie, or
call it as you please; and Presbyters are ordinary Office-bearers in the
Church: how can it be that an ordinary office in the Church, can give calling
or admission to an extraordinary? Amb. in 1. Epist. ad Tim. cap. 3.
Neque enim fas erat vt inferior ordinaret maiorem, nemo tribuit, quod non
accepit. But it shall be best, rather then you take away a Presbytery from the
Church, you should confess that Timothy was an ordinary Office-bearer in the
Church, and stands here for a Pattern to such as succeeds him in this
ministration to the worlds end, and who must have such power as he had?

17
But it is needless for our purpose to dispute this question, whether Timothy
was an extraordinary Evangelist, or an ordinary Bishop; whatsoever himself
was, the question here is; whether this instruction given him for government
of Gods house, be extraordinary, temporary, and to endure but a ^ime; or, are
they continual, and should this rule of government be kept in the Church till
Christ's coming again?

18
And if it should be (as I think no man will deny it) that this rule should
continue, then it cannot be eschewed that it is most conformable to the
Apostolic ordinance, that there should be in the Church a Bishop or Pastor,
having power of admission, deposition, judging, and censuring of Pastors: for
the conservation of true doctrine, unity, order, and love in the Church.

19
Besides this, it is not to be neglected that in the Postscript of the second
Epistle, Timothy is called the first Bishop elected of the Church of Ephesus,
and Titus, in the end of that Epistle, The first Bishop of the Church of the
^retians.

20
Against this it is objected, that the Postscript is no Scripture, and why?
because some ancient Copies have it not. A dangerous assertion: I meddle not
with it. The contents of Chapters, and marginall Notes, are no Scripture, but
inscriptions of Prophecies and Epistles, such Post-scripts also, as have been
found in most autentique Copies, from which we have the Epistles themselves,
let men beware to reject them for any favor they carry to their own private
opinion.

21
The Postscript in the Geneua Bible, bears, that Timothy and Titus were
Bishops; the Bible of the Spanish learned translator has it, Arrius Monta^^s
the Latin has it, the Greek has it, which is the language wherein the new
Testament was written; the Scots and English Bibles have it, and howsoever men
now make bold either to deny or infirm it, we must think it is of greater
authority to prove that Timothy and Titus were Bishops, then either Mr. David,
or Mr. John, or Mr. Robert, or Mr. William, their assertion in the contrary.

22
Specially, seeing so many both ancient, and recent Fathers of the Church, are
of this same judgment, that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, Titus Bishop of
Creta, it were long to rehearse all their testimonies, any man that pleases,
will find them cited by D. Whitgift, Bilson, and Douname, in their learned
Treatises, written in defense of Episcopal government. If there be any
pretty man contrary minded, that has learning, and leisure to write, I do
but here point out unto him where he may find a party: what needs new
prouocations till these be answered who have written already?

Now unto these arguments, gathered out of holy Scripture, let us but join
this one argument, furnished unto us by the Fathers, and serving for this
purpose.

Constat id esse ab Apostolis traditum quod apud ecolesias Apostolorum fuerit
Sacrosanctum: without doubt that must have been delivered unto us by the
Apostles, which in Apostolic Churches is holily observed. Tertul. aduers.
Marcion. lib. 4.

Quod vniuersa tenet ecclesia, nec Concilijs institutum, sed semper retentum
fuit, non nisi apostolica authoritate traditum rectissime creditur. That which
is received of the whole universal Church, not instituted, nor ordained by any
Council, but retained, as being before Counsels, is rightly believed to have
been delivered unto us by Apostolic authority. August. de Bap. cont. Donast.
lib. 4. cap. 24.

This being the proposition, warranted by Tertullian and Augustine, containing
a truth, which I think no reasonable man will deny; the Assumption will be
this. But Episcopal government is such: Embraced of the Catholic Church, not
instituted first by any Council: for it was before the first O^cumenick
Council of Nice, retained by all Councels; not rejected, nor impugned by any:
and this assumption is verefied by consent and testimony of the Church in all
ages, which the learned Fathers of our time, Zanchius and Beza, plainly
confess: the words of Zanchius here follow.

Fides autem mea nititur cum primis and simpliciter verbo Dei, deinde nonnihil
etiam communi totius veteris Ecclesiae consensu, si ille cum sacris literis non
pugnet. Credo enim, quae a pijs patribus in nom^^^ Domin^ congregatis communi
omnium consensu, citra vllam sacrarum literarum contradictionem, definita and
recepta fuerunt, ea etiam quanqu^m hand eiusdem cum sacris literis
authoritatis, a Spiritu Sancto esse. Hin^ fit, vt quae sunt etusmodi ego ea
improbare* nec vel^m, nec aude^m bona conscientia. Quid autem certius ex
Historijs* ex Con^lijs, and ex omnium patrum scriptis, quam illos ministroru^
ordines (de quibus dixim^s) communi totius republicae Christianae consensu in
Ecclesia constitutos, receptosque fuisse? Quis autem ego sum, qui quod tota
Ecclesia approb^uit, improb^m?

My faith leanes first of all and simply upon the word of God, thereafter also
it something depends upon the common consent of the whole ancient Church, where
it is not repugnant to the holy Scripture. For I believe those things which by
godly Fathers, assembled in the name of the Lord, have been concluded,
decreed, and received, not contradictorie unto holy Scripture, and that those
same things also, albeit they be not of equal authority with the holy
Scripture, have proceeded from the holy Spirit: whereof it comes to pass, that
I neither will, nor dare in a good conscience, contradict them. For, what is
more certain out of Histories, Councels, and the writings of all Fathers, then
that these orders of the Ministry, whereof we have spoken, were by common
consent of all Christendom concluded, and received into the Church? And who am
I, that I should d^sallow that which the whole Church has allowed? Zanch. in
his confession.

To this same purpose serves the testimony of Beza, who having declared the
reasons that moved the ancient Church, to elect one of the Presb^terie, who in
place and dignity should be above the rest, and to whom the name of a Bishop,
in special manner, should be given by the remanent, he subioynes as follows.
Neque enim quicquam est, quod in hac Prostasia, Beza de grad. minist. cap. 23.
sect. 29. and sect. 11.
reprehendi potest aut debet: for there is nothing in this presidencie or
supereminence of one Pastor above the rest, which either can, or ought to be
reproved. And the reason he gives for it, Beza ibid. cap. 23. sect. 11.
is worthy marking, Quum praesertim, vetustus hic mos, primum Presbyterum
deligendi in Alexandrina celeberrima Ecclesiaiam inde a Marco Euangelista esset
obseruatus. Especially (says he) seeing this ancient custom to choose out
the first of the Presbyters to govern the rest, has been observed in the
famous Church of Alexandria, ever since the days of S. Mark the Evangelist.
Now it may be collected, that S. Mark died in the eight year of the Emperor
Nero, the holy Apostles Peter, Paul, and John being yet alive: whereof it
follows, that this policy has had the Apostles, either authors, or approuers
of it, and so will fall to be of divine authority.

Now then, the proposition being manifest in it self, and by the testimony of
Tertullian and Ambrose confirmed. The assumption also clear, and confessed by
the testimony of Zanchius and Beza, that one Pastor was in place and dignity
above the rest, called by the name of a Bishop, in a special sense proper to
him, not common to the rest; the conclusion follows sure, that this policy
may and should be received, as descended from authority.

But now we come to speak of them; who, albeit they think not that Episcopal
government is divine, yet they reverence it as a necessary and profitable
policy for the Church.

That Episcopal government is a good and profitable policy for the Church,
in the judgment of most learned, and modest Doctors in our time.
AND as concerning these worthy Divines of our time, who thinks not Episcopal
government to be of divine authority, yet they reverence it as a godly and
most necessary policy, and all of them condemns you that nourishes a Schism
for it; I cannot now attain to them as I would, being absent from my Books,
but you shall have some notable testimonies to this purpose.

Zanchius, having set down Ieroms judgment concerning it, sub^oynes as here
follows. Non damnat Hieronimus consuetudinem hanc, vtpote vtilem and ferme
necessariam vt fit ordo in Ecclesia. Add quod non prohibetur verbo Dei, si
igitur liberum est Ecclesiae possunt ex tot^ Presbyterorum Collegio,
Presbyterum vnum eligere, qui peculiarem Ecclesiae curam ^uscipiat, and in
Con^istorio ^it se^ Consul in Senatu politico: at que vt ab alijs decernatur
(...), vocars potest Episcopus, vel Superintendens, vel Inspector, vel alio
quo^^s nomine Episcopus. Certe Ecclesiae vnitas scindi non debet propter huius
cemodi titulorum aut nominum differentias. Zanchius epist. ad Philip. cap. 1.

Jerome condemns not this confuetude (of the power and preferment of a Bishop
before a Pastor; as being profitable, and almost necessary for conservation of
order in the Church: Besides that it is not forbidden in the word of God.
Seeing therefore it is free, the Churches may choose out one of the College of
Presbyters, to have the peculiar care of the Church, and who may be in the
Consistory of Presbyters, as a Consul in the politic Senate, and to the end
he may be distinguished from others he may in more excellent manner then the
rest, be called Bishop, Superintendent or Inspector, or by any other such name.
Certainly the unity of the Church should not be rent for any such titles or
differences of names.

See you not here, that in the judgment of this worthy Doctor, Episcopal
government is not forbidden in the Word, and so is not against any point of
Faith, as you affirm? See you not that the name of a Bishop is not abused,
when it is given to one, and not unto the rest? And thirdly, does he not
condemn you that ^end the unity of our Church for such a matter?

Iunius in like manner: O (...) haec vt iuris humani, atque (...) (si ita
placet) ecclesiastici concedimus fuisse i^m olim abs^ru^ta, nec d^mnamus ea
simpliciter si non abusus access^^it. We confess that all these have been of
a long time observed in the Church, as being of humane authority, or if you
please, Ecclesiastique: neither condemn we them simply, if they be not
abused, Iunius in B^llar. Controuers. 5. lib. 1. ca. 24. But no such moderation
is in you, you are not content to fight against the abuse of the Office, you
will have the Office it self abolished, but without any reason.

To this same purpose is the testimony of He^^mingius: Tametsi tempore
Apostoli nondum receptus fuit pro^^^endi ritus, qualis nunc in vsu est,
sciendum tamen est, pi^s Ecclesiarum and Scholarum gubernatores, bono and vtili
con^ili^ instituisse promotionum gradus, tum vt arrogantes (...) vsurp^rent
sibi hunc honoris titulum si^e Ecclesie iudi^^^, tum v^ idonei ex testimonio
publico agnoscerentur, ac^^ precio haberentur. Neque hoc est contra Hierarchy
Ecclesiasti^^ diguitatem, quae nobis a S. Sancto commendatur* Nam cum S.
Sanctus or din^m and detorem commendat Ecclesi^, ius ipsi relinquit or dinandi
ritus, qui ad ordinem and (...) (...) facere videantur. Qu^ere non est quod
moremur superborum Spirituum voces contemnentium hos ecclesiasticos gradus,
meminerin^ eos non contemptus aliorum aut arrogantis supereminentiae symbola
esse, sed potius publica testimonia officij quod Ecclesiae debent, and ad quod
tanquam publico Sacramento obstringuntur. Albeit (says he) in the time of the
Apostles, this custom of promotion now used in the Church, was not then
received, yet we must know that godly governors of Churches and Schools by
good and profitable counsel have ordained degrees of promotion, partly that
arrogant men should not usurp this title of honor without approbation of the
Church; partly also, that they who by public testimony of the Church are
thought meet for it, may be known and had in reverence. Neither is this
against the dignity of Ecclesiastique Hierarchy, commended to us by the holy
Ghost; for in that he requires order and decency in his Church: the power to
ordain Rites pertaining to the Church, he leaves to the Church. Wherefore we
must not stand upon the voices of some proud spirits, contemning
Ecclesiastical degrees: for, those degrees are not given them either for
contempt of others, or to nourish any arrogant supereminence in themselves, but
only to be public testimonies of that duty wherein they stand bound and
obliged to the Church.

Sed obijciunt, Ecclesia Christi nesciat pompam, habeat fidei and sanctimoniae
probationem, preces, and manuum impositione^: respondeo, minime indignum esse
Christianis, pijs ac eruditis viris, testimonia doctrinae and honestatis
confer, vt sci^t Ecclesia quibus possit tuto gubernationem and curam doctrine
commendare. Nec obstat, quod huiusmodi promotiones longo tempore in abusu
fuerint, mod^ sordibus abstersis res Ecclesiae ^tiles retineamus. But they
object: there should be no pomp in the Church of Christ, but Faith and
holiness, prayer and imposition of hands. I answer, that it is not unseemly
for Christians to give unto godly and learned men public testimonies of
doctrine and honesty, that the Church may know to whom the care of Doctrine and
Government of the Church may safely be committed. Neither should it be any
impediment that these degrees of promotion have of a long time been abused,
providing the abuse be removed, and that which is good and profitable for the
Church be retained.

Rursus dicunt Dominum prohibuisse appellari Rabbi and Magistros super terram.
Respondeo, idem Dominus dicit non appellandum esse Patrem super terram, etc.
Quare, non de appellatione, sed de alia re interdictum est intelligendum;
dei^de (...) lo^i satis conumcit, quis sit huius loci sensus; addit enim, Qui
maximus est vestrum, erit minister: non vult sua interdictione sublatam
appellationem Patris, Magis^^i, aut Doctoris, sed arrogantem fiduciam. Hemming*
in Epist. ad Ephesians. cap. 4.

Again, it is objected that Christ has forbidden that any should be called
Lords or Masters upon earth. I answer that the same Lord has also forbidden
that any should be called Father upon earth: Wherefore the interdiction is not
to be understood of the appellation of any by such names, but of some other
thing. Again, the circumstance of the place proves plainly what is the
meaning thereof: for, he adds; He that is greatest among you, let him be the
servant of the rest: he will not therefore take away the style of Master,
Father, or Doctor, but only the arrogant conceit of any greatness in
themselves for it.

And in another place to this same purpose says Zanchius: Cum prius omnes
verbi Ministri, tum Pastores tum Episcopi, tum Presbyteri, ex aequo
app^llarentur, equalis etiam essent authoritatis, quod postea vnus caperit,
alijs omnibus praefici collegis, quanquam non vt Dominus, sed tanquam rector in
Academia, reliquis collegis, and huic imprimis, cura totius Ecclesiae commissa
fuerit, eoque and (...) quandam is solus Episcopi, and Pastoris nomine
appellari consueuerit, reliquis Symmistis nomine Presbyterorum contentis, it a
vt in vnaquaque, ciuit ate vnus tantum caeperit esse Episcopus and multi
Presbyteri, hoc minime improbari posse iudicamus.

Whereas before all Preachers of the word were called equally, Pastors,
Bishops, Presbyters, and were also of equal authority, that thereafter one
was set over the rest, albeit not as a Lord, but as a Governor of an Academie,
and that to him was committed the charge of the whole Church, who for that, in
a more excellent and singular manner was called Bishop, the rest of the
Preachers contenting themselves with the name of Presbyters; so that in every
City, there was but one Bishop and many Presbyters or Ministers. This is a
policy which in my judgment cannot be disallowed.

Hac save ratione quae etiam de Archiepiscopis, imo and de quatuor Patriarchis
ante Concilium Nic^num creatis, constituta fuerunt, excusari, defendique posse
sentimus. Zanch. de Ecclesiae militantis gubernatione, cap. 11.

And by this same reason also, that which is said of Archbishops; yea, and of
the four Patriarchs created before the Counsel of Nice, we think may be not
only excused, but easily defended. And least (as commonly is objected) men
should think that this distinction of degrees tends to establish also the
Superiority of one above the whole Church: Mark what this same Father has in
the Chapter following.

Ceterum quod vnus tantum caput omnibus per vniuersum terrarum orbem, Ecclesijs
praefeci, iusque and plenitudinem vt vocant potestatis in omnes habere debeat,
illud non solum non possumus probare, sed contra non possumus non execrari. But
that one as head should be set over all the Churches in the world, having right
and plenitude of power over all others, that is an iniquity: which not only
we cannot approve, but also cannot but curse.

Whereof it is evident, that if the judgment of Zanchius be any thing worth,
it must be either a gross ignorance, or great malice, that stirs up many to
cry out against Episcopal government, as if it were Antichristian. It is to be
wished that we had many such wise, humble, learned, and sober minded men among
us: for the cause of our trouble is the ignorance of some, the pride of others,
(a very few excepted,) and these are the Parents of needless contention.

And yet more clear is that other part of Zanchius his testimony cited by us
before, which now follows, Quis autem ego sum, qui quod tota Ecclesia
approbauit, improbem? Sed neque omnes nostri temporis viri docti improbare ausi
sunt, quippe qui norunt, and licuisse haec Ecclesiae, and ex pietate, atque ad
optimos fines pro Electorum aedificatione ea omnia fuisse perfecta and ordinata
fuit praeterea mihi habenda ratio earum etiam Ecclesiarum, quae licet
Euangelium complexae sunt, suos tamen and re, and nomine habent Episcopos. Quid
quod in Ecclesijs quoque Protestantium non desunt reipsa Episcopi, and
Archiepiscopi quos (mutatis bonis Graecis nominibus in male latina) vocant
Superintendentes, and generales Superintendentes? Sed vbi neque vetera illa
bona Graeca neque haec noua male Latina, verba obtinent, ibi tamen solent esse
aliquot primarij penes quos fere tota est authoritas. De nominibus ergo fuerint
Controversy, verum de rebus conuenit, quid de nominibus altercamur?

Who am I that I should disallow that which the whole Church has allowed; yea,
neither dare all the Doctors of this time disallow it, knowing that this
policy is lawful in the Church, and that for good ends; namely, the
edification of the Elect, it was received and ordained. It behooved me also to
have respect unto those Churches which have embraced the Gospel with Bishops
both in name and office. Yea, also in the Churches of Protestants, there wants
not in effect Bishops and Archbishops, whom (by changing good Greek names into
evil Latin names) they call Superintendents, and general Superintendents.
And even there where neither the good ancient Greek names (of Bishop and
Archbishop) nor the evil Latin names (of Superintendents) have place, yet is
there some principal men who have the authority and chief credit of
Church-gouernment. So that the Controversy is only about names, but where men
agree in the matter, why should there be an unnecessary strife about words?

And unto this same purpose says Beza: Neque tamen huius tyrannidis omnes
Archiepiscopos seu Episcopos ^odie vocatos accusamus: quae enim fuerit h^^c
arrogantia? imo cunctos sic hodie appellatos modo sanctorum illorum Episcorum
exemplum imitentur, and tam misere deformatam domum Dei ad amissim ex verbi
diuini regula pro viribus instaurent, vt Ecclesiae Christian^ fidos Pastores
cur non agnoscamus? obseruemus? and omni reuerentia prosequamur? nedum vt quod
falsissime and impudentissime nobis obijciunt, ^uiquam vspiam Ecclesiae
sequendum nostrum peculiare exemplum praescribamus, imperiti ssimorum illorum
similes, qui nihil nisi quod ipsiagunt rectum putant, Ber. de grad. Minist.
cap. 21. Sect. 2.

We accuse not all Archbishops and Bishops, so called this day, of this
tyranny: for what arrogancy were this? yea, those who are so called,
providing they follow the example of former holy Bishops, to reform the
deformed house of God, according to the rule of Gods word, why shall we not
acknowledge and reverence them as faithful Pastors of the Christian Church: so
far are we from that which most falsely, and without shame, is objected
against us, to make our particular example a rule which other Churches are
bound to follow, which is the fashion of wilful ignorant men, who think
nothing well done, but that which they do themselves.

And again, albeit (says he) of old the government of Presbyters was by
course, Attamen prostasias hic modus paulatim postea visus est ita mutandus, vt
vnus Presbyterio pr^estos esset and permaneret, cap. 23. sect. 25. yet this
form of presidence was in such sort changed, that one was set over the rest,
as constant and perpetual Governor.

Ita factum est, vt Episcopi nomen ad hunc prestota proprie significandum, and
quidem suorum Compresbyterorum respectu sit translat^m, cap. 23. Sect. 9. And
so it came to pass that the name of a Bishop was translated properly to
signify this president of the Presbytery, not only in respect of
superiority over the people, but over his Compresbyters also.

Postremum hunc ordinem, vel modum ordinis humanum, non simpliciter tamen, sed
comparate nulla cum Patrum and tot Ecclesiarum iniuria appellauero, Sect. 10.
And this last order, or manner of order without any offense of the Fathers, or
of so many Churches, I call humane, yet not simply, but in comparison.

Absit autem, vt hunc ordinem etsi Apostolica and mere diuina dispositione non
constitutum, tamen vt temere aut superbe in^ectum reprehendam. Sect. 13. Far
be it from me rashly or proudly to reprove this order, albeit it be not
established by Apostolic, or merely divine disposition.

Cuius etiam magnum fuisse vsum, quandiu boni and sancti Episcopi Ecclesijs
praefuerunt quis inficiari possit? fruantur igitur illo qui volunt and
poterunt, Sect. 13.

And it cannot be denied that this policy was very profitable unto the Church,
so long as good and holy Bishops were Presidents over it. Let them therefore
enjoy it who so will, and may have it.

This is the judgment of these modest and reverent Doctors of thereformed
Churches, who albeit they see not clearly that the Episcopal function is
divine, yet they reverence it as a necessary and lawful policy, which may
make most justly the malcontents of our time ashamed, who have nothing in
their mouths but that the office of a Bishop is Antichristian, that the name
is abused when it is given to one Pastor and not to all the rest; wherein if
they will not be reformed by us, I wish at least, that laying all prejudice
aside, they may follow in their judging and speaking, this moderation of these
learned and godly Fathers of our Church.

A short answer, to the Tripartite Antipologie of some namelesse Authors.
AS a little sparkle of fire kindles a great flame, and one wave in the waters
causes many; or as the barking of one dog in a Village wakeneth the rest to
bark also (excuse me to use this comparison, for in this, as Mr. David his
word is, the case is alike) so Mr. David by his example has provoked others,
his accomplices, to imitate him in his manner of doing. For since my coming to
Edenbrough, for directing* away my Dikaiologie to the Press, there was
delivered to me three sundry Treatises inuectiue, coincident for the most
part, with Mr. David his Parologie; and where they differ from him, a
particular answer is here returned unto them.

The Authors of them I know not, their names are suppressed: the first and the
third go together, and seems to be some Preachers of Fyffe; they reckon out
some sundry indwellers of Fyffe, to prove a certain alleagance concerning the
late Bishop of S. Andrews. their intelligence also with Perth, bordering with
that Province, from which reports of my Sermons are so easily carried unto
them, insinuates also the same; but for their persons, be what they will, the
matter is all one. Great brags were made be Mr. David, of many answers, and
many Inquisitors that were to search mine Apology: before they came, some
great thing was expected, but no such thing is found: doubtless they have
manifested the weakness of their cause, that so many laboring about one
thing have not brought among them all, so much as one argument to defend it.

An Answer to the first.
THE first (...), says he, is unacquainted with me, only has heard me
teach oftentimes, and been as sundry others were, comforted thereby, for which
he thanks God: for, truly the glory of that good which God works by the
ministry of his weak Servants belongs unto himself; for, we are not able of
our selves so much as to think a good thought. And to the end that such as
have gotten good by my Ministry, may be further confirmed, I thought it my
duty, after I had considered the matter of Church-gouernement, rightly to
inform them, that there is no cause why our Church should thus be divided for
it: And I may, and now do with a good warrant of the word and mine own
conscience say to it, I should not, I will not, I dare not, be an author nor
maintainer of division in our Church for it. If any will, let them do it upon
their own peril, wherein I will be loath to communicate with them.

In your third Sect. you mislike the boldness of others that usurp the
Iudicatorie of other men's consciences, I wish the like moderation had been
used of the rest of your Accomplices. This only you say, that albeit God be
only (...), the searcher of the heart, yet men may judge of other men by their
fruits: whereunto I willingly agree; for, it is the rule of our Savior, By
their fruits you shall know them. If a man condemn the life of another, let
him disprove it by his evil deeds; or if he will impugn the opinion, let
him do it by strength of reason: but to usurp the Iudicatorie of an other
man's conscience, is it not intolerable presumption? yet commonly practiced by
your Accomplices? Naz ^rat. 7.
for whom it were good they remembered Nazianzen his warning, Multa versanda
sunt animo priusquam ali^m iraepiet atis condemns.

Sect. 8. You grant that from the beginning of reformation till the year
1575. Our Church contented themselves with Bishops and Superintendents, why
then is it counted so odious a thing that Bishops should be in it now?

You affirm also that I can bring no warrant for Episcopal government,
neither from Gods word, nor practice of the primitive Church for the first
three hundred years. The Answer you will find in my Reply to the last
Opponent.

Sect. 11. You allege, that they who assembled at Glasgow, came upon private
missiues from his Majesty, and upon promises of gain. Mr. David objected that
before, and I answered it in my Dikaiologie; only you add, that I know it to
be so: but if you hope to make your Assertion good, you shall do well to use
some other probations, for in truth I know not any such thing.

Sect. 16. The argument I used, mistaken by you, concerning the Apostles
dispensation of Circumcision, shall be cleared in mine answer to the last
Opponent, who also impugnes it.

Sect. 17. 18. You would prove that you are not the Authors of Schism, but
Bishops: why? because they have departed from the government, whereunto you
stand (say you) but this mids will not draw on that conclusion. For we stand
to the government of our first Fathers, (confessed by your self) from the
which who so shall be found to have departed, let the blame be theirs.

Sect. 19. Your alleging of the growth of Papistrie now, that was not before,
is as I told you a Sophisme, A non causa pro causa, Kingdoms and Churches have
their own periods of times, whereinto sins long contracted before, do bring
judgment upon them, which honest and godly men cannot hold off. By this same
reason Daniell and Ezekiell might be blamed for Babels Captivity, which the
sins of former ages had procured. It were but folly for you or us either to
charge one another with the causes of this wrath. There are none of us free, by
our sins we have deserved judgment; God give us grace jointly to prevent it
by unfeigned repentance in all holiness and love.

Sect. 28. You charge me for comparing my brethren of the Ministry to
Shimeies, if I had so done, I were worthy to be blamed, but in truth you have
mistaken me, God forbid. My words are plain against the Libeller, and such as
he, who if in their calling they were laborious, as I did hope to give them
example if they were acquainted with me, they should find no time for such
idle toys, and I marvel how men can so far misconstrue my words; for I
affirmed plainly that I was persuaded no well advised Christian would fight
with such armor as lying Libels, and if no common Christian will do it, far
less ever thought I that a Christian Preacher would do it.

And where you say they are very idle if they be not more laborious then I, my
answer is, let the Work bear witness. And so fare you well in the Lord.

Edinburgh. Nouemb. 24. 1613.
An Answer to the second.
THE second (to wit (...)) comes in like a swaggerer, breathing out many
brawling speeches without either truth or modesty, ^he shoots his fectlesse
bolt, and hides himself, which is the fashion of a feeble coward: he
conceales his name, but by his speech may be discerned to be some Lucius
Blastus, a furibund, but a figuline fellow, loadned with railings, lyings,
fabulous fictions, wherewith he ouer-burdens himself. I leave him where I
found him, vexing himself with his own anger, tumbling, and weltring in the
puddle of his tumultua^ thoughts, whereof he cannot rid himself, bragging
most vainly, but bringing nothing that may be counted worthy of an answer,
save only that for lack of any other thing, wherewith to charge me. He carps
at my Commentary upon the eight to the Romans, and passing by (as the manner
of envious men is) all the good that is in it, he finds fault with the
Grammatical construction of the seventh verse. A great matter, indeed I
thank the Lord; these labors of mine published in twelve or thirteen
several Treatises, has done good to the Church: and howsoever they be
disesteemed by you and some of your humor, yet that they are in account with
men of greater piety and learning then you is evident, in that now the third
time that Commentary upon the eight to the Romans, has been imprinted;
others of them five times imprinted. You come short of this honor your self,
and grieves at it, you cannot walk with me in the same way, to put your
talent unto profit, neither yet can suffer another to do it beside you,
unless you lie snarling, and barking at his heels, and thereby declare your
self to be but a base body. I must tell you, as the truth is, for many of you
blinded, with a vain conceit of your selves, spils unspoken to, whose manner
is, that either they would do, but cannot; or else can do, but for idleness
will not, or may not: yet doing no good themselves, they will censure the
doings of all others, neither can any thing be done, were it never so good,
that shall escape the stroke of their tongue. But now to the word you quarrel,
I know very well that (...) is sometime a Substantive, and you cannot deny it
is also an Adjective* Beza in his notes, finds fault most justly with the
Latin translation, rendering the words in this manner, Carnem inimicam esse
Deo. First, because if the word had been used here as an Adjective, the
Apostle would have said (...), to make it agree with (...). Secondly, because
it does not so significantly express the Apostles meaning: it being more to
say the sense of the flesh is inimitie with God, then to say, it is an enemy
to God. Now if I looking especially to the best sense, have used (...) as an
Adjective substantiuated in the plural, the more effectually to express the
corruption of our nature, according to that of Moses, All the i^aginations of
the thoughts of man's heart, are only evil continually. And so has rendered
the words, Sensus carnis Inimicitiae aduersus Deum. And out of it, have drawn
a true and profitable observation, what have you here to carpe it? As to these
words subioyned (otherwise it could not agree with the Substantive (...): it is
of truth, it is drawn out of the first uncorrected Copy, and continues in the
second Edition expressly against my direction. But when you shall have taken as
great pains to increase your talent for edification of the Church, and shall
offer your labors to the public censure of others. I can assure you, modest
and reasonable men will excuse you for the like construction, provided they
find good in the remanent of your labors.

And truly I have great cause to thank the Lord my God, that so many eyes and
tongues, and Pens being stretched out to mark my ways: my words, my secret
writings; my public writings yet among them all they can find nothing either
in my life, or in my labors wherewith to charge me: if they could, the world
should have heard it ere now: yea, since some of them have been so impious, as
to judge of Gods affection toward me by the death of some of my children, which
I know has been tratled into the ears of some within Edinburgh. What would
these who so narrowly seeks a blame against me, have done if they could have
found it? Again, I thank the Lord who has so watched over me, as not to
suffer me to fall under the rebuke of man. I fear not, I care not the censure
of flesh, and I trust in his grace, that still he will preserve me pure and
blameless to his heavenly Kingdom for his names sake.

But to return unto you, you have here no other thing worthy of an answer:
not answered already; It is scarce a sheet of paper you have sent me, and you
post through it with such speed, that any man may perceive the heat of your
humor has spurred you to clatter out of the Cabinet of your cheek any thing
came readiest into it: never going in into your self, as becomes a modest man
to advise with your mind. My counsel to you, is, that when such a fit of
fury takes you again, you give command before to your servants to hold
Paper, Pen, and Ink out of your way, least you shame your self yet more,
and so good Master (...), vvishing to you greater modesty of mind and speech,
I bid you farewell.

Edinburgh Nouemb, 25. 1613.
An Answer to the third.
THE third begins his Logomachick declamation, with a great exclamation: O
tempora! O mores! wherein is more noise of words, then dint of reasons: Who
(says he) would have said within these twelve years, that I would have been
of this mind? But indeed it is no strange thing to see any Christian, far
less a Christian Preacher, in twelve years; yea in one year, attain to
knowledge which he had not before: What else is our life here, but a daily
changing from darkness to light, from sin to sanctification, from Satan to
the living God, from evil to good, from good to better? 2 Cor. 3. 1^.
We behold as in a mirror the glory of God with open face, and are changed
from glory to glory, into the same image by the Spirit of the Lord; what
change I have made, is neither so so dainly, nor so lightly done, as you
suppose. I have considered the matter at length, and finds for the one part
arguments from the authority of persons, which did long restrain me, as also
from a late custom of our Church, which when I searched the register of our
general assemblies, I found easily taken away by a more ancient custom of
our Church: On the other part, arguments from the truth it self, which I dare
not conceal for respect of persons; neither is it any reason that I should be
bound with the cords of former ignorance, and holden back from giving place
to a better light, when God reueales it; yet this is the maine argument you
bring against me, which I think you would not repeat so often, if you had any
stronger to bring for you.

In this same Page, you charge me with two speeches, which are untruths, they
are not mine, I never had any such words, and it is a shame for you, who in the
end of your Treatise subscribes your self Philalethe^, that you should prove
Pseustes in the very beginning. But if these vain reports, wherewith you fill
the hearts of such as lean their ears unto you, were taken from you, you
would be found bare and barren of matter, whereby you might maintain them in a
liking of your opinion.

Your calumnies, Fol. 2. that Episcopal dignity draws near to Babel, and
Egypt; that the calling is evil in it self, and corrupts the Cariers thereof:
that the show of worldly glory has turned me out of the path^way of Christ,
that a man nose-wise (like you) might smell in my speeches the savor of a
vainglorious, and selfe-pleasing humor, that mine heart cleaves to the
world, that it appears to be auaritious and ambitious, are but words of wind,
neither able to move the mountain of Episcopal dignity (as you call it) nor
yet one whit to commoue me at all: but so much the more confirms me, that I
see you fight with lies and untruths.

You deny that Superintendents and Bishops are one, Fol. 6. And why? Because
Superintendents rode not at Parliament. A strong argument (forsooth) as if this
pertained to the substance of their Office: but it is good enough, you wot
where.

Your* anger at Episcopal garments, and their riding at Parliament with
Foot-cloathes, would be the less, if your care to redress vanity of
apparel in your self, and your accomplices were greater. As for Bishops their
apparel and riding, whereupon you gnaw so much, if the honor of their place
in that supreme Court of this Kingdom, wherein now they have by his Highness
favor that benefit to sit, craved so long by our Fathers, and not obtained
till now, if this I say moved them no more, then any respect of honor to
themselves, I doubt not they could willingly content, to be without it. And if
I should answer you in this as I could, well I know I might justly make you
asharned.

Bishops you grant, Fol. 6. were once set up in our Church, with consent of
our Church: so your first brother confessed before you; what aileth you then at
a Bishop now? why make you such a stir for receiving that, which our best and
oldest Fathers embraced before us. Why call you hereafter Episcopal
government, The Romish Hierarchy? Fol. 10. Did Mr. Kn^x and our Fathers set up
Romish Hierarchy? this must follow, if you be a true man. God forgive you, and
lay it not to your charge, that rends the Unity of our Church for that which
you are forced to grant our Fathers had before us: you blame them who have
departed from you: but considers not they have joined themselves to the Fathers
of our Church older then you, the blame is not theirs, but shall be yours, if
you also follow them not: for my own part it repents me, I knew not the truth
of this matter sooner, but as now by searching the monuments of our Church and
former Churches I know it. If I had known it, no man should have been
confirmed by my example in the contrary. There may be personal faults in
Bishops present, they are but men: but I am sure the insolent pride evident in
many of you, that will follow none, but be followed of others; together with
your hot contentions and needless strife, whereby you rend the bowels of this
Church without compassion, bending your tongues in public and private against
your brethren: is a sin more abominable in Gods sight, then any wherewith
you are able to charge them? Let alone therefore this conceit, and standing
upon your reputation. Think it no shame to submit your self to Episcopal
government; to receive it in the Church, which the plain evidence of truth
forces your self to confess, that it was set up in our Church by the oldest
and best Fathers that ever our Church had. But if still you will be
contentious, and foster a division, if you will deprive this poor Church of
the good we might have under so Christian a King, so long as we have his
Highness for the establishing of the Gospel: if you have no respect to
increase his Highness joy be our Union, nor to unite the present estate of our
Church with her first estate for the honor thereof? If you have no care to
stop the mouth of the common adversary, and will divide Jerusalem within,
when it is besieged without, stand in fear, least God require this at your
hands. You deny that the Episcopal and Presbyteriall government were ever
united. You may as well deny, that the Sun shined in the Primitive Church.
Your fellow Writer wishes he had the benefit of Printing, I wish the same; you
care not what you write in private, but if you were to publish them by Print, I
hope it should be some awband to you, to restrain you from your accustomed
rash affirmations of such Paradoxes, untruths, fables: or otherwise it would
turn to your greater shame. But now if you will credit Ignatius, from Peter
the third Bishop of Antiochia: through all his Epistles, he ever distinguishes
a Bishop and a Presbytery, and yet makes them sweetly concur to do the
work of God: let it be, you doubt of some of his Epistles, but I hope you will
not reject them all: having exhorted the Traellians to obey their Bishop and
Presbyters, Ignat. ad Tra^llia^^. Epist. 2.
he defines them both (...). What is a Bishop, but he that has power and rule
in the Church, so far as a man can have it, and is according to his power a
follower of Christ (...) (...) (...). What is a Presbytery? but a sacred
consistory of Counselors and Assessors to the Bishop. See you not here a
Bishop and Presbyters distinguished: see you them not united, the one having
power to rule, the others duty being to counsel and assist. And this
testimony of their Union fifteen hundredth years old. Many other clear
testimonies out of all the Epistles of Ignatius Bishop of Antiochia, Martyr at
Rome, might be gathered to this same purpose, but that it were too long to
rehearse them.

Take with this another of Nazianzen. Nazian. ^rat. 7. de Composita disser^^^^
rati^ne.
Nos omnes vinum corpus in Christ^ (...), ac singuli tam Christ's s^mu^ membra,
quam alter alterius, nimirum imperat and praesidet hoc, illud du^^tur, necidem
efficunt vtraque, siquidem imperare, ac subie^tum esse imper^^ non sunt idem,
and fiunt tamen vtraque, vnum per vnum spiritum conglutinata in vnum Christum.
We are all one body in Christ, and every one of us the members of another,
as also the members of Christ: one is president and commands; another is
governed: both these effectuates not one thing, for to command, and to be
subject to commandment, are not one, and yet these two becomes one being
conglutinate and conjoined by one Spirit into one Christ: That Nazianzen means
here of the distinction of Ministers, whereof the Superior has power, to
rule; the Inferior his place to obey, yet both happily united in Christ, to
do the work of God: See Elias Commentary upon this place.

Look again the fourth Council of Carthage, holden about twelve hundred
year since. Presbyter ordinatur Episcopo ^um benedicente and manum imponente
capiti eius, Council. Carth. 4. cap. 3.
and qui adsunt presbyters manus suas iuxta manus Episcopi teneant: A Presbyter
is ordained, the Bishop laying hands upon him, and blessing him, and let the
Presbyters which are present, have their hands beside the hands of the Bishop.
There they are distinguished yet united.

Omnes Episcopus Presbyter est, Ambr. in 1. Tim. 3.
sed non omnis Presbyter Episcopus, hic enim Episcopus est, qui inter
Presbyteros primus est. Every Bishop is a Presbyter said Ambrose, but every
Presbyter is not a Bishop: for he is a Bishop, who is first among the
Presbyters: there they are distinguished and united.

Join to these Cyprians complaint; Cypr. Epist. 10.
Aliqui de Presbyteris nec Euangely, nec loci sui memores nec futurum Domini
iudicium, nec sibi praepositum Episcopum cogitantes, quod (...) sub
antecessoribus nostris factum est, cum contumelia and contemptu praepositi
totum sibi vendicant, etc. Si vltri in s^^dem perseuerauerint vtar ea
admonitione, qua me Dominus vti iubet vt interim prohibeantur offerre.

In his sixth Epistle he professes he was determined to do nothing without
counsel of his Compresbyters; but because some Presbyters had received some
that had fallen, to the peace of the Church, inconsulto Episcopo, without
knowledge of the Bishop; neither fearing the future judgment of God, nor the
present Bishop set over them, which he says was never done by any Presbyter
under any of his Ancestors, not without contumely and contempt of their
Bishop, he warns them if they continue in it, he will use that censure
against them which the Lord commanded him, and suspend them from their
Ministry. How unwise you were to allege the authority of Cyprian for you,
Fol. 13. and 15.
this one place, among many, may witness: for he not only affirms that the
power of a Bishop over Presbyters is more ancient then his time, but that it
is warranted also by divine authority.

I could to this same purpose bring many others, if at this time I might
attain to my own minutes, collected for help of my memory. But let these
suffice for the present. If they content you not, then I send you to the fourth
Book of Douname, wherein he proves Episcopal Function to be of Apostolical
institution, because it was generally received in the first three hundred
years after the Apostles. If you be purposed to dispute this question, you
will find him there with very formal and forcible reasonings defending
Episcopal government: if you will not, as I think you will not meddle with
him, because he is too strong for you, then you shall do best to let alone
your whisperings in the ears of simple people, and your triuiall arguments
which seem good enough to them that know no better, but in very deed are like
the Cuties of bone wherewith Children shoot in the streets, that may well
make a little fize with powder, but are not able to carry any Bullet, and it
will be long before you hurt a Bishop with such.

You carp at my Argument fol. 9. that I bring to prove the external D^scipline
to be arbitarie and changeable, as may best serve for edification, because the
Apostles, in a greater matter, dispensed with Circumcision for edification,
some of them retayning it, some not admitting it, as they saw best for the
state of their people. You need not tell me that Circumcision was a
Sacrament, and no point of Church-gouernment, I know that very well: but must
tell you again, that as quick as you think your self, you mistake the
argument; for, it is from the more to the less: If the Apostles used a
diversity in a greater thing, for the good of the Church, and did not all
keep one rule concerning the Sacrament of Circumcision; why shall it be
thought evil now to see diversity in the Church about a less thing? some
Churches using external government one way, others another way, as the state
of the time and people requires. Besides that, I believed your Doctorship had
been so acquainted, at least with the recent Writers of this age, that you
would have soon perceived the Author of the words alleged by me to be
Musculus on 1 Timothy 1. and his probation of it, is not from ancient Augustine,
as you take it, but from the latter Augustana Confessio; put on your Spectacles
and read it again. Thus while as like a blind man you would strike at me,
you strike a more worthy man then ever you were, and a whole reformed Church
also. Yet for all this, your words are oracles good enough (I warrant you) in
your own Conuenticles, and with them the simplicity of many Christians is
abused, whose eyes I pray the Lord open, that as they know the truth of the
Gospel, so they may know the truth of this question also, and leave off to
rend this Church by so unlawful a division.

That you affirm no Schism was in our Church till Bishops came. I must tell
you this is but your calumny, and the contrary is notoriously known: to me
it is clear as the light; with a mourning heart many a time have I looked unto
one, I could make it clear to the world, but I will not for all your
provocation. I say no more, but if you be ignorant of this, you are a great
stranger in S. Andrews.

Your Discourses fol. 10. 11. 12. 13. are answered already. In the 14 you
condemn the calling of the Bishops of this Church, they neither have it from
the people, nor the Church, nor the general Assembly. Surely, you are a pert
affirmer of any thing you please, for you will not find any Bishop of
Scotland, whom the general Assembly has not first nominated and given up in
lytes to that effect, or else by such as have authority in the Church to do
it.

In your fol. 15. you usurp the judgment of my conscience, and therein vtters
the pride of your spirit, but impaires not mine honest inward testimony in the
contrary. I affected no Bishoprie, no creature can convince me of Ambitus,
directly nor indirectly: but you must be like your self, affirm falsehoods
confidently, that your simple ones may believe you: nevertheless know that God
will bring you to judgment, and you shall be countable, if for your idle
words, much more for your false lying words, spoken and published for the
corrupting of others.

My words against the lying Libeller you wickedly and most wrongfully wrest
against my brethren, God forgive you; I have answered it already.

And where in your last leaf you run out upon your comparisons, that those
who have labored more faithfully and fruitfully in the work of GOD then I
have done, could teach me how to behave my self in the house of God, though
now (say you) I seem to my self a great Doctor in Israel. All this is but
needless talk: I refuse not to be taught of any in the Church, I have learned
some good from any that ever I heard, and have taken pains to keep it: but
what I seem to be in mine own eyes is hard for you to know. When in the
secret of my heart I deal with my God, I know my room, that I am the chief
of sinners, and least of Saints; and in truth I so esteem my self: but where
you will come in, and out of your pride, run over me, and tread my gift
under your feet, I will not suffer you. It is not mine own, and I got it not
from you I will speak in defense of it, and not let you disgrace it. I have by
the grace of God, labored as faithfully, diligently, and I trust also
fruitfully, as you, or any with you that have stretched the pen against me.
He that made me a Doctor in Israel, has taught me that which I never
learned from man, and wherewith you, if you were well tried would be found
unacquainted.

Some of your sort, I wot not if it be your self, have been carping at my
works in a public Sermon to the people. S. Luke (says he) when he wrote
the History of the Acts, dedicates it simply to Theophilus, but some Writers
of our time must in their Dedicatorie Epistles premit honorable Styles: Is not
this think you, good Divinity? But the reputation of this Doctor makes any
thing good enough that he likes to speak. But if he read the Book through,
before he began to expound it, he might have marked that S. Paul speaking
to Festus, gives him an honorable Style, Acts 26. 25.
O Noble Festus! What will he say when he comes to that place? If it had
been either Heresy, or flattery, or unlawful, in it self, to give Styles
of honor to honorable men, S. Paul would not have used it. And he who did
observe this lesson on Saint Lukes speech to Theophilus, did but abuse his
hearers, and wrong the absent whose works he would feign disgrace, for a
misliking of himself.

As for fideli^^e in the Ministry, the only Judge thereof is the Lord: and
who has labored more or less fruitfully in his work, will be known in that
day wherein every man's fruit shall be manifested: your presumpeuous preventing
of it will make no man up nor down: he is not higher, because you do commend
him, nor the lower, because you disesteeme of him. My labors published for
edification of others, are not the less regarded, that they want some Fifaean
Sonnets prefixed to them, meeter for Actors of Comedies then Doctors of
Divinity.

In your Conclusion, seeing you will have no peace except it agree with your
humor, which I am not able to give, and is as little reason you should
receive, I leave you till God mend you, and work a more sober and peaceable
mind in you: and so farewell.

Edinburgh, Nouemb. 28. 1613.
The CONCLUSION.
AND now to conclude all; if Mr. David, or any of his Accomplices will still be
contentious, let them know I will no more interrupt the course of my study and
better exercises for such matters, except it be by commandment of my
Superiors: if any more had come so long as my pen was about this purpose,
they should not have wanted an Answer, but now seeing I know none others, I
close up this Combat, Non licet ad huiusmodi ineptias vacare: Cypr. Epis^. 6.
surmise, say, report, backbite, lybell as you will; bu^ seek some other
party. I have bent the course of my study to more profitable labors. I wish
my pains may work in you what I would, but because we find by daily
experience the truth of that once spoken by Macarius, (...): I turn me with
Nazianzen, to the Lord, who is only able to tame the nature of man: Beatissime
Christ mortalium lumen, velim super mare nostrum ambules, and i^ctari desinet;
Sweet Jesus, the light of mankind, let it please thee to come and walk upon
the Sea of our perturbed affections and it shall become calm. Veni Domine Jesus
and aufer scandala de Regno tuo: Come Lord Jesus take offenses out of thy
Kingdom, out of our hearts. Who but thou should reign in them? let not Pride
possess us, let not Arrogancy rule over us, let not filthy Covetousness
command us: Put these to the door O Lord; come thou and possess thine own;
none but thou O Lord, can claim a title to us: Vtinam praeter Christum nihil
in nobis viueret! Oh that nothing beside Christ Jesus were living in us! Lord
Jesus who left thy peace to thy Church, keep it among us, that we may be one
in thee, with all holiness, truth, and love, Amen.

FINIS.

