THE BRAZEN SERPENT: OR, the Copy of a SERMON Preached at PAVLS Cross,
December. 31. 1620.

BY JOHN ANDREWS, Priest and Preacher of the WORD of GOD at Saint James
Clerkenwell in MIDDLESEX.

Martial. lib. 13. Ep. 2. Ne perdas operam. Qui se mirantur in illos Virus
habe; Nos Haec nouimus esse Nihil. NOLI ALTUM SAPERE


LONDON, Printed by G. P. for Thomas Thorp, and are to be sold near
Christ-Church Gate by Ed. Wright. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN, EARL OF Houldernesse, Viscount Haddington, and
Baron of Kingstone upon Thames, etc. My singular good LORD and PATRON.
Right Hon: and my very good LORD:
SInce I first understood, that it pleased GOD, of his gracious mercy, to make
choice of your right hand, to be the happy Instrument, by which He thought it
meet to make this Kingdom of Great BRITAIN happy, in rescuing the life of
His Anointed, Our Gracious and dread Sovereign, from the Malignant Sword of
bloodthirsty conspirators; I did ever magnify the name of the Lord for you.
For not I only; But all the Inhabitants of this Kingdom (at least, So many as
love the peace of Jerusalem, and pray for the prosperity of Sion) are bound
to honor you, and to praise God for you. Seeing that by your means (in
preserving our Sovereign from the Sword of the Treacherous) he preserved, for
us, the matchless perfections of many Princes in one. For in him we enjoy an
Augustus, a Commodus, a Probus, a Pius, a Constantinus, and a Solomon, a King
of Peace: (without which, neither Religion, nor Piety, nor Probity, nor
Commodity, nor Majesty can have their perfect luster.) For, his Majesty is not
only, (...), peaceable in himself; but, (...), a Peace-bringer to us in this
Land; and (...), a Peacemaker among Foreign Nations round about: and for this
cause, highly honored and devoutly prayed for, by all sorts of People, even
beyond the Seas; as being One, whom they hope God has ordained to be a
principal means to heal the fresh-bleeding wounds, and to staunch the
Bloudy-issue of Christendom. So that all Christendom, for his Majesty's
preservation, next under God, stands bound unto you. My Lord (I am a
plaine-brested man: He that knows me, knows I cannot flatter) This, with
many other expressions of goodness, was that which did first not inuit, but
enforce me to love and honor you. I may bow to your Greatness; but it is your
Goodness that claims from me all love and unfeigned honor toward you: And
herein I do but imitate your Lordship; who had rather wear the style of a
Good man and an Honest Lord, then of a Rich man and a Great Lord. And you
herein do imitate the Lord of all Lords, who, albeit he be Deus Optimus,
Maximus: of All that's good, the best; and of all that's great, the greatest:
yet, notwithstanding, as Pliny says, Plinius in Panegyric^ Traian: dict.
He is prius optimus quam maximus. He prefers his goodness before his
greatness. Wherefore (howbeit Tanto sim pessimus omnium propheta,
Quanto Tu optimus omnium Patronus)
I presumed to present these worthless Papers to your Lordship, trusting only
upon your Goodness for a liberal Acceptance. For (unless the wiser Sages
have deceived me,) Bounty and Liberality consist not only in Giving, but also
in a cheerful and gracious Accepting and receiving of a Present. The slenderer
the Present, and the meaner the Giver is, the more does it commend and increase
the Liberality of the Noble Receiver. For to Princes and great Potentates, we
do not so much give the Thing it self which we do present unto them; as in
It, we do make tender of our very Hearts, our Love, Duty, Honor and dearest
Regards. All these I here present to your Goodness, and (not doubting of your
Noble acceptance) commend you to the goodness of Him that has honored you on
Earth, and will glorify you in Heaven:

Your Honors poor Beades-man and unworthy Chaplain, JOHN ANDREWS.

To the Reader.
REader (whether courteous or discourteous, I know not; I am sure, I care not:
For, in this matter, I am John indifferent.) As I came, of late to the Cross,
as a Bear to the Stake; so, now I come to the Press, (as a Thief to the
Gallows) sore against my mind. Which I write to premonish thee, lest thou
should mistake one for another. For another there is, who writes both his
Names as I do; and has published diverse Books, as Petitions, Subpoena's,
Christ- Crosses, etc. Now because I would be loath to defraud him of any Right
or Honor, which may duly belong unto him; or that He should share with me in
my shame; I do hereby certify thee, that I am not the Man: For I never saw
the Kingdom of Ireland in all my life, but in Books; nor the County of Wilts,
but in the worthy Work of the learned, judicious and famous Antiquary, Mr.
Clarencieux. And for my part, howsoever I be the meanest among the many
thousands that are called to the Sacred Priesthood; yet I may truly protest,
that I never played the Circumforanean Theologaster: Istos enim Circulatores,
qui Sacram Philosophiam honestius neglexissent, quam vendunt, semper exosos
habui. And for mine Own part, I was never in Print before: Neither was it
either in my purpose, or in my desire to come abroad to the World in Print at
this time. The importunate request of my friends could never have pressed me to
the Press, if I had known which way to suppress certain bastard and
illegitimate Copies of this silly Sermon, which wandered up and down the Town,
like vagrants; and were taken Begging, here, for a Crown; and there for an
Angel, etc. It was my desire, that they should have been had to the House of
Correction; and (after due punishment) sent back to the place where they were
born, or, rather, misbegotten. But the multitude of them was so numerous, that
Justice (without inconvenience) could not be done upon them. Therefore, to
vindicate my self from the imputation of glorious Barbarism, and most lame
and unjointed Nonsense; I knew no better course, then by making the Genuine
Copy of that, which I then delivered, public to the World. Such as it is,
thou have it; accept it, even as thou can find in thine Heart. I grant, I
have not interlarded it with any exotique Elegancies, nor conclouted the
Margent with many Quotations; because I found it somewhat cumbersome to the
Compositors. For the Style, I confess, it is plain and incurious (even like my
Speech and Garments.) For it was my study, ever, to be rather inter Zenonis
(...), quam (...). And to say the Truth, as I never had any facility in
teaching Periods to dance Friskin, and suchlike curiosities; So did I never
take any felicity in it: For I was persuaded, that such laboriosae nugae were
better neglected then ambitiously affected; If for no other regard, yet for
this: That they do Emasculate the Sense. Knowing it therefore to be such an
homely piece, and so far out of the Fashion, I could not expect any applause by
it: nay, I defy him that can think more contemptibly of it, then I do:

Falsus honor juvat, Horat.
and mendax infamia Terret,
Quem? nisi Mendosum and Mendacem.
For as there be many great Names, to whom I do, with all reverence, rise up;
acknowledging that nothing which can fall from me, can be worthy their eye: So
for vulgar and halfe-coddled Judgments (whether of Patricians or Plebeians)
The World knows, that Pro Captu Lectoris habent sua Fata Libelli. Martial.
As it is, If it do any good to any one; it is that which I heartily wish, but
dare not Hope for. For (as the Times are) How may I hope for any Good from a
Sermon, when even Ballads (which are in far more respect amongst the Many)
can do no good upon them? If it do Good to none, it does but share with
others of far better worth; in the same Fortunes. Yet, Come the worst that
can; I am sure, That after it has burdened the Stationers Stall the 12. part
of the date of an Almanac, it may serve well enough for waste Paper; which is
the common Destiny that hangs over the Most writings of this Kind. So I take
my leave, May 25. 1621.

Io: ANDREWS, Presbyter.

THE BRAZEN SERPENT.
JOHN 3. 14. As MOSES lift up the Serpent in the Wilderness; so must the Son
of Man be lift up.
AT the hearing of a Serpent, some, it may be, will presently begin to fear
stinging: but I may speak unto them in the Angels Preface, Luke 2. 10. Nolite
timere; Be not afraid: For though I bring you here a Serpent in shape; yet
this Serpent is without a sting. And let it not seem strange to you, that for a
New-yeeres gift, I should offer to so honorable an assembly such an ominous
present, as a Serpent: For besides, that the Serpent cast into a circular
figure (holding his Tail in his mouth) has of old bin made an Pierius.
Hieroglyphique, and mystical representation of the revolution of the year,
and of the meeting of the end of the old year, with the beginning of the New:
because Virgil. Georgic.
-- In se, sua per vestigia voluitur Annus; whereupon it is called (...).
Besides, this I say, Sueton. in Tiberio c. 72.
Suetonius tells me that the great Emperor Tiberius had a Serpent, inter
oblectamenta, among his choycest delicacies, and would feed it at the Table
with his own hand; taking great pleasure in sporting himself with it. If it
found such favor with so great a Monarch; I find no reason why this Serpent
may not receive as good entertainment from You; marry, that Serpent of Tiberius
had no sting in it, to hurt withal: No more has this; wherefore let none be
afraid of it: for I will enter security for it, that it intends not to sting
any one; either Churchman, or Courtier, or Lawyer, or Citizen. Neither do I
think it has any need to sting any: for, I make no doubt, but their
Consciences have been pricked and stung sufficiently, by those of my Brethren
which have stood At the Cross.
in this place before me. And I pray God, that their stingings have not proved
to many, like Cleopatra's Aspes; which so benumbed and stupefied her Senses,
that she slumbred her self to death, insensibly. If any here have been thus
stung into a benummednesse of Conscience: I could wish, for their sakes, that I
had the virtue of the Psylli or Marsi Suetonius in Augusto cap. 17. Cleopatrae,
quam seruatam Triumpho maxim cupie bat, etiam Psyllos admouit.
; that so I might suck out the sting or poison from their souls, and make them
sound again. If any wonder, why we being now within the Octaues of the
Nativity, I selected not a Text fit for the Time; may it please him to grant
me pardon in this: for the Time is not very fit for my unsound and crazy
constitution of body: and howbeit, perhaps, I might with as much ease to my
self, and as little profit to the Audience, have discoursed upon a Christmas
Text, as upon this: yet I feared that your ears had even surfeted already upon
the Hearing of the Birth of a Savior; and I knew, by experience, that the
Children of this Age have Athenian ears, desirous of novelties; Itching after
new things, Acts 17. 21. Wherefore I thought it would be more acceptable to
treat of any other kind of Argument ad euitandam nauseam. Besides, because I
saw the supinity and carlesnesse of the people of these times to be like unto
that of the Jews. Eze. 33. 32. Ier. 6. 29. Esa. 49. 4.
Qui, modo audiant, quo audiant modo, susque deque habent: which, so they hear
somewhat, it mattereth not greatly, what it be, nor after what manner they
hear it. Therefore I put a resolution upon me, to imitate the Graecians: Which,
as Scaliger says, modo dicant, quo dicant modo, nil pensi habent; So they say
somewhat, after what manner they utter it, they do not greatly stand upon. So
that it may be a work of Supererrogation in me, a man panged with often
convulsions in body, and entangled in a multitude of unnecessary and
impertinent businesses at home, if I shall blunder out any tolerable dudgeon
Divinity out of these words read unto you: As Moses lift up the Serpent in the
Wilderness.

Which passage of Scripture, is a comparison betwixt the Brazen Serpent and our
Savior Christ, who styles himself here, the Son of Man. Christ is the
Substance and Body signified by that Serpent. The Serpent is the figure and
shadow of Christ.

The parts of it are two, a Sicut. Sic.
a Type, and Antitype.
or Figura, and Figuratu^.


The Figure or Type, is the Serpent lift up by Moses in the Wilderness (at
Phunon the six and thirtieth Mansion.) The Antitype or thing figured, is Christ
hanged on the Cross.

In the first we may consider a History. [Moses lift up, etc. Mystery. (...).
or Factu^ figurans. and Facti figuratu^.


The History is laid down in Numbers 21. from the fourth verse, to the end of
the ninth: which place I do refer the Reader unto. These words are a
Commentary of the first part of my Text.

In which story, to the end that we may the better conceive the meaning of my
Text, I shall observe unto you these four things. First, The sin of the
Israelites. Secondly, The punishment inflicted upon them for that sin.
Thirdly, Their sorrow and repentance upon that punishment. Fourthly, The remedy
which God gave them upon their repentance. I will but touch upon these four
very briefly, and so come to that which is more principally intended.

1. Their sin was murmuring against God and Moses, verse 4. 2. Their
punishment was stinging to death by fiery Serpents, verse 6. 3. Their
Repentance was in Peccauimus; We have sinued in speaking against God and thee,
verse 7. 4. Their Remedy was a Serpent of Brass set up for a Sign, verse 9.

First, The People of Israel being ouerwearied with long travail and tedious
iournies betwixt Egypt and Canaan, through the wild Wilderness of Arabia the
stony, fell into impatiency, and complained against God and his servant Moses;
as if God had dealt cruelly with them: as if Moses maliciously and cunningly
had drawn them forth of Egypt, from a sweet contented state of life, with a
purpose to plunge them into a depth of misery and distress. Wherefore the
people forgetting their no less gracious, then maruailous deliverance from the
tyranny and thraldom of Egypt, (which was no less grievous to be borne then
death it self) does now vpbraid the Lord and Moses their governor with it;
misconstruing the Blessings of God, and accounting the greatest happiness that
ever Nation received, to be their greatest curse and malediction: and not only
so; but they grew so queazy-stomackt, that they disdained Manna the food of
Angels; which God, most miraculously, showred down from heaven upon them: for
so they say in plain terms, Nu. 21. 6. Our soul loatheth this light Bread.
Which, notwithstanding, at the first, they desired most earnestly, and received
most joyfully, Exodus 16. Such was the inconstancy and ingratitude of that
people; ever whining, ever complaining, never contented.

And in them, as in a glass, we may behold our selves, even to the life. When
the light of the Gospel of Christ (which, for long time, had been beclowded
with fogs of superstition, and dark mysts of error and ignorance) began first
to dawne to us in this Land; with what general joy of heart was the blessing
welco^med? every man's mouth was filled with praise and thankfulness to God
for it; no less, then if they had been delivered from the Egyptian
servitude; nay, from the Gulf of Hell. But see the ungrateful mutability and
graceless inconstancy of the many among us, (who can never constantly affect
any thing that is truly Good;) Many now adays either fainting under the
Cross, or grown wanton with too much happiness and prosperity, do bark
against Heaven, and complain because they are freed from Romish tyranny:
insomuch that they open their mouths against God, and his Gospel, his
Messengers and Ministers; as if they were the Originals of all the evils and
curses that ever happened to this Land. They disdain and loathe the Bread of
life, the true Manna, the Gospel of God; it is but light meat to them; they
cannot relish it. The Garlike and Onions of Egypt, any fabulous tale out of
the Leaden Legend, has better taste with them, and edifies more to salvation.
Lord Jesus, lay not this sin to their charge; for they know not what they
do. So much, briefly, for the fault which provoked their punishment.

Secondly, Now follows their punishment, ver. 6. Wherefore the Lord sent fiery
Serpents among the people, so that many of the people of Israel died. See how
just, how fitting and proportionable the punishment is to the sin. As the
sin increased by little and little, and spread it self like the poison of
Serpents, flaming up more and more, till it came to the highest; even an high
contempt against God himself: So the punishment by the stinging of those fiery
Serpents crept, and spread it self by little and little: Then (the burning
heat of their sting increasing their thirst) it augmented, till at last, with
a pestilentiall flame it devoured and consumed the transgressors. For as the
People, like to Serpents, sharpened their tongues, spitting out their poison
and venom against God and Moses; So God sent Serpents that disgorged their
deadly poison upon them, that like might be punished with like; Poena talionis.
For God in wisdom does so temper his punishments to the offense, that always
there appears some proportion between the sin and the punishment. Not that
any punishment in this world is able to satisfy fully for any sin, whereby
the infinite Majesty of God is offended: but that the Temporal punishment,
here, may be (as it were) an earnest of eternal punishment otherwhere.

Thirdly, Upon their punishment (in the third place) follows their
Repentance, ver. 7. Therefore the people came to Moses, and said, We have
sinned: because we have spoken against the Lord and Thee: pray to the Lord that
he will take these Serpents from us, etc.

As plagues and punishments do put men in mind of their sins: so sin, and
the smart for sin, led them to Repentance. For as God does receive to mercy
such as are unfeignedly penitent and heartrent for their transgressions; so
impenitent and obstinate offenders he reserueth for his judgment of horrible
vengeance in another World. I leave this, because I hasten to the remedy which
God gave them upon their Repentance.

Fourthly, verse 8, 9. The Lord said to Moses, Make thee a fiery Serpent, and
set it up on a pole for a sign, that as many as are bitten and stung, may
look up on it, and live. So Moses made a Serpent of Brass, and set it up for
a sign; and when a Serpent had stung or bitten any, he looked up to the brazen
Serpent, and lived.

So many as looked up to the brazen Serpent, recovered; but such as did not
look up to it, died. But as it is most wisely and truly spoken by the
Wiseman, Sap. 16. 7. He that turned toward it, was not healed by the thing he
saw (id est, by the Brass piece upon the pole) but by thee, o Savior of all.
For this we must lay down as an immovable ground: That the Brazen Serpent,
being a thing without life, or motion, or sense in it self; had not in it
self, of it own nature, any power or virtue (by being only looked upon) to cure
actually, and really to convey health to such as were stung to death by fiery
Serpents; but all the power of healing was in the Ordinance of God. God had
ordained and promised, that whosoever (being Serpent-stung) should look up to
it, should be healed: Therefore such as believed that God would be as good as
his word, and keep his promise inviolable, they did look up to it, and were
healed. Others, that believed not the truth of Gods word, nor steadfastness of
his promise, but distrusted him, and gave no credit unto him, they did not
look up to it; and therefore were not healed, but dyed of the sting.

This is to teach us, that a thing which is once commanded, and ordained by God
to such and such an end and use, must not be valued and prized by the outward
show it has, which presents it self to our outward senses: but it must be
estimated by the Decree of Gods will, who, by his singular wisdom, has
ordained and appointed things to our use, as he best knew was most expedient
for us. Our duty it is to do that which he bids and inioynes us; and to rest
persuaded, that what he commands, he does will, and what he promises, he will
most assuredly perform.

The Causes why all promises of men are not always kept, I have observed to be
commonly two, (viz:) either want of power and ability to perform: or want of
will to be as good as their word: neither of which can be said of Christ. For
he is God omnipotent, potent and able to do whatsoever he promises; And he
is Optimus, of a good and gracious disposition, willing to perform whatsoever
he promises. So that, as I told you, though the Brazen Serpent, considered in
it self, be but a very weak and unlikely means to heal such as were stung
to death by fiery Serpents; yet because God did ordain it to that end and
purpose (as a Moral Instrument) to convey health to all such as did look
toward it: (He being able to do what he will, by what means, how weak
soever it pleases him to make choice of) therefore whosoever looked toward
it, was actually healed.

Consider the like to this, in the Cursed water, drunk by the suspected Wife,
Number. 5. 27, 28. If she were guilty of breach of wedlock; the water, being
drunk, caused her thigh to rot, and her belly to swell: if not guilty: she,
upon the drinking thereof, conceived with child. I demand then, Whence had the
water power to distinguish betwixt a chaste, and an unchaste Wife? how chance it
did not rot the thigh of the woman that was not guilty, as well as of the
other? The simplest may perceive, it did not these things by any virtue or
power it had in it self: but because God had ordained and appointed it so,
that it being thus used, should produce such effects.

And this will give some light unto us in the matter of the Sacrament, so much
controuerted betwixt us and the Church of Rome: from whom, as in diverse other
points of Religion; so also in this, we suffer slander. They would feign bear
the World in hand, that we make the Sacraments of Christ but bare empty signs
of certain graces, and no more. But herein they do us great wrong; For
howbeit we say truly, that they are Signs: yet not bare signs, but Confessio
Anglicana, articulo de Baptismo.
moral instruments and means, by which God does confer those graces really
and truly on us, which those signs do represent. So says the Catechism of
our Church. What do thou mean by this word, Sacrament? Ans. I mean an
outward and visible sign of an inward and Spiritual grace, given unto us;
ordained by Christ himself, as a means (or Instrument) whereby we receive
the same (Grace,) and a pledge to assure us thereof.

Indeed, a man would think, that a little Bread and Wine consecrated with
solemn benediction, were but poor and feeble means to convey unto us the
Body and Blood, and Godhead of Gods eternal Son, together with all his
benefits purchased for us, (as namely, to free us from the wrath of God; from
the endless torments of Hell; from the curse of the Law; to cloth us with the
righteousness of Christ, and to convey unto us a sure and firm title to the
Kingdom of Heaven and everlasting life) one would think this were impossible
to be performed by a morsel of Consecrated Bread, and a sup of hallowed Wine.
And so it is, if we consider the things as they are in their own nature. But
if we weigh with our selves, that Christ himself, being God omnipotent, has
ordained and appointed them to this end; that we, by them, shall receive such
Benefits, and has faithfully promised, that He, by them, as by a moral
instrument, will bestow such inconceivable graces upon us: though those Graces
be not Naturally contained in the Symboles and outward Elements of Bread and
Wine themselves. It remains, that we do but fit and prepare our selves to
receive them, and so to believe undoubtedly, that he is and will be as good as
his word in bestowing all them upon us, at the very instant that we receive the
Bread and Wine into our bodies. As whosoever was fitted for it; and as God had
commanded, did but look up to the Serpent, did immediately recover his bodily
health; Not because a piece of molten Brass had that power in it self to give
life (having none in it self) but because God had ordained it to that end; and
did really perform what he did promise. Let me torment your patience a while
longer upon this point.

I have often compared those Holy mysteries to a Lease: which is a moral
Instrument. A Gentleman makes, seals, delivers a Lease to a Tenant, of a
Farm, containing two or three hundred Acres of Land, lying, butting and
bordering thus and thus; upon condition that the Tenant shall pay him so much
Rent. The Tenant receives the Lease, and having it in his hand, shows it to his
Friend, and tells him, that he has there two hundred pounds a year, three
hundred Acres of Land.

The Parchment and Ink and Wax of the Lease have not the very Acres of
Ground, nor Trees, nor Houses growing in them; and yet by that Parchment or
Lease, the Tenant will possess so much. I demand then, how comes it to pass
that this piece of Parchment, and these drops of Ink (This Lease) has power
to convey so much ground (Really and actually) to me, to a Tenant? It has no
ground growing within it; whence then has it power to give it to me? The
answer is; that the Power it has to perform this, comes not from the Wax,
Ink and Parchment, but from the legal Power and Authority of the Lawmakers;
who did decree and ordain, that a Deed, conceived in such and such form of
words, should be effectual and powerful, to give to a Tenant real possession
of such Lands and Houses.

So it is in the Sacrament, even as in an Indenture; By it, Christ does give us
his very Body and Blood, his Merits and his righteousness; By it he passes
over to us a Deed of all the Joys of Heaven; he seals unto us a pardon of all
our sins, and of all the punishments belonging unto them: Mary, on this
Condition; that we do truly pay to him his Rent: viz. True Repentance of all
our sins; True Charity with our Neighbors; True Faith in his Blood, and a
New sincere Obedience to Gods Commandments. When we receive this, we say,
This is the Body and Blood of Christ: here have I Remission of all my sins,
and the Kingdom of Heaven passed over unto me. Yet that bit of bread has not
the Kingdom of Heaven contained in it, nor the Body of Christ growing in it, or
converted into it; neither has the Wine the Blood of Christ within it: and
yet, by That Bread and Wine, the worthy Receiver does really and truly receive
whole Christ, with all his Graces and benefits mentioned. Whence have they this
Power? In their own Nature they have it not. Whence then can they convey All
this to me? I Answer, The power which they have, comes from the Lawgiver
(Jesus Christ,) who decreed, instituted and ordained, that Those Elements of
Bread and Wine (received on these conditions) should be powerful and
effectual to derive unto me such and such Graces.

So that, as the Land grows not in the Lease, yet I do actually possess and
enjoy it with all appurtenances by the Lease (as by a Means and Instrument
ordained to estate me in it:) So the Body and Blood of Christ Jesus are not
within the Consecrated Bread and Wine; and yet by them (as by a Means or Moral
Instrument) ordained and appointed by God to confer such Graces upon me, I do
take as True and real possession of Christ and all his merits, as any Tenant
has true and firm possession of his Lands. I hope that I am rightly
understood, and that the simplest do fully perceive how grossly the Church of
England is belyed; when they give out that we make the Sacraments no more but
naked and empty signs. So much for the fact or History.

I come now to the Mystery, or to the figure of the fact: in (...), in Sicut;
together with which, ye must be entreated to take the Sic also: The Antitype
with the Type, for they relate one to another, and cannot well be considered
apart.

What then was pointed at and figured by this Brazen Serpent? For, there is no
question but God could have restored health, by a thousand other means besides
this. Wherefore some great Mystery was fore-signified; in that his Wisdom
(who knows all things best) made choice of this, of the Brazen Serpent,
rather then of any else. For our Savior Christ all along this Chapter, had to
do with Nicodemus, who was a Pharisee, a great Doctor in Israel, Ioh. 3. 10.
and consequently, well seen in the Laws of Moses; and therefore, having
before told him of his Godhead, verse 13. here he comes to show what his
Manhood was to suffer. And to make him believe it the more firmly; he
produces the Figure of the Brazen Serpent. For Nicodemus could not but imagine
that some great Mystery was fore-shadowed by that fact of Moses.

For none so simple, but could understand, that a Brazen Serpent hanging on a
pole, had not in it self any power at all to cure the poysonfull bitings of
living Serpents: and that God, who could, by a thousand other means, have
cured them, did upon Special and singular consideration command that: because
he, in it, would shadow forth some deep Mystery that was to come. To the end
therefore that our Savior Christ might the better persuade his doctrine, by
the lifting up of this Serpent, he shows Nicodemus beforehand of his
Passion; That when it should happen, he might not be scandalilized. And
(howsoever it chiefly aim at his Passion;) yet, to speak the truth, there is
not, in all the Old Testament, any one Type or Figure, that does more lively
represent all the parts of the Mystery of Christ his coming in the flesh,
then this of the Serpent.

For first of all, it shows us his Incarnation. For that Serpent of Brass was
but a serpent in show and shape only; it was not a serpent in deed: it had no
poison or venom in it as other Serpents had: So our Savior Christ, albeit to
many he appeared to be a sinful Man, and was reckoned among the wicked, Esaias
53. 12. yet the truth is, He did no sin, neither was any guile found in his
mouth, 1. Pet. 2. 22. Ever since our first Parents did suck poison from the Old
Serpent the Devil; every one that issued from their loins, have retained much
of the Serpentine nature, that is, of the venom and poison of sin Hence
David speaking of unregenerate men; says, The poison of Aspes is under their
lips. And John the Baptist speaking* to the principal of the Jews, Math. 3.
7. terms them, a Generation of Vipers. (And Vipers, you know, are Serpents.)
But Christ had no poison in him at all. For though he assumed the true flesh
and nature of man; yet, together with the nature, he did not take the sin of
man. He was true man, but not truly sinful Man. God sent his Son (says
Paul, Romans 8. 3.) in the similitude of sinful flesh. Similitudo non ad carnis
veritatem, sed ad peccati imaginem referenda est, says Cassianus collat. 22.
cap. 11. Where the word similitude has relation not to Flesh, (for that was
true,) but to this word sinful: for though to some he appeared a sinner in
show; yet, he never committed any sin In veritate quidem Corporis, sed sine
veritate peccati, suscepit Dominus speciem peccatoris. Ambros. de Spiritu
Sanct. li. 3. ca. 9. Non alienus ab Hominum genere, sed alienus a crimine. Leo.
Hom. 11. de Pass. Dom.
.

And herein the wisdom of the New Serpent went beyond the craft and
subtlety of the old Serpent, the Devil, as Leo de Pass. Dom. ser. 11.
Christus vt humanum genus vinculis mortiferae praevaricationis absolueret, Et
saeuienti diabolo Potentiam suae Majestatis occultauit, Et infirmitatem nostrae
humilitatis objecit.
Leo tells us. For the Devil, because Christ was a Man in deed and truth
(albeit he were a very Holy-man,) thought that he was also guilty of Original
sin derived from Adam: because all else (even the best) are so by natural
generation: and also, though sometimes he had seen the effects of his Deity
and Godhead, and had confessed him to be God indeed, Mark 1. 24. Yet, at other
times, his understanding was so dazeled, that he did not steadfastly believe,
that in him all the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily, Colos. 2. 9. Si. n.
crudelis and superbus inimicus consilium misericordiae Dei nosse potuisset,
Iudaeorum animos mansuetudine potius te^perare, quam iniustis Odijs studuisset
accendere; ne ominum Captiuorum amitteret seruitutem, dum nihil-sibi-debentis
persequitur libertatem. Fefellit igitur eum Malignitas sua etc. Id. Ibid.
for had he known certainly, that Christ had been not only very Man, without
sin; but also very God in humane flesh; no doubt, but he would have been as
wise as the Princes of this World. And Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 2. 6. That, If
the Princes of this World had known it, they would never have crucified the
Lord of Glory.

Wherefore, the Devil not believing firmly that Christ was very God, and
taking him to be but a man, as others were, subject to sin, at least, to
Original guilt; he makes at him, and uses all means to put him to death. And
Christ coming to redeem the World, did imitate the Fishers Damascenus lib 3.
de Orthod. Fide. cap. 27. Gregor. Nyssen. orat. Cat. cap. 23. Naturae nostrae
integumento celatae fuit Diuinitas; vt, instar piscium, cum esca carnis simul
attraheretur hamus Diuinitatis: and sic, vita ad mortem introducta, and Luce
apparents in tenebris, Luce and vita deleretur id quod eis contrarium
intelligitur.
, who when they angle for Fish, do not cast the hook into the water, bare,
naked and uncovered (For then they know the Fish will not bite.) Therefore they
hide the hook within a worm or some other bait, and so the Fish biting at
the worm, is caught with the Hook. So Christ, speaking of himself, Psalm. 22.
6. says, Ego vermis and non homo: I am a worm and no man. He coming to
perform the great Work of our Redemption, did cover and hide his Godhead
within the Worm of his humane nature: The great Water-Serpent Leuiathan, Job.
40. 20. (the Devil) thinking to swallow the worm of his Humanity, Captus est
Hamo Diuinitatis; was caught upon the hook of his Divinity. This hook stuck
in his jaws, and bruised the Serpents head: by thinking to destroy Christ, he
destroyed his own kingdom, and lost his own power.

In the second place, by this Serpent was figured the manner of Christ his
Incarnation and Conception. For this Serpent which Moses lift up in the
Wilderness, was not made of Wood or Stone, or Iron, (which may be labored and
wrought into a form with the Hammer, Fyle or Chesil) but it was made of
Brass, which commonly must be molten in the fire, before it can be cast into
any Form: and the Fire purges and cleanses it from all dross. Secondly, if
you go about to carue an Image of a man, in wood, or stone, or Iron, first you
fashion the Head, then the Face, then the Neck; one part after another
successively. But if you would cast the same in Brass; you need no more but
see that the Mould be fitly prepared; and then do but power the molten Brass
into the Mould, and in a moment you have a perfect Image.

So the Body of our Savior CHRIST was not begotten by the Ordinary way of
procreation, by mixture of Man and Woman: (for so many as are so conceived, are
conceived in Original sin;) but He was conceived by the Holy Ghost; (...),
says the Greek Father: Not by any carnal effusion of Seminal humor, but by
way of manufacture or handyworke: by the Power and operation of the Holy Ghost.
Non de Substantia Spiritus Sancti, sed Potentia, nec generatione, sed jussione,
says Augustine, Sermon. 6. de Tempore. He was conceived and made, not of the
substance of the Holy Ghost: (for so the Holy Ghost being God, should have
begotten him, not man, but God;) for the Holy Ghost is God; and generans
generat sibi simile. Besides, if the Holy Ghost should have begotten Christ our
of his own substance, he should have begotten a mere Spirit, and not a man:
for that which is borne of the Spirit, is Spirit, John 3. 6. But he was made,
says Augustine; Non de substantia Spiritus Sancti, sed de Potentia; Not of the
substance of the Holy Ghost, but of his Power, by his handy-worke: Nec
Generatione, sed Iussione and Benedictione; Not by way of Generation; but by
his energeticall Command and Benediction. And the Holy Ghost sanctified and
prepared the seed of the Blessed Virgin, that it might be made an habitation
fit for the Soul and Deity of the Son of God.

Now the Holy Ghost in Scripture (you know) is often compared to fire: for as
Fire purges But the dross from metals; so the Holy Ghost does cleanse, purge,
and sanctify that Matter in the Body of the Virgin, whereof the Body of Christ
was to be framed; viz. the pure blood or seed of the Virgin: For that seed,
even of the that blessed Virgin her self, before it was sanctified by the Holy
Spirit, was tainted and infected with sin: But (being once purged and
sanctified by the Holy Ghost) afterward it never had, nor ever shall have any
stain or taint; but being filled with sanctity beyond all measure, it became
a most holy Instrument of his Soul and Godhead. Let none mistake my words: I
do not say, that the blessed Virgin her self was by the Holy Ghost purged
from all sin: but that, That part of her Virgin-Blood, whereof the Body of
Christ was composed, was so sanctified and cleansed, that in it there was no
spot nor stain of Original Corruption.

Secondly, In ordinary Generation, first the Liver, the Heart, and the Brain
are fashioned, then other of the parts one after another: for the Seminall
humor first becomes an Embryo, then a body inorganicall, without form or
limbs; one by degrees successively after another is framed and perfected:
(For, as the School of Phisicians says, it is at least 40. days before the
body of a Child in the womb be fully formed;) But the Body of our Savior
CHRIST in the womb of the Virgin, by the obumbration and operation of the Holy
Ghost, was instantly, in a moment, made absolute and perfect in all parts and
members: (As the Brass molten in the fire, is no sooner powered into the Mould,
but instantly it is a perfect figure and shape of a man, or Serpent, or Beast,
as the Mould is made for.)

Besides, the reasonable soul of Christ did not stay till the 40. day (as in
other it does) before it was created and infused into His body; But at the same
moment, in and with the Body, it was created and united to his Body, by the
Holy Ghost. So that the Body of Christ, at the very first instant of
Conception, was (quoad perfectionem partium, non graduum;) perfect and complete
in all parts, and endued at that instant with a reasonable soul: Otherwise He
had not from his first conception been perfect God and perfect Man; for
perfect Man subsisteth of a reasonable soul and humane flesh:) And Athanasius
Creed.
then had he not been perfect Christ: for Christ is perfect God, and perfect
Man, subsisting of a Reasonable and Humane flesh. Wherefore the School says
truly, Christus totam humanam naturam vniendo Peronae adsumpsit, and assumendo
vniuit; Christ by uniting the whole entire Humane nature to his Person, assumed
it; and by assuming it, he united it to his Person whole and entire.

This is no new Doctrine: for the Fathers of the Primitive Church have
constantly taught it. I reckon Saint Bernard among none of those Ancients, yet
he has it Hom. 2. upon Missus est. But old Saint Hierome, he has the same
upon those words in the Prophet, Ier. cap. 3. Foemina circundabit virum; a
Woman shall compass a Man: Speaking of the Virgin enclosing Christ in her
womb. And before Hierome, Athanasius in his Book of the Incarnation of the
Word, Carnis vnio cum verbi Diuinitate ex vtero originem traxit; The union of
the flesh with the Divinity of the Word took, its original from the womb.
And after both these, Saint Augustine in his 18. Chapter de fide ad Petrum:
Firmissime creed, and nullatenus dubites, non Carnem Christi sine diuinitate,
conceptam in Virginis vtero, priusque susciperetur a Verbo; sed ipsum Verbum
Deum suae carnis acceptione conceptum, ipsamque Carnem, Verbi incarnatione,
conceptam. Do thou assuredly believe, and make no scruple of it at all, that
the Flesh (or Humanity) of Christ was not conceived in the Virgins womb,
before it was assumed by the Word: but that the very Word, God himself, was
conceived in the taking of his flesh: and that his flesh was conceived in the
Incarnation of the Word. Aug. Ep. 3. ad Volusianu^. Cu^ enim verbum Dei
permixtum est Animae habenti Corpus, Simul and animam suscepit, and corpus.
Idem, li. 1. 3. de Trinitate cap. 17.
After all these, comes Damascen in his third Book de Orthodoxa fide cap. 2.
and (...). Damascen. ibid. (...), Id. lib. 3. cap. 22.
says (...). at the same instant, that the Humanity of Christ was flesh; it
was also the flesh of God the Word; it was at the same moment, living flesh,
endued with a reasonable Soul, and understanding. The Ancients taught thus,
therefore it is no novel Doctrine. And it is no unsound Doctrine. For, besides
that it is consonant to good reason and divinity, we have not only all the
followers of D. Luther that embrace it, but others also, as Peter Martyr in his
exposition upon the Creed, (on those words, Conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne
of the Virgin Mary.) His words are these: Spiritus Sanctus in eam (sc.
Virginem) descendit, and principali sua vi, ex illius jam gratia purificato
sanguine, singularem perfectum Hominem creauit, qui miraculose fuit ab aeterno
Sermon assumptus. The Holy Ghost came down upon the Virgin; and by his
Operative power (having now purified her blood by his Grace) created an
extraordinary singular and perfect Man, which was miraculously assumed by the
eternal Word. The very selfsame is delivered by Amandus Polanus in Syntag.
Theologico, libro sexto, cap. 14. which I forbear, for breuities sake, to
repeat unto you; neither may we marvel, seeing that the first Adam in a
moment, of the slime of the Earth was made (by Gods power,) a man perfect and
complete in all parts and faculties; if that our Savior Christ (the second and
more excellent Adam) was at the first moment of his conception made by the
handyworke of God the Holy Ghost, a perfect and absolute man; and not only
perfect Man, but perfect Christ, that is, King, Cyril. lib. de. Fide ad
Theodosium, in sine. Aug. lib. 15. de Trin. ca. 26. Nazianzen. Oratione 4. de
Theologia. Hieronym. in Ps. 132. Origin. Hom. 1. in Cant. Fulgentius de Incarn
cap. 10. Anselm. in Cap. 1. ad Hebr and alij complures.
Priest and Prophet, as the Fathers do truly teach us.

But against this which has been delivered; some perhaps may pick a quarrel,
and say, that Christ was not without all manner of sin: for all that were in
Adams loins and are descended from Adam, did sin in Adam: for it is written,
Romans 15. 12. By one man sin entered into the World, and by Sin, Death; and
so death went over all men, for so much, as all men have sinned. If all men
have sinned; then Christ; for Christ is man: and, according to the flesh, was
in the loins of Adam, as all others were, and therefore S. Luke fetches his
pedigree from Adam, Luke 3. last. Therefore it should seem that Christ was not
quite free and clean from all sin.

To which I answer first, by denying that all and every one that were in Adam,
did sin in Adam, or were guilty of Adams sin. The guilt of Adams sin, laid hold
on such only as were in him, both according to the substance of their flesh:
and also, Secundum rationem Seminalem; according to the carnal way of
Propagation, by which man is begotten of Man. Of all such the Apostle speaks,
when he says, By one man sin entered into the World, and went over all men:
namely, over all that were begotten and born of Man and Woman: But Christ was
in Adam according to the substance of his flesh only; but not according to the
ordinary way of Generation: for he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of
a pure Virgin, who never knew man carnally; therefore he sinned not in Adam.

But yet S. Paul says, Romans 6. last; Death is the stipend of sin: but Christ
suffered death. Therefore, it seems that he was guilty of sin: otherwise
death durst not have arrested him.

I answer: Death did not arrest him by any lawful warrant or authority of her
own, because He had no sin: He might have brought an action of false
imprisonment against her: but he voluntarily and of his own accord went to
Death, and suffered it to attach him, that he might set us free from sin and
death. So says Esaias 53. Oblatus est, quia Christus, de Adae propagine, vnus
extitit; in quo Diabolus quod Suum diceret, non haberet. Qui dum in Eum saeuit,
Que^ sub peccati lege non: tenuit; Ius impiae dominationis amisit. Leo. de
pass. Hom. 12. D. Athanasius lib. 4. ad Antioch. Antequam Caput inclinasset,
mors propius accedere verebatur.
voluit: he was offered up, because he would: for had He not been willing,
none could compel or constrain him to it. Wherefore Christ himself says, Ioh.
10. 17. I lay down my life, that I may take it again: No man takes it from
me, but I lay it down of my self. I have power to lay it down, and I have
power to take it up again. And therefore, when he hangs upon the Cross, he
stays not Deaths leisure (till death come to take away his life,) but
willingly and courageously he meets him in the way, and like a Champion that
Quantum voluit, vixit. qua^do voluit, tradidit spiritum. Chrysostom. hom. 104
Vide August. Tract. 120. in Ioann. D. Hall. Ser. de Pass. (...).
scorns to be overcome, (nay, knows he cannot be) yields in the midst of
his strength, that He might by dying vanquish Death. Therefore Saint John 20.
30. says, that he bowed his Head, and gave up the Ghost: not bowing (as
commonly men do) because he had given it up before: but because he would do
it. Nature, in him, was strong enough, he might have lived; but he gave up the
ghost, and would die, to show himself Lord of Life and Death.

Thirdly, In the lifting up of this Serpent, is shadowed the Passion of Christ.
Moses did fasten the Serpent to a long Pole, and so hanged it up on high, that
all the whole Host of Israel might look up to it; and looking, be healed of
the Serpents biting. So Christ, at his Passion, was lift up on the Cross, that
Leo, Hom. 11. de passione.
all might look at him with the eye of Faith; and by virtue of his death,
might escape Death (the wages of sin) and receive health and Salvation. Here
is the difference: The Brazen Serpent gave them but health and life of Body
only, and that, for a time: but Christ gives eternal Health, eternal Life,
to Body and Soul both. This Serpent was but the means and instrument of that
life, which God, by it, gave to such as were Serpent-bitten: but Christ is the
Author, the cause, the very Original of eternal Life. And, as it was not
possible for the Israelites (being once stung) ever to be cured; except they
did look up to the Brazen Serpent: So, is it not possible for any man, since
the stinging of Adam by the Old Serpent in the beginning of the World, to be
saved, but by JESUS CHRIST and him crucified.

Fourthly, this Braze^ Serpent was but one, and set up by Moses, that Many
Thousands of the people that were stung by thousand other Serpents, might
recover health: and all such as were either before or behind it, on the right
hand, or on the left (if they did but turn toward it and behold it) were
healed. So Christ is but one Savior, one Mediator; yet His death is
sufficient to take away the venom and smart of all our sins; and not ours
only, but of the whole World; nay, of a Million of Worlds. If they would but
fix their Eye upon him, and believe in him: for Christ is the end of the Law
to Righteousness, to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4. a Savior he was to
such as believed that He would be sacrificed for them, (long before he was
borne of the Virgin) as, to Adam, to Noah, to Abraham and David. For Abraham
rejoiced to see my Day (says Christ) and he saw it, and was glad. He saw it by
the light of Faith, 1500. years before Christ manifested himself in the
Flesh. For (as Leo says) Refudit se, in aetates praeteritas, mysterium illud,
tam illis, qui praecesserunt, vtile; quam nobis, qui sequimur.

The Mystery of our Redemption by the death of Christ (as the Sun at one
instant disperseth his beams over the whole Horizon, from East to West) did
shoot it self to all Ages (past, present, and to come.) For He was the Lamb,
slain from the beginning of the World, Reu. 13. 8. as beneficial to such as
dyed before his coming (if they looked toward him) as to us that live after
him: for as it is in Mat. 21. 9. All that went before him, and they that
followed after, cried Hosanna to the Son of David: That is, they expected
Salvation from Jesus Christ, and by him only. Neither from any Man; were that
man, Moses: nor from the works of the Law; but only from the Blood of the
MESSIAH. As these Israelites, when they were bitten by the Serpents, although
they roared and cried to one another; yet, not any was able to heal or help,
either himself or any other; No, not Moses: but God only, by the Brazen
Serpent.

Fifthly, I beseech you consider the means, which God made choice of to give
life to the Children of Israel. It was a Serpent, as it were, dead: for it had
no life in it; Being but a piece of shining Brass* And some Naturalists
affirm, that if Hemingius.
one be poisoned with the sting or venom of a Serpent, the very looking on
shining Brass, is present death to him. In which, the power of the miracle
does more plainly discover it self: Because God made that, which, of it
self, is the cause of Death, to become to such, as used it according to his
Ordinance, a cause of Life and Health: Working one Contrary out of another:
giving Life by Death. So it is in Christ: For by his death, all true believers
are translated from Death to Life. Which is so strange a wonder, that it cannot
sink into many men's heads how it should ever be brought to pass: that Christ
his death should procure and convey everlasting Life to us.

When Christ tells the Jews, John 12. 32. that He must be lifted up, (that is,
hanged on the Cross, and so dye) and give his Life for the life of the World:
They could not be persuaded, that if he were the right Christ, the Savior of
the World, that he should die at all, but live for ever. Therefore, verse 34.
The People answered him; We have heard in our Law, that Christ bideth for ever:
then how do thou say, that he must be lifted up, that is, hanged on the Tree,
and suffer death upon the Cross? And therefore, 1. Cor. 1. 23. Christ
crucified, (that is, hope of everlasting life, by such a one as like a
notorious malefactor, suffered death upon the Gallows) is said, to the Jews
to be a stumbling block; and to the Gentiles, foolishness. So it pleases
carnal men to deem of the Mysteries of our Salvation: because they are above
their shallow Reason, they account them mere foolishness. But the Wisdom of
God in this (to such as are enlightened with super-naturall light) appears to
be the greatest: and the very foolishness of God, is wiser then the (greatest)
wisdom of Men; and the weakness of God, is stronger then Men, 1. Cor. 1. 25.

But to make both his Wisdom and power known unto Men; it has pleased God
many times to bring one contrary out of another. As at the first, he made
Heaven, and Earth, and all things else; of what? of Nothing: only by the power
of his Word. And what more contrary to all things (which have a Being) then
nothing, which has no Being at all? Whence was the order, the Beauty, the
wel-composed frame of the Universal World fashioned? was it not out of an
empty, rude, unshapen, and indigested lump or Chaos? Did not He bring light
out of Darkness? and what more contrary to Light then Darkness?

So Christ, by the very shame of the Cross, purchased to us eternal Glory;
and by his Death gives us redemption from eternal death, and everlasting Life
to all true members of his mystical Body. And this must needs be so: For,
considering that Christ is perfect God, who made all the World, and that with a
word of his mouth (being able, if he pleased, with one word to make a thousand
Worlds, as great as this.) Considering, I say, that He, Christ JESUS, the most
high God, did take upon him, (as to morrow, the day of his Circumcision) to be
Gal. 5. 3.
our Surety, to pay to his Father our Debt of death Temporal and Eternal: He
being more worth, then all the Spirits of Men and Angels, in a thousand Worlds:
(because he is the Maker of them all.) His death must needs be more
satisfactorie to Gods justice and wrath, then if all the Men and Angels in
Heaven and Earth, should, for man's sins, have suffered all the endless and
Numberless torments of Hell, for ever and ever; and if the Surety suffer
death, and pay the debt, is it not reason, that the principal go quit and
free, and have his life spared? Wherefore in Ioh. 18. 7. when the Officers came
to apprehend Christ, he asks: Whom seek ye? and they said, Jesus of
Nazareth. Then said he; I am He. Therefore if ye seek Me, let These go
their way: that is, If I that am but their Surety, must pay the debt, then
reason it is, that the principals should be discharged of it.

Sixthly, Mark. This Serpent which Moses hung up on the Pole, did not benefit
or do good to any, but only to those which did look up to it. Such as refused
to look upon it, dyed and perished in the Wilderness. So it is here: the
Death and Passion of Christ is beneficial to none, but such as look upon it
steadfastly with the eye of Faith, and by that Faith apply it to their own
Souls. Such as regard it not, nor care to consider it, but let it pass as a
matter of no moment, it heals not, but they perish in their sins.

For as in this Figure 3. things do concur. 1. God. 2. the Serpent. 3. the
looking on the Serpent. God it is that gives the^ health and life; the Serpent
is the instrument or means by which he co^ferreth it unto the^, and he that did
behold the Serpent, received this health. So also 3. things meet together in
the work of our Justification. First, Christ, he, by imputing his
Righteousness to us, does make us Righteous, before his Father. Secondly, the
means whereby he deriueth this righteousness to us, are his holy Word and
Sacraments. Thirdly, the Instrument wherewith we don this robe of
Righteousness upon our souls, is a lively faith in Christ, it is as it were
the hand, by which we buckle and gird Christ his merits to our selves, Gal. 3.
27.

Seventhly, albeit the People of Israel, whilst they traveled through the
Wlidernesse toward the Promised Land did encounter many more calamities, and
inconveniences; yet, we read not, that they had any other external Sign
given them against those inconveniences, save only this Serpent against the
mortal sting of the fiery Serpents. So we men, although we are obnoxious to a
thousand Miseries, bodily, and ghostly, (as to Hunger and thirst, Heat and
cold, weakness and sickness, shame and infamy, sorrow and fear, etc.) yet
we have no sign given us against these: because none of these (if we be clear
from sin) can do us any hurt, (no more then they hurt our LORD JESUS
CHRIST.) But against the Biting of the Serpent, (that is) against Sin, God
gave us a sign to look upon, viz. His Son hanging on the Cross. Concerning
whom, old Simeon foretold his Mother, Behold, This Child is appointed for a
Sign, Luke 2. 34.

And fitly is Sin resembled to the biting of a Serpent. For the Devil is
called a Serpent, Genesis 3. 1. and from this Serpent, this poison of sin was
first cast into our nature. Secondly, if a Serpent sting you in the heel, the
venom of the sting will poison your foot, your leg, thigh, entrails,
Heart, Liver, Brain, and all, till the whole Body be infected; of such a
poisonfull contagious nature is sin. It infecteth both Body and Soul; and
that, not in one or two parts, as other diseases do; but in every part; in
Reason, Will, Memory, affections and all: and that not in one man alone; but
in all mankind, in every Man and Woman descended from Adam by c^mmon course of
nature. Thirdly, the Biting of these Serpents was incurable; no remedy in
Nature could be found to cure it: Therefore God gave the Brazen Serpent, not for
a natural, but for a Moral means against it. Such is Sin: All the Balm in
Gilead, and all the Phisicians in the World, no, not Aesculapius-selfe with his
Serpent; Nay, all the Angels and Saints in Heaven and Earth, are not able to
cure the infection of one sin. Nothing is able to take away the poison and
sting of that, but only the Death and Blood of the Son of God, powered out for
our health and Salvation upon the Cross.

Lastly, Let us ask the question: For whose sake was this harmless Brazen
Serpent made, and afterward hung up on the Pole? was it for it self? No; in
no wise. It could reap no profit either by being made, or hung up in the Air,
exposed to all weathers and storms. All the benefit redounded to them that were
stung, and could not otherwise be cured, but by looking up to it.

Let inquiry be made: For whose sake was the glorious eternal SON of GOD
contented to be made Man? was it any honor or benefit to Himself? Surely, No.
Exinaniuit seipsum, He emptied Himself, says the Apostle, Phil. 2. 8. It was
a far greater abasement for the Son of God to be made the son of Man;
then for the greatest Prince or Monarch to be made a crawling Worm; nay, a
grain of dust. He was made man then, not for any good or profit that He could
reap thereby, but to benefit and honor us. So says Esaias 9. 5. Unto us a
Child is borne, and unto us a Symbol. Nicen. propter nos homines and propter
nostram Salutem, etc. Athan. de beat. Fill. Dei. Chrysostom. Hom. 7. in Johan.
Cypr. de van. Idol. Prosper in Epigram. -- Terrae, rerumque Creator, Me
propter, Sacra Virgin, natus Homo est.
Son is given: all the benefit of his conception and nativity is Ours, not
his: borne and made, he was for us. And for whose sake was he lift up? was he
crucified and slain? was it any profit or honor to Christ, think you, to be
put to such a painful, shameful, and dishonorable death? No certainly.
Daniel says 9. 26. The Messiah shall be slain; but not for Himself: If not
for himself; then for some others. So S. Peter, 1. Ep. 2. 21. Christ suffered
for us. So that the benefit of his Passion too, is (not His, but) Ours. His was
the pain and shame; Ours the profit and honor. If He had not been lifted up,
and put to death for us; Every Mothers child living and dead, had suffered
everlasting death in torments of Hell, with the Devil and his angels. Our
Sins, the Sins of the World, the Stinging of the Old Serpent, could not be
taken away by Man, or Angel, but only by the Blood of the Lamb of God, which
takes away the sin of the World. Our Sins they were that put to death the
Lord of Life.

The Price of them could not be bought out with gold or silver, or all the
Treasure in the World: they cost no less then the most precious Hearts-blood
of Gods own Son.

Your Souls then are bought at the highest rate: Why do you prize them so
cheap, so basely? Do thou believe in thy Heart, that the Salvation of thy
Soul cost the deare-deare price of Gods own heart blood? and dare thou go
and stake and pawn it to the Devil, to Hell, for a kiss of a Strumpet? for a
drunken Carouse? for a little painted Vanity? for an handful of glittering
dross? for a little unprofitable Profit, and deceyueable gain? See then, if
with Judas thou do not sell thy Soul and the Redeemer of thy Soul for 30.
pieces: for thirty? nay, for twenty, for ten; many, for one; a matter of half
a Crown, or less: Nay, many pass away their Souls to Satan for nothing at
all; for an oath; for a stab, a little Revenge. Oh take heed! For such as did
not feel the smart of the Serpents biting, nor had any grief or pain because
of it; Such never looked up to the Brazen Serpent, nor received any life or
health from it: only, such as felt the smart and sting, and earnestly desired
to be cured; they looked up to it, and were healed. So it is here. Such as go
on in their sin, and feel no smart of it; they think they stand not greatly
in need of Christ; and therefore they hear of his death and bloud-shedding,
as a matter that little or nothing concerns them: Such persons, as yet, are
not capable of any benefit by Christ's Blood. They only, that are wounded in
Soul, and feel the smart of their sins in their conscience; Those only look
up to their crucified Savior, and seek health and Salvation from him: These
only receive comfort by Christ; those only are healed of their sting: Psalm.
103. 1.
And all that is within them praise His holy Name: To whose Name, be all Honor
and Glory, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

