THE ANATOMY Of BASENESS. Or The four quarters of a Knave; Flattery,
Ingratitude, Envy, Detraction.


He that has these four parts, need no more have To be recorded for a
complete Knave.

Imprinted at London for Richard Redmer, and are to be sold at the West dare of
Paul's at the sign of the Star. 1615.

TO THE TRVELY enobled both by Virtue and birth, Sir ROBERT SYDNEY Knight of
the BATH: I. A. wishes the reward of his Virtue, honor in this world, Glory
in the next.
Honorable Sir:
TO immitate the common method of Epistolizers in this kind, were rather to
write of you, then to you, which course though I affect not, J cannot
altogether neglect, though I shall thereby either wrong you, or my self; for
in publishing (though sparingly) my knowledge of your worth to the world, such,
to whom you are unknown will so much iniure me, as to tax me with (what I
condemn in others) flattery; whereas some (to whom you are no stranger) will
censure me as much on the contrary to have dealt with you rather, according to
the poverty of my ability, then to the fullness of your merit.

It will peradventure seem strange unto you (if this poor work chance to
come to your view) what assurance of your good acceptance begot such
presumption in me as to dedicate the same unto you. J must first answer, I
have not done it mercenarily; for then I would have presented it to your hand:
nor vaine-gloriously; for then I would either have craved your allowance, or
subscribed my name; but freely and honestly out of that respect which I owe to
that innate Goodness which I know to be in you. Though I forbear (out of some
respects) to have my name published; yet I can acknowledge the Book to be mine
without blushing. If it be (by any) ill digested, the fault must be in the
taker not in the Author: it was written with a right hand, and I wish it may
not be sinisterly entertained by any; but if some will needs be so forward, the
care is taken. In you I am made so confident by that (I might justly use
Honorable, Noble, Worthy, or some such high Epithete: but I will rather say)
Honest (a poor phrase will some think) and virtuous disposition which
accompanies you, that I must account it may happiness that I live to know a
second, whose breast Goodness makes her habitation; yet pardon me if I say, I
enjoy not this happiness without some touch of grief; I shall not need to
implore your protection, though your pardon. I acknowledge I have presumed, and
know you can and will remit the errors of Affection in him that is,

The wisher of your Honor, and honourer of your VERTVES J. A.

THE ANATOMY of Baseness. OF THE FLATTERER.
THey that compare the fawning Parisite
unto the Spaniel, do the curre much wrong;
for he will often hear his masters tongue,
When in the field he follows his delight:
Yet never quest; but th'ecchoing Sicophant
at every word, by his weak favorer spoken,
cries good, it is true, and this is held a token
Of much respect and love; though from the haunt
Of worth and merit, his base nature range
as far as falsehood, from the strong built nest
of Truth and Goodness, which in every breast
Should like two twins be nourisht; but it is strange
To see how this poor worthless humor lives,
even in those bosoms where good blood and parts,
have their abiding, poisoning generous Arts
With that, to which no language spoken gives
An Epithete too bad: and to those men
(if I may term them so) whose only words
such sweetness to the flattered ear affoords,
To yield a fitting title by my pen:
I am as much unable, as unapt
to imitate their baseness; which indeed
had I not chanced to have heard, into my Creed
Could nere have come, but it has often happt
To sownde within the compass of my hearing,
whereby mine ears as to the pillory,
seemed to be nailde in such gross flattery;
Yet in their checkes no sign of shame appearing.
It may seem strange (yet I dare say it is true)
that I have blushed to see their impudence,
while they (vn-man-like) seemed to have no sense
Of their own baseness: of this thriuing crew.
I have observed both Sexes to be free;
too free in some respect, though in some kind
more bound then slaves, for our best part (the mind)
Was chiefly given diuinest things to see:
And not to be by ought that shares with us,
in the short course of our mortality
so fettered, least unhappily it be,
Deprived of its best good in being thus.
Have I not heard one tell, the Crow she is white,
and Midas-like prefer the pipe of Pan
before Appollo's harp? wherein this man
(Who thus from Art and Nature tears their right).
Thus from the Phrygian differs, Midas wears
(as the reward and badge of ignorance)
the ears of an Ass; but 't is the others chance
To thrive by clawing th'ignorant Asses ears.
Have I not heard some tell the prodigal,
't is for his honor to be bountiful:
and with applause commend the humorous Gull
In all his actions? I have seen them fall
And kiss the feet of a great golden calfe;
whose very best of his admired worth
was by a Tailor to the world brought forth,
To whom his Honor ought his better half.
Let a man chafe (though no just cause there be)
and then obsequious Apes will fret as fast,
as had they seen a verier slave to have past
By, then themselves: or be your humor free
And Iouially disposed, they will Ianus-like
strait show a cleerer face, where you may see
the true proportion of hypocrisy
Drawn to the life; (which loves as others like)
Many years since the famous Chaucer writ,
that, these same men which bear a double visage,
are as mere monsters in good Natures lineage;
And for good men's society unfit.
Like your Camelions these will change their hew
as you your color, be it good or ill,
change nere so often, yet you shall find them still,
(From what they were) transform as fast as you.
Seem to be most unlike your self, or speak
what you least think they 'le be, and speak like you;
tell them they 're Knaves they will smile and say so too;
Feign your self ill, they will swear they find you weak.
TO THE FLATTERED.
FOnd Man, that suck'st the pleasing poison in
(which from the Sirens unsuspected tongue
Is kindly offered to thine ear) wherein
are all the drugges and dregs of vildnesse wrung:
Assure thy self; if in thy bosom live
ought that deserves the name of worth, 't is known
More then thy self, nor shall thou need to give
Fame a reward to have thy mercy blown:
For 't is her care, the more she finds thee slow,
or careless, whether thy desert shall be
Known unto any, but thy self, or no;
to sownd the louder: (so to honor thee)
Thorough her golden Trumpet, (good men's throats:)
Or if thine ear shall love, and itch to hear
Thine own praise sung in smooth and pleasing notes,
(which makes true worth unlike it self appear)
She has an other Trumpet blown by those,
whose mercenary tongues shall sownd thy praise;
But with a breath which blasteth as it blows,
and ruins that which it pretends to raise.
For do but note, you shall perceive their plots,
are (being once assured of you as friends)
To thrust their blankes amongst your high prized lots,
so by your loss to compass their own ends.
But selfe-conceipt so much corrupts your sense,
that to your judgment, only that same man
Seems wise, and honest, and gives no offense
that by this Art, can make a Goose a Swanne.
If by the breath of these, you strive to raise
your Reputation, your Ambition's weak;
You must resolve of such to buy your praise,
not for the Truth, but for reward they speak.
If on the former (who for Virtues sake
honor that good is in you) you rely,
Their approbation shall have power to make
your glory live to all Posterity.
Do not you think that man deserves much blame
who finds his own infirmity, yet feeds
Daily on that which nourishes the same,
And dangerously the brains corruption breeds?
Such is your case (weak men and women) for
you like the meat because the sauce is sweet;
What bitter is (though wholesome) you abhor,
disabling that which judgment holds meet.
But Judgment, is no judgment, if it seem
to contradict your humor; but the longer
Y' are constant to this poorness, (which you deem
worth in your selves) your weakness proves the stronger.
Though to the palate pills distasteful be
they to the health more beneficial prove,
Then things more pleasing to the sense; we see
cutting does often in curing much behoue:
But you like Herod think, that he most loves you
who cries, you speak more like a God then man,
Beheading him that honestly reproues you,
not caring though it be baptizing John:
Let a man seem but cheerfully to sing
Placebo to your words and actions, then
You quite forget, near honey lies a sting;
and that the devil (clarke-like) says Amen:
Where flatterers (his Chaplains) read the Mass
whose superstition (making you their Saint)
You do allow as currantly to pass,
for Truth, as Gospel (which no tongue can taint.)
TO THE FLATTERER.
THou that can grieve because another smiles,
and give, to undeserving spirits, styles
Which thou do filch from generous noble minds;
because thy poor obsequious humor finds
Cold intertainment there, tell me; do think
that all are blind that are content to wink?
Or that thy shameless flattery beguiles
every man that at thy glozing smiles?
Assure thy self thy thoughts deceive thee much;
for many smile to see thy baseness such:
And such as thou think blind more truly see
thy heart, then they that hug thy flattery;
And (scorning by thy pitch to be defiled,
or by thy sweet tuned lullabies beguiled)
Do loath to view thy vilde deformity,
which pleasing is to such as favor thee.
That every man be master of his own
all men allow; but it is lately grown
To such a custom, (first by thee brought in)
among the Ambitious of this age of sin,
That to a man (if I profess to love him)
I must give titles some degrees above him:
Or else be taxed with envy or neglect,
though my soul knows, I give more true respect
Then you that id'ly light a torch at noone,
and tell the Sun he is brighter then the Moon;
Which argues only that your humor is,
still to be doing though you do amiss
In guilding gold. This I observed have
in some, whose age did homage to the grave,
Whose words in prai'rs more fitly had been spent,
and with devotion on embassage sent
To make their peace with heaven, then to obey
that which would guide them by the broader way.
If it be hateful even in younger years
to temporize and gloze, sure it appears
Monstrous in age, whose part it rather is
to grieve for what in youth it did amiss;
Then in the last act of a life misled,
To heap more blows upon a wounded head.
Could I instruct, or might I but advise;
I Would teach, or wish you to become more wise:
But 'twill be thought preposterous in youth
to tutor Age, though by the Word of Truth
Such proofs as it does bring approved be:
Therefore I leave you to your humor free;
Wherein (no doubt) you will one day find this true,
You make your fav'rers fools, they knaves of you.
Too mild a style, for that is a term for men;
if so, too good for any flatterer then:
What shall I call thee devil, monster, beast?
if not all these, thou 'rt one of them at least
Transformed to the shape of man; nor seems it strange
if thy grand Master (who himself can change
Into an Angels likeness) make thee seem,
a Saint-like man in many men's esteem;
Instructing thee upon what vain to work,
and where thou may the most securely lurk
With best assurance, bids thee plie that mind
where thou the weakest easiness shall find:
Such thou may puff as Butchers do their meat,
and with thy breath persuade them they are as great
As thou do make them; and above the rest,
be sure (my child) thou suff'rest not a Jest,
Be 't nere so poor to pass without a Good,
though by none else the same were understood
How to deserve applause; and then thou hear'st
amongst that Sect (where gracious thou appear'st)
A tedious talker, sencelesly discourse
(till he dull others, and himself grow hoarse)
Let thy attention (till his tongue ly'th still)
stare in his face, then let him find thy skill.
These be the rules, and many worse then these
thou must observe, if thou desir'st to please;
Thy Tutor says, whose help will nere deceive thee,
and to whose favor wretched man I leave thee.
OF THE INGRATEFVL.
SOme have compared (and not improperly)
him that is tainted with this worst of ills
unto the Swine, who (freely, daily) fills
His hungry mawe even to sacietie
Upon such Maste as from the fruitful tree
falls to the ground; yet his dejected eye
is fixed only where his food does lie,
And never raised the Giuers face to see.
Guilty of this unpardonable crime,
where diverse kinds of these inhumane men,
discoursed by the industrious famous pen
Or heathen Tully living in his time.
The first Dissemblers were of favors reaped
proportioning the same (being more or less)
To the small measure of their thankfulness,
Though a full hand on them the same had h^ap'd
The next acknowledged freely that occasion,
offering it self (joined with ability)
to make requital (for each courtesy)
Seemed deaf to opportunities persuasion.
An other sort there was, whose shameless craving
would not admit denial, but being made
master of their desires could soon persuade
Their tongues (too basely) to deny the having.
The fourth and last (and worst my Author writes)
were such as, what they had received, forgot.
Unthankful he then that remembers not;
He that denies, dissembles, not requites.
Let me add one kind more, which I conceive
worse then all these, who like the frozen snake,
stings that same bosom, whence it warmth did take;
And would, what gave it life, of life bereave.
Such there has been my observation knows,
who (from a poor, dejected miser state)
being raised (by Great ones) proved so ingrate,
To bring their Raysers neck near th'axes blows.
Should I demand why such unnumbered were
among the former, some man might reply;
(as unto him who ask't the reason why,
Among so many laws, so strict, severe,
Made by the Romans, none was known to touch
the child, whose hand should guide the fatal knife;
to cut his throat who gave his being life):
Because that Tully thought there lived none such.
But since the time perfidious Judas dyed
(who at his end (I fear) bequeathed his curse,
to some that do in these days bear the purse)
Such there have been, such have been Deifide.
If your prosperity strike sail, be sure
These Kites, which stoop to you while you can feed them,
come to an others fist; and if you need them
They soar aloof, check at your empty lure.
Much like their Emblem which (for the full payles)
follow the maid that bears them; if she fall
and spill the meat, to that they run, and all
Respect of her that used to feed them, fails.
Or Cuckoe-like, they to your Summers sun
sing merrily (though suck your eggs withal)
but when they find your Summer fail, and fall
Draw near, they are gone, and their harsh music done.
TO THE BOVNTIFVLL.
IF on the waters you shall cast your bread
it is not lost, but if your pearls you throw
Unto these swine, be sure the same they will tread
under their feet; good seed in good ground sown,
Beneficia male locata malefacta sunt.
Favors ill placed, are numbered with ill deeds;
for if that hand which liberally bestows,
(Though it (in giving) other men's exceedes)
not the true use of Bounty rightly knows,
Twere better be more sparing, for to give
is proper to all creatures in their kind:
The meanest thing which we can say does live,
in some respect we beneficial find.
But unto man is only given the power
to limit Bounty, know when, how, on whom,
Best to bestow; not like a heedlesse shower
to let fair flowers die in their mothers womb
For lack of moisture, whilst upon vild weeds
it (in abundance) poures refreshing drops;
This kind of giving naturally proceeds
from partial hands, which in the course soon stoppes.
Nor should your bounty (like the sun) run round
and shine on all alike, though (like the beams)
The same should seldom in the eclipse be found;
the truest Bounty lives between extremes.
Non ita claudenda est res familiaris, vt eam benignitas aperire non possit,
nec ita reseranda vt pateat omnibus.
Your hand should never be so locked from all,
as to deserve a covetous report:
Nor still in action like your Prodigal,
who makes expense his most delightful sport:
Long since were none then Good-men held more fit
to taste your Bounty (then 'twas rightly used);
But in those days, such men must naked sit:
thus is true liberality abused.
He that can now most temporize, best thriues,
and great men, more then good men, Bounty taste;
Honey is brought unto the fullest hiues,
small rivers give unto the sea (in waste.)
Many (again) like Husbandmen do lay
their seed in th'bosome of the fattest ground;
Whose richness will with much advantage pay,
where for each grain there shall an ear be found:
And some of you, to gain a knaves good word;
orby a Iester to be highly praised
Will give with both hands, place them at your board;
when good-men are not ore your threshold raised.
Bounties pure current in this muddie time,
is by the fogges of Prodigality
So steinch't, with stinking airs, so 're-spread with slime,
that (as it were not) no such thing we see.
We find the stream as contrary to run,
unto that course which it should rightly hold:
As is the West to th'rising of the sun,
or Southern heat unto the Northern cold.
Nay more, this Virtue suffers so much wrong,
as to be made a subject nay a slave;
Even unto such whose base malicious tongue
the Giuers reputation dare deprave:
Yet have they still gift after gift received,
even to the full of their desires. Shall I
Taelis benignitas vanitati est coniunctior, quam liberalitati. Cic.
Say this was bounty? I might seem bereaved
(in saying so) of sense and honesty.
If a cursed dog (fed at your table) bites you,
you will kick him (if not hang him) at the least:
And in a man (which doggedly requites you)
reward you that, you punish in a Beast?
I know not what to term this kind of giving:
nor will I make my brain a minte for phrase;
But wish that men (whilst their fair fame is living,
would manifest it comes of Virtues race:
Whose true-borne children should relieve her friends;
but Virtue starues, they so degenerate
Virtus laudatur and alget.
In sucking base ones, for their private ends
whilst she and hers (though praised) are desolate.
Alas poor Virtue, (only poor to such,
as do not know thy worth, who live and die
Without all sense of goodness, or a touch,
of ought but Beast-like sensuality):
Or rather let me pity them then thee.
for though the strange deformed Brats of vice
Be richly clad now, thine in poverty;
they valued high, but thine at meanest price;
The time may come, when Bounty shall appear
pure, like it self, and like fair Virtues friend.
When Ostentation shall not dare come near,
nor Prodigality persuade her spend,
But upon such as merit more then crave;
then shall no bauling fool, no wit-bare Iester,
No fawning base insinuating slave
presume, the place where Bounty lives to pester.
And you that now it thus abuse, shall then
curse your much-giuing, and mis-giuing hand.
When you shall see the deeds of other men,
graven in brass, yours written in the sand.
Such mettle are men's hearts, the thankful part
cannot forget the good it does receive,
But (as in brass) record it in his heart,
of which no time can ere the same bereave.
Th'ingratefull Nature (sand-like) does retain
the impression of your hand, and more perceiues
An aptness in it self to take again,
then to make show it any thing receives.
TO THE INGRATEFVLL.
IS 't long of thy short memory, that thou
yeeld'st not due thanks, where thou the same do owe?
Alas, good man; why do thou not forget
to beg as well? or do thou think it fit
For men to crave thy thanks; because to thee
vnask't their favors came not? can there be
Excuse allowed for such a fault? O no;
But contrary, no Tyrants law can show
A torture too severe for such an Ill:
Look how an ore-charg'd piece breaking does kill
The gazers on, and yet the Gunner stand
not hurt at all, though from his fatal hand
Death took his flight; so does thy want of Art
rightly to use a friend, make many smart
And suffer too unjustly: For, thy fault
makes honest hearts (with no such baseness fraught)
Suspected; which approues the Proverb true
men scalt with hot, cold water do eschew.
The guiltless servants of that Naball.
Carmelite
inur bane fool, who did with ill requite
Favors received) had been to death pursude
(but for his wife) for his Ingratitude.
Arr thou relieved in want, and can forget
(unworthy wretch) what gracious hand did set
Thy misry free? do think there is nothing more
to be performed, when of thy leaprous sore
Of Poverty you are cured; no thanks, no praise,
rendered to him which changed thy painful days
To times of ease? more grievous is thy sore
(through thy neglect) by much then 't was before.
Thine outward sense then only felt the smart;
but now it sticks so close to thy false heart,
(And vlc'ring ly'th in thy corrupted blood)
that not from thence proceeds a thought that is good.
If by sinister means thou have obtained
what thou inioy'st, thou can not say it is gained.
By wealth that is purchased with the loss of Fame,
men do grow rich in nothing else but shame:
In whom, desert, no thankfulness does move,
they do no less then cheat men of their love.
Thou with a hollow heart, false, stopped within,
on thy best friends wilt play, so thou mai'st win:
Gain savors well to thy misiudging sense, Dulcis odor lucri.

whose faculty can easily dispense
With any Stock, with any ground, or dung
(be it never so base, or vild for any tongue
But thine to touch) from whence it does proceed,
though in thy bosom with the same does breed
Hateful Ingratitude; whose brazen brow
(bold Impe of Impudence) will not allow
A blush to touch it. I confess my fault
from misconstruction came, in that I thought
Thou had been man, as well in deed, as Name,
which title di'd to thee, when thou to shame.
OF THE ENVIOVS.
Do we not hold him mad, that in his hand
dare gripean Adder, though he crush it dead?
or seems it strange, if he by whom is fed
A Lions whelpe, or has of Bears command,
Shall have his blood by them untimely shed?
What shall we think him then that entertaines
a Viper next his heart, which from his veins
Sucks his best blood, and leaves in the stead
A fretting poison? whose effect is this,
It makes him grieve and rage at others good,
to stabbe himself to spill an others blood,
And think himself cursed in an others bliss.
Let him be gorged, even to the very throat;
yet will he vex to hear an other call
for a poor crust of bread; it frets his gall
To see a sail belongs not to his boat.
If with the price of one of his own eyes
he can buy both an other man's, he will do it:
It Is to be feared too, for a Soul to boot
He Will give his own to hell a sacrifice.
This is the man which from his mothers womb
has been perverse and froward, whose vild life
is nourisht only by the breath of strife;
Which birth and breathing cannot want a room
At last in hell; for he that trauells here
(this Monster-like) with mischief, cannot find
a place more suting to his diu'lish mind,
Then where his friends and father may be near,
To be delivered of his hell-bred seed:
for there some damned infernal Hagge or other
may be the Midwife, fit for such a mother
From whom (at best) some Fury must proceed. Vix sunt ho^ hoc nomine (...)
quamque lup^^ plus seritatis bent, perfud^ maenus frate^ sanguine fr^^

This is the man who sits, and laughs to spy
where men do (Wolfe-like) by the throat, each other
tear: how th'inhumane brother kills the brother,
And by the hand of children, Parents die.
Where he perceiues an others downe-fall nigh,
He thirsts to see their ruin, more then they
whose high-flowne Falcons (watchful for their prey)
Threatening to bring Destruction from the sky,
Long to behold the fearful game struck dead.
It Is Enuies life, soul, summum bonum, all
which we term dear, to see an other fall,
Though 't be the man that gives his hunger bread.
To see his neighbor fast is his best food,
It makes him lean to see another fat;
He pines to naught, when he finds naught whereat
He may repine. To have him understood,
And to the full described; thus in a word,
it grieves his staru'ling spirit more to see
An others good, then his own misery; Inuidus non ^ nu^ discruciat^ aliena
felicita quam su^ inf^ tuni^.

Though it cut deeper then Afflictions sword.
TO THE ENVIED.
IS it not strange, that such can live, whose food
is dres'd by Envy, and with poison mixed,
Whose heart's the kitchen, and whose cankered blood
the meager Cook carowseth; while betwixt,
His master and the devil are begotten
prodigious Monsters, which appear as barren
Of honesty as Hell, their ioints as rotten
through want of marrow, as a piece of carrion?
By these thou art malic'd; but be not dismaide
nor grieve thou at them, rather for them grieve
If so thou can thy Charity persuade,
(which as you are flesh and blood, I scarce believe.)
When a fierce Dog comes running at thee, stay
and thou shall find he will rather back retire,
Then offer to assault thee: if away
from him thou fly'st thou further'st his desire.
So these (far worse then dogs) will fiercely bite,
when they perceive their venom makes thee stir:
For nothing gives such fullness of delight
to th'snarling spleen of a malicious Curre,
As to behold the mischief that he does.
But where well-tempered patience does preserve
Inuidia virtute parta, gloria, non inuidia putanda est.
(As a safe Antidote to th'rankling tooth
of Enuies whelps) they pine away, and starve.
This to thy Farewell; if thy Virtues make thee
hateful to th'bad, their envy is thy glory:
If love to vice make good men's love forsake thee,
resolve thy self they envy not, they 're sorry.
To the Envious.
But that I know thy face, I must confess
I should have trembled; for an Object less
Fearful, were able without Physics Art
To make a Costiue man play a loose part.
I cannot think the worst of Pharaoes kine
Looked half so bare, as this poor trunk of thine;
Which like Sir Cranion, or a starv'ling Capon
Staukes here and there, proportionably shapen
To thy lean spirit, whose repining hate
Has brought thy Carcass to this pining state.
I see there are more ways to th'wood then one.
Not age, or wedlock, bring'th a man alone
Unto a Nightcap; for a wretched mind
Gave thine to thee; O had it been so kind
To Have put a Nose-gaie too into thy hand;
And in thy Ruffes room placed a falling band,
Many had looked to have seen thee turn, and Hope
Would have presumed that next had come a Roape:
Whereto thy hanging ominous looks presage
Thou must do homage; in th'meane time, engage
That little hope thy wretched soul enioyes
Of Heaven, to him who thy best good destroys,
In feeding thy insatiable spleen;
Which, (had not help from hell transported been)
Could not have been so devilish as 't has proov'd,
But it in thee infernal powers have moved:
Scarce Hell it self, could conster that for ill;
Which (damned) thou (to satisfy thy will)
Have urged ( I know) as an extreme offense,
Against vnguiltie, harmless Innocence.
Which hiath by some (too credulous weak men)
(Out of their wisdoms) been found faulty; when
Had they been masters but of so much sight,
As to distinguish between day and night,
They had been less injurious, or more just;
But to such Judges must the guilty trust,
Whilst Innocence must suffer; yet not so
But it may live to see their overthrow
Who moale-like heave unseen, till at the last
Their working be discovered, and they cast
Out of their hollow trenches, and withal
Trod on by them, whom they desired might fall;
Then shall your sable Cacodaemon be
Hanged with a twigge upon some willow tree;
To all which Envious undermining slaves,
I wish no fairer Ends, no better graves.
OF THE DETRACTER.
THis comes in last, because he comes behind
those whom he wrongs, though in his doing so
the devil cannot him in skill foregoe;
Unto the last but this, This last I find
To be as near allied in Baseness, as
a brother can be to a brother twinne,
in feature, though (as often) Nature therein
Proportion them so like, that each does pass
For other. Only this one difference I note
this last, allow'th more freedom to his tongue
then Envy does, and other men are stung
By him more then himself; he makes his throat
An open grave, where his contagious breath,
labors to blast the spotless fame of such,
whose Reputation it shall chance to touch.
Nor can the hand of Reconciling Death
Free men from this injurious Monsters sting,
which through the bowels of the earth does pierce,
and in the quiet vault appears more fierce
Then Death (the graves stern tyranizing King.)
Were a man here as free from actual ill,
as when he first moved in his mothers womb;
or as the man that calls the Heaven his home
Guiltless of sin; yet would this try his skill.
If in a bul-rush he can find a knot;
or from pure honey (which the harmless Be
sucked from those flowers which like it self was free)
Strain poisoned juice; where if he find one jot
Which he can judge does relish of a weed
(from which the toylsome Be cheerfully flies,
home to the hiue with hony-laden thighs)
He strait concludes no good can thence proceed.
So strange is the distraction of this Tom
of Bedlam, that all places, times, and men
without distinction seem alike: for when
The furious railing fit comes on him, from
His stinking stomach, he 'le belch forth such geere,
such filth; and with such violence, as though
he meant to cast his rotten garbage: so
He joys to make his loathsomeness appear.
This (what shall I term him?) will devour your bread,
call you his master, crouch with cap in hand,
profess he falls, if you shall fail to stand;
Yet curse you living, joy when you are dead.
He 'le be the Herald of your Infamy,
and scandalize your worth, though you have bred
him to the shape of man even from a shred.
Hic niger est, etc.
This is a blacke-one, full of treachery.
To the Detracted.
THough Wolves against the silver Moon do bark,
they blemish not her brightness, nor the spite
Of bauling Curres, (which she disdains to mark)
can any whit eclipse her of her light.
So mai'st thou slight the railing of ill tongues,
if a clear shining conscience be thy guard;
Which to defend thee from the worst of wrongs,
will, as a wall of brass, be found as hard.
Men are by Nature apt to blame, and hate
such as distaste what they approve as good:
If thou dislike to hear a Parrat prate,
and tell a tedious tale of Robin-hood;
He 'le shoot Detractions boult against thy brain,
terming it shallow, barren, poor and dull;
Because not vented by a windy vain,
empt'ing it self to make thy mouth show full.
But wiser men then he assures thee no; Loquacit a^ certissimu^ fatuitatis
argume^tum Eras.

They are most fools (say they) that use most words:
That silence argues folly, 't is not so;
for virtues branches no such fruit affords.
Admit a Turk should call thee Infidel;
would be offended? or imagine, that
One dubbe thee knave, in whose own heart does dwell
baseness enough, to make him wondered at
By all that know him? shall the first persuade thee,
that thy Religion knows more Gods then one;
Or to deny the sacred power that made thee,
or t'giue his honor to a carved stone?
Or can the second force thee to confess
through his report, thou art as base as he?
If none of these thou will, their power's the less,
thy worth the more by their detracting thee.
An honest fame (like spice) the more it is brus'd
savors the sweeter, which when we are dead
Will be the sweetest seare-cloath can be used
to wrap us in; it will out-last the lead
Wherein that body lies, in which did live
a spotted conscience, a detracting spirit;
Which to it self an earthly heaven did give,
and of Heavens joys it self did disinherite.
TO THE DETRACTER.
Think thou it makes thy Reputation fair,
if by thy muddy tongue thou can impair
An other man's? look how a murderer can
(whose fatal hand shall kill an other man)
Add to his own by shortning others days;
so by detracting others grows by praise.
Perchance thou feed'st thy self with a conceit,
that every man that hears thee rail, does strait
Believe that all thou say is true, for that
they contradict thee not; I Will tell thee what,
In my opinion thou should rather fear,
it makes them tremble and amazed to hear,
How diu'lishly thou second'st what thou say
with oaths, and curses; or admit thou mai'st
Light upon some who (knowing not thy use)
may be persuaded, that from some abuse
Offered to thee, proceeds thy railing fit:
Yet all the glory thou enioy'st by it
Is, they will note thee euerafter, for
a creature which all good men should abhor.
Or say thou shall some man, to some deprave
who know him honest; think thou for a knave
They can do less then judge thee? and beware
thou rayl'st to no men that iuditious are:
For they 'le soon find that thou dishonest art,
and therefore know thou take no good man's part:
Whose praise they judge is equally the same,
Where Just men do applaud, or thou defame.
I might have spared my breath in wishing thee
to men of judgment not to be too free;
For thou art chiefly careful in this point
to plie his ear whose iudgement's out of joint:
By whom as yet was never understood
how any cause could, but the first, be good;
Whose ignorance (I think) might argue rather
The Vicar of fools will prove their ghostly father.
And as for thee, thou do resolve I know
thou must die mad, thy braine's distemperd so.
Which will be for thy credit when thou 'rt dead:
for some will lay the fault upon thy head,
And say thy brain enforced thy tongue to rave.
Better be thought a madman then a knave.
FINIS.
Qui ducis vultus, and non legis ista libenter,
Omnibus iuuideas liuide, nemo tibi.
Mart.

