AN Armor of Proof, brought from the Tower of David, to fight against
Spannyardes, and all enemies of the truth, By R. C.

The name of the Lord is a strong Tower: the righteous run unto it, and are
exalted.

Pro. 18. 10. Imprinted at London by G. Simson and W. White. 1596.

To the right Honorable Gilbert Talbot, Earl of Shrewesburie, Lord Talbot,
Furniuall, Strange of Blackmeare, Verdon and Louetoft, Knight of the most noble
order of the Garter: Roger Cotton wysheth grace and peace in Christ Jesus.
THe Lord our God (Right Honorable) who in great mercy has caused by his
spirit, the holy Scriptures to be written for our learning: has also
commanded, that all men should studdy therein both day and night: that so by
the help of the same spirit, men might write them in their hearts. The end
hereof is, that thereby they may recover the Image of that new man, which
again is created after the likeness of God in knowledge and holiness.

And while the people of Israel observed this: they inioyed peace throughout
their borders, and great plenty within their Palaces. And such fear God
strocke into the hearts of their enemies round about, that none durst stir
against them. But at what time they cast off this, and chose new Gods, and made
no account of the knowledge of the true God, nor of the learned, that should to
them the same God teach: Then was there war in the gate, and no peace to any
that went in or out, but great troubles arose to all the inhabitants of the
earth. For nation destroyed nation, and City destroyed City, and God
troubled them with all manner of adversities.

This standing thus, and God remaining unchangeable, I assure my self of all
kingdoms (to whom the word of God is sent) this may be spoken. That they,
Elias, I mean, the men like Elias: Joshua, Samuel, David, Daniel, and such:
whose delights are in the law of the Lord, are the Horses and Chariots of a
kingdom. O noble Sir, I beseech you therefore consider well thereof: and let
those gracious words of good king Asa, when ten hundredth thousand came against
him: and those of King Abiah, when eight hundredth thousand came against him:
and those of Ioab the Captain, when the Ammonites and Aramites came against
David, be writ most sure in your noble heart: that so they may proceed from
your lips, to the encouragement of the common sort; whose hearts often fail
in rumors of troubles. I know your Honor needs not to be taught, how
Nobility given to the holy word, must be the strongest pillars of the Church.
Israel through all ages so stood firm: but otherwise fell.

Joshua being equal to a Prophet, conquered the land through his constancy and
courage in divinity. But after him great contempt of Religion arose: wherefore
much of their land again they lost: and greatly troubled was that state,
until the days of Samuel. For as they often fell away, so the Lord often
sold them into the hands of spoylers: whereby in the end that state became
Ichabod, no glory. For the glory of God the space of seven months departed
from them: yet by means of good Samuel, faithful in religion, was again
settled in Israel: and so by him, the state was well held up all his days: who
although he descended from rebellious Corah, yet is he for Leuy a conqueror of
better then Sichemites: and as he, so, or more, did that noble and valiant
David, even by divinity, recover wholly the land first conquered by Joshua: and
David's title is not so evident for a warryer, as it is for the pleasant in
songs to Israel. For to this day, most sweet is the voice of that sweet
singer, to all that rightly understand his tune. But he that should understand
him to the full, had need of the spirit of an Apostle. A true pattern indeed
(Right honorable) of true Nobility. But yet full soon was this true pattern
lost: whereupon ten parts of that stately kingdom became in short time, not
only Izrael and Loruchama, but Loammy also. For full often did the Lord visit
them with the sword, as well at home, devouring one an other, as by the enemy
abroad: and in the end suffered them to be carried quite away by the Kings of
Asshur. And God took no pity: but even as they had cast off him from being
their Lord, so he cast of them from being his people.

Now as Jeroboam the son of Nebat, of the virtuous Joseph, is set forth as a
pattern for discommendations to all that followed his wicked steps: so noble
David of the house of Judah, is the pattern set forth for commendation to all
that had care to walk his godly paths. Therefore no further in story for
sample to true nobility need I here to seek.

Yet in so much as the fame of one of your own most noble progenatours
sounds in our ears to this day, I trust it shall of none be thought amiss,
if I lay him before your Honorable eyes, as an other example. That noble Earl
JOHN TALBOT is the man: who neither lived as languishing in idleness, riot, or
excess: nor died as having surfited with vain pleasures, and fond delyghtes:
but of manly wounds received in open feelde, after he had valiantly warred
four and twenty years in defense of his Princes right: a death and life most
honorable to them that are truly noble and valiant. Even so this worthy peer,
together with his valiant Son the Lord Lisle, in that sore battle fought at
Castilion in France, their sweet lives did end: where a monument of the
Earl remains unto this day, and this inscription following, engraven thereupon.

Here lies the right noble Knight John Talbot Earl of Shrewsburie, Earl of
Washford, Waterforth and Valence, Lord Talbot of Goodritche and Vrchingfeilde:
Lord Strange of Blackmeare, Lord Verdon of Alton, Lord Crumwell of Wingfeilde,
Lord Louetoft of Worsoppe, Lord Furniuall of Sheffeilde, and Lord Falconbridge,
Knight of the most noble orders of S. George, S. Michael, and the Golden
Fleece, Great Marshall to King Henry the sixth of his Realm of France, who
dyed at the battle of Castilion near Bordeaux, Anno. 1453.

Now as this, and other your noble ancestors, have been always at home most
honorable for their faythfulnes toward the Crown of England: and for their
service both at home, and abroad against the enemy, in so much that even the
very name of the Talbot to them, has been tirrible: so no doubt there is, but
that your self will show your self, in all nobility, as descended from such.
A most noble warryer, and faithful subject unto his anointed Prince was he,
whose example therein you follow. Therefore one point more I beseech your
honor, learn of that noble David your pattern. And as you and your honorable
fathers have followed him in the other two most honorable quallities of true
nobillitie, so let your self surmount them all in the third.

The point desired, is, his great love and zeal to the Church and house of
God: which was such, as no scoffs of wicked contemners could stay him from
preferring of the same: but by how much more he seemed as a fool, and vain in
the sight of such, for so doing, by so much more cared not he, to become more
vile, and low in his own eyes, if by such means, he might do good thereto.
Therefore if it might please your honor to follow him in this, as you have in
the other: you shall be sure that honor which he there speaks off, will
follow you with great increase. And moreover, then shall that speech which good
Abygall used unto him your noble pattern, take full effect in you. For the
Lord has not only promised to make my Lord a sure house, because he is ready
to help his noble Deborah to fight the Lords battles, and because he is so
faithful toward his anointed, that no evil can be found in him: but also
for the third point, that which is much more; even the soul of my Lord shall
be bound up in the bundle of life with the Lord your God, and the soul of your
enemies shall God cast out, as out of the middle of a Sling.

Thus, being every way over bold with your honorable patience, I crave pardon.
I am no Scholar, but a Draper: therefore not able to contriue my speeches in
such sort, as willingly I would. My trust is, your honor will the rather pardon
me, and accept the affection of my heart, and not weigh the rudeness of my pen.
I was borne in Whitchurch; which, as I think, is one of your honors principal
Lordships: where my Ancestors have of long time been poor well willers unto
your noble Progenitors, as at this present my eldest brother there, and we the
rest of his brethren here in London, are to your honorable self. These things
considered, together with your honorable inclination toward good things, made
me bold to make choice of you, to be the patron of this my small work of
meditation against the enemy. I beseech your honor accept thereof, according as
the matter requires, and not as the skill of the writer deserves. The matter
is good, though rudely handeled.

That God, who is able to do both for your Honorable self, and that virtuous
Lady the Countice your wife, far exceeding abundantly above all that I can ask
or think, give unto you both, all honor, with increase thereof here in this
life, and in the life to come, that crown of glory, which he has prepared for
all those that love and honor him in Christ Jesus. Amen.

Your honors to command, R. COTTON.

To the christian Reader.
FOr as much (dear Christian) as many weak ones are often terrified with
rumors of troubles more then they should, and many others less regard them
then they ought: I thought good to put forth a few rude verses, of my poor
Meditation thereupon: partly to encourage the weak and feeble in faith toward
God, and partly to call the rash hardy, to learn better the cause thereof, if
any such befall us. As some times God reuengeth sins, where men little look
for punishment: yea and full often and many ways God strikes, when sildome
the strocken, consider whose hand it is, or for what cause it is. Therefore my
small work tends to show unto such, who it is that strikes, and the cause
why so many and sundry ways we are strocken: I trust none of right modesty
can despise my good meaning herein. And as I would gladly accept the like
encouragement from others, so I trust this of mine, shall be taken in good
part: and somewhat move some unto meditation upon Gods word, which is an help
ready to all that come with care to seek salvation: to which word, I pray God
give you grace to fly unto in all distress, as unto your chiefest hold and
Tower. Amen.

Yours in the Lord, R. C.

An Armor of proof, brought from the Tower of David, to fight against
Spannyardes.
WHen God of hosts in eighty eight had brought, Ier. 25. 8. 9. and Esa. 10. 5.
6.

an host of men, our Country to annoy:
in that distress the Lord by us was sought, Haba. 1. 6.

whereby our woes were turned then to joy.
But yet full true to us may this be said,
in your distress, Esa. 26. 16.
you only seek my aid.
For then in deed, and only then we seek,
when troubles great, and grievous plagues arise:
But those once past, Iere. 2. 20. and 5. 23.
no promise made, we keep,
nor yet by them can learn to be more wise:
But as the Sow in fylth again does wallow, Esai. 1. 5

so we our sins of former times do swallow. 2. Pet. 2. 22

For great and small, Iere. 8. 6.
no sins of old forbear.
No rich, Pro. 20. 9.
no poor, can say in heart, I joy:
For garment white, Reave. 19. 8. and 3. 5.
which I now daily wear,
but steed thereof, Esai. 3. 16. to the end.
we faigne and frame each toy,
each toy, yea toys and tails, such to behold,
with wire and hear, 1. Pet. 3. 3. and 1. Tim. 2. 9.
that monsters be we would.
Yet few there be whose hearts consider well,
what sins are wrought each day by men of might.
No one there is that thinks how God does tell,
his own misdeedes he works day and night: Psalm. 56. 8.

yet does the Lord the least of them regard, Hebr. 2. 2. and Pro. 24. 12

and will in time, give each his full reward.
But how, Judges. 2. 11. to 15.
to whip by Spain, as some men deem?
Not so be sure, Iosu. 23. 15. and 24. 20.
those Rods would prove to sore:
For never yet, the Lord his sold I ween,
to sword of foe, Iere. 25. 6. and Deu. 4. 26. 27 and Psalm. 78. 58 to 63.
unless Gods they had store.
But rather with his own most gentle hand,
he has and will still beat a sinful land.
But will thou know what is the sin of sins: Pro. 13. 13. and Iere. 6. 10.
to 21. and 7. 23. 30. and 8. 9. 11. chap. and Rom 1. 28. Judge. 2.

It is contempt of Gods most holy word:
for that cast off, Idolatry begins,
false Gods then sought, God draws out his sword,
his sword? yea all his plagues therewith are sent,
when on false Gods the minds of his are bent. Leui. 26. and Deu.. 28.

Alas, Iere. 5. 7.
how then can we escape his hand?
Have not all sorts his holy word off cast?
Not so, Of Ohim, Zim, and Iem, read Esai. 13. 21. and 34. 11. to end.
for then naught else but plagues in land,
and it to ly both desolate and wast.
Wast? nay worse: for Ohim therein then should dwell,
yea Zim and Iem in stead of men to tell.
For will thou see for this, 2. King. 25. and 2. Cho. 36.
what God once wrought
on his own seat, Jerusalem of fame?
In dust she lies, by Babel first so brought:
once buylt again: yet Rome has spoylde the same.
Too grievous were her harms all to be told, Ezra, Nehemiah, Aggay, and Math.
24. and Luke. 21.

she lies in dust, that glittered so with gold.
Even she, whose beauty shone so clear and bright,
that all the world, Lamen. 2 15.
Perfection did her call:
Yea, Psalm. 48. 2. and Lamen. 2. 15.
she, the joy of all that were upright,
none such there was, nor never like there shall:
yet down she is, Dan. 9. 27. and Math. 24. and Luke 21. 20. to 34.
and never shall be buylt:
thou may so see in Gods book, if thou wylt.
And so Aholah sister hers likewise,
before her long, Ezekiel. 23. 4.
with Asshurs rod was whypt:
for that new gods amongst them did arise, 2. King. 17.

Gods word cast off, Micha. 6. 16.
and Omries laws well kept,
from Ahabs house their manners still they sought: Esai. 28. and Ezekiel. 23. and
Ier. 3. and Hos.

wherefore to dust, their glorious crown was brought
And so in days of Judges, long before,
the Lord his sold, Judge. 2.
to spoylers round about:
because their gods they daily did adore,
and praised them, whom God had bid thrust out:
but quite forgot the Lord, who did redeem
their necks from thrall: him did they not esteem.
And has not this of us yet taken hold?
Not full I hope: for though great store therebe
who make them Gods of wealth and wedge of gold, Job. 31. 24. and 1. Tim. 6.
17. and 2. 3. 4.

of lusts of flesh, and pleasures of the eye:
All those who love their wealth or pleasure more
then they do God, Math. 6. 24.
to them, Luke. 16. 13.
Gods they are sure. Phelip. 3. 19.

But yet this sin on all has not laid hold,
For though on some, yet many more there be,
who never sought to Gods yet made of mould, Deuteronomy. 4. 19.

or Sun or Stars: Psalm. 65. 2.
for such ne hear nor see,
To one they call, Psalm. 19. and Deuteronomy. 4. 10. and Psalm. 147. 19. 20.
who can their suit well hear,
and does to them by word and works appear.
To God alone we seek in hope to find, Psalm 50. 15.

by means of Christ, Math. 18. 19
eternal son of his,
who did our sins and foes to tree fast bind, Colo. 2. 14. 15

when he on earth Gods statutes none did mis: Psalm. 40. 6. 7. 8

yet death he took, Heb. 10. 5. to 11.
the wages due for sin,
and so by death, Romans 6. 23. Heb. 2. 14.
spoyld him that death brought in.
Who after death, John. 17. 5. and Luke. 24. 26.
all glory was to have:
which erst he had with God before all time,
and there does sit, 1. Ioh. 2. 1. 2. and Heb. 4. 14. and 7. 24. 25. and 9. and
10. and John. 17.
in shape of man to crave,
the like for all that are of him true vine.
Wherefore by him our prayers we present,
which are to God a sweet and pleasing scent.
We marvel much what foolysh doults do mean,
to fall to blocks, Seeing God has sworn that every knee shall how to him.
or call to Saints on hie:
since none on earth or heaven yet does reign,
but God alone, Esai. 45. 23.
who can our thoughts epsy:
For Abram knows us not, does Esai Esai. 41. 26.
say, Psalm. 65. 2. and 139. 2.

and Jacob wants ears to hear us pray. Esai. 63. 16.

That Virgin pure, Yet she needed a savior, and rejoiced in him, even in
Christ her son and Lord.
most blessed was in deed,
in wose small womb the Lord of life did dwell:
yet for to know what time we stand in need,
she has no skill, the Scripture plain does tell:
for God alone, Psalm. 65. 2.
our prayers all does hear:
wherefore to him by Christ we still draw near. Heb. 10. 21. 23.

We hold them fools that labor so in vain,
to call on Paul, Seeing the lord has commanded to call on him. psalm. 50. 15.
1.
or Peter, or on Pope:
for had they eyes, saint John has told them plain,
that who now sins, Ioh. 2. 1. 2.
Christ now must be his hope:
for he now only mediator is,
cause Arons trade our sins could not dismis. Heb. 10. 1. 2.

We have Gods word to teach us faith and fear, We learn not from ye precepts
of men, as those in Esaias and the Papists do.

we learn by it, all secrets meet to know.
No writ of man, to us yet is so dear,
or like esteemd Gods councels us to show:
We are most sure that God by it must gain,
such wanderyng souls as must with Christ here rain.
We have the Sacraments in perfect sort, Math. 26. 26 27. and. 1. Cor. 11. 23.
to 30.

as Christ him self at first did them ordain.
Our foes are false, It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profyteth
nothing.
who give us this report,
that we hold not, that Christ does there remain.
But how? not Really, as they do teach:
but there by faith, John. 6. 63.
as learned here do preach. For the heavens contain his body until the end of
the world. Acts. 1.

If this be true, that all Gods truth we hold,
what need we then of Spain to be afraid:
For God I say, has never yet such sold
to sword of foe: but still has sent them aid.
The truth we have, Now from south, as of old from north, but not to have the
like success.
yet therein walk not we,
wherefore often times God hisseth for a be.
In deed? Then must we all look for the same,
for few there be, that will of God do seek,
but all degrees, contemn his holy name:
Few rich or poor, Ier. 17. 21. to end, and Esai. 58. 13. 14.
one Saboth true do keep:
and all are bent their own wills to obey,
but will of God, we seek it no one day.
For whereas we should spend our lives and time, Josh. 1. 8. and John. 5. 39.

in Gods own Book, his will to see therein:
great store there be, Ephe. 5. 17.
that never sought one line,
to write in heart, Deuteronomy. 6. 6.
that so they might know him.
And so Gods will of us not being known, Iere. 6. 19. and Romans 1. 28.

he castes us off, to follow ways our own.
O England, Be instructed o Jerusalem; and let not the great things of the
law, which for thy sake are written, be counted of thee as strange things,
Iere. 6. 8. and Hose. 8. 12.
then consider well thy state,
often read Gods word, and let it bear chief sway
within thy heart, or else thou can not escape
the wrath of God: for he will surely pay.
Yea diverse rods the Lord of Hosts does use,
to chasten such, Read Leuit. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28.
as do his word refuse.
His sword thou know, Leuit. 26. 25. and Deuteronomy. 28.
he threatened sore to draw,
in eighty eight; but then he did thee spare:
yet since that time, in thee great sins he saw:
wherefore for thee great plagues he did prepare.
The Pestilence through out thy coasts has bin, Leui. 26. 25. and Deuteronomy. 28.
21.

and now with sword, to threat he does begin.
Thy land as hard as Brass has often bin made. Leuit. 26. 19. and Deuteronomy. 28. 23.

Thy heavens have as Iron bin likewise:
they both conspier to stay their wonted trade,
whereby to thee great darthes and famines rise.
Thy corn fair grown, with blasting has bin spoyld
well gotten in, yet meldeaw has it soyld.
Thy Trees, Leuit. 26. 20. and Deuteronomy. 28.
thy Vines, thy Cow, and clothing Sheep:
all fruitful things, to thee often fruiteles are,
because with God, Iere. 5. 25.
thou promise none do keep,
thy feeldes and faith, Iere. 2. 19. 20 and 5. 23. 25.
through barrennes are bare:
In stead of rain, much dust abroad does fly:
for want of deaw, Deuteronomy. 28. 24.
thy ground does burned ly.
Thy Ox and Cow with blaynes and murrens mad,
thy Sheep with rot destroyed often have bin:
Thy house with fire, thy goods thy foes have had,
thy land and right, Deuteronomy. 28. 31.
the, vile often times do win.
Thy troubles great by law do daily rise, 1. Cor. 6. 5. 6. 7. 8.

because Gods word can not yet make thee wise.
And for this cause oppressed thou art with wrong, Deuteronomy. 28. 29. 33.

yea pylde and polde by tithes, by toules, by rent,
by Landlordes bad, who think thy Lease too long:
by neighbors ill, to mischief that are bent.
Thy own bad mind to law often moves thee, 1. Cor. 6. 8.

and wilt not cease, till all be spent on fee.
Thy foes and adversaries daily do arise,
God styrreth them thy troubles to increase: 1. King. 11. 14 23. But good David
was so wise. 2. Sam. 16 10. 11.

And all for this, yet art thou not so wise,
to know that he does make them break thy peace:
But rather thou the like for like do lend, As would the sons of eruiah
have had David to done to Shemei.

whereas by them thou should thy self amend.
Thy Servants they rebellious be and naught,
they fyltch, they steal, they rob, and seek thy spoil,
in goods and name, The wicked give heed to false lyps, and a liar harkeneth
to the naughty tongue. pro 17.
thy hinderance they have sought
they run and range, they dance, and keep a quoyle,
Thy neighbors tongues by them are set on talk,
for prate and hear they must, as they by walk.
And when a tale to some of them is told,
they can well add, What good comes of these praters and tale bearers, read
Pro. 26. 20. 21. 22. and 1. Tim. 5. 13.
to bring thee in disgrace:
for thy dear name for naught, by them is sold,
to many more that dwell in further place:
And by and by as ware that rots with them,
they make great have to sell it other men.
And thus the land with wicked tongues is fraught,
whereby one may in manner plain descrne, Iame. 4. 11. 12

that Gods pure law by them is judged naught: When ye wicked can do no other
harm, then will they smite with the tongue, as they did good Jeremy. ler. 18.
18.

for else by it, to speak well they would learn.
Wherefore as men from flesh do wisdom take,
so fleshly rods do often times them wake.
And what else more, for this cause do thou feel?
Thy body sick with agues cold and hot, Leuit. 26. 16. and deuteronomy. 28. 22

with grievous pains from head down to thy heel,
because of this, Deuteronomy. 28. 35.
does fall unto thy lot.
Yet were it well, if bodies pain were all:
but soul for this is still in bonds and thrall.
For it, They shall wander from sea to sea, from north to south, to seek the
word, but shall not find it. Amo. 8. 12. and pro. 1. 20. to the end.
as blind and lame does range about,
and plundged is in pitts of crosses store,
and there does lie, when Gods word helps not out:
and so often times with such floods is forlore,
but justly then to help does it refuse,
since often it would, but thou would not it use.
And what now wantes of all Gods plagues to thee?
now surely store; Read Leuit. 26. all, and Deuteronomy. 28. all.
there is yet more behind.
But yet this one I would thee wysh to see,
the which to view, I pray thee be not blind:
the Spanyardes now with Armor brave them dight,
in hope to find thy faith, but vain and light.
Remember then thy former love and zeal,
which thou to God, Reave. 2. 5.
and to his word did bear:
and let them now again with thee preuale:
and so no force of forrayne shall thou fear. Esai. 55. 7.

None shall then move thy Candlestick from thee, ^eue. 2. 5.

if thou from it a light wilt take to see.
But is there nothing else for to be don?
Yes sure; we are to have both Shylde and Spear,
good Armor bright, with Arrows, Bows and Gone.
These being had, we need not Spain to fear.
But if thou trust in these, Iere. 17. 5.
and strength of men,
then know, as broken Reeds, shall all prove then.
For woe to them that Egypts help do seek, Esai. 31. 1.

or trust in store of Horse, and Charrets strong,
or wit of man: Iere. 17. 5.
for none of these could keep
those anciant Towns, or yet their peace prolong:
for noble pears of Zoan proved fools: Esa. 19. 11. 13

yea so did all, that wrought by such like tools.
Samarias Ox, nor Bethels Calfe of gold, 1. Kin. 12. 26. to the end, and
Hose. 8. 5. and Ezekiel. 23. 5. 7. 9.

nor Ieroboams fine device for wit,
could save ten Tribes, when God had them once sold
to Asshurs Rod, no help could save from it:
For all such wisdom, drunkenness became,
yea all device of man did then prove lame.
And so will now, if these we make our aid:
Wherefore again, Psalm. 108. 12. and Iere. 17. 5.
best help I will thee show.
To turn to God, Esai. 55. 6. 7. and Mala. 3. 7 to 13.
for so him self has said:
and that well done, will prove best fence I know:
But how? to cast on mournyng for a day?
No no, Esai. 58.
such fastes with God can bear no sway.
But this is it that shall thy Lord well please, Psalm. 1. 1. 2. and John. 5. 39.

to read his Book with all delyght and care,
both night and day, Ioshu 1. 8. 9.
until thou know his ways:
and that his laws within thy heart writ are: Deuteronomy. 6. 6. to 10.

Which laws well kept, for weapons have the name,
then for thy help, I will bring forth the same.
When Sinai hill, Exodus 19. 18. and Deu. 4. 10
and Horeb mount did burn, Deuteronomy. 33. 2.

and thunder clappes made Seir with them to shake. Exodus 19. 13. 19.

When trumpet shrill did sound, Exodus 19. 16. and 20. 18. and Ebr. 12. 20. 21
and loud blew horn,
then Jacobs sons for fear thereof did quake:
they quakde for fear, Deuteronomy. 33. 2.
though God from Paran came,
with laws to save all those that keep the same. Deuteronomy. 4. 5 and 30. 15. to
end.

Yet thou dear friend needst not to fear or quake, Ebre. 12. 21. and Exo. 19.
16 and 20. 18.

though Moses did, and thousands more with fear:
for now no Sinai terror shall thee shake,
because a Lamb in Sion does appear: Ebre. 12. 22. 23. 24. and Reave. 14.

On Sion hill there stands a Lamb most meek,
who bids thee come in peace, Romans 10. 4.
Gods laws to seek.
Ten thousand Saints did God attend, Deuteronomy. 33. 2.
when he
those glorious Laws, Exodus 20.
in sayings ten proposed:
In which thy debts toward God are all to see, Math. 22. 37. to 41.

yea all thou owst toward men are there enclosed,
enclosed are thy duties all therein: Romans 13. 8. to 11.

the which to learn in time thou must begin. Ephe. 6. 4. and Pro. 22. 6.

First then, Exodus 20.
the Lord requires of thee to hear,
that he alone from Egypts thrall thee brought.
None other Gods before thee must appear, What folly is in them that break
this commandment, read Esai 44. and 46.

nor none such serve, as may be made of naught:
Of naught some Gods are made, which men do serve,
as those of Wood and Stone, which fine they carue.
But such, Deuteronomy. 4. 15. to 25.
the Lord commandes thee not to make,
nor any thing that may him represent: To whom will ye make me like or equal,
or compare me? that I should be like unto him. Esaias 46.

in heaven or earth, or yet from sea or lake,
one wight to take, whereon thy mind is bent:
one wight to take from none of these thou art,
to bow unto, or worship in thy heart.
For if thou do, the Lord thy God is he,
a ielous God, Exodus 20.
and therefore will not spare,
to punysh sins to third and fourth degree,
on those whose hearts on feigned gods set are:
Wherefore on him, Blessed is ye man in whose heart are thy ways. plas. 84. 5.
let all thy heart be set,
so mercies great to thousands thou shall get.
Thou must not take the name of God in vain, Bring the blasphemer without the
host, and let all that heard him, put their hands upon his head, and let all
the congregation stone him. Exodus 24. 14.

but thereof speak with trembling and with fear:
for if thou do, he has in store great pain,
to power on thee, and those that do him tear:
him tear by oaths, or speeches else profane,
not meet to use on his most holy name.
The Saboth day remember well to keep,
both thou, thy Man, thy Maid, thy Ox thy Ass:
Thy own affairs in that day do not seek, Thou shall not follow thy own
ways, nor seek thy own will, nor speak a vain word on my Saboth.

ne from thy gate then let the Stranger pass:
for in six days thou labor may full free,
and God will cause thy blessignes store to be. Esai. 58. 13.

Like as him self, the heavens all did make,
the earth, the sea, and all that is therein,
within six days, and seventh rest did take:
so would he have thee sample take by him:
by him, the seventh day was sanctified,
in which thy soul on him must be employed.
Unto thy Parents honor thou must give. Exo. 20. 12. and Ephe. 6. 1. 2.

Thou must not kill, nor whoredom once commit:
to steal abhor, but labor hard, to live.
And witness false to bear, Pro. 25. 18.
let none thee get.
To covet house, or wife, or man, or maid,
or ox, or ass, of neighbors be afraid.
These are the sum, In burnt offering and sin offering had thou no
pleasure. Then said I, lo, I come: a body have thou ordained me, and within my
heart thy laws are writ, and of me it is written, that I should do thy will, O
God. psalm. 40. and Heb. 10.
of many more, all pure:
of which poor store, though none can thou fulfill,
yet have no fear: for all are writ most sure
in Christ his heart, and he has done Gods will.
The will of God, that Lamb has done for thee,
and bids not fear, his precepts all to see.
These Laws so pure (good freende) do thou esteem
above the gold, the pearl, the precious stone:
all Jewels rare, The commandments of the Lord are pure, and more to be
desired the^ gold, yea then much fine gold. psalm. 19. 8.
shall nothing then be seem,
thy Neck like them, if thou will put them on:
If all Gods laws within thy heart thou hold,
more strength will be, then can with pen be told.
Thy soul to God they will convert and turn. The law of the Lord is perfect,
converting the soul, it gives light unto the eyes, wisdom unto the simple,
sharpenes of wit unto the dull of spirit.

Thy sight so dim, they will make clear and bright.
Thy thoughts so foul, they will consume and burn.
This will they do, if thou with them thee dight,
if dight thy self with armor this thou will,
thy soul gaynst sin shall daily strong be built.
The Tower of David they will be to thee, Thy neck is as the tower of David,
buylt for Defense, a thou^and shyldes hang therein, and all the targettes of y^
strong men. Can. 4. 4.

wherein a thousand shyldes and targets strong:
yea many weapons more therein will be,
for thy defense, against those that would thee wrong:
That would thee wrong in soul, in goods, or name,
gaynst every harm, a weapon for the same.
A Shylde for Faith it is, Ephe. 6. 16.
both sound and good.
A Sword for Spirit, Ephe. 6. 17.
a Plate for Breast well tryde.
A Helmet for thy health, not made of Wood,
but made of Right and Truth, which will abide.
Which will abide, thy health still to procure,
if to thy sides thou wylt them fasten sure.
Thy Loins must be still gyrt with Verity, Ephe. 6. 14.

thy Feet still shod the Gospels peace to seek: Ephe. 6. 15. 18

Thy shute to God in prayer each day let be,
that from thy foes he would thee safely keep:
He would thee keep, from ghostly foes great store,
which thee to spoil, seek daily more and more.
Since then thou art each day (my freende) to fight, For this cause take unto
you the whole armor of God, that so ye may be able to resist in the evil day.
Eph^. 6. 13.

agynst the Flesh, the World, and Ghostly foe:
with armoure tryde, thy self each day bedight:
so shall thou from their harms still safely go,
still safely shall thou go, gaynst fend so fell,
if all Gods laws within thy heart do dwell.
Thus to conclude, For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities and powers. Ephe. 6. 12.
dear friend, be strong in God,
put on the armor whole which he has made:
which is his word, from end to end each iod,
and so no foe thy strength shall then invade:
invade can none, ne yet thy soul annoy,
if every part thereof thou will enjoy.
Stand up therefore, Have not I commanded thee, saying: be strong and of a
good courage: fear not, for I the Lord thy God will be with thee where so ever
thou go. losu. 1. 9.
and corrage to thee take.
Cast off thy sin, and cloth thy self with right,
and then no noise of Spanniardes shall thee shake,
or yet once quayle thy wonted force and might:
Thy might, say I, no, God thy might has bin,
and still will be, if turn thou will to him.
Return thou then, Can. 6. 12.
return o Shulamyte,
return to God, Whom have thou rayled on, and against whom have thou exalted
thy voice, and lyfted up thine eyes? even against the holy one of Israel.
and so thy foes shall see,
an army great, with men of might to smite,
all forces down, that shall rise up gaynst thee:
gaynst thee, nay, gaynst thy Lord they shall then fight,
when thou from sin returnest clear in sight. 2. Kin. 19. 22.

Awake therefore, These words which I commandethes this day, shall be in thy
heart. Deuteronomy. 6. 6.
and to the Lord give ear,
thy heart likewise unto his Laws incline:
print all therein, that so they may appear
to give thee light in dark estate of thine,
and so no plagues of Spain, or Egypt old,
shall light on thee, Deuteronomy. 7. 15.
the Lord has thee so told.
For what if Spain, Psalm. 3. 6.
and thousands ten such more,
should hem thee in, or cumpas thee about:
yet will the Lord, as Captain go before,
and fight thy feelde, Deuteronomy. 31. 3. 4
against the proud and stout.
Since then he has this promise past to thee,
be not afraid, Deuteronomy. 31. 6.
if Spannyardes thou do see.
For what are they? Deuteronomy. 9. 2.
Are they of Anake sons?
Suppose they were: yet be not thou afraid:
for though with slaves such speech of terror runs,
yet come gaynst thee, they are full soon dismayde.
For thou a noble people art of name,
thy valiant acts sound through the world with fame.
Thy God has thee now almost forty years,
as his old folk, in Wilderness safe kept:
A wonder through the world, as it appears.
When they at war, Psalm. 3. 5. and 4. 8.
then quiet thou have slept:
and yet much more, in this time have thou won,
for now to all thy terror is begun.
We are the men, not Spannyardes, well I know,
to whom God says: Deuteronomy. 2. 25.
This day do I begin,
to send thy fear through out the world to show
what God it is, whose service thou art in.
The Lord of Hosts is he, whom we do sarue:
But Gods of Spain, are metals which they carue.
What need we then of them to be afraid?
For when they call, their gods are often a sleep:
or else abroad; 1. Kin. 18. 27.
as one of old has said,
and can not hear: wherefore they houle and weep.
For though their gods the like gods do subdue,
yet fight gaynst ours, Esai. 37. 18. 19
their cases thus they rue.
Wherefore if they should ask to fear the weak,
what were become of Sepharvaims gods?
Or what of Indians, 2. King. 19. 13 and Esai. 37. 11 to 14.
which they daily break?
with many more: all which have felt their rods.
Yet answer thou, They had no Gods at all,
no marvel then, Esa. 37. 18. 19
though Spanyardes gave the fall.
And what if they should once demand again, As that proud beast Sanaherib
did to good king Ezekiah. 2. king. 18. 13. to the end, and 19. and Esai 36.
and 37.

and ask thee of Samarias gods likewise?
and tell how Assors Rod is now in Spain?
And as he then, so they shall now surpryse.
Yet answer thou again thou may full true,
Samarias Gods were then of Heathens hue. 1. King. 12. 28

Even so are all the Gods quite round about,
where ever yet the Spanyardes bore the sway:
though Christians names yet are they none no dout:
for Christ by them, is driven quite away,
and Cakes of bred with them, are Gods in deed,
as Calves of gold, ^. King. 12. 28
to ten Tribes as we read.
Yet thou Jerusalem, Eber. 12. 22. and Apo. 3. 12.
which we now are,
have no such Gods, And will neither slumber nor sleep psalm. 121. 3. 4.
for thine in heaven dwells:
who does for thee all good things still prepare,
and wounds thy foes, thy blood so dear that spilleth
yet does he thee, by them sometimes correct,
but if thou turn, Apo. 19. 2. and Deuteronomy. 32. 43.
he does thee not reject. Iere. 30. 11.

Return therefore, return thou Shulamyte,
return to God, Can. 6. 12.
and his pure word embrace:
Return in time, Zach. 1. 3. and Mala. 3. 7.
and he thy foes will smite,
when tears of grief shall trickell down thy face: Esai. 37. 16. to 21.

and joyful then his holy ones will be,
to strike thy foes, Esai. 37. 36.
that would have sore stroke thee.
For will thou see, Esai. 27. 7. and Iere. 25. and Joel. 3.
how God of old did deal
with all the foes of his own folk that were?
now sure to hell he sent each common weal,
that bent their force, Esa. 13. and 14 and Ezekie. 32. 17. to the end.
his own poor folk to tear.
no Rod there was, which God for his did hier:
but if too sharp, he cast the Rod in fire.
For did thou Babylon, Esa. 13. and 14 and 21. and 46. and 47. and Ier. 25.
26. and 27. 7. and 50. and 51 and Dan. 5. 26
old Rod escape free?
Or had thou Rome, new Rod, for this, cause peace?
No Babylon, thy blows all men may see:
And thou, O Rome, thy plague shall never cease.
Two instruments, Iere. 50. 29.
too hard for wrathful ire,
were for that cause, Apo. 14. 9. 10 11. and 18. and 19.
well mollyfied with fire.
What Rome? why, Two proper speeches in the 17. of the Apocalips do so plainly
Describe Rome, that no man can Deny, but that Rome is there meant: as this.
The. 7. heads are. 7. hills: they are also 7 kings: and the woman is ye
great city that reigns over ye kings of the rarth.
she is up a loft again.
But what for that; Shall she as chief reign still?
No, no, her beawtie can not long remain,
but low in dust with Babel must she dwell:
As she of ancient Babel bears name,
so both a like, for mischifes, shall have shame.
But what became of Assure, Ephraims rod?
Did he escape, for service done gaynst him?
No sure: for he the whip, would needs be God:
the axe be he, Esai. 10. and 37. 36. 37. 38.
who did the helue put in:
But he that took this instrument to hier, Read the Prophet Naum.

his work once done, set instrument on fire.
And what became of Egypt, Counting from the time that Ismael began to
persecute Isaak, unto the last year of pharoh his rage.
that hard rod,
that rod, which did four hundredth years long last?
Would not the Lord then show him self a God,
to burn the same, which did his people wast?
He did not burn: Exodus 14.
but it in Sea he dround, Exodus 1. 22.

because therewith his people they did wound. Read more of Egypts plagues long
after these days, in Ezekiel. 30.

And what of Edom and of Pallistine?
Of Tyer and Zoan, Iere. 25. 15. to end, and Esai. 14. 29. to end, Obadyah and
Ezekiel. 36. and 37. 38. and Esai 34. and 23. and 19.
of Vz and Buz withal?
Has not the Lord to all these, drunk in Wine?
Yes wrathful Wine, more bitter then was gall.
Which cup of gall, to Elam kings he sent:
yea Iauan drank, till all that wrath was spent.
So now, O Lord, cause all thy foes to drink,
this bitter cup, Iere. 25. and Esai. 34. 2. 8.
which thou of old did fill,
to Nations all, whom thine to spoil did think:
but yet could not, one straw breadth pass thy will.
Repay them Lord, For it is a righteous thing with God, to trouble the^ that
trouble us. 2. These. 1. 6.
with thine eternal fire,
for thou have said, that such shall be their hier.
And curse, O Lord, yea Meroz folk curse still,
which now are slack, Judge. 5. 23.
thy poor flock to defend.
But bless our QVEENE, the hand-mayde of thy will:
who does with Iael, thy foes sound blows still lend.
Our gracious QVEENE, Judge. 4. 21. to end, and. 5. 24. to end.
above all let be blessed:
because alone, she fights against the beast.
Be thou O Lord, Psalm. 18. 1.
her buckler and her shylde,
her strong defense, against all foreign power:
yea gaynst all foes, that forces now do yield
to help that Beast, Apo. 13. and 17. cahpe.
thy people to devour.
Confound them Lord: their faces fill with shame:
And help our QVEENE, for honor of thy name.
Be thou her peace, 2. These. 3. 16.
her plenty, and her might.
Arm her with faith, Ephe. 2. 14.
thy Gospel to defend.
Cause thou her Crown, Ephe. 6. 16.
to shine long, fresh, and bright:
yea David's days, Psalm 132. 18.
twice double do her lend.
Cause her in peace, 2. Sam. 5. 4.
with Sallomon to reign, 1. Kin. 4. 21. 24.

in spite of all, that now are joined with Spain.
Make her, O Lord, a mother old and grave:
for she to us true Deborah has bin, Judge. 5. 7.

So keep her still, thy people long to save,
from those new Gods, Judge. 5. 8.
which former days brought in:
and let them not such Gods again erect,
for feign they would: but Lord do them reject.
For if they should, they would then brag and vaunt,
and say to us, Where now is he your God?
Yea thus they will thy servants mock and taunt, Psalm. 79. 10.

if now at last they should be made thy rod. For the enemy is proud. Lam. 1.
9.

Wherefore O Lord, thy glorious name regard,
and burn these rods, Psalm. 79. 9.
that so would thine reward. Psalm. 79. 12.

So will we praise and magnify thy name, Psalm. 79. 13.

thy glorius name to ages we will show:
which is, Reave. 1. 8.
that was, and still will be the same,
to all that seek, thy face in Christ to know.
Christ is the end of Law, Romans 10. 4. and John. 6. 47. and Acts. 16. 30. 31.
for righteousness:
Believe in him, Gods kingdom then possess,
FINIS.

