ANTI-COTON, OR A REFVTATION OF Cottons Letter Declaratorie: lately directed to
the Queen Regent, for the Apologizing of the Jesuits doctrine, touching the
killing of KINGS.

A BOOK, In which it is proved that the Jesuits are guilty, and were the
Authors of the late execrable Parricide, committed upon the Person of the
French King, HENRY the fourth, of happy memory.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A Supplication of the University of Paris, for the
preventing of the Jesuits opening their Schools among them: in which their
King-killing Doctrine is also notably discovered, and confuted.

Both translated out of the French, by G. H.

Together with the Translators animaduersions upon Cottons Letter.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Richard Boil, and are to be sold at his Shop in
the black Friars. 1611.

TO THE QVEENE REGENT.
May it please your Majesty:
IN as much as it is the common opinion, as well of your own Subjects at home,
as of Strangers abroad, that the Jesuits were the workers of that damnable
Parricide, which striking to the heart of our deceased King (whom God absolve)
has stricken to the very throat of France it self: and thereupon the
Jesuits complain that they are wrongfully dealt withal, and that these
reports are spread by their enemies, thereby to make them odious to the world:
I thought it necessary to make appear to your Majesty the original causes
of this aspersion cast upon them, to the end that if it be found to spring from
sure and undoubted grounds, your Majesty may from thence conjecture, whether
it may stand with the safeguard of the present King, your Sons life, to
suffer these holy Fathers to approach near his person: as also whether it may
be done without holding your Subjects in continual alarmes, and de^iances one
of another. For if it were forbidden by Moses Law (as Father Cotton has
observed, in his Epistle Dedicatorie,) to sees the Kid in the milk of the
Damme; much more unlawful must it needs be, to deliver the Son into hands
already imbrewed in the blood of the Father. I desire not to be believed
without evident proofs, and profess withal, that I am no way transported
with passion against their persons, nor would at all be drawn to speak or
write against them, if after the manner of other Monks and Friars, they would
be content to bound themselves within the lists of instructing the people, and
managing the affairs of the Church: but that which I now speak, is not the
suggestion of Heretics, but the testimony of your highest Courts of Justice,
the consent of the greatest part of your Clergy, and among them, even of the
sacred faculty of Divinity, and in a word, the common universal out-crie of
all your people: all which, notwithstanding, would willingly have learned the
Art of forgetfulness with Father Aubigny, and been content to mourn without
speaking a word, were it not that we see the murdering of Princes become a
custom, and that if your Majesty put not to your hand to stop it betimes,
Treason will shortly stand in the rank of Christian virtues, and be held the
fairest and shortest way to heaven.

If then your Majesty please for a while to lay aside your important affairs
of State, and to peruse this ensuing discourse, you shall find, I doubt not,
in this case the voice of the people, the voice of God: whom I beseech to make
the Flower de Lice to flowrish upon your Sons head, and to pour down upon
your Majesty, all possible happiness.

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient Subject, P. D. C*

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
READER, marvel not that the Author of the Work puts not to his name: it may
justly be imputed to the iniquity of the times, in which it is hard to utter
the truth, and not thereby to procure enemies: notwithstanding, if there be any
that will undertake the answering of it from point to point (which I hold
impossible, such is the clear evidence of truth) the Author promises to
reioyne upon the same subject, and withal to discover his name: for he has
both courage and countenance enough to maintain himself, and his cause
against the malice of his adversaries, and the troublers of the public peace.

A REFVTATION of Father Cottons declaratorie Letter to the Queen Regent.
That the doctrine of the Jesuits approues and maintains the Parricide of
Kings, and the Rebellion of Subjects.
CHAP. I.
THat we may take all rubs out of the way, and fully clear the doubt in
question: it will not prove unnecessary to search out, and discover the
dependances of the matter in hand, till we arise to the head-spring it self.

We find it registered in the French History, that in the year 1407. Jews
Duke of Orleans, brother to King Charles, the sixth of that name, the 22. of
November in the twilight, was slain by Assassinates, hired to that purpose by
John Duke of Burgundy, who then contested his right to the Regencie against
the said Duke of Orleans: but the Duke of Burgundy being no way able to invent
any colorable varnish for the shifting off the fact, grew bold to maintain
in the presence of the Princes of the blood, and Officers of the Crown, that
what was acted by his command, was honorable and just; and thereupon set a
work John Petit Doctor of Divinity, by birth a Norman, who publicly
defended, that both by the Law of God and man, as well Canon as Civil, it was
lawful for any man to make away a tyrant, and that by any means; whereupon
the matter was so carried, partly through fear of violence, and partly by
strength of persuasion, that the course of Justice for that time was stopped, and
nothing done.

At that time there lived in Paris, John Gerson Chancellor of the University,
a man of no mean learning, (as that age afforded,) who strongly opposed
himself to the forementioned proposition of John Petit, insomuch that not
long after a general Council being held at Constance, Gerson was employed
thither as Ambassador from Charles the sixth, having in his instructions
express charge to propose that conclusion to the Fathers of the Council, by
them to be further discussed and censured: where both parties being
indifferently heard what could be objected on either side, the Council in
their fifteenth Session, condemned the opinion of John Petit as heretical, the
Canon begins thus: Quilibet Tyrannus, etc. plainly defining that it no way
rightfully falls within the compass of the Subjects reach, to set upon the
person of his Sovereign, under pretense of curbing a Tyrant.

This erroneous Doctrine having been now a long time quenched as it were, and
buried by the authority of this Council, is now again enlightened and set a
foot by the Jesuits, but under the cloak and color of Religion, that is to
say, when it shall be judged necessary to make away a King for the good of the
Church: to this purpose they have published diverse discourses, in which they
permit and incite the Subject to kill his Sovereign, when his Regal power
degenerates into tyranny.

Peter Ribadenera a Spanish Jesuit venteth this doctrine, in a book which he
has written of Religion, and the virtues of a Prince, speaking thus of the
parricide of James Clement: For as much as the resolution which Henry the third
took upon him, was the advice of a Politician, and a machia^elist, not
conformable to the rules of our Savior; behold the reason, that by the just
judgment of God, the said Henry was made away by the hand of a simple young
Monk, and dyed by the stroke of a knife.

Carolus Scribanius a Flemish Jesuit, who by an anagrammatisticall inuersion
of Letters, calls himself, Clarus Bonars^ius, has written a Book, which he
entitules, Amphitheatrum honoris: in which he stoutly maintains the same
murdering position. Lib. 1. Cap. 12. where he thus speaks: if it so fall out
that a Denis, or a Machanidas, or an Aristotimus, monsters of their ages,
Dionicij, Machanidas, Aristotimus saeculorum portenta, Gallia^ opprimant, nemo
Pontifex Dione^, Tim^le^nte^, Philopoeme^, Helenatum securus animabit?
oppress France, shall not the Pope have power confidently to encourage
against them some Dion, or Timoleon, or Philopoemen; that is to say, tamers,
and quellers of tyrants? and a little after speaking of a tyrant wasting
France, What? will no man take arms against that beast? will no Pope set free
that noble Kingdom from the stroke of the Axe? where observe, that he speaks
not in that passage of an usurper, Nullus in hanc belluam miles erit? nullus
Pontifex nobilissimu^ Regnum securi eximat?
but of a lawful King, who unlawfully uses his power.

Bellarmine in his second Book against the King of England, condemns treason
and conspiracy against Princes, but in such captious and ambiguous terms,
that upon the matter he seems to approve it, and incite men unto it, by
commending the Jesuit Garnet, that being acquainted with the conspiracy
against the King of England, by the confessions of the Traitors, he would not
disclose it, his words are these; Cur denique Henricus Garnetus, vir doctrina
omnis generis, and vitae sanctitate incomparabilis, vltimo supplicio affectus
est, nis^ quia reuelare noluit, quod salua conscientia reuelare non potuit?
Wherefore was Henry Garnet, a man unmatchable in all kinds of learning and
holiness of life, so punished in the highest degree, but only because he
would not detect that, which with a safe conscience he could not? See then
here the doctrine of the Jesuits, which is this: that if a man disclose unto
them his purpose to kill the King, he ought to conceal it, and rather suffer
the King to be killed, and the kingdom to be ruined, then to break up the
seal of confession: an opinion which the Sorbon holds not, it being of the Law
of God to be loyal to our Sovereign, and of the Law of Nations to hold the
receiver of stolen goods as guilty as the thief, L. 13. ff. de off. praes. L.
1. ff de Receptat.
and in the case of treason equally to punish the undertaker and the concealer,
as being both principal, L. quisquis.. id quod Cod. ad Leg. Iul. May.
an offense of that nature admitting no accessorie.

The same Jesuit Bellarmine, and together with him, the whole troop of that
society, generally defend, that the Pope has power to dispose of kingdoms,
to bestow them as he shall see fit, on whom it shall please him, and to stir up
the Subjects to rebel against their Prince, by unloosing them from their
sacred bond of allegiance: his words are these, in his sixth Chapter and fifth
Book, Papa potest mutare Regna, and vni a^ferre atque alteri confer, tanquam
summus Princeps spiritualis.
De Pontifice Romano: The Pope may dispose of Kingdoms, taking them from one,
and giving them to another, as being the Supreme Prince Ecclesiastical: and
the Jesuit Gretzer in his Book entitled; Vespertilio haeretico-politicus,
page 159. We are not such dastards, that we fear openly to affirm, that the
Pope of Rome may, Tam timidi and trepidi no^ sumus vt asserere pala^ vereamur
Romanum Pontificem posse si necessitas exigat, subditos Catholicos soluere
iurame^to fidelitatis, si Princeps tyrannic^ illos tractet. etc.
if necessity so require, free his Catholic Subjects from their oath of
fidelity, if their Sovereign handle them tyrannically: Nay, the same man
adds in the same place, that if the Pope do it discreetly and warily, it is a
meritorious work. Consider here this new and unknown kind of merit, by
raising sedition, and commanding disloyalty, from whence must necessarily
issue, attempting upon the person of the Prince: for in such a rebellion it is
to be presumed that the Prince will take arms to safeguard himself, and
oppose force to force, which cannot possibly be done, without manifest hazard
of his life.

Tolet in his first Book of the instructions of Priests, Excommunicat^ subditi
non tenentur iuraruen. to fidelitatis.
and 13. Chapter, affirms, that Subjects are not bound to keep inviolate
their oath of allegiance to an excommunicate person: and again, Excommunciatus
non potest iurisdictionis actu^ exercere.
An excommunicate person cannot exercise the act of Jurisdiction: which rule if
we admit as true, we must consequently hold that Henry the third was no King;
and he which killed him, killed no King.

Mariana, another Spanish Jesuit, has set forth a Book, De Rege and Regis
institutione, first printed at Toledo, by Peter Roderigo, in the year 1599.
and and since again at Mentz, by Balthazar Lippius in the year 1605. in the
sixth Chapter of this Book, after having commended James Clement, Cognito a
Theologis, quos ^rat (...) tyra^num iure interi^^i posse.
he adds, that he had been instructed by Divines, with whom he consulted in
that point, that it was lawful to kill a Tyrant: and thereupon describing how
the young Friar gave the deadly blow, Su^ sang^ine patriae co^m^nis and gentis
libertate^ redempta^ inter ictus and vulnera impense lae^ebatur, scilicet caes^
R^g^ ingens sibi nomen fecit, c^ede caedes est expiata ac manibu^ G^^isij Duci^
per^ide perempti regi^ sang^i^e est parentatum.
he cries out; Insignem animi confidentiam, facinus ^^emorabile! O excellent
confidence of Spirit! O memorable fact! And a little after speaking of the same
murderer, amidst the blows, and the wounds which he received, he continued
full of comfort, as having redeemed with his blood, the liberty of his Country,
and having ^lai^e the King, he purchased himself great renown, in expiating
the death of the Duke of Guise, (treacherously made away) by shedding the blood
Royal; Thus dyed Clement, being about twenty four years of age, a young man,
of nature gentle, not tough of body, but that a higher power actuated his vigor
and courage. Thus speaks this Jesuit, and in the same Chapter speaking of a
lawful King, to whom the Subjects have passed their oath of allegiance, he
says: If he pervert the Religion of the Land, or if he draw the common enemy
into his Country, he that laboring to satisfy the public desire, Si sacra
patriae pessumdet, publicosque hosts in patri^m attrahat, qui voti^ publicis
fauentes ^um p^rimere te^tarit, hand quaqua^ ^um inique fecisse existima^^.
shall assay to kill him, shall in my judgment, not do unjustly.

In the Chapter following, he steps yet one degree farther; in which he
allows the poisoning of a Tyrant as just and lawful: notwithstanding it is
worth the while to mark the niceness of the man, and how precisely those of
his hair observe their cases of conscience: for fearing least by poisoning the
Tyrants meat or drink, he should by that means be enforced to make himself
away, Mariana brings this remedy: For mine own part (says he) I would use
this moderation, Ho^ tamen temperam^nto vti in hac quidem disputatione licebit
si non ipse qui perimitur veneni^^ haurire cogitur, quo intimis medullis
co^cepto pere^t, sed exterius ab alio adhib^atur, nihil adi^^a^te eo qui
perimendus est, nimirum cu^^ tantavis est ve^eni vt sella eo aut vest delibut^
vim inter^iciendi habeat.
not to constrain him (whom I purpose to do away) to take the poison
himself, which might presently disperse it self through his inwards, and so
kill him, but that some other lay the poison so, that he who is to dye, no way
concur in the taking of it; which may be done, when the poison is so strong,
that a chair, or a garment being anointed with it, may work upon the body
which sits on the one, or wears the other: which is a cunning, I find the
Kings of the Moors have often used: Such is the piety of the Jesuit, who
makes us Disciples to the Moors.

This Book of Marianaes is commended by Gretzer the Jesuit, in his
Vespertilio, alleged once already, where he affirms, Page 160. that Mariana
is traduced, as having written that it was lawful to kill any Prince who
disobeyes the Pope: sithence he maintains, that a lawful Prince, who
disobeyes the Pope, notwithstanding ought not to be made away by any private
man, if sentence be not pronounced against him, or that it be not demanded by
the voice of the people, or that the consent of learned men run not that way:
but note this by the way, that by the definitive sentence, he understands the
judgment of the Pope; and by the approbation of learned men, the advice of
Jesuits: and touching poison laid upon a garment or chair, the Jesuit
Gretz^r page 162. approues simply Marianaes position, and complains that
Mariana is unjustly accused, for having affirmed, that a tyrant ought to be
poisoned, seeing he maintains the contrary, N^ tyrannum quide^primi vel
secundi generis ^tiam post iudiciariam contra illum latam sententiam ve^en^
licite tolli, si Tyrannus ipsem^t vene^um illud sum^re and sibi applicare
debeat.
Affirming, that a tyrant cannot lawfully be made away by poison if himself
take it, and apply it to himself, which cannot be avoided when his meat or
drink is poisoned, so that laboring to blanch Marianaes opinion, in the end
he falls upon the same himself.

Clarus Bonars^ius in the 13. chapter of his Amphitheater, likewise commends
this Mariana, both for the style and the matter, and wishes that all ages
should reverence him, what? (says he) what age shall not reverence those grave
and learned writings of Mariana, Quid? Marian^^ grauem and decora^
constructione^ sonantis ver^^^ splendor^m narrandique sublimitatem copiosum
ingenium in no^ impari materia quae ^^t^s n^n re^erebitur?
his piercing phrase, the neatness and loftiness of his narrations, the
plentifulnesse of his wit, together with stuff commendable alike?

And to the end that it may be known, that this position of Mariana is not the
opinion of a few Jesuits, on the forehead of the Book you shall find an
approbation and permission from their general Aquauiua, and Stephanus Hoyeda
Visitour of their Society in the Province of Toledo for the Printing of it; in
which grant, these words may farther be observed: These Books of Mariana have
been approved by grave and learned men of the order of Jesuits: Quippe
approbat^s prius a viris doctis and gra^ibus ex eodem nostro ordine.
Whence it appears, that howbeit the general of their Order were overtaken
(as Father Cotton would make us believe ((forging Letters as from the said
Aquauiua, out of his own brain,) yet so it is, that their Visitour and
Doctors who had the examining and censuring of the whole work, before it went
to the Press, could not possibly be ouer-seene. What should we press this
point any farther? some four Months before that execrable Parricide committed
upon the person of the good King deceased, the very same Consistoricall act, by
which the arrest against John Chastel, and Mounsieur Thuanus his History were
censured at Rome, suspended also another Book of Marianaes, which treates of
^oynes, not meddling at all with this book which approues the murdering of
Kings, which makes me think, that his holiness being busied about other
affairs, was circumuented by the cunning of the Jesuits (who dominiere at
Rome) for otherwise he would surely as I think, rather have censured this
Book, which plainly teaches murder and parricide.

This book of Mariana being first printed at Toledo, was brought into France,
about eight years since, and showed (the most seditious passages being marked
out) to his Majesty, who calling Father Cotton to him, asked him if he
approved that Doctrine or no? the Jesuit who bends with all occasions, and
knows well enough how to fashion himself to the times, replied, that he
approved it not; whereupon his Majesty* by the advice of Mounsieur Seruin his
advocate general, urged Cotton to write against it, but he found means to
excuse himself, and avoid the task, as well perceiving that he could not
oppose himself against it, but withal he must of necessity oppugn the
General of their Order, the Provincial of Toledo, and a many of their
society, who had their fingers in approving of it; but now when he sees that
through the death of the King, the Jesuits are grown into a general
distaste, and perceiues himself to be pinched by the Court of Parliament, and
the Sorbon, he has published an Epistle Dedicatorie, in which he would seem
forsooth to condemn Mariana, which he performs indeed, but in such mincing
gentle terms, that a man may without spectacles perceive, he fears to lance
too deep, only affirming, that it was the lightness of a soaring quill, in
stead of accusing the person of Heresy and perfidious barbarous treason, and
the doctrine of impiety, and enmity against God and man: but howbiet he had
reached home in reproving Mariana, yet now (as the Abbot of Boys has well
observed) the medicine comes after the Patient is deceased: for had he done as
he ought, he should then have put pen to paper when the King pressed him to
it, and not suffered such an opinion to root it self in the minds of the
people, which for want of weeding out at the first, at length growing up, cost
the King his life within a few years after: but let us pass to some other
examples.

There are yet at this day left alive in Paris above two thousand witnesses,
who upon their credit will testify that James Clement ordinarily frequented
the Jesuits, and that some of them accompanied him even to the town ditch,
when he departed out of Paris to strike the blow, and some three months after,
was published at Paris a Speech of Pope Sixtus, made in full Consistory, the
11. of September, 1589. in which the assassinate of James Clement, is paraleld
with the mysteries of the Incarnation, and Resurrection, and the exploits of
Eleazer and Judith: and after having set on the tenter-hooks the vices of the
slain King, he adds: Propter h^ec and similia manifesta impoenitenti^e sig^a
decreuimus pro ipse non esse celebrad^^ exequias.
for these and the like manifest tokens of impenitencie, we decree that his
exequies shall not be solemnized. Concluding with a prayer to God, that it
would please him graciously to accomplish that which mercifully he had begun:
this speech was imprinted at Paris by Nicholas Neuil, and Rollin Thierry,
Printer to the holy Union, together with the approbation of three Doctors,
Boucher, Decreil, Ancelin: not that I can believe, that such impious speeches
could drop from the lips of our holy Father, but rather take it to be a mere
imposture: the Jesuits and other Doctors of the same feather, having forged
it, there by to make the murder allowable, and to incite some other to the
dispatching of the succeeding King.

At the same time John Guignard a Iesuited Priest, residing in Paris, at the
College of Cleremont, wrote a Treatise in the praise of James Clement,
together with diverse motives for the making away of the succeeding King, who
last dyed; which since too manifestly appeared at the arraignment of the said
Guignard: for behold how God wrought, as the commissioners were busied at the
arraignment of John Castle, some of them, deputed to that purpose, withdrawing
themselves to the College of Cleremont, seized upon many papers, among which
was found a Book written by the hand of the said Guignard, containing many
arguments and reasons to prove that the murder of the King was just and
lawful, together with diverse inductions, and incitements for the making away
of his Successor: some of which I will here set down, being copied out of the
original, which is yet to be seen among the Records of the Court: First, that
the ^ruell Nero was slain by Clement, and the counterfaite Monk dispatched by
the hand of a true Monk. Secondly, that the heroycall act of James Clement,
termed by Divines a gift of the holy Ghost, was justly commended by Burgoin,
Prior of the Iacobins, Confessor and Martyr, and that by many reasons, as well
at Paris, when he read there upon Judith, as also before the worthy Parliament
of Tours. Thirdly, that the Biarnois, howbeit converted to the Catholic faith
should be handled more gently then he deserved, if he had set on his head a
Monastical Crown: that if he could not be deposed without war, that it
should be undertaken against him, and if that might not be, he must be made
away privately.

The Court having perused these papers, and Guignard being put to his answer,
freely confessed that they were written by his own hands: whereupon the Court
by an arrest executed the 7. of January 1595. declared the said Guignard
attainted and convinced of high Treason, condemned him to make honorable
amends, naked to his shirt, the halter about his neck, before the chief door
of our Ladies Church in Paris, and after this to be hung in the Grieve, and his
body burnt.

May it please the Reader to make inquiry if ever as yet any Iesui^e were
heard of, who condemned this Guignard of treason and disloyalty: but on the
other side, Rich^ome in his Apology excuses him as far as he dare,
affirming that Guignard discussed the forementioned propositions only by way,
and in form of Scholasticall dispute, and in this we agree: for I have
always held it, that to kill a King is the undoubted conclusion of the Jesuits
divinity: which position if any Jesuit, either driven to it by force of
argument, or drawn to it by shame, any where condemn, it arises either from
want of discretion, or learning, or some such ground.

The which may from thence be made to appear in that the Jesuits have ranged
Guignard in the catalogue of their martyrs, which they have caused to be
Printed at Rome in two forms, in the one of which Guignard is; in the other he
is left out, to the end that some copies at le^t, might be passable in France
without danger: besides this, the Jesuit Bonarscius, Chap. 8. of his
Amphitheater, extols this Guignard to the skies, howbeit without naming him,
for fear belike of offending the King, yet openly enough to decipher him, the
words are these: I will pass thee over in silence, O bright Star, Tacebo ^go
(...) clarum coelo terraque sidu^ and vltimu^ nil amplius doliturae domus
innocuu^ piamen^um? Nullu^
clearly shining both in heaven and on earth, the last expiation of an house,
no more capable of sorrow, no day will ever be able to blot out the tincture of
thy blood: and then presently adds; All France will concur with me in these
my vows: tui sanguinis ve^^igia dies exteret, to^aque in haec vota m^a ibit
Gallia^.
which words are not applyable to any but Guignard, who was a French Jesuit,
and the last that suffered in France.

Out of the same forge was shaped that detestable Book, De iusta abdicatione
Henrici 3. of the just degradation of Henry the third. A Book whereof the
Author is not certainly known, but only that it was printed at Lions, and
bears in it forefront, the stamp of the Jesuits.

Franciscus Verona Constantinus has written an Apology for John Chastel, Non
obstante de^re to supradicti Co^cilij constanti^nsis Priuatis and singulis
licitu^ sit Reges and principes haereseos and Tyrannid^s conde^^^atos ^ccid^r^.
which out-strips Mariana in villainy: for in his 2. Chap. and 2. Part, he
plainly affirms, that notwithstanding the decree of the Council of Constance,
it is lawful for any priu^te man to murder Kings and Princes condemned of
haeresie and tyranny.

Now we see by the example of our two last Kings, that at their pleasure they
would make Princes believe (whom they purpose to make away) that they are
Heretics, or favorers of them, if they set not their kingdoms in combustion
by civil wars, thereby to give advantage to the invasion of the Spaniard, or
send aid to their neighbor princes, for fear of being undermined by the
house of Austria. Thus dealt the Cyclope in Homer, who finding no reason to
misuse Ulysses and his associates, and yet desirous to feed upon them, would
needs persuade them that they were pirates. In the same Apology, he commends
the fact of James Clement, as being against a public enemy iuridically
condemned. Contra hostem publicum and i^^idice condem^at^^.
The same Author in his third Chapter defends also the fact of John Ch^stel in
this manner; that in striking at Henry of Bourbon, his intention was not to
kill the King, howbeit he called himself King, Vulnerando He^ricum Borbon^u^,
non vol^erit ^^^dere aut occidere Reg^m, etiams^ se talem dicebat, and in quo
praeter imaginem nihil Regij quam quod genere Regio ortus erat.
since he had nothing left but the appearance of a King, as being of the
blood Royal: adding thereunto, that Henry of Bourbon could not be called King,
no not since his reconcilement to the Catholic Church.

Emanuel Sa in his Aphorisms of Confessions, at the word Clericus, affirms,
that the rebellion of a Clarke against the King is no treason; Cl^rici reb^llio
in Regem non est crimen laesae Maiestatis, quia non ^st subditus regi. Summus
P^ntifex exemit clericos ^ sub^ectio^ principum. Non sunt amplius reges,
Clericorum superiores*
in as much as he is not subject to him. Bellarmine in his 28. Chapter De
Clericis, speaks in a manner the same; the Pope of Rome has exempted clarks
from subjection to Princes; Kings are now no more Superiors of Clerks.
Consider here a little their cunning; if you demand, whether it be lawful for
a subject to kill his king, or to rebel against him under pretense of being a
tyrant; upon this demand, the Jesuits fearing to speak too roughly, and
thereby become odious, in affirming that a Clark may kill the King; they affirm
that Clarks are not subject to Princes, and from thence draw this conclusion,
that being so, they cannot be held guilty of treason, since that he against
whom they conspire, is not their Master or Lord.

Garnet the Jesuit, with Hall his companion, otherwise known by the name of
Oldcorne, were executed in England for tampring in the powder treason: Garnet
being apprehended upon the deposition of one of the Conspirators, constantly,
and with oaths affirmed that he knew nothing of the plot, whereupon the
Commissioners perceiving that they gained nothing by threats, bethought
themselves of another course, which was this: they lodged Hall in a chamber
next adjoining to Garnet, and wished the Iaylor to tender to Garnet all
courteous offices, and withal to give him notice that his companion Hall was
placed in the next room, and that there was a little hole in the middle wall,
by means of which they might, if they thought good, enterchange conference,
which they daily did: in the mean time* the Iaylor sets some in a close corner
not far off, to listen what their talk was, who ouer-hearing them, by that
means brought their secrets to light, which they discovered in this conference
between themselves, but had before denied to the Judges: hereupon Garnet being
again conuented before the Court, and finding himself discovered, confessed
indeed that he understood of the enterprise, but it was opened to him in
confession, which he could by no means unseal, there were also produced
witnesses, who deposed, that in a sermon which he made to the Catholics, he
exhorted them to pray God, that an important and dangerous business, which was
then in hand, might have an happy success for the Catholic Church.

Being then demanded, wherefore he had so constantly forsworn that which now
proved to be true, he made answer, that being demanded, if he were acquainted
with the plot, he told them indeed that he knew nothing of it, but that he
understood in his mind this restriction, I knew it not to tell you, and
thereupon was brought to confess, that he had published a Book of
Equivocations, prescribing therein the means to cosen the Judges by doubtful
answers, and by ambiguities to avoid the intent of their Interrogatories.

In behalf of this venerable Father Garnet, a Jesuit named John l' Heureux,
but disguising his name in an Hyrogliphicall form, calls himself Andreas
Eudaemon-Iohannes Cydonius, has very lately written an Apology, Printed at
Colen, by John Kinke, Anno. 1610. together with the approbation of the General
of their Order, Aquauiua, and three other of their Doctors, where he maintains
it tooth and nail, that it is lawful to deceive the Judges by Equivocations,
and also that a priest, for any cause whatsoever, though the life of the King,
and the safety of the state stand to the stake for it, ought not to reveal
any confession. Upon the first point behold his words page 38. C^m quis n^llis
justice iudicijs in iusvocatur, quianemo tenetur s^ipsum magi^^ratui prodere
idque ^ex naturae satis docet aperte and libere, sin^ vlla tergiuersatione
negare potest id cuius gra^ti^ accersitur quia. semper clausula illa
intelligitur, vt t^near dicere.
When any man is drawn* into question under an unjust trial, no man standing
bound to inform against himself (as the law of Nature teaches us plainly,)
he may peremptorily and freely deny that for which he is called into question,
without any tergiuersation, because he always understands this clause, vt
tenear dicere. Here note by the way, that he styles the justice of the Kings of
England, exercised upon the Jesuits, an unjust jurisdiction, as if they stood
not obliged to appear at their command.

Martinus Nauarus Aspilcueta a Spaniard by birth, and trained up in the ^ame
school, has written a Book purposely of Equivocations: in which, page 352.
he delivers this doctrine: In de^r. C. humanae aures. 22. quest. 5. page 3^8*
Franciscus interrogatus a lictoribus homicidam persequen^ib^^, anillac vbi S.
Franciscus erat talis homicid^ transisset? i^^miss^s manibus intra manicas,
respondit hac non transiuisse, sub intelligend^ ^acit^ contra co^munem
intelligentiam non tra^siuisse per (...) manicas.
that it is lawful for a man to dissemble his being a Catholic, and in
another place allows the answer of him as good, who being demanded by the
Seriants if a murderer whom they pursued, were not passed that way, thrusting
his hand into his s^eeue, protested that he passed not that way. And in the end
adds, that the doctrine of Equivocations, is founded upon the memorable
example of S. Francis, which is without all doubt a gross injury offered to
the virtue and piety of that holy Father, by fathering upon him the coining of
such kinds of abominable lying and cousening.

The forenamed Andreas Eudemon-Iohannes Cydonius, in his 40. page targets
himself with the authority of Siluester, in the 5. accusation, and 13.
question, where he thus writes: Quando iuridice non pr^cedit, v^l quia
accusatus e^ non est subditus simpliciter, vel in hoc caus^, ^^t qu^cunque alia
de caus^, tum lice^ m^ndacium sit illicitum, non tamen e^t mortale, quia nec
est co^tra debi^um iustitiae, nec in iudicio ve^ro, sed in vsurpato. Immo ^^n
erit ^tiam veniale si respond end^ (...), and vt aiunt sophis^ice, dicat
aliquid falsum apud sensum iud^^is and apud su^m verum. Si crimen omni^o
occultum est de quo quis in^errogatur, ^um aequiuocatione vti poterit,
respo^dendo nescio, intelligendo tamen intrae se vt dicam tibi, vel respo^dendo
non feci, intelligendo intra se nunc non feci.
When the Judge does not proceed iuridically, the arraigned being not simply
subject to him, either in this case, or for some other reason; upon such
terms, howbeit lying be unlawful, yet it is not a mortal sin, it being not
against that which we owe to Justice and true judgment, but only against that
which is usurped: nay, we hold it not a venial sin, if in answering warily, or
as they term it, sophistically, he utter somewhat which is false according to
the apprehension of the Judge, but not in his own meaning, for that in this
case, sithence he is not his subject, he is not bound to speak the truth,
according to his understanding. Here we must remember, that by judgment,
which is not rightful, but usurped upon those who are not subjects, he means
the passing of the judgment of the civil Magistrate upon Ecclesiastical
persons, and chiefly Jesuits, who are no way subject to Bishops.

The Jesuit Tolet in his fourth Book of the instructions of Priests, Chap.
91. speaks thus: If the offense be secret, upon which thou art demanded, thou
may then use Equivocation, answering, I know it not, with this reservation to
the self, to tell it you; or thou may answer, I did it not, understanding,
at this present.

The ancient Ari^n Heretics chalked out this way long since to the Jesuits:
For Nicephorus in the eight Book of his History, Chap. 51. says, that
Arrius, having subscribed to the Confession of the Nicene Council, had another
Confession hid in his bosom, which himself had written, and thereupon
confidently swore to the Emperor, that he did believe as he had written,
understanding thereby the writing which he had wrapped up in his bosom. By the
virtue of this Doctrine, a man may deny his Religion, his Faith, his God, and
all, telling the Judge, that he believes not in Jesus Christ, but with this
mental reservation, to tell you: and Saint Peter denying Jesus Christ to the
Maid, might well have shifted himself by the help of this Sophistry,
saying; I know him not, but softly to himself, to tell you.

By this subtlety the Jesuits have found a trick, how to stir up
Instruments to assault the sacred persons of Princes, and withal to instruct
them in the means not to disclose their Accomplices, persuading them that they
may keep their conscience safe, by such and such Equivocations, as to deny,
that they never saw it, or heard of it; always provided, that they keep to
themselves some secret limitation or condition, by which they may free
themselves from the imputation of a lie, and not offend their conscience. This
is it which makes the parricides of Kings, so confidently to forswear
themselves in the face of the Court, being taught by their spiritual Guides,
that in so doing, if they reserve some other meaning in their own minds, it
offends not God at all.

And from hence it ensues, that a man cannot fix any certain belief upon
Father Cottons protestation, in disauowing Mariana: for who knows, whether he
have not some reservation locked up in his own breast? or who can tell whether
in saying, I condemn Marianaes books, he understands not for not having said
enough: or thus, A private man cannot lawfully attempt upon the life of the
Prince, speaking thus to himself, except the Pope give way to it, or the King
be excommunicated, or be no true King; but such, or such, is no true King,
because he does this or that, etc. But to conclude this point, as in contracts
heretofore among the ancient Romans, their women were compelled to renounce
the Villeian decree, and the authentic Si qua mulier: In like manner, Father
Cotton if he would have us give credit to his declaration, he ought first to
have renounced his privilege of lying, and using Equivocation; and yet I
fear, that in this very abrenuntiation, he would have used some other
ambiguitie and craft.

The other point maintained by John l' Heureux is, that Henry Garnet and his
companions, having understood of the conspiracy against the life of the King
and his whole race, ought not to reveal it, but keep it close: he delivers it
in these terms, Page 262. of his Apology: Add hereunto the scandal which
Catholics would conceive, Add Catholic^rum scandalum, and off^nsionem si
sacerdos idemque I^suita conscientiae causa cons^ltus idque interposita
confessionis religione q^a^ nulla mayor inter Catholicos esse potest,
consultores su^s detuliss^t? quem enim in posterum in rebus sui^ d^^bijs adire,
aut cui ampli^s ^idere possint* si ^e in sacerdotibus quidem fidem inueniant?
Rem sacrosancto confessionis arca^o obsignatam sine immanni sacrilegi^ prodi
no^ potuisse.
if a Priest, a Jesuit, being consulted in a case of Conscience, and that in
the most Religious act of Confession, (the most sacred mystery among
Catholics,) should inform against one, who comes to crave advise: for to
whom would they afterward address themselves to be resolved in their scruples
of Conscience? or whom can they trust, if they find no faithfulness in
Priests? And in the 290. Page A thing sealed up with the most holy signet of
confession, cannot be broken up without detestable sacrilege: his 13. Chapter
entire is spent about this subject, in which at length he comes to this pass,
to affirm, that there cannot fall out so great a mischief, for the avoiding
of which, it can be lawful to bewray a Confession. The Jesuit Suares says the
same in effect in his Treatise of Penance: Disput. 33. sect. 1. number* 2.
Yea, though the safety of the whole Commonwealth should stand upon it.

Of late days since the death of the last King, Father Fronton Jesuit, though
less seditious then the rest, accompanied with another Jesuit, came not long
since to the Kings library at the Cordeliers, and there finding Mounsieur
Causabon, the keeper of it, they fell into dispute with him upon this Theme,
Fronton maintaining it stoutly, that he would rather all the Kings in the
world should perish, then that he would reveal one confession.

How then? shall a Son rather suffer his Father to be slain, then acquaint
him that such or such lie in ambushment to kill him, though he have received it
under the seal of Confession? or shall a Jesuit rather suffer his King and
Country to swim in blood, then open a confession? Yea, but will some man
reply, the Confessor must be faithful to his Penitentiaries: it is true, but I
say also, that he ought to be obedient to his God, and loyal to his
Sovereign: God commanding us to be faithful to him, to whom we have solemnly
sworn allegiance; and if we look into those sacred Tomes of holy Writ, we
shall meet with store of passages which enjoin us loyalty and obedience to
Kings, but not so much as a fillable of enioyning secrecy after confession: it
is a precept which the Church only has put upon us, but with this caution,
that it be not prejudicial to the Commandments of God, or that under the
pretense of secrecy we turn Traitors, and by our perfidious silence become
the cause of the murdering of our Father or our King, which is, as if I
espying one who hastening to set fire on his brothers or neighbors house,
should quietly suffer him to do it, because I had promised to disclose it to
no man. No certainly, we must believe that on the contrary, rather the breach
of such manner obligations is more praiseworthie in it self, and pleasing to
God: for he that can prevent a mischief, and yet suffers it to pass, was
ever held as guilty. And surely for none other reason is it, that Homer in the
very entrance of his Iliads tells us; Homer. Il. (...). L. 1.. ^^cis^rum ^um
s^qq. ff. ad. S. C. Syllania. L. 9.. 1. ff. ad. leg. Cornel. de falls. L. 1.
Cod. de falsa mon. L. quisquis Cod. ad leg. Iul. May. Idem in cap. quantae
de sentent. excommu. cap. delicto. de sentent. excommuni. In 6. Cano. non
inferenda. 23. quest. 3.
that the rage of Achilles against Agamemnon, slew many valiant men, and gave
their carcasses as prays to the dogs. And hence it is, that in the Roman
laws, such kind of patience is as far forth liable to punishment, as the
principal act it self: which rule has it place and truth, not only in
common crimes, but most especially in Treason, as the Lawyers teach. And to the
end that no Marianist may object that the founders of those Laws were Pagans,
the Popes themselves have ever heretofore maintained the same to be just, in
like case together with the whole rabble of Canonists, adding their reason,
that there is a great presumption of secret intelligence and corespondence
between the delinquent and the conniuent.

The Jesuit then, and Cardinal Bellarmine, take the wrong Pigge by the ear,
in laboring to justify Garnet and Oldcorne, as if they had well done,
especially since they might easily have brought the matter to light without
accusing any body, by writing a word or two to warn the King to look to his
person, or to search under the Parliament house, and by that means might the
conspiracy have been discovered, and not the Confession. The source and
spring of all this mischief, arises from that vow which the Jesuits take to
obey their Superiors, that is to say, the Generals of their Order (who of
necessiti^ ought always to be subject to the King of Spain) as also to their
other Governors, and that with a simple, absolute unlimited obedience, not
such as enquiring why or wherefore, which themselves call an obedience not of
will only but of judgment, or a blind obedience. There is a little Pamphlet,
entitled, Regulae societatis Jesus, which themselves have caused to be Printed
at Lions Anno 1607* by Iiques Roussin, in the end of which they have set a long
Epistle of Ignatius Loyola^s, the Spanish soldier, Patron and founder of their
sect: in which the said Ignatius, Page. 254. lays down these rules to his
Society: Statuatis vobiscu^t ipsi quicquid superi^r praecipit ipsius Dei
prae^eptum esse, atque vt ad credenda qu^^ Catholica fides propo^it toto a^nimo
affectuque vestro statim in^umbitis: sic ad ^^faci^nda quaecunq^e superior
dix^rit caeco quodam impetu voluntatis parendi c^pidae sine vlla prorsus
disposi^ion^ feramini.
Entertain the command of your Superior in the same sort, as if it were the
voice of Christ: And a little after, hold this undoubted, that all which your
Superior commands, is none other then the commandment of God himself, and as
in believing those things which the Catholic Faith proposes, you are
presently carried with all the strength of your consent: so for the performance
of all those things which your Superior commands, you must be carried with a
certain blind imp^tuosity of will, desirous to obey without farther inquiring
why or wherefore. And to the end that they might not find any escape by the
word quoda^, certain impetuositie, other passages there are in the same
Epistle, where that word is forgotten; as where he says, perit caelebris illa
obedientiae caecae and simplicitas. For in as much as those things which the
Superiors command, might sometimes seem unjust and absurd, this Saint (though
not yet canonized) commands the Jesuits so to captiuate their understanding,
that they sift not the commands of their Superiors, after the example of
Abraham, who prepared even to sacrifice his Son at the commandment of God,
and of Abbot John, who watered a dry logge of wood a whole year together, to
none other purpose but to exercise his obedience; and another time put himself
to the thrusting down of a great rock, which many men together were not able
to move, not that he held them things either usual or possible, but only that
he would not disobey the command of his Superior.

This rule then consequently draws to this issue, that if the chief of the
Jesuits Order, among whom their General is always subject to the King of
Spain, command a young French Jesuit any thing whatsoever, he stands bound
instantly to put it in execution, without so much as casting an eye upon the
danger or difficulty of it, or any way respecting how dammageable it might
prove, either to himself or the state. A Maxim which if it be held as sound,
our Kings shall no longer be secure of their lives, then the Heads of the
Jesuits command their underlings nothing to the contrary: for it being once
commanded, they are forbidden to enquire if the thing be just, the matter given
them in charge, shall be sure to carry the name of the good of the Church, and
be grounded upon a satisfaction for some enormious sins, or upon the hope of
being crowned Martyr, and obtaining in heaven some pre-eminence above the
ordinary.

This vow is also the cause, that the Jesuits are exempt from the obedience of
Bishops, for it had been a matter merely impossible to obey their Superiors
in all things, if the Bishops had had power to correct or hinder that which the
Superiors should command.

Some one it may be will tell me, that these things are indeed clear enough,
and the testimonies sufficient to settle any man's judgment in discerning the
doctrine of the Jesuits: but whence comes it to pass (then will some body
here object) that in some places they condemn the murdering of Kings, and
maintain that a subject ought not to attempt upon the person of his
Sovereign, howbeit he be viciously given and abuse his power: to which I
answer, that the opinion indeed of some of the Jesuits is, that a Subject
ought not to rebel against his Sovereign, although he be an Heretic or a
Tyrant, before the sentence of depo^ition be pronounced by the Pope, or by some
of the most learned, among which the Jesuits ever suppose themselves to stand
in the first degree, and that by express declaration the subject may be
unloosed from his oath of allegiance, as the Jesuit Andreas Eudemon-Iohannes
teaches at large, in the third Chapter of his Apology for Henry Garnet: but
they also generally hold, that after sentence of deposition, which is commonly
procured at the instance of these holy Fathers, such or such a King is no
longer King, and that another ought to supply his room, and that his Subjects
owe him no obedience at all. This point is at large demonstrated by the same
Jesuit in the same Chapter, and we have already made it clear, that the same
is also the doctrine both of Ballarmine and Gretzer. Nay, France it self has
by experience sensibly felt the smart of it, to her great misery and grieuance.
Now this is it which I affirm, that whosoever maintains that the Pope can at
his pleasure alter kingdoms, displacing one, and setting up another, and
exempt the French from their oath of allegiance, consequently maintains that
the French in such a case ought to kill their King: For a man may well think
that a King from whom offer is made to snatch away his kingdom, will take
arms to maintain his right, and labor to reduce his subjects to loyalty,
who stand armed against him: now in such a war, and among so many rebels, it
is impossible that the Prince should not r^nne in hazard of his life, since
that in defending himself he is resolute not to loose his kingdom, but with
the loss of his life: these be the nicities of the Jesuits, by which they
euchant men; they protest solemnly that they allow not the murdering of Kings,
but herein lies the craft, that they acknowledge none for Kings but whom
themselves please, and maintain that to kill a King, whose government they
cannot brook, is not to kill a King, but a man (as they say) masked under that
title. But yet mark here another mischief, by which they are plainly convict
to be enemies to our Kings: for the French could never yet be brought to
acknowledge, that the Crown of France depended from the holy Sea, or that the
Pope might give it too, or take it from whom he thought fit, and never
approved the Canon Alius, which is to be found, Causa. 15. Decret. quest. 6.
and runs thus in plain terms: Romanus (...) Zachari^s s^ilicet Regem
Franciscoru^ non tam pro suis i^iquitatibus, qua^ pro eo quod tantae p^testat^
erat i^^tilis, a regno deposuit* etc.
Zachary the pope of Rome deposed the French King, not so much for his
witkednesse, as for that he was incapable of so great a power; and h^^th set
Pippin, Father to Charles the Emperor in his room, and absolved all French
men from their oath of allegiance. By virtue of which Canon the Pope attributes
to himself power, to remove the Crown from the heads of our Kings, without
regarding whether they be Here iques or Catholics; whether of a vicious or
innocent and virtuous life; but only if in his judgment he find them unfit,
and some other more capable of government. Whosoever maintains this opinion,
withal cannot but hold that our Kings are merely tit^larie, and that their
Crown is held at the mercy and disposition of the Pope.

But the Jesuits hold that the Pope cannot err in Doctrine, and thereupon
maintain all and every article which he teaches, whereupon consequently it
follows, that the Pope in pronouncing this decree, has spoken nothing but
the truth.

I will add hereunto yet one point more touching the Doctrine of the Jesuits,
which may give us a fuller taste of their humor. At Garnets arraignement among
other matters which he confessed, he acknowledged that Catesby the ringleader
in the Conspiracy, was touched with remorse of conscience, because that the
time drawing near for the acting of the plot, he considered that in blowing
up the Parliament house, he must needs together with the Heretics make away
many innocent Catholics; now to be resolved of this scruple, he addresseth
himself to Garnet, and demands of him whether in doing to death the bad, a
man might with a safe conscience make away the good also that were found among
them: Garnet to this question thus replies, that he should make no doubt but
that he might justly murtherboth the one and the other, provided always that
it advanced the good of the Catholic Church. Is it possible to find a more
desperate rage then this, which to kill Kings spares not the dearest blood
both of brothers and friends? And this I report not only from the testimony
of Garnets arraignement, but from the Confession of those Jesuits, who since
his death have written discourses in his commendation: for the Apology of
Garnet, composed by John l' Heureux, and approved by their General Aquauiua,
and three other of their Doctors, confirms the same, and offers to make good
this fact of Garnet, Page 103. and 265. He confesses moreover, M^^et omnes qui
ad solemnem Ecclesiae c^^tum conuenerant, vt obnix^ orent Deum pro felici
success^ grauissimae cuiusdam rei in causa Catholicorum sub initium comitiorum.
that Garnet in his public prayers, in a Catholic assembly, exhorted the
people to pray unto God, for the good success of an enterprise, which was to
be executed at the opening of the Parliament: and Page 269. he confesses, that
the Jesuit Hall being apprehended and put to his answer, that we were not to
judge by the unfortunate success of the enterprise, of the justness of the
cause. And Page 273. he acknowledges, that the rebels having taken Arms after
the enterprise was discovered, the Jesuit Hamond in stead of persuading them
to disarme themselves, and lay aside their weapons taken up against the King,
gave them all absolution. Again, Page. 275. he affirms, that all that were
of the powder treason, were men of very tender and scrupulous consciences. The
same Apology Page. 310. witnesses that the Jesuit Garnet in certain Letters
of his, resolving to hazard his life for the Catholic cause, speaks thus; It
is necessary that one man die for the whole people: applying to his own
person those speeches which Caiaphas inspired by the holy Ghost prophesied,
touching the redemption of the world by the death of our Savior. At the
arraignement of the same Garnet he confessed to the Commissioners deputed to
examine him, that he had offered sacrifice unto God, for the hindering of the
enterprise; yet with this restriction, if it were not profitable for the
Catholic Church; hereupon the Apology labors to excuse him in these words:
Garnet approved not the fact, Neq^e vero ob ^am re^^ factum probabat ed ^^^^bat
euentum.
but loved the event: as if a man should say, that he approved not the
murdering of the King, and his family, but yet was glad that it was done: these
are the windings and turnings of the Jesuits, ready to say and unsay the same
thing in the same line. These were the heroycall exploits for which Garnet and
Oldcorne, justly executed as Traitors, are by B^llarmine styled by the
honorable name of Martyrs, as also by the Apologist, approved as I have said
before, by their General of their Order, Aquauiua, and three of their Doctors,
and thereupon they are ranged in the Catalogue of the Jesuits martyrs, lately
printed at Rome: a copy of which is to be seen and sold, at the Palace in the
prisoners Gallerie, and that since the death of the King. From hence then let
the Kings and Princes of Christendom duly con^ider, in what suertie they can
live hereafter, since the people is instructed by these Doctors, to seek the
glory of Martyrdom in the villainy of murder; and let all good Catholics be
moved with just grief, that the sac^ed name of Martyr, so much honored in the
Primitive Church, should now a days be given to bloody barbarous parricides,
and disloyal Traitors.

I pass over my judgment to what purpose that distinction tends, which the
Jesuits make of two sorts of Catholics, naming the one true Catholics, and
the other state Catholics: for these latter, howbeit they accord in all
points of faith with the Roman Church, yet are they not esteemed of them but
as demie Catholics, because forsooth they will not be as factious as they
are, nor approve treason and rebellion, a distinction which without all
peradventure will breed a Schism in the Church of God, if his mercy prevent
it not.

These accusations which we have mustred together in this Chapter,
sufficiently witness, that Mar^ana has not alone stragled out of the way, but
that all the Jesuits upon this matter err with him, whom Father Cotton cannot
justify in general, without giving satisfaction to the particular objections
drawn out of other Books, as express for the murdering of Kings as that of
Marianaes.

CHAP. II.
Wherein the same thing is further proved by the facts of the Jesuits.
We have already sufficiently proved by the writings of the Jesuits, that it
is an opinion generally current among them, that it is lawful even for private
men to kill Kings: now we come to demonstrate the same in their actions, the
horrible effects of a detestable Doctrine.

It may from thence strongly be presumed that this mischievous sect first set a
foot this Doctrine, in as much as before their arising, never a word was
extant of attempting upon the persons of Kings, under pretense of Religion: and
behold, since, two of our Kings successively have miscarried through the
impression of this damnable persuasion; and if some order be not soon taken
against it, it will turn into custom.

And we have found by experience in France how pernicious unto a state this
Sect is, which coming out of Spain above fifty years since, yet could not
the sweetness of the French air, qualify the fierceness of their spirit
unto this day. A^lian. de ani^alib* lib. 12. cap. 23.
A very strange thing, considering that heretofore even Lions and Tigers being
brought unto the Temple of Adonis in Persia, were no sooner entered there, but
that their rage and natural cruelty was changed into such a gentleness as is
almost incredible.

And if it pleased the Queen, and my Lords the Princes of the blood, to
inform themselves thoroughly by my Lords the Presidents, and Counsailors of the
Court, or by the Advocates and Atturnies general of his Majesty, of the
proceedings taken against the Jesuits, they shall find this which follows
to be true, which we have drawn out of the arrests of the said Court, and out
of the interrogatories of the convicted, which are yet kept in the Office of
the same Court, namely:

That in the year 1594. the 27. of December, John Chastel, Clarke, brought up
in the College of the Jesuits, having given the late King a stab with a knife
in the mouth, thinking to have given it in the breast, was taken and committed
to the Provost of the Kings house, and brought into the Bishops prison, where
upon an interrogatorie, he confessed, that long ago he had purposed in
himself to give this stab, and missing of his purpose, he would do it yet if
he could, being perswa^ded that it would be for the good of the Catholic,
Apostolic, and Roman Religion. Being brought from thence to the prison of
the Palace, he was examined by the chief Officers of the Court, to whom he
confessed amongst other things, that whereas he had a conceit that he should
be forgotten of God, and was certainly persuaded, he should be damned like
Antichrist, of two evils he made choice to avoid the worst, and being a damned
person, he had rather his damnation should be in a fourth degree then in an
eight. Being demanded where he had learned this new Divinity, he made answer,
that it was by Philosophy. Being asked whether he had studied Divinity in the
College of Jesuits, he answered: Yea, and that under Father Gueret, with whom
he had continued two years and a half. Being (further) asked whether he had
ever been in the Chamber of Meditations, whether the Jesuits use to bring the
greatest sinners* there to behold the representation of many Devils, diversely
and fearfully shaped (under color of reducing them to a better life,) thereby
to cause a perturbation in their spirits, and consequently upon such or such
resolutions to push them forwards to the undertaking of some great action. His
answer was, that he had often been in this chamber of meditations. Being
demanded whether the killing of the King were not matter of ordinary
discourse amongst those Jesuits, made answer, that he had heard them say, It
was lawful to kill the King, and that he was no member of the Church, neither
ought we to obey him, nor hold him for (our)* King, until he had (received)
approbation from the Pope.

During the foresaid proceedings, certain of the Lords of the Court, came to
the College of Cleremont where the Jesuits were, and (there) seized on the
papers of John Guignard, amongst which there was found a Book composed in the
praise of James Clement, who murdered Henry the third, with exhortation to do
the like unto hi^ Successor: out of which Book diverse clauses have been
produced in the first Chapter.

The Court upon the sight of these Writings, sent for Guignard the Author, who
when his Writings were showed him, and himself examined thereupon, confessed
that himself had composed them, and written them with his own hand. And
hereupon Guignard by sentence of the Court, was (condemned and) executed the 7.
of the January, 1595.

By another sentence was Peter Gueret Jesuit, the Master of John Chastell
condemned to perpetual banishment, and all his goods seized on, and
confiscated unto the King, with commandment for the erection of a Pyramid
before the great gate of the palace, with an inscription containing the causes
why the Jesuits were banished. In which (inscription) they are termed
Heretics, troublers of the State, and corrupters of Youth. Which Pyramid
while it stood, if any did ask why it was set up, many more now a days are
ready to ask why it was pulled down.

A case like unto this fell out at Melun, the last of April. 1593. what time
the process criminal was made against Peter Barriere, who being apprehended
upon the intelligence of a Friar, an honest man and faithful unto the King,
confessed that he came purposely unto the Court to make away the King, and that
he had been incited hereunto by one Varad^ by name, a Jesuit, whose daily
practice was to defame the King with vile speeches. By the persuasion of this
Jesuit, the foresaid Barriere had prepared a knife to do the fear. About
this he first of all asked the advice of A^bry, Curate of S. Andrew des arts,
to whom he made his purpose known, and afterward betook himself unto
Varade, Rectour of the College of Jesuits, upon the foresaid Aubry his
advise. That the said Varade confirmed him in his resolution to kill the King,
and that by assuring him, that in case he were apprehended and put to death,
he should obtain in heaven a Crown of Martyrdom. That the said Varade
adjured him unto this action, upon the Sacrament of Confession, and of
Communion of the body of our Lord.

It was also observed, that when the late King was stricken, their Colleges
being environed with a Guard, certain Jesuits cried out at the doors of their
Chambers; Surge frater, agitur de Religione: Up brother, up, our Religion is in
danger.

Besides this, in the College of the said Jesuits, there were found diverse
theames given by the Masters of forms, the argument of all which was an
exhortation to set upon Tyrants, and to suffer death constantly.

It was also certified to betrue, that after Paris was reduced under the Kings
obedience, the Masters of the College of Jesuits, forbad their Scholars to
pray for the King.

Elsewhere informations have been made against Alexander Hayes, Jesuit,
borne in Scotland, who taught openly that it was good to dissemble, and for a
while to perform obedience unto the King in show. He was wont to say, Iesuita
est omnis homo. This Jesuit was further charged to have said, and that often,
that he wished if the King came along by their College, he might fall out of
the window upon him, and break his neck. For which cause by the sentence of
the Court, given the 10. of January, 1595. the said Hayes was condemned to
perpetual banishment; and withal he was wished to keep himself out of the
Country, upon pain of being hanged, without any other form of arraignement.
Moreover, the said Fathers have been often convicted for corrupting children,
that so they might send them into strange Countries against the will of their
Fathers. As for instance, in the year 1595. the 10. of April, a Jesuit, by
name John the Fair, of the College of Cleremont, did honorable penance in
the great Chamber, during the Audience, bare-head and bare-foote in a white
sheet, holding in his hand a burning Torch of two pound weight of wax, and
sentenced to profess and declare upon his knees, that rashly and unadvisedly
he practiced to seduce Francis Veron, Clarke, Student in the University of
Poictiers, to send him fo^th of the kingdom. And further, that he had
indiscreetly reserved and kept with him Lectures and Treatises made by some of
the said Society, which he received and wrote out with his own hand in the
said College of Cleremont, containing many damnable instructions to attempt
against Princes, and (withal) approbation and commendation of that detestable
parricide, committed upon the person of our King of most blessed memory, Henry
the third. These are things so common and so well known, that who so should
feign ought, or add unto it, cannot have any hope to believed; and he must
needs be accounted impudent that should deny them, the whole body of the
Court being witnesses of the truth of them. Besides all this, there is no man
that has not by experience found, that the Jesuits were never other then
sworn enemies unto our Kings. For during these last troubles, which endeavored
to transport France into Spain, there were many of the Religious persons
found, and that of all Orders, to have taken the Kings part, but there was no
one Jesuit found to be for him, until such time as for their crimes they were
driven out of the kingdom.

In a word, the late King our Prince, who never was afraid in war, (yet) was
afraid of these men in peace. My Lord the Duke of Sully can testify this, who
persuading the King not to recall the Jesuits, was answered by him, Give me
then security for my life.

And if we step forth of the kingdom of France, we shall find many examples
of the like. In all the conspiracies against Elizabeth the late Queen of
England, it was always found that some Jesuits or other had the tempering of
them: and yet for all this they cease not to martyr her with wrongful speeches
after her death, provoked hereunto by this, that she suffered them not to
murder her. Bonars^ius the Jesuit, in the first Book of his Amphitheater,
and fourth Chapter, calls her, Lupam Anglican^m, The English Wolf. And the
Jesuit Eudaemon-Iohannes, in the 116. Page. of his Apology for Garnet, calls
her Sororis filiam, Patris neptem: Her Sisters daughter, and her Fathers Niece.

Of late Henry Garnet, Hall, surnamed Oldcorne, Hamond, John Gerard, and
G^inuelle, were found to be accomplices in that powder-mine, which was made under
the house where the King with the States of the Country were to assemble
together. And for these the Jesuit, John the H^ppy, has writ an Apology:
wherein he confesses that indeed they knew the intendment, but that they
ought not to reveal it. It was found also that they had communication (hereon)
by letters with Bauldwin, the English Jesuit, who (then) lived at Bruxels:
this Jesuit was taken since as he passed through the Pals^raues Country; and
we doubt not but that if he were but a little stretched by the fingers, a man
might learn strange mysteries of him; yea, and that he had some intelligence
(to) with Francis Rauillac, who had been in Flanders somewhat before his cursed
enterprise.

And if you pass into Polonie, you shall find that the Jesuits do
absolutely possess the King, and having as it were the Tutorship of him, have
carried him unto such violent courses, that the Country by their means is
risen up against him, and he in great hazard of his kingdom. Their factio^s
humor is the cause that Sueden is lost from the Crown of Poland, and from the
Catholic Church. For they have moved the King of Poland, to make war upon
Duke Charles (who now styles himself King) so by force to compel him to
receive the Jesuits.

Neither is Transyluania free. We have seen the Letters of the Baron of
Zerotin, dated the 2. of May last, wherein he declares how a Lord of the
Country having a Jesuit (with him) in his house, was by the same Jesuit
drawn to conspire the death of the Prince of Tran^yluania; who being
advertised of the day (appointed) for the enterprise, went forth of the Town
that day, giving out that he went to hunt, and laid an ambush without the
Town, wherein he surprised the enterprisers, who followed after him to
execute their intendment upon him. He put them all to death, and the said
Jesuit was executed with the general slaughter of his accomplices.

The house of Austria alone has this privilege, (as) to be free from the
conspiracies of this Society. Of this family the Princes lives are sacred and
inviolable unto the Jesuits: for the founder of their Order, and the General of
their Society being a Spaniard, to whom they have vowed a blind obedience
under oath, it is not to be feared in this respect, that ever they should be
moved to enterprise ought against the Kings of Spain, or against such as are
of his house.

And therefore it is not without cause, that the Commonwealth of Venice,
(whose wisdom of government is to be admired) has driven them out of Venice,
and out of all their dominions: They (well) perceive that these men are
creatures of blood, and firebrarnds of war, whom they can better endure
without, then within their Country. For their last troubles had their beginning
from the Jesuits: for whereas the Senate had discovered, that the Jesuits by
cunning fetches had gotten great store of Legacies by Will, and made themselves
Lords of much land, to the prejudice of the Commonwealth: It was concluded by
advise in Council, to prohibit all Clergy men thence forward to receive any
goods immovable by testament, without leave of the commonwealth: whereunto
when other of the Church submitted, the Jesuits who opposed it, and wrought
against it at Rome, were for ever banished the State.

And for these considerations it is, that the City of Orleans would never
receive them, albeit they have much desired it and labored it. They sent
thither one of their company to preach their Lent Sermons; but the Inhabitants
were not very well satisfied: for instead of studying, he busied his brains in
searching out and entertaining such as had yet in their hearts any (remainder
of the) old leaven of the League: by whose intercourse this Jesuit set the
report going, that the Kings pleasure was, they should be established there.
Heretofore their talk was of driving out the Monks of S. Sampson, that they
might get their Church, and of displacing Mounsieur, the Marshall of Chastres,
Governor of that City, to get his house, making reckoning to join it
together with the houses in the way unto the foresaid Church. And besides all
these preparatiues, having given the King to understand, that the Citizens of
Orleans did exceedingly desire their company, they did so importune his
Majesty, that he granted them to have an house there, yet with this charge
that the Citizens should be drawn to consent unto it. Now when they were
solemnly assembled together about this matter, one amongst them, Touruille by
name, a famous Advocate of the City, a man of learning and judgment, declared
unto them the inconveniences that might befall the City if they did admit
them, and by strong reasons made it good, that in France for a man to love his
King and the Jesuits, were things that could not stand together. The chief
Officers of Justice following this first tune, and all the Citizens concurring
jointly in the same opinion, it was concluded, that they should not be
received. This City at other times has drunk of the cup of Rebellion, with
many others, but since their reducing under obedience unto the King, they
have at all times declared themselves most faithful; even by their carriage in
this last common affliction, as they have declared more grief then any other,
so do they make the continuance of their obedience appear by all manner of good
works, more then any other.

CHAP. III.
That the Jesuits are guilty of the murder of our deceased King, Henry the
fourth.
Whosoever shall consider the crime of this wicked (wretch) Rauillac, in every
part and circumstance of it shall easily perceive that the Jesuits had their
fingers in the Pie, and that the mischief came none otherwise then by their
instruction.

It is some five years since that at S. Victors, there was a Maid possessed
with a Devil, whose instrument she was for the tel^ing of diverse things that
seemed admirable. Father Cotton, either moved with curiosity, or grounding
himself upon the familiarity he had with his Spirits, took a journey
thither, to question with this Spirit on diverse points which he had a desire to
know. And to help his memory, he wrote in a ticket the points whereon he was
to demand: Amongst other points these were some: What should be the issue of
the conversion of Mounsieur de la Val: and of the enterprises against Geneua:
and of the continuance of Heresy: and of the estate of Madamoyselle Acarie;
and about the life of the King. There were many like unto these: but so it fell
out, that Father Cotton, delivering unto Mounsieur Gill^t, Counsailour, in in
the great Chamber a book which he had promised him there, through some
oversight, left behind him his memorial, which falling by this means into
the hands of the said Mr. Gillot, he communicated it unto certain others, and
amongst others to my Lord the Duke of Sully, and so the matter came abroad. Had
this fallen out at some other time, while some vigor of spirit yet remained in
men, this had been sufficient to have entered an indictment against the
Jesuit; it being a matter capital for a man to enquire about the term of
his Princes life: (and that) not only by the Roman laws, Paulus. lib. 5.
the Authors whereof were Pagans and Idolaters; Sentent. tit. 21.. 9.
but even by the laws of God, Qui de falute Principis vel summa Reipub.
Mathematicos, Ariolos Aruspices Vaticinatores consulit, cum eo qui responderit
capite punitur. Cui aute opus est serutari super Caesaris salute nisi a quo
aduersus illam aliquid cogitatur, aut post illam speratur and sust^nctur?
as we may read in the 18. Chap. of Deutronomie. And Tertullian gives the
reason of it in his Apologe. ticus, to wit, that such a one has imaginations
against the Princes life, that makes such inquirings about it.

Two years after this, so it fell that Mounsieur de le Forze, Lieutenant for
the King in Bearne, by the intelligences which he had from Spain, by reason
of his neighborhood unto it, was advertised that a Spaniard of such a
stature, of such an hair, and in such apparel, departed such a day from
Barcelona, to go into France, with intendment to make away the King, by poison
or other means. Well, this Spaniard came to Paris, addressed himself to
Father Cotton, who brought him unto the King, and gave high commendations of
him. A while after came the Letters of Monsieur de la Forze: when the King had
read them, he sends (forth) to seek Father Cotton, and shows him the Letters
of Mounsieur de la Forze, and commands him to bring back again that same
Spaniard. Father Cotton answers, he could not believe it, and that the
advertisement was false: nevertheless, he would go seek out the said
Spaniard, and bring him before his Majesty. Whereupon he goes forth, and
returning a good while after, he tells the King, he could not find him, and
that he was gone. To see clearly unto the bottom of this, but a little good
sight is too much.

It is not above a year ago that Father Cotton wrote unto a prouincial of
Spain diverse things which our King had uttered in secret, and revealed in
Confession, and such as turned to the disgrace of his Majesty. The discovery
whereof was the cause why he continued in disgrace for the space of six
Months. Nevertheless the late King (through a clemency (that was) fatal
unto his own destruction) forgave him, and received him into favor. But it
may be remembered, how not many days after, our young King being importuned by
him, gave him a gird, by such an answer as he well deserved, in these terms;
I will tell you nothing, for you will writo in into Spain, as you have done
the confession of my Father.

And to come near the fact of Rauillac: like as after the death of Henry the
third, a man might hear the Jesuits preach sediciously, and exhort their
auditors to do the like unto his Successor: and amongst others, Father
Commolet, crying out in his Sermons, We have need of an Ehud, be he a Monk, or
be he a Soldier, we have need of an Ehud. Right so at Lent last, might a man
have heard a Jesuit, by name Father Hardy, Son to one Mercier, dwelling on
Nostre-Dame bridge, preaching at S. Seuerins, and saying, that Kings heaped up
treasures to make themselves feared, but that there needed but a mattocke to
kill a King. In witness whereof, I can produce Mounsier le Grand, and Mounsier
de la Vau, Counsailours of the Court, who were present thereat, besides diverse
others.

At the same time Father Gontier preached so sediciously, and so injuriously
against the King, that Mounsier the late Marshall of Ornano, as zealously
affected unto the Catholic religion, as any man in France, being asked of his
Majesty what he thought of his Sermons; made answer to him, that if Gontier
had spoken as much at Bordeaux, he would have caused him to be thrown into the
River. Every one from that time might prognosticate some great mischief, and
the murmr was so great amongst true Frenchmen, that my self falling on a
time amongst good company, where some speech past between us, one of them
affirmed, that a jolly man of quality, called Mounsier de la Grange* Secretary
to the Prince of Condy, would avouch to Father Gontier (s face,) that whiles
(during these wars) he remained prisone^ at Perigeus, the said Gontier in
presence of Father Saphore, Rector of the College, did maintain against the
said de la Grange, that it were a good deed to kill the King.

Yet this is not all: for to give fire to the match at both ends, the Jesuits
by means of a person named Guron, (who makes show of much devotion) would
feign have prescribed unto the Curates of the parishes in Paris, a form of
preaching the very last Lent, giving them in writing sundry discourses tending
to sedition. But diverse honest Curates came to the Duke of Sully, beseeching
him, that by his means they might speak with the King; to whom they made
their complaints, saying; there were some that would prescribe them to preach
things contrary to their allegiance. The excessive clemency of this great
King contented it self with making remonstrance hereof unto Father Gontier;
yea, and to win his heart, he made him his Preacher, and gave him a pension.

Like as before lightning a man shall hear some grumbling in the Clouds: even
so, these preachings and seditious meetings were the forerunners of this great
blow, that has shaken this State in the person of so great a King, whose loss
we lament now, but shall feel it much more in the time to come.

Add hereunto the Confession of Rauillac, This is to be found in the Records.
who justified unto Father Aubigny, that he had told him in confession, that
he had been sent to give a great stroke, and that he showed him the knife,
having an heart graven upon it. But the said Jesuit protested, that God had
given him this grace, that so soon as ought was revealed unto him in
confession, he forgot it incontinently. The Gallant saved his life by this:
but had he been in another Country, he would have been taught the Art of
Memory.

They that have sounded this Rauillac, and have been present at his
examination, may perceive that the said parricide has been (very) thoroughly
instructed in this matter: for in every other point of Divinity he showed
himself most ignorant; but in the question, whether it be lawful to kill a
Tyrant; he was well skilled in all manner of euasions and Jesuitical
distinctions, as my Lords the Commissioners can testify, the Sieur Coeffeteau
Doctor of Divinity, and others, who had the examination of this Rauillac in
this matter. And this parricide being demanded what moved him to this attempt,
told them more then once, What the causes were why it was requisite to kill the
King, they might understand by the Sermons of the Preachers. His meaning was,
that he was induced hereunto be the sermons before mentioned. But (more then
this) it was easy to perceive that besides public exhortations, he had
(withal) received particular instructions at large, so well seen was he in
this argument.

Neither is it a circumstance to be neglected, that Father Cotton, having
obtained leave to speak with Rauillac in prison, amongst other things that he
spoke unto him, this was one; Look well to it, that you accuse not the
Innocent: fearing (belike) least he should accuse the Jesuits: but the
Cordeliers, Carmelites, and other honest religious persons, who were not
touched in conscience, they feared not lest any should accuse them.

But whence was it, that at Bruxelles and at Prage where the Jesuits
dominiere, the Kings death was spoken of (some) twelve, or fifteen days
before it came to pass? At Roan diverse received letters from their friends at
Bruxelles, desiring to be informed whether the report that went of the Kings
death were true, albeit at that time it was not so.

Mounsieur Argentier at Troyes, received letters from the ^utor of his children
at Prage, wherein he was advertised that a Jesuit had given it forth, that
the King was dead before it fell out to be so, and withal had told them, that
after his decease Monsieur the Dolphin should not be King, but the King of
Spain, and that for the same reasons which Father Gontier gave in his sermons
at Aduent and Lent last.

I may not omit the prediction of the provost of Petiuiers, (who was found
strangled in prison) who being at Petiuiers, two days journey from Paris, and
playing at nine pinnes, amongst sundry of his friends, told them saying; This
day the King is either slain* or has a blow. This provost was in faction a
Jesuit, and had committed a son of his unto them, who at this day is a
Jesuit.

Diverse have observed with what disdain and general indignation it was taken
of every one, to see the Jesuits at the Louure, the (very) morning after this
abominable assassinacie, looking with a smiling and pre^umptuous countenance,
as who should say, all things went well for them; and to be presented unto the
Queen by Mounsieur de la Varenne, their Benefactor and restorer; and to have
that boldness in this common heaviness and sorrow, so speedily to demand the
ha^t of the poor deceased King, which they carried away in a kind of
conquest, wherewithal they had done well to have buried also the tooth which
John Chastel, a disciple of theirs, struck out some years since.

But who did not wonder to see all the Orders of religious persons assist the
funerals of the King, and partake of the common sorrow, saving the Jesuits?
who alone having received more good turns of this good King, then all other
Ecclesiastical persons put together, even they alone vouchsafed not to
accompany his body unto the grave. Which being observed by diverse of the
Spectators, some said, the reason of their absence was, because they disdained
all other Orders: but the most judicious, their opinion was, that it was no
small part of their wisdom: and that Tiberius and Iulia, having procured the
empoysoning of Germanicus, Tacitus. lib. 3. Annal. Tiberius atque Augusta
publico abstinuere, inferius maiestate sua^rati, si palam lamentare^tur, anne
omniu^ oculis vultum eoru^ scrutantibus, falsi intelligerentur.
in the public mourning that was at Rome, would not appear openly, for fear
least the people should discover their sorrow to be but false and counterfai^e.

After the Kings death, they did what they could to keep his purpose from
taking effect, and to thwart such courses as he judged to be for the good of
the State. He had resolved to send companies unto Cleues, for aid to the
princes of Germany. Since that, Mounsieur the Marshall of Castres, General of
these forces, prepared himself for the journey, when behold two Jesuits who
came to seek him out, told him that he could not go this voyage, not bring
succor unto Heretics with a good conscience, and fought to affright his
conscience with threats, as that if he did this, he could not be saved. But
the said Marshall giving no credit unto their words, within a while after, they
come unto him to change their language, and to appease him.

CHAP. IIII.
An Examination of the declaratory Letter of Peter Cotton.
FIrst of all, I say, that this Letter being extorted (as it is) by necessity,
comes out of season, and does not prevent the evil, but comes after it: for it
should have been written against Mariana when he first peeped forth, and when
the late King entreated Father Cotton to write against it.

I say further, it is utterly unknown to us whether he speaks in earnest: in
his Letter, or whether according to the doctrine of his Order, he uses
Equivocation, and suppresseth the one half of his meaning: or if he speaks in
good earnest, who sees not that his companions are not of his opinion, since
none of them has subscribed his Book, nor approved it? which yet had been
most requisite in a matter so public and of such importance.

Again the authority of so many Jesuits condemning the murdering of Kings,
is alleged by him in vain: for all such passages of the Jesuits are
understood of Kings whom the Pope and Jesuits acknowledge for Kings: But we
have made it clear in the former Chapters by the authority of a great many
Jesuits, and by their actions, that when the Jesuits do attempt upon the life
of any King, they make good their action by this, that such a one they do not
reckon to be a King, albeit he bears the name, in as much as he is
excommunicated, or because he is an enemy unto the Church: and in very deed
this wretched Rauillac, alleged this for the cause of his attempt, to wit,
because the King would make war against the Popr, and that the Pope was God,
and by consequence, These are the very words of the interrogatori^.
that the King would make war against God.

And therefore the reverend Abbot of Boyse, has well observed in his answer
to Father Cotton, that whereas Gregory of Valence, Jesuit, says; It is no
way permitted for a man to attempt upon the life of his Prince, albeit he abuse
his authority; yet he adds, If it be not done by public judgment. Now all
the Jesuits maintain that the judgment of the General of their Order is a
public judgment, and whereon they must rest (themselves,) as on the voice of
Christ, as we have showed before; we hold also the judgment of the Pope to
be a public judgment.

Again we have formerly observed that the Apology of Eudemon-Iohannes the
Jesuit, approved by their General Aquauiua, and of three Doctors^ of the
Jesuits, affirms that Jesuits do no way approve the murdering of Kings,
notwithstanding they love the event: so that it serves to no purpose for Father
Cotton to condemn him that murdered the King, if nevertheless he be glad for
the event, that is to say, for the death of the King.

And in very deed, it is a fraudulent protestation that he makes of approving
the decree of the Council of Constance, where they condemn the proposition of
John Petit, and declare that it is not lawful for a subject to kill a Tyrant:
for the Jesuits have their evasion ready, and which is a truth, namely, that
the Council of Constance speaks of such Tyrants as are lawful Kings, and
that they speak not of Tyrants deposed by public judgment, and whose
Subjects are discharged and absolved of their oath of allegiance by the Pope,
nor of Kings who are judged enemies unto the Church. For if the Jesuits shall
undertake to make away a King, they will easily find (out) some reason (or
other) to prove that he is no King at all, and by consequence that (herein)
they do nothing against the Council of Constance, nor against those places
which Father Cotton alleged out of the writings of the Jesuits.

That which Father Cotton adds, that this was the singular opinion of Mariana,
and not of all their Order, has been disproued in the first Chapter, by the
approbation of a great many Jesuits, whose names are in the front of Marianaes
Book, and by the books of sundry Jesuits, who affirm the same that Mariana
does; yea, they commend him, and maintain him: and the Jesuit Cotton
(himself) does so tenderly condemn him, that in his reprehensions of him, he
does rather seem to flatter him.

As for that pretended decision, which he would make us believe to have been
made in a provincial congregation of the Jesuits, wherein Mariana was
condemned by them: this seems to me, to mar their Market, ^ith they have
concealed this decision hitherto,) and would have no man know it. Did they
fear to make Frenchmen too well affected toward the preservation of the
King? or did they fear to give offense to the Jesuits of Spain, by
publishing their condemnation of Mariana? Out of doubt it will be found that
either any such decision was never made, or if it were, it was a matter of
(mere) Equivocation, and ambiguous (construction)

And this will be more easily believed when a man shall come near, and observe
the Jesuits confession in this matter, which Father Cotton has reduced to
fifteen heads or Articles, which are nothing but infoldings of words, and
which declare the Jesuits belief in such points whereof no man asks them any
question: for behold, (these are the points) whereon we would expect to hear
the Confession of their Faith.

I. Whether when the Superior of the Jesuits shall command them to undertake
against the King, they ought to obey him.

II. Whether the Pope can discharge Subjects of their oath of allegiance made
unto their King.

III. Whether a King being deposed by the Pope, and excommunicated, is
nevertheless a King, and whether the Subjects are bound, nevertheless to
perform obedience to him in things temporal after excommunication.

IIII. Whether in case some good Catholic shall discover unto a Jesuit in
Confession his purpose to kill the King, the Jesuit ought to reveal this
Confession, or conceal it.

V. Whether the Pope can give and take away kingdoms, and at his pleasure
transfer them: namely, whether the Jesuits do approve that Canon which
^aith, that the Pope may take off the Crown from a Kings head, albeit he be
without blame.

VI. Whether Kings are above Clerks: that is to say, whether the King has
authority over their goods, and over their lives, as much as over his other
Subjects.

VII. Whether faith given to the enemies of the Church be to be kept.

VIII. Whether a Jesuit being accused of Treason, and kept prisoner thereupon,
may lawfully use Equivocations in his answer.

IX. Whether to slay a man's enemies, it be lawful for him to kill his friends.

X. Whether the rebellion of a Clergy man against the King be high treason.

XI. Whether a man can hate him that murthereth a King, and yet be glad for the
event.

XII. Whether Garnet and Oldcorne are Martyrs: and whether Guignard were
justly condemned to death.

These are the points, whereon all honest Catholics desire the Jesuits might
be catechized, and that it would please the Queen Regent, and my Lords the
Princes of the blood, the Officers of the Crown, and Lords of the Counsel,
to command Father Cotton, and his companions to write their minds clearly,
and to set forth their Confession, to the end these new impressions which
enfeeble the authority of our Kings, and hazard their lives, might be razed
out of (the minds of) the people, in stead of giving us articles which touch
not the matter, and which (withal) are carried in obscure and doubtful
terms, like unto the sword of Delphos, which cuts on both sides.

The first Article is this: All Jesuits (says he) in general and in
particular, are ready to seal even with their own blood, that they have not
either in this matter or other, any other Faith, doctrine and opinion, then
that of the Church of Rome. Herein he speaks against his conscience: for if
all Jesuits in particular are agreed in every thing, it follows that Cotton
and Mariana do agree together, and that Cotton does not well to condemn him.
Whereas he says, that all the Jesuits are ready to subscribe, that in this
matter they have no other belief then the universal Church has. I answer,
that the Jesuits may easily subscribe to any thing that a man would have them,
since they have their retention, and secre^ conditions, which they reserve in
their minds: but I am well assured that the universal Church will not
subscribe to any of those abominable positions of the Jesuits, which we have
formerly alleged out of their Books, much less will it approve their actions.

His second Article is: That amongst all kinds of governments and
administrations of Commonwealths a Monarchy is the best. To what purpose is
this? It is not necessary that they who esteem a Monarchy to be better then
a Democratie, for this cause, must make scruple to destroy Kings: or that they
who desire^ to kill the King, must have an intention to change the form of
Government; but only they desire another King, because he that lives mislikes
them.

The third Article savors altogether of the Jesuits vein, and of their
terms, for therein is nothing but Equivocations, and mental reseruations. It
says, That such as is the spiritual Government of the Church, which relyes on
the Vicar of Jesus Christ, the Succ^ssour of S. Peter: such is the temporal of
the State and Kingdom of France, that it determines in the person of the
King, our Sovereign Lord and Master. There is nothing spoken to the full in
this, but with much dissimulation: for he dares not affirm that the King is
as simply absolute in his Kingdom, as the Pope in the Church: for the Jesuits
alone maintain that the Pope can depose Kings; but they do not maintain that
Kings may depose Popes: they hold that Popes can discharge Subjects of their
obedience unto Kings; but they do not hold that Kings can dispense with
Christians touching their obedience unto Popes: They hold that the Popes power
reaches unto the temporalties of Kings, either directly as some say, or
indirectly as others say; but they do not believe that Kings have any power
either directly or indirectly, over the spiritualties or temporalties of Popes:
they hold that there are many persons in France who are not liable to trial
before the Kings Judges; but they do not hold, there is any man within the
territories of S. Peter who is not triable before the Officers of his
holiness: they hold that the Pope can levy money and rents upon the
Ecclesiastical revenues of the Kingdom of France; but they do not hold
that the Kings of France can levy any money upon the persons nor upon the
lands of Italy, which are of the Patrimony of S. Peter.

For it is not credible that Father Cotton will oppose himself against
Cardinal Bellarmine the Jesuit, all the Jesuits now adays being his
Disciples and Scholars, who in his fifth Book, De Pontifice Romano, and sixth
Chapter, writes thus: The Pope may change kingdoms, take them from one* and
bestow them on another, as the supreme Prince spiritual, and when he shall
find it necessary for the salvation of souls* Of whom also we have formerly
learned that Kings are not above Clarks. The same (Author) in the second
Chapter of his Book, Of the exemption of the Clergy, calls all Kings and
Princes ingenerall, Profane men: And he holds in diverse places, Qui^ dicere
audeat ius e^^e profano ^n ea quae sancta sanctaru^, id est, sanctissima dici
meruerunt?
that the power of secular Princes, is but an humane institution, and is only
the work of men. Albeit the Apostle in the thirteenth to the Romans, says;
That there is no power but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God.
And therefore it is no part of the Jesuits belief, to account Kings to be
Kings in such sort, as the Pope is the head of the Church, seeing they are not
Kings but by humane institution: but the Pope is head of the Universal Church
by the institution of God. In a word, Cotton speaks but with half a mouth,
and by that which he says, it is impossible to apprehend what he believes.
And the same may be said of his other Articles.

The last Article is a recrimination of those of the pretended reformed
Religion, sundry of whose Books he says are infected with this opinion, that
it is lawful for a Subject to make away his King. After this he adds; I could
note and specify the places, allege their words, were it not much better that
they should remain swallowed up of the gulf of forgetfulness. Oh what matter
of triumph here does he give unto our adversaries? whose saying will be, that
if Father Cotton had known those places, he would not have failed to bring
them to light, and it had been good to name the books, that they might be
suppressed, and the Authors punished if they were living.

Now hereupon I have been moved in the humor of curiosity to clear my self:
and enquiring of some of the contrary Religion, men not unlearned, they have
answered me, that indeed the Council of Constance in the eight Session,
makes an enumeration of Wickliffes Heresies, and amongst other things accuses
him for being of opinion, Artic. 15. Nullus est Dominus dum est in peccato
mortali, and Artic. 17. Populares possunt ad arbitrium suum dominos
delinquentes corr^gere.
that no m^n is a Master or Lord in civil things, during his continuance in
mortal sin. Again, that people may at their pleasure correct Princes that
are faulty. And that Buchanan an Historian and Scottish Poet, in his Book, De
iure Regni apud Scotes, speaks (indeed) of handling Kings roughly, and
driving them out, when they become Tyrants. But the Council of Constance
slandereth Wickliffe, not only in this point, but also in diverse others: that
this is no where to be found throughout his writings: and that he was not
present to answer for himself: that after the same slanderous manner, the same
Council charge him to have said, that God must^ obey the Devil: that
Buchanan was no Divine: that amongst their Doctors there are indeed found some
free speeches against Kings that persecute their Churches, so far as to say,
that notwithstanding their wicked wills, they will not give over to advance the
work of God, and such like. But not so much as any one word is to be found of
advise to kill Kings, nor so much as any one precept of rebellion. That Luther
writ indeed against King Henry the eight of England, in most contemptuous sort
and indiscreet terms: but that Luther was none of his Subject, and that he
never spoke of killing Kings, nor of rebelling against their Sovereign, and
therefore that these examples are not to purpose.

This I say, not that I rest satisfied with these iustifications, I leave them
as they are, but to stir up Father Cotton to speak more plainly unto this
point, for fear least our adversaries should say, that they are accused
without proof, and without showing wherefore.

That which remains of Father Cottons declaratorie Letter, is only a
declamatorie discourse, wherein he talks of Otacoustes, Prosagogides, and
Quadruplators: words that had given us the stop, had they been put in the
entrance (of his discourse.) For these are words too hard for us, that know no
other Latin then that of Ac^ursius, and that busy our selves to prove as good
Frenchmen, as the Jesuits are good Spaniards.

CHAP. V.
Whether it be for the good of the State, that Father Cotton should be near
about the person of the King, or of the Queen Regent, and whether the lesuites
are to be suff^red.
IF all the world wonders to see after the blow that John Chastel gave with a
knife, after the condemning of the Jesuits, after the erection of the Pyramid
for a memorial, yet nevertheless a little after (all this,) these Fathers to
be established again, and to possess the heart of the King, whose mouth they
had slit: So is it a thing as much to be wondered at, to see at this day, after
so horrible a death, those, who have set abroach the doctrine of murdering
(Princes) and who are known to have a ^inger in the action, to continue still,
and to be near about the person of the King.

I will believe that the person of Father Cotton is free from this crime, and
that Father Gontier and Aubigny had no communication with him, and that he had
no intelligence with the Jesuits of Bruxelles: yet such are his manners and his
profession, that it is no way fit, nor for (the) credit (of the Court) for him
to come near about the person of his Majesty.

First of all, I affirm that Cotton, who calls himself a religious person,
yea, of such a Company who take unto them the name of Jesus, is a scandal to
the whole Church, being every day a follower of the Court: for this is a thing
contrary, not only to the Institution of all Monks, but particularly to the
rules of the Jesuits, as Father Richeome assures us in his Apologeticall
complaint: and Cardinal Tolet the Jesuit, in his Book Of the Institution of
Priests. 1. Book, and 40. Chapter, holds it for a general truth, that a
religious person who betakes himself unto the Courts of Princes, is an
excommunicate person, albeit he has leave of his Superior.

Secondly, for the imprinting of virtue in the heart of a Prince, it is fit to
set about his person men that are enemies unto vices, and such as will not
flatter him in his imperfections. This was one of the (great) faults of Father
Cotton, even his conniuence at the pleasures of the late King, in stead of
withdrawing him from them. And such a Prince was he, that if a man an enemy
unto vice, had held his place about him, it had been an easy matter to
restrain him. This is the complaint that Father Portugais, lately made in our
hearing, in a funeral Sermon that he preached at S. James in the Shambles, and
which afterward he set forth in print.

Yet this is not all: for in stead of restrayning him, he rather humoured him,
affirming even at a full Sermon, that his Majesty made amends for his sins
with many merits: that David committed faults, although he were a man after
Gods own heart.

(Nay,) he did well worse then this: for he was the Messenger of the Kings
love, and carried his Loue-letters unto Ladies: a great Prince of this
kingdom, and who now lives in Court, can testify, that (as he told him)
(how) he wondered at this, that Father Cotton should be employed in bringing a
certain Damsel unto the King: the said Jesuit answered him, that indeed it
was a sin, but that he was rather to regard the health of the King, whose
life was so necessary unto the Church, and that this evil should be
recompensed with a greater good.

And for his life; therein he has discovered egregious Hypocrisy. He vaunted
(sometimes) in the presence of sundry Lords of the Court, who yet are living,
that since he was two and twenty years of age, he never committed any mortal
sin; and yet nevertheless, the Abbot of Boyse has justified unto him, and
is ready to justify it, that since that time it is that a sentence has passed
against him at Auignon, for getting a Nun with child. Mounsieur des Bordes,
Lord of Grigny, a man that wants no good part, save to be a Catholic, has
lying by him at this day Father Cottons (love) Letters unto Madamoyselle de
Claransac de Misme, written with his own hand: wherein after many
protestations of friendship, he tells her, that he hopes to see her shortly, to
pay her the principal, and the arrerages of his absence: and that the
affection h^e bears unto her is such, that he cannot promise himself to have
full joy in Paradise, if he find not her there. This Damsel was entered
amongst the questions which this Jesuit was to propose unto the Devil.

Who does not wonder at the incredible impudency of this man, who insinuates
himself every where, and shrinkes not back for an hundred puttings by? who
thrusts himself into every action, who makes himself a companion to Princes,
who in the Meditations he sets forth, seems as if he would flatter God, and
bring him a sleep with words that savor of his Queen? What an heart-burning
would it be to see a caitife Jesuit besiege the spirit of a King, and to be as
a man may say, tied to his girdle, while in the mean time, Princes and Lords
who have done him great service, have much a do to come near him? I cannot
conceive any reason why other of the Clergy who for many ages have been the
pillars of the Church of France, who never laid hand on their Kings, and who
never abandoned them in their afflictions, especially in the (time of our) last
troubles, should not enjoy the same favor that these new come vpstarts, who
are not subject to any Bishop, but immediately depending of their Spanish
General, and of their Consistory: and who have been already driven forth, for
the crime of parricide? Have not other Religious Orders better deserved to be
Confessors unto the King, or Preachers unto the Queen; whose Confessions these
men will write into Spain, to some Provincial of Castile, or to their
General at Rome?

And if in seven or eight years, since their reuocation, they have bestird
themselves so well, that in diverse parts of France, they have gotten above an
hundred thousand crowns of rent, and built in diverse places, especially at la
Flesche, an house, that comes to above an hundred thousand crowns, what will
they do if they continue but twenty years more? This is a canker that still gets
ground. They cannot be in a place but they must dominiere to: they have already
built an house for nouices in the Suburbs of Saint Germans, a pretty town
might stand within the precincts of it: and there the Rector of the University
shall have nothing to do, but to look on; and from thence are they like to
draw all the youth, as being more subtle then others to insinuate into men's
houses, to please women given to devotion, to flatter their children, to take
neither for washing nor candles of their scholars, so they may swallow lands,
and whole inheritances: whence it will come to pass, that the University of
Paris, shall be but a shadow, and assuredly come to nothing. From hence in ten
years space, the Privy Council, and Courts of Parliament, and the great
Council, shall be full of the Disciples of the Jesuits, and the rest of the
Clergy shall no more be made reckoning of: for they have a purpose to bring
them lower, and they speak contemptuously of them, as of ignorant persons: and
yet I have heard of many that are learned, and particularly of Mounsieur, the
Cardinal of Perron, that them selves are ignorant persons, and that they will
overthrow learning. For the restoring whereof, my Lord the said Cardinal has
a purpose to erect a new College in the University, where he will raise (the
study of good) letters, which are fallen, since these men have soyled them, by
reducing them unto a miserable kind of Schollerisme, and making them to
consist of slender observations which themselves have gathered.

(Yet) this were but a small matter, were it not that by bringing up Scholars,
and making men learned, they hereby graspe the State, and go about to bring
Kings under a Tutorship, and stir up people unto sedition, and if they were
as ready to rise, as these are busy to solicit them, France by this had run
over with blood, and the death of the King had been followed with massacres
both of the one and of the other Religion: for this was their hope in this
cursed parricide: from which if this blow cannot keep them from falling, they
will easily find the means to renew their party.

In the mean while let my Lords of the Council, and my Masters of the Courts
of Parliaments, judge whether with a good Conscience they can permit the
hearing of confessions unto them, who have sworn to reveal nothing, though it
necessarily concern the preservation of the King: and whether it be not fit to
force them from so damnable a doctrine, that makes them culpable of high
treason. To what purpose serves it to burn a book by the executioner, while the
(persons themselves) are suffered? and to execute a piece of paper, while in
the mean time a man dares not name the Jesuits, for fear to offend them? Let
them consider whether they will be glad to see the ruin of the University of
Paris, which ever since Charles the great, has been the Ornament of this
Kingdom: or whether in suffering the increase of these, and their
establishment in the Court, they can be content to hold the Kings faithful
Catholics in defiance, and in expectation to behold yet a third parricide.
Let them be forbidden to entermeddle in affairs of State: let them preach the
Gospel, and the Commandments of the Church: let Parents be bound to send
their Children unto Colleges in the University: let there not be two distinct
Universities: let inquiry be made what the Jesuits do with all their wealth,
seeing it is well known they are but few in number, and that they do not spend
it neither upon apparel, nor on horses, nor upon servants. To what end then
serves all their revenues, save to make voyages, and Commissions for strange
Countries, and to make a storehouse that may serve to wage the enemies of the
State, and contribute to the charges of some Rebellion, as they did in the last
league? For I find the Polander had reason, when he said that the Society of
the Jesuits was a sword, whose scabberd was in France, but the handle of it in
Spain, or at Rome, where the General of the Jesuits abides; for the first
motion to draw this sword comes from thence.

This is it we had to say on this matter, whereunto my desire is, that answer
should be made from point to point: or rather that we would open our eyes unto
these considerations, which are most clear and needful. And if in doing this
we shall procure more hatred then we shall gain commodity, yet this shall be
our comfort, that we have not failed in our duty of proposing things
necessary for the good of the State, and for the peace and safety of the
Church.

A QVADRANE To the Queen.
If you desire your State continue may,
Then chase these cruel Tigers far away:
Who cutting their Kings life apart,
Are their own pay-maisters with his heart.
FINIS.
THE SVPPLICATION OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PARIS, FOR THE PREVENTING OF THE
IESVITES opening of their Schools in Paris.

WHEREIN THEIR KING-KILLING DOCTRINE, IS ALSO OPENED and refuted.

TO THE QVEENE REGENT: THE LORDS, THE PRINCES OF THE BLOOD: AND THE LORDS of
the Council.
MAY it please your MAJESTY:
The University of Paris in all humility desires to make to it known to your
Majesty, that the doctrine of the killing of Kings by assa^sins, who of
devotion destine themselves to death, as to a Martyrdom pleasing to God, is by
us held to be a pestilent devise, never seen nor read in the records of
Antiquity; nor as much as known to the ancient Pagans or Christians. Among
the Mahumetanes only, one named, the old man of Montagne, is found to have used
this trick, but the rest of that Sect crushed it in the egg, and never since
put it in practice, howbeit their malice a against Christian Princes be no way
abared: Only about sixty years ago, this poison spread it self in the
veins of Christendom, and began to be put in execution in England and in
France; we say in England, in as much as in regard of civil and temporal
obedience due to Kings, and for the safeguard of their lives; all Christian
Princes, though Pagans, Heretics, Idolaters, Infidels, excommunicates,
Apostates, are notwithstanding unto us, holy and sacred, as the Apostles ^each,
and the primitive Christian Church, and the examples of Saints, now in heaven,
sometime prelates and Bishops of France. Now this hellish position of theirs is
grounded upon another erroneous doctrine, which is, the Popes omnipotency,
whom we acknowledge head of the Church, in that manner and meaning as our
predecessors have done. The doctrine of this omnipotency, is not at all to be
found in the divinity of Paris, nor in the bosom of the University, but we
find it in the Sermons and writings of the Jesuits, and in the answers of
assa^sines at their arraignment before the ludges.

To put this matter out of doubt, we need no more, then to hear themselves
speaking. Parrie, who undertook the murdering of the late Queen of England,
maintained that he might lawfully do it, she s^anding excommunicate by the
Pope, and consequently her life abandoned. Catesby the undertaker of the
fire-worke, which should have blown up the King of great Britain, the Queen,
their Children, and the States, stood to it, that the enterprise was holy: for
since Clement the eight by two briefes, forbad the Catholics to receive him,
they had better reason (as he thought) to make him away being received. John
Chastel affirmed that he thought i^ a meritorious work to kill our last King,
because that although the Bishops of France had received him into the Church,
yet he was not in it, the Pope having not admitted him. Rauillac, the last
parricide, affirmed that the King undertook the last war against the good
will of the Pope, that God was the Pope, and the Pope God, by virtue of those
words; Thou art Peter, and upon this rock, etc. Hereupon the Bishop of
Cleremont, one of their disciples failed not after the execution of the
murderer to be present at the assembly of the Sor^on, which was called
(accordingly as our ancestors had chalked us out the way,) for the censuring
and condemning of that murdering doctrine, where turning himself from company
to company, before the sitting of the Doctors, he told them they should take
heed what they did, for you have here (says he) two of the Popes Nuncioes;
and the Company being sat, he told them, that the question then to be
discussed had been diversely handled, and that in his judgment it was needful
they should propose it to the Popes Nuncioes, who might give notice of it to
the Pope their Master; as is none other Kings were to live but whom it pleased
the Pope.

After that many good Preachers of this University had contested against the
murders of Kings, and the broachers and abettors of that doctrine, at last
Father Cotton presents your Majesty with a Letter declaratorie, of the
doctrine of the Jesuits in that behalf, in which he labors to give
contentment to such as complain that their writings maintain these three
doctrines, cousen-germains, the omnipotency of the Pope, and from thence
depending rebellion against Kings, and abandoning of their lives, when they, or
such as themselves, shall judge them Tyrants: but men of understanding
sufficiently perceive the Equivocations and fallacies wherewithal they would
shadow their mischievous doctrine, following herein the use and practice of
that position where of their Sect make open profession in treatises expressly
allowed by the General of their Order; as may be seen in the Apology made in
the behalf of Henry Garnet in the Chapter of Equivocations: yet should we be
loath to discover them, and to hinder their counterfaite coin from being
current for some profit which might might from thence arise; were it not that
by the virtue of these ambiguities, that Sect hopes to get the start of us in
opening their Schools in the University of Paris, against the settled and
resolved determination of the last King. In regard whereof this University,
daughter of the French Kings, should hold her self guilty of disloyalty if
she did not unmask those fallacies, and become an humble petitioner to your
Majesty to provide that this daughter (most faithful to her Liege as long as
she is kept from being forced,) be not stained with the company of that sect
which has long since been found to be most dangerous to our State.

He then would make your Majesty believe, that the writers of his Order
affirm, that it is not lawful to kill a Tyrant but they by him alleged* and
by name, Valentia (their late great Doctor) adds this restriction: if it be
not done by public judgment; and ^o the end you may not make scruple what is
mea^^^ by that public judgment, he afterward lays y^^^ down certain
articles of the doctrine of the Iesuit^s, touching the Sovereignty of Kings,
in fashion as f^^lloweth: That a Monarchy is the best kind of goue^nment:
That the Pope is a Monarch in the Church for ^he spiritual government, as the
King is in his kingdom* for the temporal; as not allowing the King to be
King^ in his own kingdom, if the Pope be not absolute Sovereign in the
spiritual affairs of the Church. But may it please your Majesty to be
informed, that this is an assertion directly opposite to the doctrine of the
Church, which your University of Paris has always stood for: namely, to
affirm that the Pope has Monarchiall power in the Church: for they are indeed
contradictorie speeches, to maintain, that a Counsel is above the Pope, (as
your University has always done,) and that the Pope is absolute Monarch of
the Church. This doctrine of your University if ever it were necessary,
surely now a days it is more useful then ever, as well in regard of our own
King, as of all the States of Christendom.

Now what are the effects of this absolute spiritual Monarchy, he cleeres in
another Book, which he has dedicated to your Majesty, the Princes of the
blood, and the Lords of the Counsel; you shall find it in the end of the
second Tome of his Institutions, Q^est. 35. where he affirms that the Pope
has no absolute power to command and dispose the Crow^es of Kings: but his
fallacy lies in this word [ absolute,] in as much as he has power to put of
and put on the Crowns of Kings, but that power is not absolute: (...) King,
and your Majesty, and the Lords pretend (...) absolute power to dispose of the
goods of your su^iects, but only by the rule and guidance of Justice. M^reouer
Father Cotton a little after affirms that the (...) by virtue of his
spiritual government, and for the uniting of Religion and the State, may by
the po^er of his Ecclesiastical censures dispose of Princes Crowns, for the
service of God, the good of the Church, and the salvation of Souls. Neither is
this any peculiar point, which himself alone defends, but it is the common
tenent of that Society: but this doctrine of the uniting, as he terms it, of
Religion and the State of the Church and the Commonwealth, is merely opposite
to the doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has for ever put a separation
between the Church and the State, in those words, Give unto God, that which is
Gods, that is to say, religious Service; and unto Caesar, that which belongs
unto Caesar, that is, civil obedience, honor, homage, and tribute.

May it please your Majesty: your University of Paris has never taught
otherwise, holding her self fastto the ancient councels, and rejecting the
new, in that wherein they reject this wholesome doctrine, and this is it in
which the Kings, the Bishops of France, the Courts of Parliament, the Kings
council, the French Doctors, and lastly, this your University, have always
held the liberties of the French Church and kingdom to consist. And surely, it
is no final question which we have now in hand, no less worth then the estate
of the King, which these men leave to the mercy of the Pope, these men I say,
to whose charge the training up of our youth is every where committed, the
consciences of the people in their confessions, and by their sermons and
writings the instruction of all. Notwithstanding that in the mean while the
life of the King, and that of your Majesty are in hazard, in as much as when
the pope withdraws the right of government from a Prince, they hold him
presently for a tyrant, as usurping against the determination of that public
authority, which according to the Jesuits doctrine, may of a King make a
tyran^nay, they farther affirm that Subjects may rebel against their
Sovereign, although he be not excommunicate, if they believe, that those who
should do it, fearing his greatness, durst not* this is the decision of the
Jesuit Suarez, who by that means sets the estates and lives of al potent
Princes to six and seven. Such is also the practice of some murderers of
Kings, men who acknowledge the omnipotency of the Pope, taught by the
Jesuits, and indeed acknowledge none other, but so far forth as it pleases
the Pope; and this was apparently the practice of that last wretched parricide,
as it was clear by that execrable discourse which he held with those divines,
who were sent to confer with him; unto whom he showed him self to have been
perfectly skilled, in all the shifts and cauils which Sophistry it self could
possibly invent, touching that subject: this man I say, was thus cunning in
this point, who was otherwise deuoid of all good literature, and almost common
understanding.

We make no doubt, but if it would please your Majesty to consult the Pope in
this point, he would be drawn to perform that, which he ought, in condemning
by his Bu^s to hell pit such murderers and assassins, and by stopping (which
might be done by a word of his mouth) the torrent of those mischiefs, which
cast a shame and obloquie upon the innocence of Christian Religion; for the
power which these men have hitherto had at Rome, has given occasion to ^ome to
give out, that since he labors not to prevent these mischiefs, acted by
them, upon whom he may work what he list, it cannot be avoided but himself
must needs be thought to be the author of them: as the rules of justice
require.

The pretense which Cotton draws from the good of the Church, thereby to draw
to the Pope power to dispose of kingdoms, is but a colorable pretext: for by
virtue of that separation, which our Lord Jesus Christ has for ever made
between Religion and the State, through the whole world, where his Gospel
should be preached, we stand obliged, notwithstanding all Ecclesiastique
censures, interdictions, dispensations for oaths of allegiance, or
commandments whatsoever from the Pope, not to take Arms against our Kings,
but contrariwise to yield them all civil and temporal^ obedience, and for
safeguard of their lives to hazard our own. This is the law of nature,
engraven in the hearts of men, even when they enter into this world, which the
Son of God clothed with our flesh, has since established and consecrated,
binding Christians to the observance of it in a straiter manner th^n were the
Pagans, led by the sole light of Nature; and Priests more strictly then
Laickes, to whom they are to preach sound doctrine as well by words as example;
and Bishops rather then ordinary Priests, and lastly, above all, the chief^
Bishop of all, because his example in this case would more prevail then any
other, nay all the other beside. This was the true cause why the King of great
Britain, to safeguard himself from these King-killers, was constrained to
exact of his subjects an oath of allegiance, for their civil and temporal
obedience, and the surety of his life, notwithstanding the Popes Bulls.

An oath which the frequent doctrine and practice of assassines now a days
makes in a manner necessary through Christendom, to secure the estates and
lives of Gods anointed, and withal to free the Catholic Apostolic Roman
Religion toward the Kings and Princes of the earth, from that blame and hatred
which this wicked doctrine draws with it, and to make it more gracious in the
eyes of those who maintain a different religion. Yet is this wholesome doctrine
more needful in France then any where beside, because the effects of the
contrary fall especially upon the life and crown of the King, and rather now
in the minority of our King, then in his full age, this erroneous doctrine
ought to beresuted, and the venters thereof punished, because the practice of
the ages past has ever taught us, that when they would draw out their censures
against the temporalties of Kings, that commonly set upon the weakest.

For these reasons the University of Paris, daughter of the Kings of France,
most humbly beseeches your Majesty, the Princes of the blood, and the Lords
of the Council, not to give way to the Jesuits (sithence they defend an
opinion touching the popes omnipotency, and the surety of the estates and
lives of Kings, quite contrary to that which this University has always
taught and maintained) to the opening of their Schools here in Paris, much
less to their incorporating into the University, least they make the learning
and manner thereof as repugnant to the estate of Kings, as is their own Sect,
as may appear by those writings which Father Cotton dedicates to you, and puts
into your hands daily, and by that experience which we have found of them, and
yet daily find in many quarters of Christendom, and the University shall ever
be bound to pray for the establishment and happiness of the King, your
Majesty, the Princes of the blood, and the Lords of the Council.

FINIS.
THE TRANSLATOR, TO THE READER.
Reader,
THat thou be not ignorant of the occasion of Anti-coton, bepleased to be
informed, that since the last execrable parricide in France, the Doctors of the
Sorbon met together in solemn Convocation, condemned a book written by John
Mariana a Spanish Jesuit, maintaining the murdering of Kings, and before
that, was it adjudged by the presidents of the Parliament of Paris, that the
said book should publicly be burnt by the common executioner before the great
gate of the Palace, and withal as well the buying as selling of it was by
them straightly forbidden; hereupon a rumor spread it self, that the Jesuits
generally maintained the same opinion: and consequently their writings to that
purpose were as liable to censure and fire as that of Mariana Whereupon Cotton
newly returned from the Fu^erals of the Kings heart at la Flesche, and seeming
to be much appaled with this unexpected noise, was in a manner constrained (for
the making up of this sudden breach) presently to put pen to paper to
disclaim what Mariana had affirmed, to produce the testimonies of his
associates, who seemed to defend the contrary; and lastly, to set down those
articles in this point, which his society (as he pretended) would stand unto;
upon this Declaratorie Letter of Cottons (as himself terms it) dedicated to
the Queen Regent, comes forth within a very short space this Anti-Coton,
(written a^ it seems by one of the same Religion, and therefore cannot but
carry the greater show of truth,) which labors to prove against Cotton, that
the doctrine and practice of the Jesuits made a ready way unto, if not acted,
the late horrible blow in France: which book (as I am credibly informed by a
friend of good intelligence and credit, being greedily devoured of all sorts of
the French, Auidissime l^ctus ab omnibus ^sque adeo ^ssit Cottonum ^t ^^mini
exciuerit lachrymas prae dolor and iudignatione.
So ^^ung Cotton, that it wrung tears from him for very grief and
indignation, and personal imputations (as you know) the truer they are, the
deeper impressions they usually work. Now because I suppose some may be
desirous more particularly to understand of the quality of this Cotton (who is
so often named through this work,) for the further content of such, I can
assure them, that (...) France he carries the name rather of a good Orator,
then a deep Clark, as (...) better what belongs to points of Courtiership,
then Schollership, notwithstanding a man he is, much magnified by his own
Society, for having so thoroughly understood, and fully possessed the affections
of the last King, as if he had enchanted him; to whom he was both Confessor
and Preacher: and was besides that both at meals and at Mass continually in
his ear, no man more; insomuch that in France it grew to a common jest upon
any repulse from the King, or denial of acc^sse (...) him; Les oreills du Roy
sont buschees de Cotton: The Kings ears are stopped with Cotton. Whereupon about
three years since this Pasquill flew abroad in Paris.

Le Roy ne scauroit fair un pas,
Que le Pere Cotton l'accompagne:
Mais le bon Sire ne scait pas,
Que le fin Fin in the French signifies as well crafty as fine.
Cotton vient d'Espagne.
The King no where can step a foot,
But Father Cotton finds him out:
But the good King is not aware,
That fine Cotton is Spanish ware.
But I leave his person, and return again to his Letter, in the scanning of
which I have somewhat to say to him, which the Author of Anti-Coton passes by,
which is this; that whereas he undertakes to prove that the other Jesuits
accord not with Mariana, in the doctrine of making away Princes, and to that
end produces the testimony of Becanus, one of their chief pillars: turning
to the passage he quotes, I find that Becanus in that very place approues
(...) in express terms, and withal holds (...) common tenent of the
Jesuits, his words are these* In respons* ad Aphorism. 9. Atque haecest
expressa sententia Iohannis Marianae loco citato, and aliorum Iesuitarum qui
ha^ de re scripserunt, in qua non video quid Caluinistae possint merito
reprehendere: And this is expressly the opinion of John Mariana in the place
alleged, as also of the other Jesuits who have written touching this subject,
in which I see not what it is which the Caluinists ca^^ justly disprove. That
which I now affirm is a matter of fact, and therefore needs no more ado then
the opening of the Book, and the reading of the text.

Again in producing Gregory de Valentia his testimony of him, (...) 2 2.
disp. 5. quest. 8. punct. 3.
he affirms, determine qu'il n'est nullement permis d'attenter sur la vie du
Prince, iacoit qu'il abuse deson authorite: he concludes, that it is in no case
lawful to make a^ assault upon the person of the Prince, howbeit be abuse his
authority* Whereas the said Valentian in the same place by him alleged, first
distinguishing of a tyrant by adminis^ration and usurpation, plainly
affirms, de primo eadem estratio, ac de alijs malefactoribus* qui solum per
publicam pote^^atem puniri possint: of a tyrant taken in the first sense (that
is by administration) there is the same reason as of other malefactors, who
cannot be punished but by public authori^ie. In which words he seems to me to
range unruly Princes (though they pretend never so just a title to their
Crowns) in the Catalogue of common murderers and thieves, and to make them as
abnoxious to public censure, whereas Cotton would make us believe that he
holds their persons altogether inviolable.

Lastly, that (...) to say at this time against Cotton, and the (...) he
alleges is this; against himself, that he prote^^eth, the opinion in this
case of all the I^suites in common, and every of them in pa^ticular, no way to
dissent or vary from that of the uniuersall Catholic Church, which assertion
of his to be merely u^true, shall hereafter (God willing) be fully
demonstrated, by making it clearly appear what the Catholic Church has
ever taught and practiced in this point from age to (...) down to these very
present times, and by comparing it with that which the Jesuits now adays
generally both teach and practis^. Against the Authors he alleges this I say,
that whereas they impute the occasion of the Canon of the Council of Constance
against tyrannicides, Azorius Serarius, alijque.
to the doctrine of the Hussites, it must needs arise either from their
ignorance, or their malice, or both; for had they but read the Canon it self
as it is laid down in the body of the Council, or John Gerson, In his
proposition on the behalf of the French King: or lastly, The French History
in the life of Charles the sixth, they might easily have perceived that the
occasion thereof grew from a doctrine which John Petit, a Doctor of the Sorbon,
set a foot in ^aris on the behalf of John Duke of Burgundy, who tre^herously
show Lewis Duke of Orleance, as the author of this precedent Book has rightly
observed, in the very first entrance thereof, and surely I make no doubt but
the greatest part of those Fathers who met at that Council, if they now lived
and saw how matters are carried in Christend^m, would as willingly subscribe to
the censuring of that opinion which the Iesuit^^ (...) maintain touching to
making away of (...), (...) did to the condemnation of that of John (...) very
deed and truth is little or nothing differing from that of the Jesuits, sa^e
only they are grown more cunning to east a fairer glass and varnish upon it.
Thus much have I added, not that I take any pleasure in ripping up and
discovering other men's imperfections, which with my heart I rather wish were
not; or in exagitating that Sect among whom reside many excellent wits, but
which dwell ill, and as he said, in malum publicum, but only that I might a
little farther search into that wound which I find cannot be cured without much
launcing: in the mean time my desire is, and daily prayer unto God shall be,
that notwithstanding we differ in some points of our Religion, yet we may all
agree in our obedience to our Sovereign, and strive on each side to gain
credit to our Religion by the fruits of our obedience, as assuring o^r selu^s
(because Truth it self has delivered it) that Obedience is better then
Sacrifice: 1. Sam. 15. 22. Ita a plebibus Principes, and a s^r^is domini
fer^^di sunt, vt sub ^x^rcitati^^e t^leranti^e (...)
Iconclude with S. Augustine: So are Subjects to bear with their Sovereigns,
and Servants with their Lords, that through the exercise of our patience,
things transitory may be endured, and eternal hoped for.

FINIS.

