POLIMANTEIA, OR, The means lawful and unlawful, to IVDGE OF THE FALL OF A
COMMONWEALTH, AGAINST the frivolous and foolish conjectures of this age.
Whereunto is added, A letter from England to her three daughters, Cambridge,
Oxford, Innes of Court, and to all the rest of her inhabitants: persuading them
to a constant unity of what religion soever they are, for the defense of our
dread sovereign, and native cuntry: most requisite for this time wherein we
now live.

Invide, quod neque as imitari carpere noli:
Nil nisicum sumptu mentem oculosque iuvat.
Printed by John Legate, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1595. And are
to be sold at the sign of the Sun in Paul's Churchyard in London.

TO THE RIGHT honorable, Robert Devorax Earl of Essex and Ewe, Vicount of
Hereforde, Lord Ferrer of Chartley, Borcher, and Lovaine, Master of the Queens
Majesty's Horse, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of her
Majesty's most Honorable privy Council.
IT is easy to guess (honorable Lord) why Scholars flock under the
patronage of men in your place; their condition is so weak, that unless men
truly honorable do defend them, they are most of all in this age distressed.
And yet (brave noble Lord) ingeniously to confess my true meaning) it is not
that which moved me at this time; but it is the height of admiration which my
thoughts conceived of your honors worth, that made me think all men bound to
offer signs of love and duty, where both are deserved in so high a measure I
take upon me Englands person and speak like a Commonwealth. And therefore
howsoever it were presumption in me to dedicate papers of so small moment, to a
personage of so rare worth, yet (honorable Lord) take them as your cuntries
talk, vouchsafe to read them stamped with her name, and so all shall be
afraid to mislike them, being graced with yours. And yet I weigh not whether
others mislike them or no; let but your honor for learnings sake (a thing
which I know you do) say you are content to accept of the meanest trifle, and
grace it with a good look, and then I contemn what male-contented melancholy
can speak against me. Your honor (be it spoken without envy) like Englands
Cedar is sprung up to preserve with your shadow, the humblest in all
professions, from hatreds malice. The warlike and brave soldier thinks him
self (and that in truth is) graced, to be termed but your follower. The
worthy and kind passionate Courtier deemes (and worthily) this his honor, to
be your favorite. The sober and devout student, that despised does walk
melancholy, takes himself (and not without cause) fortunate to be termed your
scholar. Thus all rely noble Lord, upon your favor. And I (who though I must
needs honor) yet usually with so deep affection am not devoted without cause)
do so in kindness and love (if that be not a word too presumptuous) pass
over the full interest of my self to your dispose, as in what kind soever a
scholar may do his duty, I am ready and desirous to be commanded by you:
then accept (noble lord) the willing mind of him that has nothing else: and
say, that that alone, is absolutely sufficient to content you. Read it, but (or
if that be to much) do but accept it, and so rest. where of not doubting in
the midst of so many signs of a schollar-respecting honor, in duty I kiss
my hand, and humbly take my leave.

Your honors in all duty most affectionate, W C.

The Preface to the Reader.
We are fallen into the barren age of the world (courteous Reader) wherein
though some few travail to expel Barbarism, (which fortunately they have
done in our English tongue) yet a number of idle conceited-wise-foolish heads
take upon them peremptorily to censure other The cause why many write not.
Ignorance sits idle and will judge. In vain do we complain of multitude of
books.
men's pains: so that every man is loath to enter into the view whilst Idleness
shall stand controlling and give her sentence. I know it could fit these to
write, but that magni laboris est quem plerique fugimus. Homer wrote of the
travails of the worthy Grecian Ulysses; Curtius of Alexander and Darius;
Rome had never been so renowned but for Titus Livius; Thucydides eternized
Jason and Minotaure; and sweet Salust Iugurth and Cateline: nay this wise age,
long since had been plain foolish, if our painful forefathers had not
travailed for their good. And if any man think this age is too wisely learned
to read any thing which is but some few drops of that main Ocean which
ouerflowed in their days, let him know this, that care added to their
industrious travails, is easily able to perform matters of great importance.
Learning was let loose over all Europe ever since Athens did first flourish
(excepting a fevve years when the Goths and Vandalls compelled her to live in
exile) who flying fast from their fury left Italy and those famous places,
and planted her self so firmly in these poor countreies, that ever since
amongst us she has lived honorably. Thus in the abundance of our knowledge,
he that has taken pains, stands at the courtesy of every paltrie fellow to
be censured as it please him. In consideration whereof, wise men have deemed it
the safest, secretly to smile, and soberly to say nothing. For my pains I much
care not, I esteem thee (Reader) as thou do me, for (degenerous Vales.
Zanch. N. D. B. Gallici
minds entreated, grow insolent:) the days are evil, and the argument is fit
for these times; I know diverse have travailed in the same kind, whom I but
humble (without wronging them) to speak unto thy capacity: Nobility fully
learned made My L. Henry Howard.
choice to handle the same argument, and with such profounde deep skill
performde it, as that truth takes her self much bound unto him, who made her
to speak eloquently that uses to be plain, and false prophesies ashamed, who
so long have usurped truths titles. From hence may thou learn (or at least
remember) that the greatest Monarchs (howsoever proud in their own strength)
must either fall with an enemies stroke, or (as Rome did) with her own
weight: here may thou see that nothing is so made, but subject to great
change. And yet least thou desire to know what thou ought not, I have
labored to make known what thou should desire: my leisure will not serve
to detain thee long, and a short preface is beseeming so small pains. I take
my leave, and (if thou have deserved) I give thee thanks: only this I must
add further (not to accuse others, or make an Apology for my self) that I
never yet in the least syllable of the so termed loosest line, meant either to
modesty, piety, chastity, time, the Muses, or kindness to do wrong; neither
should the surmised object of my muses song, or the dearest which that object
has, suspect in me but the least shadow of supposed eniurie: for I neither
meant to make loose poetry a true history, or thought that wise courtesy
would be so suspicious to misdeeme him, whose thoughts long since were devoted
to grauer studies: from whence taking leisure but to pause a little, my pen
grew passionate, and my idle papers scattered unawares flew abroad (I protest)
not to offend any: thus I bind thee (by that credit which truth deserves)
whosoever thou art which reads, to believe what I have spoken herein, and (if
thou please) for my sake to accept For such a Coxcombe.
this. And because every Balductum makes divine poetry to be but baserime, I
leave thee (sacred eloquence) to be defended by the Muses ornaments, and such
(despised) to live tormented with endless poverty. Farewell.

Diluuium, terrae motus, contagia passim
Bella, fames, mundi quid reliquum exitio est?
Ignis and ipse prope est; vnde haec? ex arce tonantis:
Tot mala quid mundo congerit? Impietas.
Anne salutis adhuc spes vlla est? vnica: quisnam
Porriget hanc? piet as: haec vbi? nullus habet:
Quid stas munde? rue, vt pietas est nulla; ruentem
Sic video; auxilium numina laesa negant.
Inscriptio portae.
Si nihil aedificas, quia spectas nostra viator?
Aut mea ne carpas, aut meliora struas.
Si meliora tenes, id divos poscito mecum,
Ne, quod vterque tenet, fascinet inuidia.
Labor.
O labor, o sudor, scelerati proemia morsus,
Ah satis natos occule terra tuos.
Nec omnia nec omnes mihi
placuere; quinam ego omnibus?
non omnibus Cous senex,
non Eremita Spagirus,
number tu viator omnibus?
deo placere cura, abei.
POLIMANTEIA.
BEfore we come particularly to speak of Diuinations lawful and unlawful;
for the true and better understanding of them, we will first define, what
Divination is: Divination What Divination is.
is a foretelling of things to come, performing it in diverse manners, as well
artificially, as naturally. But those that more curiously subtilize upon the
Etymology, say, that to divine is properly to foretell, and to foresee things
to come, by an exterior motion, without having any subject, cause, or sign
before hand God alone absolutely knows things to come.
to conjecture so; and therefore in this sort, God testifies of himself, that
he alone knows things to come, which afterward he reueiled by his Prophets
and Apostles, as it pleased him. Now Satan desiring in this to be Gods Ape,
Satan Gods
(thereby the better to abuse the world, and to drown men in intolerable
superstition, by a natural curiosity to know things to come) has
injuriously and falselie usurped the same authority to Satan falsely a
Diuiner.
divine, and from thence proceeds the word Divination: so that thereby Satan
so much the more under a cloak of natural things, is for the most part as a
forger and cou^terfeiter (excepting the divination whereupon the subject of
this matter depends:) and therefore it is necessary to try and examine in the
first place, the might, subtlety and craft of the devil; in whom we shall
find as great knowledge and understanding, The power of Satan.
(excepting the Angels) as in all the other creatures besides; we shall find
as great subtlety for interpreting the signs of diverse things: a matchles
vigilancie: an incomparable cunning, to invent trumperies; and deceit, under
fine colored, but false pretenses: And to conclude, a most perfect malice
accompanied with a perpetual hate against Satan a perpetual enemy to
mankind.
mankind: and the rather, seeing that it is not in his force, to do any thing
of himself: to hinder the course of things natural ordained by God: to
destroy and to make again: to sound the depth of man's heart: or to foresee how
God governs the course of the world: the affairs of Kings and Princes before
the revelation of his divine prophesies. Notwithstanding he perceives by his
subtlety the hid properties of things bodily and spiritual. His knowledge is
exceeding by his manifold experience of things past: he diueth so far as may
possibly be sounded into men's manners; and copies out their actions, from
whence he deriueth his greatest profit. Thus he incombers the actions of Kings
and Princes of each in particular; that contrary to all reason and opinion of
men, they are all so intermedlingly inwrapped each in other states, that scarce
any knows how to escape himself. Thorough the deep whereof he so lancheth
without sight, that he makes one of them to entrap and beguile another:
whereof every where are examples sufficient, and therefore S. Paul to the
Ephesians sets down most lively Satan's puissance. But let us see a little
nearer the devils policy, of what force and efficacy it is, especially in
those things which concern the ruins of Government, or change of a Common
wealth. First then, although that the devil knows not the state and affairs
of Kings and Princes in particular, as God from the beginning has
predestined them in his immutable counsel, nor how he will dispose and change
them contrary to the opinion of men and ordinary course of things natural;
yet notwithstanding the knowledge which men by the permission of almighty God,
have drawn Man inferior in knowledge to Satan.
out of the divine prophesies of ancient time, is not comparable to that of
Satan, by reason he far surpasses man, in fine, quick and nimble subtlety,
which he uses to his own advantage. These Spirits.
know by the predictions of Prophets: that such Kings and Princes shall come to
govern: besides, by what means Note.
they shall attain it, and by whom God will give the Scepter into their hands:
besides, when and how it shall be taken from them. And in one word, Satan
Foretold.
knows the estate of Government which must happen, and how long it shall
endure, and the enemies which shall rise up for the ruin of it. From these and
such like revelations would they draw their diuinations. They have found out
by the prophesies of Daniel the estate and change of Monarchies which must
happen, the ruin of Darius, the destruction of Asia: and that the Monarchy of
Babylon shall be transported to the Greeks: By means whereof, when Alexander
the Great consulted with the Oracles.
Oracle at Delphos, Pythias answered him, Eris inuictus Alexander: Thou shall
be unconquered Alexander. And afterward for confirming, and giving credit to
his Oracle, he ceased not to show Satan's subtlety.
signs and wonders together with vain illusions, in the behalf of Alexander,
which way soever he marched with his army: on the contrary not to daunt
Darius too much, he nourisht in him a Satan an Ambidexter.
vain hope by doubtful dreams, persuading him fondly of victory, against
his enemy. For the temptations of Satan are of that sort, that they promise us
all joy and happiness whatsoever: but no sooner they are entertained of us, but
in their place comes despair, with a perpetual torment. By the prophecy of
Daniel and Esai, the devil Satan knows the scripture.
knew that the Monarchy of the Assyrians should be wholly desolate and given
into the power of the Medes and Persians, and that all this should be done by
Cyrus. For this cause it was foretold, that King Croesus should be chased and
spoiled of the kingdom of Lydia: And therefore knowing the might of King
Cyrus, Satan ceased not to move and incite Croesus by a bayte of ambition, to
Croesus conquered.
oppose himself against the Persian Cyrus. This being done, the Assyrians
Empire was spoiled, Croesus conquered, and the Monarchy translated to Cyrus.

There is one especial example far surpassing all that antiquity mentions
of Satan's subtlety, whereby apparently he showed the intent and effect of his
whole treachery: It was that of the great contemplative divine Iamblicke,
Iamblich.
who desirous to know the name of him that should in the Empire succeed the
Emperor Ualens that then reigned, he made trial of it by a certain A thing
unlawful.
foolish (be it spoken with reverence to so wise a man) and most unlearned
divination in this manner: He caused the Greek Alphabet written to be put by
distinct letters, in the ground, and upon every one he placed a grain of
Barley; A foolish proof.
in the midst a Cock, and the letters where the Cock scraped the Barley,
should signify the thing he so much desired. Now it happened that the Cock
bared these four letters: (...) yet now likewise (...).
he remained uncertain of the name which these letters should portend, to
discern whether it were Theodosius, or Theodotus, Theodorus, or Theodectes.
The Emperor Ualens seeing the event of all this, and fearing some false play,
made Divination will beget Tyranny.
(Herod like) all such to be put to death, as those letters did point out. He
commanded likewise, to search forth the Divine. Iamblicke, fearing the
cruelty of the Emperor, by reason of the fault which he had committed, (for
it was not Unmeet it should be.
lawful in Rome to enquire into the succession of the Empire during the life
of the Emperor) poisoned himself. But we shall find for the most part that
the devil the more to delude men by Doubtful answers argue deceit, or
ignorance.
these diuinations, gave his answers hid, dark, double, and doubtful,
especially when himself (which often happened) was uncertain of the event,
being only led by suspicious and slight conjectures, without evidence of
divine revelation, (as appeared by the doubt of that name which those four
letters might portend:) for not knowing the truth, he talks by circumstances
and dark signs, sometimes telling the truth to gain credit to his false
lies, A Caveat.
seeing by a malicious instinct he strives to obscure the truth, to the great
damage of mortal men. For his delight is in falsehood, and his joy is in our
fall. That is the reason why he uses these doubtful and uncertain answers,
to the intent to abuse men by his ridiculous apish mockeries, and finally to
bring them by a certain fear, and a sorrow of things to come, to most
abominable wickedness, in executing the self same evil, which before he had
told unto him, that inquired of it.

We have a most famous example and worth the marking, of an Oracle (in respect
of their doubtful answers) which was found in Greece under the shadow
Ambiguitie in oracles.
of the word (...), which signifies both man and light, if the accent be not
rightly (...), man, light.
placed (for the ancient Greeks were not careful in this, as it is well noted
by Iustus Lypsius:) then the doubt of the foresaid Oracle, by reason of the
ambiguitie of the word, made them uncertain whether their sacrifice should be
of humane flesh or some other thing; even so now we see oftentimes that he has
told the event of things, whereof he is the author: yet notwithstanding for all
that, because God has admirable means in his counsel for to govern all that
is in the world, and because Satan is ignorant of the event or change God
disproueth his sophistry.
of things disposed by GOD himself, (whether it be a punishment or a release
of his rigor, which he uses sometimes in the execution of his justice) he
utters his diuinations and predictions in obscure manner, balanced with an
equal, yet difficult interpretation, which may as well agree to this as to
that, not only for the doubtful sense, but for the double reading of it. Of
this kind was this: Croesus Halym penetrans magna^ peruertit opum vim. Likewise
the fraudulent example of the answer which the Pope Borgias.
devil gave unto Pope Borgias of eleven years and eight months, may serve to
confirm this. Furthermore, the devil not only knows by divine prophesies
Satan cunning in divine prophesies.
the subuersions, ruins, and restroings of Monarchies, but he intrudeth
himself often into the handling of them, and entermedleth in the counsel of
Kings and Princes, enforcing them A states man.
by all means possible to bring in a confusion: to trouble the estate: to
oppose themselves one against another: to disperse Realms: to debase laws
tending to the good government of the Common wealth. He is always hammering of
some news, daily to hinder good and sound counsel, and in stead The author of
ill laws.
of them to set abroach other, fatal to the Church and the Common wealth: he
enflameth the hearts of the mighty, with an ambitious desire of ruling, to
this end, he persuades them to follow bad counsel, serving for the execution
of their dissignments: Such as these are Jeroboam.
plentiful in the holy scripture. Thus he moved the Chaldeans to come to rob
and spoil Job of his riches, and to sley Job. 1. 17.
his servants. Thus he plotted like an ancient states man, to hinder the
rebuilding of the Temple of Jerusalem, after the return from Babylon,
persuading Note.
king Cambyses, by means of the Courts flatterers, to make war against the
Egyptians, which he did: And for fear lest the Jews should enter into
alliance Satan uses great men sometimes for his turn.
with them of Egypt, the king commanded in plain terms, to hinder the work of
the Temple which was then begun: and thus Satan compassed his intended scope.
When he asked leave to enter into the heard of swine, he had more craft then a
common politic: He did A foreseeing Politician.
the Gaderens a displeasure in their religion, by that means, foreseeing they
would entreat Christ to go out of their kingdom, and so run headlong with
their swine, into eternal destruction. Again, he stood at the right side of
the Sacrificer in Jerusalem, to hinder that no good thing might be done in
that city. He attacheth (as it were) with a Rather them then others to make
the^ hurt by example.
contagious infection the most part of public persons, the better by that
means to obtain his purpose, by reason of the charge which they sustain for
to preserve others. Then seeing that Satan intermingleth himself in the midst
of affairs public, and that by a divine permission, he insnareth both 1.
King. 22.
one, and other, aiming continually to subvert the state, (especially of
Monarchs) knowing besides, that their ruin and change shall happen, it is no
marvel that he oftentimes foresees the events whereof he is the cause, and
afterward forgeth Diuinations, to the Satan buzzeth into men's hearts that which
he has plotted himself.
intent to deceive both one and other. But although that God oftentimes permit
Satan (by reason of our demerits) to exercise his tyranny over the principal
states of the world, yet notwithstanding, that permission is not infinite; for
God keeps, gardeth, and defends Realms, to the intent that being shaken
they may not be altogether ruinated, God is the sure rock of defense to a
kingdom.
causing his holy spirit to watch over them, against an enemy so mighty, in
giving them wholesome counsel, for the preservation of their estate. It is most
certain that GOD permits Satan sometimes to tyrannize over one, or other, as
we see in the King of Babylon, Dan 4. 29.
who was given into his power for seven years: yet notwithstanding when it
pleased him he made a restraint and brideled his unruly will. We see sometimes
how he keeps and vpholdeth the Realms of wicked Kings, for to make them a
means to maintain his So at this day Spain a stay for Christians against the
Turk. Nero.
Church, as appeared in the kingdoms of Babylon, Persia, and the Romans in
the time of Nero (Natures most strange monster in respect whereof, it is said,
that the society of man is resembled to a flock of sheep, whereof though The
society of man compared.
some indaunger themselves, yet the faithful shepherd endeavors himself by
all means possible, to save his flock whole, and defend it against the rage
of the wolves, which would devour it. For if we would but consider the matter
a little further, we shall find by the scripture in the time of Noah, after
the building of the tower of Babylon, Genesis 10 1^
that Nimrod was elected by divine providence, to guide and govern the people
then, when as the children, nephews, and lineage of Noah, wandered without
towns to dwell in, destitute of cities, or houses, living by hunting and upon
the fruits of the earth, without any tillage, who then represented a majesty,
force and valor in his person; by reason whereof the holy scripture says,
that he was Robustus venator Domini, Genesis 10. 9.
aut, Coram Domino, a strong hunter of the Lord, by reason of the might and Or
as some say, tyra^nize over men.
puissance that he had to tame the savage and wild beasts: Whereby we may well
conclude, that Common wealths had their beginnings by violent Tyrannies, and
that Nimrod by force and violence obtained the sovereignty. Notwithstanding we
find in scripture, that he was a most heroical King and no Tyrant: (howsoever
some do intend otherwise) A monarchy easily a tyranny.
because that by his means was established the form of a Common wealth, most
durable to govern, His beginning.
and to keep the people in order and discipline. And so from this first divine
wisdom, humane society was kept united from time to time. This likewise A
Prince Gods Vicegerent.
is the cause why the Prince is termed Gods Vicegerent upon earth. Finally, he
was guarded with such force, that the Empyres (which we call Monarchies) by
this means were ordained: and then of the self same Monarchies, (by reason A
thing usual.
of an insatiable ambition and desire to rule) proceeded Tyrannies. But
although that Tyrants, by the permission of God, seemed sometimes (by reason of
their horrible murders and destructions) to be willing to cancel all law, and
pervert all justice, that tended to the maintenance of a Commonwealth, and
whereby Empyres flourished: yet notwithstanding we find by the discourse of
histories, that the very Tyrants themselves, by a divine providence, Tyrants
have often had a care of good laws.
have oftentimes left behind the^ good laws, as the true marks of Justice,
tending to the maintenance and conservation of kingdoms, to the intent that
humane society should not either be dispersed, or raced out. God has the
means to us unknown, to keep them from such wickednesses, that he turns the
evil of present ruling Tyrants, unto the especial good of governing
posterity: for his will is the perfect rule and the infallible direction of
all right and equity. By reason whereof some are of that mind, that although
the Empire of the Turks, in dignity and greatness The Turk no Monarch.
exceeded the four Monarchs of the world, yet notwithstanding it could not
be reputed for a true Monarchy, because that amongst those barbarous people,
there was neither humanity nor form, or show of justice, but a Without
Justice no Monarchy.
mere deuastation of Empyres, and a real destruction of all laws and
policies; which were established and dreamingly observed of other Monarchies,
under whom (notwithstanding their enormities) God had continually preserved
miraculously a form of justice, to the intent to preserve his own people. I
will only allege two examples (not to be too troublesome) without touch or
mention of the Roman laws afterward brought in, to show by them the equity
and justice, which Tyrants and Infidels themselves have sometimes in the
government of their Commonwealths used, as well in regard of their Justice
sometimes amongst Tyrants.
civil and politic order, as Military. The one long since famous, is the
example of the execution of justice in King Cambyses (otherwise a great Tyrant)
which he executed upon the Judge Cambyses. Herodotus lib. 1.
corrupted with bribes in the person of Sysannes, who after he was put to death
he was fleyed, and his skin hung over the Judgment seat, where his son
was commanded to sit as Judge, that in judging he might remember the offense of
his father. The other, is the famous Anaxilaus.
and memorable example of Anaxilaus, whom the Lacedaemonians used thus: He
seeing that in the time of the siege of the city Byzance, Clearchus the
Governor began to take the goods of the Burgesses, that dyed for famine, to
divide amongst his Soldiers, to the intent to hold the town longer, he dealt
in the absence of Clearchus with the enemy, to yield up the town upon good
conditions, which soon yielded without pillage or shedding of blood. Afterward
Anaxilaus was accused to the^ of Sparta for rendering the town, who (using a
most honest excuse) answered, that they ought to make war against the enemy
and not their own selves, and that it was a thing most unjust to handle the
Burgesses more rudely then the enemy. And for these excuses full of reason
they absolved him. This example may serve at this day sometimes to excuse
public persons, who^ some But not to excuse treason.
endeavor to accuse and blame slanderously, without discretion, not considering
that God miraculously governs the heart of those whom God has placed to
govern others, to the intent to hinder and prevent the total ruin of his
people and Common wealth; as we may read of the Prophet Jeremiah, who gave
counsel to the King Zedechias, when he was besieged in Jerusalem, to yield
himself to the Chaldeans, to the intent to preserve the people and the town,
notwithstanding many others persuaded the contrary. Many such examples full of
natural equity are largely handled by Saint Ambrose in the third book of his
Offices. On the other side to return to our former subject, it is known unto
all, that the devil has knowledge concerning the ruins and changes of Common
wealths, and Not absolutely.
that he has learned much by the periods of years, and the fatal age of
Realms, and Empires, knowing by observation of times, that they are limited:
and because their state is subject to change, that serves him for all
occasions. Cicero in the twelft of the Nature of Cicero de Natura Deorum.
gods, speaking of the invention of sundry diuinations, and superstitious
observations, has these words, Multas Observation has begotten this
Divination.
res diuturnus vsus ita notauit vt artem Diuinationis efficeret: and in another
place he says, Obseruatio diuturna notandis rebus fecit artem: The histories
of all times do teach us (in case we would carefully observe them, and search
them thoroughly) that the most part of the greatest kingdoms, have not endured
five hundred years. Many have light 500. years the common period of a
Kingdom in former time.
short of that full time: none or very few have passed it, but have fallen
either at that period, or not long before it; some having perished in whole,
some only changed in some form; the government of the Kings of Judah beginning
The Kings of Judah. Saul.
with Saul, the first kingdom continued to the captivity of Babylon, which
was five hundred years. The same space of time was likewise again marked after
the Captivity, beginning at Esdras, and continuing to the Emperor Esdras,
Vespasian. Joseph de Bell. Iud.
Uespasian, which ruinated Jerusalem from the very ground, and then were the
Jews dispersed, and scattered from one part of the world to another: and since
that time their common wealth Gods judgment.
was never perfectly restored, notwithstanding the endeavors and extreme
pains they employed therein. The Commonwealth of the Athenians from The common
wealth of Athens continued 490. years.
Cecrope to Codrus, continued four hundred fourscore and ten years: which
was then changed to a Democratie. The Common wealth of the Lacedaemonians The
common wealth of the Lacedaemonians. Roman Consuls 500. years.
changed about that time, under the Kings Heraclides, till the time of
Alexander the Great. The Romayne Consuls governed five hundred years, from the
banishment of the Kings, until the time of the monarchy of Augustus; the same
was observed since Augustus till Valentinian. West Empire.
the fall of Ualentinian the last Emperor of the West: and that then the West
Empire failed: and that the barbarous Uandales, Alaius and others, invaded
Uandales
the countries of Spain, and in the end all Italy, with the city of Rome.
The same number of years were observed a little after, from the time that
Constantine the Great transported the Constantine.
Italian Empire to Constantinople, until Charlemaine, who restored the Empire
Charlemaine.
of the west, having chased the Lombards out of Italy. Likewise we may call
to mind by histories, that many realms and Common wealths have endured not
past the half period of those five hundred, or there about; as that of the
Persians, which from Cyrus to the last Persians continued 230.
Darius flourished: but in the two hundred and thirty years, it was fully
ruinated by the force of Alexander the Monarch of the Greeks 250. years.
Great. On the other side, the Monarchy of the Greeks, which began with
Alexander, and afterward successively was derived to diverse kings, as of Syria,
and Egypt, continued two hundred and fifty years, which after that time was
subverted by the might of the Romans. Furthermore if we would search the
Chronicles of France, we shall find the same period (after that Syagre, last
Proconsull and Lieutenant for the Romans in France, was deposed) till Clowis
France.
the first christian king, until Pepin father of Charlemaine, and then after
until Hugh Capet, was numbered 237. years. 237. years.
Further, besides all this, we may see in the discourse of histories, that the
period The periode of 700. years observed by some.
of seven hundred years brought notable change to states. The Common wealth of
the Carthaginians, (then The Carthaginians had continued 700. years.
when it was wholly spoiled by Scipio) had continued seven hundred years. The
war betwixt Caesar and Pompey, Caesar and Pompey his war was in the 700.
year after Romes foundation.
which is some sort decayed the state of the Romayne Empire, happened in the
seven hundred years after Romes foundation; and at the same time two periods
met together, the one of five hundred from the beginning of the Consuls, Two
Periodes met together.
the other of seven after the foundation of Rome. In like sort about seven
hundred years after the destruction of Carthage, Totilas the king of the
Tot^las.
Goths robbed the city of Rome, carrying captive with him the principal
Lords of the city, which Scipio had long before foretold, when Carthage The
Moors with Spain in the year after Christ 700.
was besieged. So likewise do we read that the Moors dealt with Spain, the
year after Christ seven hundredth; after that were they all chased out by
Ferdinand of Arragon, grandfather by Ferdinand.
the mother to Charles the fifth. For example, of our times we see, that it is
seven hundred years past, that Charles Charles the great.
the Great established the western Empire, which period (considering the Note
this.
change of the times present) seems to threaten some great ruin, although
there is nothing so of necessity, but as it pleases God to dispose all things
for the best. Now it is needful likewise to examine more nearely the Quality
of The quality of periods.
the foresaid periods, for it is questioned of at this day, if there be any
such period necessarily certain, and fatal for Empires: likewise why some
fail before Todin and others.
their prefixed time, without expecting their ordinary fall. The Philosophers
not knowing how to find Ignorance of true causes faineth false ones.
out the reasons, because of their incredulity, have so incombred their true
understandings, that they have forged arithmetical aenigmes, other imposing to
stars, and celestial causes. But for the true understanding of it, let us
consider the testimonies and examples of holy Scripture, besides the mere
conjectures of heathen Philosophy. The universal period of Empyres is
declared unto us by the Prophet Daniel, speaking The touchstone of periodes.
of the seauenty weeks, containing about five hundred years since the
restoring of the Temple, after the return from Babylon, until the time of
Christ. But because the period is not general and perpetual (by reason that
we see some Empyres not attain half their period;) notwithstanding we shall
find by the discourse and testimony of histories, that the period (as by a
divine institution) is fatal to the most According to our view.
Empyres for their beginnings and endings, as may be apparently manifest, both
by the examples alleged before, and by many others here and there which may
be alleged to that purpose. The reason of the difference in regard of time,
and the diversity of change which happens in them, is likewise grounded upon
the holy scripture of Gods word: we have said before, that GOD gives the
Scepter of realms as it pleases him, and takes them away as his pleasure is.
Likewise The change of Kingdoms not by chance.
the change of kingdoms happens not by chance, but by divine providence; by
reason of the causes, which go before the ruins of them, by means whereof,
God so disposes of Realms and Empyres, that whomsoever he has installed for
government, are by him defended with might and authority, as the especial
gift of God, accompanied with many virtues requisite thereunto, namely wisdom,
happiness, goodwill, justice, clemency, etc. all which jointly sustain the
pillars of the Empire: for it is written, Misericordia and veritas custodiunt
regem and clementia fulcitur thronus eius. In such sort that the Common wealths
of Kings and Princes defended with this authority, are for a long time,
flourishing and in Prosperous Kingdoms.
most prosperous estate. On the contrary, if the Common wealth be governed by
wicked kings, vicious, or tyrants, and that the subjects to the imitation of
their Prince, are infected with the same faults, and plunged so deep, that
they can no way get out; then authority fails, virtues are abandoned, and
punishment does ensew: hereupon GOD hasteneth his judgments which prevent the
reuolutions, and changes in that they had appearance to The punishment of sin
is the change of the state.
continue longer: he punishes sins both of the Prince and people ordinarily
by the change and ruin of the Common wealth: for being not bound to the
periods of time, he disanulleth, God not tied to periods.
changes, and alters their estates, as it pleases him. This shows Solomon
plainly, where he says: Because of Injustice Kingdoms are translated from one
place to another, for the sins of the land, Wisdom the stay of a land.
some after others are made Princes, and by reason of a wise and understanding
man, the Empire is more durable. Thus we may see the reason of the
contrariety in respect of the change of the periods above mentioned. Master
Peucer treating M. Peucer.
the difference of them, says, that three sorts of sins are noted in the holy
Causes of the fall of Kingdoms three. 1. Impiety. 2. Injustice. 3. Lechery.
scripture, which principally cause the ruins and changes of a common wealth.
Impiety ruinating the Church: Injustice corrupting the Common wealth: and
Lechery destroying the family, with which Pride is intermedled, and their
several harms redound unto al: for this cause Intemperancie and Pride mixed, is
noted by the Poet to be most special for the subuerting of a state: Nam
caetera regna Luxuries vitijs odijsque superbia vertit. Aristotle ascribing the
change of Empyres Aristotle.
to sins, comprehends them all under this one word of inequality,
Inequality.
and the difference of the degrees of honor, and dignities; and that for
virtue, although not for religion. But the causes and occasions going before
these chaunges, consist in the manners and actions of men, which all are not of
the same sort, but exceeding diverse. And therefore the same author adds and
reproves the former opinion that states are troubled by diverse means. I take
it here not a thing impertinent (seeing the subject of our matter) to stay a
little and examine somewhat the opinion of some authors, which are willing to
set down rules to judge of the happenings for the events and chaunges of Common
wealths. Amongst others Plato Plato. Celestial influence.
ascribes not this either to a celestial influence, nor to the motion of
stars, but to the dissolution of Harmony. This is his opinion, but we find
at this day a great contrariety amongst the late writers, for the true
understanding of Plato his mind, and chiefly of the word Bodin. de Rep. lib. 4.
Harmony. Master John Bodin is of that mind, that this Harmony is to be
understood Harmony.
of tunes and melodious sounds. For the better interpretation whereof, and the
more to confirm his opinion, in the fourth book of his Politics he has made
the form of a Tria^gle with certain numbers thereupon, to ground a musical
harmony; and so apply it to Plato his opinion. Wherein he is reprehended by
Master Augier Ferrier Lord of Castillon, who making the distinction
Aequiuocation in Harmony.
of the word Harmony, to put away all equiuocatio^s, says, that the word
Harmony is a general term, applied to all things well beseeming: and to all
good proportions: to all Common wealths well framed: to all families well
ordered, and generally to every thing justly and orderly disposed: of perfect
measure and of fine accord. So the Physicians call the best constitutions of
body. The Musicians take the word otherwise, and refer it to tunes and
melodious soundes: and so Plato saying that Common wealths come to ruin when
the harmony fails, that is to Plato expounded by M. Augier.
say, when the policy, the laws, the order, the union of the inhabitants is
broken, uses the word in the first signification: for it is then that a way is
open to troubles and seditions whatsoever. And speaking to Master Bodin, think
you (says he) that Plato understood that of tunes and melodious sounds, which
Plato never thought of concerning the change of Kingdoms and Commonwealths?
And giving another reason against the former interpretation, he says, that
all proportion is not song, or melody, although otherwise it be a harmony,
for his good structure and equal figure: he alleges only this place for
the defense of the true understanding of that which Plato wrote, and of the
word Harmony: for concerning Harmony not the ground of Kingdoms.
the maine point, Bodin himself is of that opinion, that changing or
preservation of Common wealths, no way depends on the Harmony of soundes. But
a man ought more to fear it, when the citizens begin to stray from the
natural The fall of a city is the breach of good laws.
harmony of good laws well ordered; and from manners rightly disposed, to
laws, customs, and manners unlawful, wicked, and pernicious: although he
denies not that Harmony of sounds has a great force and effect to change a
Common wealth: for (says he) we have a memorable example of the Cynethian
Common wealth in The Cynethian common wealth.
Arcadia, which having forsaken the pleasure of Music, soon after fell to
seditions and civil wars, attributing the effect to Music, to appease and
mollify The effect of Music.
a people so barbarous and savage. By means whereof he confesses that this
causes the natural harmony of well agreeing laws, which causes me^ to
continue in good and perfect order, and thereupon follows the preservation of
the Common wealth. It is very likely that Music has a great force to
appease the minds of men, as diverse examples may give us witness, namely of
Saul and Pythagoras, who as well before Pythagoras.
as after his sleep used a certain Musical and melodious Harmony: And as
Censorin speaks, Vt animum sua semper diuinitate imbueret: To furnish the
mind with the divinity of it. The same author says, that Asclepiades the
Physician Asclepiades.
used ordinarily a musical harmony to call furious and phreneticall spirits
to their own nature: and there upon is it common (says he) Ut legionibus in
Music expels the fear of danger.
acie dimicantibus metus mortis classico depellatur: and in nauis metu vel vt
facilius laborem sufferant a vectore Symphonia adhibetur. Yet notwithstanding
he teaches us that Music at this day has not the effect to withstand the
sedition of our age, because she has lost much of her ancient nimblenes, by
reason whereof Music not so nimble as it has been.
Music is not esteemed of all equally in general. On the other side we may
observe the opinion of those who would judge of the change of Kingdoms,
(although they are founded upon a ground ruinous) as those who The Horoscopy of
cities bad rules to judge by of chaunges.
build upon the Horoscopies of towns, thereby to judge of Common wealths:
Imagining that some Planets and fixed Stars are the workers and contriuers of
the worlds adventures, of which by reason of their incertitude I will not
speak, as being a thing merely ridiculous, to refer the acts, manners of
men, cities and particular events, to any such cause. Others as curiously
observing A 100 unprofitable curiosity.
the same matter concerning the state of kingdoms, have not only noted the
years, but the months, as Master John Bodin, who says, that if we mark the
great and notable changes of states and kingdoms, we shall find September.
the most part to have been in September, in which month the law of God gave
his beginning to all the world: and for better confirming his opinion, he
gives diverse examples; amongst others the great victory of Augustus
Augustus. M. Anthony conquered the 2. day of September.
against Marc. Anthony, which happened the second day of September, being a
contention for the greatest Empire that ever was. Paulus Aemilius changed the
great Empire of Macedoma into many popular estates, and sent King Perseus
prisoner to Rome, obtaining the victory the thirteenth of September: the
fourteenth of September 13. September.
Sultan Syliman dyed before Segett, and the seventeenth the town was taken:
the day following, Sigismund the father of Augustus, king of Polonia, put to
flight the army of the Muscouits: the day after James the king of Scots was
slain, with many of his Nobility by the English in battle. He recites many
more examples besides, which we may read in the fourth book of his De
Republica, where he likewise affirms, that there have been many great
Princes who have dyed in that month, and there he recites at least twenty.
But me thinks (as one September not so fatal as Bodin writes.
well notes) that this should give too much credit to the month of September,
to the prejudice of the other, in that it has force to change estates, and
that these curiosities are not to be admitted of us, but to be referred
rather to the historical Calender, then to be reputed a matter of sound
doctrine: for what month is there which may not be authorized with like
examples? In every month some great states have dyed.
At least, it is changed from his former natural force, in respect of that
time present: for the greatest alterations and change of states at this day,
and especially in the kingdom of France, In France the greatest alterations
betwixt December and August.
have happened betwixt December and August. The same may I allege likewise of
the death of the greatest Lords of France, who dyed in other months, and that
the month of September has almost lost his prerogative since. For concerning
the Princes which have dyed of late in France, and which have brought notable
change with them, (as we may see at this day) we shall find none which dyed in
the month of September, Mouns^ier Duke of Alenson, and The Duke of Alenson
dyed in June.
brother of the late King dyed in June, 1584. and the tenth of that month. The
Prince of Orange (whose death can The Prince of Orange.
never be sufficiently lamented, nor the manner hated and abhorred) likewise A
hateful proscription.
dyed the same day of July following, whose death was violent and practiced by
the Spanish treason in that manner, that never history in respect of the
proscription has made mention of the like; unless it be of Pirates, Robbers by
sea, and such, who (according to the laws of nations) have ever been excluded
from the benefit of faith, truth, and loyalty, and consequently from all
saftie, for as Tullie writes: Pyrata non est ex perduellium numero definitus,
sed communis hostis omnium, alioqui ius etiam bellicum fidesque iurisiurandi
saepe cum host seruanda. For instance we have the memorable proscription of
Crocotas the Crocotas.
arch pyrat, of whom Augustus the Emperor caused proclamation to be made by the
sound of his trumpet, that whosoever A fact that for it the greatness of
Spaines fall cannot satisfy the measure of Gods wrath.
would take him, should have a hundred and twenty thousand crowns. I only
allege this in respect of the most detestable murder of the worthy and
virtuous Prince of Orange: not long after the death of these two great
personages followed the fatal ruins of the Low Country. In one word
Catherine of Medices, the Duke of Guyse Katherine of Medices.
his brother, the Cardinal, the King of Under pretense of confession to kill a
Prince never heard of before.
France last slain by that false Iacobin, (a murder written in Times forhead,
by the pen of aeternitie to astonish all posterity) these all happened from
December to August: and therefore me thinks September has small virtue to
induce us to respect it. But of all rules which I know worth the marking to
judge by of the falls of kingdoms, and Common wealths, I find none more
renounced by Master Bodin, then the numbers of seven and nine, and those which
arise from the multiplication of these two, and the perfect number of 496.
which first is observed by him, and he says the reason is, because of the
infinite wisdom of God, who has so disposed Bodin.
all things by number, that kingdoms themselves after certain years, have
ordinarily come to end, and that humane things fall not out by chance. I
confess indeed, concerning the critical days (whereof the seventh day is
called the King by Galen) that from thence are drawn strange meruailes of
numbers, applied to weeks, months, years, ages, worlds; and so to towns,
Common wealths, and Kingdoms: whereunto all that may be referred which we
have spoken before of the periods of 500. of 250. of 700. years, although
Numbers no certain grounds of undoubted truth.
I find such contrariety in the examples alleged by Master Bodin, for the
confirming of these numbers, that they are not firmly to be relied on, as
undoubtedly true. For to the intent to have them established more strongly, he
alleges the Roman fasts, who, as he says, can neither fail nor lie. But
on the contrary, Onuphrius who has corrected them justly, makes a doubt. And
as Master Augier says, he likewise would rely upon the annals of Fabius
pictor. And in the first place the better to confirm his Square, being the
root of the fatal number, composed of twelve Twelues, multiplied by Bodin
greatly erred.
12. he says that the Monarchy of Rome continued a hundred and forty years,
which by the consent of all authors continued 244. years, or thereabout: and I
find another which says it endured longer, namely, 245. years, which cannot
serve to fulfill the Cube of the fatal number* but it is an exceeding fault to
slip a hundred years. Furthermore, A 100. years slipped by M. Bodin. 196.
to confirm one of the perfect numbers, namely, that of 196. and to show the
effect of it, he says, that since Augustus unto Augustulus the last Emperor
of the Romans, the one whereof he calls by the name of Conquering, All ^hese
shall be more plainly set down in my book of the universal periods of all
Kingdoms.
the other of Diminishing, there was 496. years; where the Histories and
Chronicles mention five hundred. On the other side, to the intent the better to
ground his opinion of numbers; as likewise to show their force, he alleges
that in holy scripture the law of GOD The 7. number.
has nothing so often as the 7. number; be it either in the solemn feasts, of
the Sabbath, or the seventh month; be it for the freeing of servants, and
leaving the ground without tilth, the seventh year, which was the year of
Iubile. But some do reprove this, for as much as that the places out of
scripture implie It is no Sabbath for a Kingdom to fall.
naturally a rest or Sabbath, whereas on the contrary the seventh, alleged
for the fall, and change of kingdoms, is full of troubles, depending on humane
actions, which number can neither be drawn out of the law of God, either in
plain terms, or by way of The 7. number not drawn out of Scripture
necessarily.
necessary consequent: yet for all this he confesses, that of those above
named rules, indifferently observed of diverse authors, there is none of
necessity, whereupon we may so justly rely our selves, as to set down a
certain judgment of things to come: seeing that the greatest part of those,
who have been willing to judge of the means, and rules surely touching the
foresaid changes, Uncertainty in Diuinations.
they have often stayed themselves upon Astronomy, supposing that change of
Kingdoms chiefly to depend upon stars, and celestial causes, whereunto
God has sometimes (as it were) tied himself for the showing of things to
come; wherein Satan as the Prince of A sleight of Satan.
the air, makes to appear oftentimes the eue^ts which resemble the true,
that should happen: and hereupon he forgeth these false predictions. But seeing
that by the effects of celestial bodies, the unlearned themselves are able to
judge of their force and virtue; notwithstanding from all antiquity, there
has been found contrariety of opinions, The certainty and uncertainty of
Astronomicall judgments.
amongst them who will judge soundly in Astrology: wherefore it shall not be
impertinent to this purpose to handle a word or two for the examining of the
certainty or uncertainty of them, thereby the better to understand this which
I have in hand, the rather because Astrology it self is placed Astrology.
amongst Diuinations. Some and of great learning would wholly make it
frustrate, and exclude it from the liberal An absurd error begotten of
ignorance.
Arts, as teaching us prestigious and false surmises under trueths color. Some
are so foolish, that they give unto it the force of governing the whole world:
namely, all that which may happen to A foolish Superstition.
men, not daring to attempt, or undertake any thing in the world without the
favor of the stars and celestial bodies. Zanch. Myzald.
Others that have better judged of it have not ascribed unto them an absolute
power, but an intermediate virtue amongst the rest. The reason of such as
wholly contemn the Art without No good reason.
ascribing unto it any virtue, or force at all, is grounded upon the
uncertainty of it, as being only builded upon uncertain conjectures, without
the true demonstration of things, whereupon only truth depends. But those that
do avouch the virtue of them, suppose in the first place, that God said in the
beginning that he made lights, that Genesis 1.
he placed them in the heavens, to separate night from day, and to be for
signs and seasons for days and years. From this place they reason thus, that
Nature made nothing in vain, since that all creatures are made for some
certain end, but these creatures day lie do the same works by their order
and course appointed them of God, and the end of No good reason.
that which they do is their operation; now the stars do by the order of
nature that which the Art of Astronomy says has bin found out by experience,
and afterward approved by many reasons. Then the end of the stars is that for
which they were created. Likewise the demonstrations of things are taken from
celestial causes, and their effects, observed of a long timed experience, by
the influence, intension, remission, access and recesse of stars: for even
as An unlike similitude.
in the seed the virtue of those things is hid which it brings forth, even
so in the stars is hid the force of that likewise giving the effect of a
natural elementarie change, which is incontinently perceived of them who
before have searched by supputation the caelestiall motions, and have attained
by long experience to know the course of things, with the events and effects.
The reason is, for even as we judge of the force of things which we feel, by
their effect, even so we judge of the force of Stars by the experience we
have from the long reach of their effects. And although their force being hid
unto us, is It is impossible to have such experience.
not so apparently discovered and clearly seen, notwithstanding the ordinary
signs show them, and the common observations of long experience make the^ to
be easily known; so that those who have this foresaid experience, may easily
foretell by an evident conjecture, This possible and common.
the ordinary effect of the Stars. But thereby to foretell of the natiuities
of men which the Greeks call pronosticon Geneseon, that which may happen Mere
toies and vain fables.
unto them in such a year, or such a day, it is hard for a man to give credit
to them; so that it be not for the searching of natural causes in that manner,
as we have spoken before. For as Master Beza speaks in a certain epistle,
Beza his opinion of Judicial Astrology.
of judicial Astrology: If any one would have foretold that the Empire of
Augustus should have endured so long, it should likewise have been necessary
to have diuined what should have happened of Brutus, Cassius, Lepidus, and
Anthony, his adversaries, which would have brought a man into a labyrinth not
easily avoided. So likewise How far one may judge of particular men.
speaking of the usage of the former searching, he referres them only to
complexions, and dispositions of bodies, by means whereof, one may judge if
such a man will become melancholicke, or whether he will be subject to such or
such sickenesses. This opinion is confirmed somewhat by that of Physicians.
Diogenes the Stoike; notwithstanding the Physicians themselves are able to
judge of all things above mentioned by signs, and Symptoms more certain, and
yet there of the profit is not great. Others who under a show of religion,
have contemned the Astrologicall science, allege for reason the place of
Jeremy The art contemners of this age, misunderstand Jeremy.
saying: Let them stand and save thee the Southsayers of heaven, which gaze on
the stars, and cast the months to tell thee of things to come: yet
notwithstanding the true meaning of that place is no whit to condemn, or
detest the foresaid science, but only the superstitious abuse of it, which
has been brought in by little and little, by those who by means of their
Diabolical arts, and The abuse of Astronomy.
under the hope of some base gain, have corrupted the true knowledge of it.
Others erroniouslie have sought out all the secrets of the world, by means of
caelestiall causes, in such sort, that continuing in the same superstition,
they are at the length fallen into so great abuse, He that yields himself to
believe Pronostications, gives himself the 1. of January to be a fool all the year after.
that they will govern all their actions, according to the course and
demonstration of Stars, preferring their Pronostications before Gods
promises. From hence proceeds the superstitious elections of works, good or
bad, governed according to the twelve signs of heaven: in like manner the My L
Henry Haward in lib. of supposed Prophets.
days fortunate, and unfortunate; with the angles and circles forged by the
Philosopher Pythagoras, to know by the composition of numbers and letters
which it contained (intermediating the observation of the day of the months,
and the Planets) all that any man desired to know. To conclude, from hence is
it Errors from hence.
come to pass, that some are persuaded that the souls abide in the Moon:
others were persuaded that as soon as she lost her light, she was inchaunted:
and for that cause in old time they were wont to sound Trumpets, Tabrets,
Cornets and other instruments to remedy that, to the intent to drive away
those Lib. 1. Annal.
inchauntments: or (as Lipsius upon Tacitus says) Ad leuandos lunae labores,
To ease the moon of her travails. Plutarch, Liuie and others have made
mention also of it. And Iuuenall says, Cum frustra resonant Ignorance of true
causes brought this.
era auxiliaria Lunae. Furthermore, many have adored and acknowledged the
Planets for their gods, chiefly the Sun, whereunto all the gods of the
Coeli. Rhoding.
Panims may be referred and agree as Macrobius notes, and as Histories are
full. The tractes and steps (as it were) of this Idol-madnes, may appear in
the laws of the Romans, Titul. de Coelicolis and Iudaeis. Likewise in the
Scripture, in the 7. and 47. chapter of Jeremy, God convert all those who yet
worship them in many places of the world. To the intent then that we may
soundly judge of Astrology, let us conclude (following What Astronomers can
do by their art.
the common opinion) that Astrologers generally cannot foretell any other thing
by the knowledge of their art, but that which concerns the constitution of
the air, and the particular change of that, according to the demonstration of
the celestial signs. But concerning those tokens and signs that appear
extraordinarily in the heavens, as Comets, and such like strange apparitions,
Comets.
(although the prediction of their effect depend sometimes on caelestiall
causes) yet notwithstanding in my opinion such signs are more certain and
sure in their operation, to signify the change and events of Common wealths
then any other; for if we Zanch. de oper. lib. 3. cap. 2.
would search the histories of all times, we shall find that never Comet
appeared, which undoubtedly brought not after it some general or particular
change, and most often the sad and lamentable events of war, plague famine,
deluges, the death of great personages, and the like; but by reason that these
fall out extraordinarily, so likewise their effects are extraordinary. Those
that are curious to know the events which at all times have been observed, and
whereof the histories are full, may read the catalogue of wonders, written in
latin by M. Fritschius, and imprinted at And Erastus de Come^is.
Noremberge, where he recites abundance in all kinds. And of late time in
respect of those in the Low Countries, they may feel the effect by their
scarce well tuned iarres, in the midst of their best towns, which began
immediately after the Comet in the year 1577. and the earthquake which
followed, which Earthquakes
is also numbered amongst strange and prodigious signs. A certain
Mathematician in his book of the discourse, and Pronostication by him made,
concerning a Comet seen in the year 1581. says amongst other things, that A
Comet. 1581.
the Comet in the year 1577. (whereof we spoke) was in the Horoscope of Don
John, and in the sixth house of Mounsieur the Duke of Alenson, which two No
undoubted certainetie in Comets.
had both been partakers of the same fortune, if credit might have been given
to that. Certain it is, that Comets and extraordinary signs of heaven do
daily portend some novelty, good or evil for some. The redemption Stars
from time to time have foreshewed wonders to come.
of mankind was presaged by an extraordinary sign of Heaven, in form of a
Star; which guided the wise men of the East to adore and worship him, who was
descended from heaven, to draw us from eternal damnation. And in the time of
the Emperor Augustus, before the birth of our Savior Christ, many signs
extraordinarily appeared in heaven, in such manner, that all the Divines small
and great were in arms (as it were) and flockt together to advise upon it. And
then when as the Massacre continued throughout al France a new star began to
appear in the heaven, whereof the Lord Plesseyes Dever. Chr. Relig.
speaking, says, that since the creation of the world the like was not seen
but at the birth of our Savior Jesus Christ: All the world marked it, for 3.
years together: all the Astronomers admyred it, and remain yet astonished. The
wise of the Heavens signs serve to confute Atheists.
world who in a deep irreligious policy thought al things to be eternal, now
began to worship a Creator. And what shall we think (says he) but that it
signifies the new birth of Christ in earth by the preaching of the Gospel?
We read also of a certain flame of fire which showed it self miraculously
in the heaven right above the army of Licinius the Emperor of the East, at
the Licinius.
same time when he lost the battle against Constantine the Great, then when
there was question for an universal change of the Roman Empire, and a total
destruction of Gods Church: for the one maintained the Christians, the other
tyrannized upon them, and in the cruellest manner put them to death. Hereupon
followed a most bloody and deadly war betwixt these two. It was then or a
little before that Constantine had seen in the heaven the victorious Cross of
Christ, whereof Eusebius speaks so assuredly: For when he would combat,
Maxence having seen the Maxent.
foresaid Cross with this inscription about it, In this sign shall thou
overcome thy enemies: he caused then the Christians to come, and enquired of
them concerning our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, of his nativity, of his
passion, of his resurrection. The scripture likewise teaches us, that the
signs and tokens from heaven threaten us and Luke 2^.
bring strange punishments, as appears by the place of Jeremy, where he
says, A signis coeli nolite timere: which Jeremy misconstrued.
some would have expounded, that we should not rely upon the stars, nor
have any care of that which they may signify: these are such as are most
willing to contemn the art and skill of Astronomy. The meaning of Ieremies
words are no such thing: for he would not seem either to contemn or condemn
the signs of heaven, thereby to despise Astronomy, but only to admonish the
faithful fearing God, to the intent they might remain confirmed and
strengthened in Gods promises, without being discouraged or fearful in their
minds by the sight of the signs in heaven. On the other side, a man Wonders
in the air to what they serve.
may set down the same judgment of many other strange signs, which are
showed in the heavens contrary to the course of nature, as Armies, Dragons,
raining down of blood, fire, fearful Eclipses, and such like, which bring
often times after them like chaunges to their own strangenes. Cleanthes the
Philosopher having marked four causes whereby a man may know the mighty
puissance of the gods, has put the extraordinary signs of the heavens for
the third cause: the Greeks called this kind of Divination ( Teratoscopia)
that (...).
is to say, a monstrous and strange vision. But when these and such calamities
are whole and entire, as it happened to the towns of Sodom, of Gomorrah (which
in Abraham's time were made a lake of Brimstone) and since that to the towns of
Helice and Bura: that change is then as it were from death to life, and by
consequent far more great and more notable then of a Monarchy turned into an
Aristocratie and Democratie, or any other kind of common wealth; and therefore
well deserves to be added to the chapter of chaunges, and ruins of Common
wealths. The foresaid Catalogue contains many sorts as well of towns
swallowed by the earth, as consumed by thunder from heaven, and otherwise;
Inundations universal, and Inundations.
particular, are of this sort. Furthermore we may here add to the Diuinations
above said, the great Conjunctions of Conjunctions of Planets.
the hye Planets, which are principally set to play together, thereby to judge
of the change and fall of a Commonwealth. And although these depend likewise
upon Astrology, yet notwithstanding these seem to be more certain and
better grounded then any other particular predictions of the stars, by reason
of their revolution and ordinary running every eight hundred year, or there
about, according to the opinion of Master Augier Ferrier, which No absolute
necessity.
as a man would think have showed their effect (as it were) to the touch, and
to the eye, with an astonishment of the wise, although that draw not with it
any mere necessity. For we must not think the necessity of their operation
such, as the Astrologers did say, in the year 1524. having foretold that there
should 1524.
happen a Conjunction, like to that of the Deluge, (although some yet are of
that mind that there was no Conjunction) Ridiculous fear so in the year 1588.
and that the whole earth should be ouerflowed with water. By reason whereof
they have made themselves ridiculous to the whole world with a number of
Infidels, who built up pillars And therefore E. Zing. in his tables made our
period to be 1584. whom I shall confute in my book of periods. Then Christ as
he was should not have been ignorant of it. Lib 4. de Repub.
to save themselves. It is also for the same matter that Master Bodin iesteth
so at Cyprian Leouice in his fourth book of his Common wealth, who for the
great Conjunction in the year 1584. was bold to pronosticate the second coming
of the son of God in his glorious majesty. Many notable chaunges, which
happened here and there by reason of great Conjunctions, may be seen in Bodin
in the same place. By these rules and means aforesaid, we may settle a
certain judgment for the change that is to happen to Common wealths, Realms
and Empires.

Now remains the last point, which principally has moved me to allege
those places, concerning this subject matter which we have in hand: that is, of
Dreams, which the devil spreads Of dreams.
as a means, to make his illusions prevail, to make his crafty subtilties
and false predictions of things to come to be of more force, knowing that men
by an exceeding curiosity would force Man's curiosity never stayed.
themselves, by unlawful means, to find out the knowledge of the effect of
them. Then because there are diverse sorts of Dreams, we will make a
distinction of the chief of them. And to intent to draw out the better
knowledge of their difference, I think it good to divide them into four
parts, (and the rather to avoid the pluralities of degrees, which authors have
made in the handling of them) that is to say, Natural, Devilish, Diuinatorie
(or as the Greeks call it Simantica) and Divine. The natural Dreams are when
things Natural Dreams. 1.
before either seen, heard, or touched, or forethought of, and afterward as
repeated in the fantasy, are represented sleeping, bringing the visions which
before have been imprinted by a continual motion of the spirits, which sometime
are strange and monstrous, according In melancholy men.
to the disposition of the body, with a certain demonstration of forms and
figures of the thing we dream of: and these are properly called natural
Dreams and common. Cicero speaking De Somno Scipionis.
of the dream of Scipio, gives the same definition: Fit enim fere (says he)
vt Amans sibi Somnia fingit.
cogitationes sermonesque nostri pariant aliquid in somno tale quale de Homero
scribit Ennius, de quo videlicet saepissime vigila^s solebat cogitare and
loqui. Devilish dreams 2.
are of two sorts. First when they happen Devilish Dreams.
by inspiration of the devil, without cause of him that dreameth, tending
continually to an ill end, to wickedness, to lies, to Idolatry, or to affright
the people, with some vain fear, or sad events to come, as we read of
Cassius Valor. Max. lib. 1. 7.
Parmensis, who having followed the party of M. Anthony against the Emperor
Augustus, betook him after the battle toward Athens, and that night being in
bed without all fear (as he was) dreamed, that he saw before him a black man
with a fauchion, long head, and with an ilfauored beard; and asking him what he
was, he answered him, Mark it.
Cacodaemon, that is an evil spirit: Cassius being afraid as well of the
name, as the shape, called his servants, and demanded Satan's illusion.
if they had seen such a man, either enter or go out: then when they told
him they had seen no such, he betook himself again to sleep.
Incontinently after, the same spirit appeared unto him again the second time.
Cassius seeing that, betook him no more to sleep, commanding his men not to
go from him. But the history says, that soon after he was put to death by
the commandment of the Emperor. The vision of Marcus Brutus was like to this,
then when the Devil appeared unto him in a most hideous shape. The other sort
of devilish dreams are, A second sort of devilish dreams.
when as the men themselves are causes of them, as the heathen were in times
past by means of their vows and sacrifices full of idolatry, which they made
by the instigation of Satan, who went to meet them in appointed places,
Heathen superstition.
as we read of those who went in the night to the Temples, covered with the
skins of beasts, which they had slain to idols, with a full persuasion,
that all that they dreamed should be reputed for a most undoubted oracle: And
thus took they their beginning. The answers which the devil gave to the
heathen in diverse sorts, namely by voice, by dreams, and by other means By
shaking the head.
of them whom he has in chaunted, to the imitation of these are instituted,
as by tradition those oblations which are at this day to Saints in the Church
of Rome, to the intent to obtain some remedy for their malady, and it makes
them answer by hanging down of the An imitation of the heathen.
head of him, that is put in the image, to the example of those ill spirits,
who allured men sometimes within these statues by art Magic. These devilish
answers abouesaide, they termed oracles, Oracles.
and they had diverse names. Amongst many others whereunto histories give
credit, are renowned that of Trophonius Trophonius den. Seraphis. Delphos.
and Seraphis in Egypt, that of Delphos in Greece, ordained to the example of
divine Oracles: for God declared himself unto his Prophets three manner of
ways, namely by vision walking, by 1. Uision. 2. Dreams. 3. Voice.
dreams sleeping, and by open voice without all obscurity. The two first were
with a certain rauishment of the spirit, and the transporting (as it were) of
all the sense by a revelation. The third without trouble, either of sense, or
spirit. But concerning the revelation done by Urim and Thummim, to the intent
to know the success of things, it may appear by the text of the Bible, that
that manner of prophesying was not so common, nor continued so long, as those
above mentioned, for it was one of the principal which failed at the restoring
When Vrim and Thummim ceased.
of the second Temple. Then it is a thing most clear, that Satan will imitate
all manner of fashions, the better to abuse men under a pretense of A perfect
Ape.
holiness: as when God showed himself to Moses in the burning bush, and when
Exodus 3. Math. 3. 17.
the voice came from Heaven at Christ's Baptism; whereby we were let to
understand, that he was the son of God. In like manner are invented the
answers of Satan, which he gives by dreams, to the imitation of divine
dreams, as that of Pharoh, Joseph, and others from Gen 41.
GOD. To conclude, all practices and sleights of Satan, to the intent to
deceive mankind, have been invented under the shadow of the institutions and
works ordained of God, and therefore justly he may be called Gods Ape. Devilish
Magic, and all those kinds 3.
of it (by reason of the association which wicked spirits have with men, to
the example of this divine conference,) The original of al charms.
chiefly that which is done by recital of certain charms, namely the
papisticall consecrations themselves, in respect of salt, water, and hallowed
oil, from whence all had their beginning. For if we would sift out narrowly
the means which the Chaldeans, and Assyrians used in their Magic arts to call
out the Devil, we shall find that they used Satan indeed cares for none of
all these.
as well light, wax, candels, and holy words, as the priests do at this
day. There have been also of other nations, as Greeks, and Romans, who
observed other sorts of superstitions and idolatries by them to forge their
diuinations, which they did to the imitation of the divine sacrifices, by the
inspection of the intrales of beasts which were slain, namely the liver, the
heart, and the gall, which the Latins call Extispicium, Extispiciu^.
quasi extorum inspectio. Finally, from hence came it in former time that they
have sacrificed humane flesh as it is apparent: Cruel Idolatry.
a thing which was ordinary long since in the western Islands, and chiefly
with the Normanes and Danes, who always in the month of January Barbarous
sacrifices.
made an oblation yearly of ninety nine men. The Romans had in singular
estimation the art of divining by the flying Augures.
of birds, and chiefly by the Angures, who had the young ones to that end
nourished in Cages, to serve them for their uses: but in the end they were so
mocked with them, as P. Claudius did well show then, when he would know the
success of the battle by sea, which was to be performed in the time of the
Punicke war, and when the poulterers Poulterers.
toulde him the young ones would not come out of the Cage, he commanded to
cast them into Tyber, saying, Quia esse nolunt bibant, because they will not
eat Uanities end.
let them drink. And Tullie with diverse others have mocked him all they
could. I only allege these places to this end, to touch by the way the
ground of these Diuinations and devilish superstitions, Most common at this day.
which are entered into the world under the cover of religion, and yet
notwithstanding remain so ingrafted in many places, that they can hardly be
rooted out. But I intend not to enter at particularly of many other kinds of
Diuinations, as Orneomantie, Hieroscopie, Hidromantie, and many like kinds,
because these properly cannot serve* to judge of the change, or ruin of Common
wealths, contenting my self to note out those which concern the subject of
this particular matter. Then it is certain, that al these abominable impieties
are by success of time so increased, that the Roman Emperors were constrained
for the weal public to forbid them upon Unlawful Astrology forbidden by the
ancient laws.
pain of their lives: as appears by the draught of the (ode de pagan Sacraf
and Temp. where the second law makes mention of the inspection of intrails,
and by the 13. law ad legem Cor. de Sicarijs, may be seen likewise the
forbidding of the foresaid sacrifices, whereof there is mention in the title
De pagan Sacraf. contrary to the opinion of Accursius. Moreover, they have
forbidden Accursius ened.
all sorts of Diuinations in general, by the title of the Code de Malef and
Mathemat. and caeteris. By reason whereof the Mathematician of the Duke of
Saxony, John UUaynstler complains greatly, A choleric Gentleman.
saying, that the lawmakers make no distinction of Sorcerers, Magitians,
Cheiromants, and such like wicked Arts, but have under a general law forbidden
all sorts of Divination. But although the law generally forbid, yet
notwithstanding the intent of the lawmakers is not such, A thing not thought of
by any law.
that he would wholly frustrate the true and lawful Science of Astronomy,
(whereof he makes no express mention) but only the abuse of it and other Arts
of the Heathen, full of superstition, as that of Aruspices and of the Augures;
for the^ they found out 1000. Arts to deceive the Idiots; namely, the Diuiners
and other Former times full of them.
Impostors being in so great abundance, that the law after the naming of a
great part of the^, and not knowing the true distinction, says, Et caeteros
quos maleficos ob facinorum multitudinem vulgus appellat: and for this abuse
the Mathematicians likewise are comprehended in them. Saint Augustine giving
the true interpretation of the word Mathematician, by reason of the abuses
above mentioned, he compares them to those whom at that time they called
Genethliacos, and says, Perniciosae superstitionis homines, qui Austin.
Genethliaci propter natalium dierum consideratione^, nunc autem vulgo
Mathematici voca^tur. Tully speaks expressly that the Mathematicians agree
with the Soothsayers, in that which concerns the art of Divining. Bodin
speaking of the laws contained in the title above said, compares the^ with
Sorcerers, whereas they Too great frowardnes to say there are no Witches,
Sorcerers, and such like.
are called enemies of nature, enemies of mankind, witches for the great
wickednesses they commit, and by reason of the exceeding imprecations which the
laws have against them, the like whereof Discou. of witches.
are in no law to be found but against Sorcerers. That cruel plague (says the
law) may be extinguished and consumed. And although that the law, Item apud
Unlawful Divination forbidden.
verse. Si quis Astrologus D. de iniurijs, seems willingly to take
indifferently the Astrologer for the Diuiner, Magitian, or like abuser, yet
notwithstanding it must be rightly understood, and according to the proper
words of the text, namely, Qui aliquam illicitam Diuinationem pollicetur, only
taxing there the abuse and unlawful means used, under the cloak of
Astrology: wherefore he reports that law, Si quis aliquid D. de poenis,
like as the former law De extraord. cognit. verse. Medicos, says, that he is
not to be called a Physician which either by exorcising or inchaunting cures;
so likewise he is not to be called an Astrologer, Note this.
who abuses his art and the notable skill of Astronomy. We shall find also
that the word (Chaldaeus) is often used for a Sorcerer or Inchaunter, yet
notwithstanding it does not follow thereupon in general it must be understood
so of all.

The Dreams which we call Diuinatorie or presaging, differ from natural
Dreams, in that these happen not by reason of the motion, or abundance of any
humor, or other quality of the body, but by a singular virtue and influence
of the stars, who (as it were) moved with an understanding of things to come,
affect likewise the brain of him that dreameth by a commixtion and conjunction
How stars work in our Dreams.
of the first qualities, which are betwixt the^ from the beginning, in such
sort that the Dreamer being as it were advertised, he imprinteth that in his
brain, and so continually thinking to know the event, by little and little,
the forms and figures of things to come represent themselves unto his spirit.
Sometimes that is reueiled by a comparison of things to come, as the Dream of
King Astyages, who dreamed that The dream of Astyages.
from the womb of his daughter Madanes came forth a Vine so great and large,
that it covered with the shadow of it all the parts of his Realm. The like
have we of Madian, who dreamed that he saw a piece of barlie bread which
turned into the Camp of Madian, and Judge. cap. 7.
came to his pauillion and beat it to make it fall, and then returned when the
pauillion was fallen. The same may appear in the Dreams of Nabuchadnezzar (in
respect of things prefigured) in the form of a high Image and a great, as it
is set down in Daniel. But for so much as the manner of Dreams above said
seems to be very strange and altogether incredible, by reason of the
Sympathy spoken of before: and that there be some skilful me^, who (holding it
impossible that which some go about to have to be believed of that Sympathy
betwixt earthly and heavenly things) are persuaded it is impossible from thence
to have such intelligence. Others who are of opinion that this Sympathy both
may be and is, suppose for insta^ce the Sympathy betwixt the stars of the
North and the Adamant stone; The Adamant.
whereas we see continually that those stars draw that stone: Likewise we
see that certain flowers open and shut after the approaching and departing of
the Sun: That the Nightingall and the The Cuckowe. The Nightingall.
Cuckoo both grow hoarse at the rising of (Syrius) the Dog star: that the
humors abound in the full Moon, and Luna. Jupiter. Saturn. Sol.
afterward diminish: In like manner that some constitutions of stars can
govern and maintain, and on the contrary others corrupt the humors in some
parts of the body. And for confirmation hereof they allege us a reason, that
God in the beginning has given and ingrafted in every of his creatures made by
his own hand, a special virtue and a secret property, which are hid and
contained in the seeds of them, from whence successively are procreated all
corporal things, receiving their form by a commixtion and temperature of
qualities, according to that order of nature which God has appointed. And
although the stars so drawing the Adamant stone, have not a power or virtue
to give entyre forms to creatures themselves, yet notwithstanding the world
below, being compassed with the heaven, as it is, and all that Note this.
it contains, as well in respect of things created, as generated, they are all
governed Zanch.
and maintained (by a divine power) of a celestial light; and the especial
virtue of the air, which not only shines through darkness (as the common sort
do imagine) but contains in it an excellent and divine virtue, sustaining
with a life-making heat all the creatures of the world, according to the course
of nature: for (as one says) the heaven Austin.
so comma^deth the earth, as God commands the Angels, the Angels men, men
beasts, the soul the body, the reason the appetite. Neither must we think
that these creatures are only maintained by their proper seed and the mixture
Influence and celestial heat. Jupiter Stator Ascent. in cap. 13. lib. 2. Gell.
of the qualities above said, but likewise that there is another virtue
proceeding from the heavenly light, which does sustain and govern them in
most miraculous manner; the veins and arteries shining like little flames in
natural bodies, do show unto us plainly the spiritual virtue that is in
them: likewise in men the spirits and the natural A fit similitude.
heat which sustaines them: for even as the light of the fire coming out of
the flint constantly shows it self until that be consumed which is
enlighted, even such a light comes from above, which governs and sustaineth
as a nurse all the living creatures below. Master Barlasse in the second day
of his week speaks fitly to that purpose, and says.

Cela se voit a laeil dans le brulant tison.
Son feu court verse sa natale Maison
Son aer vole en fumee, en cendre chet saterre
Son aeau bout dans ses naeus, vne semblable querre.
Tient en paix nostre corpse, la Terre est sa chair.
Semee de maint os, au lieu de maint rocher.
Dans les vitaux esprits, git son aer, and sa flamme.
Dans les humeurs son flot, et le ciel dans son ame.
Then from this conjunction and heavenly The force of the bodies heavenly in
these earthly.
alliance proceeds a marvelous concord, and natural agreement betwixt
heavenly and earthly bodies. There is no man who finds not in himself the
virtue proceeding from the Sun beams, which in the exposition of Joseph's
dream is called the Father Josephus de antiqu. lib. 2.
and nourisher, as it is written in the second book of the antiquities of the
Jews: The bodies and spirits of all things are recreated by the rising of the
Sun. The soul is (as it were) awaked with a certain nimblenes, finding a
wholesome fine time by the good disposition of the air. On the contrary we
grow We follow the air.
drowsy, melancholy, and (as it were) in a deadly lethargy, by the
indisposition and change of the air. The natural We follow the year.
constitution and complexion of men changes after the manner of the four
seasons in the year, we see a man's spirits to be more quick and nimble at
one time then another, without any manifest discerning of cause why. It is the
Note this.
above named heavenly light, which awaketh in us some part of that virtue,
which she lent us, at our first beginning: hereby happens the change of
flowers, of the beasts before mentioned, of the inclination of the Adamant
toward the North. In like sort if we would suppose the foresaid conjunction
and natural agreement which is in the creatures above mentioned, we should
find it no whit strange: the Sympathy which is The ground of Sympathy.
said to be betwixt some heavenly and earthly bodies, which is made by an
interchangeable touch of the supposed natural conjunction, consisting in the
agreement of their formal qualities. Thus much of Sympathy.

Notwithstanding all that we have said, both concerning the singular virtue of
the stars, causing the foresaid presaging dreams, as also in respect of
Astrology it self, there is an opinion An excellent writer.
at this day quite contrary. For Nicodem Frischlin, a late Astronomer holds
it as a Paradoxe, that none of all the stars have any virtue either general,
or special upon the things below, and he derideth all those, who think the
Stars have virtue to warm, Unlikely in my opinion.
to cool, to dry, to moysten. And in like manner, that neither Aries, Leo,
Taurus, or any other of the celestial signs, have any force to affect the
things below. Moreover, that the art of Astrology, and all the credit it
has, until present time was invented by the craft and subtletie of the
Chaldaeans and Arabians, A great error, and a foul oversight of a Scholar.
who (following the fables of Poets) have themselves imposed the names to the
signs in the Zodiac, and to the other stars which are observed at this
day, whereat the heathen themselves scoffed, as Ovid.

Vacca sit an Taurus non est cognoscere promptum.
Pars prior apparet, posterior a latent.
Or Cow or Bull, if it be, it cannot well be known,
The former parts are seen, the hinder be not shown.
By means whereof, he maintains it a An unsound conclusion.
thing impossible, either to measure the height of the heaven above, or the
depth of the earth below: according to the testimony of the Prophet Jeremy,
saying: If the heavens can be measured, or the foundations of the earth be
searched out beneath, then will I cast off, etc. But amongst other particular
reasons, which he alleges to the end to confirm his opinion, he says
further in these words (which I think convenient to allege.) Primo Deus
ille mundi opifex, in alium vsum stellas non creauit nisi vt noctu lucerent,
and facem quandam hominibus atque A mistaking of the Creation.
anim antibus praeberent, and vt motu certa Temporum interualla describerent:
denique vt ornatu suo nos de sapientissimo architecto tanquam signa Diuinae
prudentiae Co^monefacerent vt omnia boni causa fecisset, that is: First, God
the universal creator of all the world, made the stars for no other use but
that they might shine in the night, and to affoorde (as it were) a kind of
light both to man and beast, and withal to distinguish by motion the
difference of times. Lastly, with his excellency, to admonish us of the
wisdom of the workman, as one that made all things for some good end. He
denies also, that the change of the air, and the season, are caused by the
particular stars* so that this new Astronomer ascribes all the force of the
stars, to the Sun; and not particularly to the virtue of any special
star which borrows light from it. Hereunto he adds diverse other reasons,
which may be found in the third book of his Astrology: Neither is it
material though (says he) it come to pass sometimes as they have foretold,
for God so testifies that it shall happen, Deutero. 13. For if there rise in
the midst Deuteronomy. 13.
of thee a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, who give thee a sign or miracle,
and that the sign or miracle which he told thee come to pass, thou shall not
hear the words of this Prophet or dreamer: for the Lord your God tempts
you to see if you love them. For it is he only that knows all things to
come. On the other side, concerning that which some say of Moses and the
Prophet Daniel, as it is written, That Act. 7.
Moses was skillful in all the knowledge of the Egyptians, that ought not to
be understood An unlike conjecture.
of Astrology, or Mateologie, but of skill in the Hebrew learning, and of such
like arts: Wherein there is nothing contrary to Gods truth: and we see the
flat contrary, that Moses in the presence of King Pharaoh reprehended the
divines of Egypt, and discovered their abominable superstitions. The same may
appear by Daniel and his companions, who had in such hatred the devilish arts
that rayned in the court of the King of Babylon, that they concluded al to
abstain from eating of the Kings dainties. Then because it seems strange to
hold against the common opinion of all Astronomers, that the change of the
air, and that a happy or unhappy time is no whit caused by the particular
virtue of the stars, as to this present has been observed, how Ob.
happens it, that in the 16. of Matthew. and in the 12. of Luke, the tempests
and storms, and also fair weather are foretold by the appearance of heaven?
To Sol.
this he answers and says, that it is one A sign and a cause differ.
thing to conjecture by signs likely, and another to foretell what must happen
from causes necessary. For signs and causes far differ the one from the
other, as for example, the dawning of the day or the twilight, are neither
causes of rain nor fair weather, but only a sign joined to the nature of
the thing, which thereby shows unto us the constitution of the air: even as
we see a Physician, who by the color of the vrin can easily judge of the
disposition of the body, yet no man will say that A Similitude.
the color is the cause of his sickness; in like manner of the heaven, a sign
but no cause. The same also may be done by the appeara^ce of* the Sun or
Moon: nevertheless, it is by the evidence of such signs as necessarily shall
happen, and as he says. A causis iam fieri and incipientibus, hoc est, vbi iam
causa est in effectu aliquo posita. From thence are the causes of the
predictions of the change of air, and of bad times by the Mariners,
Physicians, and such like, whereunto those may be referred of Uirgil, in
diverse places, all which differ from the predictions and prognostications,
which the Astronomers ordinarily do forge unto us, a whole year before: Et
qui ex causis remotissimis praedicunt effectus. In the end he concludes, that
these predictions and Astrologicall diuinations are wholly forbidden, as well by
equity, Frischlin is too vehement against Astronomers.
as by holy Scripture: and as God himself speaks in the 37. of Job, It is
impossible for man to sound the depth of heaven and earth. Have thou
considered (says he) the spacious place of the earth, declare it if thou can
tell? And Solomon in the book of Ecclesiastes says: As thou know not at all
the way of the wind, nor how the bones are knit together in the belly of her
that is with child, even so thou know not the whole of Gods work. And even
so the stars are made for no other end Genesis 1. 17.
then for to serve us for the observation of days, months, and years, as it
is written in Genesis: And to confirm the places Chap. 11.
and arguments above said, the same author alleges the opinion of Basil,
Chrysostom, Nazianzen, Theodoret, Austin, Ambrose, Lactantius, Eusebius,
Hierome. And of the ancient Philosophers he alleges Plato, Aristotle,
Hipocrates, Celsus. Of the latter, Celius, Rodinginus, Picus Mirandula, Longus,
Thomas, Erastus, Calvin, Luther. By means whereof if we will suppose the
truth of the reasons above said, the Art of Astrology should obtain none or
very little credit of us at all. Notwithstanding, although it appears by many
places of holy scripture, that it is impossible for Astronomy must not go so
far.
man to sound the secrets of heaven, as from them to be able to draw certain
diuinations, or predictions of things to come, as well in particular as in
general; so likewise to submit the life of man to the influences of stars
and celestial bodies: yet so it is that the stars and signs of heaven have
bin observed of a long time to have in them a certain especial virtue, by
that of the Sun. But that is not specially to govern the creatures below,
for GOD himself has told us in the 37. of Job: Did thou know when God
disposed them and made the light to shine? Have thou known the variety of the
clouds, and the wondrous works of him that is perfect in knowledge? And so
Solomon says in Ecclesiastes: As thou know not the voice of the wind, etc.
And in the ninth chapter, Who made Fritschling confuted.
the star Acturus and Orion, and the stars Hyades, and the Climats of the mid
day? By these places it is at least thus evident, that some stars have
singular virtues, causing ordinarily the change of time, and of the air; if so
be we ascribe not that virtue to the sun, which seems to belong to the
stars themselves, following the opinion of the forenamed Astronomer and that
of Tully alleged before: yet notwithstanding I report me to the best learned
men's judgments.

Upon the other side, to return to Dreams whereof we have begun to speak
before: those dreams that come by reason of a Sympathy, are placed amongst
Dreams by reason of a Sympathy.
those of presaging, as when one friend dreameth of another: As for example,
we have that of Calphurnia wife Calphurnia.
of Julius Caesar, who dreamed the day before he was murdered, that she saw
her husband lie wounded in her bosom, and for that cause she prayed him
earnestly not to go that day unto the Senate: But to the intent he might not
be thought to be skarred with a womans dream, he went and was slain. It is
said that Catherine of Medices dreamed one Katherine of Medices.
day that King Henry her husband had one of his eyes put out, as it happened
unto him the next morning. But by reason of the truth and certitude of events
which these dreams have brought with the^, some are of that opinion that they
deserve rather to be called Divine and Supernatural, then Diuinatorie, to the
example of that of Pilats wife, who being set in the judgment Hall, she sent
to him and told him, that he should not have to do with that just one: for
that night in her dream she had suffered much because of him, as it is in
Matthew. That Chap. 27.
likewise of Caius Gracchus (by reason of a Sympathy and natural conjunction)
when that he dreamed of Tiberius his C. Gracchus lib. 1. 7.
brother, is of the number of presaging dreams, as Ualerius Maximus writes.
But because all the above mentioned dreams cause nothing but an increase of
superstition in the world, by reason Dreams the fountain of superstition.
of unlawful means, which men use to attain to the knowledge of the events
of things to come, for this cause we ought not either to observe, or give Not
to trust them.
credit unto the^, nor interpret them, as God has commanded. The truth and
effect of prophesies which is drawn from them is discovered, and made known
by the end and impossibility (as the scripture speaks by the works of the
Prophet.) Although we see oftentimes by experience, that the devil So at
Christ's presence.
says the truth for fear: although in the Acts he mocketh the Inchaunters
which know not Christ, and entreats them so ill that they go hurt out of the
chamber. And in the 8. and 9. chapter of Exodus, after the dust was turned into
lice, the Inchaunters themselves finally confessed that the finger of God was
there, and that they were not able to imitate the last miracle as they had done
the former. For example of these times, it is not long since that in the
country of Northland there was a maid by who^ The world is full of such.
the devil foretold the event of things which came after, and he failed only
in one point, by which it was found out to be an ill spirit, which being
disguised from the beginning, at length discovered himself such as he was. The
divine Divine Dreams.
Dreams which come by the immutable counsel of God, are those whereof the
holy scripture makes mention, as of the Prophets and other persons,
containing the revelations of great matters, of weight and importance; as of
Jesus Christ, the government of his Church, and other unlooked for changes.
Such were the dreams of Joseph and the Prophets, which were known by their
certainty, and by the testimony of truth it self. Some have made more
degrees of divine Dreams, to the intent to make known the diversity of
means, which it has pleased God in former time to use in the revelations of
his prophesies, which may be read at large in the fourth chapter of the first
book of Master Bodin his Demononania, God uses often simple means.
there he observes as well in the revelation of divine prophesies, as in many
other miracles, that God is served by persons of diverse quality and condition,
which had not the degree of ordinary Prophets, whereof the scripture makes
mention, as of Esai, Jeremy, and others. But we shall find that oftentimes
the same is done by persons heroical, and of great respect; as appears by
the dreams of Pharaoh, Nabuchadnezzar, and others, especially in great
matters, concerning the state of Monarchies and Empires. The same he does
sometime in things particular and of less moment, as may be proved by
infinite places of scripture, and other histories. The dream of the Emperor
Mauricius (by reason Mauricius.
of the divine providence which may be marked in it) may serve us for an
example, who dreamed that he should be delivered to a servant of his named
Phocas, to be slain: for this cause he sent for the Captain Philippick to
come out of prison, and demanded of him if there were not one named Phocas: the
other answered that there was such a one, a centurion, ambitious, and
fearful. Whereupon the Emperor said, alleging an old proverb to that
end, If he be a coward A coward a murderer.
he is a murderer. This was the same, who after that he had first slain his
wife and children, caused his head to be cut off: but the recital of it is
memorable, that Maurice seeing his children murdered by Phocas, and that he
himself must be put to death presently, he spoke often in this manner, O Lord
thou art just, Note.
and so are all thy works. In like manner, the dream of Alexander the Great
is also worth the marking, who marching with his army toward Judea, met with
the hie Priest clothed in his solemn attire, who came to demand peace of him
in the name of the people. Alexander seeing that, lighted from his horse, and
saluted him with great reverence, and promised them peace. His Captains amazed
hereat, incontinently demanded, what made Alexander to do Alexander.
such honor to the Priest. Alexander said, that before the wars of Macedon
he had seen him in a vision in the same form and fashion that he came unto
him, calling him to come into Asia, and commanding him to make war with the
Persians, and he put forth his hand as it were to guide him. And so seeing now
that this high Priest is most like to the former vision, he was persuaded that
God had some care of his people there, and for that cause he would spare them,
as indeed he showed afterward, both by freeing them from tribute, and
defending them against their enemies. By reason whereof some are of that
opinion, that it is very likely that the Jews advertised Alexander then of the
prophecy of Daniel, having foretold 200. year before, that the King of Greece
should conquer Persia. The dream of the Emperor Theodosius was such like,
Theodosius.
then when as sleeping it seemed unto him that by a certain vision he was
commanded to go combat Eugenius and Argobastus, both Tyrants and sworn
enemies to the name of God, which he did, and in fighting upon a sudden such
a great storm arose, that in all respects so hindered the enemy, that that was
the cause of the victory, and the victory the cause of the Poets song
Claudianus:

O nimium dilecta Deo, cui militat ether, So of ours against the Spaniards
1588.

Et coniurati, veniunt, ad classica venti.
On the other side, GOD reuealeth sometimes the truth of things to come, by the
means of some men who are of good life and fearing God; wherein the dream of
Mardocay concerning Queen Esther his Niece, and of Aman, (as it is written in
the book of Hester) shall serve us for example. In like manner the dream of
Anthony the Hermit, Anthony the Hermit.
who dreamed that he saw hogs which pulled down the Altars with their feet,
and awaking said, that the Church of God should come to be spoiled and wasted
by whoremasters, adulterers, etc. as afterward it came to pass. Philip
Melanchton notes this prophecy against Melanchto^.
the voluptuous life of the Monks and Priests. Many such like dreams may be
found out in the course of histories. Now these dreams whereof we have
spoken, and all such as are of the same sort, are acknowledged for good, by the
conformity which they have to the will of GOD, and to the truth of the
dream, as God himself has taught us in the 23. of Jeremy, saying, The
Prophet Iere. 23.
that has a dream let him tell a dream, and he that has my word let him
speak my word faithfully, etc. Furthermore, the histories of all ages do teach
us, that God manifests sometimes the truth of some things by the means of
inspiration Inspiration.
only without dream; which fashion of prophesying is put in the second degree
of prophesies: and this he does when as one perceives waking something which
enters into his soul, which he may utter to the praise of God and his works;
wherein God uses such persons as it pleases him. And although it may seem
needles to have many prophecies, by reason that by many visions and divine
revelations continued in the holy Scripture, we are already assured of Gods
truth and good pleasure, yet notwithstanding histories, besides experience,
have declared But great care must be had herein by reason of so many false
inspirations.
unto us, that we have such daily, and that God never cease to send
aduertisements to men; be it by dream, vision, or any other means, to make
them know his will, to the intent to guide and govern them according to the
same; as well for the preserving of Empires, as of his people, and his own
Church: Then for example of such aduertisements and divine inspirations,
whereof we now speak, we have that of the Christian Schoolmaster in Antioch
with Lybianus the Sophister, (when Lybianus.
as Julian the Emperor, and also the Apostata, went against the Persians) who
demanded what think thou that the carpenters son does? The other answered
him, the Creator of all things, whom thou scornefully call the Carpenters
son, is making a Cofin to intombe Julian, and soon after the news came that
Julian was slain. The most admirable foresight of the Philosopher Cratippus,
(although Cratippus.
he were a heathen) deserves to be accounted amongst divine predictions; who
then when as Pompey demanded of him, if he were vanquished in a just cause, and
a far better one then his enemies, answered that a state and common wealth
vicious, and corrupt, required a governor to be a Monarch, and that so the
periods of Empires were fatal, and that the Common wealth Note this.
of the Romans should change at that instant (as afterward it happened) to an
absolute Monarchy. The prediction of S. John.
Saint John the Evangelist is not amiss for this purpose, who being in
Ephesus, and going to the Bathes, found in the same place Cerinthus the
Sophister, blaspheming the name of God, he hearing it, said unto his
companions, Let us go hence, for this house will presently fall upon the
blasphemer and his auditors; he was no sooner gone, but the house fell to the
ground upon Cerinthus and his company. We read also in Josephus, that in the
time of Herod there was a number of Pharisees, who refused to swear to the
Emperor, and for that cause they wear constrained to pay a great sum of
money, as a recompense, which was paid for them by the wife of one Pheroras,
and in recompense thereof, Inspirations in former times.
one amongst them revealed a certain secret unto her, which he said was
inspired unto him from God, namely, that God had determined in his secret
counsel to root out Herod and all his race: and that the end of his kingdom
was at hand; as afterward it happened. But it cost the Pharisees dear to have
foretold the death of Herod, for he made them al to be put to death before.
Like examples to these may easily be found (besides in histories) here and
there in holy Scriptures, which I omit for brevity sake. The late Chronicles
testify of John Husse Martyr, that he John Husse. Fox in lib. Martyr.
told before his death, that the kingdom of the Pope should by little and
little, come to ruin and utter decay, and that out of his ashes and cynders,
there should rise a Swan which should Meaning Luther which signifies a swan.
not be roasted in the same sort, as that Goose was roasted; speaking of
himself; for the word Husse in the Bohemian tongue signifies a Goose. He
foretold also, that his adversaries a hundred years after his death should
come to answer both God and him. M. Peucer speaking of the same prediction,
says that the effect followed, for after the Synod of Constance, till the
beginning of the disputatio^s of M. Luther were counted a hundred years. At
the self same time was fulfilled the third and last period of the 500. years;
then that darkness of errors (wherewith Gods Church had been dimmed) began to be
dispersed and vanish away. The truth of such like inspirations are known by
their ends; as the Prophet Jeremy testifies, saying, The Prophet that shall
foretell of Cap. 38.
peace, when his speech shall come to pass, then such a Prophet shall be
known that the Lord sent him. In truth principally then, when it is perceived
by diverse circumstances, that the effect wholly depends upon the will of
God, by reason of the changing of matters of importance, Anote against
peremptory conclusions in Divining.
which we see to happen: likewise we see that God serves himself with whom
it pleases him, guiding and governing their spirits for the execution of his
works, according to his good pleasure. For example of our times, there is
extant the prediction of one Paul Greber, which he made of the estates Paul
Greber.
and Common wealths of Europe, of the house of Burgonie, and of the Low
Countries, who amongst other things which he foretold (whereof many have come
to pass) he named the succession of the King of Navarre, to the Crown of
France, in the year 1589. and proceeding further in the course of that matter,
he promises greater things to the King of Navarre, and of the good success
which he shall have in his affairs, and of the Low Countries, that they
shall speedily be delivered from the tyranny of Spain: in one word, as the
proverb is, Halcionia promittit. But coming to the year 1590. he tells of
the death of a great and mighty Uncertain who, and so are all such
diuinations.
king, enemy to the former, which death (says he) shall happen in the year
1590. But concerning any certainty, or true conjectures in numbers, either of
Numbers uncertain.
years or such like, wherein Master Bodin and others are too curious, I let
them pass as matter impertinent and things of too nice and nimble conjecture.
Then by the difference of dreams, whereof we have spoken before, by the
distinction of their kinds, likewise by the general exposition of diuinations,
lawful and unlawful, it may be understood and easily known, how to apply
them to the alteration and change of a Common wealth. There be also other
sorts of Diuinations besides these, but because they cannot serve to judge of
the change of states (by requiring a whole treatise themselves, and being most
learnedly My L. Henry Howard.
handled of others) I have determined wholly to let them pass, as only
purposing to note out the principal and general rules serving for this
purpose. But as of all the means and rules which have been observed from
antiquity, to confirm the judgment concerning the change and fall of a
Common wealth, there is none necessary, although No rule necessary to judge
of the change of a Kingdom.
God sometimes permit things to fall out according to their natural course:
therefore it becomes us likewise to attend patiently the end and the events
of all things, as God has determined in his immutable counsel, without
presuming too far, by too great a curiosity unbeseeming our blind and dull
capacities. And although by reason of our weakness we cannot sound the
understanding of the depth of those predictions, which GOD has made, sometime
by one mean, sometime by other; yet notwithstanding we must We ought to mark
Gods threatenings.
not cast aside his threatenings, serving to advertise us of what must happen,
to the intent to avoid the scourge of his wrath, (nor yet esteem them as
necessary, and that God cannot turn them to good:) but on the contrary
wholly rely upon his mercy, which is infinite toward them which repent in
fit and convenient time: consider what we have observed by discourse of
histories, and according to our capacity, touching diuinations in this kind,
lawful and unlawful, to the intent that by their difference it may be the
better judged, what shall happen for the chang and ruins of Common wealths,
and of the estate of Realms, and Empires: not to the intent to set down
certain rules whereby to divine generally of things The scope of this whole
treatise.
to come, against the might and authority of God, or to give occasion to some,
to rely upon superstitious and foolish vanities; but to the intent to judge by
things past, of things to come, and by that which has bin, of that which may
be, according to the natural course appointed unto all things by God himself.

The chief kinds of Divination unlawful.
1. By observation of the flying of fowls. Deuteronomy. 18. 10. 2. By observation of
Dreams. Leu. 19. 3. By Sorcerie or lottes. Deuteronomy. 18. 4. Per Pythones, by
inspiration of the devil. Leuit. 20. 5. By false and counterfeit apparitions
of the devil. 1. Sam. 28.
Effecta nulla futura per se cognosci possunt ab vllo Intellectu praeterquam a
diuino cui omnia sunt praesentia.

Zanch. de oper. lib. 6. cap. 2. ENGLAND TO HER THREE DAVGHters, Cambridge,
Oxford, Innes of Court, and to all her Inhabitants.
IF from the depth of intyre affection, I take upon me to deal more plainly,
then your honorably augmented dignities will well permit; or from too Liberty
of speech sits a mother.
fervent a love, ouerweyingly value you at too high a rate, persuade your
selves (if these be my faults) that the name of a mother has a privilege to
excuse them both: and howsoever a mother to her daughters, might more fitly
speak in secret and not hard, yet seeing my naked truth desires not to
shroude it self from my greatest enemy, I challenge those kingdoms that have
had children, to be witness of my talk; and if either there be folly in me,
for to love so much, or fault in you to deserve so A thing not possible.
little, then let the^ blame me of too blind affection: and accuse you of not
deserving, and so speedily from Fames book will I cancel out your praise, and
recant my love to a mothers shame. But if I (justly fortunate) have high cause
to commend you, and Europe for your sake, All Europe bound to England for her
daughters.
has greater cause to commend me; then may I not lawfully with a mothers
love, show the affection of a grandmother, to commend your children? And
although my revenues are such, as I cannot give you large patrimonies, yet
from my mouth shall the whole world take notice to give you eternal praises.
The time was (and happy time may I say) when in the glory of my age, in the
prime of my youth, in the honor of my days, in the fame of my desert, in the
multitude of my friends, I matched with Sigebertus sometimes my loving husband;
Anno Dom. 630. Cambridge founded as some write.
and howsoever my behavior was far from lightness, my manners from loosenes,
and my modesty from the least suspect, yet I was taken in the corrupt minds
of some few, to be too familiar with Cantabrus the K. of Spain, the supposed
father of Cambridge my eldest daughter: but to excuse my self, (though there
was no cause) I protest I was free from such adultery, lawfully married to
Sigebert: by him was be gotten my eldest daughter Cambridge: and the suspision
only proceeded from this, that Cantabrus seeing me happy for so sweet a
child, was desirous to christen it, and calde it Cambridge, and after from
Athens sent for some to nurse her. Then after Sigebertus death (sweet daughter
sigh that he died so soon) (for legacies far greater would he have left
thee) courted devoutly, I matched at last (weary of my widdowhood) with
worthy Alfred: of him (sweet daughter Oxford) Anno Dom. 800. Oxford founded.
was thou borne: and howsoever some shadows of discord have bin betwixt Caius
de antiquitate Cantab.
you two (a thing usually incident to your sex) which of you might challenge
the first place; yet I must needs confess this, I lived long comforted only
with one child; doubting I should have been aged and past childbearing, and
then to my perpetual comfort (sweet Oxford) was thou borne. And howsoever thy
elder sister may challenge Cambridge more ancient.
that she has lived longer, yet ca^ she not boast that either I have loved her
better, or that she her self has deserved to be loved better. More fruitful
Both admirable and both matchless.
Oxford have thou bin; (neither herein do I commend thee) but more proudly
jealous (Cambridge) of thy honor have thou been; yet both of you so dear to
me, so equally beloved, so worthily accounted of, so walled with privileges,
so crowned with all kind of honor, as both (unequal to be compared with each
other) may in the highest terms be preferred before the most famous, that
Europe has: the^ strive not betwixt your selves, but both be unite together:
join hands, and if famous Alexandria, Alexandria not comparable.
that sometime lived with high honor, who now lies buried in her own ashes,
were flourishing, to make comparison, let her know that within your walls,
(howsoever you reverence hers for their age) are many as famous as Athanasius,
many as full of learned variety as Clemens, Doctors in Cambridge and Oxford.
and many far more soundly religious then them both. Join I say together and
strive both to grace your The Innes of court.
youngest sister (daughter frown not that I term thee youngest:) (daughters
frown not that I term her your sister:) for although she cannot brag of
the same progeny, nor has received such ample legacies from her deceased
father, yet her beauty, her modesty, her own behavior, has matched her
with such noble families, as both of you may be entertained by her, Both
Uniuersities stand in need of the Innes of court.
and have your children graced with her favor: you are both grown into good
years, gravity befits you. But she is young, stately, courtlike, and such a
one as scornfully can answer her proudest suitors; nay her children are so
valiantly wise, as when my subjects disagree The mother of peace.
she makes them friends, when you fall out she ends all strife, and to whom I
have committed now in my age the The fountain of policy.
government of al my subjects: then repine not at her happiness, if you love
mine; wish that daily she may grow more honorable. And howsoever I have
heard complaints, that she has received some of your children, and cherished
them so much, that she has made them wanton, yet (daughters) the fault The
Innes of court falsely standered to be too loose in the educatio^ of her youth.
is not hers; you your selves having bin ancient mothers, can well judge, that
youth (and youth plentifully stored with all favors) can hardly be restrained
to a stricter course: she has not been careless, plentifully to set before them
grave and worthy mirrhors of wise sobriety, who^ if your youth would emulate,
the^ should you causeles complain of her kindness: And for her, this must I say
(though I hear otherwise) Careful of the Universities.
that kindly, lovingly, and wisely she respects you, as her elder sisters.
Neither can it be, (howsoever perhaps she might persuade her self) that if I
should live to see you buried (O unfortunate if I live so long) that (sweet
daughters) she alone could be sufficient to comfort me; nay my age and her
youth, both so nearly depend upon your welfare, as if either ye dye (which I
dare not think of) or be offended with us (which I will The Innes of court not
able alone to furnish England with wisdom.
not suppose) the^ desolate were our case, and both of us like to be seen
ruinous. Account of them then (daughter) as your elder sisters, and howsoever
you are youthful and full of favor, yet they are aged and full of honor: And
though it be the part of a mother equally to respect you all three, yet at my
husbands suit (he living) I so bequeathed mine honor unto them two, as the
stay of Uniuersities the stay of a land.
our house remains in them only. Then I entreat thee (daughter) by the love
which thou bear to mine inhabitants: by the care which thou have of thy own
safety: and lastly by the duty which thou owe to me thy mother, in all
respects to favor thy sisters honor: in all causes chiefly to intend their
good: and to bind those with a sacred vow, who are thy posterity, to seek
their glory whilst the world endures. Stately Greece, who sometimes was
famous over all the world, had long since been buried in the eternal night of
dark forgetfulness, if her daughter Athens had not lincked her children in
Athens.
marriage, with the greatest families in all Europe: And renowned Florence
(daughters give me leave to advance your petegree) (not half so nobly
descended as you are) being begotten by Silla his soldiers, a Pagan, borne in
Ante adue^tum Christi 90.
the days of infidelity, had never been reputed as the flower of Italy, if
laureat Petrarch, Dantes, Accursius, Aretin, Cosmus Medices.
and lastly, the famous Duke had not made her indeard to the most renowned in
all Greece. And Padway eternizing Padway.
the river Po, had been long since in the midst of her distresses, rased out
of famous memories, if Rome liue-making Liuie had not been noted to descend
Liuie.
from her. Then flourish (kind daughters) all united in that manner, that the
world may know your posterity A happy Union.
to be so linckt together, as that my love cannot be greater to you all, then
all the world may see that yours is amongst your selves: Cambridge thou once
like the Queen of the Amazons, for my honor accepted the proud challenge of
the Roman Champion; and Campion.
thy children have often since so valiantly withstoode their learned foes, as
Rome can neither advance her Bellarmin: Confuted by D. Whitaker. Confuted by D.
Fulke.
Louan her Stapleton, (nay mine by right) Rhemes their margent: or the proudest
of them all, say, they have dared me, and I have not answered: nay thy other
sister has been so forward in that kind, as the wounds she made, Humfrey
Reinold.
are not yet cured. And if at home any base pesant, not valewing thy worth,
upon presumption shall do you wrong, either hardly entreating your children,
denying them their names of honor, defrauding them of their land: detracting
Puritans. Politickes. Atheists. Law must cut these off.
from their fame; your youngest sister shall be so incensed with it, as humbling
their pride, she shall cause them to repent their boldness: and think daughters,
I intend not to see you want, for no sooner will I hear that you are
distressed, but my nobility shall redress your A thing often done.
wrong; my citizens shall relieve your want; and my soldiers shall procure
your peace. And for your scoulding Your Townsmen.
neighbors, vouchsafe not daughters to contend with them; humble not my honor
so low, as to mate it with such mean Knights. Paris, wise was thy Iaphets
progeny, who made thy Sequan to part thy town and thee. And great Charles,
thou were great in this, to foresee an University and a town, could not well
agree: My youngest daughter it was thy case, to have one of thy children
undeservedly endangered by thy often relieved neighbors. But as the Lincolnes
Inn by the Chancery lane.
excellency of the object corrupts the sense: and Lions are never so furious,
as at the sight of a red color: nor the Elephants so unruly, as at the show of
the Mulberie; so my ignorant inhabitants are no where so rude, as placed so
near a sun: my Lions are no where Ly-ans.
so furious, as seeing your scarlet gowns, nor my Elephants so unruly, as
tasting of your powrefull and poison killing mulberies. I would exhort you in
more ample terms, but that I know your patience, and control them in a
sharper manner, but that I see their fury: betake your selves to more high
atchieueme^ts. Let your aged sit down, and rest them Honor your Doctors.
in honors chair; set your children to write triumphing songs for their
mothers victory: show your quick disceruing eyesight in these deceiving times.
Let the world see, that amongst your children, wit has fruitefully grown, in
this untimely, niggardly blasting age: wherein though blackemouthed envy
Railing Asses.
repine at every choice conceit, tearming it, either time or wit, or both
idlelie Young men should write and inure themselves in smaller matters.
employed, yet my true discernement and a mothers love, makes me term them
natures works, made with a comparing pride, in these latter times to show their
excellency: Yet follow not so far the conceited imitation of former time, to
take trifles for subjects to work upon, as therein meaning to make art
wondered at that work of nothing. Thousands of objects might be found out,
wherein your high spirited muse might fly an unmatched pitch, and Phoenix-like
fire her self into immortal ashes by the Sun. So only without compare,
eternally should you live: for in your children shall the loue-writing muse of
divine Sydnay, and the pure flowing stream of Chrystallin Spenser survive
only: write then of Elizas A fit task for the finest Scholar.
reign, a task only meet for so rare a pen: it is easy to give
immortality to an everliving Empress: or if this be matter, which the
baseness of these worthless times would hardly prefer before trifles, (a thing
sufficient to accuse this age of treason) then take a tragic style, and
mourn for the truly Hon. Ferdinandos The late worthy Earl of Darbie, who
died April. 1593. Never enough lamented. Who dyed, Sept. 1593.
death: whom though scattered tears have honored in some few sonnets, yet he
is a true worthy object of everlasting mourning for the sacred Muses: who
languishing with late sorrow for the fathers death, want strength and leisure
to weep for the Sons eclipse: honor him sweet daughters children, who
living honored you: and control with the muses pen the repining fates, so
far as give him immortality, and cause him live to despite them. Thus wept
you for famous Sydnay, my Cantabrigiae lachrimae.
brave soldier: and men Hon. are only fit to be mourned for by your Muses:
which if being made sorrowful they require larger matter to mourn for. Then
name but Hatton, the Muses favorite: Sir Christopher Hatton L. Chancellor of
England.
the Churches music: Learnings Patron, my once poor Islands ornament: the
Courtiers grace, the Scholars conntenance, and the Guardes Captain. Thames I
dare avouch will become tears: the sweetest perfumes of the Court will be sad
sighs: every action shall accent grief; honor and eternity shall strive to
make his tomb, and after curious skill and infinite cost, ingraue this with
golden letters, Minus merito: Aurea puluereis, praestant aeterna caducis.
the fainting Hind untimely chasde shall trip toward heaven, and candem si
shall be virtues mot. Or if sad Melancholy (daughters) displease your Muses (a
thing well agreeing with my age) then take the course to canonize your own
writers, that not every bald ballader to A thing fit only to be done by the^.
the prejudice of Art, may pass current with a Poets name, but that they only
may be reputed Hon. by that term, that shall live privileged under your
pens: For not precise Aristarchus, or aged censoring Cato, might challenge
greater privilege of truth, then your free toongd and vn-aw-bound skill: I
speak this (daughters) not to that end to make your children like the
peremptory Critics of this age, but to diswade you from the fault of the
common people, the cruel mislike of your own, and the intolerable flattery
of strangers wits. And if this or such like be not matter, wherein your dear
cherished muse may justly delight it self, and sweetly Of the wars in
Flaunders, on the Sea. 1588.
please others, then sing of wars, and of learned valor: of Mineruas
foe-danting shield: of Mars-conquering honor: of the Courts Loadstarre: of
Englands Scipio: of France his aid: of Fames glory: In France.
of the Muses eldest son: of Arts ornament: of virtues miracle: of Religions
champion: of thrice honorable, The every where beloved Earl of Essex.
and worthilie-worthie-honored-noble Essex. (Daughter Cambridge) he was
sometimes thy care, thou now art become In Trinity College.
his; be proud that thou gave suck to so brave a man; and assure thy A
patron of the Uniuersities, and the Innes of court.
self (yet slack not to honor him) that he will willingly bestow that
milk (which is now made blood) with interest in thy quarrel; howsoever slack
not, but write; sleep not, but sing: let your mornings muse like Aurora
blushing march her equipage, in her stateliest buskind Poetry. I know
Cambridge howsoever now old, thou have some young, Sweet Master Campio^.
bid them be chaste, yet suffer them to be witty; let them be soundly learned,
yet suffer them to be gentlemanlike qualified: Oxford thou have many, and they
Britton. Percie. Willobie. France. Lodge. Master Dauis of L. I. Drayton.
Learned M. Plat.
are able to sing sweetly when it please thee. And thou youngest of all three,
either in Hexameter English, thou art curious (but that thou learned of my
daughter Cambridge) or in any other kind thou art so wisely merry, as my
self (though old) am often delighted with thy music, tune thy sweet strings,
and sing what please thee. Now me thinks I begin to smile, to see how these
smaller Balladmakers.
lights (who not altogether unworthily were set up to expel darkness)
blushinglie hide themselves at the Suns appear. Then should not tragic
Garnier have A work howsoever not respected yet excellently done by Th. Kid.
his poor Cornelia stand naked upon every post: then should not Times
complaint delude with so good a title: then should not the Paradise of dainty
devises be a packet of balde rimes: then should not Zepheria, Cephalus and
Procris But by the greedy Printers so made prostitute that they are contemned.
(works I dispraise not) like water me^ pluck every passinger by the sleeue:
then every braineles toy should not usurp the name of Poetry: then should not
the Muses in their tinsell habit be so Nor Poetry be termed Ryme.
basely handled by every rough swain: then should not loves humor so
tyrannise over the chaste virgins: the^ should honor be mournd for in better
terms. Cambridge make thy two children friends, thou have been unkind unto
the one to weane him before his time; and too fond D. Haruey. M. Nash.
upon the other to keep him so long without preferment; the one is ancient,
and of much reading, the other is young but full of wit: tell them both thou
bred the^, and brought the^ up: bid the ancient forbear to offer wrong; tell
the younger Doctores liberi sunto. Others of that name, as fit for a Scholar to
inueigh against.
he shall suffer none: bid him that is free by law, think it a shame to be
entangled in small matters: but tell the other, he must leave to meditate
revenge, for his adversary (and let that suffice for all revenge) Great pity.
(to learnings injury) lives unregarded. And daughter (but I list not chide
thee) I hear thou art in preferring grown too partial: thou love For
fellowships.
sinisterly thy self, and have quite forgotten me thy mother; it is thy
sisters fault, as well as thine, you both of you prefer such into your private
favors, grace them with degrees, give the^ places; Many Graduats unmeet for
the common wealth.
(but I will say nothing because strangers hear me) who of all other are most
unmeet to do me good: nay, that which does vex me more, you say all herein
you are mother like: What? Lamentable when it is so in a common wealth.
have I preferred to dignity in the Common wealth, such as the world in true
estimate, have thought unmeet? Have I relied upon them, as upon Atlas
shoulders, who were unmeet for so great a burden? Have I ever ventured my
self in the field under their ensigns, who Englands great care in appoynting
her officers.
were reputed cowards? Did I ever employ in foreign matters, such as were
unfit for private causes? Nay, I protest for these 36. years I have always
cared to take them nearest into my favor, The right Honorable LL. of the privy
Counsel. Valiant captains. Learned Ambassadors. Hen. Darby.
who were best acquainted with wisdoms secret. I relied upon those in my
peace, who Nestor like, were wise to prevent war: I trusted to those in my
wars; who Hector-like were valiant to procure my peace: I sent such into
foreign countries, as birth made Hon. experience wise; education learned:
these have been my honors: and if I have faults (children) they proceed from
you. But I am loath to do you the least Universities not to be controld by
every odd conceit.
wrong: and to charge you with unkindness in my last age: for unless I have
ever doted (a thing easy in so great a love) France my sister (for I will
begin with her) cannot so much brag of Paris, The Universities of France, not
equal to ours in England. Founded 1490. Founded 1506.
Oreleance, Lions, Rhemes, or the proudest of al her children: as I may justly
of you three. Germany has painful Basil, and pleasant populous
Franckefort: where Ceres, Bacchus, the Naiades and Dryades do march together,
and yet these too mean to compare with you. I pass by Italies offspring, who
of long time has carried Anno. 1457.
her self with excessive pride. Rich Venice, with her 400. bridges: great
Millayn, proud Genua, fertile Bomonia, ancient Rauema, nobly honorable
Naples, (once Parthinope:) holy Rome, and fair Florence. Thus they were
termed long since, but now unequal to compare with you: Salernitana sometimes
could give counsel, when she showed her care and skill to my dear Henry, but
now obscurelie To King Henry 8.
she lies desolate: you may pass these far, and without presumption
compare with Toledo, Spaynes Navel: with Uienna fearful to the Turks: you
are talked of every where, and falselie The Papists diligent to gain English
Stude^ts.
Rome goes about to entice your children, offering them kingdoms to forsake
you: (daughters) spare not, take what I have and bestow upon them: let them
not whilst I live, forsake you for want of living: my wealth and possessions
that I have, are intended chiefelie to your good: and howsoever either the base
cormorant, or the poor All think they have more reason to be richer then
Scholars.
citie-vsurer, or the wanton spend-thrift, take themselves to have more
interest in my substance then you have, yet they usurp upon my kindenes, and
make me believe, that the two stays of my age (you my children for peace, and
my soldiers for war) have both enough: An untruth.
I have made laws to augment your revenues by your rent corn: I provided
lately for my soldiers, when they Englands chief care is of learning.
were in want: credit me children, my care is of you only; for unless you
direct them, their plenty is dangerous to breed rebellion: their force is
doubtful to make them disobedient: their honor likely to grow tyrannous, and
what soever they enjoy without you, to be dangerous to the Common wealth. Let
your children (daughters) content themselves: leave to repine at baser
fortunes: let them be persuaded of this, that Fame Scholars must learn
patience.
shall be their servant, Honor shall be their subject, Glory shall be their
crown, Eternity their inheritance: (then indeard wit decking admired
daughters) write and let the world know that heavens harmony is no music,
in respect of your sweet, and well art tuned strings: that Italian Ariosto
did but shadow the meanest part of thy muse, that Tassos Godfrey is not
worthy to make compare with your truly eternizing Elizas style: let
France-admired Bellaw, M. Alablaster. Spenser and others.
and courtlike amarous Rousard confess that there be of your children, that in
these latter times have far surpassed Lylia clouded, whose tears are making.
them. Let divine Bartasse eternally praise worthy for his weeks work, say
the best things were made first: Let other countries (sweet Cambridge) envy,
(yet admire) my Virgil, thy petrarch, divine Spenser. And unless I err, (a
thing easy in such simplicity) deluded by All praise worthy. Lucrecia Sweet
Shakspeare. Eloquent Gaueston. Wanton Adonts. Watsons heir. So well graced
Anthony deserves immortal praise from the hand of that divine Lady who like
Corinna conte^ding with Pindarus was often victorious. Sir David Lynsay. Matilda
honorably honored by so sweet a Poe^. Diana.
dearly beloved Delia, and fortunately fortunate Cleopatra; Oxford thou may
extol thy courte-deare-verse happy Daniell, whose sweet refined muse, in
contracted shape, were sufficient amongst men, to gain pardon of the sin to
Rosemond, pity to distressed Cleopatra, and everliving praise to her loving
Delia. Register your childrens petegree in Fames forehead, so may you fill
volumes with Chausers praise, with Lydgate, the Scottish Knight, and such like,
whose unrefined tongues far short of the excellency of this age, wrote
simply and purelie as the times wear. And when base and injurious trades, the
sworn enemies to Learnings eternity (a thing usual) shall have devoured
them, either with the fretting cancker worm of mouldie time: with Arabian
spicerie: with english honnie: with outlandish butter (matters of employment
for the aged days of our late authors) yet that then such (if you think them
worthy) in despite of base Grosers, (whom I Procul hinc, procul ite profani.
charge upon pain of learnings curse, not to handle a leaf of mine) may live
by your means, canonized in learning catalogue. I am loath to be too long in
my aduisements to you (wise daughters:) and therefore here I period them,
wishing you (if need be) to make mine apology: not that I fainte England to
be defended by scholars.
to maintain the least part of my credit, against any male-contented
selfeconceited, unregarded malicious subject, but that Europe in this age,
delited only with things personal, shall not bring me upon the theater in
matter of such designements, to stand (against my own inhabitants) to the
favorable courtesy of their wise Censors. Daughters follow their counsel,
and Your learned Doctors.
honor such, as I have for wisdom loved; for years and authority appointed
to rule over you: let not your younger children despise their aged brethren,
love them as becomes mothers, Cherish your youth.
and I will send for them in convenient The fault of Universities.
time (as their grandmother) to govern my common wealth. And because she
shall not think I neglect her, read what I have written to mine inhabitants
in her behalf: judge how I stand affectionate; God grant you may all follow
my advise, so shall I find you trusty, and you me to be most loving: then
shall the world fear me, for such worthy children: and envy you for so
kind a mother. But here (children) I must end with you, and speak to the
rest of my wise inhabitants.

ENGLAND TO AL HER INHABITANTS.
IF the sad and just complaint of a mournful (unjustly wronged) mother, would
give England too kind.
my tears but truce so long till my tongue had told my tale; then could I
easily persuade my self, that a matter so full rathe should gain pity, and
that these often stopped periods should gain credit: But seeing faults done
by such as had no reason to wish me evil, and my grief increased by those, who
might justly have been my comfort; give me leave to leave those, who unkindly
forsook me, and exhort the^, She speaks not to those that have fled the land.
whom abode terms English men; nature children; and duty subjects. And
herein first foreseeing the evils to come, I will renew the speech of the
Roman Orator in the like case begu^ in the person of Africanus. This age
having received into her hand the Commonwealth, resembling a table of most
curious and exact workmanship, yet obscured (as it were) and darkened with old
age, does so blame her self that any shall go about to renew her colors, that
she has not so much as care to preserve her rude dark dimmed and obscured
shadows: for what is left now of the ancient Roman manners, which happily
sometime sustained the Common wealth? Where is now that worthy and ancient
honor due to the learned Student and courageous Soldier? These are so long
since worn out of use, as Rome that sometimes flourished, seems now to want
the very remembrance of them. It is needful therefore that I should awake the
eternally famosed personages of old, who lived once honorable to their
country, but now lie dead, and their virtues buried with them, because few or
none can be found to follow their example. We live to render an account for
this offense, but God grant we be not found faulty and chastised for our
labor: for it is not by chance but by our sin, that we have but the
appearance of a state well governed, the truth whereof we have lost long since.
This Orator weighing the virtue and honesty of the ancient Romans, against
the ambition and ryotous Rome altered.
demeanor of his time, found that his fear was not causeles, for the ruin of
the Common wealth. In like manner The common wealth miserable, that has her
foes within her self.
may I poor desolate and distressed caitife do, if within my bowels untimely
bred by my own folly, be found signs of greater danger; and not so much
remaining as the very name of honesty; for to my insufferable and unpitied
grief, Modesty and Sobriety are changed Excess of these times.
into all manner of dissolution. There could not be found amongst them in the
sober times of our forefathers such needles excess of all superfluities: for
they were sober, frugall, and full of strength, fit to labor the earth and to
weild arms, knowing, as Alexander the Great made remonstrance to them of
Macedon, who saw Darius his army shine with gold, that all that sumptuous
show should be nothing but a richer spoil to them which were clad with Not
safe for a country to brag of weal^h if the Spaniard know it.
iron. Late is the time since the Low Countries, Images of my state, and a
glass whereby to address my self; since the Duke of Burgonie, as Cominaeus
writes, could gain nothing of the Swizard for his poor poverty: And
howsoever in Caesar's time, conquering ambition that meant to make the Roman
Eagle perch under the Northpole, could hardly be content to suffer me to live
free from invasion, yet now my abundance has made me an eye sore to my
neighbor Kings, and the vain superfluities of some has made the world
believe that my Albion cliffes are white rocks of pure Diamont: and that under
pretense of burning coal, my poor inhabitants dig out mines of burnisht
gold. Sparta howsoever thy wise counselling Licurgus advised thee The fault of
Empires.
often, yet untimely did thou perish by this means: And Rome late mentioned
to honors infamy, thou had never been spoiled by the Gauls sought unto by
the^ of Carthage, sacked by the Goths and Va^dals, if thy streets had not bin
hung with tapestrie, thy Matrons brau'd it in their golden chariots, and thy
young men unadvisedly lascivious (as mine do at this day) neglect their home
borne poor, and brag of their wealth, as to make challenge by proclamation to
the whole world; what can this be, but untimely set me to sail? make me a
pray to the never glutted covetous monster? enuies mark; and that which my
own cannot spend fast enough by prodigality, that to cause others to rob me
of by tyranny; and that which is worst of al, few or none (but distressed I)
consider the harms caused by these evils. For to remember the times Laws for
sobriety, the sinews of a Kingdom.
never to be forgotten, when old Brutus lived, severe laws prohibiting these
intemperancies (which howsoever made in abundance seem to sleep at this day)
with severe discipline strengthened the sinews of my Common wealth, forbidding
me thereby to come to dissolution and covetousness; imitating their estates
who have highly risen by observation of such laws, and by their Plenty and
ease the Ca kers of a Kingdom.
continual pains, gained that fame, which I loose by my perpetual ease. O if
those ancient laws, if those strict and severe customs had renewed their force
in the midst of me, they would have served to have remedied my evil, by want
whereof I fear my state shall be no better then Rome or Sparta; betwixt whom
(these laws having lost their virtue) in stead of emulation for worth in true
Proud Kingdoms must fall.
honor, they proudly bandied vain titles, striving which should be most
prodigal; and thus each corrupting other, both became so distressed, that they
were compelled to retaile that which they had bought by gross, and in the end
remain a perpetual example of a memorable vengeance, and so make Rome subject
to Caesar's Tiberius, and other How Rome fell.
tyrannies. Behold a true mirrhor which makes me see my sentence to be just;
and that there is no plague more deadly poysonful, then pleasure, whose Loose
pleasure begets treason.
rash desires presume upon government, and not fearing to touch her sacred
throne, fill the land full of treasons; the subjects full of impiety; and in
the end does ruinate the whole state: This I might witness by sundry, whose
excessive pride and intolerable pleasures putrefying the air, have filled
their houses with contagion, fiered their walls, and the earth as weary has
devoured them up. But that which besides these (for these I silently pass as
being but the faults of some few) which does make my fear to increase daily,
and (like the warlike engine that ploweth furrows in the army) shall batter
down the walls of my peace (if provision in Discord vntieth the armor of a
common wealth.
time prevent not so foul a mischief) is the hateful discord untying those
firm knottes, which once bound my armor so fast about me, that I contemned
open violence, as being too weak to encounter me, and scorned undermining
treachery, as being too foolish to supplant my prosperity. For where are now
become these renowned amities of our forefathers? these common Happy days.
resolutions sometime usual to mine inhabitants? those jealous minds
impatient of strangers pride? uniting themselves, least forreiners should do
them wrong? what is become of that once used true-hearted love toward me
their country? has not envy, dissimulation and needeles discord, so shaken
the pillars of my age? the stay of mine honor? the fortress of my Island? and
the posterity of my land? that my divines may say, Ephraim is against
Manasses, Manasses against Ephraim, and both against Judah; that my
tragick-writers may compare me to poor Iocasta; Miserable state that is so.
that Eteocles and Pollinyces have both forgotten that one womb bare them
both; small distance parted but those two teates, which so often gave them both
suck; nor could that (hatred) after death living hatred, possibly proceed
Let the traitors accuse me if they can.
from poor Iocasta: And let these speak, (if shame will let them speak) if
the least show of harm, the smallest shadow of injury, if pretense were
given of the least wrong by my means: did I spoil them of their wealth? and
closely A thing done in other countries.
sold them to be a pray to strangers? did I banish without cause, their
kinsemen, wives, or children to live distressed in a foreign country? did I
hide nigardly Yet these no causes to be rebellious.
the benefits of my peace, and plenty from them? Let him answer me that is
most unthankful, has just cause been offered on my part, why discord
Discord.
distracting my inhabitants, should lay me open to the spoil of mine enemies?
Whom God keeps in despigth of them.
could their cause proceed from a poor Island, that I should have my princess
surprised by treason? my nobility defamed A thing often attempted. Lybels.
by slander? my stately buildings undermined by tyranny? and my self left
comfortles to lament my fortune? was it (english men) (for though cruelty
forbids, yet kindenes makes me so term you) was it (I say) any just cause,
but supposed, by my means? I am loath No Island ca^ remember greater benefits
to her inhabitants.
to vpbraide your unthankfulness, by remembering of my favors. Have you not had
(and so long may have,) unless your selves be injurious to your selves, a
Princess truly nobled with all virtues, a Queen matchles, in whom honors
Elizabeth.
vnsteined pure die, has set forth such lively colors, as enemies must (and
do) fear: friends ought and should love: whom the age now present must
admire, and the time following still praising, wonder at; more courteous then
the churle-sauing Abigal: more courtly then the friendes-honoring Hester: more
valiant then princekilling Judith; who blessing me by her means with a
plentious peace, and beautifying her court with eternal praise, has made
both to be enuies mark in No pen able to praise sufficiently.
her enemies eye; the shadowing Cedar to her distressed friends: and the force
conquering sword to her professed foes. Here might my muse dare to fly a
matchles pitch, but that faintinglie, I feel my Icarian wings to melt with the
heat of so bright a sun, this only shall snffice without further
repeatings of her worth, thereby to make your fault far greater conceived with
tears, accented with sighs; and uttered by truethes naked oratresse; that
what praise ever wisdom gained (as al praise is but wisdoms due) that same
is, and shall be your (sacred princess) her inheritance, who has so often
contended whether her glory might mount higher unto fames tower, blown up
with the vows of mortal men; or her thanks ascend further unto heaven,
conveyed by thousand Seraphins. Live the^, though sorrowful to see me sad
(divine and renowned Empress) earths glory, religions comfort, admired
wisdoms inheritrix, here perpetually to be praised of men, and else where
immortallie to be crowned of God himself. Have No land so many.
you not had thousands of worthy and brave ladies bewtifying poor me, who all
seem vestall-like to have lighted virginities lamp, from the euer-burning
taper of chaste Elizas virtues? Have you not had in me (things hardly Grave
and wise Counselors has England still had. The strength of a kingdom are
laws, and their execution the means to expel fear from her subjects.
England may justly glory of her three daughters: 1. Ca^bridge. 2. Oxford. 3.
Innes of court.
found else where) sage and wise Nestors, such whose state guiding wisdoms
were able to equalize (if it were not your fault) me a poor Island to the
former monarchies: were but those famous and never enough commended laws, made
by them in their deep scanning judgments, practiced by you, then how should I
justly pride it in my worth, and be valiantly courageous where now I fear?
have you not had for the space of these many years, though but two, yet
eternally famoused universities, Cambridge and Oxford, where Englands youth
have learned such worthy precepts, as ill beseemes the^ to requite me with
such ingratitude? These serve to beautify (in their want) my plenty with
their wisdom, whilst you (ungrateful you) in your ple^tie seek through
their want, to contemn their wisdom: here Note this.
could I justly complain for them, but that I want tears to express my own
sorrow: for I see those who most are A thing miserable when the Universities
are poor.
bound (if benefits received might bind) to respect them, in the injurious
opinion of learned-modest-naked-humilitie wrongfully to deprive them of things
necessary: And least they should grow too glorious, to obscure the^ too far
to learnings infamy. I cease to repeat A wicked policy.
the smaller favors, (matters justly deserving a thankful loyalty) and
content my self with these; that for the greatest benefits that ever
inhabitants enjoyed since Paradices first erection, I distressed Island have (by
discord of my An undoubted truth.
own) lamentably endured the greatest wrongs: my enemies have seen into The
Spaniard.
the seed plots of my discord long since, and have found them to threaten my
ruin; they have bred dissentions, and Pope. Frenchmen. Scots and all laugh at
our discord.
make me nourish them to my own destruction, they have struck fire into the
tinder of my soft heart, and have made me blow it till I burn to ashes. Is it
the The cause of discord.
inequality of condition that makes this discord? Is it the might of some few
ouershadowing the meaner, that fills you with envy against me? I cannot live A
Kingdom can not stand without inequality.
(howsoever Plato foolishly dreamed) but my harmony must be made of diverse
sounds; my sinews must be of sundry strength, and my states full of
inequality: yet for all this the meanest The moderation of inequality.
can have no wrong, the greatest shall do no violence; I will live never to
permit a tyranny: both equal dear to me, whereof neither can suffer danger,
but I must needs perish: for thus to see either Lamemtable times.
my Nobility (a thing not yet heard of) or my Clergy (a thing too usual) or
my cities (a thing too common) or my subjects (a thing too lamentable) fondly
to disagree; what is it else but to breed within my borders wolves, which I
banished long since, by my Edgars means? and to nourish that flame which
consumed Greece? I mean the envy between Greece perished by discord.
her two eyes, Athens and Lacedaemon, to the great contentment of their sworn
enemy Philip, the King of Macedon; and shall not your hatred, discord, and
such Beware (true English me^.)
like, tennising your own infamies to make others smile, make me perpetually
mourn as sold to sorrow, and the Spanish Philip more joyful then the King
of Macedon? Let us not stay till we Dangerous cause of vuion.
be united by our enemies cruelty, as Xerxes often caused the Greekish union.
Shall they persuade you (degenerous minds to be persuaded) that it is better
to suffer tyranny of a stranger, then inequality of a friend? (Dear
countrymen) and so still to be reputed (until extremely you deserve
otherwise) in a humane body do the hands, the feet, and the head, fall at
discord among themselves? Is not a wound sometimes The praise of inequality.
as deadly in the heel, (for so perished the thrice valiant Achilles) as
dangerous in the head? Are not my parts so united amongst themselves, that the
least jar is a fault, the least discord a fall? Were I made so absolute that
I could stand, and have no parts, then might iarres be, and I in tune: were I
not a mother that bred you both, then might you dissent, and I not fall.
Suppose some part of my Island has beauty of towns, yet other parts have
fertiltie of soil: some place has wise inhabitants, yet others are valiant:
some are plain, full of all pleasure, yet others are walled, as it were with
mountains, and full of all saftie: some are shadowed with thick trees: to
avoid heat, yet others are compassed with silver streams, to beget cold: thus
all parts of my: Island, and the particulars of my state are such, that each
imparting dignity, all of them make me partaker of an absolute happiness: so
that whilst unity is maintained amongst my people, I universally enjoy those
benefits which I lack (as looselie being dispersed) by cruel discord: alas:
in what Common Equality not to be hoped for of strangers.
wealth can equality be found? Think you if I were sold to strangers, you
were free from emulation, unless it were by this means, by being miserable?
the Philosophers sometimes desired this, in their Common wealths: but foolish
men are ignorant of the truth, not sounding into the depth of eternities
wisdom, who ordained the inequality of things, to preserve each other:
amongst the elements is not the fire tempered with the water: in the body, the
heart cooled by the lights: in the soul the affections ruled by the reason,
and what nature has done in these, shall we think intolerable in a Common
wealth? Look but upon the Low Countries, where unequal Cantons Low countries
dangered by emulation.
bred such a fire, (increased by false report) that whilst some boasting of
their valor, did disgrace others, all have bin in danger of the enemies
conquest: and howsoever their governors could not easily see to what this
tended, yet lamentable experience has taught them now, that discord is fatal
to a Common wealth. The disagreement of Italy was the overthrow of Discord.
their conquering empire: the same made the Gauls subject to Julius Caesar:
thus if Europe, the grandmother of us poor Islands, had not dealt by
misconstring her own friends, the Turk had not so far made entrance into
Greece, Slauonia, Hungary and other countries, that he should proudely dare to
And challenge him. 1594. If Christians join not together.
encounter the German Emperor; and stand thereby to threaten us, like as a
tempest upon the top of a mountain, ready with his showers, to ouerflow the
valleys. But what firm constancy can be expected in the universal palsy
of all Europe? How can kingdoms unite themselves, when I but one small Island
have a number of such contrary minds to harbor in me? This might possibly
be hoped A true rule.
for, if we had but learned this, that one of us cannot perish without
another: and as we see in a firm pillard vaulte, that some few stones being
taken away, the other incontinently fall, and then in time ruins the whole
work: so fares it with my state, whose contrary minds Note.
may seem smallie dangerous at the first view, but swiftly (though unseen)
it does tumble down. Surueie but the grounds of our liberty, and foundations
of our Common wealth, which were laid by the mercy of God, the valor of our
union; the relief of brethren, and the concord of all: if I were endangered by
my allies, and distressed by the multitude of my acquaintance, (as sometimes
has been the state of Flaunders) whose enemies have caused by corruption her
supposed friends to divide her body, selling her to them that have offered the
utmost farthing; then might I justly blame (not you) but A thing to be
respected.
those whom colored terms christened by the name of friends: but now seeing
I have relieved many, sent my soldiers to take arms, not for my own, but for
their good; seeing I opened not my city gates, to admit strangers, who As some
have done.
were able to command my strongest walls, but hoyste up my sails to convey
out my soldiers to defend others; then let not me perish by you whom I have
deemed no less dear, then my own life: trecheries have taught states, to
take heed with whom they join in amity: and Demosthenes wished the Greeks
to take heed of this, which if they had wisely followed Amyntas son and his
successors had not oppressed Greece by a fained amity. Thus forewarned
Nicolaus under vauld the Flemmings A thing lamentable.
forefathers, to take heed of forrainers, which if they had wisely followed,
so many cities of traffic had not been towns of Garrisons. But my ruin (if
it vnhappelie happen, which If we our selves be united.
God forbid) is not by strangers force, for they are too feeble to weaken my
state: but by such as I kindly nourish in A thing too miserable if it should
be so
mine own bowels: for whilst one holds for Spain, another for France, the
third for the Low Countries, and every quarter of the land, has such as
being displeased with me, are desirous to please strangers; it must needs
happen that my joints being racked with so great a torment, I live feeble, and
confess England can not perish but by English men.
that mine own inhabitants did work my overthrow: the gold and silver of
mine enemies is able to prevail as much (with my unjustly termed English men)
as in the days of Scaurus. Fondly are you deceived with a hope of quiet The
Spaniard is foolish to hope so.
to your minds, howsoever in show they pretend so: for credit me that have
tried it long since, they mean nothing less.

But as Philip made the Athenians believe Note this.
that he had pretenses against the Plotenses, Olynthians, and others, thereby
to pass further; but Demosthenes told the citizens, that if Philip had once
won Olyntha and Loreyra, who demanded succor of the Athenians, he would
not rest till he had conquered whole Grecia: which by little and little he
effected after. And howsoever (cou^trimen) Philip may persuade you, that his
purpose is but only to reform religion, and to pass no further: yet under
Trust him not.
this pretense, having gotten footing within your walls, harbor within your
towns, and hands within your treasuries, you shall find his intent to be
far otherwise, and never (unless your wives Give him an inch he will take an
ell.
conspire against them) to be rooted out. Thus having obtained Corinth, he
shall after come to ride upon the back of Greece: or as Cassius persuading the
Heluetians, under pretense of alliance, and show of a good cause, broched a
discord, and so made France subject to the Roman Empire. For if Maximilian
the Duke of Austrich durst say that he treated of agreement with King Jews An
usual policy at this day.
the 12. only to be revenged of the seuenteen injuries which he had received
of the French men (although they were scarce thought to have done him any) what
shall we think the Spanyard will perform against us, of who^ he supposes to
have received so many harms, and so foul dishonors? No (valerous and noble
Englishmen) credit not so far, either the hope of Spanish gold, (a canker
that has fretted the greatest Offered to Judas to betray his Master.
kingdoms) or the free passage of religion, a thing never thought of by them;
but show your selves valiant, as erst True English men.
you have bin; loyal, as still you should be, then shall you be conquerous, as
still you may be. For Flanders had never bin so firmly united with France, if
Jews the 12. being but then Daulphin, solicited by Pope Eugenius, and
Frederick the Truth in a few is often victorious.
Duke of Austrich, to break the counsel of Basil, and to ouerrun the
country, had not bin incountred with some few Ualour begets love.
Fle^mings, and put to such famous flight, that he was constrained to praise
their valor, and to make an alliance with them, which continued long after.
The like had the French King stirred up by Pope Julius, who considering their
ancient magnanimity, has desired to be united with the Flemmings, as the
chief pillar of his crown and kingdom: this was continued to them in the said
manner, first obtained by their true valor, by Henry the 2. and after by
Charles the 9. and so lately by these two last Henry's. In like manner, if you
continue as you have begun, to be united amongst your selves, to be suspicious
of foreign flattery, to distrust (upon al pretenses) As still you have been.
the Spanish treachery; then shall I flourish as most fortunate, and cause them
sue for my truce. That one conquest (when seas did swel with so great pride)
obtained against their Navy 1588. has Note this.
by Fames alarm been sounded in the utmost parts of the world, and has made
the Spanyard desirous of my favor. And if I be challenged to buy my peace at
too high a rate, I will sooner join with France, and lend him (as I have done)
the riches of my land, the^ intrapped by Syre^s songs, have my beauty so long
commended, with Aesops Crow to let fall the Dangerous to join with Spain.
food whereupon I live. And howsoeFrance by too much sweating is grown dry,
and by too great bloudletting is waxen pale, and that for one crown she has
spent so many, that now she is France poor by wars.
scarce able to give her soldiers pay. And howsoever Flanders falsely will sell
Not so faithful as they should be.
their friends to buy their peace: yet let us make this a rule of estate, that
when the might of one kingdom extr^a ordinarily grows great, the lesser
should unite themselves, as the smaller beasts against the enemies they fear.
And though Spain may seem constantly prodigal, (a wonder prodigality to be
Why Spain is so constant in her free offers.
constant) (and never possible without supply of the Indian gold) and France
too poor and needy, yet think that civil wars having been so long within
her bowels, are only the causes of all this misery. I compare not the greatness
of these two kingdoms (howsoever there may be matter wherein to No great ods
betwixt the^ if they had equal peace.
balance them) but I am sure of this (as the case stands) I have far less
cause to suspect the Frenchman then the Spanyard: for his intent has been as
it was toward them of the Low Countries, Beware of them both.
when Charles the fifth and the Pope concluded to overthrow and disperse them by
their own means: the pretense was religion, the commission was granted to the
Bishop of Terracina: such like policies (as they thought) were not easily found
out. I cease to repeat and To Parry, Babington, etc.
shame to utter the sundry offers that have been made to my own country men,
feeding them with vain hope and uncertain promises, to sell my wealth, my
honor, my dignity, and what I reputed excellent to the enemies hand; the
present times, and the fear and danger Lopez executed the 7. of June 1594.
scarce past, make me I must remember it. Nor are the malicious practices
against me, such, as zeal sometime kindled for Religions sake; but in those
days when Spain and I were both of Spain not only an enemy for religion.
one mind, he courted me with terms half deceiving my simplicity; he
ambitiously sued to obtain my favor; he spoke me fair but meant falsely; he
was treacherous, I suspicious, and so we parted: and do those now within my
bounds (who term themselves Catholics at this day) persuade themselves that
any religion were able to Too great simplicity to think so.
protect them from Spanish tyranny? Look a little into the Low Countries,
(these I mention often, as tasting fully of the Spanish fury) how did
religion warrant them from the cruelty of Landeburg, Grisler, Rottenburge, and
others? Take heed by others.
and how have they of late time bin free from invasion for religions sake? Have
they not readily embraced that which they call the Catholic religion? and are
they for all this free from the enemies invasion? Have they not yielded their
towns, paid sufficiently for their presumption? and has not Spain
maintained her straggling soldiers by their spoil? Have they not entertained
any Inconstancy in religion is the mother of Atheism.
religion (nay, is it not feared they are willing to forsake all) to please the
King of Spain, and are they for all this any more quiet? Did poor America,
who powered forth her bowels to content them, purchase her quiet, with the
embracing of their religion? nay, together with the intrals of her earth, did
she not shed the purest of her blood to satisfy those Spanish bloud-hounds?
This, truth has told us, out of the untrue The Spanish colonie.
mouth of their own Bishops. Has religion saved lawful Princes that they
have not violently been expelled their own kingdoms, by the Spanish tyranny?
What country soever had to deal with them (as few there be which are free
from them) have been forced to confess that Spain is humble till she Note
this.
get footing; but the^ ambitiously proud: that she pretends religion and
promises largely, but that she cares for no religion and performs it
sparingly: yet her false zeal, smoothing her face over to the simple view,
has made her united to some; dear to many; and unsuspected to all. But such
practices have been a tyrants cloak, which they have cast about the^ to
devour the Church. Such prete^ces have bin masking weeds which they have worn
in policy, the better to cast lottes for the Commonwealth. then (credulous and
unwise country men) (for so I may justly term you if you believe them) if
either you mean to have me live, or see amongst you my sister the Church to
remain and flourish, credit no pretense whatsoever: admit no strangers to see
the secrets An exhortation to England.
of my land: approve none in hope to gain your falsely pretended religion;
when you shall findethey slander me but of inconstancy, your brethren of
heresy, themselves of piety, and only to this end, the more easily to spoil
me, and the more deadly to poison the Church: did not the Babylonians thus
accuse Gods people of false religion? the Jews and the Romans, have they not
Spaniards like Jews.
under this pretense accused our Savior and his own disciples? Is not damned
Mahomet a cause at this day, why the Turk has conquered so many countries?
and if there be one amongst them (as it may be there are some few) who are
desirous of our good, and wish us the truth (as they term it) of the
catholic religion, yet there are a thousand Hamans who will enterprise the
ruin of the Jewish nation, accuse them to the King of Persia, that they have a
religion Spanish Haman.
differing from his; but it is by reason of the hate, conceived against just
Mardocey: They pretend Religion but intend treachery. Absolon a right Spaniard.
thus religion was made a cloak for treacherous and intolerable pride: thus
Absolon the pattern of these courtly politics stood pitying the Jews at
the court gate, as though he had desired the helping of their estate, but it
was nothing else but an ambitious humor to obtain a kingdom; in like manner
deal the Spaniards with my catholics so termed at this day, they stand and
court them, and say with Absolon, your cause is good, but there is none that
pitties you: O if I had the government of these things, then should England
obtain her ancient religion, Take heed: trust the^ not.
and then would follow their former plenty: and thus the Island that is now
distressed every day in fear of foreign invasion, should be able to meet the
enemy in the gate; the consciences that are now distracted, be quieted, by
obtaining of true pardon: so should heresies be rooted out from amongst you,
peace should be within your walls, and plenty within your gates:
false-deceiuing smooth-tonged heart-stealing SpanishAbsolon (I deserve pardon,
if my weak womanish nature in fear of my state, in love to mine inhabitants,
in care of so good a cause should carry me to term thee by worser titles)
but answer Let Spain answer.
treacherous and state-corrupting golde-offering Spaniard, do thou persuade
thy self (fondly deceived to be so persuaded) that my true inhabitants can be
resolved of thy good meaning? Do thou think that ever they hope for peace in
the midst of strangers? For plenty in the midst of tirants? For religion
in the midst of Atheists? Note this.
Nay it never has been nor never shall be: therefore resolve thy self, that
howsoever some within my borders do heartily desire, and earnestly expect a
freedom of their conscience: yet these are never so foolish to think it
possible, to be obtained by your means; nor so profanelie wicked, to admit of
so bad a cause. And although some few (and I persuade my self they are very
few) may be found perhaps, as either being Atheists without God, or Jews
without Christ, or monsters without natural affection, who can be content to
pearce my bowels through my Princess side, and so let forth my peace, or lay
violent hands upon mine anointed, to make my children to eat themselves: yet
resolve thy self (and vainelie foolish to resolve otherwise) that the most
estranged Englishman from natural love, who has lost his affection by long
travail, or: the loose stchristian I harbor, Note this.
who has lent his affection to all pleasure, or the most desperate, whom need
and extremity have made careless, or the deuoutest Catholic, whom deceiuedlie
zeal and conscience have made religious Impossible to be so.
shall ever so far estrange them selves from an English mind? So much be
alienated from my long bred love? And lastly so cruelly to wish me evil?
That they would open my gates to strangers? Prostrate my wealth to the
Spaniard; and exchange my peace for most cruel tirannie? Nay if they were all
in arms and had vowed to admit a stranger, and the stranger ready (as perhaps
you were, 1588.) to accept by policy, Let the Spaniard credit me.
what you intended to keep by cruelty: yet if I should but frown as
discontented, and say quid agitis? And name S. George.
but England, the worthy love of me, derived from their forefathers, would so
far pearce into the English hearts, that their swords drawn forth against
me their mother, would speedily be sheathed in you their murderers: for if
in all ages (saving only in this last, and amongst you) faith and promise
has been religiously observed, to their very enemies, then can you think
they will falsify the same to me that bred them? And as for you who have
surpassed the false punicane gaining that brand Fides Hispanica.
of treachery, which once was Carthage due, resolve upon this point, that he
which punished the faith broken to the Turks (at the Popes persuasion by them
of Hungary) by putting to flight Sigismund the Emperor, and slaying Cardinal
Julian the Popes Legate (who God himself will punish traitors.
brought the message) he I say shall never suffer so great an injury
unpunished, to me their mother. Let me then in kindenes persuade you (my dear
country men) that if treachery be most odious, the^ that especially which
ouerturneth a Common wealth: if ingratitude Note this.
be hateful both to God and man, then that which is of children to their
mother: if credulity be a fault and argues want of experience, then to trust
a stranger, a false dissembling and deceitful tirant, must reprove us of great
leuitie: love peace then and love my peace, follow unity, but within my
walls, for if neither inequality of condition, emulation of partakers, nor
religion ought to disunite us, then this only remains for you, that you be
united with love amongst your selves, tied with affection toward your mother,
bound with a sacred reverence toward your Soue reign, and carried with a wise
suspicion toward a stranger: so shall prosperity O happy England if this
happen.
be mine inheritance; plenty the legacy bequeathed to my meanest friends;
and England as a city at unity within it self: thus shall the union of Judah
and Israel make the people round about them to quake and tremble; this made
Rome to co^quer Africa; the Greeks to prevail against Xerxes; and the Princes
of Europe to prevail against the Turk at Lepantho: which victory had been
far more glorious, if vntime lie discord had not fallen amongst them. Discord
fatal to great attempts.
The^ banish this, unite your selves, yield not to gilded colors and false
pretenses; whether of religion or of friends, or of promise, and especially
with them who^ we know to be our enemies: let us bring against glittering
hate-working gold, the ancient magnanimity of brave Fabricius, who would never
be moved by the offers of King Pyrrhus. Thus ought you courageously to unite
your selves, if you love the glory of your conquests, the sweetness of your
liberty, the happiness of your quiet, the lives of your wives and children: and
if none of all these can move you, yet think that I weep for your sake the
milk that sometime was your food: that I sweat for your fear the blood that
bred yours: that I sigh for your cause the air that gave you breath. And as
for my own part (silly destressed as I am) I have considered the threatenings
of God against my subjects lives: the tokens The late mortality more
lamentable then the loss of Aegypts first borne.
sent me not long since: the wonders that heaven showed: the loud speech that
the dumb creatures used, and all only for this end, that I fearing might
persuade you, and you persuaded might make me to live without fear: yet I
rely not so far upon Astrologicall reason, as upon the strange star 1572.
the Comets that have appeared since: the great thunder 1584. the terrible
Earthquake the first of March the same year: the strange inundations not long
since: the fearful mortality that has hewed down my tallest Cedars, and
moved (as it were) the lesser plants: yet I take these to be means to humble
me, least in pride of courage I ouerweiningly do love my self. And now
(daughters) seeing I grow faint, I will cause two to speak in my behalf,
committed to me from eternities bosom: Religion and Loyalty, (daughters)
hearken, and these briefly shall speak unto you.

RELIGIONS SPEECH TO ENGLANDS CHILDREN.
AT what time, Love Religion brought from heavenly love.
brought me from Eternities bosom, and commanded me like a Queen to dwell
in earth, I then easelie foresawe (which I now find) that all Religion falsely
accused.
harms, miseries, wants, tragedies, and what else soever the world deemeth
hateful, should be falsely supposed to proceed out of my womb: and seeing I
have now lived so long till I find it Religions Apology.
true, pardon me to make mine apology thus far, that since the day of my
Religion no true cause of miseries in a common wealth.
first birth, since I first shined weekly in these coasts, since the time I
was called (as I am) by Religions name, I never caused either Kingdom to be
desolate, Prince to be distressed, people to despair: or any private person
to be malecontent. In deed I must needs acknowledge thus much, that at what
time I was sent into earth, sinful man by reason of his immortality, desirous
of a Note this.
deity, and not able by the weakness of Man's ignorance makes false religion.
his understanding to admit of me, forged unto himself a false, cruel,
irreligious, vain, proud superstitious strumpet, Superstition.
and fondly deluded, termed her by my name; then seeing her to have such
prerogative, finding her to rule over so many subjects, and fearing she would
banish me to Heaven, from whence I first came; we have been still in
continual Religion and superstition at continual wars. In England many
religious fanorers.
wars: I found those who have been forward in my cause, who have plentifully
bestowed their wealth to maintain me, and who have not feared to dye to do
me good. And she persuading, that Truth sent her to direct them, has so
much prevailed with a great number, that howsoever for other faults (in the
bloody wounds of Harms for religion grieve not either the dooer or the
sufferer.
an afflicted conscieuce) there is none either so careless without remorse, or
so profanely wicked without fear, but that relenting at the faults which they
have done, remain grieved: yet falselie suborned by her means, neither the
most fatal wars, dragging the infants from their mothers breasts, drawing
them from out their wombes, slaying them in their cradles, rauishing their
wives and daughters: wasting their countries, burning their houses, defacing
their temples, violating their sepulchers: performing all cruelty: forgetting
all courtesy to those that were borne amongst them: nor the civil slanders in
the time of peace performed Miserable blindness.
against them in malicious manner, who sought my prosperity above their own
safety: these and such like I say So does Romoaldus Scotus.
(and if ought else can be thought of greater then these are) are done (and
Superstition is most zealous.
without remorse) upon the false surmife of true Religion. Judge now, if ever
creature of my innocence (and I may boldly stand to justify my own integrity)
has had greater cause to complain of wrong: more just reason to suspect
violence: and more true grounds of undoubted fear then I, that have sued Among
the Atheists of this age.
and am not heard, have lowdely spoken and not regarded, have infinitely
deserved and not rewarded: It is objected against me that the first murder was
committed by my means, that Cayn Afalse accusation of religion.
had never laid violent hands upon Abel, if in religion he had not been far
more righteous. And if the Persians had not supposed that to be profane which
the Greeks believed to be most holy, Xerxes had not come from Asia to Xerxes.
Grecce, he had not spoiled their towns, burnt their temples, and done them
Zealte false.
thousand wrongs (but falsely supposed by my means:) Thus discord grew betwixt
the Egyptians and the Hebrews, and both contended which should be my
followers: but if I had not been proudly confronted with a base strumpet, and
that my honor had not been therein Religion impatient of an indignity.
hazarded, wherein it was infamy to contend, I had quietly rested, though with
some disgrace, and had lived contented, though with loss of credit. Nay,
rather give me leave womanlike to complain (though hopeless without relief)
of wrongs offered to my person; in stead of offering, I have suffered; in stead
of doing, I have received such manifest violence, such apparent wrongs, such
The wrongs are infinite which religion has suffered for being called relig.
secret disgraces, such open injuries; as when I shall make report what I have
endured for my names sake, the red sea shall disagree (as once it did) and part
a sunder, the Sun shall be amazed (as sometimes it was) and stand still: Nay,
shame shall darken it, and it shall hide it Religion has had continual and
great enemies.
self to hear the reports but what I have suffered: at first I was put to
fly out of Egypt with six hundred thousand besides women and children,
pursued Anno mundi 1517.
by Cencres the King of Egypt: and if heaven in the midst of my distress
God knows how to deliver his.
had not made the raging sea to be a dry land, so many had perished for my
sake. But then I must needs confess after a tempest came a calm, for
humiliation I Affliction may endure for a time, but deliverance is not far
from Gods church.
had honor, authority for fear, and in stead of Egypt I possessed Canaan:
and although the power of my almighty, from whence I came, casting a snaffle
into the mouth of the red sea, made him that he durst not attempt to do me
violence, So the fire for the three children.
yet I lived not long in the land of Canaan, but like a Nightingale, I had
thorns to awake me, to keep me singing, and soon after false she that
termed Superstition makes dissension in the Church.
herself by my name, caused dissension amongst her children, and brought me in
danger by my own followers; the^ were my favorers divided, together with
Roboam and Jeroboam their Kings: Libertatis amor stultu^ quid decipis orbem.
not long after was I with Israel cut off from the house of David, and first
transported into Assyria, where I remained captive; then with Judah making my
habitation within Jerusalem, I was pitifully afflicted, lamentably spoiled,
and cruelly taken by Nabuchadnezzar the King ^ King. 24.
of the Assyrians, who pulled down her walls, burned her temple and the Kings
palace, took away the golden vessels dedicated by Solomon to my use, put out
Sedechias eyes, bound him with brazen chains, and spoiled the books of my 2.
Chron. 36.
law, which after miraculously were restored by my Scribe Esdras: thus was I
Religion still perfecuted
handled by the Greeks, Alexanders successors ruling in Syria, who would have
compelled my people to have yielded to their manners, especially that proudly
famous (and so termed King Antiochus, who took the ornaments and vessels of
the Temple which had been restored by them of Persia, ruinating again
Jerusalem new built, forbad my burnt offerings, sacrifices, and such like, How
Gods enemies seek to deface all parts of religion.
to deface me, and make me basely an exile to the Greekish ceremonies: neither
was I only thus handled by them, but those who at this day are my sworn
enemies, I mean the Romans, who extended The Romans enemies to religion.
their Empire into that corner where I dwelt, placing their Images within my
Temple, setting their Eagles over my portals, from whence proceeded abundance
of superstitions: but I had been thoroughly wounded before that, by my own
countrymen at Christ's death, who had given me so great a blow, as that (in
justice) for my sake they The Jews* sin the cause of their punishment.
were sacked by the Romans, and to this present wheresoever they abide, they
are poor, practicing base trades, as Usurie, and Broaking, made subject to
extreme Jews Usurers.
tributes, paying continual tasks, and yet without houses, lands, or other
possessions, not retaining so much as the A miserable state where there is no
religion.
shadow of a Common wealth, since that I cruelly was banished from amongst
them: yet notwithstanding all the calamities which they suffered, could not
keep them from contending amongst the Christians; they grounded their Many of
the^ still persist in their sins.
false points upon the old Testament, so that after all this they were chased
from France, England, Spain, by reason of blasphemies which they vomited out
against Christ Jesus: thus the Mahometists termed my people Miscreants, and
vowed themselves for their sworn enemies. And howsoever these were Religion in
great danger amongst her own friends.
harms, which in the weakness of my favorers I could not defend without
flight, yet if among Christians themselves, I had not been pursued with as
great hatred at this time, I should not need to have complained of wrong: But
now seeing bloody wars have happened betwixt those that were my own
children, where I their mother entreating in most kind terms, was not
Contention the ground of Atheism.
free from danger, nor could exempt them from spoil, let the world judge, if
ever any received greater wrong, the^ I have suffered. The Greeks and the
Romans both contended so long for my favor, till both were content to forsake
me quite, and to make me perish if it had been possible; (for undoubtedly I had
dyed but that I was immortal). Arrius: and so Heretics grow mighty in the
midst of contentions.
Arrius came from Egypt to sheath his sword within my bowels; he had no sooner
given alarm to assault me, but that multitudes flocked unto him to be his
Heretics never want followers.
followers: the East Church wherein I sometime gloried, lost her beauty and
her love in so ample manner, by this means, that pitifully to my wrong,
Constantius the Emperor became an Constantius an Arrian.
Arrian. Judge if it were not lamentable that I, who sometimes was highly
favored, accounted of in their assemblies, and wholly relied upon their
integrity, became so distressed by his means, that openly to do me wrong,
105. Bishops 105. Bishops Arrians. Holar. contra Consta^tium. Alex. Athan.
became Arrians: and if Alexa^drias Bishops (religious Alexander, and learned
Athanasius) had not encountered his forces with a matchles valor, I had then
utterly perished in those countries: from hence proceeded the fatal calamity
of my fortune: Councels against Councels: Judge if religion have not suffered
wrong.
Confessions against Confessions; Accusatio^s, Defenses, Banishments, and
cruel Martyrdomes. Do you hear and credit me, and yet for all this take me
to have offered wrong, and suffered none? Nay, when I (fearful) had taken my
self into the inner parts of Europe, for fear of harm; Religion no where
safe in earth.
then came the Persians, Arabians, Syrians, and Egyptians called Sarracins,
under pretense to enlarge the honor of their Mahomet, occupied all Afric,
passed into Spain, where they conquering, from thence came to Tours in France,
where if they had not been discomfited, A famous victory. After King of France.
of three hundred and sixty thousand persons by Charles Martel, I had then
perished. After this I began to grow more Godfrey of Bolloygne.
valiant, and my worthy Godfrey, with the rest of his Lords confederate, at
the instance of Pope Urban, drew from France an incredible army, passed by sea
Whereof sweet Tasso song.
and land after many travails, to the furthest parts of the western coast,
from Syria to the frontiers of Arabia and Persia, whereby my Godfreys true
Martyrs all.
valarous army I won Jerusalem: neither was there then drop of blood shed,
by any Christian in my quarrel, which I have not entreated Fame to record, to
my posterity: nor was it either less ve^turous or honorable, which Englands
first Richard against the Turks attempted for my cause: and howsoever Religion
hates discord.
I may be thought to love discord, and to make dissension, yet in respect of
the favor that I found then, in regard of the kindenes (country men) I
received at your hands, I have been willing to rely upon you, and desirous to
England the seat of religion.
dwell amongst you: that whilst other countries loosing their Religion have
lost their Peace, and lacking peace, their Religion has quite perished;
England has been a Garden of Olive branches, The happiness of England by
religions means.
fensed with walls against violence, shadowed with a Cedar against heat;
watered like Paradise against barrennes, and preserved with true Loyalty against
rebellion. And whilst Greece, Lacedemon, and Athens have been at discord:
Carthage, and Parthia, with the^ of Rome, the French with the Italian, the
Almayn with the Switzard: Africa with Spayn: The discord of other countries.
the Turk with the Christians, the Persians with the Turk: the Zauolians with
the Persians, the Muscouit with the Polon: and the Tartar with them both: in
the England in peace.
mean time England for my sake has found a peace, has sitten at ease, and
had leisure to look at their falls. And I earnestly pray (as I have good
cause) Peace the child of religion begets plenty that kills the grandmother.
that peace being my child, beget not plenty, and that be a means for to
banish me: for when a country through Religion has obtained peace, through
peace has plenty, and through plenty is grown rebellious; then God by
seditions and change of state, by inundations of floods, by famine, plague, and
England note this.
such like, he brings them (in favor) to a smaller number, least in pride and
multitude they should grow for to scorn me. Thus have I some times tasted of
their harms, and though I have lived In the days of our dread Sovereign.
safe this 36. years, that no foreign enemy was able to root me from the
land of mine inheritance: yet I have bin still so united to your dread
sovereign, Essex, Willowbie, Norris, Sir Francis Uere, etc.
so in favor with my valiant champions, that none opposed themselves against
me, but first committed treason against her: and though at my entreaty she
was content to pardon them my fault, yet Justice and conscience both would,
that they all should perish that wish her evil. Then howsoever (thereby to be
A false slander to make traitors Martyrs.
dearer to false religion) they make the world believe, that they dye for my
cause, yet I cannot choose but I must needs renownce them: Martyrs I have had,
that have dyed in my quarrel; yet never Never martyr was a traitor.
any that entangled himself to destroy a Prince. I have wept while tirants
have slain my children: yet I never saw them to be found rebellious: give me
leave then openly to disclame those out of my favor, to cancel them out of
honors book, to renounce them from being my followers, who have traitorously
conspired with my sworn enemies: who treacherously have intended their
Iustitia Britannica.
Princes death: who rebelliouslie have taken arms against my sides, who
falsely have expected to see me fall: these I pronounce, not to be my sons,
and I must tell the World, that they dyed not for my sake. And Campia.
Martyrium.
because Rome has lately noted those with the title of Martyrs, whom
rebellious malice caused to be treacherous to their Prince; I must needs be
plain that the world may see, Rebellion and not Religion, Treason and not
Truth, was the cause of their utter ruin. Custom has made it a thing
common, and the community has made it a thing credible, that the worse things
have masked under good names, that singularity Anvsuall fault.
is termed zeal; disobedience freedom of conscience; rebellion, sincerity
of profession, and open treason to be pure religion. Thus was the notorious
rebellion in England, (after affecting the Irish) supposed to be the sign of a
Catholic truth, wherein though many suffered the just recompense of so foul
desert, yet the Queen was merciful and forgave some. How can I then make an
apology in their behalf? how can I say, these favored religion, who sought
to root out the Prince, and land, where I had dwelt of a long continuance? I
conceal their names as loath posterity should remember an Englishman to be so
disloyal. And herein the Pope, that should have been most religious, Gregory
13.
was a chief dealer to subvert me, sending over pardons, absolutions, and Pius
5.
such like, to exempt the subjects of this realm from their true obedience.
And the better continually to perform what Sixtus 5.
he intended, Seminaries were erected under pretense to do me good, which have
harbored (howsoever some of them learned) such politic, subtle,
treacherous, and disloyal people, that having swarmed from thence as from a
Exceeding pity.
hiue, and pretending (as they have said) the Catholic good of their own
countrymen, have infected them with such pernicious poison, moved them to such
great treasons, persuaded them to those attempts; that if heaven had not
withstood them with a mighty power; Miraculous preservation of Gods Church.
if God had not detected them with a pearcing eye; if the Lord had not
confounded them with a mighty arm: then had I (in all likelihood) been
banished from this Island, then had England I fear to think of it.
perished, her Prince, her subjects, and that most cruelly by the means of her
own countrymen. These were they, who justly convicted of treason, by laws made
200. year since, in the time of Edward Iusticia Britannica.
the 3. do openly (but wrongfully) boast that they have suffered for religion:
and yet I may say this, that such as repenting A greater number.
their folly, showed a sorrow, and were willing to perform amendment, were
pardoned, a thing not to be expected in so great a fault; although
(injuriously) some of them have not been ashamed Stapleton. Parsons.
to say, that never religion was persecuted more, then under the most virtuous,
peaceable, mild, merciful, and religious government of Queen Elizabeth: nay,
I can confidently say this, that in stead of punishing those who have not
offended, she has suffered This can not be denied.
many to keep their religion still, to live without danger of law, and such as
have professed themselves to be Romish Catholics; ask but that grave and
reverend father Nicholas Heath sometimes In Queen Mary's time.
Archbishop of York, and Lord high Chancellor of England, he must needs
confess (and undoubtedly would do it, if he now lived) that he tasted of his
Sovereigns clemency in so great a measure, that those who for religion term
her to be cruel, are such as seek by all means possible to defame her
government. Pole the Bishop of Peterborough: Slander is never tongue tied.
Cutbert Tonstall a reverend grave man, White, Oglethorp, Thurlbie, Watson,
Turberuile, Fecknam, such as all of them had been zealous against me, yet she
pardoned them their lives, because they had not traitorously sought hers: for
since the beginning of her reign to this present day, there is no man able to
prove (howsoever some have bin malicious to affirm the same) that Queen
Elizabeth has for religion In their libel against the English Justice.
only, put any to death of the Romish sectaries. It were long for me to
repeat (things already sufficiently known) wherein Rome has so
malitiouslie Papa pius moritur quintus, res mira tot inter pontifices, tantum
quinque suisse pios.
dealt to suborne her Jesuits, that from them, this 36. years, England has
had the greatest cause to fear the subversion of her whole state. Pius the
fifth (ungodly and cruel in this point) intended to free the subjects of this
land, from their allegiance to their dread Sovereign: a thing abhorring
against divinity, a matter never heard of, with any of my followers, and hated
even of the heathen themselves, who never tasted of my truth: to grant
pardon, and openly to avouch it: to subjects and against their Prince, and to
English Leave given to Parsons, Campion by Gregory 13. 1580. April 14. to
interpret the bull of Pius 5.
men against their own country, it is such a fault as former time never
thought of: the age present does abhor, and shall make thereat the days
ensuing to be astonished: and it were too lamentable to be thought of,
Religions superstition should make any so fearful of the Popes authority:
France, howsoever thou art now distracted into small pieces, yet in the days
of thy second Henry, thou had little fear of Henry the 2. King of France
his edict against the Pope. Anno. 1550.
the Popes Bulls, when impatient of his proud and usual usurping within thy
territories, thou did not only by edict, decrees, parliaments,
proclamations, disanull his supreme authority, but denied him stoutly those
yearly revenues, which he exacted out of thy dominions. And Philip thou
which now King Philip once feared not the Popes Bulls. Duke of Albany with an
army against the Pope.
gouernest Spain, and fondly intendest to be the worlds Monarch, what mind
then did thou bear against the Pope, when sending with thy Duke of Albanie
an Army into the coasts of Italy, thou spoyledst their towns, destroyedst
their fields, sackedst their cities, and with thy canons girt them within the
compass of their own walls? This showed to the world how little (being
offended) thou esteemedst of the Popes Bulls: and thy father, that worthy
Charles the 5. took Pope Clemence captive, and the 1527. Whom he kept in
Adrians tower 7 months.
whole College of Cardinals, and made him pay for his ransom 400000. Ducats,
and valued the Cardinals at a higher rate. And least thou which art openly my
professed enemy, should think that Englands Elizabeth wants presidents
of her country, valiantly to withstand, Let the Pope mark this.
and scornfully to make account of the roaring of thy Bulls: remember but the
time of Queen Mary, (a gracious Sovereign if she had not been blinded by thy
means) when thou were offended with her cousin Cardinal Pole, Cardinal Pole
offended with the Pope.
and in disgrace of him sent unto Petie a begging Friar, the Cardinals Hat: she
crossed thee in thy purpose, and made small account of thy great threats. I
could allege the worthy Henry the 8. Henry the 8. shaked off the Pope.
regestred in Honors Catalogue to live for ever: how courageously to advance
me, he shaked off thy servile yoke, and exempted his subjects from the Romish
tyranny. But to let these pass, (as matter apparent without proof) I must
needs complain of two notorious enemies, Religions enemies.
such, as in the days of peace, have done me the greatest wrong that ever
woman suffered: and least wondering thou stand amazed how this should be, in
the land of knowledge in Elizas reign, I mean the profane Atheist, and the
zealous (but falsely) Puritan. The Atheist and the Puritan so called.
And although I poor Religion am not so good a states man, that willingly I
intermeddle with matters of the common Religion no states man but of counsel
with the^.
wealth, yet I must say thus much in the true defense of my self, that since
profane Machiuell has obtained so much credit amongst the greatest states men
of all Europe, Atheism has persuaded Dangerous for a Prince.
the world of my death, and told Princes that there was no religion. Can any
counsel be more pernicious to a Common wealth? more dangerous to a Country?
more fatal to a Prince? Machiuell confuted.
then only to rely in causes of greatest importance upon his own wisdom?
to seem to have that religion in show, which he never means to embrace in
truth? to prefer Heathens before me? to ascribe felicity to fortune, and
not to virtue and true religion? And these with diverse others of like impuritie
that profane A theist broched unto the world, which was no sooner drunk by
the states of Europe, but some of their States in Europe ruinated by Machiuell.
kingdoms have come to ruin. Nay, I will take upon me without presumption to
prophecy thus far, that the greatest A certain prophecy.
kingdom that Europe has; the most mighty people that ever was; and the Note
this.
most famous common wealth that ever flourished, shall all of them by contemning
religion, become desolate. And howsoever I will not presume so far, proudly
to make (with Bellarmine) temporal prosperity a note of the true Church,
seeing she is ordained to suffer many calamities, under the hands of tyrants;
yet I dare say thus much, that religious Princes, while confidently in a Relig
Princes do still triumph.
good cause, they have fully relied upon Gods assistance, they have notably
triumphed over all their enemies: thus in Genesis Exo. Ios. Judge. King. Machab.
the old Testament, Abraham, Moses, Joshua, Gedeon, Samuel, David, Ezechias,
Josias, and the Machabees, all triumphed over multitudes of their enemies,
because I (howsoever contemned by profane Machiuel) was the sole conductor of
all their armies: thus almost (as Aug lib. 5. de ciuit. cap. 25.
Moses did Pharaoh) in these latter times Constantinus overcame Maxentius. The
like might be spoken of Theodosius the Cap. 26.
elder, of whom Theodoret makes honorable Lib. 5. histor. cap. 24.
mention, of many privileged favors he obtained for his true profession: thus
in the days of Theodosius the younger, when the Sarracins came to help the
Persians, against whom he fought, the Angels from heaven (like the stars
against Sisera) troubled the Socrat lib. 7. histor cap. 18.
Sarracens, that in Euphrates there was drowned a hundred thousand: thus Julian
whilst he was my friend, made Italy Euagr. lib 4. histor. cap. 16. ibid.
cap. vlt.
and Afrike stoop to the Roman Empire, but suddenly perished when he had
revolted: thus Heraclius conquered the Persians till he became a Monothelite:
I could allege histories of these latter times, but being a controversy for
the true religion (howsoever indeed it is without controversy) I will not do
them that wrong, to ground upon a thing, that is not yet granted: the
contentions for my cause, and the apish policies of other countries has
pitifully persuaded them, to become Atheists. By sundry Doctors of great
learning.
I have encountered the Papists, and told him he mistakes the truth: his
religion is mere erroneous, and whilst I went about soundely to persuade this,
Satan raised up the lewd faction of irreligious Brownists to tell the world,
Brownists a sect to support Atheism.
that England was not so happy to have a Church, that titles of honor were
things impertinent to true religion; that decency was a matter of ceremony;
which was no sooner bruted in the worlds ear, but the Papists began
scoffingly, As since they have written in their books.
to contemn my truth, and the Atheist profanely to think there was none at
all. But I am loath to rake in the dead cinders of polluted Machiuell, who^
though Satan made an instrument to disgrace me, and with his dregs
dangerously poisoned the best states: yet shall my truth like the sun from
under a cloud shine clearly in the days of Elizabeth. And men famouslie
learned Ambr. Catharinus. Archiep. Co^pusonus. Ioh. Molanus. Ioh Boterus.
Anonymos. Petrus Corotus. Posseuinus Jesuit. Learned Puritans.
in all knowledge (as some have done in other places) shall openly show unto
the world, that such policies are but cankers to a Common wealth, such
discordes, weapons sheathed in the womb of true religion; and those great
promises nothing but Cannon shot, to undermine (if it were possible) the rock
where upon I stand. And concerning the other, which in a forward pretended
zeal have desired to clear the mudde that has troubled the fountain: to
root out the weeds that have hindered the corn, to try out the dross, that
has dimd the gold; have unawares (howsoever some of them politickelie
malicious) stopped the fountain; plucked up the corn, and By wise authority
and learned answers.
confounded the treasure of true religion; so that if they might have prevailed
(as they might have prevailed if diligent L. Archb. of Canturbury. Bancroft.
Bilson. Sutcliff. Hooker, etc.
care had not been taken in this respect) the Church must have withered as
wanting springs, the people must have famished as wanting corn: and religion
must have begged as wanting treasure: In deed just faults have been found,
for that many insufficient have taken upon them so great charge: that the
Bishops have paultered their livings A true fault in Englands Church.
in so base a manner, that forgetting their honor, they have seemed to be
familiar with mean persons: that they have suffered the patrons of their
livings to present any: nay, that which is most intolerable, that they have
consented, whilst patrons have paused so long (a thing needelesse so near an
University) to find one sufficient to take Cruel patrons pity the church
has not the favor of an ordinary ward.
the charge, that either a harvest must quite the cost that the patron has had
by many suitors, or if it can be compasfed, it shall be plainly temporal. I
feel my self both too feeble to complain and too far spent to remedy so
great a mischief: faults will be, yet religion must be; the days are
evil, but my charge is not to leave England whilst the world endures; and if
I must (being her companion) I will dye valiantly in her cause.

LOYALTIES SPEECH TO ENGLANDS CHILDREN.
AFter abundant trial of my many favors, give me leave not vpbrayding you
with Loyalty urges her benefits.
benefits you have received, only in equal comparison of other countries, to
show the wealth of Englands subjects, the happiness of her land, the increase of
her honor, the contentment and the everlasting fame of her three children, and
of all these obtained by my means. Now as the religious duty to your Prince,
the kind affection to your country, and the common care amongst your selves
one toward another, are things not only requisite for your good, but likewise
commanded by the laws of God and nature: so rebellion (a thing which I quake
to hear of) Loyalty can not abide to hear of treason or sedition.
sedition (a thing which I hope I shall never hear of) are both so capital in
themselves, and so detested of all ages, as the people must needs be barbarous
that live to do them, and the Prince, land, and people lamentably miserable,
that live to suffer them. And if it were not that false pretenses (an usual
cloak Understanding misled, begets treason.
for the greatest faults) did make men think they were less offensive, never
traitor would intend his Princes death, but take punishment of himself for so
bad a thought: and never subjects would draw their swords in seditious manner,
but sheath them in the guilty intrals of their own bowels. And therefore those
who have intended to alter, or usurp What is rebellion.
the state of their superiors (which we call rebellion) not to be branded
with so foul a shame; not to be noted with so black a mark; not to be called
by so bad a name, have endeavored to signify their sinisters practices by a
good pretense, and have employed such for the effecting of them, as
inconstancy has made desirous of a change, Atheism careless by what means,
Prodigality What men are traitors.
beggars and full of want, and lastly want has made them to grow desperate.
The truth hereof is apparently known, both by ancient histories, and of later
time, not only within these small dominions, hemmed with the narrow seas, but
in populous and large Italy, within the walls of proud, stately and
commanding Rome, where the often Secessions of the common people, to the Mount
Auentin, may plainly testify that malecontented, they pretended a reformation
of the rich Nobility. So that the horrible, strange, and detested practices of
our time, which some most irreligiously have plotted to obtain their purpose
(being nothing in truth but an ouerflowing ambition, and an insatiable desire
to rule) have been False pretenses in traitors and rebels.
smoothed over with the fine terms of a common good, of the freedom of the
people, of justice, of religion, of reformation, and such like, things only
mentioned in name, and no further intended, then in a bare show: thus dealt
they that sought to alter the Roman Empire, by lighting the torch of civil
dissension, (pretending the more easily to win the people) to free them from
subsidies and oppression, which then seemed by their governors to lie upon
them, making a show to the common sort, that they tendered their case in so
great a measure, that they could not longer endure to see them afflicted in so
bad a manner. These pretenses we read to have been made in France, these have
been made in our country: and there was never either subject seditious in the
Common wealth, or heretic hateful to Gods Church, but they desired to be
accounted Euangelike and Apostolic reformers, their Note this.
bad conuenticles (Cockatrices to hatch treason) they termed by the name of
Gods Church, their fantastical opinions, Gods known truth, and their
poisoned heresies, the inspiration of Gods spirit. It were tedious and too long
to repeat their names, who continually have slaundered Loyalty with base
terms, when themselves have deserved most badly, both of the Church and of
the Common wealth. Thus might I with tears remember the wrong that I suffered
in the Northern Rebellion, where As may appear by the six articles written in
french.
though the fact was so infamous, as the memory is odious to this day, yet did
they pretend a reforming of religion, a freedom of conscience, and a bettering
of the Common wealth. I pass over without speech (but never to be remembered
without sighs) the lamentable rebellions made in Lincolneshire, the disorder
Sir John Cheek wrote of Sed. Alex. Neuill.
in Norffolke by Ket and his bad company, the intolerable boldness in Kent by
Jack Straw and his accomplices. These and such like have labored to root me
from the place of mine abode, to pull out Loyalty from the minds of subjects,
to make them offend and think there is no fault, to raise a flame that may
give light, whilst the Commonwealth shall burn; to stir up those under
pretense of right, who have desired to subvert the state of the whole land.
Josephus an ancient writer, setting down the rebellious reuolting, which the
Jews made from the Romans, under color of rude and untoward dealing which
they found in Florus their governor, he sets down the particular
remonstrance that King Agrippa Ever bad things have good pretenses.
made, touching the small appearance of occasion which they had, rebelliously to
exempt them from their lawful obedience: the Jews replied that it was only
against Florus, and not the Romans, that they bare arms: whom Agrippa told
it was easy to say so, but their actions So may I say to the English traitors.
were such as worse could not have been by the greatest enemies of the Roman
Empire: for the towns they sacked, the treasuries they robbed, the houses they
burnt, the fields they wasted; neither were the towns, the treasuries, the
houses, the fields of Florus, and no man had wrong but the Romans, to whom
these belonged. In like manner, when in former times (for I am loath to mention
these later faults) wrong openly was offered to them of our country, the
towns taken, the churches robbed, the houses burnt, the men slain, and not so
much sacred, as the very sepulchers of our forefathers, the By Ket.
pretense was only this, not a wrong or disobedience to the Prince, but a
revenge and reformation of the oppressing cormorant. And thus lately (for I
must needs touch it) whilst Lopez most Iewishlie, nay, Iudaslie had concluded
with the Spanish Pharisees to sell his Sovereign, yet shamefully he protested
this, whereunto common sense will A thing unlikely and impossible.
hardly allow credit, that he only meant to deceive them of their coin, and to
save her from harm. Can we think the Spanyard so credulous as in a matter of
so great importance to credit without good cause? Can we think it likely,
that he, who had concealed it hitherto from her Council, meant after to impart
it to her Majesty? These things and many such (howsoever smoothed over Read
the chronicles.
with a fair show) have been committed by unnatural subjects, since her
Majesty's reign, that our very enemies for the state of our country, could by
no means possible have deserved worse. And howsoever the law term them, not
enemies, but simply as rebels and seditious to their own country, yet they
ought not to be honored with the name of peace, nor as subjects any way to be
made partakers thereof, unless the Mercy undeserved.
infinitely ouerflowing mercy of their Prince vouchsafe them (undeserved) so
Peace to enemies but not to traitors.
great a favor. When Anthony rose up in arms against his country, he was
judged and condemned worthily by the Senate to be a rebel: and when some
intended to send unto him to entreat of peace, Tully thought it was most
strange and far differing from the state of the Senate, to afford a rebel
the privilege of an open enemy. France can testify of the like when
traiterous subjects undeservedly (give me leave to term them by that name)
have been so mighty to withstand the King, that he has sent without
co^trolling terms as to an open enemy: England has not now (and I happily
wish, as I hope it never shall) any cause to deal in the like manner. But the
time was in the days of Edward the sixth, when a base pesant With open enemies
out of her self.
so braued the Kings army, that they vouchsafed them parle, as if Rome had
sent Ambassadors to the men of Carthage. But rebellion being the canker of a
Common wealth, time has taught us by lamentable experience in the wars of
Rome, That sedition does grow by suffering, Rome fell by clemency to traitors.
and that clemency is rebellions spur: which if it had not bin a state so
flourishing had not so soon failed. And for France in the time of holy Jews,
sedition had not been so soon cut off, no rebellion had been rooted out, if
the sword had not been made sharp for to cut them off: for it be comes a
Prince like a good Surgion, to cut off the putrified parts, least the sound be
infected with the like contagion. Furthermore, to ground my severity upon the
terms of honor (for Loyalty ca^ hardly endure clemency toward treason)
there is no Gentleman (unless degenerate) that will If we can not suffer the
lie, much less treason.
endure the lie of his companion without recanting: and shall the Prince not
only suffer this, but wrongs, damages, injuries, and despitefully at the
hands of traitors? Then band your selves An exhortation.
Honorable Lords, wise Prelates, brave Captains, worthy Gentlemen, resolute
Soldiers, trusty Citizens, and painful Cominaltie, that the smallest part of
treason may not take strength in our time, and all of you rather hazard the
last drop of your dearest blood, then by treacherous dealing, the least wrong
may be offered to her sacred Majesty? This is a just quarrel wherein
Loyally we are to unite our selves: for loosing but the bridle to such
dangerous treasons, our Prince, our lives, our Country, our fortunes, A
necessary caveat.
are all endangered at the same instant. Besides, either to pardon these at
home, or fondly to credit those abroad, can bring no other benefit to the land
but this, a contempt of our authority, a certain danger to the Princes
person, a perpetual and needful fear of some new attempts: yet ever I must
reserve a prerogative to my gracious Sovereign; for gracious clemency (a
worthy Mercy often cruel.
virtue to a subject) but dangerous to a traitor, gives them but leisure to
fortify themselves; graunts them but time to renew their force, and the storm
is no sooner past, but there is present fear of as great a tempest. For it is
great simplicity to suppose, and (at least) the extremity of folly to
believe, that those who are once plu^ged in the gulf Not safe to trust a
traitor.
of treason, and have thoroughly plotted for a kingdoms conquest, can possibly
be reclaimed with the greatest kindness, or let go their hope, before their
lives give up the latest gasp. If a kingdom were so weak, or a Prince so
timorous, (as almost it was lately in the Realm of France) yet it were easy
to prove out of the histories of al times, that traitors and seditious persons,
howsoever they have been so bold that they durst in the field encounter the
Lords anointed: yet he whom the scripture calls the author of victory and
the God of battle, shall make them to fly, when no man follows, shall cause
ten thousand of them to be chased with a thousand, and in the day of battle
give victory to his own anointed. The rebellion that was made in Spain
against the Emperor Charles Charles the fifth.
the 5. in the beginning of his reign, together with the happy success of
his Majesty, may serve as apparent proof to confirm this, seeing the
seditious faction was foiled, and the most of the^ taken captive. It shall be
needles to add this, that in the days of Queen Mary, when first she came
unto the Crown, finding the people to be mutinous, and in the land nothing
almost but flat rebellion, in shorter time then the space of two months,
worthily she was conqueror over all her enemies: such was the state of Flanders
1566. and three years after: yet never heard of that rebellious sedition
prevailed against a lawful Sovereign: all ages afoorde multitude of examples
in this kind; the unnatural riot of Duras: the wonderful success of the
battle of Dreux in France, and after of Poncenas: and not to stand in
particulars of that country, the event of things has made known unto us, that
rebellion builded upon a weak foundation cannot possibly stand, if the Lord in
anger do blow upon it: neither speak I this to make a Prince more severe
against his rebellious subjects, to make the Scepter of a King plow up the
bowels of his own country men, but to show that Loyalty cannot brook
rebellion, that sedition is odious to a good subject, and that treason is
intolerable in a Common wealth, if I lincked with Religion, (a thing hardly to
be hoped for in this bad age) could but live for a small time safe from
treason, if some of Englands subjects had continually remained in my favor,
then durst I boldly Some of the nobility.
have compared with the proudest nation; and having religion a crown, and
loyalty as a strong defense, she might valiantly have incountered her stoutest
foes; for I may confidently avouch (in the reverend security of an upright
mind) that excepting treasons blown into the hearts of her subjects, by
foreign enemies, England has been as free Note this.
from danger, as far from distress, in as great prosperity, as ever was Island
in so bad an age. Then countriemen give me leave, to persuade thus much, that
the benefit of treason shall be this, if unhappily (which God forbid) you
obtain your purpose, your country shall be desolate, you your selves shall
be feared and suspected of your enemies, and these ample ornaments, garlands A
thing lamentable.
of long peace, shall crown your enemies, for the victories obtained in your
conquest. I that have made your children dutiful, in whose minds the name
What loyalty has done.
of a Father did extinguish disobedience: I that have made your friends
trusty, in whom the name of sacred Friendship was wont to banish all deceit:
I that have made your wives, in the honorable reverence of your love, to
respect no persuasion of strangers, thereby wantonly to commit adultery; I (I
say) entreat you by these favors, that being children, in duty you be not
disobedient to so good a mother, being friends by promise (and that confirmed
with a sacred vow) you be not found deceitefull to so dread a Sovereign: and
lastly, being those whom nature, religion, time and country have matched
nearlie for this 36. years, with so gracious a Prince, that you be not seen
to prostitute your beauty to a stranger, to admit Tarquin into your Plutar. in
lib. de exi^io.
favor, and (never to be unpunished) to violate so great an oath: for what
the seven Ambassadors commended in their common wealths unto King Ptolomey,
that England may justly vaunt she professes at this day: and where as they in
three things compared which should excel, England possessing one and twenty,
may justly in comparison out strip the proudest that Europe has. The
Ambassadors of Rome boasted that their 1.
Temples were honored, their governors obeyed, and their wicked punished; may
not England do it more justly, if you compare it with those times? And yet for
honoring our Temples, I cannot so much commend us, but only that that little
honor (which they have amongst some) it is in true sincerity. The Ambassadors
of Carthage justly boasted that 2.
their Nobility was valiant to fight, their Co^minaltie to take pains, and
their Philosophers to teach: was there ever country (I except not Carthage in
his best estate) where either the Nobility is more valiant, the Co^minaltie
more laborious, or the teachers more profound, then in England at this day? The
Ambassadors 3.
of Cicely boasted that their country executed justice, loved truth, and
commended simplicity: never Common wealth I dare avouch, since the first
society that man had, was ruled with more upright justice, was honored with
greater truth, and admired for more simplicity, 4.
then generally is the state of England: the Ambassadors of the Rhodians
bragged, that the old men were honest, the young men shamefaste, and the women
peaceable, and may not England justly boaste of all these? The Ambassadors of
Athens, that they consented not that 5.
their rich should be partial, their people should be idle, their governors
should be ignorant, and is not all this now as true in England amongst us; as
ever it was in Athens amongst them? The Ambassadors 6.
of Lacedemon, vaunted that there was no envy because all were equal, no
coueteousnes because all were common: no idleness, because all did labor: and
are not the same banished from our Envied of other nations.
land, howsoever procured by a better cause? For England wants envy in her
self, not because all are equal, but all friends: England is not covetous,
not by reason of community, but because of conscience. And idleness out of this
land was banished long since, with the Lord Lourdane.
Dane. The Ambassadors of Sictonia glorified 7.
justly in these three (wherein England is supposed to be far short) that
they admitted no strangers, inuentors of new toys, that they wanted Physicians
to kill the sick, and advocates to make their pleas immortal, wherein I must
needs confess (for truth only becomes my talk) that howsoever in the
abundance of her wealth, England has given strangers money for very toys,
yet it was not for love of them, but to show the world, that their plenty was
not debarde from every stranger: for Physicians I may truly say thus, that the
Aesculapins honoring Pad^^^^ in the abundance of her skill, is unequal
Learned Judges, Serieants, Counselors.
to make comparison with us in England; and lastly, for our advocates (a
slander I confess common, but yet most untrue) men so learnedlie wise, so
wisely religious, and so respectively learned, wise and religious, as if
Europe would seem to contend in this, doutles she should be found far
inferior. Now these (and benefits far greater then these are) should England
be robbed of by Treason, deprived of by Sedition, and quite spoiled of by
Rebellion. And therefore in the cold quaking fear of so great an evil, when
as I think how treason goes about to supplant my state, to sell my honor, and
make me perish with one wound, then do I justly wish the tears of King
Anchises mourning for the fatal destruction of proud Troy, or of M.
Marcellus for the city of Syracusa, when he saw it burned or of Salust when
he saw Rome ill governed: or of King Demetrius, when he saw his son in law
slain in the battle of Marathone. But because men's hearts are flintie, and
not touched with just sorrow, breeding remorse of my fall, let me wish, and
wishing obtain the kind and brinish tears of Queen Rosana, for her husband
Darius, when he was conquered by the great Alexander, or of bewtifull
Cleopatra, weeping without comfort, that her best beloved Anthony was conquered
by Caesar: but if these tears be profane, and not befitting to mourn for the
wrong, to so virtuous and to so holy an Island, then let me wish the tears of
Jeremy for Babylon, when it was made captive, or David's mourning for his son
Absolon, or old father Jacobs for his son Joseph: this were tragic matter,
to write of treason, to think but of that (yet death to think) which they
intended, after that day (if ever that then day should enjoy a sun) (being
darker then the blackest night) (as I wish and hope that it never shall) shall
Englands wise and painful Chroniclers write nothing but wars and bloody
fields: Poets Lucan-like begin with Bella per emathios plus quam ciui^ia
Campos: and then those that like the Philosopher Ariminus, (who wrote of the
abundance of Egypt) have finely discoursed of the plenty of this Island, may
sit down, and show a naked, bare, and fleshles Skeleton to the whole world*
and those that have boasted (as Demophon of the fertiltie of Arabia) shall sigh
and say that Englishmens tears has shed such abundance of salt, in the
earths furrows, that the Island is become barren: and they that like Thurilides
(of the treasures of Tyrus) have told the world by travail of Englands
wealth, may sit down and say, The rich betrayed, are the richest spoils: and
those that like Asclepius (of the mines of Europe) have written of the welthie
bowels of the English earth, shall say that then she sends forth nothing but
smoke, desirous to make an eternal night: And those that have written like
Dodrillus (of the praise of Greece) (or Leonidas of the triumphs of Thebes, or
Eumenides of Athens government) shall tell posterity, that Treason in one day
deprived England of all these.

But least some should think, that then As they account it.
my sorrow should be greater the^ cause why, and that the loss were nothing
which England should have by so foul a sin; give me leave but in plain
terms to set forth a naked truth, and diuiningly to tell, what would be
Englands misery at that day: M. Crassus the renowned Roman, valiant in war,
and wise at home, taking Syllas part against Marius and Julius Caesar, that was
then Dictator, who being taken prisoner spoke a loud, I weigh not my harm,
but Tell it not in Gath, etc.
the pleasure that Crassus shall have to hear this news: And amongst other,
surely this will not be the least that Spain should hear but of this harm,
the Court which is now (like the eight Sphere) beautified fully with fixed
stars, should be nothing but like the air full of Meteors, sending down
lightning, thunder, rain, hail, and such like: and then should ancient Cato
that in 86. The ancient and grave counselor.
years was never seen to violate gravity, so much as by a smile; who was
wise in speech, sweet in conversation, in correcting severe, in presents
liberal, in diet sober, in promise certain, and lastly inexorable in justice:
leave the Court at the age of 55. years, and betake him to a little village
near Pilena, where the passinger might write upon the porch of his poor
cabinet, O foelix Cato tu solus scis viuere: O happy Cato thou only know
how to live: then should Lucullus one of the valiantest Captains that Rome had
after the war The misery of captains.
against the Parthians (seeing the common wealth troubled with the civil
faction of Sylla and Marius) from Rome, betake himself to Lobo near Athens;
then might Dioclesian (although a tyrant, Elius, Spar.
which is seldom but ambitious) after 18. years government, betake himself
to spend the rest of his days in obscure silence; whom if the Romans would
recall by embassage, within two years after he would rather live in his poor
garden with Pericles his inscription, Inueni portum, spes and fortuna valete,
nil mihi vobiscum, ludite nunc alios: (the same is engraven in the tomb of
Franciscus Pullicius) And then justly should Scipio Africanus sometimes so
highly honored in Rome, which in the 22. years tha the made war with Asia,
Africa and Spain, never fought vnluckely, who gained Africa, sacked Carthage,
overcame Numantia, and conquered Hannibal: yet discontented lived in a poor
town for eleven years, without ever entering into Rome or Capua. Such should
be then the desolate state of this whole Island: and greater calamities should
fall upon us, then a heart not used to these, possibly were able to utter. But
seeing I have begun, give me leave a little to reason the case further: Can
Loyalty vehement against treason.
they prefer unknown, before those that are well known? unjust, before
those that are most just? strangers, before domestical? covetous, before
soberly moderate? wicked, before religious? deadly enemies, before those that
are sworn unto the Common wealth? a Spanyard, before an Englishman, and Thilip
before our dread Sovereign? There was never nation found so barbarous, so
cruel, so without pity, wherein not so many (nay not one) was found so cruel
to his own country. Tully (O if he lived now to inuey against those) thought
Verres the worst man that ever country had: yet compare him with these, and he
was merely honest; he stole but out of Apollos temple, secretly and in the
night, some few religiously Traitors compared with Uerres.
honored Images: but these (I fear to speak it) have intended to take a
sacred Prince from a holy land: he offered violence to the place where Apollo
was borne, but these not to the place, but to a personage, far more sacred
then Apollos was. But let not deep scanning wisdom be offended that I compare
her to Apollo: for whatsoever wrong was offered to that, which truth, or
ignorance, deemed in earth the dearest, that is contained in the treasons,
which have been intended against our dread Sovereign; who all this while
standing like a rock of pearls (in the assured God.
confidence of Englands watchman) is not danted to see her enemies to be so
malicious. After that Philip of Macedon had conquered the Athenians, having
Philosophers at supper with him he propounded this Question, What was the
greatest thing in all the world; one answered the water: another said the
sun: another said the hill Olympus: another said the giant Atlas: another
said Homer: but the last and wisest answered (nihil aliud in rebus humanis
magnum, nisi magna despiciens) nothing is great in humane things, but a mind
that contemns great things. M. Curious, when the Ambassadors of the Samnites
offered him gold in great abundance, answered, I had rather be Lord over you,
that are Lords over it, then only possess it self: and did not this speech
of his deserve better then the action of Lucullus to rob the Spartans? Did not
Crates gain more glory by casting his riches into the sea, then King
Nabuchadonozor for taking the treasure out of the temple? Is it not more honor
for the rich Indians to contemn their gold, then for the greedy Spaniards so
to covet it? which if it were not used to the prejudice of foreign princes,
all countries could wish him to be glutted with it, and that the Iberian sands
were like unto golden Tagu^, and their little rivers, like unto Pactolus
streams; but since he makes it the sinew of his war, and his war nothing
but an intended triumph over the greatest Empyres; it behooves Princes to
cross his Argoses, that goods lewdlie gotten, may not be worse spent: but
whilst these ruinating ambitious plotts, grounded upon treason, have risen up
like a Pyramides in the greatest Kingdoms, Englands Sovereign has A happy
sight.
sitten confident, without presumption, conquering without cruelty, and
victorious without contention. Whilst in the mean time Sedition shall be
ruinous, Rebellion shall have an end, and Treason shall be fatal to him that
thought it: for when heathen writers have flatteringly persuaded that treason
may have success, then shall the Scripture say, That 4. King. 15.
never traitor was mentioned and left unpunished. Sellam conspired against
Zacharias the King of Israel, and slew him, but within one month after, he
himself was slain of Manahem: Peka conspired against Pekaiam, and after was
slain of Oseas, and Oseas the last king of Israel, was taken bound and brought
into Assyria. Infinite might examples be in this kind, who upon false
persuasion have risen up against the Lords anointed, and have perished like
Iabin Judge. 4. 23.
in the day of battle, and we may sing with Deborah, They fought from heaven
even the stars in their course fought against Judge. 5. 20. 21.
Sisera: the river of Kishon swept them away, the ancient river, the river
Kishon, O So the Spanish fleet.
my soul thou have marched valiantly. Hitherto have I been tossed in the
dangerous waves of swelling Treason, where just occasion was offered to speak
of sundry by name, famous to the world for such foul offenses: but I am
loath to rippe up the hateful memory of our countries enemies, whom though
railing In confutat. Summarij Rat.
brainsicke Romoaldus the Scot, seem to clear by his fond defense, yet it is
so frivolous, idle, without learning, reading, or experience, as I can term
it nothing but Catilins oration against Against my L. Keeper and others.
Tullies Consulship: and when profanely by his defense he has encouraged
traitors the best he can: yet then with indifferent and wise readers he shall
be deemed foolish, and England flourish over all her enemies. I am willing
Countrymen, The conclusion.
to speak more largely unto you, but fearing to be troublesome, I only
desire but this favor, that according to the Hon. Examples of your famous
forefathers, Loyalty may dwell in the hearts of English subjects.

FINIS.

