THE LIFE, APPREHENSION Arraignement, and Execution of CHARLES COVRTNEY, alias
Hollice, alias Worsley, and Clement Sly Fencer: with their Escapes and
Breaking of Prison: As also the true and hearty Repentance of Charles Courtney
with other passages, worthy the note and Reading. depiction of execution

LONDON Printed for Edward Merchant, and are to be sold in Paul's Churceyard
over against the Cross. 1612.

THE APPREHENSION AND ARRAIGNMENT of CHARLES COVRTNEY, alias Hallice,
gentleman, with the form of his Life.
HE, that as in a glass, will behold the picture of a wretched Life, or the
lively representation of the myseries incident to Mankind, the image of both
may be seen in this man: here may be discerned, the mutations of Fortunes, the
inconstancy of things, and the uncertainty of days, since sin has spread
it self like a leprosy over all flesh, and iniquity has so gotten the upper
hand, that a Spider is able to choke us, a hair to stifle us, and a tyle
falling on our heads to extinguish us, even in that moment, when we least
suspect so sudden a calamity.

Our life then so momentanie, that in that minute we breath (if not defended by
our Maker) in that minute we are breathless. Why should any flesh, endowed
with that heavenly reason, which God has only given to men and Angels, so
forget his uncertainty? as for a little gold, which is but the dregs of the
earth, for vanity, the pleasures of the world, or for the world it self;
possessed with an exterior appearance of goodness, and within lined with
loathsome corruption, which is but like to reeds, who when they shoot out
first, in the spring of the year, entice, and with their fresh green color,
delight the eye for a while; but if we break, and look within them, we find
nothing but emptiness and hollownesse) neglect his Maker, and the dignity of
his creation, who being ordained for virtuous dispositions, conducts his whole
life to vicious actions; being men but in show, and like birds in their
course, who greedily flee to pecke up corn, till they be caught in the ginne:
or like fishes, who earnestly swim to catch the bait, till they be choked
with the hook.

But why do I talk of the frenzy of others, when no man's madness has been
equal to mine? or who will receive a homely counsel from that tongue, whose
folly has brought him to be condemned himself?

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. Then let me forget the world,
pity her infirmities, and with my souls sorrow, and hearty repentance,
build me up a ladder, on the steps of whose petitions I might climb toward
heaven. Yet alas words uttered from me, are but like birds feathers, who serve
their bodies use to flee withal, whilst they are alive, and others regardlesse
lie down upon them, when they are dead. The repetition of my sins, is but
with the winnowerand the wind, to fan away the chafe, and leave the growth
of the grain to live: with my shame, I may say, I have sinned, and do sing I
repent, yet the Law must have his power, and the living give their verdict: my
grief is the spring, which my sorrow lets out, and Justice is the pipe, which
does take, and can stop, whilst the world, as a sponge that suckes up the
superfluous, is of power to be squeezd forth, as the multitude please: what
though I sigh, yet my sins must be struck, the Law requires it, and mine
iniquities have deserved it: what though I dying complain, the living must
have their wills, and they have wills can reprove whatsoever I say (then
since the Law, as from y^ fountain of my offenses, has had power to draw my
life from me, and the world, even after death, may have strength to condemn
me, words uttered with tears, but requests of them thus: That since my body
shall have power to blunt the edge of affliction, my untimely fall may have
force to abate the keen sharpnes of their rumouring tongues; and if any
thirsty or unsatisfied spleen, either rejoicing at my death, or bemoning my
ruin, shall desire to see vnraueld the whole web of my life, he shall here
behold the piece of my Travels: in reading which, I desire him to wash from his
memory the stains of my name: here shall he read my diurnall transgressions,
which I request him to pardon, and not to reprove (since no Curre is so cruel
to bite the dead:) here as in a Mirror, shall he look into my miseries,
hand-workes, my sins, my sorrow, my life, my death, and the building of mine
own labor, began from the time of my apprehension at Dunstable in
Bedfordshire, from whence I was conuaid to Bedford Jail, from thence to
Newgate* where, after my several escapes, it was most untimely concluded at
Warwick lane end, near Newgate to die. For my birth and education, it was
fortunate, and commendable. It was a credit to my careful and loving Father,
and he was obeyed by me, as a dutiful son. In my youth I grew up like a
straight plant, and was expected of the worthiest, and hoped for of the best of
my country, to have proved the Timber of a fruitful tree: my company to the
best of the Gentry was accounted so welcome, that they esteemed me more for
pleasure, then expenses; and the contempt I held to associate with the base,
had brought my fair demeanure to be beloved with the best, that my fellowship
entirely desired, and my condition held honest* my Father was proud to call me
his happy son. In my prime, and fitting years, my Father endeavored to
join me in marriage, as well to joy in the posterity of his son, as a wife
by bringing a dowry with her, should strengthen my estate: which desire of
his, was equalled by diverse Gentlemen of good worship in our Country: and to
mine own love and liking, with the joy and wishes of our Parents, I was joined
in wedlock with a virtuous Gentlewoman; with whom, during the lives of our
Fathers, whose eyes were like careful Sentinels, watchful of our safeties, I
lived decently and orderly, as did befit a son, and a husband, and she
loving and dutiful, as should a daughter and a wife. But Time, the parent of
Death, and finisher of all things, calling them our Nourishers to their graves,
and I entered the gappe of wilfulness, and liberty; the which, before* either
their grave discretions had rained me from, or I had not leisure to find out:
I grew now to be a worser man, and did not seem in any thing, like that which
before I had been: my civility was turned to disorder, my temperance to
drunkenness, my thrift to riot, my honesty to misbehauiour; and my whole life
to those unseemly acts, that I should blush to record.

In which tide of expenses, consuming my means reserved by my Parents to
defend my reputation, and uphold our house, want, the Enemy to superfluity,
Tauerns, Dyce, and whores came on like a greedy purseuant to arrest me, with
whose gripe I being touched, and finding my state so infeebled, that I could
not continue in the course I had begun: my undertakings grue desperate,
fearelesse to attempt, and careless of the headlongst danger that could ensue.
To rob I was resolved, not fearing the law, and to persist I grew bold, not
regarding my ruin.

To reckon up now all the Robberies I have done, were but to add grief to a
number, that should hear of the account, and little benefit to me, that am
going to my grave. A many they are, which particularly to express would beget
doubt to the Readers belief, yet thus much Reader for thy satisfaction, I have
been too prosperous in these Adventures, so that I never failed in any
purchase I went about, I never stood upon the way to watch for any passengers,
nor never undertook any Robbery, but what was appointed and certain notice
given us which way they would pass, and what store of Coin they carried, by
some who were trusted, more then mistrusted. I never took from the needy, or
those whose poverty might cause them to complain, but all my aim either at
house or highway, were at such Curmugions, who care not who starues so
themselves be Corn fed.

In the effecting of all my Robberies and Burglaryes, never (to my souls
Comfort) did I shed any blood, but still my care was how to prevent that stayne
to my soul, only it was my ill Fate to stumble upon one Robbery, for which I
heartily wish I had been taken and received the law, according to my deserts,
I had then prevented the untimely end of two worthy gentlemen, whose names I
forbear. For the reputation of their house that were apprehended, endited,
arraignd, condemned, judged and most innocently hanged for a Robbery which I
did, Oh that my cradle had been my grave, I had not then offended my maker.
For the blood of the Innocents, for which I do first most earnestly on the
knees of my heart beg forgiveness of the Lord, hoping through my unfeigned
and hearty repentance to obtain remission of that grievous sin, next of those
friends, which were by me made friendlesse of two hopeful gentlemen, which in
time might have proved fruitful vines to defend their posterity, yet thus
much Reader for thy satisfaction, these gentlemen were apprehended, judged and
dead ere I knew of it, for I protest (as I think) had I known thereof before
their execution, I should have yielded, my own life, and have thought it
chief means to obtain remission of God, for my manifold transgressions to
save the Innocents. This warning piece should have Chastised me, forever
undertaking the like Enterprise.

My Conscience for the time was grieved, complained on it, yet my wilfulness
regarded it not, but like a Dog, Redi^t ad vomitum, I was still the same and
persisted. Insomuch, that my conscience being Clogged with the blood of
Innocents, I retired my self for releefein London.

In which Den of acquaintance, I met with many, who had been my Consorts,
with whom we Reuelled, while we had money, drancke while we had Credit, whored
whilst we had health, regardles of any good we applied our selves to all
villainies whatsoever, but these being weak sinews to maintain strength
without supply, and none of us all having means to relieve himself, in the
worst of our Credit, we began to Consult, our Resolve was thus, he that is
borne must be kept, we are borne and therefore must be kept, and will find
Nurses in the world though to other men's charge. Briefly we stood not long upon
it, but our Conference was, how we might come by a Purse on the highway, that
was worth the taking, or enter some house that might benefit the breaking.
Every man gave his Resolve, some that the highway was the best, having Ostlers
ready to furnish them with horses, and every Country in the whole Kingdom
for their free escape. Others knowing me a better thief then the rest, swore
they would be ruled by me, and desired me to set down some Course what should
be done, I never paused on it, but finding them all fit Fry for the gallows as
my self was, I desired to be heard, and told them this, that there was a
Gardner in the town that sowed seed, and gathered the Croppe for himself. A
man, an usurer, one that would take much in paune, and lend little on it. One
that would keep a house of great use, yet have no hospitality in it, near
about Temple Bar was this Gardners Orchard: One whose fruitewe must pluck
for our profit, the course was likte, the Plot approved, and my self best
knowing the conueyance of the house, having oftentimes resorted thither, when
my Pockets were Lancke, both to pleasure my self, and other of my friends with
a good Pledge, I must be the man must bring the matter to Act.

Two several times we had undertook this Enterprise, and were as often
prevented, entending to break into the house, but finding the house too strong
for our weak purposes, hopeles to effect, we were about to give it over, till
on the sudden, it came in my minds that this Gardner, was so ielous of his
substance, and so distrustful of every one (nay even of his wife) her self,
that he would never go abroad, but he would take his Key of his door with
him, reserving to himself certain hours in the day, when he would not fail
to be at home, to meet with his customers, and to furnish them with money. So
that some Certain means must be found out for the getting of his Key, or all
our Labor was lost, and we had undertook abooteles attempt. In brief I
having by this time so insinuated my self into his love by fair words, and as
fair behavior, that no man was more welcomer to his house then my self,
neither could any draw him forth sooner then I: still baiting the book of my
plot, with bestowing every morning a pint of wine or two on him, as they use
to say, for his first draft, but never suffering him to spend a Penie, as we
satebibling together oftentimes, thus hand to hand turning over the Cups,
with no other Complement then this, here father Gardner, heeres to you, and
son Courtney to you. I warrant you an oath (...)ew not out of my mouth for
the world, and Circumstance was seldom of any thing else but of thrift, and
thriuing, how we might get wealth and hoord it up, being got, I knew now that
buttermilke would serve in summer both for meat and drink, as well as
himself, that a good sauer might stand Cheek by Iole with a great getter, and
could now tell how to multiply a hundred to a thousand, with the best of them
all, so that I stood in doubt at last he would make me his heir.

Our familiarity thus linckte, and the rest of our Crew being nine or ten in
number, acquainted, therewith, it was by general Consent agreed upon that at
some Tavern or other, a solemn supper should be prepared, and M. Gardner and
his wife invited and brought thither as my guests. I stood not much upon the
undertaking of it, and the rather, because I knew good cheer, and of free
Cost, was both bait and line, and would draw my Gudgeon at ease. The time is
come, supper ready, the Cloth is laid, my gallants in the room attending for
M. Gardener his wife, and my self, who at the hour appointed, made our
appearance, when according to Course, to some that were there before, and the
worthiest in show, I must entreat of them to bid these friends welcome, who
are especially mine, and what Courtesy soever they extended toward them, I
should ever approve it manifested toward me, whereby the good woman is with all
Courtesies placed at the upper end of the Table, and a chair with a soft
Cushion, provided for the good man, every one is ready to carue unto her, and
all are as forward to quaffe unto him.

Supper ended and the sign of the wine began to show in his face, a noise of
Fiddlers was provided to come in, just in the Nicke, and now in the Devils name,
we must needs go dance, when in protesting of Love, embracing and hugging of
him, one of the Crew whose fingers were nimbler then the rest, had daunced the
Key out of his pocket, Intelligence was straight given to me of that which was
done, and by meas privately borne to the rest with strickt warning to keep him
up in his mirth, for by his wealth we were in hope to be ever made.

About then slip the healthes, more Iouiall then before, whilst three of us
on the sudden slunke down the stares, have to the house, open the door, and
up into the Chambers, where we found that we came for, and stood not long a
Culling out, but like crafty Merchants, taking up our Commodities by the
great, we were now only puzzled how, and in what, to Carry it from thence. But
I being my Crafts-Master pulled off a fetherbed, ripped up the ticke, powered out
the Feathers, and in this Case for Conueiance, we put as much plate and Jewels
as we could find, and conveniently carry away, Only one bag of money of
some thirty pound was scattered about the Room, the bag brook. It was not
far off but for the instant we had a warehouse provided for the Harboring of
it. My Confederates all this while kept them at the tavern, excusing mine, and
the others sudden departure to some extraordinary business which we had to
do. When they thought we had our purpose, call for a reckoning, paid it, and
so like honest, loving, familiar friends, we quietly and peaceably departed
the Tavern.

By this, Master Gardner with his wife come home to their house, find their
door shut, there was no hurt in that, bids his wife light a candle, there was
no hurt in that, but missing his key, was forced to break the door open:
coming up into his chamber, espying the feathers scattered all about one
room, and money about another, the windows shut, and walls safe, (not without
cause) my old friend began to wonder at that: and being suddenly affrighted,
flees to his Counting House, where, when he saw what ransacke was made, what a
pitiful heat was my old Grandfire in, let enery one judge.

It was no time for him to delay, Enquiry was made amongst the neighbors, what
passengers they had seen go into his house since his departure, suspicion was
had of us; search every where was made for us, Hue and Cry into all places
sent after us, all ports and havens laid for us, our habits and personages
described, warning left at all Gold-smithes and Iewellers, if any such plate
came to be sold, to make stay of it: all Newgate Coniurers set a work, with
promise of great reward, if by their Art they could find any of us out. But we
being lodged secure from present danger, began to consult what means might be
used for our free escape. Some were so fearful (as it has bin still my hap
to rob with cowards) that they would have given one leg, and their shares
in the Robbery, to have had the other leg safe in France. I knew my self as
safe here as in France, but aiming at the full purchase, holding it no sin to
deceive the deceivers, persuaded them how dangerous it was to abide here, and
told them that I knew the malice of Gardner to be such nothing could satisfy
him but life, or restitution: this fear infected them all, and they that
before thought scorn of my company, now became suitors to me, to plot their
escape. I conveyed them with speed to an old Sea-thiefe, an acquaintance of
mine, which dwelt near the Sea coast, that would at any time for a small
gratuitie, convey a Fellon, or one in danger, out of this land; told them he
must have a great reward for his pains, and for the plate and jewels, we would
share the^ there where he took ship: for I made them believe this
Sea-thiefe was still full of money, to furnish these occasions. He being
acquainted with my purport, persuaded them their securest harbor was on
shipboord, till he could provide me money upon these pawnes. They being all
shipped, one night I caused a false alarm to be sent, that they were pursued, my
self taken, the town laid for their apprehensions. This news made them
forget what they stayed for, preferring their lives before any thing else,
cried Hoist sail, away to France: the wind being then good, away they went,
and left me with my old Sea-thiefe, reuelling in the town. So all the plate
and jewels which we took from Gardner, which amou^ted to a good round sum,
of which some nine or ten should have shared, I shared to my self; only
some money they got from me, nothing to their expectations, and some charge
they put me to, in sending them away.

Now having conveyed them safe away, I must use a course to protect my self: I
knew all places where it was known I had any acquaintance, was laid for me,
with promise of reward to them that could apprehend me: so that my safest
refuge was where I was least known. In one place I would never abide long, but
coursing the countries, I happened to lodge at Dunstable, where I was taken
upon Suspicion of Felony, being known by my horse, was committed to Bedford
Jail: and notice of my apprehension was given unto Gardner, who procured
authority to fetch me from Bedford to London. Whither I was safely, and with
great care conveyed. And being brought to Newgate, was lodged on the Masters
side: where my smooth tongue, civil carriage, and friendly courtesy (not
only to the worthiest and best esteemed on that side, but even to the worst
boy in the house) had gotten me such a good opinion amongst them, that I was of
every one beloved, and pitied: and every one behind my back commended me to
the Keeper, and would often produce me for example to others. But all this was
but a curtain to shadow my villainy: for when I seemed freest from thought of
wrong, I was most busy to work my escape. My life, I knew, was forfeit to
the Law, which at the next Sessions I was sure to pay, unless it were ventured
by breaking out of prison. I found the Jail to be of that approved strength,
as it was impossible to be broken: besides, being lodged in a chamber with
other prisoners, I could not have time to do it. Yet still persisting in my
Resolve, and taking hold of any occasion that might further my attempt, I did
perceive a door which did lead out of a gentleman's chamber, that was a
prisoner, into the Leads, which door was continually locked, this was the
door must lead me to my pardon, I let no time slip, but by means of a
dear friend, I had a Jack line conveyed unto me, and a Chissell of Iron, and
that night I purposed to get away, being in the Hall at supper, with the rest
of the prisoners, I made excuse, to go up to my Chamber, to write a letter. To
work I went, where without long labor, as it seemed to me, being a cunning
workman, I had opened the door that led into the Leads, and finding an old
door in the gutter, on the back of which were fastened bars to keep close
the boordes, and with the help thereof, I climed up to the Battlements, where
my eye measuring the way that I held best for my descent, I fastened my cord to
the top of one Battlement, on the west side of the gate, and began to slide
down, but see the will of our just God, that gives prevention to evil, for
the prosperity of honest and good men, (which I now heartily pray for) that I
that had the Contriuing to open the Locks, the Cunning how to sort out the
time, should not for this which I held my advantage, have had the foresight to
have laid some cloth, or other help, betwixt the edge of the wall, whereunto
I had fastened the cord, and the stay of the rope. So that in my slipping
down, striving to vntangle the cord being small, it cut my right hand to the
bone, and the force of my body, with the sharpenes of the stone cut in sunder
the cord, by the breaking of which I fell down into the gutter, belongiug to a
Linen Draper adjoining to Newgate, lying a quarter of an hour astonished, ere I
recovered my self.

Being come to my remembrance, and seeing my hope frustrate, and no help for
me to be gone, at last I groaped out a garret window, the door of which opened
into the gutter, but being bolted in the inside, I was as much in a maze as I
was before, where presently my invention helping me again, and by the shaking
of the door, learnt whereabout the staple was fastened, I had in a trice with
my nails scraped out a hole, yet no bigger but where I might thrust two of my
fingers, so thrusting back the boult, I opened the gutter door, having a cord
about my middle, wherewith I meant to get out of the gutter ino the street. But
the master keeper whose diligence, and care in his well governing of the
Prison, I must with modesty commend, having been forth with some friends of
his, and coming in again, at the time they use to lock up, demanded if the
Jail were safe, and all well with the Prisoners, and being answered yes, I
knew not by what means, but sure God had a hand in it, having a strange
impression on the sudden in his mind, came up into the masters side, and the
first he asked for was me, where receiving a strange answer from every one, as
that he was here even now, or such like, going into every room, still calling,
still calling, Master Courtney, Master Courtney, but Master Courtney could
not hear. It was perfectly evident, I had wrought my escape. In what a
conflict was this gentleman in, the danger I had brought him in, let even
Charity judge. But it was no time for delay, search round about the house was
made, which way I might escape, some persuaded him, I was gone out of the door
in some disguise, some that I had got out at the leads, the leads were
viewed, at last they found the cord tied about the Battlements. Linkes then
were sent for, the Cunstable and his watch beset every house on that side, from
Newgate to Pie Corner, the Leads were likewise beset with linckes. All this I
did see though to my great grief, into the garret then I crept, and there hid
my self under a table, covered with a cloak, this Drapers house being
searched, as the likeliest place, I should take for my refuge, till the hurry
was over. In the garret where I lay, they came, and found me not, but God would
not suffer me to escape, nor would suffer them to give over their search in
that house. Into the garret the Keeper came again, with a cudgel in his hand
turning up the cloak, espied me lying as it were a sleep waking me without
blows or sign of anger, called to me, come Master Courtney, will you go,
when looking heavily up, and seeing it was he, I fell down on my knees asking
him forgiveness, who most mildly without afflicting me gave me this answer,
nay never ask forgiveness of me, there is no hurt done Master Courtney, for
I am the gladdest to see you of any man alive.

So from thence being carried up to the common Jail, and sessions coming on,
I was called up to trial according to my merit. Convict, but by the favor of
the bench, some promises of mine own to help some to their goods, who had
been robbde of a number, and at the especial suit of my friends, I was for
that sessions repreeued without judgment, the sessions following, I had my
sentence of death, but in the distance betwixt my conviction and sentence, my
remain being still in the common Jail. I had searching eyes touching the
strength of the prison, the condition and humor of the officers, and where and
what hour it was fittest for me to labor my deliverance, whose policy
failing, I was certain of death. In brief I had found the way, and manner of
my conueiance, and had I not been prevented, by my unexpected sentence, at the
following sessions after my conviction, and that night according to the custom
due to Condemned and Judged men, being lodged in a dungeon, which is called the
Limbord, that instant night, with one Clement Sli^ a fencer by title, and lay
condemned for Murder, whom I had wrought to be an agent with me, I had him
as forcibly as after I performed, confirmed by escape.

Now seeing I was prevented, and knowing I must die with the rest of the
prisoners, I found now there was no refuge left, but to labor our repreeue,
which cunningly, and not ordinarily, I thus brought to effect, there was a
gentleman, and at that time a prisoner for debt, whom I had understood his
entreats would prevail with some honorable personages in this land, I
commended me to him, to his conference with me, and in this manner solicited
him, that I was a gentleman, as himself was, and for lack of means, and
neglect of friends, compeld to take offending courses, the which himself knew
the law had taken hold of, to the mark of my life I importune him to consider
of me, yet in no kind whereby himself, whom I labor, should be brought into
danger, neither those whom he should move for me, should receive discredit
but gain.

For when I stood condemned, for this apparent robbery of Gardner, I desired
him to be certain, that I had ever this care in the evil of my life, not so
to overthrow the state of my being, but in spite of calamity, I would always
some what reserve, should be as a fence to my health, in spite of my sin,
namely, that of the same I stand convicted for, being most of it in plate, I
had at that time, as much, the which in one month I would make money of, as
should amount to the sum of six hundred pounds, four of which I would
assure to any honorable or worshipful friends should labor my repreeue, and
effect my pardon, and the other hundred pounds should be to gratify him, that
should travel in the cause since himself was a prisoner) till it were fully
confirmed. And if within four days, after my repreeue, I did not answer my
word, I would willingly yield to my sentence of death.

This made my gentleman labor, this drew a friend of his to question with me,
and was satisfied with my promise. So that the untimely morning I was expected
by the gaze of the multitude to have gone to execution with the rest, I had my
repreeue brought in hope of my promise, which indeed was only coined for
another end.

The effect was this, that I being still continued in the Jail, and night
coming on, I began to argue with Sly of our former plot, whom I found to be
the man, whom I wished to be, namely, to go forward in the attempt, which
before we had enterprised, whom I finding to be confident, and resolute still,
that night we made a vow, to confirm our purpose.

It is here to be noted, that in the same ward where we lay, namely the
Masters Chamber was also lodged one Woodward for suspect of Coining, whom we
taking down into the seller, amongst other prisoners, we made so absolutely
drunk, that he was forced upon men's shoulders to be carried up stairs, this
fellow thus drunk, and we were sure now, in a dead sleep, in the dead of the
night, we fell to work, and prevailed so far, that we came up through a
seeling, and a planke that was broken in a room, that is commonly called the
high hall, with a rope that uses to draw up, and let down the beer into the
Taphouse, having been used, then time out of mind, and dreadlesse of that, by
which we made use of it, we determined our escape. But being both above, and
out of the room where we lay, all the policy and actiuitie we had, could
not clime up to the beam, to vnroofe the house, whereby we were forced to come
down quietly to bed, but the next day, and two or three nights together,
having conveyed to us a line, and a dark lantorne, by a friend which was sent
to us, which before we wanted, with certain sticks, which we had privily
conveyed out of the kitchen Iaole, we made us a ladder of roapes, with the
help of which the Satturday night following, being the last of February, as
before Sly climing up the beam, with my help fastened the ladder of Roapes,
whereon I getting up into the high hall, got up to the beam, where being, we
vntiled a hole in the top, which led into the leads, and the same rope which
he had taken from the Pullice, we fastened to the Battlements, and so slidde
down into the press yard, and there by means of a ladder, which by chance
we found there, got into the street, went down warricke lane, so to Saint
Giles, from thence into Hide-Parke, where we lay in a hole, or a hogstie all
Sunday, without any sustenance. On sunday night, we were directed of a letter
sent, unto me, whilst I was in prison, if we escapte, to come into a gentleman's
Chamber in the Temple, which we should know by a light burning in the window,
and by the same letter, we were directed the way, which candle burnt there
three nights a fore, and should have done three nights longer, if we had not
come, to which place we went on Sunday night, and there with others plotted to
rob a worshipful gentleman at Layton on monday night, we took water at the
Temple stares, and landed at Saint Katterns, where we spent our time, till the
night following, and then with some four or five more effected this Robbery,
and repaired again to the Temple, where, by what means, we were betrayed and
taken, God knows best, for we do not, but I do apply it the work of God
to clear a great many, which were most unjustly accused, for consenting to our
escape, of whom I do ask pardon, there we were taken the thursday night after
our escape, and from thence brought bound to Newgate, where we temained till
the day of our execution.

On friday mourning, being the thirteenth of this instant month of March, I
was sent for to Sir Henry Mountegues in Aldersgate street, where being
examined of some points concerning the Robbery done at Layton, after a worthy
and zealous exhortation made unto me to forget the world, and all hope of life,
and to spend that little time I had to live, in prayer. For you are (quoth he)
appointed to morrow with your companion Sly, to yield your lives to the law,
which so many ways you have offended, and so sent me back again to Newgate,
where all that after noone, I spent my time only in prayer, being still
frequented with diverse good and godly men, who labored zealously for the good
of my soul, and who I hope can testify to the world, that I died a true
penitent and servant of God. God for his mercy grant unto at other offenders
the like unfeigned contrition, and true feeling of his benefits, and unto me
life everlasting, A men.

On Satterday morning was two gibbets set up one within the gate, near
warricke lane end, whereon was hanged Charles Courtney gentleman, and one other
without the gate at the old Baily end, where on was hanged Clement Sly a
Fencer, for killing a Fencer near about Kentish town. The body of Charles
Courtney, was begd by the Barbar Surgeons, for an anatomy. The body of Clement
Sly was buried in Christ's Church in Christian Burial.

Courtneis repentance.
THe silent night that shadoweth every tree,
And Phoebus in the West was shrouded low,
Each hiue had home her busy laboring Be,
And Birds their nightly harbor began to know,
And all things did from weary labor linne,
And I began to weigh my state and sin.
Men worn with work, betook them to their rest.
The Sun had left to show his glorious beams,
Titan had fully hid him in the West,
To cool the fetlockes of his weary teames,
When sunk with sorrow, being captiuate.
I shed forth tears lamenting much my state.
My head on hand, my elbow on my knee,
And tears did trickle down my countenance then,
My countenance as sad, as man's might be,
My dumps befitting well a Captive man,
Fettered in prison, passionate alone,
My sighs wrought tears, and thus I began to moan.
I that of late did live a soldiers life,
And spent my service in my Countries good,
Now captive lie, where naught but cares are rife,
Where is no hope, but loss of dearest blood,
This is befallen me, cause I did mis-spend,
That time which God to better use did lend.
Had I but stopped my ears where Siren sung,
And bound my self unto Ulysses mast,
Or had I thought, alas I am but young,
Too much it is all to venture on a cast,
I might have lived from all dangers free,
Where now I die, for life is not for me.
But I do follow what I knew was vain,
Instead of virtue, I did vice embrace,
My former pleasures now procure my pain,
And cause I lackt one spark of timely grace,
The poisoned Aconite of death and woe
Resolves to send a fatal overthrow.
This makes my eyes to gush out floods of tears,
My flesh to melt, my eyes and arteris rend
My soul to seek redress, to cure her fears,
For now my cause cannot afford one friend,
I that of late did number many a friend,
Now find them fled, and no man comfort lend.
The Leafelesse tree, with wrath of winters wind,
Best represents my wretched wasting state,
Fortune the wind, the leaves my friends I find,
My self the tree, that thus am erost by fate,
And yet in this we greatly differ may,
That it reuiues and I still pine away.
Villains auaunt, you bastards are by kind,
That do perturbe the countries quiet state,
Shame to offend, shun a corrupted mind,
And learn by me, your former lives to hate,
Live of your own, and brave it not with brags,
Least law condemn you in your proudest rags.
Drink not the Harvest of your neighbors sweat,
Steal not at all, thy God does thee command
Whose law to keep your sovereign does entreat,
Thy health it is Gods law to understand,
Obeying God, God shall all harms prevent,
Keeping Kings peace, thy King is well content.
Like to the Woolfe in every place you range,
Preying on lamb, that never went astray,
And like Camelions must your suits be strange,
Who does by kind change Colors every day,
Without respect, forgetting what you be,
Masking in sin, as if God could not see.
Abate presumption, sin is not a I est,
Though God forbear, yet he will strike at length,
God made thee man, make not thy self a beast,
But seek to love thy God, with soul and strength,
Ill got, Ill spent, your hopes (in theft) pretended,
Are grief and shame, and life in sorrows ended.
Might sorrowing sobs, with tears redeem what is past
Or floods of tears suffice for foredone ils,
Behold my looks with discontent orecast,
Whose heart does rend, whose eyes fresh fountains still,
And yet all this, and all that I can do,
Is small to that which I have need to do.
My soul shall mourn for all my ill done deeds,
And I will weep, sole author of souls woe,
Repentance shall be my black mourning weeds,
I Will bath my self in tears, from top to toe,
And while life lasts, which cannot now be long,
Grant mercy Lord, this shall be all my song.
My heart through flesh shall issue sweating grief,
And scald my bones with salt and brinish tears,
Through flesh and bone, my heart shall beg relief,
On bended knees till bone my flesh out-weares,
All that I am I Will spend in mourn for sin,
And where I end, afresh I will begin.
If Maudlins tears did ever Christ's feet wet,
And sweet her soul with true repentant tears.
If Peter's mourning streams did mercy get
For all his sins, though he his Christ for swears,
My sad laments abounding from my eyes,
Sweet God accept, and hear my mourn fullcries.
A wouuded soul a broken contrite heart,
Creepes in great'st throng, thy mercies throne to touch,
The oil of life, King of my life impart,
Though sin be great, thy mercy's thrice as much,
Oh thou that art in power and mercy great,
Send down thy mercy from thy mercies seat.
My colored suits I now exchange for black,
Till scarlet sin be all as white as snow,
On me sweet time shall never turn his back,
Nor shall his task be more, my tares to mow,
But with repentance furrow hopes for lorne,
Till God give grace, I sheafe up better Corn.
This little remnant of my life so poor,
I Will teach to shun all sin and vices all,
Giver of all grace, grant grace I sin no more,
Establish me that I may never fall,
To thee my heart, my soul and life I give,
Who after death eternally may live.
Direct my path even for thy mercies sake,
Guide thou my steps to keep repentant ways,
Keep me from sleep, in thee still let me wake,
To laud thy name during these earthly days,
And when from earth I shall dissolve to dust,
Grant that my soul may live among the just.
Chapter Courtney.

FINIS.

