CERTAIN Very worthy, godly and profitable Sermons, upon the fifth Chapter
of the Songs of SOLOMON:

Preached by BARTIMEVS ANDREAS, Minister of the word of God; Published at the
earnest and long request of sundry well minded Christians.

ESAIAS. 62.6.7 I have set watchmen on thy walls, (O Jerusalem) which all the
day and all the night continually shall not cease: ye that are mindful of the
Lord, keep not silence: And give him no rest till he repair, and until he
set up Jerusalem the praise of the world. 2. TIM. 2.19. But the foundation of
God remains sure, and has this zeal. The Lord knows who are his: and let
every one that calls on the name of Christ depart from iniquity. AT LONDON;
Printed by Robert Waldegraue, for Thomas man. 1583.

TO THE RIGHT honorable and my very good Lord, Henry, Earl of Huntington,
Lord Hastings, Hungerforde, Botreaux, Mullens and Moyles, of the most
honorable order of the garter Knight, and Lord president of the Queens
Majesty's council established in the North parts, Bartimeus, Andrews, wishes
increase of all true honor, and the fruition of all those blessed promises,
which concern this life and the life to come. Amen.
BEING at the last overcome (right honorable) by the long and earnest request
of diverse Godly and well disposed christians, to yield my consent to the
publishing of this to homly and simple a work: I forthwith was resolved in my
self to dedicate the first fruits of my labor in this kind of writing unto
your honor, as to a most worthy MECOENAS and convenient Patron both of all
learning and good causes And albeit at the first blush it may seem some what
strange unto your honor, that I should presume to present you with so simple
a gift being unworthy the view of so honorable a personage, and wise. Yet
because I do it, not as one expecting any temporal benefit or preferment at
your hand (as the manner of the world for the most part in such matters is):
But as a token rather of my special good will, and duty toward you, and an
argument of thankfulness unto God for his graces in you, as also to minister
some occasion of increase and going forward, with constancy and Heroical
spirit in so good, gracious and Godly ways as you have turned your feet to
step in already: I persuade my self therefore of your facile and courteous
nature and good will in accepting of the same. And even this small duty of
writing is one point of the honoring and gratifying of our betters, and those
to whom we stand charged from the Lord to perform duties of reverence and
honor. Especially when we see the Image of God by the second creation, to
shine in them, as it does break forth in your honorable and virtuous breast,
by many worthy and commendable graces and virtues, with the plausible
approbation fame and report, both of the wise and Godly. I speak not this as
one that would fill the trompe of flattery, with the wind of vaineglorious
praise, to seem to speak for your honor to the world (for that is not my
manner) since your virtuous religious and Godly ways, speak for them selves,
to your great commendation, and your everlasting praise in Christ Jesus. But I
speak of the work of God in you (right honorable) that God might have his
just glory in his own work, and your self might also be encouraged with
comfort to proceed and increase in that good course, so as the work of God
which is begun might be perfited in you. For sure it is (my very good Lord)
that the enemy of mankind seeks to beset, as all men, so specially those,
whom the Lord begins to frame to him self; but chieflyest those, that are
as it were over frayghted with the abundance of the troublesome affairs of
this present life, by reason of their great calling. For they whom God calls
to so great honor, riches and dignity are (as one wisely writes) set upon the
main sea of occasions, in danger to be drenched and swallowed up of the
tempestuous rages, and surging waves of diverse temptations, if the Lord do
not mightily by his grace support and vnderstay them. But when God stands by
them, and frames their hearts to the love of his truth, then does he reap
great honor and glory at their hands. Which he highly priseth and reckons
off, insomuch, that he has honorably spoken of such by his Prophets that they
should bring much glory to his Church, Esaias. 49.23. and 60.16.
and be nursing fathers and nursing mothers thereunto, yea the glory of LEBANON
(even of great personages) shall come together to beautify the place of my
sunctuary (says the Lord), for I will glorify the place of my feet. Esaias.
60.13.
For the service which such should do to his Church was not a servile
condition, but a beautifying of his Church, as it is there called, and a glory
even unto him self. And undoubtedly blessed are those Princes, Nobles,
honorable and worshipful, who them selves embracing and obeying the truth
sincerely, become presidentes and examples in their own persons, to allure
others to the fellowship of the church, to the love of the word and true
religion. For the fall or vprising of many after a sort depends upon the
public persons whom God has lift up in high places over others. Insomuch as
the eyes of the multitude are been upon the examples of public persons:
Furthermore we see from time to time, how the Church of God (not without
great cause) accounted highly of such personages as those by whom they received
special blessings from the Lord. So the church of Israel, Psalm. 21.6.
made precious account of DAVID that worthy Prince, as one that was set of God
as blessings for ever, Meaning as a benefit and testimony of Gods favor upon
his people. EZEKIAH, NEHEMIAH, Neh. 1. and 2. Hag. 1.14. Ier. 40. 2. Chr. 35.25
ZERVBBABEL, GEDALIAH. etc. were great blessings to the Church, who greatly
lamented the loss of the^. Also JOSIAH, his death was lamented with a doleful
lamentation of all the church of IVDA. And sure it is that our Church has great
cause to magnify the mercies of God toward us, in trusting us with so
gracious a JOSIAH as our Sovereign Princess ELIZABETH; as by whose government
the church has received many blessings. The loss of whom if our sins should
procure (which the Lord keep far from us) would yield no less occasion for us
to complain and say then the Church of IVDA had, Lamen. 5.20
at the death of JOSIAH when they said, Our life and the breath of our
nostrels, the anointed of the Lord, was taken in their nets, of whom we
said under his shadow we shall be preserved alive, among the heathen. Hereunto
god has added further matter of joy and thankfulness unto his Church, in that
many nobles and worthy personages of this land both learned, Godly and wise,
(among whom your honor has not the least room) are faithful Patrons of the
cause of Religion. And therefore if the church reverenced, and highly accounted
of such, if the godly teachers of the church commended such, and gratifyed them
by writing of some such duty, as the Apostle JOHN did the elect Lady, and
HIEROM, 2. Ioh. 1.
that virtuous Lady LETA, and GAVDENTIA, to encourage them in the truth, and to
show their thankfulness for them unto God: why may not we in our times likewise
gratify our noble and worthy personages with some such duty? to show forth our
thankfulness and reverence toward them: as also to minister occasion by such
means as we can, of further proceeding in all religious and godly ways with
zeal to advance gods glory in his church? For we should all step out for the
defense and advancement of Gods gospel and glory. For the true honor of al men
stands in this chiefly, that they embrace the word which is the wisdom of
God, since without religion there is no true honor. Therefore Prou. 8, VVisdome
lays claim to all the honor and kingdom of princes, Pro. 8.15.16.18.
as without whom they wanted al true honor. Yea she challenges to her self al
true wisdom, council, understanding, strength and honor, etc. Also else where
SOLOMON a prince of greatest hono^^ and wisdom, sets down plainly, Pro 4.8.
ver. 14.
that they which embrace wisdom shall have great honor, and they which exalt
her shall be exalted the^ selves. For God crowns them with honor which honor
his word. But strippeth al such naked of honor and renoum before him, which do
not honor his word. Therefore the governors of Israel, were charged to be
always conversant in the book of the law day and night, that they might
learn to fear the lord their God: Deu. 17.19.
adding a great reason, that by such means they should provide for their own
safety, and for the good estate of their posterity. Verse 20.
Yea it was promised to DAVID as a special prerogative that so long as he
held the Lord to be his Father and made him his God, by trusting in him and
embracing the testimonies of his word, Psa. 89.26. ver. 28.29.
that the Lord would not fail him, but establishe his covenant with him, yea
and with his seed for evermore. So that such as set their delight in the word
of God, carry with them store of blessings from the Lord, both for them selves
and for their posterity. And we see that the Lord does not otherwise promise
to prosper the affairs of men, then as they are careful to know his will in
his word. Hereof it was that the Lord promised the like success unto IOSHVA.
For after he had encouraged him to obey his word, Josh. 1.7. and ver. 8.
showing that therein stood all true prosperity, he adds this exhortation.
Let not this book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein
day and night, that thou may observe and do, according to all that is
written therein, then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then shall thou
have good success. For the Lord knew, that since IOSHVA stood in great peril
of temptation every way, by the reason of the waightynesse of his calling and
dignity, therefore also he shows that he had greatest need of the means to
vnderstay himself, and to be acquainted with the Lords privy Council,
revealed in his word, to direct him in all his actions. So DAVID made the
word of God his Councellers, Psa. 119.24.
without whom he would do nothing. For he knew that it behooves such to
employ their honor, glory, estimation, riches, and credit as handmaydes to
further Gods glory. And then no doubt they are to expect great blessings from
the Lord, with immortal praise and everlasting honor with Christ Jesus. I
doubt not therefore (right honorable) but all these blessings shall be
accomplished upon you as also upon your posterity, since you love and embrace
the religion of the true God and the truth of his word, who will not see you
want that honor that he has promised to his most excellent Saints.

And now here I present unto your Honor this poor Tallent of mine: which may
it please you to accept at my hand, as of one that wishes all happiness unto
you and yours in the Lord, humbly craving that your favorable wisdom would
supply the wants of this thing, and that this so simple a gift as it is, may be
accepted of you, rather for my good meaning in the thing and the end wherefore
I do it, then for the vallue of the thing it self. Doing your honor to
understand, that you are not to expect any flourishing speeches garnished with
Rhetorical flowers and figures, or any cunning sleightes of man's wisdom, or
painted eloquence with affected words, but having an eye to the matter and not
to the manner, to expect a simple and plain handling of that which is entreated
off. For my desire is not to be seen in the height, and intricate questions of
man's wisdom, but in the baseness and simplycity of the Gospel that it may
appear in the power thereof. Thus (right honorable) surceasing from adding
any further words of discourse, and remaining ready to undergo all lawful
duetyes toward your honor (which God any manner of ways shall enable me to
do) I humbly commit your honorable Lordship (with the right honorable that
virtuous Lady the Countess your wife), even to our good and merciful God, who
evermore preserve you and yours in all blessed safety both of body and soul, be
present with you, govern and guide you by his gracious spirit, and heap upon
you all heavenly blessings, and show forth the riches of his grace upon you,
that you may hold out with all constancy in his truth unto the end, so as you
glorifying him in this life, may be received unto eternal glory, and felicity
with him in the life to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Your honors humble to command in the Lord, Bartimaeus Andrews.

To the Christian Reader.
IT was not in vain (Christian reader) that the ancient fathers of the Church,
worthy and Godly writers used always preuentions in some preface or Epistle
before their works to reclaim their writings from suspicion and reproach: in
so much as the Church of God never wanted envious, malicious and captious
adversaries, who with their slanderous tongues and dispightfull laws sought
to tear in pieces, or by Zoylous vpbraydings to blemishe, or by reproachful
speeches and lyspings to cancel the credit of whatsoever was godly, wisely,
carefully and to good purpose penned down by them. These times yield occasion
of no less suspicion of like intertainment to be given to good things written
for the comfort and help of the simple and ignorant: especially when they are
to proceed from so unworthy an instrument and so unskillful an indictor as my
self, when the writings and works of so famous and godly men have gone before
as great torchelights, or as the Sun at noone days, and I to come after in
so low a course, should seem as a starie borrowing light from others, and yet
so, as giving light to some. But because God has his glory as well of the
interior plances and fixed startes in their order and degree, as of the Sun
and the great lights in their excellency: I doubted not but was persuaded that
in my calling, degree, measure and place assigned me of God, I should both do
good and be helpful to the simple at least and ignorant (if not to the learned)
and also should bring some glory unto that God from whom I have received that
which I have. Casting mine eyes therefore of from the scornful reproaches of
the world, from the malice and envy of the ca^pers, and from the suspicious
heart of them which suspect all things, and finally from the regard of mortal
men my heart being directed to the Lord on whom onoly I wait, mine eyes turned
toward his Church who^ I dearly tender in the Lord, I was forced to yield to
this work which I have taken in hand: yet so that after the request of many
which hard these few Sermons that follow (not with out some comfort and
profit as they said) I yielded to try what I could do in penning of them
as I uttered them so near as I could, after which thing done and being seen
of some, altho^gh I never thought to have it pass out of my hands, yet had I
it not only coppied out by others, but also I was exceedingly charged by them
that I should dishonor God in concealing of the thing, and should do great
injury to many souls which might reap special comfort thereby, themselves
being witnesses against me of that comfort and benefit which they should want
by the withholding thereof insomuch as it was likely to be preferred unto
publishing without my knowledge or consent if I had not yielded. For which
causes I have taken in had to prefix these few words Humbly entreating that no
man misiudge of this my poor travail. Now if any marueil at these long
excuses preceding any other matter, it is therefore, that I might satisfy the
godly in rendering a reason of the publishing hereof, being of my self timorous
and suspicious of mine own works, as such which I reckon unworthy the public
view of men. But God grant it may profit the simple and godly at least, for
whose sake I have chiefly done it. Also of the otherside, to stay the
mutterings of the malicious enuions and suspicious men. Now in that I have
labored so near as I could to pen it down in such manner as it was uttered by
me (having some notes of the same delivered unto me), so as by the reason of
the exhortations the matter will seem more rarely a great deal in reading
then when it is vttred with lively voice and godly zeal, whereby it has the
greater force to move, being the ordinary means appointed of God to save men,
yet because writings do long seed memory then words spoken, they which
wanted the use of the first, shall yet have the benefit of the written
letters to their longer remembrance. I am therefore humbly to crave of the
(christian reader) that thou accept these first fruits of my labor in this
kind of vvriting, if there be any thing vvorth the accepting, as I hope and am
persuaded thou shall find them not altogether barin* though the homlinesse of
exhortation and baseness of style may want plausibilitie to some, yet the
matter will savor comfortably to those which are seasoned with grace, and in
whom God has begun in deed a true Christian calling and humbled in a true
sight of themselves, so as they are able to surueie their own hearts, and to
discry their wants and infirmities, The first part of the chapter the calling
of the church or faithful.
and are therewithal careful to make supply of their wants by thirsting
after grace and the means whereby the same is offered and conveyed into the
faithful. For my labor was (in the handling of this fifth Chapter of the
CANTICLES) to lay forth as I could the calling whereby Christ calls his
Church and faithful to the participation of his heavenly riches, and the suite
which he makes to be entertained of his Church, with some reasons of weight
annexed unto his suite, to make it the more forcible, that men might be made
privy unto the means of their calling, which is the first part of the Chapter
in general. Then secondly I have noted how the faithful come on by degrees
and in what manner they obey their Christian calling, The second part, the
manner of their coming on or obeying of their calling.
what stovve proceedings they make, what lets they meet withal, and how they
hang of and on a long time with the Lord or ever they conclude and make up the
match with him in their hearts. Now though these things are displayed in
figures and presented to us in dark speeches by SOLOMON, yet shall we by the
grace of God see the sense, meaning and use of them by the Scriptures. In these
two parts of this chapter with the particulers that shall be noted out of them in
the process of the matter, I doubt not but whosoever shall read with a single
eye unto the end, shall find both instruction and much comfort to his soul
and conscience therein. For in the first Sermon and part of the second, the
suite of Christ calling his Church to obedience and to the pertaking of his
grace, is handled with such reasons alleged by him, as might move any
tractable nature to yield unto his suite. The other three Sermons with most of
the second, are spent in shevving the manner how the godly come on in their
calling and how they obey. First the lets which the saints of God meet withal.
And first the manifold lets and incumbraunces both at home in themselves and
abroad in others, which fetter and tie the children of God are discovered, how
hardly and slowly they proceed in their christian course, yea, how long or
they enter into it, till the Lord as it were force them forward and find them
out in their delays. Having in themselves so many pulbackes lurking in their
own nature, First lets in our selves.
which make their hearts so drovvzie and vntovvard, as they seek shifts to
^oorde of the Lord and not to aunsvvere their inward calling, and when they
are coming on they find them selves vnfi^te, slovve and unapt even to those
duties which they desire heartilye to perform, whereby they feel sometime
this discommoditie, that when they seek after Christ Jesus, coveting to be
refreshed and satisfied with his Love, they find him as it were stepped
aside, as though the Lord absented him self from them, had rejected them and
would not be found of them. For the Clouds of the infirmities of the
Saints of GOD are so great sometimes in their own sight (when they are
truly humbled) and so thick that they blem sh the sight of Gods favor, so
as they can not discrye the brightness thereof, at times when they covet most
to feel it. Yea when they groan in the secrets of their hearts for it unto
God, calling after him by Prayer, being Suitors for it a long time between
hope and despair, not feelinge the comfort of his favor but suspecting
rather, when yet they are in best state: yea, in best assurance of his grace
(though they feel it not for the time). Since they retain a true heartye and
unfeigned desire, to taste of that favor which for the time they can not
feel. For that desire after his favor with a loathing of our selves for
sin, is an infallible argument of the interest which the Spirit of God has
in the believers. Especially when that desire inforceth them to use the means
wherebye God offers himself unto us. Namely to hear the word preached
where God is residente with his perver, and to pray often and heartilye,
Math. 18.^0.
for to such God promises him se fe to be present. Thus it pleases the
Lord to exercise his Saints by holding aloof from them sometime, that they
might be made priuye to their own infirmityes, and might see the lettes
that lie hid in them selves which hinder them, and so labor to shun them.
Which things the second Sermon chiefly does handle. The third Sermon spends
it self partly in laying forth the let, 2. Lets abroa^e in others.
which the faithful find abroad in others, whereby satan seeks to
discourage them, by the reproach of the wicked, by the contempt of the
world, and envy of the malicious and spightfull adversaries. Which albeit
they shrewdly dismay the Saints of God for a time, yet in the end they shall
see by the example of the spouse how to ouerstride all stumbling blocks For God
causes the faith of his children to break out so much the more, how much the
more it is impugned A second circumstance of the manner of the coming on of the
fa^thful is also there noted, namely how they recover their zeal and stir up
themselves to a more diligent inquiring after Christ, when they see what lets
there are in themselves and in other, 2. The recovering of the zeal of the
faithful notwithstanding lets.
which would defeat them of the benefit of Christ Jesus their eternal lover.
VVherby they break out into a famous descr^ption of Christ Jesus, alluring
others thereby to h ue part with them in him, And in the fourth sermon is set
down the great fruit and Senesit that comes to the church and faithful, by
the mutual profession, conference and commending of the graces of God one to
another. How other by that means are drawn on to the Lord, Zac. 8.22.23.
as was prophesied of the Church of the Gentiles that they should flock to
the Jews, and associate themselves to the Church when they should here that
God was with them. The fifth and last sermon shows the conclusion of the
whole, how the church and spouse of Christ Jesus (namely the true believers),
does assure her self of the love of Christ toward her, 3. The conclusion
of the match 1. The unity between Christ and the faithful.
when thee feels the Testimonies of his residence in her, in which conclusion
is matter of most singular comfort. First the unity whereby Christ and the
faithful become one so as they can never be severed, is comfortably I hope
(though plainly) handled, where the godly may see how to be assured that they
are one with Christ even in this life, and so co^seque^tly after a sort one
with God himself, that the faithful ca^nnot be cut of or utterly severed from
him, so long as God himself and Christ remains Secondly the certainty of
perseverance, 2. The certainty of the salvation of the believers and their
perseverance.
and of the salvation of the saints of God, whereby they may in some measure
assure themselves of their salvation even in this life, is at large proved,
against the assertion of the Papists, and against all the replies that our
nature makes to des^a^^^s of the comfort of that assurance. VVh^ch last sermon
let me desire thee to read (good christian) with the spirit of sobernes and
judgment Which I have only written for the comfort of the afflicted
conscience. Yet so that the enemies of grace and the Libertines I hope shall
have small advantage thereby to so^th them selves in their loose Liberty: but
rather matter to humble them selves, yea even to condemn themselves if God
smite them with the Spirit of judgment. Thus have I breefly given thee a
taste (christian reader) of the pryncipal matters handled in larger
circumstances in this little volume, persuading my self both of thy diligence
in perusing them to the end, and of thy accepting in good worth and favorable
construing of this work, as also of thy moderation and equity of mind, in
casting away all sinister affections in reading thereof, fith I commit my self
to the judgment of those that are neither ignorant nor malicious.

And now to conclude, commending thee unto God and to the word of his grace,
which is able to build further and to give thee an inheritance among all them
that are sanctified, I humbly beseech the Lord our God even the God of peace
that he will make thee perfect in all good works to do his will, working in
thee that which is pleasant in his sight through Jesus Christ. To whom be
praise for ever and ever. Amen.

Thine in the Lord, B. Andrews.

Certain very worthy, Godly and profitable Sermons, upon the songs of Solomon.
FOR so much as (right dearly beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ) by ye
providence of God, I am come among you at this time, where I am likely to stay
a few days: I thought good as my manner is, to spend the time in bestowing on
you some portion of such Talentes, as the Lord in some measure has enriched
me with all. My purpose is therefore, (the Lord ayding me with his holy spirit,
in this so holy and weighty a work, as the preaching of his sacred word is)
to handle unto you for some good considerations, the fifth Chapter of the
excellent songs of Solomon, with the two first verses of the sixth Chapter, as
it is read in the common translation: but I read them with the fifth chapter,
for the causes that shall be alleged when I come to the handling of them, the
Chapter follows to this effect.

Canticles
5.
1 I Am come into my garden, my Sister, my spouse: I gathered my myrrh with my
spice: I ate mine honye comb with mine bony, I drank my wine with my milk:
eat, O friends, drink, and make you merry, O well-beloved.

2 I sleep, but mine heart waketh, it is the voice of my well-beloved that
knocks, saying, Open unto me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for
mine head is full of dew, and my locks with the drops of the night.

3 I have put of my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how
shall I defile them?

4 My well-beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and mine heart was
affectioned toward him.

5 I rose up to open to my well-beloved, and mine hands did drop down myrrh,
and my fingers pure myrrh upon the handles of the bar.

6 I opened to my well-beloved: but my well-beloved was gone, and past: mine heart
was gone when he did speak: I sought him, but I could not find him: I called
him, but he answered me not.

7 The watchmen that went about the city, found me: they smote me and wounded
me: the Watchmen of the walls took away my veil from me.

8 I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my well-beloved, that you
tell him that I am sick of love.

9 O the fairest among women, what is thy well-beloved more then other
well-beloved? what is thy well-beloved more then a another lover, that thou do so
charge us.

10 My well-beloved is white and ruddie, the cheifest of ten thousand.

11 His head is as fine Gold, his locks curled and black as a Raven.

12 His eyes are like doves upon the rivers of waters, which are washed with
milk, and remain by the full vessels.

13 His cbeeks are as a bed of spices, and as sweet flowers, and his lips
like lilies dropping down pure myrrh.

14 His bands as ringes of gold, set witb the cbrysolite, his belly like white
yuorie covered with saphirs,

15 His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold: his
countenance as Lebano^, excellent as the Cedars.

16 His mouth is as sweet things, and be is wholly delectable: this is my
well-beloved, and this is my lover, O daughters of Jerusalem.

17 O the fairest among women, whither is thy well-beloved gone? whither is thy
well-beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with thee?

Canticles. 6.
1 My well-beloved is gone down into his garden to the beds of spices, to feed
in the gardens, and to gather lillies.

2 I am my welbeloueds, and my well-beloved is mine, who feedetb among the
lillies.

THAT wise and excellent man Solomon King of peace and righteousness: who was a
Figure of Christ, as he wrote many worthy Proverbs, pithy and weighty
sentences, and many things of great wisdom: so among the rest, he wrote these
excellent songs, in which he does amiably, pleasauntly, sweetly, and
comfortably, by alligoricall, and parabolicall speeches, cipher out and
describe unto us, the pure, free, perfect, eternal and constant love of Christ
Jesus, toward his Church, and every faithful soul, with all his incomparable
and heavenly riches, wisdom, beauty, and personnage: as also the love of the
Church toward him, and what great and princely benefits she reapeth by him.
For Solomon in his marriage with the daughter of Pharaoh, in all his wisdom,
government, and riches, supported the person of Christ Jesus: as in the 45.
Psalm. is manifest. Now after many things mentioned before in this book, which
were between Christ and his spouse, in discovering their love one to the
other, with many other circumstances, which the Tert it self shall yield unto
you: in this Chapter, Solomon declares how Christ calls his spouse, making
liberal and princely offers unto her, earnestly suing for entertainment, using
many reasons to further his suit, and many tokens of his love and good will, to
obtain the favor of his spouse. Which calling of Christ, we had need to be
made acquainted withal, that we may be careful to embrace, love and obey him.
Also, of the other side, he lays forth unto us comfortably, how the Church
comes on by degrees, and what lets she met with all in her beginnings, within
and with out, at home and abroad, in her self and in others: yet in the end,
ouerstrideth all lets, and sequestreth her self from the world, cares, and
all hurtful hindrances: inquiring seriously after her love of others, and
conferring with her fellow virgins of his person, and excellency, of his
wisdom, doctrine, and of the place where he haunted: by which means they
were allured to seek after Christ with her: from which circumstances, flows
wholesome and comfortable instructions for us in our times. Lastly, he shows
how the spouse assures her self of the love of Christ, craving his
everlasting presence, and satisfiying her self in his love. So as I will
consider the whole sum of this chapter in two principal parts and after the
particular branches, The Chapter divided into two principal parts.
issuing out of these general parts, as in the process of the matter I shall
note unto you. First in the 1. and 2. verses of her calling: which continues
it self from the third verse to the end, which also shall be considered in
several parts, according to the nature of the text, when we come to handle it.
Now to speak in order of the words themselves.

Verse 1.
I am come into my Garden, (my Sister my spouse) I gathered my myrrh with my
spice, I ate my bony comb with my bony, I have drunk my Wine with my Milk,
Eat O friends, drink and make you merry, O well-beloved. This speech is an
answer and reply to a former suite and supplication of the spouse or church,
which she had made unto Christ, that he would vouchsafe to come and be
resident in his garden, which is his Church, and that the comfortable wind of
his spirit, might blow upon it, to prosper it, as in the end of the fourth
chapter, ver. 16. appears. Not that Christ is first sought of his church
before he seeks that. For in ye 1. Chap. the church confesses she can not
come unless she be drawn, but being once drawn on, and illumined with Gods
Spirit, then her will is reformed, and her desires sanctified, to long after
God and Christ. So that after she had somewhat seen into the excellency of
Christ, she coueteth to feel him more thoroughly, and to have him make his
abode with her. For the godly ever groan and sigh, both for the increase of
graces already received, and also for new graces daily to be distilled into
their hearts. Christ therefore answers, that he has taken possession of his
Garden, even of his heavenly kingdom, and that he is very rich, and able to
pleasure al his friends, suitors, and cliants: there wants nothing unto him,
but he has al things in abundance, and without measure. Wherefore he
replieth with a new suit upon his spouse and church, that she will take part
with him of those his heavenly riches and spiritual treasures, giving also
entertainmente to his own personage, who had taken such pain, and ventred him
self to so many discommodities for his Churches sake, as after follows in the
second verse. For Solomon as I said, Moses
was a figure of Christ in his marriage with the daughter of Pharaoh, as Psalm.
45. Now the true husband of the Church is Christ Jesus, and none other: for he
is that Bridegroom that has the bride. John. 3.29
Whosoever therefore usurps the head ship of the Church, besides Christ the
true husband, is a thief and enemy to the spouse. The Pope therefore is a
false husband, and wrongfully lays claim to the Church, and all his children
are but bastardes. But Solomon here figuratively describing Christ, to enter
into his garden: understands both that he has taken possession of his
heavenly Kingdom and riches, where he prepares heavenly and eternal banquets
for his saints and elect: and also that he is come into his Church and
inheritance upon earth, to make proffer of al these his riches and royal
treasures to his saints, that they may participate with him in his glory. To
this end Solomon puts upon Christ the person of a Suitor, or woer: and
describes the Church under the person of a maiden or virgin, longing after
her love. This 1. verse. and the 2. contains the first part of the Chapter,
the first part of the chapter, standing in two points.
which concerns the suite of Christ, whereby he calls his Church and
faithful. This suite I will give unto you after this manner. First the reasons
The reasons.
which are 4. These shall be considered in their place Secondly, the suite it
self, or calling The suite it self.
which because it is intermedled between the reasons. I will note them to you as
they lie, for I will not tie my self to any prezise order, but note the matter
it self, as may be most forcible to move us, and most fit for the sense of
the place, and edifying of you. The first reason.
He first begins with reasons which he propounds, as matter to move his
Spouse withal, and to make a more easy way to his suite. The first reason,
he sets down in the form of a preface or narration, which is drawn from
his excellent dignity, prerogative, and eternal riches, which he has already
received. I am come into my Garden, I gathered my Myrrh. etc. He propounds as
I say, his reasons, and first, that he has fair possessions, and a rich and
princely kingdom, furnished with all heavenly and spiritual commodities, and he
offers the pleasures of this his kindome unto his Church on earth, which he
after again calls his garden. For I cannot understand this entrance into his
garden only of Christ's heavenly residence in glory, whither he is ascended
and has taken possession of life, but even of his kingdom also, which he
exercises over his saints on earth. Because it is an answer and grant to the
former suite of the Church that he would come to his garden, even to his
Church on earth, by his word and spirit. Hitherto tends the Metaphor of
descending, chapter 6. ver. 2.10. So that albeit Christ be resident in the
heavens, enriched and dignified with all power of things in heaven and earth,
yet is he present with his Church on earth in spirit, and in the ministry of
his word and Sacraments, as the printes of the soals of his feet. Ezech. 42.7.
And so does set abroach all his heavenly riches to us, by the preaching of his
Gospel, entreating us to receive them. Also we see that usually Christ's
kingdom and Church on earth, is figured by a Garden, field or yard, and not
his heavenly kingdom of glory, so as the Metaphors or similies used of the
holy Ghost else where make plain this matter. For the Church is compared to a
vineyarde, Isai. 5.1. Iere. 2.21. Math. 21.33. Mar. 12.1. By which places we
find yt the church of God which is on ye earth is compared often to a garden or
yard. So as I conclude by these borrowed speeches of the scripture, that ye
garden does not only import the possession of his heavenly kingdom, but even
also his church on earth, which God gave his son an inheritance: even to the
utmost parts thereof, both Jews and Gentiles, to whom he offers his riches,
and communicates his heavenly inheritance to the faithful which they
apprehend here by faith, and after shall fully possess in heaven with Christ.
Christ here protests himself to have all true felicity, and therefore
persuades his Spouse to open unto him, and participate his graces: and sure it
is, this cannot but be a great reason to move us to embrace him, since he is
chief heir of al things, it is a reason which earthly woers use much, if they
can report of their great revenues, riches, possessions, rich friends:
especially if they are already in possession, and their inheritance come to
them already, then it carries some sway withal, to move their lovers to cast
some liking on them. So Christ is here discribed unto us as a Suitor, which
stands not at the courtesy of his friends, but is already invested and
installed into his royal kingdom: and his inheritance is already delivered
into his hands, by his heavenly father. This reason, me thinks should weigh
very much with us, for it is forcible, if we have any hearts to be moved.
This reason is amplified by particulars: afterward when he says, I have
gathered my myrrh with my spice, I baue ate my bony comb with my honey, etc

There is interlaced certain titles of love, as my sister, my dove, which
include part of another reason, which titles, we will consider of afterward,
when we come to the mention of many titles given to the spouse in the 2, verse
by myrrh, spice, honey, wine, and milk. Solomon figureth and imports unto us,
heavenly and spiritual riches. For as these things are delicate, and
nourishable to ye body, so ye word and the sweet promises of life, are meat
drink and all necessaries to the soul. Therefore the spirit of God under
these earthly benefits, commends the heavenly and spiritual. As Esaias 55.1.2.
The graces of the spirit of god brought to us by Jesus Christ, and conuaied
into the faithful by the preaching of the Gospel, are called waters, wine,
honey, bread. And Proverb. 9.1. Wisdom is compared to a Queen, keeping open
house, opening all her Treasures, drawing her wines, preparing her table,
bringing forth her treasures, and calling all to participate with her. Also
Christ himself, John. 7.37. offers to the thirsty, to drink even of the
waters of life, which after is interpreted, John. 7. ver. 39. to be meant of the
graces of the spirit of God. Thus we plainly see by the borrowed speeches of
the scriptures, that by these earthly benefits and commodities, are figured
heavenly and spiritual graces. For the same that meat drink and other
pleasures is to the body, the same is the word and the riches thereof to the
soul. Christ is else where compared to a Kings son that married and bids
guess to his wedding. Math. 22.2. See then the force of this reason I pray
you, that Christ entreats to be received, since he has taken possession of
all riches and wants nothing, but is able every way to do us good. If this
reason can prevail with me^ in earthly matters and benefits? Oh what shame is
it that the same should not prevail with us in heavenly suites, wherein
stands the life of our souls. So God reasons with Israel many times for
his benefits, that he is able to pleasure them, therefore they ought to admit
of him to be their God. Thus Christ hers after a sort boasts of his riches,
as suitors make many brags of their wealth, but Christ has all true wealth in
deed, so as we may rest on his word. It is sure a strong argument to persuade
us (if we saw into it aright) to grant to his love, since so rich a suitor
vouchsafes to make offer unto us. Neither does he require any rich dowry at
our hands, only to find a faithful and obedient spouse of us, which he himself
also works in his. Thus christ offers liberally of his riches to al his
people, to allure the^ to take part with him, and to be married unto him: for
as I said, Solomon in ye person of a husband or suitor, and of a wife or mayde^
as lovers, describes the love which is between Christ and his church. Now
Christ comes into his garden and church on earth diverse ways, to reveal and
discover his heavenly riches to us. First by himself in his own person in ye
dais of his flesh, and by his own ministry enjoined him of his father, he
came to redeem and save his spouse being lost, and to feoft her into his
eternal inheritance laid up in the heavens, having also committed the
evidences and free deed of his gift to his Church: namely, his word. Also he
comes by his Ministers, whom he sends as spokesmen and friends, for so
John calls himself the Bridegromes friend. Io. 3.29 Albeit then, that Christ
be ascended in to his heavenly palace, yet he cease not daily to become a
Suitor unto us by his preachers, discovering by his Gospel, Col. 1.27.
al his heavenly and glorious riches, to cause us to be enamored upon him. For
as the Suitors and Woers boast them selves of their wealth, lands, riches, etc.
that they might the sooner speed, and make large offers of feoftments into
lands, to obtain those whom they love: so our Christ sets out him self as
a very rich and wealthy woer, who is able to bestow a very rich dowry on his
wife, who also comes of a very noble famous and honorable parentage and rich
friends, is himself a rich heir, yea the only heir of all things, and yet
most sweetly, lovingly, and favorably abaseth him self, to match with a
poor, miserable, naked, and despised maiden, having no friends, void of
succor, out of apparel, diseased, and helpless, who Ezekiel. 16, in the day of
her birth was destitute, no eye pitied her, cast out in the open fields to
the contempt of her person, in the day of her birth: yea left in her own blood
naked and despised. But this sweet and merciful suitor, touched with the bowels
of pity, had compassion on her, when she could not pity her self (oh
doleful estate and desperate) but Oh gracious and liberal love, which promised
life to the dead, comfort to the distressed, and beautified her with his own
garments and jewels, yea visited her in the time of love, coming in his own
person to woo her unto himself. See then the exceeding love of Christ Jesus
toward us miserable and unworthy wretches, inuicting and calling us, to the
participation of his riches so incomparable: but we are scorneful and high
minded, which play as the coye Dames which are sullen and self willed, that
say many ways, and love many suitors. Yea we foord of Christ that most loving
and gracious woer, setting light by him, as one to homely and base, to grant
our love unto. Oh unkindness intolerable, oh intractable frowardness, oh
damnable refusal of so healthful offers, yet such is our nicenes, that we
hold aloof from so happy offers, and yet persuade our selves, we shall speed
well enough. Can it be that the Lord will take this at our hand, that when he
has offered to match his son so basely for our benefit, we should hold scorn
of his merciful offers? no no, he will surely revenge it upon us. Well, we see
yt Christ is set out unto us, as one yt has eat, drunk, and gathered al his
commodities (yt is) as one yt has possession already of all things, is under
no man's gardenership, and liberally offers to participate the same to his
church. Eat O friends, drink, and be merry, O well-beloved. We see here the
franck liberality of Christ, who hourdeth not up to himself, but largely
gives forth unto others, yea, he cheereth up his guests most comfortably:
noting that as Christ feeds his Church on earth, with the spiritual
dainties of his word, etc. So after this life, he calls them to the
participation of his heavenly and eternal joys. Eat, drink, etc. This is part
of the suit, containing matter of exhortrtion, to move the spouse to
participate of the heavenly riches, which he offers unto her, and conueyeth
them into the hearts of the believers, by the preaching of his word, whereby he
assures them of the right title of life, communicating the riches of his grace
and life unto them, and we eat and taste of these heavenly benefits here on
earth by faith, so that unless we thorough faith receive the word, and feed
of it, we can have no part with Christ in his riches. So also, through faith we
feed upon Christ in deed, in the Sacrament of the supper, and are nourished
by his body and blood, into a new life of holiness, and righteousness here: and
unto eternal life in the resurrection of the just: Wherefore Christ is
described here, as one yt banqueteth his spouse. But as these are words that
do contain part of his suite: so also, they include a second reason which he
uses, The second reason.
and it is drawn from his liberal kindness and free heartedness, in offering
to participate his riches to his spouse. For if Christ had been never so able
to pleasure his church, or never so rich and glorious: yet if we were not sure
that he would be liberal and depart from his riches, but that he kept al to
himself, it booted us nothing: but since Christ abounding in all rich treasures
and heavenly, does also depart as it were from them, to employ his riches on
us: this should greatly persuade with us, me thinks to yield to his request,
and take this frank offer at his hands. So that all his speech is full of
reasons and arguments to persuade. But pity it is to see, how worldly men are
blockish at these things, ye we al show our contempt and neglect of these rich
offers of the Lord toward us. But what excuse can we forge, to shift of this
so wonderful a love, that we should set so light by it? Is it because he
comes no more in his own person unto us? Why, the Heavens must contain him
til he come to judgment. Acts. 3.21. What is it, because he is poor, of low
degree or mean personage? his riches are without price, his parentage is of
God, his person is most amiable. What then? is it because he speaks by
others as his spokesmen, and those men thraught with infirmities as our selves?
In deed this sticks in the stomach of many, for they contemn ye word, which
is ye suit of Christ, because it is spoken by men: so they esteem the sacred
word as of men, and not of God. Surely, he could have sent the troup of his
mighty and glorious Angels to make his match, but he has himself spoke in
his own person first, and now continues his suite to us in his behalf, by
his ministers and faithful servants. For he has put his treasure in earthy
vessels, that the excellencye of that power might be of God and not of us. 2.
Cor. 4.7. Also, We are ambassadors in Christ's steed, as though God did beseech
you through us, so we pray you in Christ's steed, to be reconciled unto God.
2, Cor. 5.20. So as the Lord has ordained Pastors and teachers in his church,
even of men in his own name. Paul he likewise labored to present the people a
pure virgin unto God. 2. Cor. 11.2. Let us not therefore (my brethren) despise
ye means which God has ordained to save us by, and to make up the match
between his son and us in our hearts, least we provoke the Lords
displesure. If some great Prince should send of his nobles as ambassadors unto
any of us, or to a man of poors estate, to beg his daughter for his only
son, meaning to prefer her so honorably, and his son loving her
entirely: were it not great discourtesye to refuse? and would he not easily
grant to it? so since God sends out his ministers to beg our souls for his
dear son, and requires that we will bestow our selves upon him: were it not
a great contempt against God, and a worse danger to our own souls? if we
shall refuse so gracious an offer. Now as God vouchsafes this honor to his
ministers: as to be Suitors for his son to his Church, to call them to the
heavenly banquet: So they must not labor to win the Church to them selves,
and to prefer their own glory. As the Pope which would have the Church at his
commandment, and so commit whooredome against Christ. Or as many vain
glorious teachers, which preach them selves and not Christ. Also seducers,
sectuaries, etc. They all play as the false hearted man, which being put in
trust to speak to a maiden for another, do woo and make suite for them
selves, to turn the liking of the maiden to their own persons. Thus many
teachers play the wantons with the Spouse of Christ Jesus, when they should
learn of Paul, to present her perfect unto Christ. Howbeit the church of our
times, has many wanton Suitors that woo for them selves, and not for Christ.
It is requisite, that since the ministers of the word, are to speak for so
noble and heavenly a personage, who is a rare Phoenix, and the only Son of
the living God, sent to his chosen Spouse upon earth to offer the match of
life, to unfold and discover all the secrets of his heavenly and eternal
love, spiritual and princely riches of his grace: that they deal in these
weighty matters, most reverently, wisely, religiously, carefully and
faithfully, to speak the Gospel and message of Christ as they ought to speak
it, and not to utter themselves in preaching of Christ. For many which preach
the truth after a sort, yet ah alas, nothing regard the weight of this so
honorable and holy embassage. For there are some which think Christ too base
to be preached simply in him self, and therefore mingle with him too too much
the wisdom of man's eloquence, and think that Christ comes nakedly,
unless clothed with vain ostentaion of words. Others esteem him too
homely, simple and unlearned, unless he be beautified and blazed over with
store of Greek or Laten sentences in the pulpits: some reckon of him as
solitary, or as a private person with out honor and pomp, unless he be
brought forth of them very solemnly, accompaned and countenaunced, with the
ancient Guard of the fathers and Doctors of the Church to speak for him: or
else he must be glosed out and painted with the frooth of Philosophi, Poetry or
such like. And so regard not to preach Christ crucified to the Jews. A
stumbling block to the Grecians folishnes, but to them which are called both
Jews and Grecians, Christ is the power of God, and the wisdom of God. 1. Cor.
1.23.24. I do not speak against learning, wisdom, the knowledge of tongues,
or the fathers, abolishing all use of them, but highly esteming of the first
as the Lords gifts and graces, and reuerencing the Fathers as worthy
instruments which the Lord used for their time. And all these are necessary,
time, person, place, and fit occasion serving. But I would gladly Christ might
appear in his power by the pure handling of the Gospel, though it be counted
foolish preaching of the world. 1. Cor. 1.21. Yet it is the ordinary means
appointed to save them that believe. And sure, I cannot otherwise think of
many, which study to preach them selves, and to have their gifts, (yea some
times those gifts which they have not) to be known, rather then the power of
God in his Gospel, then of Babes and young children; which having any gay thing
about them, that they themselves think highly on, think all men should delight
in their gayes: therefore they are always pointing at their gay brooches,
points, laces, etc. showing every one where they are gay. So these men which
preach them selves, are always poyncting at their gaye eloquence or gifts,
which they set more by, then the pure handling of the word. But we are in
Christ's steed, to make suite for him to the souls of men: wherefore we must
deal faithfully with him, For a wicked messenger faelleth into evil, but a
faithful ambassador is preservation. Proverb. 13.17. I therefore (beloved)
though most unworthy to open my mouth in Christ's behalf unto you, yet as one
appointed a suitor in the Lords cause and his Churches, do beseech you in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, that you would be won unto him: espousing both body
and soul to be at his heavenly pleasure. O, despise not so gracious offers.
Let it not be your pride to say often nay to the Lords suite, it is more
courtesy to let him speed at the first. And though we have heretofore listened
to the suite of Satan, and he has had his pleasure at our hands, which might
give the Lord just cause to cast us off, and not to continue any more his
suite to us: yet if we will return from our sinful love of Satan and sin,
the world and our own selves, to match with Christ Jesus, and be governed
under him: he will vouchsafe to embrace us, and receive us to favor. Oh,
therefore good people, as you love your own souls, let me entreat, and in
entreating let me obtain, that you will unfeignedly love Christ Jesus again.
I may not leave you til I obtain at your hands. O that I could so undermine
your hearts and use my speech so, as I might prevail with you, and speed for
so gracious a suitor and lover. Alas (my dear brethren) we have served our own
lusts too too long already. For is it not sufficient for us, that we have
spent ye time past of the life after the lust of ye Gentiles, walking in
wantonness, lusts, drunkenness, pride, selfeloue, covetousness, gluttony,
drinkings, and such other abominations? 1. Pet. 4.3. Let the rest of our life
be consecrate unto God, for we have played the filthy harlots too much, and
have mocked with the Lord a long time. We have made many fayer promises and
shows of love, but in vain some of us, for we have turned to our own
filthiness again, and not lived chaste in our souls before the Lord, so as it
is wonder that he has not given us a bil of diuorcement all this time, and
turned us out of doors. Let us therefore humble our selves, before the bill of
diuorcement be published against us. Alas, let not the love of this world,
though it seem never so gorgious rich and precious in our eyes, deceive us, so
that our love should be set upon that, and Christ should be gainesayd, who
has been at great cost with us. Some refuse to join with Christ, because
they are wedded to their pleasures and profits, and are loath to be weaned from
them. Some think Christ to homely and plain for them, and not gallant enough
to maintain them in their pride, in their great ruffes, gorbellies, broadred
hear, and a thousand such vanities which hinder them from matching with
Christ. The courtlike minions drowned in their pleasures, are ashamed of the
playnes of Christ, for they that are in kings housen wear soft apparel, but
Christ is without such pomp. Othersome refuse him because he is deformed and
worn with afflictions, being loath to undergo the cross with him. Othersome
embrace him willingly, so far as their pleasures and commodities reach, and
as they may live easily, but when Christ looks to have their love in trouble,
in poverty, in shame, in dishonor, then they leave him, as most faithless and
shameless strompetes. Other some use Christ as a band to cover their unchaste
and filthy life, and as a cloak to cover their uncleanness, when in
professing of him, they think to set a good face on the matter, and
countenance themselves by him, though they privily nourish and pamper most vile
and beastly affections, yea vglesome monsters at home, as a harlot which takes
a husband is bear his name as an outward honesty, and yet let out her body most
shamelesly to other men, who cutteth off her self by her unfaithfulness from
her husband: So shall al such have a bill of diuorcement, and be utterly cast
off from Christ Jesus, unless they repent. Christ I say is come into his
Garden by his ministers, and ouerlooketh his Church, laboring by his word to
draw men more near unto him, for his word is his errande or suite, which he
makes to us, and the free deed of feofment which he makes to his Spouse of
his inheritance: so as we must by faith set our hand to it, doing all services
and loyalties due to the Lord, who holds the prerogative over us. Yet we
refuse to make sure this our estate unto us, or to match with Christ,
affiauncing our selves wholly unto him, both body and soul to be sanctified, to
the use of holiness and righteousness. Surely there is just cause that we
should yield to this suite, to eat of his pleasures with him. to make merry
with Christ in this his roial banquet, and to match our selves to him. In deed
there is a great inequality in the match, that the son of God should come
down from heaven, endued in our ^^^she, to espouse him self to man's soul,
which was forfeited into the hand of satan and hell: so as modesty might seem
to be an excuse to hold us back, but it is not that which hinders us, but
even pride, selfeloue, contempt ignorance, worldly mindedness and such like.
Cast off therefore al lets, and yield over your selves to the Lord, since he
having all riches, offers to participate the same with us, and entreats us
so to do, by his servants. If we seek for a rich match: Lo, he is most rich.
If for honor and dignity, he is most honorable and king of al kings. If for
pomp, he has all the glory of his father. If for beauty and person, he is most
beautiful and personable. If for pleasure, he has all true pleasures. If for
ease, he offers true rest and ease, even to our souls. If we seek to match
with an honest stock, who is more honest, gracious, loving, and holy then the
son of God? Who looks not to our person, beauty, riches, stock, or pare^tage
(for we come al off the rotten, poor, beggarly, deformed, Psalm. 44.3.
and defiled race of Adam) but beholds us in him self, and as the Hebrwes
speak, pleases him self in us and so sanctifies us in him self, to become a
noble generation and kingly priesthood: 1. Pet. 2.9.10
yea he has mercy on her yt was not pitied. Hosh. 2.23. Thus we see, that
Christ in whom all riches are without measure, is not a niggarde to keep the^
to himself, but most frankly and freely he imparteth the^ al to his church, and
participateth, even his own glory with his saints: so as he has given charge
to his angels to become ye princely guard of his queen (which is the company of
the believers) whom the Lord sanctifies to be holy without spot and wrinckle.
For we must not look to be at our own will, and follow our own minds, but
must be at the commandment of our spiritual husband Christ Jesus, to do his
will, renouncing our own will and corrupt affections, and become new
creatures. For they yt are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the lusts
and desires thereof: Gal. 5.24.
and let him yt is in Christ become a new creature. 2. Cor. 5.17.
And this is it, that frayeth men from Christ, because they are loath to under
go his burden and yoke, to cast of the world, and leuing themselves behind
the^ to follow Christ. And true it is, until we are truly won unto christ, and
affianced to him by faith, forsaking our own selves, we are in the state of
damnation. Let us therefore upon pain of damnation, forsake our selves, the
world, Satan, sin, and our own worthiness, and stand to the Lords courtesy:
yea, let us wed our selves to him, serving him with obedient hearts,
preserving our thoughts, affections and desires chaste unto him, not entangled
with the love of the world, our own pleasures, and filthy lusts. For Christ
loves not to match with the soul that is set in the love of this world, or
where uncleanness is resident. Oh therefore I pray you, let us join hands
and hearts with him, let us even this day make a new covenant with him: yea
let every one of us in our souls mourn and lament, that we have let out our
lusts thoughts, affections, and members to Satan heretofore, and played the
harlots with him: I say, let this day be a witness with us, that we have
affianced our hearts unto Christ. O let me not speak or entreat in vain, it
will be your own hurt dear brethren. We can except nothing against this
heavenly suitor, neither in his person, parentage, riches, love, nor in the
couenaunts which he makes with us. He may except many things against us, but
passing over al occasions, he freely loved us when we were his enemies: he
chose us before we were, and visited us when we were miserable harlots and
outcastes, redeemed us when we were captiued of Satan, washed us and bathed us
in his own precious blood, when we were grievously defiled and desperately
forlorn, he trymmed us with his own beauty and righteousness, when we were
vglesome in our selves, clothed us in his own garments, when we were naked.
Finally he decked us, that he might love his own goods in us, and came in the
time of wooing in his own flesh: pitched the field against satan and sin,
who had taken us captive, and to whom we had given our selves as slaves, and so
as a valiant champion fought for his spouse, iustled with all the powers of
hell, Math. 16.
and shook the foundations of it, brake the iron gates thereof, that they
shall not prevail against his spouse, and brought us out from thence,
restoring us most wonderfully, even by his paineful death and blouddy passion.
Also he has left us pledges and pawnes of his love, and that he will return in
his time to take us home to his own heavenly palace. For his sacraments are
as rings and regal gifts, tokens, and remembraunces of his love, to bind us to
him again, who has so dearly redeemed and purchased us by a costly and
bloody price: so as he has left worthy remembrances of his valiant acts, and
noble exploites: yea his Royal Stratagemes, and princely policies, and
skilfulnesse to shift off all the fiery darts of the adversary, have easily
bewrayed them selves, who in that spiritual battle has foiled, nay clean
destroyed, and triumphed over al his and our enemies, having gotten a full
conquest and victory for his church and spouse. Thus this noble and ventrous
Knight, has dearly purchased a Spouse to him self. O wonderful love, O mercy
unspeakable, O invincible courage of an Heroical spirit. But ah alas, our
wilful and damnable frowardness, that yields not to this heavenly and loving
Suitor. If this will not move us, what will move us? If this causes not our
hearts to melt nothing can. Oh stony hearts harder then the flint, that are
not broken at this, and colder then the stone Chalazias (which the fire can not
heat) if this kindle not fervent love in our hearts again unto Christ. For
who can deny love to such a steadfast lover, or can say nay, to such a paineful
Suitor? Now therefore, if there be any Bowels of love in us (dear Christians)
let us be moved at this, and since he took such pain to win us most vile
and unworthy of his love, what if it cost us our pleasures, commodities, our
credit, our friends, yea or our life it self, to follow him? Let us not
strain courtesy at these things to loose so incomparable a Jewel.

It may be, here will be reply made ye I spend many words in vain, since no man
denies this suite, but all men plaucibly entertain Christ, and come to the
banquet of his word and Sacraments, etc. The worldly covetous man running
headlong after his profits, makes great account of Christ, that he shall
stand him in steed: the mere civil men also have this hope, they here his
word sometime at their leisure, they look for salvation in Christ only, and
so they diet them selves with Christ, thinking they make merry with him. So
the adulterers, murderers, deceivers, iesters, swearers, liars, railers,
contemners, drunkerds, proud men, belly Gods, Epicures, Athists, and such
others: they are content to aforde Christ a room in their mouths, and many
admit of his word to lie on their deskes, and scattered in their parlours,
desiring to be married and joined unto him, hoping to have life with him. So
that there is no man but will bid Christ welcome if it please him to math with
them. But I answer all that talk of Christ, all that kiss him, all that
smile on him, all that bid him welcome, and would have a good turn at his
hands, are not Christ's. For so long as we remain worldlinges, covetous, mere
civil men, adulterers, murderers, deceivers, iesters, swearers, liers,
raylers, contemners, drunkerds, proud men, belly Gods, epicures, Athists, etc.
1. Cor. 6.9.10. Ephe. 5.5. Gal. 5.19.20
We have no inheritance in the kingdom of God and Christ. And therefore
nothing to do with him For what agreement has righteousness with
unrighteousness, or what communion has light with darkness? What concord
has Christ with Belial? 2. Cor. 6.14.15.
Or the believer with the infidel, etc? We must therefore fly from at
appearaunce of evil. If we will have fellowship with Christ Jesus. For so long as
we are companions with evil men, delighting in their company, suffering evil
unrebuked in others, or nourishing evil in our selves: we have not truly
yielded unto this suite. Be not therefore companions with such, Ephe. 5.6. and
verse 11.
yea have nothing to do with the unfruitful works of darkness, but even
reprove them rather. Let no man therefore deceive him self, with vain hope
and speeches: for, for such things comes the wrath of God upon the Children
of disobedience. Ephe. 5.6.
Let us then have fellowship with Christ Jesus, eating and drinking of his
heavenly banquets, and making merry with him, that we may joy in the strength
of our salvation. This we see two of the reasons which Solomon uses, both as
arguments of persuasion, and also, as part of the suite which Christ makes to
his Spouse.

Now in this 2. verse before, Solomon does not set down any more reasons, or
go on forward in the suite: he interlaceth one circumstance of ye lets which
hindered the spouse in her coming on: (For I will not precisely draw every
circumstance to his own proper place in the division made, but note them as
the text most fitly gives occasion, and yet not altogether confusedly, nor
improper to the division it self which I set down before) I sleep (says she)
but my heart waketh, etc. As if she should say. These amorous speeches and
friendly offers of my love, do much affect me: so as I am forced to listen, but
yet as a far off, and as one in a dream or drouzie, having mine eyes heavy,
but my faith is not utterly extinguished, for that my heart is pricked and
moved at him, but I am so fettred with the things of this life, and my corrupt
nature lingereth about these earthly vanities, so that I am as in a sleep and
slumber, when my love speaks: For ye spouse complayneth of her untowardness,
finding fault with her self, and accusing her self of her flacknes. Solomon,
therefore here in the person of the spouse, discovers the estate of the
faithful, noting how hardly they are thoroughly brought on unto Christ, and how
long it is or ever we yield to his suite, so as he has much a do to get any
advantage at our hearts, they are so environed with the love of the things
of this life. For the world holds her own in us so long as it can, and we
naturally wedded thereunto, securely sleeping in the enticing and deceiuable
pleasures thereof, do suffer the vanities of this life, to seek too too deeply
into our bowels, for horor, promotions, dignities, titles, credit, riches,
possessions, and the company of those that we have pleasured in before our
calling, do make sore assaults upon men, that the lord cannot easily vndermind
them a long time. And what is the reason that men sleep in these earthly
pleasures and profits, even then when their hearts are by many privy motions
of the spirit, affectioned or moved toward Christ after a sort? Or why are
men so hindered from yielding wholly unto christ by these transitory things? For
sooth, because Satan abuses the lawful things of this life to poison man
withal. For under the title of lawfulnes, satan beguileth and bewitcheth the
hearts of men, to break forth into al intemperate use of profits and
pleasures, as thus: to eat, drink, to bye, sell, to exchange, to labor in a
trade, to marry, to provide necessaries of this life, to be in honor, to be
rich, to use profits and pleasures, to wear apparel, and such like, are
things in themselves lawful, now satan inueigleeh men, closely rounding them
in the ear, persuades them, that since they are lawful, men may use them at
their pleasure, and satisfy their destres in the^ to the full: thus he steals
the greatest part of men's hearts to ye world, crouding up the Lord, but in a
corner of their hearts, yea thrusts him altogether out sometimes, taking
their pennyworthos of the world, but letting the Lord and his kingdom fall to
the ground. Howbeit Christ teaches us to take another course, Math. 6.33.
First to seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and then
all other things shall be cast unto us. Also Paul teaches us to use these
things, as though we used them not, having our affections removed and freed
from them, least they become incombrances to fetter and cloy us, that we fail
in heavenly duties. Lo then, how ye saints of God also are many times holden a
loufe from following of Christ, and listening to the voice of his word, even
then, when their hearts linger after him. Thus have they lets in them selves
and untowardness to keep them from a choerful following of Christ. But we must
valiantly strive against these lets, and ouerstryde al stumbling blocks, to
hasten toward him whom we love. For we shall be sure to be holden back enough,
yea: even our selves find delays to drive off ye time in following, our God
calling us. For the pleasures and profits of this life do so ceaze upon our
affections, to take them up into the service of the world satan and sin,
that we have small lust to serve God as is required. Any of all the saints of
God can easily testify with me, that even when Christ has by the preaching of
his word somewhat drawn our hearts toward him, yet we make stay at every
small let, unless we are marvelous watchful over our selves. For how has the
Lord made suite to us, and presented it to our hearts, by many privy motions
of his spirit: which we quench again sometimes, having our hearts possessed
again with filthy lusts. We make many beginninges and commings on. But alas,
if satan make never so little suit to us in the behalf of our own lusts,
pleasures or profits, how soon are we a sleep at Christ's suit? but
marvelous waking unto the suit of Satan, though sometime the heart goes
against it. Some are loath to be weaned from their vain company, when they
have yet some lingering in their hearts after Christ. Some have much a do to
renounce special sins, that have deeply rooted and strongly ruled in their
nature before their calling. Othersome loath to yield up their pleasures,
gaminges, profits, riches, estimation, honor, promotions, etc. I mean not
that they should utterly cast off their honor, or calling, but renounce the
overmuch love of the^, which holds them from following of God sincerely, or
furthering of religion carefully. Othersome are holden a sleep in ye cares of
this life, some ouercharged with the troubles of a family and cross things in
their household, become drowzie and slack to listen unto Christ, so as many
step back again. If God call some ruffian, or famous wicked man, or one that
has been a companion of vain persons: then this comes into his head, if I
take this course, and follow the hearing of his word, and keep company with
the Godly, sure the world will point me out, I shall be laughed at of my
companions, and so shall become a sign to nod the head at amongst men. Thus
shame disputes with many men, when God begins to turn their hearts, and
to work in them a disliking of their former life, so as men aunsweare their
inward calling, but as men in a sleep and half amazed, til God work further
in them. Also, when God begins to frame the heart of some honorable or
worshipful man, to the obedience of his Gospel, to here it, and prefer the
preaching of it, then these replies are made of the world, which hold them in
a slumber for the time. Sir (say they) you shall loose your estimation in the
court, and among the great men, you shall not be so regarded as you have been:
such gravity and melancholic passions of sadness as the Gospel brings,
beseems not your honorable and worshipful estate. These are the engines of
satan, yea these are his charms whereby he labors to lull even the Godly a
sleep, that they might not cheerfully weight upon their calling. But the
saints of God, though in their beginninges, these things may somewhat weigh
with them for a time, yet certainly, if their hearts do truly lie after
Christ, they strive exceedingly with them selves by prayer unto God, till they
have gotten the mastery in these things.

My self (most miserable and wretched man that I am) have had good experience
of the dangerous pulbackes and lets, which lie hid in our nature to lull men a
sleep, and make them drouzie. For when my heart in the beginning of my
calling, began to yield toward the Lord, and to be somewhat wakened: then the
pleasures of sins past, the shame of reproaches which I saw to be uttered of
the world against the Godly, the baseness of the Gospel, the dangers of trials
in the professing of christ Jesus, the glittering and deceiuable pleasures of
this life, the holding of friendship with the world and worldly friends: but
especially the manifold dangers and intolerable waightines of this high
calling of the preaching of the word, to deal with it purely and sincerely, as
in the sight of God: from God through Christ, these things held tacke with me
a long time, and a thousand other things amazed me: so as I aunsweared my
calling at the first, but as one a stammed, or in a sleep or dream.

Let every man therefore among you in good earnest, deal with his own heart,
for it is full of deceitfulness. Every moving of the heart, and hopping for
joy after Christ, is not a right moving. For so he that received the seed
with joy. Math. 13.20. might have been in Christ, who yet vannished again.
Thou may think that thy heart is maruailous affectioned after Christ, and
that thou ioyest in him, when as thy affection truly tried, is altogether
carnal and filthy. Yea many no doubt persuade them selves, that they have
Christ sure in their hearts, that they are in his favor, that they are even
hugged in his arms, and that they shall be saved by him, as well as the best:
which yet never so much as truly knew Christ, nor tasted of him, and are
furthest off from being saved by him. A man would think (beloved) that there
could not be any such deceitfulnsse in man's heart, that when they are most
sure, they should be most deceived. The reason is, because they persuade
themselves to be of Christ, if they do but speak of him, though the fruictes
and effects of Christ's residence, are not to be seen in them. For when Christ
truly takes possession of men, and occupies ye room of their hearts, there
his death is strong, to expel Satan, the world, sin, evil thoughts, yea
to destroy and pull down satan's kingdom. Also his resurrection is not idle
in his saints, but sanctifies the heart, thoughts, mind, will, affections,
and understanding: yea, reformeth the whole man within and without, that he is
changed, and becomes a new creature, his words looks, gestures, and all his
members bewray a holy and spiritual change: which although it be not wrought
all at once, but by degrees, yet men must not loyter and flacke their pace to
aspire to perfection. I have marked by experience within these few years,
that many whom the Lord has called to the love of his Gospel, from their
former evil and civil life, that they have been very diligent and painful in
hearing the word, at the first neglecting their callings and trades, (yea more
then was expedient sometimes) yet after a while when they had somewhat waded in
the word, that they have come to some knowledge or some other gift, have
again much neglected the word, prayer, and other holy exercises, both in
public, and also in their private families: and so again, somewhat sleeping
in their pleasures and profits. Thus men sleep, and are easly drawn to it,
but let them take heed that their hearts sleep not. It stands Christians in
hand, to look to them selves, since they have so dangerous a nature and
deceauable, as also so hurtful enemies of Satan and the world. Many a man and
woman when God calls them, and their hearts begin to aim after the Lord,
and they are forced to acknowledge the power of his word, and to condemn and
find fault with their corruptions, yet they sleep. One deferreth of the Lord
with this excuse, Oh I have a trade, and I must follow it, I could find in my
heart to hear the word, and to do as other do, but I must live, and I please
God as well says another, in my trade, etc. as in going to Sermons. Here is a
sleep that falls upon men, that they might not wake at the Lords call and
suit. Why? God promises not to bless any man in his calling (though he
prospers the contemners to their condemnation and sometime, to make them
inexcusable) unless they are careful to obey his word and will. And it is a
greater work to worship God (and to hear his word, is a part of his worship)
then to labor in our trade. I bind no man from following his calling, but to
be diligent in it, yet so that the Lord have his part at our hands, and that
we serve not our own turns and the worlds, and so neglect the Lords
worship, yea and our own salvation, which is brought unto us by the preaching
of ye gospel. Others there are, whose hearts somewhat melt at the word,
prayer and good things, and would fain have part in the^: but either some
several sins, which they do not thoroughly set them selves against, and use
means to mortify, but they break forth at every occasion, so as they are a
sleep again, and yet the heart may have some waking after Christ. These do
hinder them, and make their heart almost a sleep, and faint unto any duties, or
else wanting ye means to stir them up, and being of themselves lubbrish to seek
ye means (having their minds too much occupied in the world) or else shame
deteining them, or fear of laws taking hold of them, and of the wicked spying
them out, etc.) they neglect all good means that may do them good. Thus every
man may complain and say, I am asleep, but few see the danger of their
sleep, and so labor to stir up themselves from sleep, as the spouse does
here: but it is to be feared, yt many men are a sleep, even in their hearts,
which hope better of themselves, and that is a dangerous sleep. Awake therefore
truly out of sleeep and sin not. Let us therefore (good christians in the
love of Christ Jesus and of our own souls) search and survey all the corners
of our hearts, that there lie hid nothing in us yt may hold us back from
following of Christ: yea, let every one of us say, here Lord: we are at hand to
wait upon thee, our souls and body does delight in the living God. That we may
thus shake of al sleepy, drowzy, and worldly cares and affections, and watch to
wayt upon the Lords call, that we may be ready, willingly at a beck, to
embrace him heartely in our souls: which grace God grant us. Amen. Thus we
see in this circumstance, of ye lets that is interlaced here in a word, what
lets are with in us, which make our hearts heavy to look up to Christ Jesus.
Yet we must note yt the spouse labored to waken herself, and gives not place
to sleeping, but museth and calls to mind her lovers voice, making suit to
be entertained. Oh (says she) This is the voice of my beloved knocking, etc.
We should thus learn to rouse up our selves from worldly sleeps, by musing of
that which we have heard out of the word: and when satan would bring us a
sleep, in these sweet pleasures of this life and profits, we should thus
make use of this doctrine, and reply upon all temptations, saying, Oh I hear
ye voice of my beloved Christ Jesus, by the preaching of his word, calling out
upon me, that I should beware of such sleeps, I may not be wooed from him: In
every tentation a man may make use of this reply. Let not satan, or sin, or
the world, so soon whisper in our ears, to allure us to any uncleanness, but
let us straight way answer: Oh I hear the voice of Christ, calling me
another way, I must weight upon him and obey his word, etc. But I cannot go
forward with this matter any further at this time, because the time cutteth me
off, you shall hear the rest of ye suite and reasons in the after noone, by ye
grace of God. And the Lord our God give us all the true use of this doctrine,
that we may make gain of it in our hearts to the Lord, so as these reasons of
our heavenly suter Christ Jesus, may move us in truth, that we seeing his
great riches and spiritual treasures, with the eyes of faith, and also having
the offer of them made unto us by the preaching of his word, may cast off al
lets and incumbra^ces what so ever, and willingly embrace Christ with all his
riches, that we may communicate with him, and may be fruitful in all obedience
toward him all our life. Which grace God grant for Jesus Christ his sake,
both to us and to all Nations, and his whole church, etc. Amen. To the which
Christ with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory, majesty,
dominion and power, now and for ever. Amen.

Let us pray. etc.
The second Sermon. After Prayer, as is before mentioned following thus.
IN the former part of this day (beloved in the Lord) we have heard of two
reasons, which were used of the husband, to move his spouse to participate
with him in his riches, and to embrace him. The one drawn from his excellent
dignity, and eternal riches and possessions, which he had already received.
The other taken of his kindness and liberal offers, to participate the same
his riches to his Spouse: which as I said, included in it a part of the suite
it self. Also we have heard of one circumstaunce of the second part of the
chapter, concerning the manner of the spouses coming on: and namely of the
lets in her self, which somewhat tied her at the first. Yet so, as she
stirs up her self notwithstanding, with the meditation of the suite and
voice of her husband or suitor. All these circumstances, with the use of them we
have already handled. Now it follows in the 2. verse, wherein the suit is
still continued. Open unto me my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled. etc.
This second suite as it were, is noted by Solomon, to be mentioned by the
spouse her self, making report of the exceeding love of her suitor Christ Jesus,
who spak to her so amiably, graciously, honorably, ye so carefully, as he was
loath for her own good to lose his labor. Therefore christ is brought in as one
renewing his suite again and again, and continuing it, as he does even to this
day by the preachers of his word: Yea he has long come a wooing unto us.
Wherefore I pray you (my brethren) let him now come a speeding, open your
hearts unto him, enlarge your bowels toward him, embrace and hug him
thorough faith, yea set your whole love on him. The like speech of knocking
and opening we have in other places, as namely in the 3. chapter of the
Revelation. verse 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear
my voice, and open the door, I will come in unto him, and will sup with him,
etc. Which speeches, import ye Christ is always calling upon me^, and
vouchsafes to come to them by ye preaching of his word, craving entertainment.
God ^^ocketh diverse ways.
Yea he knocks aloud at every man's heart, and that sundry ways. First by
his word, First by his word
as by an ordinary means to awaken men. And how long has the Lord continued
knocking to us by his word? And yet alas few open unto him. None can deny but
the Lords voice has shaken even the foundation of their hearts, ye even the
most ungodly ones, though they refuse to hear the voice of the charmer, charm
he never so wisely. So he knocked early and late, to the people of Israel by
his Prophets, but because they refused to hear his voice, the Lord forsook
them, and gave them over in ye end to be a dispersed people. Secondly, Secondly
by his spirit.
the lord knocks by his spirit: for me^ cannot deny, but many instincts and
motions of Gods spirit have knocked at their hearts, though they have
rebounded again, and men have quenched the spirit, so as the Lord has punished
them with the spirit of slumber, that they should have ears to hear, and
should not understand, eyes to see, and not perceive, hearts to know, and
should not believe, least they should be converted, and I should heal them says
Christ. Math. 13.15. Thirdly, Thirdly by his judgments.
Christ knocks by his judgments and works, by signs in ye heavens above,
tokens in thearth beneath. The constellations of the heavens threaten strange
alterations, excha^ges and great calamities, the strange wonders have their
loud voices: as untimely thu^ders, fiery appearances, unknown commets. Also
beneath, universal earthquaks, practiced conspiracies, reports of wars, ye
Romish Antichrist seeking to subvert the truth, dangers at home, dangers
abroad. Which al are forewarnings and knockings for our good to waken us, and
cause us to trim up our selves for our bridegroms coming, to entertain him in
our hearts here below, that we may be entertained with him (at his coming)
into the heavens. Fourthly, Fourthly by his mercies.
he knocks by his mercies and benefits, as a most gentle and friendly
knocking: so yt the heavens, ye earth, son, moon, stars, fowls, beasts,
fishes, fruits, and the daily kindness of God are arguments of his suite to
move us to open unto Christ. But of al these, ye knocking of his word is
vehement and mighty, and for our good, if we can see it or had hearts to open
unto it. Open unto me. etc. When such speeches and exhortatio^s ar used in ye
scripture, yt is not left to ye power and will of man to open, as else where 2.
Tim. 2.21. If any man purge him self from these, he shall be a vessel of the
Lord unto honor, sanctified and prepared to every good work. So Heb. 4.7. To
day if you will hear his voice, etc. Also Io. 3.3. He that has this hope in
himself, purges himself, even as he is pure. These speeches attribute not
to man any thing of him self. For albeit God requires us to open, to come to
him, to purge our selves, and to hear, etc. yet all these are borrowed from
the lord, who works them in his saints by his spirit, and God requires
obedience at our hands. John. 6.44.
Christ says no man comes unto me unless my heavenly father draws him. Also
the means of our purging is in the word: for Ioh. 15.3. Christ affirms that
his Disciples were clean by his word. Yea, God works both the will and the
deed of his own good pleasure. Phil. 2.13. Notwithstanding here arise
disputations in the flesh. Either we will challenge too much to our selves, or
else wilfully set against the Lords grace offered, and so cease doing well,
saying: if I be chosen, then whatsoever I do, I shall be saved: if I be a
reprobate, then what soever good I do, I shall perish. Thus men murmr
against God, and would bring him to account of his own works, sitting like
proud men in the seat of the Lords judgment, arreigning him, as though they
would compel God to hold up his hand at the bar. O intolerable pride, Oh
damnable blasphemy. If thou art chosen, then shall thou in time feel of the
fruit of thy election in Christ, by holiness and sanctimonie. For therefore
has God elected his, that in time they may be called to be saints. Romans 1.7.
1. Cor. 1.2. Yea, he has chosen us before the foundation of the world, that we
should be holy and without blame before him. Ephesians. 1.4. So then, this is the
evidence of our election, and so of our salvation, if we labor for holiness
and a new life. For so God sanctifies his unto a new life, and refourmeth them
to have their hearts open, that so being renewed, they open unto Christ. So that
it follows not, that if thou art elect what soever thou do thou shall be
saved. But if thou art elect, then God calls thee in time unto
sanctification, to renounce sin and thine own lusts, and so causes thee to
make sure thy election by good fruits, as are mentioned. Col. 3.12. As the
elect of God holy and beloved, put on tender mercy, kindness, humblenes,
meekenes, etc. with all the furniture of ye new man. And read I pray you the
first Chapter of the second Epistle of Peter, verses. 5.6.7.8.9.10.11 So then
who soever is in Christ must become a new creature. 2. Cor. 5.17. And who so
ever never tastes of true mortification, holiness and newnes of life,
forsaking sin and ungodliness, can never have evidence of salvation, but remain
still in damnation, and the wrath of God abides upon him. And as for the other
objection, where they say, yt if they be reprobates, etc. what so ever good
they do, yet they shall be damned. This follows not neither, so as they take
it. For although the purpose of God in the reprobate can not be altered, yet
they must know that ye cause of their destruction is of them selves, who being
left of God to them selves in the matter of their condemnation, do perish of
them selves, and wilfully despise the sacred means of life, hardening their
hearts, and shutting them up against Christ, by that malice which is
resident in their own nature. Then how soever man murmureth against God calling
them to obedience, as though God required some unlawful or unreasonable thing at
their hands. Yet let them know yt howsoever ye wicked perish in their
contempt, not showing the fruits of election, and so shut up ye gate against
christ, it is the just judgment of God. On the other side, ye children of God
being sanctified, and their hearts renewed by his spirit, they open unto Christ.
For ye regenerate as god works in them by his spirit, whereby the praise of
their regeneration belongs unto God, so their actions are both active and
passive. Active, in ye God having reformed and altered their wills and nature by
his second creation, they will good things, desiring ye lords will to be
accomplished in them. And passive, in that though they are reformed, yet (by ye
reason of ye remnants of sin which remain in ye saints not fully purged) they
still have need of ye lords aid to go through in their calling. As Paul does
insinuate when, praying that God would make the^ worthy of their calling, 2.
The. 1.11.
and fulfill the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with
power. He shows that the Godly must still be continued and holden up of God to
the end. But they neglect not the hearing of the word, prayer, and all the
sovereign means of their salvation. For they know that as God works all in
all, so he has appointed ordinary means, to cause his graces to be effectual
in his saints, as the preaching of his word, 1. Cor. 1.
the use of the Sacraments and prayer, etc. And sure it is, who soever is in
the way of life, delights in these means. But he that contemns or
neglects these means, neglects his own salvation, having no true taste of
Christ, and so open not unto him: in so much as the door of utterance is
closed up in them, their hearts not being opened by the keys of the word,
which being committed to Peter and the Apostles, have successively been
delivered to the ministers of the word. In deed the Lord must first open our
hearts, booring through our ears (as David speaks) by his spirit: yet this
hinders not, but that the word opens them also by preaching, conueying as
it were the spirit into the hearts of the faithful, and therefore is called the
ministry of the spirit. 2. Cor. 3.8. I will not stand to confute the Maniches,
nor the Minium spirituales which divide the spirit from the word, when the
work together in the faithful, neither will I trifle with the Scholiastes,
and Papists, affirming that freewil, though it be helped by grace: Yet is it
in us to deserve righteousness, etc. they may easily be confuted by the former
places alleged. I need not delay time to frame any several conclusions
against them in any Syllogistical form. I conclude therefore generally, that
they which open unto Christ, do open by the grace of God, clensing and
preparing their hearts thereunto through his word, and so as a fruitful cause,
brings forth necessary effects of faith and obedience. And they which do
not open, being left in their own sins by the just judgment of God, through
their own fault open not, and not through any defect or fault in God, or in
the means whereby he offers grace, but they refuse it. Let us therefore
crave, yt God would vouchsafe to open our eyes that we sleep not in death Also
to open our ears, hearts, minds, and souls, and forbear them by his spirit
that his word may enter and Christ may have place in us, that we may open unto
him at his suite and request, and so we may heartely bid him welcome. See then
I pray you this suite and calling of Christ, desiring us to open unto him and
to give him entertainment in our hearts, which friendly offer of his, to
vouchsafe to abase him self to dwell in our sinful bodies and souls, should
me thinks greatly move us, since it is not for his own benefit but for our
eternal good. But let us now go on to consider the other two reasons which are
set down after his suite. For the calling of Christ or his suite to his
Church is interplaced between the four reasons which I noted before. The 3.
reason.
My sister, my love, my Dove, my undefiled. These titles and all those before
named, as Spouse, Friends, beloved, etc. they include in them selves a another
reason to move the Spouse with all, drawn from the love of Christ in making
choice of the faithful to be as his Wife and Spouse. As if he should say:
since I have vouchsafed to cast my love upon you, and to choose you for my Wife,
and have reckoned of you as of my dearest friends, having sanctified you to my
self: think it not much to grant me this curtisie again to open unto me and
entertain my person, submitting your selves to my good will and pleasure,
which can not but wish your good and welfare even as mine own. This is the
reason why he uses such titles of love to bewray what good will he bears
to the faithful, and therefore adorneth the^ with these Epithets. The title of
Sister notes the spiritual kindred which we have with Christ, as him self
calls ye believers which do ye will of his heavenly father. Mat. 12.50. His
mother, sister and brother. This should be a maruailous mean to move us to
love him again, since he vouchsafes such friendly and familiar names to us,
which are of our selves mere harlots and of kin to Satan. But they are all
borrowed titles of Christ, and special prerogatives to the faithful. Especially
this, that he intiteleth us his Spouse and Love: as also John calls the
Church the Bryde. Ioh. 3.29. Also Paul. Ephesians. 5.28.32. calls the Church the
wife and spouse of Christ. The title of Dove, as it is a word of love, so it
does not unfitly note unto us the innocencye, simplicity, comelines, and
chastity, which should be in the saints. As we find also, that the Gentiles
which should flock to the Church under the Gospel, Esaias. 60.8. are compared to
Doves, which flock to their windows. Christ also teaches his Disciples to be
innocent as Doves. The title of Friends and beloved, is the same which he gave
to his Disciples to be his friends, for so by imputation he accounts us,
which before were his enemies. Romans 5.10. Col. 1.21. My undefiled, or perfect
one. This title is wholly borrowed from Christ as the other, in whom we yt are
filthy and loathsome in our selves, are yet in him purged from all uncleanness,
as Ephe. 5.26.27. He has sanctified and cleansed his Church, by the washing of
water through the word, that he might make it unto him self a glorious
Church, not having spotte or wrinckle, but that it should be holy and without
blame. Thus he amiably, inticeth and allureth us to taste of his spiritual
graces which he has brought from heaven, indignifiing us with honorable and
gracious titles in Christ, not that we are such of our selves: but Christ by
imputation applies that unto us, which is not ours, but his own proper, and
imputes yt unto him self (for our cause) which is not his own but ours:
namely sin, so that by imputation Christ was counted and made sin for us,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. 2. Cor. 5.21. Yea, in ye
similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin, he has condemned sin in the flesh,
that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not
after the flesh but after the spirit. Romans 8.3.4. So then Christ has given
sin the foyl and bound Satan to the good abearing, that there is no
condemnation to those which are in Christ Jesus, but they stand as pure, holy,
and undefiled in Christ Jesus before God his father, which before were most
vile and filthy in themselves. This is the happy benefit which we have by
Christ, to be flocked into the heavenly society of our spiritual husband,
which were without Christ before, and aliants from the common weal of Israel,
strangers from the covenant of promise, and were without hope and without God
in the world. Ephe. 2.12. Then, since now we are made one with Christ, and he
has chosen us to be his Spouse and wife, making so high account of us,
preferring and commending us, with so honorable and gracious titles, let us
labor to be joined with him, embracing him and solacing our selves in his
love, repenting us of our former lives, howsoever Aungel-like they have seemed
to be in the eyes of men, and let us become his friends in deed and of kin to
him, that we may reresemble his Image in all holiness, pureness, innocencye,
and righteousness, that we may prove to the comfort of our own
consciences, by an inward and effectual feeling of his grace in us that we
are in deed, his love, Sister, Spouse and undefiled: which thing every man
must labor to seal up to his own conscience. The 4. reason.
Now follows the fourth and last reason of his suite, drawn from his
patience and long suffering, that he has tarried long for us, and ventred
himself to many hurtes, having undergone many discommodities, and refused no
labor to pleasure us, and obtain our love. For (says he) my head is full
of dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. It is a metaphoriall or
borrowed speech from such as watch long, and that in the night season, noting
the long sufferance and patience of Christ Jesus toward his Church, that had
so long waited for an answer, and borne so many discommodities. As if he
should say, O my Spouse, or you people to whom I speak by the ministry of my
word, even as he which watches many nights bare headded, is bedewed with the
mist of the nights, and not with the dew of ye morning, so I have long waited
to be received and embraced of you in my word, I have sustained infinite
dangers and paineful labors to pleasure you: but you have foorded me off from
time to time, that I am as one weary, fainting, and discouraged, therefore open
unto me, least I depart and cast you off. A maruailous speech, but we must take
use of it to our selves. For has not Christ made entreaty unto us, and
tarryed for us, not one night or many, but even whole years he has continued
his suite without intermission to us in this land, and has been a Suitor this
24. years, by the preaching of his word: And yet alas poor Christ, he may
stand and starve abroad, for any entertainment he has with the most. Can we
hear that Christ took such great pain for us, as we heard before? And can we
be so blockish and unkind toward him again? This reason might move us more,
if we look thoroughly into it. The Lord sometime reasons in such like manner
by his Prophets, that he spent his strength in vain, Esaias, 49.4.
and for nothing, to shame the people withal, who had caused the Lord to
labor in vain by his servant, and so be moved to repentance. So he
testifies, Iere. 7.13. and 11.7. Romans 10.21. That he rose up early, and
stretched out his hands all the day long by his servants the Prophets, but
they would not hear. Oh let us take heed (my brethren) least that by our
scornful refusal of the Lords long sufferaunce and labor, we cause the
Lord to use this reason against us, to our condemnation in the day of
judgment, if it be not, now a reason to move us to repentance, and to open
unto the Lord after so long a suite. Thus you see the first part of this
chapter, containing the suite of Christ, and the calling of his Spouse, with
the reasons which are used to provoke her with all. Let us therefore in few
words be moved here by (dear christians) to embrace this so earnest and
paineful a Suitor, and rest in his love, that Christ may live in us here, and we
may live with him after this life, in his heavenly inheritance for ever more.
Amen.

Now in this third verse, follows the second part of this Chapter, The
second part of the Chapter.
concerning the manner of the Spouses coming on and obeying of her calling,
which I will consider in three points. First the lets hindering the Spouse.
One circumstaunce whereof was touched in the 2. verse, which reaches to the 7.
verse. Secondly, the renewing and recovery of her zeal, by diligent inquiring
after Christ, conferring with the daughters of Jerusalem, which continues from
the 7. ver. to the 18. verse as I read it. Thirdly, the conclusion of the
whole, wherein the Spouse assures her self of the love of Christ, and
affianceth her self to him. But first concerning the lets The lets.
First within, at home, in her self, verse 3. 4. 5. Secondly, abroad and in
others which are effects and punishments of the former as we shall note when
we Lets with in
verse 3. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my
feet, how shall I defile them? Some understand this, as though the Spouse
should confess her nakedness and that of her self she had nothing, neither was
able to rise to open. Which confession as the Spouse might justly make, yet
because the speech and words properly affoorde no such sense in my judgment
the Metaphors being considered, I can not therefore willingly receive that
interpretation. First for that then the spouse should acknowledge, that she
had put of that which she never had. For we are by nature naked and void of
grace, and so have not cast it of, since we never have it, till the Lord
instilleth it into us. Secondly, the other Simile, or rather metaphor of
washing of feet, can not properly note our nakedness, inability, or emptines
of grace, for that the scripture usually takes the washing of the feet for
sanctification and purging of the affections, as Ecclesiastes. 4.17. Ioh.
13.10. and so pure hands for pure affections, 1. Tim. 2.8. Other reasons I
could allege from the contrary, but these suffice me. Others take it (and
more properly) as if the spouse should reason, that since she is once cleansed,
she would not defile her self again, and so promises to grow in
sanctification. For the reason is very forcible, (if we take it in this sense)
that because God has sanctified, justified and freed us from sin, it were
unseemly and a shame that we should again defile our selves, and so frustrate
our selves of the fruit of Christ's death, and cleansing sacrifice offered for
our sins. For the benefit of our cleansing and redemption, should be so
far from ministering occasion of sin unto us, or to presume on Gods mercyes,
yt it should be the greatest argument to stir up our selves, to holiness and
sanctimony, as the Apostle reasons. To. 12.1. By the mercies of God, to cause
the Romans to offer up them selves wholly a spiritual and holy sacrifice to
God. So that in this sense, the Metaphor agrees with the speeches that Paul
uses. Col. 3. and else where, hidding us to put off the old man, etc. So that
by translation, our own corrupt nature, with the appurtenances is compared to
a coat both old and past wearing, which bring nothing but shame in the use of
it, therefore to be put off. And true it is, we can not otherwise come unto
Christ, neither will he receive us, unless we deny our selves, laying a side
all our own lusts and carnal affections, which all are rotten rags that
causes Christ to loath us. For as he that has lain long in prison in one
coat, old and louzie: men would be loath to company with him, and would be
squamishe to eat, drink or lodge with him, unless he be new shifted, rid of
his lice and well ayred. So if we will have fellwoship with Christ our husband,
we must leave our selves behind, and wait on him, we must be well ayred,
sweeted and shifted, else Christ will be squaymishe of our company. For he has
redeemed us out of the prison of Hell and Sin, where we were forlorn, has
also washed rensed and bathed us in his own blood, not to go wallow again in
the mire of sin, but to walk in holiness and righteousness before him,
being arrayed and beautified with the garments of his spirit and decked with
the new man. In deed there are many civil men and carnal Gospellers that can
afoord the Lord some outward reformation, in words or behavior, as though
they would put off their coat, but they never deal in truth with their hearts
to root out from thence the root of bytternesse altering their will, thoughts
and affections. For Christ loves to dwell in the privy Chamber of our hearts
and to bear rule there. When she says that she has washed her feet, it is
meant of the affections as before I noted, importing that the saints of God
when they feel themselves sanctified and prepared to embrace Christ,, they
feel such benefit by his presence, that they stir up themselves by all means,
that they may not turn back again to their own lusts and corruptions, but
labor to consecrate them selves wholly body and soul to the Lord, that whereas
they have before in their members served sin, satan and their own lusts,
having let them out and bound them as apprentices unto satan. Now they make
new vows and couenantes with the Lord that they will give over their members
as instruments of righteousness unto God. Then here is no way for Civil men
so long as they are mere Civil men, nor for worldlinges, covetous men,
Athistes, drunkerds, raylers, proud persons, Swearers, or any such like, to
come unto Christ, till their corrupt nature be cast off, and their
affections washed, sanctified and reformed. Yea, and this not for a time, but
we must vow it for ever. For it is impossible that they which have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy ghost, having tasted of
the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come, if they fall
away, should be renewed again by repentance. Heb. 6.4. If the righteous
scarcely be saved, 1. Pet. 4.18.
where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? Woe be then to the swinish and
brutish generation, ye wallow still in ye mire of their own affections, and will
not come out from the world and unclean things. These shall howl with pitiful
shrikes and shril voices, when they shall be shut out from the bridegroom
Christ Jesus in his coming. Then shall they lament their whoredoms,
gluttonies, pride, contempt, their railings, unbelief, and al their unhappy
ways, but too late. Let us therefore, (dear brethren) crave Gods spirit to
wash our affections and cleanse our hearts, that we drasse them not in the dirt
of sin any more, least our latter end, be worse then our beginning. But
albeit this be the more received interpretation, which I have now longest
stayed in: namely, that since she is cleansed, she will not defile her self
again. Yet me thinks it is to be taken of the excuses which the Spouse made,
showing that she had much a do to renonunce her pleasures, and complains
that she is untoward to obey her calling, having many lets, as if a man being
in bed is loath to rise and diseaze himself in the night: so the Spouse though
desirous to arise to Christ, yet her pleasures stick some what in her
stomach, and she finds many delais in her nature, debateth the matter before
she can cheerfully rise up to follow the call of Christ Jesus. The reasons
that move me to this sense, are these chiefly, 1. because it is an answer to
the former suite of Christ, desiring to be opened unto, as one knocking in the
night, she answers she has put of her coat and is at rest, having washed
her feet (as the manner of that country was) so as she was loath to rise and
ray her feet, discovering her untowardness. Now if she should answer when
Christ calls, that she is cleansed and sanctified, how should she be,
uncleansed again and sanctified? (when Christ calls to sanctification) it
were a weak answer to the request of Christ. 2. The metaphor of sleep and of
the night, and al circumstances (in a word) aford this sense as most natural
and proper to this place. So then the use of it, is to teach us how hard
beginninges we have in our calling, how slowly we come forward, and how many
delays our corrupt nature finds to shift of al true obedience to Christ
Jesus. For we must know that our condition and estate is figured unto us in the
person of the spouse. Therefore purposely, Solomon shows how we hang of and
on, with Christ til the Lord has throuhlye humbled us and weaned us from our
selves, which is a doctrine most necessary and comfortable, that we may be
stirred up to shake of all drowsines and loytering. For we see how hardly we
obey our calling, and listen to the word of God, but we answer a far off,
and hold our selves aloof. As Samuel, 1. Sam. 3.5.
which ran to Hell often before he took a straight course to the Lord. For
we think that the Lord calls us not because he speaks by men, so childish
or babish are we in our beginnings which are poor. And we scant perceive who
calls us. Feign we would follow God and come to heaven, but we are loath to
foil our feet to step the way that leads thither. Our pleasurs whispereth
us in the one ear, and our profits round us in the other, ye corruption of our
nature ye cleaves so fast on, and custom of sin presses us so sore down, yt
we can not look up to ye heavenly calling, but are inueigled and carried away
(alas) almost at every motion, but we must bid al farewell to follow Christ.
Genesis 19.16.
Lot lingered behind and loytered in his departure from Sodom, Jeremiah had
excuses, Iere. 1.6. Jonah. 1.3.
Jonas fled from the presence of God, because of the charge inioined him, Luke
9.59.61.
Peter was loath to follow a while and kept aloof.

Luke 9.59.61
The disciples made delays, one would bury his father first, then he would
wait on Christ. Another would needs bid his friends farewell first. Thus we see
how our nature is very slow, and untoward to follow the Lord, shifting of so
long as we can, and we will set times our selves to wait on him. Thus we set
the Lord his stent, and he must dance attendance upon our leisure. Genesis 12.4.
Math. 9.9. Luke 19.6.8. Mat. 4.28.22. John. 3.2. John. 19.38.
Some are more suddenly called and obey: as, Abraham, Mathewe, Zacheus, the two
brethren. Magdalen and others. Other some are longer coming on, as Nicodemus,
Joseph of Aramathia and others, the one by night came to Christ, the other
secretly at the first. And though the spouse here, confesses her slacknes, and
how she was hindered from following of Christ, (as she destred) through her
own corruptions, and worldly affections. Yet after she recouereth her zeal,
and grows more earnest in seeking after Christ, even then when other would
have discouraged her. As verse 8. So that faith stands not at a stay in the
saints, but increases by degrees: as we see in Nicodemus and Joseph. For
Nicodemus John. 7.50. spoke boldly in Christ's cause before the Pharisyes,
though he received a check: Mar. 15.43.
and both he and Joseph, John. 19.38.39. expressed their zeal after, in a
costly and honorable burial of Christ Jesus, even then, when greatest danger
was. Peter also is charged after his denial, that when he is converted, he
should strengthen his brethren. So that we must not cocker and flatter our
selves in our poor beginninges, as though God required no more then we can do,
or to begin and stand at a stay, but we must increase in faith, knowledge,
zeal, and love unfeigned toward our brethren, also in care to further others,
especially those of our charges and families. We see then, that it is a hard
thing to follow Christ, it must cost us our pleasures and profits, yea even
our selves wholly. Therefore Psa. 45.10. The Spouse of Solomon, which is a figure
of the Church, is taught, that she can not be fit for doctrine and instruction
and for her husband, til she had forgot her own people and her fathers house,
so casting off all carnal affections to obey Christ only. Now this we do
maruailously unwillingly til ye Lord put us forward. And in deed God measures
his graces by degrees to his saints, partly to discover our own miseries,
wants, untowardness, and unfitness to heavenly things, as also the hardness
of repentance, that so we may be humbled and forced to seek unto God to
obtain grace to grow unto perfection, and to be thankful to God for his own
work in us. Partly also that we should not lift up our selves to contemn the
small beginninges in our brethren, but labor to draw them on, since we have
found it hard in our selves. So that the difficulty of the thing, would stir us
up to use the means the more carefully to increase. As the hearing of the word
exercising our selves in it with continual and earnest prayer. This answer of
the the spouse and the former sleeping she complained of in her self,
bewrays our untowardness, that wrangle with the Lord a long time before we
yield and have many out Lanes to turn a side from him.

If therefore men will prove themselves to belong to Christ, (though they
feel many lets in them selves) yet that shall not excuse them, but they must
labor against all lets, and endeavor to resemble the Image of Christ Jesus in
righteousness and holiness, hating sin in them selves and in others, no more
entangle themselus in the pleasures of sin. But they feel the power of
Christ's death (as I said before) mortifiyng in them the corruptions of their
nature, Gal. 5.24.
whereby they crucify the flesh with the lusts and desires thereof. And so are
changed within and without, in their hearts and in their manners, and become
holy even as God which has called them is holy. 1. Pet. 1.15.
But me thinks I hear some reply: yea taught even now that the faithful come
very hardly on, and now ye look for great things at our hands, and exact
very precisely a great change. Men are but men, and we can do no more then we
can do, and as God will give grace, and every man can not be a like, neither
can every man show that which is in him, nor handle his tongue: but we hope to
do as well as the proudest professor of them all. And a thousand such
sleightes men have to deceive them selves, and to deny christ in effect. These
are goodly shifts that shall never stand for payment. Men are but men (say
they). I answer, so long as they are but men, they are not in Christ, they
must be more the^ natural men, 1. Cor. 6.11.
for such know not the things that are of God. 1. Cor. 2.14. They must be
sanctified and cleansed by Gods spirit from their corruptions, for flesh and
blood can not inherit the kingdom of God, but must be changed 1.. Cor.
15.50. And where they say men can do no more then they can do, and God
requires no more. I answer, God requires more then we can do of our
selves, for we have nothing as of our selves, no not to think a good thought,
but God works in his both to will and to do of his own good pleasure. Now
God requires holiness, faith, obedience, etc. Phil. 2.13.
which we can not do, therefore he requires more of us, then we can do of our
selves, that we by his grace, may be enabled to do, that which of our selves we
can not do. When they add as God will give grace, they seem to charge the
Lord privily of injustice, and clear them selves as faultles if they perish
for want of grace, and so would blasphemously arraigne the Lord, as gilty of
their perishing. When they see not miserable men as they are, that the cause is
in them selves, that God with holds his graces from them. And further, how
should the Lord give grace to them which despise his word, and the ministry
thereof? Whereby the Lord conuayeth the graces of his spirit into the hearts
of his Children* and increases the same graces by the same means. And yet
despising grace offered, like desperate and brainelesse men, will blame the
Lord as cause why they want grace. Oh say they, every man can not be a like,
nor show yt which is in them, but hope to do as as well as the greatest
professor of the^ all, etc. Here they think they have stricken dead all the
professors at once, and have quitted them selves like men, but though all have
not graces a like, yet all must strive by like means to come to grace and
perfection, by diligent hearing, reading and musing of the word, by Prayer and
use of the Sacraments and such like to grow on in holiness. But these poor
wretches are never aunsweared, but seek even to lull them selves, yea and that
their hearts a sleep, that they might not hear the voice of Christ speaking
by his Ministers. But let us (my dear brethren) cast off al delays and not be
sluggish as they which are loath to rise, to open unto Christ. But willingly
leap out of our beds, and renounce all worldly cares, pleasures, profits,
friends and such other hindrances as ye spouse is taught, psa. 45.10. That we
may hasten to Christ for our lives yt we may be embraced of him, which grace
he grant us. It follows verse 4. My beloved put in his hand at the hole of
the door, and my inward parts were moved toward him, or groned after him,
or were troubled for him, as the same Hebrewe words import in Jeremy Chapter
31.20. These speeches of the gestures of love, are not to be carnally
understood, but they note that Christ (whom Solomon as you have heard
presents to us in the person of a Suitor) uses all tokens of spiritual
iestures and shows of love that may be, to allure his Spouse to love him
again. Not that Christ comes down in his own person now, to entice men to
his love. But (as I have said) he presents him self to be seen of us in
his Gospel as in a glass, 2. Cor. 3.18.
where he appears in the glory of his father unto us. For by his word he
puts in his hand as it were at ye door of our hearts, and uses his faithful
Ministers as soliciters of his cause to his Church and faithful, who feel in
deed the hand and power of Christ in his word by preaching so as they are
ravished, and inamored upon him. In deed some take the putting in of the hand,
for smiting and afflicting his Church, and so translate the word following.
And my bowels trembled at him. So the sense after their meaning is, that the
Church being slack and slow to grow in faith and obedience, was afflicted,
rebuked, and corrected of Christ, whereby she was terrified and forced with
fear, to regard more earnestly the call of Christ Jesus. And indeed true it
is, that the lord calling his saints, and they being very slow of the^ selves,
he uses whyps and corrections to spur them forward, of his great love, and
we are often made more quick and ready to obey our calling, when the Lord some
way afflicts us. For our nature is so untamed, so proud so lofty, sturdy and
rebellious, that the Lord is feign to join with his word, many crosses and
trials, either of sickness, poverty, reproach, loss of friends, loss of
goods, crosses in wise, in Children, in families, in affairs, having enemies
stirred up against us and such like, that his word and admonitions might
sincke the more deeply into our hearts. Which fruit David felt by
afflictions, when he said, Before I was afflicted I went wrong, but now I
keep thy word. Psalm. 119.67. So then the Lord is feign to urge us to obey
often times: Furthermore some sins which we see not a long time in our
selves by the word (yet thorough our own blindness) the Lord by some rod
traceth out in us, and haleth us forth before his judgment seat, causing us
to bring in evidence against our selves, that convicted in our own conscience
at the bar of his judgment seat, we might confess our selves and humbly sue
for pardon. And this fruit we have not simply by the affliction it self, (in so
much as the wicked also are afflicted oftentimes, and yet profit not by it) but
being taught the use of it by ye word, the doctrine of the word sincketh the
deeper when some trial is annexed, as the souls that are truly humbled can
bear good witness with me by their own experience, but if we are still
blockish and sullen, that we murmr and bristle up our affections against
Gods corrections secretly in our hearts, though our mouths are silent, and so
not stirred up to profit in repentance by them: then we loose the use of
them. But the Spouse she trembled at the Lords hand and rose to open. It is a
good sign when with reverence men tremble at the word, ioining with that fear
a purpose to keep the word and obey it in our heart. Otherwise the wicked
are forced spite of their teeth sometime to tremble at the word as Foelix did,
Act. 24.25.
but they seek shifts to cast of the hands of the Lords obedience without
purposing to obey. But as I said this place may be understood of ye loving
iesture of Christ who by his word allureth the godly, so as the spouse
testifies she was affectioned toward him. For this effect the word works
in the faithful that their hearts do melt at Gods threats, 2. Kin. 22.11 19.
repenting them of their backwardness as Josiah did, and joy in the sweet
comfort of his word and promises, reckoning of them above all riches and
pleasures as David did Psalm. 119.111. and else where. Other some understand
this place, as though Christ left off knocking and departed when he had
received so churlish an answer of his Spouse, whereby her heart was smitten
with sorrow repenting her of her slacknesse, which may well agree to that
which follows, where she finds her love departed when she had opened. The
Doctrine of which sense we shall have fitter occasion to note afterward.
verse. 5. I rose up to open to my well-beloved, and my hands did drop down
myrrh, and my fingers pure myrrh upon the handles of the bar. Here the
spouse begins somewhat to rowze up her self, seeking at the call of Christ
to be reconciled unto him. And first she shows that all her purest
naturalities, or civil sobernes (which she highly thought of at the first) or
her good works, or whatsoever she could present Christ with all of her
own, were nothing to procure his favor or draw his love toward her. For he
is not to be found by them, neither needs he our Myrrh to annointe him
withal. So then we must not come in our own garments, but away with all
beauty of nature and flesh and blood, and on with a pure faith and a good
conscience, in which Christ has delight. The Romish Church therefore, and all the iustitiaries, they preparing themselves, with their own works,
annoyntinge and trimming themselves, with their own ciuility, naturalities and
moral conjectures, are but as painted Harlottes that drive Christ far from
them, though they seem to carry him in their bosoms. But he will not be taken
in their beauty for it is but as a menstruous cloth unto him. It may also be
that the Myrrb may be understood of ye blessing and sweet savor of the gospel,
which Christ powers by ye preaching thereof into ye hearts of the faithful, so
as they are anointed with it and made sweet, yea are also brought to
repentance and to seck after God in his word, As the spouse here perfumed with
the sweet odours and moistened with the smelling ointment (which is spiritually
to be understood of the graces of Gods spirit) which her love had left
behind him, she arises to open and seek after him. ver. 6. I opened to my
beloved but he was gone and past, my heart was gone when he did speak, I
sought him but I could not find him, I called but be answered me not.
Secondly lets without
Here the spouse begins to complain of the lets she found without, and
first the absence of her husband, whereby after she found some discommoditie,
in that others afflicted her, verse 7. For she shows that she got some
courage and gathered up her spirits, so as she opens unto him desyring to
embrace him, yet she found lets abroad also which partly dismayed her, as the
absence of her lover, and partly tied or hindered her though in the end she
preuayleth. For finding her love slipped aside, she fainted, and hearing his
voice which so affected her and wroght upon her, that she swounded for sorrow
and her heart failed her. Which yet caused her to seek the more earnestly
after him, but he wo^ld not be found nor answer. So that, Solomon infers
Christ taking displeasure that he was not granted unto at the first, and
therefore turns a side, also the faithful mourning after him and repenting
that they embraced him not at the first. Wherein we see the state of a fainting
soul that longs sore after Christ, such a one as David bewrays in him
self. Psalm. 42.1. whose heart thirsted after God, as the weary and chased
heart does after ye water brooks. And after he says verse 6. Why have thou
forgotten me? Why go I mourning so heavily, etc. For the thirsty soul that
longs after Christ Jesus in truth, and would feign yield obedience unto
him and have assurance and full pledge of his love, making haste to Christ,
inquyring after him in his word, groaning, sighing and calling after him by
Prayer: Satan the envious and malicious man, enemy of our souls, seeks to
stir up our incredulity to step between us and Christ, presenting to our
eyes our sins past, our present infirmites, our sins before our calling,
and since our calling, our wantes, lack of zeal, our little profiting by ye
word, and a thousand other bye thoughts, that we should seem not to be
near Christ, but as though he had turned his back upon us, had cast us of
again, and held scorn of us, and as though all our former beginnings had
been in vain. So we we begin to languish, the Lord also sometime leaves
us in our dumpes a while, that after in his good time, he might the more
recover our zeal, love, faith, hope, patience and waiting on the Lord, that
we may say with David. Psalm. 77.7.10
I saw it was but mine own infirmitye. In which Psalm David speaks of
great tryalles, and so causes his Saints to make so much the more of his
mercy and favor, how much the more Satan and our incredulity seeks to
hide it from us.

And this hyding of Christ, is described here of Solomon, by the figure of
lovers, which sometime by showing of strangnes one to the other, make one the
more feign on the other. Likewise Christ by his strangenes sometimes kindles
the desire of his saints the more toward him. So Christ showed himself strange
to the woman of Cananea, was of a very grown countenance not vouchsafing to
answer her a while, Math. 15.22.
and when he answered, it was (as a man would thinck) a very churlish answer
but al was to stir up and try her faith. Sometime also Christ seems to leave
his church, afflicting it so, that when it seeks after him he seems to be
away. Which sometime dismaieth the Godly they thinck that the Lord neglects
them, as David complains, Why hidest thou thy face in the needful time of
trouble? and again, Why art thou so far from my health and from the tears of
my complaint? The like complaints he makes. Psalm. 89.46. to the end, and
Psalm. 69.17.18. And this last manner of Christ's holding off, by afflicting
his Saints does amaze them, when they see the Church of God left in the
Briars, and the wicked tryumphing. For we think that the Lord put up too many
injuries at the hands of his enemies. I sought him but I could not find him.
etc. See how the Spouse though in a maze and mammering at the absence of her
love, yet lingreth after him and seeks out for him, but as yet she finds
him not, neither will he answer when she calls. This should not
discourage us, or put us off from inquiring after God, though he seem to
absente him self for a time, and though we have not out of hand the
knowledge, faith, zeal, love, obedience, or that measure of repentance which
we would feign have, yea though we have often craved for some grace at the
hand of God, waiting long for it, and yet he seems to deny it unto us in
not granting that grace which we pray for: yet let us not give over, but
still pray and even wrestle with the Lord till we obtain the blessing. For
God deferreth off long sometime before he will hear, that he might try our
Faith, for he will be tied neither to time, means nor measure, so as we
must not prescribe him neither when, how, or how far he shall grant our
requests, only let us still be inquiring after him and calling upon him,
seeking him whereas he is to be found, even in his word and when he is to be
found, which is so long as he makes offer of his grace by his word.

This inquiring after God is a part of his worship, as we may gather from
the contrary, Zephany. 1.5. where God threatens to cut of all that sought not
after God nor inquyred for him. So then we see what a damnable state all those
are in what so ever they are, which do not seek after God aright in his word,
and are not daily inquiring after his will to do it, but rather turn themselves
away wilfully when the Lord seeks to find them. As they do which contemn
the word will not hear it, or hearing it are not moved with Zeal to
follow after God and walk in his ways, increasinge in the knoweledge of his
will: but think it even a drudgerye to be compelled or called on to hear the
word, or at least way count it a needelesse thing. But let us be stirred
up (beeloued) to use all means, wherebye we may shake off all such lettes
as hinder us, that we may open unto Christ, and seek after him even then
when he seems as it were to be turned aside, that we may never let him
slip utterly from us, nor give him cause by our scornful behavior to
depart from us, least we after seek him with tears when he will not be
found.

Thus at this time we have seen some of the letts of the spouse, too morrow if
God will we shall see the rest so far as time shall permit. The Lord our good
God make all this fruitful unto our Souls, that we by his grace may
ouerstride all lettes to embrace Christ and seek after him, so as he may
abide with us for ever by his grace here, and we abide with him in his
Heavenly Kingdom for ever and ever. Amen.

Let us pray. etc.
The third Sermon.
IT follows in the seventh verse. The watchmen that went about the City
found me, they smote and wounded me, the watchmen of the walls took away my
veil from me. We heard yesterday concerning the lets in nature which hindered
the Spouse in her coming on, and how many stays men meet with all in their
Christian calling. Also we have seen that the spouse for slowing the time, had
some what to do afterward when she would feign have found her love that he with
drew him self for a time, which was some trouble to her. And sure it is when
men drive off long or they come to the obedience of the Gospel, it is a corzie
to them when they are called: to see how they drive off the time with ye lord,
and God corrects such slackinges in his saints by many means. Well here the
spouse inquiring after Christ her husband, and having over stryded al lets in
her self, makes report what lets she found abroad in others. And how the
malice of the false and envious teachers burst out aganst her, yt they abused
her greatly. Some understand this of the Godly teachers, that they found the
Spouse and smote her with reprehensions of the word, and took away the veil
of her ignorance from her. But because she still inquireth for her husband and
lover, and that of others of Jerusalem after, for that she could not be
satisfied by the watchmen, which rather hindered her: I take it therefore without
question to be meant of the wicked teachers, which are so far from helping
forward of the Godly, that they pine at the zeal and diligence of Gods
children laboring to disgrace them, and hazard their profession to discredit
among the wicked, pulling off their veil, dealing roughly as roynishe
rufflers, to boisterous to handle or lovingly entreat the tender Spouse of
Christ Jesus. Yea some are not ashamed to say, none are worse then those
great professors and these that talk most, thus they strengthen the hands of
the wicked and raylers, opening the mouths of the enemies to blaspheme even
the Gospel it self: discountenauncing the true servants of God, causing
them to mourn, whom the Lord has not caused to mourn: Ezekiel. 13.
but sow pillows under the elbowes of the dainty and wanton people preaching
peace to them, to whom the Lord has not spoken peace. The Church of God has
always had dangerous Prophets, Apostles and teachers, which have troubled
the church, besides those which seduced the people with false doctrine. For I
am fully persuaded yt the false Prophets which Ezekiel and other Prophets of
God spoke against, or ye falls Apostles in Paul's time, which he speaks of to
ye Corinthians and Philippia^s: were not al of the^ so called simply for yt
they preached falls doctrine, but in respect of their misapplying and abusing of
doctrine. As for example to preach peace, and to cause to mourn is lawful:
but to preach peace to the wicked, or apply mourning to the godly, etc. is
falsely to handle the truth. So to preach Christ is lawful, but when it is done
of vain glory or contention, or to add bonds to the saints of God, it is
evil to the person that so does. Yet Paul rejoiced that Christ was preached,
though of contention, etc. and sure he would not have rejoiced if false
doctrine had been taught by them. So we have many no doubt which are void of
the spirit of judgment to apply doctrine but handling it vncunningly smit
and wound the Godly, but flatter and strengthen the wicked, which is no doubt a
great and fearful sin which Ezekiel complained of in his 13. Chapter. We
must be wise to handle the word and not mingle chafe with wheat as Jeremy
speaks Chapter 23.28. Hereof it comes that the false and unfaithful
teachers, do rather beat back and discourage those that seek earnestly after
Christ, then further them. For they envy that the simple sort should grow in
knowledge, least their evil life, covetousness, ambition, flattery and
unfaithfulness in their calling should be found out. Therefore the ignorant
ministry they seek to hold men in ignorance still, or keep them at a stay,
or at least way would abuse aucthority to molest and suppress the zealous and
Godly. But this should not discourage men from inquiring after God still. If
therefore any such thing should befall to any of us, eue^ at ye hands teachers
of the Church let us not marvel: for it must be so in the Church of God, that
they which are perfect may be known. And I perceive even here among you in
these parts, yt as the Lord has begun a good work in many, so it goes hardly
forward, by the reason of some dangerous watchmen and ministers, envying the
success of the word preached. But learn of the spouse here to inquire the
more earnestly after Christ in his word, of those which are careful in wisdom
to teach. Such there have bin always in the Church of God and shall be, yea:
even of those many times which hold not ye smallest rooms in ye church. So we
see Amaziah, Amos. 7.10. who envied the simple, and sincere preaching of Amos.
Therefore he complained of him to the king saying: Amos has co^spired against
thee: and the land is not able to bear his word, etc. And subtily like a fox
in the mean time counseled him to fly the land, for he thought his pomp and
honor would decay, if Amos proceeded, because the people resorted to him, but
what followed read the chapter. Hoshea the Prophet chapter. 5.1. complained
of such in his time, saying that judgment was against the Priests and princes,
because ye are as a snare on Mizpeb and as a net spread upon Tabor. Meaning that
both the Magistrates and the Priests of Israel devoured the people and sought
to entrap them, as the fowlers in those mountains laid snares for the birds.
Also the Scribes, Pharisees and Priests of the Jews, which retained the
chiefest dignities and titles in the Church, were most noisome to the same, so
as the scripture was verified saying, Psa. 118.22. Mat. 21.42.
The stone which the chief builders refused is become the head of the corner.
This certainly is a great offense to many when they see Christ abused of any of
the rulers and great Doctors in the Church. Oh say they I can tell some of the
grave fathers, and Doctors of the Church and wise learned men, yea some also of
countenance and authority, like not very well of these great teachers nor of
these gadders to sermons, and few such will resort to the Sermons, etc.
Therefore I will do as they do, they are as wise as the best, as learned and
as well thought of as any of them all. Thus the poor and miserable people are
hindered from Christ by such means. But Christ Math. ^1. acknowledges his
fathers wisdom herein, that he has revealed those high and heavenly
misteryes to the simple, and hid them from the wise and prudent of this
world. And Paul. 1. Cor. 1.26. affirms that not many noble the Lord has
called, or wise men after the flesh, but God has called the foolish things of
the world to confound the wise, etc. Howbeit (the Lord make us truly
thankful) God has beautified our soil and Church of England with many nobles
and godly magistrates, which countenance the truth and the Godly teachers and
are a wall to the^, has also enriched this his Church, with many Godly, learned
and worthy men, and that of countenance and titles which prefer the Gospel
of Christ Jesus. Notwithstanding (as I said) such there have been and shall be
some in the Church, even of great ones which shall molest the same. And because
this doctrine which discovers the ambition and hurtfulnesse of some persons
in the Church is hardly disgested. I must he came beyond my usual order to
insert some authority of the fathers in a word, who I suppose shall more
tollerably be heard then my self. Saint Barnard in the 33. Sermon upon these
Canticles says. From whom shall the Church hide her self? All are friends and
all are enemies, all kinsfolk and all adversaries, all household servants,
yet there is none at peace, they walk in the honor of the Lords goodness to
whom they do no honor. Hereeby he shows afterward, how many inconveniences
come in the Church, thereby come their pomper pride covetousness. Thereby (says
he) their purses are filled, therefore they covet to be Princes of the Church,
etc. Such things (says he) come not lawfully, but because they are occupied
in the affairs of darkness, etc. Also Barnard else where in sermon de Pauli
comissione. Alas lord these are the first which do persecute thee which we see
to affect the highest rooms in the Church, they have taken the arches from
Sion, they occupy the Castle, and have by power set the City on fire, their
conversation is miserable, the subversion of the people is pitiful.
Furthermore Saint Hierome upon the 9. chap. of Hoshea says. I do not find in
the ancient histories any other to have separated the Church and seduced the
people from Gods house, then the Priests and Prelates which are placed of God
to be the watchmen for the people because they abused their office. For many
ambitious men creeping into the seat of the Church, were ashamed of the
humilitye of Christ. Which al things are truly verefied in the Romish Church
where the Pope challenges to be Ecumenical and universal Bishop of the whole
Church, and so is noisome to all churches. And would to God this noysomnesse
had only kept it self at home in Rome, and had not also infected some
Christian Churches. But such is the misery of our times thorough sin as we
can witness of many troublesome watchmen (which count them selves so) in the
Church of God in many places. Yea the noysomnes of that Romish crew has sore
annoyed the Churches beyond the seas and cease not to trouble and vex our
Church of this land, by sending out their Seminary Papists, and scattering
abroad that Viperous brood of ye Jesuits, which greatly molest our Church and
land through their seditious and traitorous practizes, that they might bring
the spouse eue^ the church of England in bondage again to that dangerous
whatchman the Pope, (which I hope shall never be). For he cease not to smite
and wound where soever he can reach, and to disturb the true Spouse of
Christ Jesus. For he plays the roynish ruffler with the Spouse where soever
he becomes: and all his accomplices and adhearentes are troublesome watchmen
and smiters. Furthermore there are some other which for want of warrines smite
the sincere professors, and their fellow brethren, wounding them either with
doctrine misapplied as Ezekiel. 13. or with complaining of them as Amaziah did of
Amos. Amos. 7.
Or by open reproach or some such kind of Ishmaeliticall persecution. Othersome
as the Brownists (if I may so term the^) they smite all and spare none, yea
the carefullest Preachers are most charged of the^ as reuolters, etc. they
seek after a sort ye subversion of ye whole state. Finally many ungracious men
of a filthy life and servile nature which pretend some better show for the time,
seek to occupy the rooms of the Church, which are many times sooner admitted
a room (I know not by what negligence and gross oversight) then they which are
careful to discharge a conscience in that calling. But would to God that they
in whose hands it is to reform would bend themselves to root out such
loytering idle and loose men out of the Church. But thus the vanity which
Solomon noted in the world is to be seen, Folly is set in great excellency, and
the rich set in the law place. I have seen servants on horseback, and Princes
walking as servants on the ground. Ecc. 10.6. For many vile and unworthy
persons (as I said) are crept (I know not by what oversight) into the Church
liuinges. Ruffians, gamesters, fornicators, idolaters, popish prelates, idol
ministers, and as Esaias speaks, domb dogs, belly Gods, Isai. 59.10.11. 2.
Pet. 2.13.14.17.
lovers of filthy lucre, wels with out water, empty clouds, wandering stars,
etc. also sectuaries, Famelists, or Louists, and many other unworthy persons
are set on horseback, when many worthy me^ for their learning, Godliness,
gravity, yea (as Solomon calls them) princes, are fayn to go on foot like
servants. For so many blind Dolts of the Country, Ploughmen and artificers,
thorough Symmony and corruption steal into the liuinges of the Church, that
the learned and meet persons in the University which should be called forth,
are fayn to be without place. Which happens partly by default of Patrons
which make not conscience of the Lords people, partly by other corruptions:
but howsoever it be the poor souls of the people are in extreme hazard
thereby, and the people for the most part see not their own misery, and
therefore pity not themselves, nor use any prayer to the Lord in such causes,
wherein lies the cheifest danger of souls, so as both people and ministers
in many places conspire, to murder and spoil their own fouls: For if they may
have an honest and quiet man (as they term him) and a good fellow, they are
best with such a one, though he has no graces from ye Lord meet for that
honorable and high embassage, which is a lamentable case. And the Lord
punishes the neglect and contempt of our times with the just plague of the
famine of their souls in some place. As Hoshea mentions, chap. 9. ver.
7.8.9. The days of recompense are come, Israel shall know it. The prophet is a
fool, the spiritual man is mad, for the multitude of thine iniquity, therefore
the hatred is great. The watchmen of Ephraim should be with my God, but the
Prophet is the snare of a fowler in all his wais, and hatred in the house of
his God. So that they exercised hatred in ye Church bringing such as desire to
be taught in to contempt, to be wondered at as Owls in ye day time, being made a
sign to nod ye head at, every man has a pull at the^, raising up scornful
reproaches, lies, troubles and vexations against the godly, Esaias. 8.18.
yea they lift them up on ye scaffolds of the world, as monsters among men to
be displaied and laid forth to contempt as Esaias in his time complayneth. I,
and the children whom thou have given me, are as signs and wonders in Israel,
by the Lord of Hosts which dwelletb in m^^nt, Sion. Of ye one side diverse
harsh spirits under the pretense of zeal for the reformation of the Church
(which all the godly heartily wish for and procure in their callings what they
may) they do sore assault the Church and the tender consciences of such simple
ones as they can preuail with, rashly condemning all things, and seeking soul
good thing after an ungodly and unlawful manner as the Brownists and such
like, which labor to alienate the minds of men, from their teachers, and from
the word and Sacraments in the Church of this Land, because of their
private dislikings, whom I would wish to learn more modesty. I speak not to
discredit any, but to wish men to be wise and stayed in their zeal without
rashness. But thus the saints of God are tried, by diverse means and have many
repulses in their coming on, and by these means some that should be the
watchmen smite the spouse and pull of her veil, playing the rufflers with her.
Which as it is not without the Lords witting, but by his providence, so it
shall be revenged upon them by the same God, when he shall take the cause of his
church into his hand, here we see then that the church sometime finds greatest
lets and hurts at their hands who should chiefly prefer the cause of the
church* and yet these watchmen they go about the city to visit, but to what
end: they are painful as many now a days, can have nimble eyes to spy out the
best and forwardest; not to further the^, but to hinder them. Now let us see
what the spouse does in these lets and afflictions, she grows not blockish,
neither wait on other to do as they do, or to serve the present time, but
zealously inquireth ye more after her make eue^ in ye midst of the contempt of
men, and not being satisfied of the evil watchme^, turns to ye godly in
Jerusalem saying. verse. 8. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem if you find
my well-beloved that you report to him that I am sick of love. she now rowzeth
up her self and is rered up an end, after the pushes of the envious watchmen,
yea she ouerstrideth these perils, that albeit she saw some hang behind, and
othersome to let what they could, yet she recouereth her zeal and becomes of
an invincible courage. The second part of the manner of her coming on.
Here therefore is the second part of the manner of the spouses coming on,
namely, the recovering of her zeal and inquiring more busily after Christ,
when she saw what lets were in the way, and contemning all lets, she boldoly
charge the godly of Jerusalem (for that she knew salvation should come from
Sion, and the word of God from Jerusalem) that they would direct her and
further her unto Christ, praying for her and commending her to the Lord
signifiing her earnest affection and constant love toward Christ Jesus. Thus
the godly should not cease to inquire after God still and not be hindered by the
wicked, but continue in confessing Christ, embracing his word with carefulnes,
musing conferring and reading of it, which prayer and calling upon God, that
so others also should be stirred up by their example. As after follows verse.
17. For it is not enough to shake hands with Christ when all other plausibly
entertain him, when princes countenance his Gospel, and in a calms and
sunshine day. But we must also when troubles arise, when falls teachers shall
seem to deprave the truth, yea when princes shall gage batel against Christ.
Otherwise we shall prove our selves to be but timeseruers In deed it is
somewhat and that which few come unto, to countenance the gospel, to speak,
ride and go in the behalf of ye preachers and godly men, and to further the
preaching of the word, even now in the time of our Halcion days. But this is
not al. We must prepare and adresse our selves, for foul weather and stormy
trials, and to be forward though al other should flip back. We must not alone
then confess Christ Jesus, with others, and perform the exercises of
Religion, when others do only, but also apart by our selves, as Zach. 12.13.
They should mourn every family apart, and their wines apart by themselves: for
a man may pray when others pray, or with his family, and hear the word, or
confer of it when others do, and yet be a very hypocryte. For it is a
dangerous sign of Hypocrisy, if a man have a delighte to pray, to hear the
word, or to talk of it, or to be occupied in any godly exercise, only when
others are occupied in them, or when he is in company, or may be seen, or
hard: and has not a joy and delighte also to be occupied in such holy
exercises, even alone and apart by him self, though none be with him, hear
him, nor see him. We see that often times men hardlye come to this, to be
zealous when other are zealous, to pray when other pray, to confess when
other confess, and to exercise the worship of God when other do, but also be
zealous and forward in Religion when others hang back or become enemies, this
is rare and seldom amongst men.

It were good therefore if men would go many times aside by themselves, and
in the closet of their own hearts, deal with God, humbling themselves praying
earnestlye, fasting apart by themselves, that they might, be the more fit to
do good to themselves and others. So then we see the zeal of the faithful
must break out more and more, though it be insulted upon by men and sought
to be undermined, yea we should study to procure and stir up our housbandes,
wives, household, kindred, neighbors and friends. As we read they of the
church should show their zeal, not only in being forward themselves, but
calling upon others. as Esaias. 2.3. Come let us go up to the mountain of the
Lord etc. Also Iosshua in the 24. Josh. 14 15.
Chapter of his book, exhorting the people to serve God in truth, bad^ them
consider what they would do, But I (says he) and my household will serve the
Lord. If then this be the duties of Christians one to further another as they
can, not tarrying one for another, (as men straint courtesy in this point) how
much more should the Minister be forward in Godliness, knowledge and zeal,
notwithstanding all lets to towle on the people with them unto God? Yea: this
is required of all magistrates, rulers, richmen, headboroughes of parishes,
that they should be forwardest, stirring up others by their example. But for
the most part they are flowest in the lords causes, but let not us tarry upon
others, the more we have forslowed the time, the more we are bound to redeem
it. The spouse rescueth her self from the abuse of the evil watchmen, and
turns to them of Jerusalem, where the Lord was then only resident by his
ministry in his temple, inquiring of the Lord in his lawful and ordinary
means, even the ministerye of his word, whereby both he instructs his Church
and the Church and faithful again consult with the Lord. We should
therefore make our recourse to the lawful ministry of the word: and call upon,
yea: and charge our Pastors and ministers (if they are slow to the execution of
their charge) that they reveal and discover Jesus Christ unto us. And because
this will seem somewhat saucely and mallepertly done, that the people should
call upon and charge their ministers to be careful, etc. I must be feign to
vndershore my exhortation in this point by some example. For I speak no other
thing then that which Paul exhorts the Collossians unto, in his Epistle to
them, chapter 4. ver. 17. Say unto Archippus, look unto thy ministry, which
thou have received in the lord, that thou fulfill it. So that Paul would have
the congregation by admonition to stir him up. And sure Paul could have
admonished him him self in his own person, but he lays that charge on the
Collossians, that they ought them selves to spur forward their Pastor if he
wax cold, and the Pastor him self should not refuse to be admonished by his
church or people, but it must be done of them with reverence. If Archippus was
to be stirred up to his duty by the people, who yet labored in some measure
in the Church, what shall be said to those that labor not at all, neither
can a way with admonition, but are deaf at such doctrine as concern their
duty? Or what shall be said of those Archministers which are appointed to over
see the rest, yet some of them are so far from charging them to teach, as
they do after a sort maintain a dumb and loose ministry? I say therefore
again, entreat the ministers of your parrishes and call upon them, yea charge
them, (but reverently in the fear of God with an humble spirit) that they
have care of you, to fulfill the ministry enjoined them of the high God, upon
pain of his displesure, and as they will answer before God for you and your
families in the dreadful day of judgment when they shall give an account for
your souls. Heb. 13.17. Oh it shakes my trembling joints, and dissolueth my
sinnewes with fear, to think what woofull euydence shall be brought in
against the careless ministry by the Souls of their charge, which perish
for want of instruction, when they shall stand up in plea, against them to
testify upon their heads saying: Ah alas we never received instruction by our
Pastors, we may thank them in part of our damnable destruction, which have
not sought to bring us unto God, nor taught us the way of truth, nor labored
to turn us from our sins, being without knowledge themselves, kept us in
ignorance and blindness flattering us in our sins. But now woe alas, Hosh. ^.6.
we perish because we had not the knowledge of God. Me thinks I see the woeful
wringing of hands, the trickling tears distilling from their eyes, the
condemning of themselves by speechless silence, their heads hanging down and
the diereful dent of doleful death to cease upon them. Yea me thinks I hear
their shiftles shifts, their shouting shrames crying out of their damnable
estate. For what shifts can they have before the alseeing and just judge of
all the world? Shall pretense of laws excuse them, if they can say, I have read
service to them, and the common book of Prayer, and done all that law require?
For herewith they think they have stopped men's mouths. But they slander the
laws of our Prince, which require as I suppose, most of those gifts in the
ministers that should be admitted, which Paul mentions to Titus. Howsoever
it be ouerseen of those that have admitted such, but laws of men, countenance
of Magistrates, nor the example of others shall not bear us out, in the glorious
and fearful presence of the great God, who shall sit as sole judge over al
persons and causes. But if thou have not fed the Lords people, and preached
the Gospel (though to read the word is good, to read the book of common Prayer
is good) yet thou shall not be excused since it pleased the Lord, not simply by
his word but Through preaching to save them that believe. As the public
ordinary means in his Church. Yea and the laws of the realm require such to
be admitted as are able to teach. 1. Cor. 1.21. 2. Tim. 4.1.2
And Paul gives a precise charge to Timothy to preach the word. But some man
will say that I wander from my text to speak thus much of the dumb and
careless Ministers. I swerue not from it at al. For if the Spouse straitely
charge them of Jerusalem (where God was to be inquired after in his word) to
further her to her love, then is it necessary that the neglect of this duty
in the Pastors which chiefly should help that way, should be found fault with all, especially where their own danger is greatest, for we know how the Lord
has threatened such in the law. I speak not this of the ministry that men
should insult upon the same with reproach (for our own looseness have made
us reprochful enough to the world) but rather that men should pray for the
state hereof the more carefully being so deformed. Neither do I speak to
whette the tongues of men (for it is their glory to deface the ministry)
neither yet of sinister affection against any as the Lord knows. But I
speak from a heart pitying the estate thereof. That if it might please God, the
loose ministry may see their danger, and so be moved to reform them selves
with grace, God grant them. Amen. And I speak the more of that state now
because many are here present of that calling. This title of Daughters as it is
a Metaphorical speech, borrowed from the fellowship of Virgins before their
marriage, and in the time of their suit, as Psalm 45.14. may appear: so also
this name of Virgins in the ninth Chapter of the Proverbs signifies the
Preachers of the word, Prou. 9.2.
as Prophets Apostles, etc. where wisdom sends out her Maidens to call men
to her heavenly and rich banquet, so the Daughters of Jerusalem may (not
improperly) signify the teachers in this place. For their lips should
preserve knowledge, and the people should inquire the law at their mouths,
as the prophet Malachi says, Mal. 2.7.
adding also a strong reason, to move the people to inquire, and the pastor to
teach, because he is the m^ssenger of the Lord of Hosts. Now shall we think that
the Lord will send unfit messengers, blind men and babes of his embassage or
errande, that shall not speak forth their message? Will Princes wisely
provide to send wise and learned men on their embassage? And shall we deny ye
Lord his wisdom and foresight? but we think any good enough for the Lords
errand. But al such, as they run before they are sent, so the Lord sends
them in his justice to punish the sins of men, as we heard before. Hosh.
9.7.8. Now follows. If ye find my well-beloved tell him I am sick of love.
The like diligent inquiry after Christ the Spouse makes. Canticles. 3.1.2.
Read it I pray you where she makes straight search as for a thing of high
price. So that she desires after Christ so much the more, how much the more
she was beaten back of others, yea she ever languisheth after Christ
contemning all other things in respect of him. As Paul counted all things
vile dung in comparison of Christ Jesus. These are all speeches of love, she
would have the Godly, specially the teachers to commend her in their prayers
unto God. This speech, I am sick of love, is to discover the heart and love of
the faithful toward Christ, that they cannot tell how to love him enough.
The worldly men never trouble themselves with this love* neither pine of this
heavenly and spiritual love sicknesses. It is rather sickness to the earthly
minded men to hear of this love, or to be required to love the Lord again But
they are meruellous fain of the world, which is an evil sickness (as Solomon
says). Well let us (my dear brethren) labor to affect our hearts more with
Christ Jesus, casting of al lets to study of his love and require of all the
Godly, and of the faithful Pastors that they would further us in this love.
The Spouse seems to be impudent here to spread abroad her love toward her
Suitor. For our lovers are ashamed to have it known that they are sick of
love, so also the world is ashamed to be sick of love for Christ Jesus: but
the Spouse openly confesses and bewrays her languishing after him. This
sickness of love many sweet souls labor of, some that long after the word,
having it not at home, do mourn for it and are feign to seek else where for
it: If many were sick of that disease, there were exceeding hope of happy
health for such. Some poor souls lie panting after Christ, and pine for his
comfort and residence in them, who being ouercharged with the sight of their
infirmities, and seeing them selves so far behind hand to some worthy persons
of the saints of God, also so unapt to duties, and are so fearful of the
evidence of their own sins, desiring to grow in holiness and obedience,
that they think every hour, many days, till they have more fully tasted of
Christ. But to these Christ comes willinglye and amiablye as one that will
not break a bruised reed, nor quench the the smooking flax.

Now follows upon this charge a a conference between the spouse and the
maidens of Jerusalem, standing in two questions with their aunswears, The
conference in two questions with their aunsweres.
to the 18. verse. And secondly the fruits of this conference is noted in the
17. verse. as we shall see afterward. The first question First question
verse 9. O thou fairest among women, what is thy well-beloved more then other
well-beloved, what is thy well-beloved more then an other lover, that thou do so
charge us. Here they of Jerusalem inquire the cause why she makes more
account of her well-beloved then of any other, and what singular thing she saw
in him more then in other. For her zeal had kindled the love of the Godly. And
Solomon purposely notes herein how the Godly seek to edyfie one the other by
religious conference. When they add, That thou so chargest us, or causest us
to swear, or take an oath of us, for so the Hebrew word imports, as else
where so in the 13. Chapter of Exodus verse 19. Where Moses says that Joseph
had made the Children of Israel swear, that they would carry his bones with the^
out of Egypt. For this speech is of great emphasis and force, binding all men
by a pryuye oath to help forward and edify one another, but (as I have noted
before) especially the Ministers of the word are bound by a solemn and
doubble Oath as it were, to express their care this way. These speeches
therefore are to discribe the vehemencye of love, which should be in the
Saints toward Christ, that they should never be satisfied with his love.
We therefore should be still inquiring, after Christ in his Church of his
Servants, especially of his ministers, who should be the mouth of God unto
us, till we increase and come to a full and perfect age in Christ Jesus.
Ephe. 4.
And truly it can not be, but where the heart is truly taken up with the
love of Christ, there will be an exceeding joy in his word, and a desire to
enquire of him more and more in the same. The wiseman notes the effect of the
word when it is truly resident in the heart. Pro 6.22. If my word be in thy
heart, it shall lead thee when thou walk, it shall watch for thee when
thou sleep, and when thou wakest it shall talk with thee, Meaning that when
the heart is possessed with the word, then the mind, thoughts, tongue and
members are in some practice of it. So David Psa. 37.31. The mouth of the
righteous will speak of wisdom, and his tongue will talk of judgment, for the
love of God is in his heart, and his goings shall not slide. So that the slack
hearing of the word, the small longing after it, the little joy to talk of it,
is a token of very little love or none at al toward Christ, and they are
enemies to the Spouse which being watchmen do not comfort her, showing her the
way to Christ in his word but rather discourage and hold her back. But let
them ye truly love Christ, be ever inquiring after him, co^forting one another,
conferring, meditating, praying, stirring up one another, so that by these
means, as the Spouse does here with the Godly, we may grow on in knowledge
and obedience. The minister should always be Catechizing his people,
inquiring what Christ is, what cause they have to love and make much of him,
above all other, where he is, how he is to be found, and labor to make them
pryuie to all the counsel of God as Paul did, Acts. 20.
and that from house to house. Also the husband should be examining and
furthering his wife, the wife inquyring of the husband. I pray you husband since
you should be the mouth of God to me at home, help me in knowledge, let us
often pray together, let us read the word and hear it, comforting one an
other by it. The parents should be trayning up their Children to know Christ,
the Masters the Servants. For such charge is given in diverse places. Read I
pray you Deuteronomy. 4.9. and 6.7. and 11.19. So that we should by all means draw
other on by our example. And sure it is, who so ever does not help to further
the kingdom of Christ and the salvation of men, after a sort is against him.
And they are unworthy to be counted in the flock of Christ which bestow not
their care on him, and labor not to gather together. For our sluggishenesse
suffers the kingdom of God to fall, when yet we are all called to further
the same. He that is not with me is against me (says Christ) and he that
gathers not scatters abroad. Mat. 12.30.
But many which will seem to offer courtesy to the Lord and bear him good will
in word, yet never move foot, nor bestow cost, nor seek any way to
prefer Gods glory or the preaching of his Gospel, neither yet to redress
sin, neither love those unfeignedly that fear God. And truly I know not how
a man can have any true persuasion of faith in God and true love to his
neighbor, or any comfort that he shall persevere to the end, when he is
not prepared in some measure to suffer with Christ even in trouble, and to
further him in Peace, countenauncing his Saints to the vttermoste of his power,
and to succor them when they are any ways molested and afflicted. And when he
labors not to stand by the ministers of the word in the defense and
confirmation of the gospel, which were the effects and fruits which caused
Paul to be so well persuaded of ye Philippians. Phil. 17.
For when a man steppeth back from the defense of the gospel, for fear of
trouble, or for loss of his credit, goods, estimation, etc. and neglects
the servants of God in their distress, not upholding to their power, their
credit, and good estate, it is a hard sign of starting aside from God to
this present world, as Demas did. I speak this by occasion of the Spouse
which stirs up other by her zeal, seeking help, and furtherance of ye
daughters of Jerusalem to prefer her cause to her lover, so as it is matter not
altogether alienate from my text, or impertinent to my purpose, but necessarily
incident to the matter subject. Now follows the answer to the first
question The answer to the first question.
concerning the person of her lover what he is, or what excellent thing is
in his person above others, verse. 10. My well-beloved is white and ruddy, the
chiefest of ten thousand, etc. Here follows an allegorical description of
her husband or lover Christ Jesus, which me thinks stands generally in three
points. First she describes him from his lively color and sanguine
complexion in this 10. verse. The description of the husband.
Secondly she describes him by the ennumeration of his parts or members from
the eleventh verse to the 16. verse. First his color or complexion.
Thirdly by his speech in the 16. verse. But first in this verse she commends
and prayseth his color and complexion, that he is white and ru^^y. I will not
stand curiously to descant upon the allegorical sense of these figurative
speeches. But briefly note the sense and meaning as I can neareliest gather,
and after we will make use generally of the universal description. This
whiteness and ruddinesse imports a perfect and sound complexion, near
approaching to the sanguine, noting the perfection, courage and spiritual
beauty of Christ Jesus. This quality of whitenes is a color sometime
ascribed to God the Father. Daniel. 7.9.10. Also it is applied to Christ. Apoc.
1.14. noting his eternity wisdom and deity with his father, so whiteness is
ascribed to him in his transfiguration on the mount. Also sometimes the
heavenly saints are said to be white and clothed with whiteness, because of
their glorious estate. But if I should set down reasons of al these
appellations titles or Epithets I should but open away to many questions
unnecessary to my purpose, I may not pursue these things after such sort, but
here the perfection, holiness, spiritual beauty and comelines of Christ is
noted. For so Solomon bearing his person for the time is commended for his
fayrenesse above others, Psalm. 45.2 Ruddy. This color of ruddinesse is
commended in David. 1. Sam. 16.12. It imports courage and healthfulnesse.
Some would have this to be the reason of this color in Christ, for that he
washed sinners in his blood. And albeit I dare not say that this should be
precisely meant of his bloudshedding. Yet we see sometime he is described bloody
and of a red color in the respect of his death and passion for our sins. But
here the purpose of Solomon, is to speak worthily and honorably of Christ, as
of a most comely and amiable personage, in whom nothing wants to a perfect
and spiritual beauty. The cheef among ten thousand. The spouse here seems to
amplify the beauty of Christ from the excellency of it, that he was such a
one as a man should scant find again among ten thousand, but was as the
only Diamonde, one picked out and shoaled from al other, having also the
preeminence over infinite numbers, being also as one that had don many feats
of war, and was famous for his noble exploites, worthy to wear a royal and
princely Diadem. For the simile or Metaphor is taken from the affairs of war,
as though he were a valiant personage comely and sturdy, yea even a standart
bearer for a mighty Host. And sure it is that Christ as he is above all
beutiful, and of a perfect temperature, so is he also head of men and Angels,
whereby he brings great credit and honor to his spouse, assuring us of his
valiant courage and invincible strength, who is ready to sauegarde and protect
all that trust in him, most worthy therefore to be sought after. We should
learn then to register in our hearts al excellent things of christ that we
might know both him as also the honor and benefits which we enjoy by him. And
so be able to describe him unto others, and to make reports to our families,
wives, children and servants of the great felicity we have in Christ, by
his word and spirit, to draw them on also to seek Christ's with us in his word.
Where he is described unto us most worthily and perfectly: neither is he to be
known else where. For the spouse becomes a very blab (if I may speak so
grossly) to blaze abroad to al men the secrets of her love, but this blabbing
is such a quality as will be seen in those which truly love Christ, as we
heard before. For such as are affected truly to christ Jesus loving him
unfeignedly, they are ever talking of him, of his word, of his great riches, and
of the princely dowry of his heavenly inheritance, which he inricheth his
Church withal. Also by discreet and religious conference labor to towle on
others. When they which never or seldom speak of Christ with joy, are so modest
(if it be worth that title) as they blushe to be seen or heard talking of the
scriptures or of Christ Jesus. Especially if any wicked person be in presence,
or scorners, they are then ashamed of Christ, and so bewray that they are not
affected with him. Now secondly follows the description of Christ from the
enumeration of his parts. Secondly the enumeration of his parts.
verse 11. His head is as fine gould, his locks curled and black as a raven.
When the spouse says that his head is as fine, strong or perfect gould, she
means that his head is most precious, splendent and shining for beauty. For
it seems to me to be spoken by translation: as thus, his head is gould, (that
is) perfect and pure as gould is. For it is not unwonted to the Hebrews sometime
to use both the word Cethem that is set down here, as also Zabab, which both
signify gold, by translation, for any thing that is pure of excellent. And so
some do inte^p^eat that word in the ins^^iption or first verse of the 56.
Psalm, Also Psalm. 16.1. and psalm. 57.1.
taking M^cth^m in this sense that the psalm was precious to David as gold.
But howsoever it be these corporal and earthly speeches are used by Solomon, to
bewraye and set out the spiritual beauty and personage of Christ Jesus,
noting by gold his perfection, soundnes, purity, and precious excellency. For
look of what account these precious things are to the outward man, of the
same account and greater are the glorious things of Christ Jesus to the saints
of God. Also the ceremony of gold, precious stones and jewels, was in much use
in the old law, to figure unto us heavenly riches. Therefore the Priest had a
breast plate of gold, and of most costly and precious jewels. The Temple was
wholly gilt, the Altar of beaten gold, the vessels also for the lords worship,
both to import the pureness that should be in them which come near to the
Lord, (for he will be sanctified in them that come near him) as also to note
the excellency and holiness of the worship of God. Therefore also ye word for the
pureness truth and soundnes of it is called gold. That which follows of hi^
locks curled or left up, is a speech borrowed from the use of men, having in
those times locks of here curled or standing up, that as it is the custom or
manner of men to count them comely and seemly with their locks, so the spouse
says, he lacks nothing to comlines. Not that hereby ruffians in our times
should bear out them selves in their curled hair, women with their hair
crisped and laid out as a seemly thing, when that is reprehended by Peter. 1.
Pet. 3.
But it was the manner then of some valiant men to go to. Again it may be that
she means, that as the world set by them selves and think them selves
comely with their brodred or crisped hair, so the Spouse says her love wanted
nothing to set him out. For the speech (as I said) in allegorical. And we see
that in such figures as well from a bad thing as a good, a simile may be
borrowed, as the coming of Christ is compared to a thief figuratively in the
Gospel; etc. Vain fellows therefore may not scoffingly maintain their vile
and whorishe pride by this speech, neither yet the mincing Dames their crisped
and broydred here colored with unnatural colors, as checking the Lord in
his work, as one that did not ^^lly his part in fashioning of men, but we will
add of our own, hereof come all strange apparel (as the Prophet speaks)
here of come the swynishe gorbellies, Zeph. 1.8.
their ruffes like Carte wheels about their necks. Here of spring that
filthye abomination, men to resemble women in their long here, and women to
imitate men in their dublets, and all such things as the Lord count the an
abomination, spring of this saucely checking of the Lord in his workmanship,
by seeking of new and unnatural forms. So as we commit filthiness with all
nations and borrowe of their whoredoms, as Israel and Iehudah did. Eze. 23.3.14
Who also lusting after the Chaldeans, had even their images and form of their
persons, and attire painted on their walls that they might become like unto
them, but in the end God justly sent them into captivity into Babylon, and
scattered them in bondage even in those nations whose fashions they lusted
after. The Lord grant yt the wanton lusts of our land also in these points be
not a cause in the end to turn us out of our own land, and punish us with those
nations, whose danities we have lusted after. It follows yt his hair was
black as a Raven. The contrary is ascribed to his hair. Dan. 7.9. and Apoc.
1.14. Where they are said to be as white as Wool or Snow, where the perfection,
holiness, uprightness, righteousness, and justice of Christ, specially his
felicity and eternity is noted. It should seem unto me that albeit by
blackness is not meant the contrary in all points to whitenes, yet it may
import the deformed estate of Christ concerning afflictions as it i^ re^b^ned
deformed with the world, and as Christ is said to be Esaias ^3.2. Esaias. 532.
For the beginnings of his kingdom should be base and contemptible as a root
out of a dry ground, But he has neither form nor beauty, when we see him
there shall be no form that we should desire him. But in the end he should be
most glorious, he should have a portion with the great, and divide the spoil
with the strong. Also we read in the first of the Canticles verse 5. How the
spouse says she is black, noting her afflictions chiefly. So that here also
his locks may be called Black per metonymian, that is as one that has tasted
of afflictions which may make him despised of fools, but therein his beauty
appears very much to his Saints. And usual it is to the Hebrews to call
affliction and troubles by the name of darkness and blacknes, as Mic. 7.^ verse
12 His eyes like Doves by the brooks of waters. She now describes his eyes by
the sober comlines and beuty of them, full of al singlenes innocence and
chastity, for so she means by comparing them to Doves, this simile he
amplyfieth by Periphrasis. First not simply liking them to Doves, but to most
beautiful Doves and clean, which haunt the rivers. Secondly white as the
milk shining with clear brightness, (for a Dove is very sharp and clear
sighted). Thirdly always iny^y and moist as the Doves, by the full vessels.
Whereby the perfection of Christ's age may be noted always young and never
approaching to decaying age. It may be also rod being set by, or according to
fulness, or disposed in most apt and comely order. For the word which is
translated full vessels, signifies a thing that is made to fit any hollow place
or room, as the precious stone in a ringe is fitted closly to fill up the
hollow place of the ring. So that the meaning is that his eyes are fitly placed
in most comely, full and convenient manner. Yea that he is perfectly sighted,
without blemish or any appearaunce of vnseemelynesse; but having hansome,
welfauoured and chaste looks. Al these metaphors are borrowed from earthly
things (as I have said and must often repeat) to figure a heavenly and
incomparable comlines in Christ Jesus. verse. 13. His cheeks are like a bed of
spices and as sweet flowers, or as young plants, etc Meaning that as the beds
of spices set in comely order, are pleasant to the sight and sweet to the
smell, so his cheeks were beset with a most comely and sweet smelling beard,
his lips most odourous, comely ouerhanging as the flower of the sweet and
beautiful Lilly. These figurative speeches borrowed from the comeliness of the
creatures object to our senses and applied to the person of Christ, must in no
case be corporally understood. For the holy Ghost moves not to wanton
love, nor teaches men to discribe their lovers, according to our fleshly
liking. But in all these things poynteth out a spiritual and heavenly love,
which does not satisfy it self in musing upon, or talking of our eternal love
Christ Jesus. For all the similies that may be or comeliness of the Heavens and
celestial bodies, can not sufficiently discover and make plain the beauty of
Christ Jesus our husband and constant lover.

Verse. 14. His hands as rings of Gold set with the Chrysolite or Tarshish.
Now she describes her lover by the gorgeous attire, precious gemmes, rich and
costly, Jewels which the nobles in those times used in their rings, and in
their garments golden buttons beset with precious pearls. Therefore she
names such precious stones as were then in highest price. For the Chrysolite
or Tarshish, was a very rich stone that came out of Aethiopia, glistering as
Gold, sparkling as fire, of color like the sea, somewhat green being set in
Gold. But I have not to speak of the colors, form, effects or properties, or
diverse kinds of them, it is called of some Berillus, which stone was in times
past, most used in ringes of love, or marriage rings, because of the effect
that was thought to be in it for the coupling of the love of lovers and married
folks, the six square form thereof, the kinds and qualities. I leave to the
Physiologists to inquire out. It means that he abounds with all precious and
excellent things. His belly like white Iuory covered with Saphires. The belly
or intralls is set down for ye body by Synecdochen and she says it has the
brightness of Iuory, and it is ouerlayd or beset with Saphires (that is) most
comely and most conveniently arrayed. Having all pure affections. As for the
Iuory, it is known for the pureness whitenes and virtues of it. The Sapphire is a
most precious stone of all others, so as it is called the gemme of gemmes. Al
which costly gemmes and rich Jewels, beseemly the Princes of most worthy
renown, are to note the inestmable riches, treasures spiritual and heavenly,
which Christ does possess, far surpassing and amounting in price all the
riches in the world or a thousand worlds. verse. 15. His legs as pillars of
marble fastened on sockets of fine gold. Apec. 1. His feet are compared to fine
brass most precious, yea more accounted of then Gold, it was made of salt
Peter, and a certain stone as Pliny reports. lib. 24. chap. 2. calling it a
kind of brass which is dug out of the veins of the earth in times past had
in great price. Some think it to be the same which is called Hasmal. Ezekiel. 1.
a present remedy against poisons, for if poison intoxicate be put in a
Goblet made thereof it will hiss whereby the poison is detected. But here the
Spouse compares his legs to Marble pillars, his feet to sockettes of fine
brass, noting his perfect constancy, soundness, strength and duraunce, for of
all other stones the Marble is most sound, strong, smooth, durable and
profitable. So then she commends her love as most comely through out and
personable. His countenance as Lebanon excellent as the Cedars. Noting the
stature talenesse and boldness of his countenance. Thus she commends the
person of her beloved by the several members: showing by these figurative
speeches the excellency of his person. And all these are by Solomon applied
to figure (as I said) the spiritual beauty of Christ. Now have ye seen the
lettes without, which the Spouse found in others which smote and hindered her.
Also the recovery of her zeal notwithstanding lets, in inquiring more bustlye
after Christ and charging others to further her, whereby others were stirred
also to confer with her about her lover, whereupon she takes occasion as you
see, to describe him most liuelye and worthilye hitherto, first his
complexion, then his person, as concerning his manner of speech follows
and remains to be handled, which we shall consider of with others things
that follow the next reading. The Lord give us all grace that no lets may
hinder us from following of the call of God, and that we may not alone
profess him when others do, but even when others step hark, and in the
time of trial. Laboring to stir up others by our zeal, conferring one with
another, that we may be able to make report to others of the excellency of
Christ Jesus our eternal lover, even as the Spouse does here of her love. That
we may be always commending his goodness to all ages, that so we may bring
much glory to Christ Jesus and to God his Father by our obedience, sanctimony,
holiness and care to profess his love, mercy, truth, and kindness, which
grace God grant us, and his whole Church. etc. Amen.

Let us pray. etc.
The 4. Sermon or lecture.
IN the former verses you have heard (beloved) how the Spouse has described
her lover. First from his excellent color and complexion. Secondly from his
person and the parts and members thereof. Now it remains in the third place to
consider the description of him from the manner of his speech, verse 16. His
mouth is as sweet things. And he is wholly delectable: this is my well-beloved,
and this is my lover, O daughters of Jerusalem. His mouth she uses
metonymically, for his speech and words which are sull of sweet, gracious and
comfortable doctrine, replenished with heavenly pleasures, for to the saints
of God which are seasoned with his spirit, the words and doctrine of Christ
Jesus, are most sweet and delectable. David reports the law was more sweet
unto his taste then honey and the honey comb. Psa. 19.10
This effect of sweetness and pleasantnes is ascribed unto the word. Therefore
it is said of the preacher, Eccle. 12.10. That he sought to find out pleasant
words and an upright writing, Eccl. 12 10.
even the words of truth. For the wisdom and doctrine of Christ Jesus brings
life and sweetness to the soul, so as the faithful feel a most blessed
effect of the word of Christ, and his heavenly doctrine in their hearts, which
forced Peter to answer to his master, asking of his disciples if they would
start from him as the other which saw not the use of his doctrine, Ioh. 6.68.
To whom shall we come but to thee? for thou have the words of eternal life.
This is that beloved Son of God the Father, whom he has authorized and
replenished with all heavenly wisdom, charging us that we should hear him. The
like speech is of Solomon being a figure and tipe of Christ, yt his speech was
gracious. as psa. 45.2. Thou art fayrer then the sons of men, full of grace
are thy lips because God has blessed thee for ever. In which the excellency of
the Gospel whereof Christ was a Minister is noted, which is full of grace and
sweetness, in so much that the Ministers thereof are said, 2. Cor. 5. 15, 2. Cor.
5.15.
To be a sweet savor of Christ unto God in them that are saved, and in them
which perish. For the gospel in the own nature always breaths forth a
comfortable savor of life, but because malice, rebellion and treason, lie hid
in the hearts of men against it, therefore it is deadly to the wicked and
unbelievers, thorough their own corruption. Wherefore there follows in that
45. Psalm, after mention of the gracious wisdom of Christ, that he should be
gyrded with a sword, and sufficiently armed against all his enemies and the
contemners. So then, since most sweet pleasant and amiable speeches, proceed
out of the mouth of Christ Jesus, let us willingly and cheerfully embrace and
obey them, least we be compelled to use his sword against us, Apoc. 1.16.
for a two edged swoorde comes out of his mouth, most sharp and cutting,
having two effects, either to defend, comfort and maintain the obedient, or
else to confound overthrow and destroy the disobedient and unbelievers. The wise
man says. Pro. 12.14.18 Pro. 13.14. and 14.3.
A man shall be sociate with good things by the fruit of his mouth, also the
tongue of the wise men is health, yea the instruction of a wise or Godly man is
as the well spring of life, to turn away from the snares of death, and the
lyps of the wise preserve them. Many such commendations are of the spirit of a
Godly speech proceeding from good men. Now if God has sanctified his doctrine
in the mouth of his servant to be healthful even to the soul, how sweet,
comfortable, healthful and happy are the speeches of Christ Jesus? and how
should we embrace and love the doctrine of the Gospel, which he has by his
own mouth in his own person begun to preach, and confirms the same unto us,
Heb. 1.2. and 2 3.
by his ministers and faithful teachers. It stands us in hand therefore to
examine what sweetness we find in the word of Christ Jesus, and how our souls
are taken up with the delight of it, so as we set our felicity in the word,
that it be not wormwood unto us, as it is unto most men. In deed true it is,
the wicked, reprobates, worldlinges, ruffians, dispisers of the word preached,
and such others, think the Gospel to be sugar to them, imagining they have good
taste of it. Oh say they, God is merciful, a sweet and figgy God, who forgiueth
sins freely for Christ's sake, he says, Come to me al you that labor, etc.
and I will ease you, and Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners,
Math. 11.28. 1. Tim. 1.15.
etc. These and such like sweet fragmentes, profane worldlinges and others
snatche to them selves, supposing and imagining that they have great
sweetness by them, the adulterer, drunkard, belly god, and carnal man can
say, Christ came to dye for sinners and we hope to be saved by him, etc. But
alas poor souls their sweetness shall be turned to wormwood, their pleasant
taste into gal and bitterness. It is no sweet taste of Christ's doctrine,
when we flatter our selves in sin and yet hope to escape vnpunnished because
Christ is merciful. No, no, thou deceiuest thy self, because thou delightest
still in evil, which is bitter and brings damnable agues, thou love the
speeches of mercy and remission of sins, but the judgments of god they are
very unsavory, thou have no taste nor use of them, to humble thy self before God
and to fear him, forsaking thy sins. But all doctrine that makes against
thy sins and pleasures thou suspectest and art shie of as of poison. Now
whosoever tastes of true sweetness in the word, can not but like of the
judgments of God which is a part of his word, as well as of his mercies, to
fear the one and love the other. For it is an essential properly in God to be a
judge to consound the wicked, to correct and rebuke his saints, as well as to be
merciful. Now to who^ soever gods mercy seems sweet, and not his judgments
because god is author of both, he is with out all question void of true taste
of God and his word. David prayed, O Lord teach me thy judgments. And surely
this public out cry of men, whereby they sue al for the Gospel, the Gospel,
give us the Gospel, preach not the law to us, it bewrays both a maruailous
ignorance in men, as though the doctrine and end of the law and Gospel were
utter contraryes, and were not al one in effect though diversely revealed:
therewithal it discovers a privy evidence in the hearts of men against
their own souls, that they never were truly humbled in the sight of them
selves, neither tasted of Christ aright, how soever they wrangle and seek
shyftes in their own imaginations. More then this, they vomit out before they
are aware, a heinous reproach against God, as though they would set the Lord
to school and Catechize him a new. For though they seem to insult upon men,
charging that they which preach the law and judgments are black preachers,
and black Ravens come from hell, (as I am sorry that such odious words can be
witnessed to proceed from the mouths of such as challenge to them felues the
title of learning, and reverence for their judgment) yet notwithstanding
their blows and reproaches reach even to the Lord, insomuch as the Lord framing
the hearts and mouths of his faithful teachers does speak by them. I will
not stand to prove the lawfulnes, nay the necessity of the preaching of the
law, when our times abound with sin, and wantonness is covered under the
title of the Gospel, yea when the godly themselves greatly need to be
humbled, for I suppose that any man of wisdom or mean understanding in the
word (specially if he be truly humbled) would blush to gainesaye this thing.
But let us know (my dear brethren) that the sweetenes of Christ's word,
whether teaching repentance, and a new life, promising eternal life to the
believers, or threatening the curse of God to the disobedient and unsanctified
(is sweet and comfortable to all that are truly in love with Christ Jesus,
and works in them a care to apply Gods judgments to themselves) to humble
their flesh by them, stirring the^ selves up to reformation, forsaking sin,
also it works in them a care to seal up the assurance of the Lords mercy
toward them, in that they feel the effect of the word converting their hearts
from sin, unto the living God, for the most part, men esteem of the mouth of
Christ, as full of sharp, bitter and loath some things, because they contemn or
neglect the preaching of ye gospel, thinking it a thing superfluous, so they
commend not of the sweetness of his doctrine when in ye mean time the servants
of God which with a careful conscience frequent sermons, and with a greedye
desire hear the word, they gain so much good and receive such sweetness from
the mouth of Christ Jesus (even the preachers which are his mouth) as they with
hopping hearts return to their wives, families or neighbors, so filled with ye
pleasant things of his mouth yt they say. Oh what a sweet sermon have we heard
to day, oh how my heart is ioyed in this heavenly and sweet tasting doctrine of
Christ Jesus, thus they make report, as the Spouse does here, what comfort
they have by Christ that they may also affect others. For they that truly are
in love with Christ Jesus, can not but highly accounte of the words of his
mouth. But the cause why the word is not sauouring to so many men, is for that
they delight in evil, wherebye men grow to so gross a contempt as they
command in effect the prophets not to prophesy. But as the Lord replieth
against the contemners. Mic. 2.7. Are not my words good to him that walks
uprightly? So then if all the doctrine of Christ (who is author as well of the
law as of the Gospel) be not sweet and pleasant to us, it is because we
make not conscience to walk uprightly before our God. For men will not come
to the light because their works are evil.

But it will be objected of the contemners I love the word, the sweet things of
Christ's doctrine are pleasant unto me. But the preachers they are very harshe
and collericke, others are too too Melancholic, urging heaviness, mourning
and solitarines, being too precise, they will abide no pastime, etc. tell us
of pleasant things, of wine, etc. Isai 30.10. Micah. 2.7.
Surely I answer them as before, are not the Lord his words good to him that
walks uprightly? but you are risen up against the Lord, he that walks in
the spirit and would prophesy of new wine, he shall be a prophet for this
people. Thus these men would separate ye word from ye ministry and preaching of
it, or else would have the word limited by their own affections and liking,
to serve their own turn and their filthy lusts. But we speak as we are
taught of God, 1. John. 4.6.
He that knows God hears us, he that is not of God bears us not. Also,
he that despises the ministers of God, despises God that sent us, As for our
parts we have the evidence of our own conscience, to stand for us that we
seek to do nothing against the truethe but with the truth, we have the Lord
also to witness on the one side, yea our labors and the pour of our doctrine
speak for us in the hearts of those that are converted, nay: even the
conscience of the wicked themselves do afford us some evidence, insomuch as they
tremble at the word, though they spurn against it being disobedient. So that
we stand confidentlye persuaded in our selves through the Lord, yt our
ministry is ye ministry of ye spirit of God, and ye sweet words of Christ
Jesus: even then when we do by thretning judgments seek to convert the wicked
to repentance, as also to further and increase the same, already begun in ye
godly, for we are a sweet savor of Christ unto God, in the^ which are saved
and in them that perish. 2. Cor. 2.15.
So that they which will seem to count of the word in it self as they
imagine, and yet contemn it and parbreake it up as a bitter or loathsome thing
when it is preached, certainly they never tasted in truethe of the word, but
remain deadly diseased in their souls, of spiritual, Hellishe and damnable
agues. Well: after this woorthye description of her Lover, the Spouse
vauntingly tryumpheth saying. He is wholly delectable, this is my beeloued, this
is my love, O daughters of Jerusalem. This emphaticall repetition, poyntinge
him out so often, is forcible to move those whom she talked with, to the
liking and allowing of her Lover. Thus she concludes in one word that her
love was wholye delectable, wanting nothing to comeliness and perfection. For
not being able by any figures, metaphors or similies to discribe him fully,
she in a word shuts up al, that he is altogether amiable. When she
calls him her well-beloved, she notes that as her Suitor bore good will to her,
so she also held him as her dereling and best beloved, on whom only she
could find in her heart to bestow her whole love, in calling him lover:
Solomon notes that Christ loved his Church and Spouse first, so as in loving
of him, we shall love such a one as loved us first. In this conferrence of
the Spouse with them of Jerusalem, Solomon would insinuate unto us, how the
Faithful should often be talking of their love Christ Jesus, confessinge his
Inestimable kindness toward them to allure others. It is one chief effect
or token of a true calling, when a man syncerely delights in Wisdom to be
talking of the word, to commend the Love of God in Christ, as David says
My mouth shall be always telling of the louinge kindness of the Lord, and
I will also tell of thy greatness. So also the Woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4. After
she was won by Christ's Sermon, contented not her self to be acquaynted
with Christ her self alone, but leaving her Water pot and other necessaryes,
in all haste made report of the Messiah to her Neighbors to toule on them
also. And certaynlye when a man is truly called, his desire is kindled to
make others partakers of those joys of the word which himself does feel.
He is also grieved and sorrowful when he sees it to be contemned of men.
Especially such covet to acquaynte their Wife, Children, Servants and
Neighbors, or those which have been partners with them in the days of their
vanities, with that Heavenly message of life. For we should be careful that
whomsoever we have offended or hurt by our example before, or they with whom
we have had fellowshippe in evil, might by our means be brought to a
taste of Christ, that we commending the grace of God in Christ to them,
might by some means draw them (if it may be) from their vanities to Christ.
Saying: Oh that you felt the good that I feel by the word, for where I
loved sin before, now I hate that, and Christ Jesus is my love. Yea let
every one say to other, it pityeth my soul and I am covered with shame and
blushing to think how I have before times lived in vanity, when I knew not
Christ aright. But now Oh happy I, I see the love of Christ toward me in his
word, and I can not but love him again. Thus we should be reporting the good
that we have by Christ, seek to make others partners with us. If it be a
duty of one Christian to another, much more should ministers towle on their
people, the husbands their wives, the parents their children, ye masters their
servants, etc. Then who soever delight not to talk of God in his word, but
rather envy the forwardnes of others, it is a manifest taken that they belong
not to Christ. What shall we say then of them which will not commend Christ to
their people, nor draw them on, but rather discourage and pull back? how can
they have any true love to Christ them selves, when they are afraid men should
come too near him? Thus Solomon has allegorically set before our eyes a
description of Christ Jesus.

Since then we have presented before our eyes so honorable a state, so gracious
a personage, so peereles a Prince, so worthy a Moschel, wise and rich in all
precious jewels as Solomon, victorious as David, finally who is all in all, why
should we not highly account of him, honorably entertain him, and with all
submission subject our selves unto him as our only head and guide? who shines
in passing beauty, surpasses in all victorious courage, in princely dignity, in
perfect pureness, his habit is most seemly, his comely looks most gracious and
amiable in the eyes of his saints, his face wholly glorious of perfect hue,
sweet with heavenly perfumes, odoriferous with spiritual spice and ointment,
his garments and attire most costly and orderly, man garments of unspotted
righteousness, and most perfect holiness, whereby he justifies and
sanctifies others. His breasts, loins and al his body void of al carnal
affections, but replenished with heavenly and spiritual, he is garnished with
hurtles innocence, with inuinsible constancy, with enduring patience, with endless
love, his mouth abou^deth with all heavenly wisdom and doctrine full of al
saving health. Finally there is nothing wanting unto Christ, but he is the glory
of his father, the riches, the only joy and delight of his Father in who^ he
is well pleased, being therefore in favor with him we can want nothing. Who
would not then be rainshed at ye offer of so gracious and worthy a peer, who
would stay with lingering steps and heavy gange to fellow faintly but rather
cheerfully so rich and friendly a lover? yea who is there, but would make all the speed may be, til he were with him in his dwelling place? But it is wounder
to see how our nature bewitcheth us, and Satan casts a mist before our eyes,
that we can not see these excellent things in christ Jesus, but count him a
holy base personage and contemned, because he is so smally regarded of the
world and seems at first blushe deformed and despised of men. But oh how
dear is he in the eyes of God? And to his saints he is most amiable, they can
not want him, neither will be from him though they beg with Christ for a time,
and have not where on to rest their head, for they are sure to enjoy
incomparable treasures in the end, in the mean while they behold them with the
eyes of faith. But alas the miserable world they see no such thing. Let us
therefore (my dear brethren) make use of this description which the Spouse has
made of Christ Jesus, that since we hear of him to be so famous, comely,
perfect, innocent, holy, valiant, constant, loving, kind, yea wholly amiable:
Also since we see that he abounds with all heavenly and eternal riches
wherewith he is willing and able to pleasure al his lovers, let us with all joy
and willingness embrace him, offering him self unto us in his word with all
his riches: let us believe his word, obey it, joy in it, comforting our selves
in the sweet things of his mouth. Let us yield to his suite, becoming
commenders of his love toward us. Talking of his kindness, stirring up
others to love him with us, that we may prosper together in all true and
unfeigned love and obedidience toward his majesty, which grace God grant us.
Amen.

Now follows the second question of the conference, verse 17. The second
question.
O thou fairest among women whither is thy well-beloved gone, whither is he turned
a side, etc. After the spouse had so described the person of her love to the
damsels and madens her companions, his complexion, members and speech, making
report of him in such honorable manner in their conference about his person, at
the hearesay of his beauty, virtues, excellent qualities, incomparable riches,
her companions are taken with love toward him, so as they join with her in
seeking her love, inquiring of the Church where her beloved is become, that
they also may inioye the benefit of his love. And she (as a blab) discovers
the haunte of her lover, willingly consenting to admit their fellowship, nay
seeking earnestly for it, that they may together embrace that heavenly and
spiritual Suitor. (For as I said, it is the property of the Godly which have in
truth tasted of the love of Christ to labor to draw on others, participating
that sweet and rich benefit unto them). Finally the Spouse after the
narration of the excellencye of her love, the more to allure others by her
example, adds an Epiphonema, or concluding sentence in the end in her own
person, assuring her self to be one with her love Christ in a most holy
communion, and that she is a feoffy with him in all his riches, affiauncing her
self to him, being persuaded of his love, desiring his presence with her all
her life, professing that what soever happen, come life or death, health or
sickness, she is her beloueds to live and die. Yea what soever shall be said, or
how so ever Satan and men should labor to inueagle her from his love, yet she
will be constant and persevere in his love to the end. Thus she whetteth and
sharpeneth her faith by this means to rescue her self under the shadow of his
wings, hoping for his continual residence with her, to feed among his lillyes
and repast him self in the company of his Spouse and Church. O thou fairest
among Women. This beauty is ascribed to the Spouse in respect of that beauty
which she borrows from Christ her husband, for she had before. Chapter. 1.
confessed her blackness by reason of her sins and afflictions, but we that
are most vgglesome to behold in our selves, are in Christ made most comely.
Whither is he gone that we may seek him with thee? So they inquire the place
of his abode that they may seek him with her. These words include the fruit
that came of the uttering and recovering of the Spouses zeal, and of that
conference which she had with her companions, 2. The fruit of the conference.
and this is interlaced in the questions, yet I note it a part, for good
considerations. That we may see the effect of the profession of the Church
that others are drawn on by her. In which much comfortable doctrine for our
instruction offers it self. For we are taught that they which have profited
in knowledge, and are acquainted in the Lords misteryes, are called,
sanctified, and have outgon their brethren in any graces, should become
careful and diligent to help forward the nouices and yonglinges in religion,
drawing on those that are not yet come on. Furthermore they which are not
forward, but ignorant or behind hand to others should cast off all pride and
shame to prepare them selves to be helped of their brethren. We find yt it was
often prophesied that in the kingdom of Christ, the Gentiles should spur
forward one an other, provoking one an other to seek the Lord, and become
examples one to the other, ioining together in a most holy unity to seek after
God as in places which we have alleged before. Esaias. 2.2. Mic. 4.3. Also the
prophet Zachary mentions this thing in the eight chapter of his prophecy,
verse. 21. They that dwell in one City shall go to an other and say, up let us go
and pray before the lord and seek the Lord of hosts. I will go with you also.
In which we see a lively Image of that practice which should be among
Christians, to allure and entice one another, yea one neighbor to draw on
another. For they also vow that they in their own persons will accompany them
in seeking the Lord. Oh that this Christian fellowship and heavenly society of
the saints of God, were more carefully practiced among men. But alas, such is
the misery and contempt of our times, that he which labors to seek after
God, in hearing his word, frequenting Sermons, resorting to the company of
the Godly, persuading others also to seek God with them, such a man is counted
(O intolerable contempt) even a monster among men, or as an owl in the day
time among the birds. And as Isaiah says, he that refrayneth from evil,
makes himself a pray. Isai. 59.15.
Oh say the scorning raylers, now this holy man will go to heaven in a Hey
barn, now these Puritans flock together, and I cannot tell what scornful
reproaches they hurl out against those which would feign profit by hearing of
the word. Yea I tremble to think upon their damnable speeches which they
spewe out of their poisoned mouths, and the mischiefs which they conceive in
their viperous hearts against the servant of God. Thus our times (ah alas)
in steed of inquiring one of another and seeking after God together, do
despise their brethren, casting the Lord behind them. But let not us be
dismayed at these reproaches and taunts of the wicked, so that we should cease
to stir up all that we can to seek Christ Jesus with us. Let ye minister
exhort, persuade and earnestly call on his people to ioin in this christian
society. Let the husband say to his wife, children and servants, come I pray
you wife, let us go to the sermon, children and servants hasten and make
speed, that we may together seek after the Lord of hosts, and let every man
ad this, I will go with you also. So one neighbor should say to another, I pray
you neighbor let us go together to such a sermon or such a godly exercise, and
I will go with you. So let us persuade, not only in word but in example also to
do our selves that which we require of others. For many there are that can say
to others go, which go not themselves. Some husband can be content his wife
go or his child (of which there are but few) but he will not move him
self, which is a lamentable and doleful estate: for though we should be
willing that al men should go to God, hearing his word, using his
Sacraments, praying unto him carefullye and continually, if we our selves ioin
not with the Godly in these holy exercises, and in this holy Communion, unity
and fellowship, what shall it boot us? What shall it pleasure a man to see his
Wife go to Heaven, and him self go to hell, or what shall it benefit a Wife to
see her Housbande careful to serve God and so go to life, but her self
refusing the ordinarye means of Salvation to taste of eternal Death? For
whosoever joins not himself in Christian society with the church of God,
cutteth of him self from God, and dismembreth him self from Christ Jesus.
Neither can any man be of God which hears not his word, John. 8.47.
yea and that by his servants and ministers. For he that is of God hearetth us
(says S. John, 1. John. 4.6.
) but he that is not of God hears us not. Also no man can have fellowship or
acquaintance with the father or the son, unless he abide in the word, for
whosoever transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ has not
God, 2. John. 9.
etc. Alas (my dear brethren) let there not be found a froward heart in any
of you, to be so proud or ashamed that you should be loath to be drawn
forward of your brethren to seek after God in his word, where only he is
truly to be found. Oh let us join hands and hearts together (good
christians) to seek our God whilste he may be found, let us say one to
another, neighbor if you will go to any sermon or Godly exercise, I will go
with you and bear you company. I speak grossly unto you, (but for your good)
and yet no otherwise then the spirit of God spoke by Zacharye. Now as there
are some that can be content, others go and themselves tarry at home, so there
are of the other side some that can afforde themselves leisure, and can beteem
to be saved themselves, but are very Nigardes and churles toward their wife,
children, servants or neighbors. Never caring to further them or to use
means to draw them on, being untoward of them selves, which is a heinous
iniurye against the Souls of those that belong to us, since we stand charged
from the Lord upon the penalty of his high displeasure, and forfaiture of his
favor, to teach our household, children and servant, acquainting them with
the Lords will, making them privy to his heavenly council enacted in the
parliament house of the heavens, and proclaimed to men by the preaching of his
word. Look I pray you upon such places, perusing them with reverence, as lay
this charge upon us from the Lord to teach our household and children, yea
even our childrens children Deu. 4.9.10. Deu. 6.7. and 11.19. But our times
think this a precisenes, or at least a duetye that stands at our own
curtesy to do or not to do. As though God made Laws, or drew out statutes
vnauthorized, and sent them down to men leaving them to their will and wisdom,
to be interlined, altered or confirmed at their pleasure. No: we must not ad
nor take from his word, Apoc. 22.18.19.
upon pain of damnation and danger of all the curses that are written in Gods
book. Let us therefore in Gods name (my brethren) be forward our selves,
therewithal likewise careful over others A third sort of people there is,
which neither themselves will enquire after Christ, and as much as lie in them
do also wilfully hinder others, with scorning, railing at them, end speaking,
taunting, disouraging, dissuading, putting in ye heads of such as they dare
bewray them selves t^, saying, what mean you to be thus zealous in Religion,
and to be so precise? You see wise men, and they of countenance, and some
grave Fathers like not of this way, you will be laughed at, if you gadde thus
to sermons. And you shall be slouted behind your back, you will also indaunger
your self to trouble, and a thousand other such poisoned charms the subtle
Adder sets a work to discourage the saints of God, and to carry many
souls unto Hell. Some will add this complaint, that many undo them selves with
going to sermons, and poor men can not live for them. Thus as Pharaoh they
seek to set the poor so a work, as they might loyter in matters of
salvation. Other some they ask what need these sermons on the working days,
is not the sunday or Lords day enough, and I can not tell what. But thus they
envy the work of God in saving men every way, Not knowing that we had
need to be occupied in the word of God day and night. And some are loath
that on the Sabbath day either, there should be continually Sermons etc. As
the rulers, of the Synagogue which checked the people for that they came to
Christ to be healed on the Sabbath. Luke 13.14.


But a fourth sort of people, they go them selves to seek after God and to
pray to him, enticing also others by their example, of the which sort there
are very few. Yet certainly we ought to labor (as I said) that where we have
before our calling, done hurt by our example in deed or word, to our Wife,
children, servants or our companions, we should now redeem that occasion by
a Godly sobernes and holiness of life. They also which have been partakers with
us in corruption and sin, should by our means if it may be, even be made
partakers with us of grace. For this is one thing which undoubtedly we do not
for the most part make conscience of. He that has been a companion with
drunkards, or ruffians, swearers, or vain civil men before his calling, he
should labor when him self is called, and sees the damnable estate of such
men, to make his companions privy to the damnable estate that they are in, and
show them what happiness it is to leave those ways of vanity to fear God
aright, and that if they were out of that hellish estate, and saw the mirye of
it, they would not for a thousand worlds be in it again, how so ever it
seems to the flesh pleasant for the time. Oh the Lord give us eyes to see
this matter and hearts to practice it. But now let us see further what this
gracious example of forwardnes in religion works in the godly, even that they
are made desirous to be coopartners with the church in the graces of Christ
Jesus. Wherefore the maidens they seeing the Church so wonderfullye ravished
with the love of Christ, would needs know where he was become, yt they may
seek him with her. The like fruit altogether Zachary. chapter 8. verse 23.
notes should break forth in the Church of the Gentiles, for says he. Ten
men of the nations should take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, and
say, we will goo with you, for we have heard that God is with you. So then it
is a special property incident to the children of God, to be humble, lowly and
willing to learn of others, casting away pride, scornefulnes and shame: for
many are too modest, or rather squaymishe in that point If this readiness should
be in the Saints to catch one another, making offer of themselves to accompany
the godly unto God, and all godly exercises: then what shall be said of those,
which not only are not willing to join with the children of God, but even
rushe upon them, thrusting them away from them, as most noisome and hurtful,
pulling others back what they can? sure they bewray that as yet they have no
fellowshippe in this holy and precious society with Christ Jesus.

Again, they which are forward and excel others in graces, must take heed
that vayneglorie vndermind not their hearts, or that contempt and
scornefulnesse do not set them afloate, to despise or neglecte their brethren,
or to condemn those that are not so far forward as themselves, but with all
amiable modesty labor to encourage and draw them on. O that we could strive
with a godly envy one to outgoe another in godliness, yet so that by our
godly counsel and holy life we might be means to stir up others, procuring
them to a holy emulation. It is reported in the fourth chapter of John his
Gospel, what good the report and example of the woman of Samaria did in that
city where she dwelled, to allure many of that place to believe in Christ,
which were after more confirmed in faith by Christ himself. So we should
labor that not only they of our own household, parish or country, should
be occasioned by us to seek after God, but it were to be wished that the
state of the Church of our land were such thorowout, as that we being
governed all according to godly Discipline, in most happy and religious
manner, the word of GOD having pre-eminence in all places, persons and
causes, even other Nations: yea, the Jews them selves might be provoked to
emulation by us. Saint Paul I remember in his epistle to the Romans the
eleventh chapter, verse 11. Speaks that the Gentiles should draw on the
Jews by emulation to follow the true God by their faith. I demand then (says
he) have the Jews stumbled that they should utterly fall? God forbid, but
through their fall salvation comes to the Gentiles to provoke the Jews to
emulation, or to follow the Gentiles. For to this end God adopteth the
Gentiles into the place of the Jews, that they seeing the Gentiles joined unto
God, perceiving also the fruit of their faith, they might be set on fire to be
reconciled unto God again, repenting them of their falling from him, that so
with the Gentiles they might again be flocked into the fellowship of ye
church. And certainly we al incur a great and blameable fault, that we are
no more touched with pity over the nation of the Jews, by whose fall we were
lift up into the Church, whose diminishing is our riches, that we pity no more
their estate and blindness, nor praying for their vprising, conversion and
restoring, whose receiving again, what is it? but life to us from the dead? For
I see not the contrary but that the Lord will yet bring back again some of the
Jews to his truth, that they may be turned to their God, though the most of
the nation perish in blindness. Let us then bestow upon them this courtesy,
to pray for their conversion, and to live so in holiness and righteousness
our selves, that the Jews and all other, may see that we fear and serve the
true and living God. That so they may be moved by our means, to seek Christ
Jesus with us, being parteners with us of that health, the foundation whereof
sprung to us from the Jews. For the redeemer shall come unto Sion and to them
that turn from iniquity in Jacob. Esaias. 59.20.
We are therefore sore to be blamed, when we so scornefully reproach the Nation
of the Jews, that when we would speak disdainefully of any man, we think we
can not speak more haynously, of him then to call him a Jew, also any
deceitful, false, spiteful, or unkind touch that is served us of any man,
we say, he has served me a Iewishe trick, and such like railing speeches we
throw out against that miserable dispersed nation, whom all the world have
cause most to pity, and pray for their turning unto God. But this is a token
of uncharitable, vnreligious and unchristian hearts. Let us therefore offer
them this kindness, to wish well to them and all others, to labor to towle
on others, as the Spouse does in this place, that they may with us go to
seek the Lord of hosts, and our Savior Christ Jesus. Thus should we
further one another to Christ, for we are exceeding negligent this way, to
redeem our former times of vanitye spente with our brethren. As for my self
(miserable man that I am) unworthy to do any good in the Church of God, or to
any of his Saints. Oh how feign would I, that I were as ready and able to
do as much good in furthering of Christ's Kingdom, as any of us have
furthered the kingdom of Satan and sin before our calling. Oh that you all
present had such taste with me of the excellencye of Christ Jesus, as you
might all say with one voice I will go with you, and will seek Christ with
you. Oh that my sins and yours would permit the Lord to bless my labors
among you this day, as also at all times and in other places of his Church. As
some souls might be gained to him by my poor mynisterye, that it may be the
joy of my heart. Yea, would to God that many souls among you might be so
affected unto Christ in truth, being turned from your own ways that ye
might say, as David did to Abigail. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel who sent
thee this day to meet us, 1. Sam. 25.32
blessed be this day. Blessed be this sermon or counsel, and blessed be thou,
which haste kept me this day from such an evil, etc. and caused me to have
a sight and disliking of my former life and such a taste of Christ Jesus, that I
utterly abhor my self for my sins, heartily embracing Christ Jesus, vowing
hereafter to endeavor to walk in all the ways of God. I speak grossly unto you
brethren, and abase my self to move your affections to the love of God, for
the love of Christ Jesus even constrayneth me there unto for your good. Let no
man therefore abuse my homeliness of speech in this point, being to your
edifying and gayning of glory unto God. But let us (I pray you beloved)
consent together in one to seek after Christ with his Church til we have
found him out, that we may safely assure our selves of his love to the end as
the Spouse does afterward, which grace God for Jesus Christ his sake grant
unto every one of us Now follows the answer to the second question of the
maidens in this conference, verse 18. My beloved is gone down into his garden
to the beds of spice, to feed in the gardens and to gather Lillies. Some make
this verse the beginning of the sixth chapter. But I read this and the verse
following with the fifth chapter. For that they have most proper relation to all the matter going before in this 5. chapter, and is alienate and utterly
impertinent to the matter following in the sixth chapter. Especially since it is
a knitting up of all the matter of her complaints in her beginning and coming
on, also a full conclusion of her love, a fit answer likewise to the second
question, in the dialogue and conference had with her companions, and so a full
conclusion of the whole. She signifies to her companions that her love is
descended into his garden and Church on earth, being conuersaunt amongst men,
in his own person sometime, also by his Ministers, by his word and
Sacraments, finally by his spirit properly in his saints. For by these means
Christ is said to be come down among his, and to be resident in his Church even
to the end of the world. (For Christ is not of ye number of ye non
residentes) but testifies to his Church saying, Fear not, I am with you to
the ends of the world. Solomon uses a figurative or metaphorical speech
borrowed from the cituation of Jerusalem, that they went down hill, and
descended to go to their out gardens, for Sion was a great hill whereon the
City was built. In this answer also the church has relation to her former
suit made to Christ, chap. 4: ver. 16. that he would come to his garden and
eat his pleasant fruit, also to the answer which was given her, that he had
taken possession of his riches, and was come into his garden, so that as Christ
is in heaven with all his riches, so is he also in his garden on earth
solacing himself, and gathering daily fruit in his church, Ioh. 15.16.
by his ministers whom he sends, that they may bring forth more fruit, for
true it is, that albeit Christ has all riches in him self, and needs not
any, yet does he gather fruit in his church at the hands of his servants:
In so much as they yield obedience unto him, and are in this respect called
the first fruits of his creatures, because they are consecrate, sanctified
and set apart from the world Satan and sin, to serve the Lord, and are
called his Portion and inheritance in many places. But the fruit which they
yield, is not their own proper or natural in them, but supernatural and
from above, springing out of the fountayn of the Lords good pleasure and will,
is also framed, graffed, nouryshed and increased in them by his word preached.
For all these things the cause efficiente, the isntrumental means with the
effect thereof, is pithily comprysed in few words by the Apostle James in
the first Chapter of his Epistle at the 18. verse, where he says, Of his own
will begat he us, by the word of truth, that we should be as the first
fruits of his creatures, Also the graces of Gods spirit are called fruits.
Gal. 5.22. The qualities likewise necessarily incident to repentance are caled
fruits. Mat. 3.8. Which metaphorical speeches, import ye God looks to reap
fruit at our hands in his church, that we may grow from faith to faith, from
strength to strength from grace to grace, til we come to full ripeness in
Christ Jesus, to be gathered into his barn of eternal felicity in his coming.
These fruits that the Lord gathers and reapeth at our hands are his own
then, insomuch as he works them in his saints that he may receive his own
with advantage, crowning his own works in us. It were expedient therefore
that we labor to be fruitful in all heavenly knoweledge and obedience, that
Christ coming down to visit his Garden or church, (as it is set down in the
sixth Chap. ver. 10.) he find us not empty or fruitless, that he should have
no pleasure in us, and so be forced to cast us up to the spoil. Sure it is
(the more is the pity) the Lord should find but small fruit among us if he
should survey our Church in this land. He has lent us the name of his
Church, and given us a lease of his garden 21. years, and has added to that
three years more from year to year, but alas we have been il tennants to the
Lord, his church is little stored by us, his hedges and walls are as it were
plucked down by many lying in decay. For where true discipline should build up
the breaches of the Lords fence, and should keep out the noisome beasts, the
lion, ye wolf, the bear, the swine, dogs and such hurtful cattle and beasts,
we (ah alas) have this garden of the Lord hindered by such Lions, woolfs, privy
scorpions, foxlike papists, swinish Athists, brutish belly gods, envious dogs,
which al, with others would easily show their nature against the people of God
if they had opportunity, and yet they are hatched (oh pitiful danger) and
nou^ished even in the lap of the church. Thus many Cankers breed in the bowels
of the church, heresies, fond opinions, familists, Brounists, and such other.
Thus by such means (as lamentable it is to see) the graft of godliness and
zeal is hindered. And through the neglect of officers and magistrates rather
then laws, these beasts swarm in our Church. Also drunkards, swearers,
whores, adulterers, proud pecockes, raylers, contemners of God and his word,
prophanations of the Sabbath, and an innumerable kinds both of sinners and
sins which ouergrow the church as a wilderness, which because magistrates
do not labor to root out so carefully as they ought, the Lord does
strangely consume some sinners by the fire of his wrath from heaven. Which al
should be cut off by discipline or at least way be forced to some reformation.
Can it be that the Lord will trust us any longer with a Lease of his garden? we
abusing him in such manner, so as we grieve the Lords soul with our
unfaithfulness and cause his soul to hate us. Esaias. 1.14.
Who bestows such cost on us and we prosper so little, as he can gather very
few Lillies amongst us, he wants the fruit of our hearts and lips, as
faith, love, fear, obedience, charity, thanksgiving, praise, invocation,
hearing his word, professing his name, etc. But some perhaps will say, why it is
in as good case as we found it, the same discipline, laws, and doctrine are
still, which was in ye beginning of her majesty's reign, so the Lords garden and
church is not impaired, and it shall be left in as good case as it was found,
and better then heretofore. Sure the Lord does not pla^t a vineyard and let it
out to stand or be kept always at a stay, but to be tilled and dressed, that
it may grow and prosper to bring forth more fruit. For he requires that
men bestow their care, labor, wisdom and trauail upon it, that he may
have it more furnished and fenced. For he tataketh pain him self about his
Church to that end, that sin may be suppressed and Godliness advanced But
the Lord make us truly thankful in Christ Jesus, for those beginninges and
proceedinges of his church which we have, yt he has planted his word and true
religion amongst us, countenancing the same his truth, with the authority and
sword of our gracious Princess Elizabeth, as also with many worthy learned,
godly and noble Councellers, as also other learned Patrons of his Church,
without whom we should find to our great misery and the spoil of religion,
how hardly the Lords garden should be at al kept without them. But our
sins, yea our contempt and neglect of the word of God and his glory, do
hinder the Lord from blessing us with that increase which otherwise we might
enjoy, yea our sins betraye the state of our Church and land, and deserve
the loss of so Princely a Deborah, and other woorthye personnages wherewith
our Church is enriched, yea that the Lord should take away all the walls and
defenses of our church and land, and give us over to the spoil. Let us
therefore if we bear any good will to our Church or Country, labor to purge
our selves from al corruption and to repent us of our sins, that we may
bring forth good fruits, such as the lord may have pleasure in, that he may
have a delight to abide among us. For it is the sins of a land that causes
the Lords wrath to smoke against the same, but our land I suppose have
exceeded the old world, Sodom and Gomorrha, Israel, Iehuda, and al lands in
strange sins, so that if in comparison, Ezec. 16.51.
Judah and the inhabitants thereof justified Sodom, for that their sins
exceeded the sins of the Sodomits. Then we have justified al Nations in
comparison of our sins, and therefore are in danger to all the fearful plagues
that are mentioned in the book of God, unless we speedely therefore repent, I
fear we shall taste of such judgments as that the stranger that shall come from
a far land, Deuteronomy. 29.22.
shall say when they see the plagues of this land and the diseases thereof,
wherewith the Lord shall smite it, (because it shall be fearfully destroyed except
they repent) Oh wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this land, and ver.
24. and ver. 25.
how feirce is this great wrath? And it shall be answered because they have
forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of their Fathers, and have sinned
against the Lord. Let us al then (my dear brethren) be humbled with Godly
sorrow that may cause repentance unto salvation not to be repented of: Being
offended with our selves that we have not sooner and more earnestly inquyred
after Christ, praying the Lord to beautify his Garden and Church of this
land, with such sweet flowers, as he may please him self in us, and we may
grow and prosper in all fruits of the spirit. I can not finish this chapter to
day, because of time, and the matter of the conclusion though in few words,
yet includes very comfortable and heavenly matter, which cannot in a few words
be uttered, I will therefore defer it til to morrow, when by Gods grace I shall
finish the whole. Now the Lord our good God sanctify our hearts to conceive
the excellencye and feel the sweetness of the words of the mouth of Christ
Jesus, that we being our selves purged and sanctified by his word and truth,
may carefully labor that others with us may truly be affected toward him,
that we may ioyn together in seeking of Christ, so as in the end finding him
in his word and Sacraments, and feeling of him by his spirit, our souls and
bodies may become clean, and well tilled Gardens, beautified with all heavenly
fruits of his spirit, as that Christ may have pleasure to walk in us, to
dwell and make his abode in us unto the end, and in the end we also may be
received with him into his heavenly Garden of eternal joy, to dwell, continue
and abide with him, in the company of all the glorious Angels and fellowship of
the heavenly saints, in the presence of God his Father, for ever and ever.
Amen.

Let us pray. etc.
The fifth Sermon or lecture.
YEsterday we heard (beloved) a part of the description of Christ, concerning
his speech and sweet thing of his mouth, with the excellency of his doctrine:
also the second question of the maidens concerning the place where he used with
the answer, between which was interlined what fruit came by this conference,
and how the Godly at Jerusalem were kyndled with love to Christ by the example
of the Spouse, whereby she answers to her companions making them privy to the
place of his abode, showing how the church is his Garden, and that he
delights to be conversant there, yea the soul of every faithful man is a
Garden enclosed, where Christ looks for fruit, and comes down thither by
his spirit, gathering the fruits of obedience, sanctimony, praise and thanks
giving. Now we have the conclusion of the whole remaining to be spoken of,
verse 19. I am my beloueds and my beloved is mine who feeds among the
Lillies. Thirdly the conclusion.
This is the third part in general of the manner of the coming on of the
spouse, or of her obeying of her calling, and admitting of the suit of her
lover, (which I noted to be the second part of the chapter). For after the
suit of her husband whereof you have heard verse 1. and 2. and her manner of
coming on in being encumbered with lets at the first, yet over striding them,
and recovering her zeal breaking forth into a noble and famous description of
her lover, whereby she affects her companions greatly toward him, now in a
triumphing manner, encouraging others by her example, she concludes with an
Epiphonema, and finitiue sentence or determination, assuring her self to be
one with her love, and makes up the match in her heart with Christ Jesus,
purposing to hold out in faithful love to the end toward him. Persuading
also her own heart of his faithful permanent and eternal love toward her.
So that we will consider in this last clause and sentence as the vpshot of the
whole matter. Two things in the conclusion.
First the holy society, communion, conjunction and unity that is between
Christ and his Church, joined with an indissoluble band and knot. Secondly the
perseueraunce, also the constant, permanent and certain estate of the Godly
and elect, whereby they stand assured of the eternal love of Christ Jesus
toward them, First the unity between christ and his Church.
and of their own salvation in him. First therefore concerning the comfortable
unity and conjunction of Christ with his Church. We see that it is described
unto us by many similitudes in the scriptures, wherein most lively,
effectually, and co^fortably that holy, spiritual and sacred society whereby we
are incorporate into Christ is discovered. As in the 15. Chapter of the
Evangelist Saint John: our savior Christ under the parable of a Vine and the
branches, shows the mutual love between him and his members, as also the
sweet conjunction whereby they are necessarily joined together, that the life
of the one stands not without the life of the other, and the perfection of
the one is not without the perfection of the other. For Christ has
inseperably joined all the faithful unto him self, so as without them he
counts him self as it were imperfect. Therefore Paul Ephesians. 1.23. after he
had magnified the grace of God toward the elect, and highly commended the
excellency of Christ Jesus whom God had made the head of his Church, he
concludes that the Church as it is the body of Christ, so it is his fullness.
As if he should say, in that God the Father has ordained his Son to be the
head of his Church, even as the head without the body, is not full but
imperfect, and the body wanting any member is not in all parts complete, so with
out the number of his saints which should fulfill the mistical body of Christ,
even Christ him self is after a sort imperfect. Not that he is so in him
self, for he is in his own nature full infinite, and perfect admitting
neither maius nor minus. But this is the riches of his grace that he ^ath so
united every one of his saints and elect unto him, as he can not want any one
of them. The force of this speech is wonderful to him that has the eyes of
faith, and exceedingly comfortable to the troubled conscience, which has once
in truth tasted of the mercies and grace of God, in whom also the work of
faith has been truly begun, though it be sometime in a dampe and as it were
smoothered up, yea it can not but rauishe them to see that Christ cannot want
nor cut of any member that he has once begun to graft into him self. But as
ye Vines and such like plants every branch thereof receives juice, moisture,
life and nourishment from the stock and root, has also a necessary community
with the stock in all things, so as from the stock or root is conveyed life
and nourishment to every branch: so every faithful person which is in Christ
receive from him al necessary juice and supplement, to the nourishing and
preserving of a spiritual life in them. Though sometime some of the branches
hang the head, but yet they which are planted of the heavenly Father, shall
never be cut off but shall have life eternal with Christ Jesus. This thing also
is set forth unto us in the simile of a body even of the head and the members.
Therefore (as I said) Christ is called the head of the Church, Ephesians. 1.22.
Col. 1.18. For there is a mutual analogy and proportion, betwetne the head and
the members and Christ and his Church. Wherefore the whole Church considered in
Christ and his members, is called not only a body but also it is called by the
name of Christ. 1. Cor. 12.12. So as there is a necessary unity between
Christ and his members, whereby they are made one, therefore follows in the
13. verse. of that Chapter, that by one spirit we are al baptized into one
body, whether Jews or Gentiles, bond or free. Wherein the holy and sweet
Communion between Christ and his members is laid forth, so as verse. 27.
he concludes, now you are the body of Christ, and members for your part,
noting that they alone without other churches, were not the body of Christ,
but they with all other should be associate to the church in all times and places.
Furthermore certain it is, that as the body can not be absolutely perfect, if
it want any, even the least member, so Christ counts not himself perfect
til he has every one of his members, namely the believers united unto him. And
this body of Christ which is ye Church, receives life from him, yea every
member is nourished, kept and maintained by one and the same spirit, which
being derided from Christ, spreads it self by equal measure according to
the proportion of faith into every believer. So as the spirit of God is as it
were the soul of the Church, whereby every member receives of the fulness of
Christ, being quickened by him, and living by a common life with Christ,
whereby they are assured that they are one with him, and have life in him. So
as Paul. Gal. 2.20. testifies that when he was in Christ, he lived not, but
Christ lived in him. And albeit the members of Christ have not always a like
feeling of life in them selves, but sometime they seem to be benumbed and a
cold as it were, having no nimblenesse or agilitye in them selves, yea as it
were a sleep and void of feeling, so as they scantly can have comfort, that
they are of the body of Christ, yet this hinders not, but that they are joined
still to their head, since it is as impossible that any member, that is
truly grafted into Christ should perish, be cut or want life, as it is
impossible that Christ him self should want life. I speak this in the
respect of the free grace of God, communicating life unto us in Christ, also
for the comfort of such poor souls, as being graffed into Christ by faith,
having also felt of the power of his death and resurrection in truth, in that
they are reformed from their former ways and desire to please God in
holiness, yet in the present feeling of their miseries and imperfections can
not have comfort, but lie as poor members wounded and panting for life for the
time, when yet life is not utterly out of them. As for the bold and
presumptuous sinner or libertine, as he never tasted of the life which is in
Christ, by mortification and sanctification, so he has no warrant yet that he
is of Christ, and therefore I can not assure any such of the certainty of that
life. This unity and conjunction is also figured unto us in the simile of a
building or house. For we are all lively stones of a spiritual building,
couched and laid upon Christ Jesus the foundation and corner stone of the
building. As 1. Pet. 2.4.5. So that as many stones couched and placed together
in order do make one building, even so Christ and his members become one
spiritual house. Also as as the bread and wine received into our bodies,
become one with our nature and substance, so Christ and his members become
one and are as it were incorporate together. They therefore which by faith
receive Christ Jesus in the Sacraments, applying him with all his riches and
mercies unto them selves, may conclude with the spouse, I am my beloueds and my
beloved is mine, etc. But this spiritual society and conjunction is most
lively naturally and comfortably portraitured out unto us, in the union and
fellowshippe which is between man and wife, as the Apostle Paul does worthily
mention in the fifth chapter of his Epistle to the Ephesians, verse 30.
affirming that we are members of Christ's body of his flesh and of his bones.
And what more nearer society of life is there then that which is between man
and wife, who of two are made one flesh, have al things common, are a like
intiteled to all commoidties and riches, the one has a right unto the other,
that they are sequestered from all other to have and retain a perfect and
continual society in them selves? The societye of Parents and children is
great, of masters and servant as part of a household, the society also of
brethren and kindred. But this exceeds all other, yea it is preferred above
all other Societyes, as most comfortable, near, secret and continual. But
such is the infinite love of God toward us, yt he has not only affianced us
to his Son as friends and brethren, but even made us one with him and he
with us. Oh Heavenly, holy, comfortable and most sweet fellowship. No marvel
then though the Spouse here so cheerefullye and confidentlye affirms that
she is her beloueds, and her beloved is hers: wherein she does not only joy
that she is one with her beloved, but also aduoucheth her faith to him,
warranting her self of all his rich, Heavenly and incomparable dowrye. Thus
all the believers should labor to assure them selves of this holy union and
society with Christ, being persuaded that not only the heavenly Saints, or the
excellent servants of God which exceed others in holiness, knowledge and
godliness, or ye Apostles, Pastors, Preachers or such like are one in Christ,
and so happy: but every faithful man and woman must be assured in some
measure, by the spirit of adoption that they are one with him. For sometime
Satan would vndermind the poor afflicted souls which are snarled in ye
conscience of their own infirmityes and corruptions, persuading them that
though the Church be one in Christ, neither can be separate from him also the
prophets, apostles, godly learned men, or such in whom they see greater
graces far way then in them selves, they easily grant such are happy and may be
sure of salvation in Christ. But I miserable wretch yt I am (says the poor
afflicted conscience, humbled in ye sight and loathing of the corruptions and
remnants of sin) I am not like to them: I cannot have that joy in Christ, and
in his word which I see others have, neither can I profit in knowledge by the
word, I can not pray so zealously as others do, neither can I have that
assurance of Gods favor and of salvation which me thinks other seem to have,
my sins are greater then theirs. Also I have such vile, damnable and hellishe
thoughts come upon me sometime, as I think it is impossible the children of
God should be troubled with, especially when I would ratherest prepare my
self to hear the word reverently, or to pray faithfully. Therefore I can not
persuade my self that I am one with Christ and shall never be cut off from
him. Many such like things I know arise in the hearts of the Godly sometime,
and many such replies dispute in their thoughts and minds oftentimes, whereby
Satan would feign make them weary of the means of their salvation, and
because they can not profit by them as they would, and when they would,
therefore they suspect them selves, calling their own estate into question not
having for the time any comfort, in this holy and comfortable society which
is in Christ. Thus poor souls they many times are troubled with their own
shadow, even then when they strive to come near to Christ, and are in deed
nearest to him some time, when they think them selves furthest off. But such
is the love of our God that he hides it from us, that we may after be the
surer of it. Howbeit certain it is (if I may speak from experience in my
self and some others, whose state I have been privy unto) that many times such
replies before mentioned, namely that we are inferiors to other in knowledge,
in zeal, in prayer, etc. whereby we faint and suspect our selves and such like
motions as rise up in our selves, spring partly from a secreat envy sometime
in our nature which is not seen to our selves, partly of our incredulity and
of other infirmities in us, as also partly of Satan's malice which would
discourage the godly from using the means whereby we may go forward and
persevere. But howsoever it be, these motions spring of our nature, the root
whereof is incredulity and want of faith, yet so that such motions as hurtful
as they are, yet are they not utterly void of faith. For a certain sound sead
of faith remains in the saints of God, even in these tumults and vprores of
of the mind, in so much as there remains a certain earnest lingering in
their hearts toward Christ, coveting to be assured of the truth of Gods
promise in them selves, which concern everlasting life, yea and desiring to
feel that comfort of his love which for the time they can not feel. Which I
dare warrant to that soul yt feels these in truth, that they are sure
arguments, certain and infallible tokens, that he is one with Christ. For as
that member which is a sleep, benoumed, bruised or hurt, do not cease to be a
member of the body, though it loses some strength for the time, but is after
recovered to strength and feeling again, so every hurt or wound which the
saints of God have of their infirmities, is not by and by a cutting off from
Christ. For this continual society or unity of Christ with his Church, is not
for a time but for ever, not only in ye whole Church, but also in every
particular member thereof. Romans 8.35.38.39.
Paul triumphs in the person of the believers, that nothing could separate
them from the love of God, which is in Jesus Christ our Lord. Though therefore
many od thoughts or surmises may incumber us for a time, so long as we dislike
them in our selves, stryuing against them, groaning for grace of God to
suppress them: yet we may boldly say with the spouse, I am Christ's and
Christ is mine, for so long as we hold him ours having a true, hearty and
longing desire after him so long we are his. Of this unity comes
necessarily that certainty of perseueraunce and of salvation, 2. The certeinety
of perseverance and salvation of the saints.
which the Saints of God have in this life, which is the second thing that I
noted unto you out of this conclusion of the Spouse. For look of what
condition the root and stock is (concerning the unity and abiding) of the same
condition and nature are the branches, but Christ the true root and Vine is
eternal, therefore his Church or company of the believers which are the
branches of that Vine, are eternal. The head is eternal, therefore the body and
members are eternal. The foundation of that spiritual house never decays,
therefore neither the building. The husband of the Church is everlasting and can
not perish, therefore the company of the believers which are his wife can
never perish. For the reason of the consequence of these arguments, stands
in the nature of those qualities that are in God, and not in the nature of the
things them selves. For as Christ can not cease to be eternal no more then his
father can, so the state of the godly can not cease to be eternal, unless God
and Christ should cease from their eternity. For whatsoever quality is
resident in the nature of God, is alwais the same because the Godhead is not
mutable nor contrary in it self, but always like it self. Wherefore unless
God and Christ should cease to be them selves, the Church or believers which
were elect before al time can not cease to be eternal, in so much as the love
wherewith he loves his eternal and cha^geth not. For Io. 13.1. Those whom he
loves, to the end he loves them. So that the Godly which have once in truth
tasted of the love of God, can no more perish then the love of God it self
can perish, or his mercy come to an end. This causes the spouse in the
confidence of Gods favor to assure her self that Christ is hers. Now as this
is true in the whole Church that it is permanent and can not perish but be
saved. So is it true in every member, whereby they may be assured of salvation
in them selves and of their perserance. How soever the Papists would hold
souls in unstableness, in suspense and doubt of their salvation always. Certain
it is, that in some measure, the children of God have assurance of their
salvation in this life, though not at al times alike, nor al men alike
assurance. That the Church or elect in general can not but be saved, there is
no man I suppose that doubts. But if any doubt I will set down such proofs as
come into my mind, wherein the perseverance of ye elect shall easily appear, but
we must look into the^ with ye eyes of faith, for ye eyes of reason are not
able once to look up into these mysteries of faith. psa. 125.1.2. They that
trust in the lord, are as mount Sion which stands fast for ever, and can not
be removed. Also psa. 89.30. God promises his mercies shall be eternal to
David, after he adds yt if his children sin. Then I will visit their
transgressio^ with the rod, and their iniquity with strokes. Yet my loving
kindness will I never take from him nor falsify my truth. This being true in
David, is also true in every believer. Esa. 43.4.7. he shows that as God
makes a precious account of his people and love them, so they should be called
by his name and entitled to his inheritance, and he could not neglect their
salvation, but he must also neglect his own glory. Likewise in his 49. chap he
infers ye church, Esai. 49.14. and verse 15
co^plaining that the lord had forsaken the^: but the lord answers, yt his
love surpasses ye dearest love of mothers toward their children, so as he can
not forget them, unless he forget him self. In so much as He has graven them in
the palm of his hands, and they are ever in his sight. and verse. 1^
The Lord Christ affirms. Math. 16.18. That as the church is founded in him
self, So it should never perish, neither the gates of hell should preuail
against it. The like certainty of the salvation of ye believers, our savior
Christ avouches. Ioh. 10. ver. 28.29. That they which are his sheep and obey
the voice of his word, shall never perish but have everlasting life. Confirming
his assertion by a reason drawn from ye nature of God his father, yt it was as
impossible for any which truly believed in christ Jesus and obeyed his voice to
perish, as it was for God his father and him self to be overcome, which ca^
never be, therefore nether can ye believers be frustrate of life and salvation.
For he reasons yt because his father and he is one, and his father was of al
power absolut yt none cold ever master him or prevail against him, therefore
none could ever master him or preuail against him, therefore none could preuail
against Christ him self, being equal with his father in infinite power.
Therefore also consequently none can prevail against the salvation of his
elect, which are in Christ Jesus. So that God has laid up the salvation of
every believer in him self in the heavens, 1. Pet. 1.4.5.
without the reach of Satan hell, the Pope and sin, so as we can not be
defeated of it. Yea none can deprive any of the Godly and faithful of their
salvation, unless they first rob God of his infinite power, and set Christ a
side from that glory wherewith his father has glorified him. Yea shall I speak
further? (But in reverence of Gods free grace) the faithful the^ selves can not
cut off them selves from their own salvation, nor forfait it, because it is
not laid up in them selves but in God, in whose custody it is. True it is, we
give God cause in our selves to frustrate all his graces toward us: But God
will accomplish his work and finishe it in his servant. Neither let any
Libertine hereof conclude, that he will live he cares not how, because if I
believe I am sure al my sins cannot loose my salvation, I answer: faith is
never severed from obedience nor from a good conscience, 1. Tim. 1.5
and a pure heart which spring from faith which is careful to please God, so as
such have no faith but an opinion of faith. Nevertheless I affirm it to be true,
that the sins, infirmities and falls of the Saints of God can not frustrate
their salvation, because God looks not on them but in Christ. Shall this
therefore ad courage unto men to sin? God forbid: nay they which are truly
humbled as they know, that God will not for their sins cast them away. So they
dare not for their lives to sin upon hope, though they are many times foiled
sore of their infirmities. So that although I herein minister comfort to the
troubled soul, so I must say to those that presume upon these great and
eternal riches of Gods grace, making his mercies a bawd for their sins:
certainly they are without all true love to God, and must not once look for
any comfort, but be assured that as yet they are void of the benefit of
salvation, and are in a damnable and Hellishe estate. For being without the
Church, in that they show forth no fruits of obedience to the word, etc.
they can not look for salvation, since without the Church there is no
salvation. Without Noah's Arc was no life. All perished in Jericho that were
not in Rachabs house, so in the Church only is salvation, without, nothing but
hell and damnation. Every man therefore must labor to be a member of the
church of Christ, yielding obedience to the calling of God by the preaching of
his word that they may be flocked into his fold and Church. For men must
know that election must not be severed from an effectual calling which works
in time in the true believers. It is a blessedness in deed that we are
elected, but if our election be not ratified by the spirit of sanctification,
and that we have not good evidence of it in our own conscience, what shall it
boot us? Therefore the Psalm 65.4. After they of the Church had complained of
their sins as lets to their Prayers before God, so as they began to suspect
their own estate because of sin, they conclude to the comfort of their
conscience, that their blessedness stood not in them selves, but in the
election of God. Blessed is be whom thou choosest and causest to come unto
thee. So as these two are joined together, namely election and calling, or
vocation in the passive sense (that is) that God causes his to come, for none
come of them selves. Now therefore it is expedient that we make our election
sure by good works. 2. Pet. 1.10.
Yet must we not measure our election by our good works or the perfection of
them. For we see when the servants of God survey their hearts to gather comfort
by their calling, or by those graces which they have tasted off, to look on
their faith, hope, obedience, love toward God or their neighbors, alas when
they ouerlook al their best works that they can reckon up, yet they can not
have comfort in them, if they shall only stay in them: but they must from the
effects of their calling (which if they be in truth are good evidences and
arguments of comfort) look into this original of their happiness, Blessed
is be whom thou chusest. etc. For this is the fountain of blessed es unto us.
Then in the second place we may say, blessed is he whom God causes to come
to him, and he ye fears God, loving and obeying his word carefully and
unfeignedly, etc. Which al fruits of our calling are not causes of our
happiness, but testimonies and warrantes through the earnest of the spirit
that we are happy.

But it may seem somewhat nakedly affirmed of the Spouse without proof, when
she professes her self to be her beloueds and that her beloved is hers, when
she adds no reason of it. For albeit many grant that they which are truly in
Christ, and in the favor of God they are happy, they can not but do well and
are of the sure ground. But here stands the question and difficulty of the
cause, how every man may know that he has part in that unity of Christ,
and how a man may be sure of salvation in this life. To come to this point,
we must first consider that that which is spoken in the scriptures concerning
the salvation of the Church or elect in general, with the causes and effects
thereof, is spoken also of every member of the Church, and is true in both. As
for example, if it be true, that the Church or Elect were loved and elected
of God before the beginninges of the World, then this is true, every
faithful believer was elected before al times. Again if the Church be
called to the participation of the graces of God, then every faithful believer
is. Also if the Church be holy, then every one of the Church is also in
time called to be holy. If the church be redeemed and the sins thereof
pardoned, that it be sanctified, justified, saved and glorified in the end,
then every believer (which is of the church) is redeemed, his sins pardoned,
is justified, sanctified in time, saved and glorified in the end. If the
Church or elect in general can not perish, but is permanent, enduring and sure
of salvation, then neither any one member of the church can perish nor be lost,
but is permanent and sure of salvation. Now this we must consider when I
speak of the assurance of the Children of God: I understand not such a
certantye as is not mingled at all with any doubtfulnesse. For the best assured
is not always alyke persuaded of his salvation, neither have all men a like
feeling of the comfort and assurance of eternal health. For sometime it is in
the Eclipse, and the comfort of Gods favor, is intercepted from us by the
clouds of our infirmities, so as the eyes of our faith are dazeled. But at
sometimes at least, the Children of God have some good assurance of their
salvation, though for the most part they seem to hang in a mammering. Also
othersome have not so full a sight of it as others have. Partly because of
many corruptions in their nature, which they labor not so earnestly to purge
as they ought. Partly also because the proportion of faith or the knowledge of
God is not a like in all, but some more some less. But we shall in vain speak
of the assurance of the grace of perseueraunce or certainty of salvation,
unless we look upon the head spring of Gods mercyes in Christ Jesus, with
the eyes of faith and soberness: also unless we have the testimony and
earnest penny of the spirit of God, whereby we are sealed against the day of
redemption. For if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is not his. Romans
8, verse. 9. Ephesians. 1.13.14. Romans 8.14. Gal. 4.6.
Of the other side, They that are led by the spirit they are the sons of God
since God has sent forth the spirit of his son into their hearts which
cries Abba Father. Which as Paul says in the eight of ye Romans, bears
witness with our spirit that we are the children of God, Romans 8.16.
if we be children then heirs also of God and annexed heirs with Christ.
Hitherto agrees that sentence of John in his first epistle chapter 4.13. 1.
Ioh. 4.13.
Hereby we know that we dwell in God and God in us, in that he has given us
of his spirit. Yet it may be some man will reply how shall I know that I have the
spirit of God and Christ? I answer that by the fruits of the spirit of
sanctification, we may have good comfort and persuasion that we have the
spirit of God. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans chap. 8. If Christ be in you
the body is dead concerning sin, Romans 8.10.11
but the spirit is life for righteousness sake. If the spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in you, be that raised up Christ from
the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies, for his spirit that dwelle^h in
you. Where the Apostle shows that Gods spirit works mortification in his
saints, renewing them to a new life, purging daily the corruptions of sin and
remnant of iniquity, which by degrees diminish in the saints. Whosoever
therefore tastes of true mortification and sanctification, hating sin in
truth, laboring to reform the same, desiring to grow in holiness and a new
life, applying his heart to be governed by the word in obedience, though he
taste of the remnauntes of sin, which will never be fully purged in the
saints, til they are restored fully in the appearing of Christ Jesus, in that
person undoubtedly the spirit of God begins to have a work, and to
incorporate that person into himself, that he may be one with Christ and may
put on Christ. Many circumstaunces there are which time will not suffer me to
note unto you concerning this matter. But sure it is that these are general
and infallible notes which I have mentioned, whereby a man may be persuaded
(these being in him in truth though imperfect) that he shall never fall utterly
away, laboring to show forth the fruit of faith, hope, patience, obedience,
love to the word, toward his brethren, a care to keep the word, being
prepared or unfeignedly desiring to ^e prepared to be parteners with the saints
of God in affliction and in the confirmation of the Gospel, ^^m. 8.17.
suffering with Christ that we may also be glorified with him, for these fruits
caused Paul to affirm (as I noted before) that he was persuaded of the
Phillipians, that God would perfect that good work that he had begun in them,
even to the day of Jesus Christ. Now if this work of perseverance were our
own, we might justly suspect that we could never be saved, or if God having
begun in us, should after leave us to our selves to finishe up our own
salvation, then we might well doubt of life: But since God which is a perfect
workman begins (who leaves nothing that he takes in hand unfinished) to
work grace, faith, sanctification, obedience, love and mortification in us,
(though they are not perfect and absolute in us) he can not but finish his own
work and perfect his saints. Hereof David boldly, confidently and comfortably,
insulting upon, and triumphing against all troubles and afflictions. Psa.
138.8. concludes with full assurance, That the Lord will perform his work
toward him, Adding a reason, because His mercies endured for ever. And yet he
ascribes the work of perseverance unto God, ending with this suite. O Lord
forsake not the work of thy hands. Charging the Lord that he was his work,
in that he had framed him a new by his spirit, therefore it could not stand
with the Lords mercy to cast him off. Oh valiant faith in the servant of God.
Thus God ever perfiteth his work in any one that belong unto him, but the
time of his working and the mesure, he reserueth to him self to appoint at his
pleasure. So that though we feel not his quickening grace when we desire it,
(nay sometime it seems to be furthest off when we crave it and need it most)
also though we have not that measure of his grace which we would have, yet
let us not faint, but wait on the Lord with Patience and prayer, for
certainelye except the Lord will deny him self (I speak with reverence of
his glorious majesty) he can not but give to him that has, ^^th. 13.12.
and he shall have abundantly, yet he can not but make an end in his servant
when he has once begun. Not that God is tied to us at our commandment. But
ipsemet sibi est necessitas. He is a necessity to him self, for his mercies
are eternal. But this I have sufficiently proved before. Yet in a word note
this, that God has tied his power to his will and promise, that whatsoever he
wills and promises in his word he can not choose but do it. Whatsoever he
has denied, that he does not. In this sense God says, Genesis 19.22.
That be can do nothing to Sodom before Lot was departed. But to return to
the Spouse again, though she does not fully in this speech set down the
reasons that might persuade her of this certainty: yet if we consider all the
former circumstaunces of her coming on or obaying of her calling, we shall
find worthy fruits which she felt in her self and expressed, that might
yield some argument of this certain persuasion. As this: her heart lying after
Christ in the beginning of her calling, though many lets met with her, also
the complaining of her untowardness which bewrayed a sight of her wants.
Furthermore her trembling at his displeasure or fearing at his word being
affectioned toward him. Finally her seeking and inquyring after him even when
danger was, her zeal in following him, not only when others forsook her,
but even when many sought to hinder and molest her. Thus recovering her zeal
she procured others by conferring of the excellency of Christ, to be parteners
with her in seeking after him. Which al were worthy fruits of faith, that might
give her comfort to conclude that she was her welbeloueds. Thus every man
must labor to come to some assurance of his future estate, that we may not
live always to doubt, but that we may be ready to pass in peace at our
latter day, having assurance that we shall dye happily and well: yea, that we
may have the eyes of faith to look into our salvation, so far as we may
say with Simeon, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according
to thy word, ^uk. 2.29.30
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Also that we may with Job, stand
persuaded through says that our redeemer lives, and that we shall See God,
not with other, but with these same eyes. ^ob. 19.25.27
In the mean time let us labor to glorify our God by our obedience, faith,
love, and newness of life, that we may show how we are one with Christ by
this that he may live in us and we may dye so our selves: that so we may in
this life be sure of salvation afterward. For what myserye is it to live, and
in the end not to be sure of salvation? To this purpose John in his first
Epistle, chapter 3. verse 2. shows that the love of God is great in yt he
has admitted us to be his sons, after he adds, That we are even now the
sons of God, but it does not appear what we shall be: that is, we see not now
fully what glory the Lord has laid up for us. But we are assured that we shall
be like to the son of God. So then the faithful have their comfort and
assurance in this life, of obtaining life after. Also Paul affirms unto
Timothy, 2. Tim. ^
That he was sure from hence forth there was laid up for him the crown of
righteousness, which the lord the righteous judge should give him at the last
day. And because we should not make exception and say, yea Paul was a
notable instrument of God, I easly believe he might be sure of life, but I am
nothing to Paul, etc. therefore he adds. That crown is not laid up only
for me, but for all them also that love his coming or appearing. For sure it
is, God has committed us to the custody of him that will never see us perish,
and he again most carefully commits us to his father. Ouerlooke I pray
you, with all diligence that heavenly prayer of our Savior Jesus Christ in
the 17. Chapter of John, especially from the sixth verse, to the end. Which
is full of most Heavenly and wonderful comfort if the Lord give us eyes and
hearts to see and understand it aright. Christ there notes these qualities
chiefly, in his saints. After the fountayn of their election discovered which
issues out of the free love of God, he says of them that they keep his word.
2. They acknowledge all good things to come from God thorough Christ receiving
them thankfully as from him, also they receive his words and are assured that
he came from God. And because he was to leave his Disciples and to depart
concerning his corporal presence, he therefore commits them in this sort to
his father saying. Verse 11. I am now no more in the world these are in the
world and I come to thee. O holy father keep them in thy name, even them whom
thou have given me, that they may be one as we are. This unity he prays for
in all that should after believe, that they may be one in God and Christ, as be
and his Father was one. O wonderful care of so gracious a Patron. In these
words Christ shows that as the father and the some are one, so as they can
not be severed, so also they which are in Christ, in whom these foresaid
effects are to be found in truth in some measure, are one with God and
Christ, so as nothing can divide nor separate them asu^der. Which is a
wonderful comfort to the Saints of God, that their happy life and eternal
being, is necessarilye after a sort joined with the life and eternal being of
God and Christ. He means not that the saints are so one with God as he
should be hominified with man, and man deified with God. For this foolish and
doltishe blasphemye of the Family of love is so absurd, as it were a folly to
spend any speech in the confutation thereof. But as the godly are in Christ
and so sure of salvation, so they must not loyter in hope and neglect their
calling, now because men are subject to this sliding, our Savior Christ in
that 17. of Ioh. John. 17.
ver. 15. prays that his father would keep them from evil, sanctifying them
in his truth which is his word. For that is the ordinary means and instrument
whereby God vpholdeth his children, and we abide in him and he in us so long
as we abide in his doctrine, 2. John. 9.
which is easily seen in this, that Satan seeks nothing more then to weaken
our faith in the word, raising up so many opinions, sects and heresies:
therefore this should stir us up to watchfulness.

Thus we see the Spouse might lawfully conclude of the certainty of her unity
and perseverance with her husband. Yea al of us by her example should labor
to have the like persuasion of our selves, affiancing our selves also unto
Christ, praying for the fruits of the spirit of adoption in us, that we being
careful to keep the word, to believe and receive it, that being assured that
Christ was sent of God a savior unto us, may embrace him heartely with all his
heavenly riches, stryuing to ouerstride al lets that might hinder us from
coming to him, being zealous of his glory and truth, stirring up others by our
example, professing his name boldly, exercising all godly exercises, hearing
his word, praying often and heartly unto him, joining in the company of the
godly, being humbly thankful unto God for his great mercyes in Christ: so
as every one of us may be bold in truth and feeling to say, I am Christ's, and
Christ is mine. O let us endeavor our selves (my dear brethren) that we may
have a lively taste and assurance, of this heavenly and spiritual communion,
unity, conjunction society and fellowship with Christ Jesus, that we may stand
persuaded of his eternal love toward us and of our own salvation in him. For
alas it makes me tremble to think what a miserable state ye doubtful
unbelievers which labor not to have any assurance of life shall come unto.
Who as they never were in Christ, nor tasted not in truth of the effects before
mentioned, so shall they be without christ in eternal pain banished from the
presence of God and of his glorious angels, without the favor of God and
without life it self. But let not those be dismayed which doubting sometime
yet in the midst of their doubt desire to be sure of Gods favor, for the
unbelieving doubters have no such desire in truth, resting upon the word, and
waiting for further grace and assurance. I know our nature will never make an
end of replying against the certainty of our salvation, because of the
imperfections and infirmities of the Children of God being full of distrust
many times. For when we consider our estate in our selves, how we are short
of all duties, unfit to serve our God in all true obedience, finding many
treasons and rebellions in our selves, being ignorant in his truth, also when
we profit not by the word, by prayer, neither prevail as we would against our
imperfections, infirmities and corruptions: then we doubt of the Lords love
toward us, suspecting of his work in us, fearing least al our former
profession be in vain, and can see nothing that should give us comfort of the
favor of God toward us. Thus we suppose the love of God and his favor to be
inconstant, measuring them by our infirm and weak faith, or by the scant
measure of our obedience. But what should such a one doubt of the grace of
God, who seeing his wants, loathing his sins, stryuing against them, loving
the word unfeignedly, desiring to have a heart to pray without hypocrisy,
laboring for a new life, being angry with him self for sin, and that he
can no more profit by the word, in knowledge, true zeal, humility, love,
patience, and desiring heartily that he may never start from the obedience of
God and his word? Can it be that when the Lord loved us before we were, ye
when we were his enemies, before our calling of his free mercy, that he will
now loath us, leave and forsake us utterly when he has begun his own work in
us? Could he love us when we were in our sins without remorse of conscience:
and can he now hate us when we endeavor to leave our sins and are vexed that
we can no more grow in godliness and obedience? Could he love us when we were
void of his grace, and unsanctified? and can he abhor us when he has
begun sanctification in us by his word and spirit? shall we measure the love
of God by our infyrmities? or shall we think that his love lasts no longer
then we stand in full obedience? In deed we must continue grounded in the
truth, and Paul after the mention of the constant estate of the faithful,
prays still for the increase of grace, because we can not be perfect in
this earth. But God who begins and calls us is faithful, The. 5.24. These.
3.3.
which will also do it: yea, he is faithful which will stablishe us and
keep us from evil.

Furthermore, what moved the Lord to begin any beginning of grace in us? did
not his own free mercy and love? and the same cause also moves the Lord to
continue and hold out his mercies begun to his saints unto the end. So
Genesis 18. Genesis 18.18.
God reasons and takes occasion from his own mercies to be still merciful
unto Abraham.

So that God does not measure his mercy by our faith or obedience, but by his
own love and nature, that as his love is eternal, so his mercyes have no
end. Oh d^uinity unspeakable, Oh infinite love, Oh gracious mercy, Oh the
wonderful goodness, constancye, truth and faithfulness of so loving and
kind a God, toward us poor, miserable, vile wretches and crauling Worms.
But as for the contemners of grace and they which hereupon shall presume of
their good estate without good testimonye of the Lords work in them, not
loving his word, not hearing nor obeying the same, nor being careful to
mortify several sins in them, not caring but neglecting to refourme them
selves and their familyes by the word, nor exercising Prayer a necessary
fruit of faith, etc. Let such be assured that the Lord has not begun his
work in them yet, nor made them priuye to his eternal and free love: But
they are void of the earnest penny of the spirit of God, and in danger to be
damned from the presence of God. For he shall come in flaming fire, ^. The.
1.8.9
rendering vengeance to them that know not God, nor obey unto the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be punished with everlasting perdition from the
presence of the Lord, and the glory of his power. This might make the
contemners and neglecters of the word to tremble if their hearts were not
closed up to destruction. Therefore if we want the effects a fore say e, or
have them but in a show or in hip^^^^sie, let us fear: for the hypocrites may
go very far, so as in outward apperaunce there appears no difference between
them and the children of God. Let us then beware that our hearts deceive us not.
For hypocrites may confess their sins and that to the servants of God may
also crave forgiveness, desiring the prayers of the Godly but more for the
escaping of the punishment of sin, Exo. 10.16.17. Acts. 8.24.
then the hatred of the sin it felfe as Pharao did, and Simon Magus.
Hypocrites may seem to have a great taste and joy in the happy estate of the
righteous, and a desire to have part of their felicity as Balaam, Number. 23.^ and
24.4.5.
excelling in some gifts of knowledge, yea they are forced to bless and favor
the righteous, but all this as men in a trance. 1. Kin. 21.2 27.
They may repent after a sort with Achab, who yet was sold to do wickedly,
and as Judas who hung himself. For the repentance of hypocrites is not joined
with a hatred of their sin, nor a desire of change and amendment, neither yet
with the hope of Gods favor, but either they are ouercharged altogether with
the horror of the punishment of sin, but not of the sin it self and so
despair: or else they harden their hearts again in their sins, and so
purpose not unfeigned amendment of life: therefore though they seem to rerepent
often, yet are never the better. But the godly as they tremble and shook at ye
horror of the punishment of sin, so they also hate sin it self, desiring
and longing for a new change in them selves and a through amendment, panting,
thirsting, breathing and unfeignedly longing to taste more and more of the
favor of God. Furthermore hypocrites may strive for the defense of religion,
infer scriptures for their purpose, may find fault with the ignorant and
dumb ministry, may boast them selves to be of God as Abilah did. Chr. 13.4.
verse. 9.10.
Yea they may be hot against papistry and idolatry, and yet faint from the true
faith in God, and be hurtful and merciless toward the saints of God as
As^ the king was. Chr 15 9.6. and 16.10.2.
Yea hypocrites may after a sort reverence the ministers of God, and do good
things whilst the preachers are with them, furthering religion and
countenancing after a sort good things for the time, ^. Chro. 24.^.6. Mark.
6.20.
as Ioash did in the days of Iehoiada the priest. And as Herod in the days of
John the Baptist. And yet in the end turn again to idolatry and slay those
that rebuke them, as Ioash did. 2. Chr. 24.21.
Hipocrites may assemble with the saints of God to holy exercises, and frequent
the same as Achitophell did with David. Psa. 55.13.14
They may receive the word with joy and bring forth some kind of fruit for a
season, Math. 13.2^
they may refourme them selves in their outward manners and in their speeches.
Finally hypocrites some of them may come to these points, to be lightened with
knowledge, to taste of the heavenly gift to be partakers of the holy Ghost,
(concerning the gifts thereof, though not of the spirit of sanctification in
them selves) to taste of the good word of God for the time, and of the powers of
the world to come. Thus far may hypocrites go, which yet because they are
not reformed unto the image of God, and taste not in truth of the spirit of
regeneration, they are but as vanitye and shall perish as the smoke. Those
points I note to the end that the wicked hypocrites might not presume upon
this doctrine of comfort, for the saints of God that truly begin to taste of
regeneration, and that the godly also might be humbled to examine their
hearts that they may be sure, that though the measure of grace in them be
scant, yet that it be sound and in truth in them. I can not stand to set down
the Antithesies and oppositions of the qualities of the hypocrites and of the
Godly, to show in particulers wherein these things differ, yet I know if time
would serve it were profitable for the children of God. Neither can I stand to
show of the other side how far the Godly may slide and yet be recovered, and
the difference of the falls of the hypocrites and of the righteous and
believers. For true it is that the saints of God though they can not utterly
fall away from God or from grace (as we have already proved). Yet some of them
some times fall very far, yea and that not only before their calling, but also
after they have truly tasted of grace. If I should reckon up the fall of Noah
after the flood, the fall of Lot, the fall of David, Solomon, Peter, which fell
into gross sins after their calling: (For, as for the example of Paul,
Magdalen, Matthew, Zacheus, who were notoryous sinners before their calling, and
were truly converted: these examples stand not so fitly to this point which I
speak of, but the other sinning after their calling, for these after sins,
be they that wound some of ye saints of God so deeply) if I say I should
mention the example of them sinning after their calling, no man must be so
bold to presume to extenuate their sins by them, or boulster their falls by
their slydings (as the hypocrites do against whom the wrath of God shall
smoke). But the children of God they may see somewhat hereby how far some of
the Godly slide sometime and are recovered. But these sinned not upon
presumption but of infirmity. So that the corruption of nature prevailing,
Gods spirit was buried as it were for the time. But if men by their slidinges
are not warned to stand the surer after, having their hearts more kindled
with the hatred of sin, and are not made more watchful over their
infirmities praying more against them, purposing against them, fasting and
mourning for them, so as they gather the more strength thereby to withstand
the stronglier after, then let them beware least their estate indeed be most
dangerous and miserable, but thus much in a word of this thing for I mention
these circumstances, because of the certeintie which the saints of God have in
this life, that none might deceive them selves under a color of hope, unless
they feel the true work of sanctification in them, though but begun and not
yet perfited which cannot be til the coming of Jesus Christ. Let us all
therefore labor (my dear brethren) to increase in all true holiness and
sanctimony after the revealed will of God, that we may resemble the Image of
our heavenly father prsented unto us in a manifest pattern, even in Christ.
That by the word we may grow to more perfection daily, praying for the graces
of Gods spirit to be increased in us, that ouerstriding al lets and
encumbrances which might fetter or insnarle us, tasting of all former vanities,
filthy lusts, the love of this world self love, pride, vainglory, hypocrisy,
fear of dangers, not having our eyes fixed on the hate of the world, to be
so tied to our own credit, estimation, commodities, profits or eaze, as we
should fear any hatred of the wicked scornfulnesse and reproaches of the
ungodly, or be loath to undergo any shame for the supporting of Gods glory, that
all these being set apart of us, we may cheerfully with the spouse, even when
others set against us and forsake us, press forth to the discovering of our
zeal, serving God in shame and honor, in good report and ill report, in
peace and trouble, yea in life and in death, always preferring the Lords
cause and his glory, which should be more precious in our eyes then a
thousand worlds or our own life it self: yea let us labor to draw on others
to follow Christ with us, that ye Lord may ceaze upon our hearts taking them
up into his service. That so we glorifying God in our calling both general and
particular, furthering others also we may joyfully behold the fruits of our
obedience and profession, that we may with the spouse conclude affirmatively,
confidently and boldly in full assurance by the testimony of Gos spirit, that
we are Christ's and Christ is ours affiancing our selves unto him, so that
nothing may separate us from the love of God which is in Jesus Christ our Lord,
but that we shall take possession with him of his glory in the heavens, which
grace God grant to every one of us and to all his people, for Jesus Christ his
sake. To whom with the father and the holy ghost, be al glory honor, praise
and dominion, for ever and ever, Amen.

Let us pray. etc.

