

Reader when first thou shall behold this boys
Picture, perhaps thou wilt think his writings toys
Wrong not our Cowley so will nothing pass
But gravity with thee Apollo was
Beardlesse himself and for ought I can see
Cowley may youngest son of Phoebus be.
POETICAL BLOSSOMS BY A. C.

-- fit surculus Arbor.
LONDON, Printed by B.A. and T.F. for HENRY S^IL^, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Sign of the Tygers-head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1633*

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, and right Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Bishop of
LINCOLN. And Deane of Westminster.
MY LORD:
I Might well fear, least these my rude and unpolished lines, should offend
your Honorable survay; but that I hope your Nobleness will rather smile at the
faults committed by a Child, then censure them; Howsoever I desire your
Lordships pardon, for presenting things so unworthy to your view, and to accept
the good will of him, who in all duty is bound to be

Your Lordships, most humble servant, ABRA: COVVLEY.

To the Reader.
I.
I Called the bushin'd Muse MELPOMENE,
And told her what sad Story I would write,
She wept at hearing such a Tragedy:
Though wont in mournful Ditties to delight.
If thou dislike these sorrowful lines; Then know
My Muse with tears not with Conceits did flow.
II.
And as she my vnabler quill did guide,
Her briny tears did on the paper fall,
If then unequal numbers be espied,
Oh Reader! do not that my error call,
But think her tears defaced it, and blame then
My Muses grief, and not my missing Pen.
ABRA: COVVLEY.

To his dear Friend and Schoole-fellow ABRAHAM COVVLEY, on his flourishing and
hopeful BLOSSOMS.
NAture we say decays, because our Age
Is worse then were the Times of old: The Stage
And Histories the former Times declare:
In these our latter Days what defects are
Experience teaches. What then? Shall we blame
Nature for this? Not so; let us declayme
Rather against our Selves: it is we Decay,
Not She: She is the same every way
She was at first. COVVLEY, thou prov'st this truth.
Could ever former Age brag of a Youth
So forward at these years? Could NASO write
Thus young such witty Poems? TVLLI's mite
Of Eloquence, at this Age was not seen.
Nor yet was CATO'S Judgment, at Thirteen
So great is thine. Suppose it were so; yet
He CIC'RO's Eloquence, TVLLY the Wit
Of OVID wanted: OVID too came far
In Judgment behind CATO. Therefore are
None of all equal unto Thee, so pretty,
So Eloquent, Judicious, and Witty.
Let the world's spring time but produce and show
Such Blossoms as thy Writings are, and know
Then (not till then) shall my opinion be
That it is Nature fails, and not we.
BEN MAERS.

To his Friend and Schoole-fellow ABRAHAM COVVLEY, on his Poetical Blossoms.
MAny, when Youths of tender Age they see
Expressing CATO, in their Gravitie;
Judgment, and Wit, will oftentimes report
They think their thread of Life exceeding short.
But my opinion is, not so of Thee
For thou shall live, to all Posterity.
These gifts will never let thee dye, for Death
Can not bereave thee of thy fame, though breath.
Let snarling Critticks spend their brains to find
A fault, though there be none; This is my mind
Let him that carpeth with his vipers Tougne,
Think with himself, what he could do as young.
But if the Springing blossoms, thus rare be
What ripened Fruit shall we hereafter see.
ROB: MEADE, Condiscipulus.

CONSTANTIA AND PHILETVS.
I Sing two constant Lovers various fate,
The hopes, and fears which equally attend
Their loves: Their rivals envy, Parents hate;
I sing their sorrowful life, and tragic end.
Assist me this sad story to rehearse
You Gods, and be propitious to my verse.
In Florence for her stately buildings famed,
And lofty roofes that emulate the sky;
There dwelt a lovely Maid CONSTANTIA named,
Renowned, (as mirror of all Italy,)
Her, lavish nature did at first adorn,
With PALEAS soul, in CYTHEREA's form.
And framing her attractive eyes so bright,
Spent all her wit in study, that they might
Keep the earth from Chaos, and eternal night,
But envious Death destroyed their glorious light.
Expect not beauty then, since she did part;
For in her Nature wasted all her Art.
Her hair was brighter then the beams which are
A Crown to PHOEBVS, and her breath so sweet,
It did transcend Arabian odours far,
Or th'smelling Flowers, wherewith the Spring does greet
Approaching Summer, teeth like falling snow
For white, were placed in a double row.
Her wit excelled all praise, all admiration,
And speech was so attractive it might be
A means to cause great PALLAS indignation
And raise an envy from that Deity,
The maiden Lillyes at her lovely sight
Waxt pale with envy, and from thence grew white.
She was in birth and Parentage as high
As in her fortune great, or beauty rare,
And to her virtuous minds nobility
The gifts of Fate and Nature doubled were;
That in her spotless Soul, and lovely Face
Thou might have seen, each Deity and grace.
The scornful Boy ADONIS viewing her
Would VENUS still despise, yet her desire;
Each who but saw, was a Competitor
And rival, scorcht alike with CVPID'S fire
The glorious beams of her fair Eyes did move
And light beholders on their way to Love.
Amongst her many Suitors a young Knight
'Bove others wounded with the Majesty
Of her fair presence, presses most in sight;
Yet seldom his desire can satisfy
With that blessed object, or her rareness see;
For Beauties guard, is watchful Jealousy.
Oft-times that he might see his Dearest-fayre
Upon his stately Iennet he in the way
Rides by her house, who neighes as if he were
Proud to be viewed by bright CONSTANTIA.
But his poor Master though to see her move
His joy, dares show no look betraying Love.
Soon as the morn peeped from her rosy bed
And all Heavens smaller lights expulsed were;
She by her friends and near acquaintance led
Like other Maids, often walked to take the air;
AVRORA blushed at such a sight unknown,
To see those cheeks were redder then her own.
The obsequious Lover always follows them
And where they go, that way his journey feines,
Should they turn back, he would turn back again;
For where his Love, his business there remains.
Nor is it strange he should be loath to part
From her, since she had stolen away his heart.
PHILETVS he was called, sprung from a race
Of Noble ancestors; But destroying Time
And envious Fate had labored to deface
The glory which in his great Stock did shine;
His state but small, so Fortune did decree
But Love being blind, he that could never see*
Yet he by chance had hit his heart aright,
And on CONSTANTIA'S eye his Arrow whet
Had blown the Fire, that would destroy him quite,
Unless his flames might like in her beget:
But yet he fears, because he blinded is
Though he have shot him right, her heart he will miss.
Unto Loves Altar therefore he repayres,
And offers there a pleasing Sacrifice;
Entreating CUPID with inducing Prayers
To look upon and ease his Miseries:
Where having wept, recovering breath again
Thus to immortal Love he did complain:
Oh CUPID! thou, whose all commanding sway
Has oft-times ruled the Olympian Thunderer,
Whom all Celestial Deities obey,
And Men and Gods both reverence and fear!
Oh force CONSTANTIA'S heart to yield to Love,
Of all thy Works, the Masterpiece 'twill prove.
And let me not Affection vainly spend,
But kindle flames in her like those in me;
Yet if that gift my Fortune does transcend,
Grant that her charming Beauty I may see:
And view those Eyes who with their ravishing light
Do only give Contentment to my sight.
Those who contemn thy sacred Deity
And mock thy Power, let them thy anger know,
I faultlesse am, nor cannot an honor be
To wound your slave alone, and spare your Foe.
Here tears and sighs speak his imperfect moan
In language far more dolorous then his own.
Home he retired, his Soul he brought not home,
Just like a Ship whilst every mounting wave
Tossed by enraged BOREAS up and down,
Threatens the Mariner with a gaping grave;
Such did his cse, such did his state appear
Alike distracted, between hope and fear.
Thinking her love he never shall obtain,
One morn he goes to the Woods and does complain
Of his unhappy Fate, but all in vain,
And thus fond Echo, answers him again.
So that it seems AVRORA wept to hear,
For the verdant grass was dew'd with many a tear.
THE ECHO.
OH! what has caused my killing miseries,
Eyes, ( Echo said) what has detayned my ease,
Ease; straight the reasonable Nymph replies,
That nothing can my troubled mind appease:
Peace, Echo answers? What, is any nigh
(Quoth she) at which, she quickly vtters, I.
Is It Echo answers, tell me then thy will,
I will, she said? What shall I get (quoth he)
By loving still: to which she answers, ill,
Ill: shall I void of wished for pleasure dye:
I, shall not I who toil in ceaseless pain,
Some pleasure know? no, she replies again.
False and inconstant Nymph, thou lie (quoth he)
Thou lie (she said) and I deserved her hate,
If I should thee believe; believe, (says she)
For why thy idle words are of no weight.
Weigh it, (she replies) I therefore will depart,
To which, resounding Echo answers, part.
Then from the Woods with sorrowful heart he goes,
Filling with flowing thoughts his grieved mind,
He seeks to ease his soul oppressing woes,
But no refreshing comfort can he find:
He weeps to quench the fires that burn in him,
But tears do fall to the earth, flames are within.
No morning banished darkness, nor black night
By her alternate course expuls'd the day.
Bin with PHILETVS by a constant rite
And CVPIDS Altars did not weep and pray;
And yet had reaped naught for all his pain
But Care and Sorrow that was all his gain.
But now at last the pitying God overcome
By his constant votes and tears, fixed in her heart
A golden shaft, and she is now become
A suppliant to Love that with like Dart
He Would wound PHILETVS and does now implore
With tears aid from that power she scorned before.
Little she thinks she kept PHILETVS heart
In her scorcht breast, because her own she gave
To him. But either suffers, equal smart
And alike measure in their torments have:
His soul, his grief, his fires; now hers are grown
Her heart, her mind, her love; is his alone.
Whilst wandering thoughts thus guide her troubled Brain
Seeing a Lute (being far from any ears)
She tuned this song whose music did transcend
The pleasant harmony of the rolling Spheres;
Which rauishing Notes, if when her love was slain
She had sung; from Styx t'had called him back again.
THE SONG.
TO whom shall I my Sorrows show?
Not to Love for he is blind.
And my PHILETVS does not know,
The inward sorrow of my mind.
And all the senseless walls which are
Now round about me, cannot hear.
For if they could, they sure would weep,
And with my griefs relent.
Unless their willing tears they keep,
Till I from the earth am sent.
Then I believe they will all deplore
My fate, since I them taught before.
I willingly would weep my store,
If th'floud would land thy Love,
My dear PHILETVS on the shore
Of my heart; but should thou prove
A feared of the flames, know the fires are
But bonfires for thy coming there.
Then tears in envy of her speech did flow
From her fair eyes, as if it seemed that there,
Her burning flame had melted hills of snow,
And so dissolved them into many a tear;
Which Nilus like, did quickly ouerflow,
And caused soon new serpent griefs to grow.
Here stay my Muse, for if I should recite,
Her mournful Language, I should make you weep
Like her a flood, and so not see to write,
Such lines as I desire, that they may keep,
Me from stern death, or when I leave my rhyme,
They in my deaths revenge may conquer time.
By this time, chance and his own industry
Had helped PHILETVS forward that he grew
Acquainted with his Brother, so that he,
Might by this means, his bright CONSTANTIA veiw:
And as time served show her his misery,
And this was the first act in's Tragedy.
Thus to himself soothed by his flattering state
He said; How shall I thank thee for this gain,
O CUPID, or reward my helping Fate,
Who sweetens all my sorrows, all my pain?
What Husbandman would any sweat refuse,
To reap at last such fruit, his labors use?
But waying straight his doubtful state aright,
Seeing his griefs linked like an endless chain
To following woes, he could despair delight,
Quench his hot flames, and the fondling love disdain.
But CUPID when his heart was set on fire
Had burnt his wings, and could not then retire.
The wounded youth, and kind PHILOCRATES
(So was her Brother called) grew soon so dear,
So true, and constant, in their Amities,
And in that league so strictly joined were;
That death it self could not their friendship sev^r.
But as they lived in love, they dyed together.
If one be malancholy, the other's sad;
If one be sick, the other he is ill,
And if PHILETVS any sorrow had,
PHILOCRATES was partner in it still:
As th'soule of PYLADES and ORESTES was
In these, may we believe PITHAGORAS.
Often in the Woods PHILETVS walks, and there
Exclaimes against his fate as too unkind.
With speaking tears his griefs he does declare,
And with sad sighs teareth the angry wind,
To sigh, and though it never so cruel were,
It roared to hear PHILETVS tell his care.
The Christ^ll Brooks which gently run between
The shadowing Trees, and as they through them pass
Water the Earth, and keep the Meadows green,
Giving a color to the verdant grass:
Hearing PHILETVS tell his woeful state,
In show of grief run murmuring at his Fate.
PHILOMEL answers him again and shows
In her best language, her sad History.
And in a mournful sweetness tells her woes,
As if she strove to show her miseries
Were greater far then his, and sweetly sings
To out-reach his Sorrows, by her sufferings.
His sadness cannot from PHILOCRATES
Be hid, who seeks all means his grief to know,
Seeing all mirth PHILETVS does displease
And Passion still pursues his conquered Foe:
He therefore of his grief did often enquire,
But Love with covering wings had hid the fire.
But when his noble Friend perceived that he
Yields to usurping Passion more and more,
Desirous to partake his mallady,
He watches him in hope to cure his sore
By counsel, and recall the poisonous Dart
When it alas was fixed in his heart.
When in the Woods, places best fit for care,
He to himself did his past griefs recite,
The obsequious friend straight follows him, and there
Does hide himself from sad PHILETVS sight.
Who thus exclaimes, for a swollen heart would break
If it for vent of sorrow might not speak.
Oh! I am lost, not in this desert Wood
But in loves pathlesse Laborinth, there I
My health, each joy and pleasure counted good
Have lost, and which is more my liberty.
And now am forced to let him sacrifice
My heart, for rash believing of my eyes.
Long have I stayed, but yet have no relief,
Long have I loved, yet have no favor shown,
Because she knows not of my killing grief,
And I have feared, to make my sorrows known.
For why alas, if she should once but dart
At me disdain, 'twould kill my subject heart.
But how should she, ere I impart my Love,
Reward my ardent flame with like desire,
But when I speak, if she should angry prove,
Laugh at my flowing tears, and scorn my fire?
Why he who has all sorrows borne before,
Needs not fear to be oppressed with more,
PHILOCRATES no longer can forbear,
But running to his loved Friend; Oh (said he)
My dear PHILETVS be thy self, and swear
To rule that Passion which now masters Thee
And all thy faculties; but if it may not be,
Give to thy Love but eyes that it may see.
Amazement strikes him dumb what shall he do?
Should he reveal his Love, he fears 'twould prove
A hinderance, which should he deny to show,
It might perhaps his dear friends anger move:
These doubts like SCYLLA and CARIEDIS stand,
Whilst CUPID a blind Pilot does command.
At last resolved, how shall I seek, said he
To excuse my self, dearest PHILOCRATES;
That I from thee have hid this secrecy?
Yet censure not, give me first leave to ease
My case with words, my grief you should have known
Ere this, if that my heart had bin my own.
I am all Love, my heart was burnt with fire
From two bright Suns which do all light disclose;
First kindling in my breast the flame Desire,
But like the rare Arabian Bird there rose
From my hearts ashes, never quenched Love,
Which now this torment in my soul does move.
Oh! let not then my Passion cause your hate,
Nor let my choice offend you, or detayne
Your ancient Friendship; it is alas too late
To call my firm affection back again:
No Physic can recure my weak'ned state,
The wound is grown too great, too desperate.
But Counsel said his Friend, a remedy
Which never fayles the Patient, may at least
If not quite heal your minds infirmity,
Assuage your torment, and procure some rest.
But there is no Physician can apply
A medicine, ere he know the Malady.
Then hear me, said PHILETVS; but why? Stay,
I will not toil thee with my history,
For to remember Sorrows past away,
Is to renew an old Calamity.
He who acquainteth others with his moan,
Adds to his friends grief, but not cures his own.
But said PHILOCRATES, it is best in woe,
To have a faithful partner of their care;
That burden may be undergone by two,
Which is perhaps too great for one to bear.
I should mistrust your love to hide from me
Your thoughts, and tax you of Inconstancy.
What shall he do? Or with what language frame
Excuse? He must resolve not to deny,
But open his close thoughts, and inward flame,
With that as prologue to his Tragedy
He sight, as if they would cool his torments ire
When they alas, did blow the raging fire.
When years first styled me Twenty, I began
To sport with the catching snares that Love had set,
Like Birds that flutter 'bout the gyn till taken,
Or the poor Fly caught in Arachnes net,
Even so I sported with her Beautyes light
Till I at last, grew blind with too much sight.
First it came stealing on me, whilst I thought,
It Was easy to expulse it, but as fire
Though but a spark, soon into flames is brought,
So mine grew great, and quickly mounted higher;
Which so have scorcht my love struck soul, that I
Still live in torment, though each minute dye.
Who is it said PHILOCRATES can move
With charming eyes such deep affection,
I may perhaps assist you in your love,
Two can effect more then your self alone.
My council this thy error may reclayme
Or my salt tears quench thy annoying flame.
Nay said PHILETVS, often my eyes do flow
Like Egypt covering Nilus, nor yet can
Assuage my heat, which still does greater grow,
As if my tears did but augment my flame.
Like to the waters of the Dodonean spring,
That lights a torch the which is put therein.
But being you desire to know her, she
Is called (with that his eyes let fall a shower
As if they feign would drown the memory
Of his life keepers name,) CONSTANTIA more;
Grief would not let him utter; Tears the best
Expressers of true sorrow, spoke the rest.
To which his noble friend did thus reply.
And was this all? What ere your grief would ease
Though a far greater task, beleeu't for thee,
It should be soon done by PHILOCRATES;
Think all you wish performed but see the day
Tired with i'ts heat is hasting now away.
Home from the silent Woods, night bids them go,
But sad PHILETVS can no comfort find,
What in the day he fears of future woe,
At night in dreams, like truth afright his mind
Why do thou vex him love? Had eyes (I say)
Thou would thy self have loved CONSTANTIA.
PHILOCRATES pitying his doleful moan,
And wounded with the Sorrows of his friend,
Brings him to fair CONSTANTIA; where alone
He might impart his love, and either end
His fruitless hopes, cropped by her coy disdain,
Or By her liking, his wished Joys attain.
Fairest, (quoth he) whom the bright Heavens do cover,
Do not these tears, these speaking tears, despise:
And dolorous sighs, of a submissive Lover,
Thus struck to the earth by your all dazeling Eyes.
And do not you contemn that ardent flame,
Which from your self: Your own fair Beauty came.
Trust me, I long have hid my love, but now
Am forced to shew't, such is my inward smart,
And you alone (sweet fair) the means do know
To heal the wound of my consuming heart.
Then since it only in your power does lie
To kill, or save, Oh help! or else I die.
His gently cruel Love, did thus reply;
I for your pain am grieved, and would do
Without impeachment to my Chastity
And honor, any thing might pleasure you.
But if beyond those limits you demand,
I must not answer, (Sir) nor understand.
Believe me virtuous maiden, my desire
Is chaste and pious, as thy Virgin thought,
No flash of lust, it is no dishonest fire
Which goes as soon as it is quickly brought.
But as thy beauty pure, which let not be
Eclipsed by disdain, or cruelty.
Oh! how shall I reply (quoth she) thou'ast won
My soul, and therefore take thy victory:
Thy eyes and speeches have my heart overcome
And if I should deny thee love, then I
My self should feel his torment for that fire
Which is kept close, does burn with greatest ire.
Yet do not count my yielding, lightness in me,
Impute it rather to my ardent love,
Thy pleasing carriage long ago did win me
And pleading beauty did my liking move.
Thy eyes which draw like loadstones with their might
The hardest hearts, won mine to leave me quite.
Oh! I am rapt above the reach, said he
Of thought, my soul already feels the bliss
Of heaven, when (sweet) my thoughts once tax but thee
With any crime, may I lose all happiness
Is wished for: both your favor here, and dead,
May the just Gods power vengance on my head.
Whilst he was speaking this: behold their fate,
CONSTANTIA'S father entered in the room,
When glad PHILETVS ignorant of his state,
Kisses her cheeks, more red then the setting Sun,
Or else, the morn blushing through clouds of water
To see ascending Sol congratulate her.
Just as the guilty prisoner fearful stands
Reading his fatal Theta in the brows
Of him, who both his life and death commands,
Ere from his mouth he the sad sentence knows,
Such was his state to see her father come,
Nor wished for, nor expected to the room.
The enraged old man bids him no more to dare
Such bold intrudance in that house, nor be
At any time with his loved daughter there
Till he had given him such authority,
But to depart, since she her love did show him
Was living death, with lingering torments to him.
This being known to kind PHILOCRATES
He cheares his friend, bidding him banish fear,
And by some letter his grieved mind appease,
And show her that which to her freindly ear,
Time gave no leave to tell, and thus his quill
Declares to her, her absent lovers will.
THE LETTER.
PHILETVS to CONSTANTIA.
I Trust (dear Soul) my absence cannot move
You to forget, or doubt my ardent love;
For were there any means to see you; I
Would run through Death and all the misery
Fate could inflict, that so the world might say,
In Life and Death I loved CONSTANTIA.
Then let not (dearest Sweet) our absence sever
Our loves, let them joined closely still together
Give warmth to one another, till there rise
From all our labors and our industries
The long expected fruits; have patience (Sweet)
There Is no man whom the Summer pleasures greet
Before he taste the Winter, none can say
Ere night was gone, he saw the rising Day.
So when we once have wasted Sorrows night,
The sun of Comfort then, shall give us light.
PHILETVS.

This when CONSTANTIA read, she thought her state
Most happy by PHILETVS Constancy
And perfect Love, she thanks her flattering Fate,
And never missing CUPID, 'cause that he
Had pierced his heart; and thus she writes again,
Vnfeyn'd affection guiding of her Pen.
CONSTANTIA to PHILETVS.
YOur absence (Sir) though it be long, yet I
Neither forget, or doubt your Constancy:
Nor need you fear, that I should yield unto
Another, what to your true Love is due.
My heart is yours, it is not in my claim,
Nor have I power to give't away again.
There Is naught but Death can part our souls, no time
Or angry Friends, shall make my Love decline:
But for the harvest of our hopes I Will stay,
Unless Death cut it, ere't be ripe, away.
CONSTANTIA.

Oh! how this Letter did exalt his pride,
More proud was he of this, then PHAETON
When PHOEBVS flaming Chariot he did guide,
Before he knew the danger was to come.
Or else then JASON, when from Colchos he
Returned, with the Fleeces victory.
But ere the Autumn which fair CERES crowned,
Had paid the swetting Plowmans greediest prayer;
And by the Fall disrobed the gaudy ground
Of all her Summer ornaments, they were
By kind PHILOCRATES together brought
Where they this means to 'nioy their freedom wrought.
Sweet Mistress, said PHILETVS, since the time
Propitious to our votes, now gives us leave
To enjoy our loves, let us not dear resign
His longed for favor, nor our selves bereave
Of opportunity, left it fly again
Further then Love has wings to follow him.
For when your Father, as his custom is
For pleasure, does pursue the timorous Hare;
If you will resort but thither, I Will not miss
To be in those Woods ready for you, where
We may depart in safety, and no more
With Dreams of pleasure only, heal our sore.
This both the Lovers soon agreed upon,
But ere they parted, he desires that she
Would bless this greedy hearing, with a Song
From her harmonious voice, she does agree
To his request, and does this Ditty sing,
Whose ravishing Notes new fires to's old does bring.
THE SONG.
TIme fly with greater speed away
Add feathers to thy wings,
Till thy have in flying brings
That wished for and expected Day.
Comforts sun, we then shall see,
Though at first it dark'ned be
With dangers, yet those Clouds being gone,
Our Day will put his luster on.
Then though Deaths sad night do come,
And we in silence sleep,
'Lasting Day again will greet
Our ravished Souls, and then there is none
Can part us more, no Death, nor Friends,
Being dead, their power over us ends.
Thus there is nothing can dissever,
Hearts which Love have joined together.
Fear of being seen, PHILETVS homeward drove
But ere they part she willingly does give
As faithful pledges of her constant love
Many a kiss, and then each other leave
In grief, though rapt with joy that they have found
A way to heal the torment of their wound.
But ere the Sun through many days had run,
CONSTANTIA'S charming beauty had overcome
GVISCARDO'S heart, and's scorned affection won,
Her eyes, that conquered all they shone upon
Shot through his glutton eyes such hot desire
As nothing but her love could quench the fire.
In roofes which Gold and Parian stone adorn
Proud as their Landlords mind, he did abound
In fields so fertile for their yearly corn
As might contend with scorcht Calabria's ground;
But in his soul where should be the best store
Of surest riches, he was base and poor.
Him was CONSTANTIA urged continually
By her friends to love, sometimes they did entreat
With gentle speeches, and mild courtesy,
Which when they see despised by her, they threat.
But love too deep was seated in her heart
To be worn out with thought of any smart.
Her father shortly went unto the wood
To hunt, his friend GVISCARDO being there
With others who by freindship and by blood
Unto CONSTANTIA'S aged father were
Alyed nere, there likewise were with these,
His beauteous daughter, and PHILOCRATES.
Being entered in the pathlesse woods, whilst they
Pursue their game, PHILETVS being late
Hid in a thicket, carries straight away
His love, and hastens his own hasty fate.
Which came to soon upon him, and his Sun
Eclipsed was, before it fully shone.
For when CONSTANTIA'S missed, in a maze,
Each takes a several course, and by cursed fate
GVISCARDO runs, with a love carried pace
Toward them, who little knew their sorrowful state*
So he like bold Icarus soaring hye
To Honor, fell to th'depth of misery.
For when GVISCARDO sees his Rival there,
Swelling with poisonous envy, comes behind
PHILETVS, who such fortune did not fear,
And with his flaming sword a way does find
To his heart, who ere that death possessed him quite,
In these few words gaspt out his flying sprite.
O see CONSTANTIA my short race is run,
See how my blood the thirsty ground does die,
But live thou happier then thy love has done
And when I Am dead think sometime upon me.
More my short time permits me not to tell
For now death seaseth me, oh my dear farewell.
As soon as he had spoke these words life fled
From's wounded body, whilst CONSTANTIA she
Kisses his cheeks which loose there lively red;
And become pale, and wan, and now each eye
Which was so bright, (is like) when life was done
A fallen star, or an eclipsed Sun.
Thither PHILOCRATES by's fate being drove
To accompany PHILETVS Tragedy,
Seeing his friend was dead, and's sorrowful love
Sat weeping over his bleeding body, I
Will now revenge your death said he
Or in your murder bear you company.
I am by Jove sent to revenge this fate,
Nay, stay GVISCARDO think not heaven in jest,
It Is vain to hope flight can secure thy state
Then thrusting's sword into the Villains breast.
Here, said PHILOCRATES, thy life I send
A sacrifice, to appease my slaughtered friend.
But as he falls here take reward said he
For this thy victory, with that he flung
His killing rapier at his enemy,
Which hit his head, and in his braine-pan hung.
With that he falls, but lifting up his eyes
Farewell CONSTANTIA, that word said, he dies.
What shall she do, she to her brother runs
And 's cold, and livelesse body does embrace,
She calls to him, he cannot hear her moanes:
And with her kisses warmes his clammie face.
My Dear PHILOCRATES, she weeping cries,
Speak to thy Sister: but no voice replies.
Then running to her love, with many a tear,
Thus her minds fervent passion she expressed,
O stay (blessed Soul) stay but a little here
And we will both have to a lasting rest.
Then to Elisiums Mansions both together
We Will journey, and be married there for ever.
But when she saw they both were dead, quoth she
Oh my PHILETVS for thy sake will I
Make up a full and perfect Tragedy
Since it was for me (Dear love) that thou did dye;
I Will follow thee, and not thy loss deplore,
These eyes that saw thee killed, shall see no more.
It shall not sure be said that you did dye
And thy CONSTANTIA live since thou wast slain:
No, no, dear Soul, I will not stay from thee,
But constant be in act, as well as Name.
Then piercing her sad breast, I come, she cries,
And Death for ever closed her weeping eyes.
Her Soul being fled to it is Eternal rest,
Her Father comes, who seeing this, he falls
To the earth, with grief too great to be expressed.
Whose doleful words my tired Muse me calls
TO o'repasse, which I might gladly do, for fear
That I should toil too much, the Readers ear*
FINIS.
THE TRAGICAL HISTORY OF PIRAMVS AND THISBE. Written, By A. C.

-- fit surculus Arbor.
LONDON, Printed by B.A. and T.F. for HENRY S^ILE, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Sign of the Tygers-head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1633.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL, my very loving Master LAMBERT OSBOLSTON, chief
Schoolmasters of Westminster-Schoole.
SIR,
MY childish Muse is in her Spring: and yet
Can only show some budding of her Wit.
One frown upon her Work, (Learned Sir) from you:
Like some vnkinder storm shot from your brow,
Would turn her Spring, to withering Autumne's time,
And make her Blossoms perish, ere their Prime.
But if you Smile, if in your gracious Eye
She an auspicious Alpha can discrie.
How soon will they grow Fruit? How will they flourish
That had such beams their Infancy to nourish.
Which being sprung to ripeness, expect then
The best, and first fruits, of her grateful Pen.
Yours, Abraham Cowley.

THE TRAGICAL HISTORY OF PYRAMVS and THISBE.
WHere Babilons high Walls erected were
By mighty NINVS wife; two houses (...)*
One THISBE lived in, PIRAMVS the fai^^
In the other: Earth never boasted such a pai^e
The very senseless walls themselves combined
And grew in one; Just like their Masters mind.
THISBE all other women did excel,
The Queen of Love, less lovely was then she.
And PIRAMVS more sweet then tongue can tell,
Nature grew proud in framing them so well.
But VENUS envying they so fair should be,
Bids her son CUPID show his cruelty.
The all-subduing God his bow did bend,
And does prepare his most remorsl^sse dart,
Which he unseen unto their hearts did send
And so was Love the cause of Be^uties end.
But could he see, he had not wrought their smart
For pity sure, would have overcome his heart.
Like as a bird within a net is taine,
By struggling more entangles in the ginne,
So they who in loves Laborinth remain,
With striving never can a freedom gain.
The way to enter's broad, but being in
No art, no labor, can an exit win.
These Lovers though their parents did reprove
Their fires, and watched their deeds with jealousy,
Though in these storms no comfort could remove
The various doubts, and fears that cool hot love.
Though he nor hers, nor she his face could see,
Yet this did not abolish loves decree.
For age had crackd the wall which did them part*
This the vnanimate couple soon did spy,
And here their inward sorrows did impart,
Vnlading the sad burden of their heart.
Though love be blind, this shows he can discrie
A way to lessen his own misery.
Often to the friendly cranny they resort,
And feed themselves with the celestial air,
Of odoriferous breath; no other sport
They could enjoy, yet think the time but short.
And wish that it again renewed were
To suck each others breath for ever there.
Sometimes they did exclaim against their fate,
And sometimes they accused imperial JOVE,
Sometimes repent their flames, but all too late*
The arrow could not be recald, their state
Ordained was, by IVPITER above,
And CUPID had appointed they should love.
They cursed the wall which did their kisses part,
And to the stones their dolorous words they sent,
As if they saw the sorrow of their heart,
And by their tears could understand their smart:
But it was hard, and knew not what they meant,
Nor with their siths (alas) would it relent.
This in effect they said; Cursed wall, O why
Will thou our bodies sever, whose true love
Breaks through all thy flinty cruelty:
For both our souls so closely joined lie,
That naught but angry death can them remove,
And though he part them yet they will meet above.
Abortive tears from their fair eyes straight flowed
And dimmed the lovely splendour of their sight,
Which seemed like TITAN, whilst some watery Cloud
O'respreads his face, and his bright beams does shroud.
Till VESPER chased away the conquered light,
And forces them (though loath) to bid Goodnight.
But e're AVRORA, Usher to the Day,
Began with welcome luster to appear,
The Lovers rise, and at that crannie they
Thus to each other, their thoughts open lay:
With many a Since, many a speaking Tear,
Whose grief the pitying Morning blushed to hear.
Dear love (quoth PIRAMVS) how long shall we
Like fairest Flowers, not gathered in their Prime,
Wast precious youth, and let advantage flee,
Till we bewail (at last) our Cruelty
Upon our selves, for Beauty though it shine
Like Day, will quickly find an Evening time.
Therefore (sweet THISBE) let us meet this night
At NINVS Tomb, without the City wall,
Under the Mulberie-tree, with Berries white
Abounding, there t'inioy our wished delight.
For mounting Love stopped in his course does fall,
And longed for yet vntested Joy kills all.
What though our cruel parents angry be?
What though our friends (alas) are too unkind?
Time now propitious, may anon deny,
And soon hold back, fit opportunity.
Who lets slip Fortune, her shall never find.
Occasion once passed by, is bald behind.
She soon agreed to that which he required,
For little Wooing needs where both consent,
What he so long had pleaded she desired,
Which VENUS seeing, with blind Chance conspired,
And many a charming accent to her sent,
That she (at last) would frustrate their intent.
Thus Beauty is by beauties means undone,
Striving to close these eyes that make her bright;
Just like the Moon, which seeks t'eclipse the Sun
Whence all her splendour, all her beams, do come:
So she, who fetches luster from their sight
Does purpose to destroy their glorious light.
Unto the Mulberie-tree, Sweet THISBE came,
Where having rested long (at last) she began,
Against her PIRAMVS for to exclaim,
Whilst various thoughts turmoile her troubled brain.
And imitating thus the sylver Swan,
A little while before her Death she sang.
THE SONG.
Come Love, why stayest thou? The night
Will vanish, e're we taste delight:
The Moon obscures her self from sight
Thou absent, whose Eyes give her light.
Come quickly Dear, be brief as time,
Or we by Morn shall be over taken:
Loves Ioy's thine own as well as mine,
Spend not therefore, time in vain.
Here doubtful thoughts broke off her pleasant Song
Against her love; for staying she began cry,
Her PIRAMVS she thought did tarry long,
And that his absence did her too much wrong.
Then betwixt longing hope, and Jealousy,
She fears, yet's loath, to tax his loyalty.
Sometimes she thinks, that he has her forsaken,
Sometimes that danger has befallen to him;
She fears that he another love has taken,
Which being but imagined, soon does waken:
Numberless thoughts, which on her heart do fling
Fears, that her future fate too truly sing.
Whilst she thus musing sat, ran from the wood
An angry Lion, to the cristall Springs;
Nere to that place, who coming from his food,
His chaps were all besmeared with crimson blood.
Swifter then thought, Sweet THISBE straight begins
To fly from him, fear gave her Swallows wings.
As she auoids the Lion, her desire
Bids her to stay, lest PIRAMVS should come,
And be devoured by the stern Lions ire,
So she for ever burn in vnquench'd fire.
But fear expells all reasons she does run
Into a darksome Cave, near seen by Sun.
With hast-shee let her looser Mantle fall,
Which when the enraged Lion did epsy,
With bloody teeth, he tore't in pieces small,
Whilst THISBE ran and looked not back at all.
For could the senseless beast, her face discrie
It had not done her such an injury.
The night half wasted, PIRAMVS did come,
Who seeing printed in the subtle sand
The Lions paw, and by the fountain some
Of THISBES garment, sorrow struck him dumb:
Just like a marble statue did he stand,
Cut by some skillful grauers, cunning hand.
Recovering breath, against Fate he began t'exclayme,
Washing with tears the torn and bloody weed.
I may said he, my self for her death blame;
Therefore my blood shall wash away that shame.
Since she is dead, whose Beauty does exceed
All that frail man, can either hear or read.
This speaking, he his sharp Sword drew, and said;
Receive thou my red blood, as a due debt
Unto thy constant Love, to which it is paid.
I straight will meet thee in the pleasant shade
Of cool Elysium, where we being met,
Shall taste the Joys, that here we could not yet.
Then through his breast thrusting his sword: life hies
From him, and he makes have to seek his fair.
And as upon the crimsend ground he lies,
His blood spirt'd up upon the Mulberries:
With which th'vnspotted berries stained were,
And ever since with Red they colored are.
At last, came THISBE from the den for fear
Of disappointing PYRAMVS, being she
Was bound by promise, for to meet him there,
But when she saw the berries changed were.
From white to black, she knew not certainly
It was the place where they agreed to be.
With what delight from the dark cave she came
Thinking to tell how she escaped the beast;
But when she saw her PIRAMVS lie slain,
In what perplexity she did remain.
She tears her Golden hair, and beats her breast,
All signs of raging sorrow she expressed.
She cries against mighty JOVE, and then does take
His bleeding body from the moist'ned ground.
She kisses his pale face till she does make
It red with kissing, and then seeks to wake
His parting soul with mournful words, and's wound
Washes with tears which her sweet speech confound.
But afterward recovering breath, quoth she,
(Alas) what chance has parted thee and I.
O tell what evil, has befallen to thee;
That of thy Death I may a Partner be.
Tell THISBE, what has caused this Tragedy.
He hearing THISBE'S name, lift up his eye.
And on his Love he raised his dying head,
Where striving long for breath (at last) said he,
O THISBE, I am hasting to the dead,
And cannot heal that Wound my fear has bred.
Farewell, sweet THISBE, we must parted be,
For angry Death will force me go from Thee.
Life did from him, he from his Mistress part,
Leaving his Love to languish here in woe.
What shall she do? How shall she ease her heart?
Or with what language speak her inward smart?
Usurping passion, reason does overflow,
She swears, that with her PYRAMVS she will go.
Then takes the Sword, wherewith her Love was slain
With PYRAMVS his crimson blood warm still.
And said, Oh stay (blessed Soul) that so we twain
May go together where we shall remain
In endless Joys, and never fear the ill
Of grudging Friends: Then she her self did kill.
To tell what grief their Parents did sustain,
Were more then my rude Quill can overcome.
Many a tear they spent but all in vain,
For weeping calls not back the Dead again.
They both were laid in one Grave, life done,
And these few words were writ upon the Tomb.
Epitaph.
Underneath this Marble stone,
Lie two Beauties joined in one.
Two whose Loves Death could not sever,
For both lived, both died together.
Two whose Souls, being too divine
For earth, in their own Sphere now shine.
Who have left their loves to Fame,
And their earth, to earth again.
FINIS.
AN ELEGY ON THE Death of the Right Honorable, DVDLEY Lord CARLETON, Viscount
DORCHESTER, late Principal Secretary of State.
THe infernal Sisters, did a Counsel call
Of all the Feinds, to the black Stygian Hall;
The dire Tartarean Monsters, hating light,
Begot by dismal Erebus, and night.
Wheresoever dispersed abroad, hearing the Fame
Of their accursed meeting, thither came
Revenge, whose greedy mind no Blood can fill,
And Envy, never satisfied with ill.
Thither blind Boldness, and impatient Rage,
Resorted, with Death's neighbor envious Age,
And Messengers diseases, wheresoever
Then wandering, at that Senate present were:
Whom to oppress the Earth, the Furies sent
To spare the Guilty, vex the Innocent.
The Counsel thus dissolved, an angry fever,
Whose quenchlesse thirst, by Blood was sated never.
Envying the Riches, Honor, Greatness, Love
And Virtue (Loadstone, which all these did move)
Of Noble CARLETON, him she took away,
And like a greedy Vultur seas'd her prey:
Weep with me each who either reads or hears,
And know his loss, deserves his Countries tears:
The Muses lost a Patron by his Fate,
Virtue a Husband, and a Prop the State,
SOL'S Chorus weeps, and to adorn his Hearse
CALLIOPE would sing a Tragic verse.
And had there bin before no Spring of theirs,
They would have made a Helicon with their tears.
A. C.

AN ELEGY ON THE Death of my loving Friend and Cosen, Mr. RICHARD CLERK,
late of LINCOLNES- Inn Gentleman.
IT was decreed by steadfast Destiny,
(The World from Chaos turned) that all should Die.
He who durst fearelesse pass black Acheron
And dangers of the infernal Region,
Leading Hell's triple Porter captivate,
Was overcome himself, by conquering Fate.
The Roman TVLLIE'S pleasing Eloquence,
Which in the Ears did lock up every Sense
Of the rapt hearer, his Mellifluous breath
Could not at all charm vnremorsefull Death.
Nor SOLON so by Greece admired, could save
Himself with all his Wisdom, from the Grave.
Stern Fate brought MARO to his Funeral flame,
And would have ended in that fire his Fame;
Burning those lofty Lines, which now shall be
Times conquerors, and out-last Eternity.
Even so loved CLERK from Death no escape could find,
Though armed with great ALCIDES valiant mind.
He was adorned in years though far more young,
With learned CICERO'S, or a sweeter Tongue.
And could dead VIRGIL hear his lofty strain,
He would condemn his own to fire again.
His youth a SOLON'S Wisdom did presage,
Had envious Time but given him SOLONS age.
And all that in our Ancestors has bin
Of any Virtue, earth now lost in him.
Who would not therefore now if Learnings friend
Bewail his fatal and untimely end:
Who has such hard, such unrelenting Eyes,
As would not weeps when so much Virtue dies?
The God of Poets does in darkness shroud
His glorious face, and weeps behind a Cloud.
The doleful Muses thinking now to write
Sad Elegies, their tears confound their sight:
But him to Elysium's lasting Joys they bring,
Where winged Angels his sad Requiems sing.
Abraham Cowley.

A DREAM OF ELYSIVM.
PHOEBVS expuls'd by the approaching Night
Blushed, and for shame closed in his bashful light.
Whilst I with leaden MORPHEVS overcome,
The Muse whom I adore entered the room.
Her hair with looser curiosity,
Did on her comely back disheveled lie.
Her Eyes with such attractive beauty shone,
As might have waked sleeping ENDYMION.
She bid me rise, and promised I should see
Those Fields, those mansions of Felicity
We mortals so admire at: Speaking thus,
She lifts me up upon winged Pegasus.
On whom I rid: Knowing where ever sh^e
Did go, that place must needs a Temple be.
No sooner was my flying Courser come
To the blessed dwellings of Elysium.
When straight a thousand unknown joys resort,
And hemmed me round: Chaste loves, innocuous sport.
A thousand sweets bought with no following Gall,
Joys not like ours, short, but perpetual.
How many objects charm my wandering eye,
And bid my soul gaze there eternally?
Here in full streams, BACCHVS thy liquor flows,
Nor knows to ebb: here JOVE'S broad Tree bestows
Distilling honey, here does Nectar pass
With copious current through the vardant grass.
Here HYACINTH, his fate writ in his looks.
And thou NARCISSUS loving still the brooks,
Once lovely boys; and Acis now a Flower,
Are nourished, with that rarer herb, whose power
Created the wars potent God, here grows
The spotless Lilly, and the blushing Rose.
And all those diverse ornaments abound,
That variously may paint the gaudy ground.
No Willow, sorrows garland, there has room
Nor Cypress, sad attendant of a Tomb.
None but APOLLO'S tree, and th'Ivie twine
Embracing the stout Oak, the fruitful Vine.
And trees with golden Apples loaded down,
On whose fair tops sweet PHILOMEL alone,
Unmindful of her former misery,
Tunes with her voice a rauishing Harmony.
Whilst all the murmuring brooks that glide along
Make up a burden to her pleasing song.
No Scritchowle, sad companion of the night,
Or hideous Raven with prodigeous flight
Presaging future ill. Nor Progne thee
Yet spotted with young Ilis tragedy,
Those Sacred bowers receive. There Is nothing there,
That is not pure, immaculate, and rare.
Turning my greedy sight another way,
Under a row of storme-contemning Bay
I saw the Thracian singer with his lyre
Teach the deaf stones to hear him, and admire.
Him the whole Poets Chorus compas'd round,
All whom the Oak, all whom the Laurel crowned.
There banished OVID had a lasting home,
Better then thou could give ungrateful Rome,
And LVCAN (spite of Nero) in each vain
Had every drop of his spilt blood again:
HOMER, Sol's first borne, was not poor or blind,
But saw as well in body, as in mind.
TVLLIE, grave CATO, SOLON, and the rest
Of Greece's admired Wisemen, hear possessed
A large reward for their past deeds, and gain
A life, as everlasting as their Fame.
By these, the valiant Heroes take their place,
All who stern Death and perils did embrace
For Virtues cause. Great ALEXANDER there
Laughing at Earth's small Empier, did wear
A nobler Crown, then the whole world could give.
There did HORATIVS, COCLES, SCAEVA, live,
And valiant DECIVS, who now freely cease
From war, and purchase an Eternal peace.
Next them, beneath a Myrtle bower, where Doves,
And gallesse Pigeons build their nests, all Loves.
Faithful perseverers, with amorous kisses,
And soft embraces, taste their greediest wishes.
LEANDER with his beauteous HERO plays,
Nor are they parted with dividing Seas.
PORCIA injoyes her BRUTUS, Death no more
Can now divorce their wedding, as before.
THISBE her PIRAMVS kissed, his THISBE he
Embraced, each blessed with the others company.
And every couple always dancing, sing
Eternal Ditties to Elysium's King.
But see how soon these pleasures fade away,
How near to Evening is delights short Day?
For th'watchfull Bird, true Nuncius of the Light
Straight crow'd: and all these vanished from my sight.
My very Muse her self forsook me too.
Me g^iefe and wonder waked: What should I do?
Oh! let me follow thee (said I) and go
From life, that I may Dream for ever so.
With that my flying Muse I though to claspe
Within my arm^s, but did a Shadow graspe.
Thus ch^efest Joys glide with the swiftest stream,
And all our greatest Pleasure's but a Dream.
ABRA: COVVLEY.

FINIS.
Some mistakes are passed in the Impression, which I beseech thee Gentle Reader
to pardon.

Vale. H. S.


