A TRVE AND ALMOST INCREdible report of an Englishman, that (being cast away in
the good Ship call the Assention in Cambaya the farthest part of the East
Indies) Traveled by Land through many unknown Kingdoms, and great Cities.

With a particular Description of all those Kingdoms, Cities, and People.

As also A Relation of their commodities and manner of Traffic, and at what
season of the year they are most in use, Faithfully related.

WITH A DISCOVERY OF A GREAT Emperor called the Great Mogull, a Prince not
till now known to our English Nation.

By Captain Robert Couerte.

LONDON Printed by WILLIAM HALL, for Thomas Archer and Richard Redmer. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT, EARL OF SALISBVRY, KNIGHT OF THE MOST
Honorable Order of the Garter, Vicount Cranborne, Lord CECIL of Essindon, Lord
high TREASVRER of England, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, and one
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
AS the most noble Maecenas of all good Arts, and the most worthy Patron of all
such as can any way merit of their Country: I have elected you (Right
Honorable Lord) to whom I have presumed (encouraged by your known grace and
Clemency) to Dedicate these my tedious and dangerous Travels. In which, your
Honor shall find undoubtedly all truth, and some nouelty. If after your more
weighty and serious Considerations, you will daine the perusal of this my rude
and unpolished discourse. For being shipwrackt in Cambaya, the farthest part of
the East Indies, and not dispairing in the power of the Almighty, of my safe
return to my Country. Leaving the rest, to the number of 75. that would not
hazard so desperate and unexpected an undertaking. I adventured to pass through
many unknown Kingdoms and Cities over Land: of all which, I have (to my plain
understanding) made a particular and ^aithfull discovery: Protesting to your
Honor that in all my travels and (almost incredible dangers) I have here
expressed no more then I have directly seen, and to my great sufferance and
difficulty proved. Pardon, I entreat your Lordship, this my presumption, in
selecting you the noble and worthy Patron, to so rude a discourse, whose
simpleness is only excused in the Truth. That granted, I shall think my
self most comforted after al my precedent Hazards, that your Honor will but
daine to accept of this report.

Your Lordships Humbly devoted. Robert Couerte.

To the Reader.
Receive, Courteous Reader, a true report of my dangerous Travels, which will
(I make no question) be as pleasing to thee in reading, as they were painful
to me in suffering. Here thou may safely and without danger see that, which
has cost me many a tedious and weary step; many a cold and comfortless
lodging; and many a thin and hungry meal. I publish not these my Adventures in
any pride or Arrogancy: But I think, I should prove ungrateful to my
preserver, not to let the world know his miraculous power, in safegarding me
beyond mine own hope or man's Imagination. The report of these my perils are
freely thine, mine has only been the dangers and sufferance. Be thou as well
pleased with my faithful discovery: as I am contented with my hard and
paineful Pilgrimage.

Thine ROBERT COVER^^

A TRVE AND ALmost incredible report of an Englishman, that (being cast away in
the ship called the Assention in Cambaya the farthest part of the East Indies)
Traveled by Land through many unknown Kingdoms and great CITIES.
THe 14. day of March, 1607.
1607. we came into the Downs, and there ancored against Deal, about 3.
miles from Sandwich, where we stayed until the 25. day of the same month,
being by computation the first day of the year, 1608.
1608. upon which day, about four of the clock in the morning, we waighed
ancor and past by Dover, between three and four of the clock in the
afternoon, without any staying, but giving them notice with 3. pieces of
Ordinance of our passing by, and so passed forwards some three leagues, and
then by a contrary wind we were driven back again into Dover road where we
ancored and stayed till five of the clock in the morning, being the twenty
six day of March. and then weighing ancor, we sailed some three leagues, when
the wind contrarying constrained us again to cast ancor until the 27. day in
the morning about seven or eight of the clock, and then having a fair gale of
wind, we sailed to Plymouth, where we arrived the 29. day between ten and
eleven of the clock in the forenoone, where we stayed till the thirty one day
of March. And then having a fair gale of wind, we waighed ancor and sailed
until we came in sight of an Island called the Saluages, on Sunday being the
tenth day of April, being about five hundred leagues from Plymouth, and still
sailed forwards until the next morning, that we came within sight of the grand
Canaries, which belong to the Spaniard. And upon the twelfth day of April,
about eight or nine of the clock in the night we ancored, and discharged a
piece of Ordinance, for a boat to come aboard, but to no effect: For before our
ariuall in the road, there was a rumor of twelve sail of Flemmings that were
coming that way, to no good intent (as the Spaniards afterward told us) to be
some of those Flemmings that had ouerrunne the rest, where upon they sent up
into the Country for one hundred and fifty horse and foot or more, for their
defense and safeguard (if need should be) nor would they be peswaded to the
contrary, until two of our Factors went on shore, and fully satisfied them in
any thing they demanded or doubted, and that our intent was only to make
provision for such things as we wanted, and the next morning, (as the manner
there is) we discharged another piece of Ordinance. And then the Governor of
the Town sent a boat to know what we craved, whereupon we certified them of
our wants, and they told us they would give the Governor intelligence, and
return us an answer, which was, that unless we came into the road, it was
beyond his Commission to relieve us, yet having first sworn and examined our
Factors, and so knowing the truth of our intended voyage, they gave them a
warrant to take a boat, to come aboard at their pleasures with license to
supply our wants, if they had any thing that might content us. Yet one thing
above the rest made us much to marvel, which was, two English ships (which we
perceived and knew by their flagges) being in the road, who had not so much
kindness in them as to give us notice, of the custom or manners of these
subtle and currish people. And of this doubt, we were also resolved, that no
man whatsoever, being once within their Dominions, may come aboard any ship,
that shall arrive there, and lie out of the road, although they be of their
own Nation, without their Governors and Councels permittance or license. At
our being there some of them came aboard of us every day for the space of five
days that we stayed there, and eat and drank with us, after an insatiable
manner, and very greedily. Also we sent the Governor a present of two cheeses,
a Gammon of bakon, and five or six harrels of pickle Oisters, which he
accepted very thankefully and returned us in requital thereof, two or three
Goats and a Sheep or two, and good store of Unions. And there we took in
fresh water, Canarie wine, Marmalad of Quinces at twelve pence the pound,
little barrels of Suckets at three shillings the barrel, Oranges, Limmons,
Ponicitrions and excellent fair white bread made with Anniseeds, and is by
them called Nuns bread.

The eighteenth day of April about seven of the clock in the morning, we
waighed Ancor and set sail having a fair gale of wind for some three hours
and being then becalmed, we houered too and fro till the 21. day, and having
then again a fair gale of wind, we sailed until the 27. day about two or
three of the clock in the afternoon, that we arrived and ancored at Mayo, being
about three hundred leagues from the Canaries, and coming from thence, we
were determined to take in fresh water at a place called Bonauista, but having
ancored we found the water to be two or three miles, up in the land, neither
was it clear water, so that we took the smaller quantity. But thero were
other good commodities. For at our first coming we were told by two Negroes,
that there we might have as many Goats as we would, gratis, and I well
remember, we had to the number of two hundred, or there abouts in both our
ships. Also-they told us that there were but twelu men in the Island, and that
there was very great store of Salt growing out of the ground so that (if we
pleased) we might lade both our ships therewith, it is excellent good white
salt, and as clear as ever I saw any in England.

Over against the I Will of Mayo, some eight leagues distance, is an Island called
S. Deago; we stayed at Mayo from the twenty seventh of April in the
afternoon until the fourth day of May at six of the clock in the morning,
when we set sail and sailed until the twentieth day of May, that we were past
the Equinoctial line, about 4. or 6. of the clock in the morning, being
distant from the I Will of Mayo about three hundred forty eight leag^es or there
abouts, as our master Philip de Groan noted it down in his own Book of the
description of the whole Uoiage. And thence we still sailed forwards until the
fourth of July, that we ca^^e to a part of Souldania with all our men in
health, Gods name be praised, but two which were touched a little with the
scuruy, which ^^one after recovered themselves on shore to their former health.

Also the same day we espied Land which is called, Cape bona Speranse being
some fifteen or sixteen leagues of Souldania and stands in some thirty five
Degrees or thereabouts.

At Souldania we refreshed our selves excellently well so long as we were
there, and had, and took in for our provision about four hundred head of
Cattle, as Oxen, Steeres, Sheep and Lambs, and fowls, and fish of sundry
sorts very plentiful, and fresh water, great store. Also in that place is an
Island called Pengwin, some five or six leagues from the maine Land, where are
great store of fowls called also Pengwins, infinite number of Sealles: And to
fetch some of those Seals, we went twice thither and filled our boat each
time, and made tranie Oil thereof for Lamps. Also in this Island we found 20.
fat sheep, being left there by the Hollanders, for a Pinnis which we met some
two hundred leagues from Cape bona Speranse, which sheep we took with us and
left six beasts or bullocks in their steads.

At our first coming to Souldania, we began to build or set up our Pinnis,
and launched her the fifth day of September next following, and in seven or
eight days after, she was rigged and ready in all points to have gone away, if
any such necessity had been.

Souldania is within the Kingdom of Ethiopia, Now the Ethiopians are by nature
very brutish or beastly people, especially in their feeding. For I have seen
them eat the guts and garbedge, yea even the very panch where the dung and
^ilth lies. Also when we have cast off those Seal fishes into the river near
adioining where they have lain the space of fourteen days, and that they have
been putri^ied and stuncke so veh^mently, that it could almost have stifled
one of us to come by them, these people have taken them up and ^aten them when
they have ^warmed with cranling maggots.

Also in this Country are sundry sorts of wild beasts, which my self and
others of our Company (going on shore of purpose) have seen, and perceived
some of them to ^e very fierce and cruel: so that afterward when we found
their dens, we durst not enter them, nor come very near them, lest they should
be in them.

The Ethiopians brought down to the shore side to sell Estridgs eggs and some
empty shells, with a small hole in one end, with Estridges feathers and
Porpentines quils, and for all their Traffic and Commodities, they chiefly
desire Iron, esteeming it more then either gold or silver. For with our old
iron, we bought all our Cattle and any thing else that we had of them.

In this Country we remained from the foureteenth day of July until the
twentieth day of September then next following.

The 20. day of September early in the morning we waighed ancor, and that
night we lost the good ship called the Union, and our Pinnis called by the name
of the Good hope, the night being very dark and windy, now, the evening before
we lost them, the Union (about five of the Clock) put out her Ensign, but to
what intent we knew not, nor could imagine, but all that night we lay at hull.

The next day being the 21. day having a fair and strong gale of wind, and
afterward sundry contrary winds and many calmes, yet at length we attained
to the height of S. Laurence on the 27. day of October standing in the height
of 26. degrees, from whence we sailed with many cross and contrary winds, and
calmes. Yet at length on the 22. day of November in the morning we descried
two or three small Islands, and in the afternoon we espied an Island called
Gomora a very high Land: and on the 24. day we sent our boat to the shore side,
and there came to the shore side five or six men of that Country, and sold us
Plantains, and nothing else at that time.

The next day we sent our boat again, but a little before they came to the
shore they espied a Cannooe and two men in it a fishing, we went between them
and the shore but would not violently take them, then we showed them a knife o^
two, and they came both into our Boat, and we brought them aboard our Ship and
used them very kindly, and gave one of them a Turbant to put on his head and to
the other a little glass of a quarter of a pint full of Aquauitae, and sent
them ashore. From the 22. day that we espied the Island Gomora, and came
amongst the Islands we could have no steedy gale of wind to carry us forward,
until the 25. day that with the wind and aid of our Pinnis, which towed our
ship between the two Islands adioining to the shore, we came to an ancor that
night between four and five of the Clock in some 17. or 20. fathom water.

The ^6. day we sent our boat to the shore with a present to the King, by
master Jordan who went himself alone with the present, leaving only a pledge
or two in the boat till his return: The present was a pair of Knives, a
Shash or Turbant, and a looking glass with a comb in it, to the value of some
15. shillings in all, which the King received somewhat scornefully, not scarce
looking on it, or at the least thinking it to be but of small value, and gave
it to one of his Noble men, and told master Jordan our Factor, that if our
General would come on shore, he should have any thing that they had, and with
this answer he departed, and at his coming from the King, the King bowed
himself toward him in very courteous manner and after his departure (as it
may seem) he better perused the present. For in the afternoon he sent our
General in requital, a very fat yongue Bul^locke, which we received, and
gratified the messengers with a couple of penny knives, wherewith they thought
themselves very royally contented. The 27. day our General went on shore and
some 12. with him, and carried with him a small banquet: as, a box of Marmaled,
a barrel of Suckets, and Wine, which they did eat before the King, but he
would neither eat nor drink, but his Nobles did both eat and drink. And after
the banquet having some conference with the King by his Interpreter concerning
our wants, by whom we understood that they had, some dealings with the
Portugals, of which language he could speak a little, which was sufficient to
satisfy us with what they had.

The 28. day the King had determined to come aboard our ship, but his
Interpretor told us, that his Council and the common people would not suffer
him so to do. Also that day toward night I went a shore where our people were
cutting down wood, and came aboard again with the boat.

The 29. day I went ashore again, with our Master, master Tindall, master
Jordan, and our whole noise of Trumpeters, and at the shore side were very
kindly entertained by the Interpretor, who brought us to the King, being then
by his Palace side, who at our approach bowed himself unto us very
courteously. He has for his guard when he walks abroad six or eight men
with knives of a foot long, and as broad as hatchets and very sharp, which go
next to his person, and more go before him, and many behind him, to keep and
defend him, from what injury or wrong soever may come or happen.

These people seem to be civil, kind, and true hearted to strangers, for in
going too and fro, a shore and aboard, one of our men carelessly left his sword
behind him at night when he came aboard, which being found by one of the
people of Gomora, he brought it to the King, who perceiving it to be some of
ours, demanded how he came by it, who answered, he found it, and the King
again told him, that if he proved the contrary it should cost his best blood,
the next day at our coming on shore, the Kings Interpretor brought us the
sword and told us the Kings pleasure therein.

Also they seem to have a very civil government amongst them, for at their
meeting in the morning, they will shake hands each with other, and speak one
to another, which to us seemed to be their kind and friendly salutations one
to another. They are very modest, straight, big limmed, and very comely in
gesture both men and women. Their Religion Mahometicall, and go almost naked,
only their priuities are covered with linen cloth, and Turbants on their
heads.

The women have a linen cloth, that covers their breasts before and reaches
to the middle, and from the middle to the knee and somewhat lower, they are
covered round about with linen, next to their skin, and sedges tied round
about them like a roll at their waste, and hung down, which does become them
very well.

They go all barefoot except the King, who has a pair of soles on his feet:
and for his apparel when I saw him, he had a white wrought networke Cap, a
Scarlet wastcote loose about him, and open before, with sleeves and a linen
cloth about his middle, and another which hanged down from his shoulders to
his feet.

Also at our being there at the Town, they brought us Coquo nuts to sell, as
big as a man's head, and round, and some bigger and some lesser, with water in
them according to the proportion or bigness of the shell, and as much meat in
one shell as would suffice for a wans dinner.

Also they brought us Goats, Hens, Chickens, Limons, Rice, Milk, Fish, and
such like, which we bought for Commodities, as two hens for a penny knife,
Limmons, and Coquonuts for old Iron, as nails, broken pickes, and such like.
But for fresh water there is small store, and that they have is gotten out of
the sands, viz. First, they make a hole in the sands and when the water comes
into the hole, they lade it out into their Coquo shells, and so drink it. They
brought us of that water but none of our company would drink thereof it looked
so thick and muddy.

In this Island of Gomora we stayed from the 25. day of November until the 29.
of the same, and then we waighed Ancor and departed.

The tenth day of December about two or three of the Clock in the morning, and
the Moon shining, we espied on a sudden a low land with high trees growing by
the shore side, we being not a league from the shore, so that if we had not
espied the trees, we should have thought the land to have been but the shadow
of the Moon and so might have run our selves on shore, and cast our selves
away with ship and goods: but it was Gods good providence thus to defend us
from so great and imminent danger, whose name be blessed and praised now and
evermore.

This was the Island of Pemba, which we took to be Zinzabar, until by one of
the people of the Country we found it to be Pemba. At the sight of this low
Island, after we plainly perceived it, we presently tackt about and set from
the shore till day, and then we tackt about again to the shore side, and
neering along the shore side for a harbor to ancor in, we sent our Pinnis
in the mean time, to the shore with the Gang only and master Elmore to seek
for a convenient watering place, we keeping our course till our Pinnis came to
the shore side. Then two or three of the people of the Island demanded in the
Portugal language what we were, and one of our men made answer, that we were
Englishmen. Then they demanded again what we had to do there, in regard the
King of Portugal was King of that Island: we replied, that we knew not so
much, neither came we thither for any evil intent whatsoever, but only to
water, and would give them satisfaction, for any other thing that we should
have of them. Then it drew toward night, and our men came aboard and
acquainted the whole Company with this their parley on shore.

The 11. day our boat went ashore to the same place, but found it void of
people and returned, and presently we came to an ancor, about five or six of
the Clock in the afternoon near unto two or three broken Islands there,
adjoining near to the maine Island of Pemba. This place of our then ancoring
stands in the height of five Degrees and 20. minutes.

The 12. day our Pinnis went on shore to the same place, with master Jordan,
one of our Merchants. At whose coming on shore, after some conference with
some that could speak Portugal, but not with those (as it seemed) with whom
we spoke the day before, for these told master Jordan the King was a Mallaibar,
and after some other conference, master Jordan told them, that although our
ship were an English ship, yet he was a Portugal Merchant, and the goods in
the ship were Portugals goods. Then they told us we should not want for any
thing they had, and hereupon they sent a Moore into our boat to make search for
a convenient watering ^lace, who after some small search, brought us to a
little hole at the bottom of a hill, being hemmed in with the hill on the one
side and a dich on the other side, there we filled our Barreecoes, and being
ready to go aboard, we desired the Moore to go aboard with us, who will^^gly
agreed thereto, and we used him very kindly, till the next morning that we went
to water again, and carried him on shore with us, by whose report of his kind
usage aboard, there came down with him, another that could speak a little
Portugal^, who (as he said) was one of the Kings Gentlemen, him we also
brought aboard and used him very kindly, and set him a shore the next day. Who
promised at his departure to bring us Hens* Coqu^nuts, and Orenges, which he
did accordingly, and then our Master, with master Reuet and my self went a
shore with some others of the Company, where we dined, and after dinner came
two Cauelliers, and a Moore being one of their flaues to the watering place,
where our men were filling of the Caske, and asked whether there were any of
the chief of our ship, or Company there, to who^ Edward Churchman one of our
Company made answer, and said there was our Master, and one of the Merchants,
whom (if it pleased them) he would bring to parlee with them: and at their
meeting, they saluted each other after the Portugal manner. And after some
Conference, demanding what we were, we told them we were Englishmen, and they
replied that we were very welcome, and all that they had, or the Island could
afford, was at our command and disposing; to whom we gave hearty thanks.

But those sugared words of theirs, was only in outward show, to cloak their
treacherous practices, as afterward we found it true.

Then we demanded what they were, and it was answered, that one of them was the
Kings brother, who instantly showed us a silver ring, whereon was engraven the
number of villages, and houses, or cottages in the Island, and said he was Ruler
and Governor of all those places. Then we asked them, if there were any
Portugals in the Island, they said no, for they had banished them all because
they would have relief there perforce, and would make slaves of the people of
the Island, (which being not able to endure) they made continual wars with
them at their coming thither.

In the mean time, our Pinnis came on shore, which had been at an other place
of the Island for Cattle, according to appointment, but were deferred of, till
they might get fitter opportunity for their intended treachery.

Then our men told us that they had heard of that side of the Island where they
were for Cattle that 15. sail of Hollanders had lately taken Mosemb^ge, and
put all the Portugals to the sword, which news they had heard from Zinzibar to
be true, whereat these Cauelliers seemed outwardly to rejoice, which was also
another subtle train to bring us within compass of their intended treachery.
And when night drew on, we entreated them to go aboard with us, which then,
they refused to do, but promised to come aboard the next day being the
seventeenth day of December, which the Kings brother (as he named himself) did
with two others, but before they came aboard, they craved pledges, which they
had, viz. Thomas Cave, Gabriel Brook, and Laurence Pigot our Surgeon. The
other three being then aboard, we used them very kindly until they went on
shore, on the eighteenth day in the morning: And our General gave the chief of
them two Goats, a paper Cartridge of Gunpowder and some other small trifles to
the other two, and so went on shore, and master Reuet, master Jordan, M.
Glascot and my self went with them for our pledges, and at our coming on
shore and fearing no treachery, we went six or eight unadvisedly up to the
houses for our pledges, whom we found guarded with fifty or sixty men armed with
several weapon, as Bows and Arrows, Swords and Bucklers, Darts, and
Cu^ltleaxes, yet at our coming thither, we received our pledges and without
longer stay, departed to the Sea side, accompanied with the Kings brother, and
immediately most of those Moors came also after us, and six or eight of them
came to our Pinnis side and viewed her and so departed again to the rest of
their fellows.

And we instantly entered our boat, and entreated the Kings brother to go
aboard with us, which he willingly did, and we entertained him with all kindness
that we could, until toward night that he was to depart, when our Master
offered him a knife, with some other odd trifles, which he scornfully refused,
and presently went ashoare in our boat. Upon this, we mistrusted some treachery,
intended against us, and therefore thought to be better armed at our next
coming ashoare.

The 19. day our Longboat went a shore in the morning very early, to fill our
Caske with water, and having filled the same, within a little, they espied our
sails out, being let down to dry; but they imagined we were going away: where
upon the companion to the Kings brother came to our boatswaine, and asked him
if we were going away; The boat-swaine, as well as he could, both by signs
and otherwise, told him, it was only to dry our sails. And as they were thus
talking, they espied our Pinnace coming, being then very well armed, and left
off making any further inquiry; which Pinnace had they not then espied, it was
likely they had intended to have cut off our men, and taken our boat; for there
was two of these Rogues at the least lying in ambush about the watering place,
ready to have given the onset, if the watchword had been given. By this time
our Pinnace was come to the shore, and our men standing on their guard upon the
sands, not far from her, then our Master sent Nicholas White, one of our
gang, to tell them of the Island that our Merchants were come on shore, who
passing by one of their houses, might perceive the same to be full of people,
and amongst the rest, six Portugales, in long branched damask Coats, lined
with blew taffata, and under the same, white callico breeches. This Nichol^s
White, at his return, told us, and presently came down the companion to the
Kings brother, and told Master Reuet, the Merchants were weary, and entreated
them to go up to the^ to see the Cattle, which was only one bullock which
Nicholas White saw at his going up, and no more. But Master Reuet craved
pardon, des^ring him to send down the Bullock, and their was commodities in
the boat to make satisfaction for the same. With this answer, and seeing us
better armed then we were wont to be, he went away. The Kings brother being
then on the sands, commanded a Negro to gather Coquonuts to send to our
General, and made choice of Edward Churchman one of our men, to fetch the same,
whom we never saw after, nor could ever know what became of him; But when they
saw that none of us would come a shore, but stood upon our guard, they gave the
watchword and sounded a horn, and presently set upon our men at the watering
place and slew John Har^ington, the boat-swaines man, and wounded Robert
Buckler, Master Ellanors man very sore, with 8. or 10. several wounds, and had
killed him, but that we discharged a Musket or two, which (as it seemed) hurt
some of them; for then they retired and cried out: and so (though weak and
faint) he did at length recover our boat. Also two or three more of our men by
creeping, and lying close in the ditch, until they espied our boat, got also
safe aboard; and then counting our men, we only missed Edward Churchman, and
John Harrington, that was slain: and so coming aboard, we certified the
company of all our proceedings on shore; and our Surgeon dressed Robert
Buckler, and after, did his best for his cure and recovery of his health.

The twentieth day in the morning we went on shore with our Pinnace and
Longboat, very well armed to fetch in our David, (which is a piece of wood or
timber wherewith we hale up our Ancor) and a little beyond the same, we found
John Harrington dead, and stark naked, whom we buried at another Island, hard
by the maine Island.

The natural people of the Island P^mba, seem to be loving and kind: for they
made signs to me and others, at our first coming, to beware of our throats
cutting: which then we took no heed or notice of, until this their treachery
put us in mind thereof again.

The same day (being the 20. day) we waighed Ancor, and about 12. of the clock
at night, our ship was on ground, on the shoulds of Meluidee, or Pemba, which
we certainly knew not: Yet God of his mercy, (as formerly in the late
pretended treachery, so in that extremity) did mightily defend and preserve
us, whose name be praised and glorified now and evermore.

The 21. day in the morning, we espied three sail being small boats,
slightly wrought together, called Paugaias which we made after and took,
which they on shore espying, they sent out an Aduisor being also a Paugaia,
which perceived that we had taken the other and returned to the shore.

Now of those which we had taken there were some 6. or 8. of the chiefest that
were thought by our company to be Portugals, the rest being certainly known to
be Moors, and were in all some forty and odd persons, and those six or
eight were pale and white, much differing from the color of the Moors, Yet
being asked, what they were, they said, they were Moors, and showed us their
backs all written with Characters; and when we affirmed them to be Portugals,
they then told us the Portugals were not circumcised.

But to conclude; our Company would not be persuaded but that they were
Portugals: then some of our Company told them of all the intended treacheries
with the loss of two of our men, and wounding of the the third, which made
them fearful of our revenge, (as it seemed) and then they talked together in
th^^r own language, which made us also suspect, some villainous and desperate
attempt to be pretended by them, and therefore, I kept my self still upon the
poope, and looked carefully to the swords which stood nakedly in the Masters
Cabin, which they also knew and noted, and marked Master Glaskock, and my
self where we set our swords still expecting to have the place voided, which I
perceiving, kept good watch, lest greater hurt should ensue thereby, and being
thus alone on the poope they beckoned me three or four several times to come
to them upon the spare D^ck, which I denied, lest they should so recover the
swords, whereby far more harm might have been done, then afterward was done.

Then our Master came upon the spare deck and demanded, which was their Pilot,
whom he took down into his Cabin, and showed him his plat, which he at his
coming down did very earnestly behold.

But at his going from the rest with our Master, he spoke in the Moors
language, warning them (as we thought) to look to themselves and do their
best amongst us, and to give ear when he gave the watchword, and then to give
the Onset.

Also there were speeches used that the Pilot had a knife about him, and being
searched for it, he nimbly conveyed the same from the one side to the other,
and therewith suddenly stabbed the Master into the belly, and then cried out,
which (belike) was the Watchword: For then they began the onset on the spare
deck, where Master Glascocke, Master Tindall, our General, and one or two
more with them chanched to kill four or five of the white Roagues, and made
such havoc among the rest, that at length they had slain almost forty of
them, and brought the rest in subjection.

Now, a little before our Master thus called the Pilot, he entreated our
General, that if they had any garuances or peason (being their Country food)
they would let us have some, which they should be paid for, and what was taken
from them should be redeliuered, with free liberty to go where they would,
whereto the General consented, and hereupon our Master called the Pilot, to
see if he had any skill in the Plat, and so to let him depart, and all the rest.
But when thus treacherously they offered us the first abuse, we could do no
less then we did, being in our own defense, and for the safeguard of our lives.

Yet did some five or six of these villains, recover a Pangaia by their
excellent swiftness in swimming, and escaped to the shore, they swimming to
windward, faster then our Pinnis could row.

In this skirmish were hurt but three of our Company, namely, Master Glascocke,
with two wounds, whereof one was a deep wound in his back, Master Tindals was
aimed at his breast, he having nothing in his hand to defend himself, yet by
the assistance of the Almighty he turned himself about and received the stabbe
in his arm, and our Masters was in his belly, as is formerly said, which (God
be thanked) they all recovered and were well cured.

The 19. day of January we espied many Islands, which the Portugals call by the
name of Almaisant, being to the number of nine Islands, al unpeopled as the
Portugals write and affirm.

The 20. day we sent our Pinnis in the morning to one of those Islands to seek
fresh water, but could find none: yet they found there great store of Land
Turtles, and brought some six aboard, then we sailed ^o an other Island, which
seemed more likely for fresh water then the first, where we cast Ancor.

The 21. day about ten of the Clock in the forenoone Riding there at twelve or
thirteen fathom water, and a reasonable good harbor, we stayed there until
the first day of February, and then waighed Ancor, and departed. Here we
refreshed our selves very well with fresh water, Coquonuts, fish, Palmitoes,
and Doves, great plenty.

The first day of February, we set sail, and sailed with a fair wind until
the 19. day, that we passed the Equinoctial line, and on the fifteenth day in
the morning betime, we came within ken of land, which was the coast of
Melueidey upon the maine.

The 16. day we came to an Ancor, about nine of the Clock in the morning, at
12. fathom water, and some two leagues from the shore, and presently we sent
our Pinnis to the shore to seek some refreshing, but they could by no means
get on shore; nor would the people of the Country (being fearful) come
within parley, which at their return they certified our Master of, and so in
the afternoon we set sail again, and departed.

Now about this time it pleased God, (by the confession of William Acton, one
of our ship boys) to reveal a foul and detestable sin committed amongst
us; which being approved against him by a Jury, he was condemned to die, and
was executed for the same on the third day of March (being Friday) in the
morning.

The 21. day betimes in the morning, we espied an Island standing in the height
of 12. Degrees and 17. minutes, being barren and unpeopled, over against which
Island, some three leagues distant, stood four hillocks or rocks, and for this
Island we bore up a whole day, and a night, and finding it to be barren and
unpeopled, by sending our skiffe on shore, we passed by it, and the same day
we espied three Islands more about sun setting standing in the height of 12.
Degrees and 29. minutes, to which Islands we came the 29. day of March, 1609.
two of which Islands were within a league one of another, and the third we found
to be Sacatora, and stands in 12. Degrees and 24. minutes where we Ancored in
a fine Bay the 30. day, in the morning about ten of the Clock.

At sight of us, the Ilanders made a fire, and we sent our skiffe an shore,
but the people fled with great fear and trembling, having (as it seemed) been
formerly injured by some that had passed (...) our men looking about, found no
likelie-hood of any relief there, and so came aboard and certified the
General thereof: so that about five of the clock in the afternoon, we
waighed ancor, and sailed along to find out the chief harbor.

The 31. day we stood of into the main Sea, where we met with a Guzarat ship,
laden with Cotton woolls, Callicoes, and Pentathoes, being bound for Adden,
whether we kept her company, in regard they told us it was a Town of great
trading, but we found it quite contrary: for it was only a Town of garrison,
and many Soldiers in it: and at the very entering into the Town, is a Castle
cut out of the maine, and encompassed round with the Sea, wherein are thirty
two pieces of Ordinance, and fifty pieces in the town.

The 10. day of April we arrived there, and the Guzarat ship went into the
Town, and told the Governor, there was an English Ship come to trade there.
Who presently sent his Admiral to us, and our General unadvisedly went on
shore, where he, and his fellows were received with 4. great Horses, and were
carried before the Governor, in as great pomp and state, as the Town could
yield. But the Governor finding him to be a plain and simple man, put him in a
house with a Chowse or keeper, with many Ianyzaries or Soldiers to guard him,
and so kept him prisoner six weeks, my self being prisoner with him.

And then the Governor caused him to send aboard for Iron, Tin, and Cloth,
to the value of 2500. Dollars, with promise to buy the same, which when he had
on shore, he claimed and made stay thereof, for the Custom of the ship only:
and when he saw he had gotten as much as he could, he sent him aboard the
27. day of May, and kept 2. of our Merchants for 2000. Dollars, which he said
was for ancorage: but the general voice of the company was, that he should
have none: whereupon he sent the Merchants up into the Country some 8. days
journey, to a place called Siany where the Bashaw then lay.

The 28. day, our Pinnace came to us, who told us their Master was dead, The
master of the Pinnace murdered.
and inquiring where, and how, the company told us, he was knocked in the head
with a Mallet hammer, by one Thomas Clarke, with the consent of Francis Driuer
his mate, Andrew Euans, and Edward Hills, being four murderous and bad
minded men, who being asked why, and upon what occasion they did it, they
could make no excuse, nor allege any cause, save only, that he had some
small quantity of Aquauitae and Rosa solis, for his own store, and for the
good of them, or any one aboard, that should stand in need thereof, and was
provident to keep and preserve the same, till great need should be, and
therefore out of mere malice, and chiefly by the instigation of Francis
Driuer his mate, they thus murdered an innocent man, who thought them no harm,
nor suspected any such danger.

The 31. day of May, a Jury was called, and upon just and due proof, according
to our English laws, they were convicted, and Francis Driuer and Thomas Clarke
were condemned and judged to die, and were hanged in the Pinnace, where they
did the fact: and on the other two, God showed his just judgment afterward.
For Edward Hills was eaten with Caribs or Man-eaters, and the other died and
rotted where he lay.

The third day of June, we waighed ancor and sailed into the Red Sea, through
the straights of Mockoo; which are some league over from shore to shore, and 18
fathom water, close aboard the Island shore, and about 3. leagues in length.

When you are within the Straits, there lies a great shole, some two leagues
of into the Sea, and to shun it you must take a good breadth off, and so you
shall come in no danger, and then you have to Mockoo, some 6. leagues, Moha six
leagues wihin the Straits
where is a good Road to ancor in, and fair ground, and you may ride at 14.
fathom water. It is a place that is never without shipping, for it is a Town
of great trade of merchandise, and has Carrauans or Conuoies that come from
Seena, from Mecha, from grand Cairo, and Alexandria, and all those places.

It is a City of great trading for our Commodities: as Tynne, Iron, Lead,
Cloth, Sword blades, and all English commodities. It has a great Bussart or
Market every day in the week. There is great store of fruit, as Apricocks,
Quinces, Dates, Grapes abundance, Peaches, Limmons, and Plantins great store,
which I much marvelled at, in regard the people of the Country told us, they
had no rain in seven years before, and yet there was very good Corn and good
store, for eighteen pence a bushel.

There are Oxen, Sheep, and Goats abundance: as an Ox, for 3. Dollars, a Goat
for half a Dollar, and a Sheep for half a Dollar: as much Fish for three
pence, as will suffice ten men to a meal. As Dolphines, More-fish, Basse,
Mullets, and other good Fish.

The Town is Arabian, and governed by the Turk, and if an Arabian offend, he
is severely punished by their Law. For they have Galleys and Chains of
purpose, which offenders are put into, else were they not able to keep them in
awe and subjection.

At Mockoo, we ^aied from the 13. of June till the 18. of Iulie, Their abod at
Moha.
and then waighed ancor, and went out to the mouth of Mockoo, where we lost
two ancors, and from thence we set sail to Sacatora: and about the 5. of
August, we cast ancor over against the Towe^^ (...) Saiob, where the King
lies and one of our Merch^^^^ went on shore and gave the King a present, and
(...) that we might buy Water, Goats, and other provision, which he would not
grant, because the women of the Country were much afraid: yet he told him, if
he would go to a Road some five leagues of, we should have any thing his
Country would afford: where we bought Goats, Water, aloes Socotrina, Dragons
blood, and what else the Country would afford.

Here at Sawb, we remain from the 5. day of August, till the 18. day, and
set sail with an ancor and a ha^fe, for Cambaia. And on the 28. day of August,
we came to Moa, where one of the Country people told us that for the value of
20. Dollars, we might have a Pilot to bring us to the bar of Surot. But our
wilful Master refused it, and said he would have none.

The 29. day we set sail from thence, thinking to hit the Channel to go to
the bar, but we came out of 10. fathom water into 7. fathom, and into six
fathom and a half. Then we tackt about to the Westward, and came into 15.
fathom, and then we tackt about again to the Eastward, and came into 5.
fathom water. Then some of the company asked whether the Master would go,
who answered let her go over the height, and presently the ship struck, which
I presently went up and told him of: who turning about asked who durst say she
struck, then presently she struck again, and struck off her Rudder, and
lost it in the Sea: then we came to an ancor, and rode there two days, then
our Skiffe split in pieces, and we had no more but our long boat to help our
selves withal: yet we made such shift, that we got the pieces of our skiffe
into the ship, and the Carpenter went so round^ly to work, that they had bound
her up together with woldings, so that when our greatest need was, she brought
16. men one shore.

The second day of September about six of the clock ^ night, The ship foundere^*
our ship struck and began to founder, and ^^uing ^^^ke twice, we had
presently 24. inches of water in the Well, then we plied the pumpe, some four
hours, viz. from seven of the Clock to eleven of the Clock at night, then
the water increased so fast that we were able to keep her no longer, but were
forced to take our boats.

The Merchants had some 10000. l. lying between the maine Maste and the
Stearidge, whereof the General bid the Company take what they would, and I
think they took amongst them some 3000. pounds some having 100. pounds, some
50. pounds, some 40. pounds, some more, and some less, and so we left the
ship, and took neither meat nor drink with us. And between twelve and one of
the Clock, we set sail to come ashore, which was at the least 20. leagues to
the Eastward, and so we sailed all that night, and the next day, without any
sustenance at all, till five or six of the Clock at night, being the third day
of September, that we made the Land being a little Island, standing upon the
bar, and then a gust came down upon us, and brok the midship thought of our
long boat, wherein were 55. persons, yet it pleased God that we recovered our
Maste, and (the gust ceasing) we went over the bar, ^andeuee River.
and got into the River of Gandeuee.

But when the Country people saw so many men in two boats, they struck up
their drums and were in Arms, taking us to be Portugales, and that we came to
take some of their Towns, which we perceiving, and having by chance a
Guzarat, aboard we sent him ashore to tell them truly what we were: and when
they knew we were Englishmen, they directed us to the City of Gandeuee, where
was a great Governor, who at our coming thither (and understanding we were
Englishmen) seemed to be very sorry for our misfortunes, and welcome us very
kindly. And there ended our travels by Sea for that time.

16^9.
The fourth day of September, 1609. we came to the City of Gandeuee, which is a
very fa^re haven, and great store of shipping built there, whereof some are of
four or five hundredth Tun, it stands in a good Soil, and is governed by the
Gentiles.

The 25. day of September, we took our journey toward Surrot, to a Town
called Sabay, which is a Town, only consisting of Spinners and Weauers, and
there is much Calico made, and from thence we came to Surrate, where we found
one William Finch an English Merchant, and servant to Master Johnson in
Cheapside, who very courteously went to the Governor, and acquainted him with
our distress, who (as hereafter we found it to be true) was bribed by the
Portugals, which told him we were a kind of turbule^t people that would make
mutinies, and sow civil discention in the Town, and so adventure to surprise
the Town, whereupon we were put into a Monastery, where we lived three days,
nor could this suff^ce, but we were removed to a great house, being a Gentiles
house, where we lay 14. days; in which time, (by the good advise of the said
William Finch) we made provision of Coaches, Horses, and other things to
travel to the great Mogol, and certify him of our great distress and
misfortunes. This is a City of great fame and Antiquity, being walled about
with free stone, and a strong Garrison lying therein, and a City of great
trading for Merchandise, and great store of shipping, whereof some are of 500.
Tun, which they cannot lade at the Town but carry them over the bar with their
balance only, and there lade the^, but for their smaller shipping they lade
them at the Town, and so go over the bar, where at a high water, they have 16.
foot water.

The 22. of September, The taruell to Agra.
we took our journey from Sur^at to Agra, with our General and 52. men, with
21. Coaches of our own, and some others being hired, and 19. Horses to a great
City called Brampoit, and the first two nights we lay in the fields.

The 26. day we came to Nawbon where Sugar grows in abundance, with Cotton
and all manner of grain, as Rice, Wheat, Beans, Pease, Cheecore Lanteechoes,
Motte, etc. For the Country is so plentiful, that you may have a gallon of
milk for a half penny, a Hen for three halfpence, and 16. Eggs for a penny.

From Gandeuee to Sabay is 12. course, and from Sabay to Surrot is 12* course
and every two course is three English miles.

The 27. day, we traveled 12. course and came to a City of the Bannions called
Daytaotote, and there Master Reuet one of our Merchants died.

This City could never be conquored by the great Mogol, but yielded upon
composition, and still holds his title of King of the Bannians, and at this
City we stai^d two days.

This City yeeldes great store of Drugs, fine Pentathose and Calico Lawnes.

The first of October we traveled 12. course, and lay in the fields.

The second day we traveled 14. course to a great City of the Bannians called
Netherberry, where is a great Basar or Market, and all manner of brazen wares to
be sold, as Pots, Kettles, Candlesticks, and Caldrons of four foot long,
Shirts of Male, Swords and Bucklers, Lances, Horses in Armor of Arrowe proof,
Camels, and all manner of beasts.

There is also great store of Cotton wools, Cotton yarne, Pentathoes, Callico
Lawnes, Shashes for Turbants for their heads, Limmons, Potatoes, three pound
for a penny, and all manner of Drugs.

And surely cloth would be a very vendible commodity there: for course felt is
there extreme dear. Also Cold and Silver is there very plentiful, and these
are very good people to deal withal.

The third day we traveled ten course, to a small Town of Husbandry called
Sailote* where is also great store of Sugar, and fruits of all sorts.

The next day we traveled 18 course to a Garrison Town called Saddisee, and
there is the River of Tyndee which runs to Surrat, wherein is great store of
Fish of all sorts, and this River divides the confines, of the Bannians and
the Guzarates.

The Bannians are a strange people in their belief, and honor God in a
strange fashion, viz. in pictures of stone, hanging their beads on the heads
of the pictures, and then with their faces toward the sun do worship it,
saying, that all their comforts proceeds from it. And yet I saw more then this,
which was a Cow adorned with a vest of gold and many Jewels, her head bedecked
with garlands and flowers, and then being brought to a burial place, where
they do use to make Sermons, they kiss her feet and teats, and worship her,
that it grieved me to see their sond superstition, and abominable Idolatry.
And asking why they did it, they answered, that she was the mother of beasts,
and brought them, milk, butter, cheese, and the Ox to till the ground, and
lastly, her hide did make leather to make them shoes. Moreover, they say, she
is blessed by the Mother of God, to be honored above all beasts. And so leaving
the Bannians, we crossed the River of Tindee into the Gentiles Country.

Now at Saddisee, we being many, some in Coaches, some on Horseback, they
thought we had come to take their Town, and did shut their gates, and bent
their Ordinance upon us. But our General sent our Linguist or Interpreter to
certify them, what we were, and then the Governor opened the Gates, and came
himself to entertain us with great courtesy and state. Yet that night we lay
by the River side, and the next day being the fifth of October, we came into
the Town, where we lay that night: And the next day we traveled some 12.
Course, and lay at a Monastery: And the seventh day we went to the great City
of B^amport where the great General called the (...) Canawe lives, this being
his Garrison or resting place when he is out of the wars, and on the twelfth
of October, he came from the wars with 1500. Elephants, 30000. Horses, 10000.
Camels, 3000. Drumdaries.

The Elephant serves in the Field with a small tower of wood or timber upon
his back, whereon is placed 4. pieces of brass as big as ^abnets, and 10. men
very artificially placed in the said Tower, with bows and arrows, and to
discharge those pieces.

The Elephants skin is musket proof, unless it be on his face and belly, and
he is a beast of so great understanding, that he is ruled and governed by word
of mouth, understanding what his keeper commands him to do.

This Country bears toward the Northwest, in the height of 28. Degrees, or
thereabouts: And here Muskets, Snaphances, Pistols, Petronels, and Swords, be
good commodities, but no Firelocks in in any wise.

Also Cloth is an excellent commodity to my knowledge, for I was offered three
pound for an old cloak, which here, is not worth 20. shillings at the
uttermost.

And in Bramport we stayed from the seventh of October until the 11. of
November following: Then I and John Frencham one of our Company went to crave
the Generals pass, to go to the great Mogol, but he asked us if we would
serve him in his wars, and he would give us what means we would desire: but
we told him, we were poor distressed Merchants, that had been shipwracked:
and he again replied, that there was no Englishman, Merchant, nor other but
he was a Soldier. But we told him that we had wives and children in our
Country, to whom we must of necessity go, to which he said, it was very
well spoken, and that it was against their Laws to keep any man against his
will: Then he asked ^s if we had any Jewels for his Ladies, I answered I had
one stone and one Jewel, which I sold him for forty pound sterling, and then
h^e commanded his Secretary to make us a Pass, and seal it with his great
S^ale, for our safe Conduct to Agra. Also for the nature and strength of the
Elephant, I can say thus much of mine own knowledge because I saw it.

An Elephant royal being brought to remove a piece of Ordinance of one and
twenty foot long, which carried a shot of seven inches high, and lay upon the
carriage on the side of a hill, and to carry the same some half furlong off;
which he did as it seemed to the great dislike of his Keeper, who told him he
was a lazy villain, and deserved not his meat. Now the nature of the Elephant
is, not to be disparaged in any thing, and stands much upon his reputation
and valor: so that upon these speeches of his Keeper, he came to it again,
and with maine strength tore the carriage in pieces, and left the piece lying
on the ground. Then were Carpenters set on work to make a new carriage, which
being done, the same Elephant was brought, who clapped his Trunk about the
wheels, and brought the Ordinance where his Keeper commanded him.

This City is far bigger then London, and great trade of all sorts of
merchandise therein: it is one of the most famous heathen Cities that ever I
came in, and the Citizens are very good and kind people, and very many Gallants
in the City. Also fine rivers, ponds, orchards, gardens, pleasant walks, and
excellent fair prospects as ever I saw. Here any Gentleman may have pastime
to hunt or hawke: and if he will not go far, he may buy a Dear in the
Busar or market for a Doller, being but four shillings sterling, and hunt him
where and when he will.

Now in my judgment, our English cloth of gold and s^luer, veluets,
broad-cloth, bays, and cottons, would be very vendable, in regard there are so
many Gallants. And thus much for the great City of Bramport.

The eleventh of November we took our iourny toward Agroe, I and Joseph
Salebanck our Purser, and one Io. Frencham, with one of the Country people for
our guide, taking leave of our General, who was extreme sick of an Ague, and
no hope of any speedy recovery. Also we had thought to have gone along with a
Carrauand of four hundred and fifty strong, which were bound for Agro: but the
Captain told us, that they were to stay seven days longer; but said, if we
would travel some two days iourny (which we might safely do without any
danger of thieves) we should meet with a greater Carrauand then they were.

So on the twelfth day, we traveled to a Town called Caddor, some fifteen
course from thence, where we lay that night.

Here the Governor hearing that we were strangers, or Christians, demanded
what we would have, and whether we traveled? We answered, to Agro, to the
King, and that we came from Surrot. Then he asked us what we would do with the
King? And when I heard him so inquisitiue, I peremptorily answered, that my
business was too great for him to know: but he said, he would know it ere we
went out of the Town: and I again replied, that my business was such, that I
would go out ot the Town and ask him no leave: and so making us ready to
depart, we said, we would see who would stay us, without a very lawful
occasion: Then the Governor sent his Cotwall or the Mayor of the Town, who
asked us why we used such peremptory speeches to the Governor? We told him, we
answered him in no worse manner then his place and calling deserved, and that
it was not for him to force us to acquaint him with our business to the King,
and then we showed him she Can Canawes pass to the King. Whereupon the
Governor came to us again with twenty Gentlemen of the Town, and by all means
entreated us to stay all night, and whatsoever we wanted that the Country
could afford, should be at our service; and withal told us, the way was
dangerous, and very bad to travel.

The next day we gave him half a pound of Tobacco for a present, which we
brought out of England, which he accepted very thankfully.

The thirteenth day we came to a Town called Sawbon, some 14 course from
Caddor, but before we were half a course out of the Town, the Governor sent
12. Horsemen with Lances, Bows and Arrows, to conduct us some part of the
way that was most dangerous, which was some 10. or 12. English miles.

And when we came to Sawbon, we found the Carrauand being 500. Camels bound for
Agro. And were laden with Taffateis, wrought Silks, Cloth, Sugar, and other
Commodities, some from Bramport, some from Bengalla, and some from Cambaia.

The 14. day we set forwards with the Carrauand* and traveled some 12. course
to a Monastery called Tindey.

The 15. day, we traveled some 10. course and lay in the woods.

The next day, we came to a great City called Cannowe, where is much trading
for Cloth, Swords, Shashes, Pieces, and Armor tied on with strings, being but
only Arrow proof.

There is great store of fruit, and colors for Diars, of all sorts: and I
think our English cloth would be an excellent commodity there: for it is very
cold, esspecially in January February and March, for it bears to the
Northwards.

The 16. day we traveled some 14 course to a great River, called the River of
Andee, which is as broad as the Thames at Woolwich, and runs into the Bay of
Bengalla, and this is the utmost part or border of the Gentiles, and one the
17. day we passed over the River and went out of the Gentiles Country.

The Gentiles will eat nothing that bleedeth, and the Sim is their great god,
For, should they eat any thing that bleedeth, they believe that they may eat
the souls of their Father, Mother, Sister, Brother, or friends, that are
deceased? For, they say, that when any one dies, their breath presently goes
into one beast or other, and so, in eating that beast, a man may eat the soul
of some friend together with the flesh of that beast, such is their great
bl^ndenesse and ignorance. Nay more, they do make every living thing their
Idols: as, the first living they meet in the morning is their god or saint for
that day, to worship that, and so leaving the Gentiles, we come to the
Bulloits, or Pithagoreans.

The 17. day we came to the City of Gorra, where are many Surroyes, or Innes,
where Travelers may set their Camels, Horses or Catell, and cost nothing.

Also there are four great Schools for learning like to an Uniuersity: In
this Country were two Brothers being Kings sons, who warred for this City,
being eight miles in compass, and in the middle a great wall, and there they
laid their Seedge, a long time. And at the last the King of the East part got
the victory, and held the same for seven years, and then the great Mogol
Tamberlaine the sixth overcame the whole Country and took it into his hands.

The 18. day, we went ten course to a great Tanck or poole of water, like unto
the Bath, the water boiling out of the earth and is very warm.

The 19. day, we traveled some 15. course to a Town called Sanday where is
great store of W^ll, like Spanish Wool, here are made great ^^ore of Caps to
cover Turbants, felt gowns to ride in, both fine and course, there are great
store of sheep, and so much Sugar, that they feed horses therewith as we do
with prouender, also there are goodly Surroies or I^^es for horsemen and
footmen.

The 20. day, we traveled some fifteen course to a great Surroy, near unto
a Monastery, where we had great store of fruit called Mangees being like an
Apple, and have a stone as big as an Apricocke, and in sent or taste, and is
excellent good for the Flixe, and are there much esteemed of.

The 21. day we traveled twelve course to a small village, called Lee.

The 22. day we traveled some 16. course to a City called Easman, where is a
great Bussart or Market for the country people, for Wool, ^^tten, Cotton
yearne, Swords, Iau^lins, and other weapons for the wars.

The 23. day, we came to a little Town called Zingreene, some 14. course,
where is great store of Oad, and abundance of Drugs for Diars.

The 24. day, we traveled 16. course to a City called Barrandonn where are
great store of Merchants of the Bannians and Mesulipatanians.

It is a City where the great Carrauans meet, and there is great trade of
Merchandise, for Cloth, Shashes, Armor, for men and Horses, Coats of Male,
Armor of Arrow proof, bombast Headpeeces, and Elephants teeth, also many
wild Elephants in the Country: here we stayed two days and lest our
Carrauant in the City.

The 17. day we took our journey forwards, and by the way we met with a Conor
Knight of that Country, with forty Horse being bound for Agro, and f^f^y
shot, with whom we also kept company, being about 140. strong, and traveled in
the Desert some six days, where are great store of wild Elephants, Lions,
Tygars, Cat of Mountains, Porpentines and other wild beasts innumerable, but
those we saw. These Deserts are 100. course long, where every night we made
great fires round about our tents, to shun the dangers of the wild beasts:
This Con or Knight told us the nature or wit of the Elephant, who knowing he is
hunted to death for his teeth, will go to a tree and there by maine force will
wring or wrest his teeth out of his head, knowing that so he shall live secure
and free from that danger, and this he protes^ed to be true.

The third of December, we past those Deserts and came to a Town called
Tranado.

The fourth day, we traveled some 16. course to a Town called Zaioberdee,
where is hay, corn, and grain, great plenty.

The fifth day we traveled some 18. course to a City called Handee, where the
King has a Castle and house, cut out of the maine Rock, and wrought with
carved work round about. This Castle is invincible, and has fifty pieces of
Ordinance in it.

There lay in this Castle, when we were there 200. Knights, Captains, and
other Gallants, that had transgressed the Law, or the Kings commandment, as in
Treason, Rebellion, and such like matters. Also, in this City are two houses
much like Saint Jones, where Captains and Cauiliers, that have been maimed,
and hurt in the wars, do live, and have each one a Mammothee a day being nine
pence English, and meat and drink at the Kings allowance.

The 6. day we came to the River of Tamluo, which runs into the River Indus,
which parts the Countries of the Pythagoreans, and the Indestands.

The Pithagoreans in former times have been a vile and treacherous kind of
people, and had a Law that when the husband died, the wife should be also
burnt, which is holden till this day, though not in so strict a manner, for now
she may refuse it, but then her head is shaven and she clad in a black
vesture or garment, which among them is reputed most vile and hateful, that
the basest slave in the Country will not succor nor relieve her though she
should starve.

Now, the cause why this Law was first made, was, for that the women there were
so fickle and inconstant, that, upon any slight occasion of dislike or spleen,
they would poison their husbands. Whereas now the establishing and executing of
this Law, is the cause that moves the wife to love and cheerish her husband,
and wishes not to survive him.

As for example, I saw a young woman the wife of a Doctor, whose husband being
dead, she made choice to be carried in a Pageant, by four men, she being
clothed in Lawne, and her head deacked with Jewels and rich Ornaments, and
before her went Music of all sorts that the Country afforded, as Hoeboies,
Drums, fifes, and Trumpets, and next unto her all her kindred, and so she was
brought to the place of Execution, where was a stake and a hole to set her feet
in, and so being tied to the stake, all her kindred kneeling round about her,
and praying to the sun and their other Idols, the fire was set to her, she
having under each arm a bag of gunpowder, and a bag betwixt her legs,
and so burnt to death, the fire being made of Benjamin, Storare, Lignomal l^es,
and other sweet woods. Thus much for the Bulloits, and so to the Indestands,
and the next day we traveled some ten course to a Town called Addar.

The eight day, we traveled some 26. course, and came to the great City of
Agro where the great Mogoll keeps his Court and residence.

The ninth day Captain Hawkins came to us, and brought us before the King, as
it is the custom and manner of the Country. For no stranger must stay above
twenty four hours before he be brought before the King to know what he is,
and wherefore he comes Also every stranger must present the King with some
present, be it never so small, which he will not refuse. And I gave him for a
present, a small whistle of gold, waighing almost an ounce, set with sparks of
Rubies, which he took and whistleled therewith almost an hour. Also I gave
him the picture of Saint John's head cut in Amber and Gold, which he also
received very graciously.

The whistle he gave to one of his great women, and the picture to Sultane
Caroone his youngest son. His eldest son rebelled, and is in prison with his
eyes sealed up, and it is noised amongst the common people that his eyes are
put out: But it was told me by a great man, that they are but sealed up. His
name is Patteshaw Shelham, which in our language is heir apparent to the
Crown: His second son lives with him and is called Sultane Nawbree, and him
he thinks to make his heir apparent: His third son is called Sultane
Lawlle, and is Uiceroy of Lihorne: His fourth son is called Sultane Lill, and
is Uiceroy of the Gentiles, and these are his five sons. Also he has ten
Uiceroys more under him, that govern ten several Provinces or Countries, viz.
Can Canow Uiceroy of the Guzarats: Can John Uiceroy of the Bulloites: Michall
Can Uiceroy of the Bannians: Howsouer Can, Uiceroy of Cambaia: Hodge John,
Uiceroy of Bengolla: Michaell Can, Uiceroy of the Hendownes: Sawder Can Uiceroy
of the Puttans, and he lies in the City of Candahar: Allee Can Uiceroy of the
Bullochies, and lies in the City of Buckera: Sawber Can, Uiceroy of the
Multans, and Can Bullard Uiceroy of the Indestands.

These are the names of his ten Uiceroys, being all Heathens, but very worthy
men, and expert in the wars. He has a great number of Noble men to attend
on him. An Earl is called a Nawbob, and they are the chief men that attend on
him, when he go^eth abroad: for at home none attend him but Euenuches or gelded
men.

His Lord chief Justice is an Euenuch, and is cal^led, Awlee Nawbob: he is
thought to be worth twenty English millions: He keeps twenty Elephants,
one hundredth and fifty Camels and Dromedaries, and five hundredth Horse to
attend on him.

The Lord Treasurer is a mighty man, called Sultan Carowdon: He has forty
Elephants to attend him, two hundredth Camels and Dromedaries, and one thousand
Horse at his service. And when he comes to sit in his place of Justice, he
is brought upon an Elephant clad in cloth of gold or silver, and sometimes in a
Pollankan, carried by four slaves, he lying in it, as if he lay in a cradle,
in as great pomp and ease as may be, and has four maces of silver and gilt
carried before him, and ten banners, and as great attendance, as if he were a
King; yet on Twesdaies and Thursdaies the King himself sits in Judgment of
all causes: He custometh all strangers goods himself, the custom being but
small at his pleasure, as sometimes, the value of ten shillings, custometh
goods worth two hundredth pound. Also if a Merchant stranger, bring wares or
merchandise from a far Country: as from Chyna, Bengalla, and thinks he
shall make a bad voyage, or lose thereby: if he acquaint the King therewith,
and that the merchandise be fit for Kings, Princes, and Noble men, the King
himself will take part thereof, and cause his Nobles to take the rest, at such
rates as the Merchant, shall not only be a sauer, but a great gainer thereby.

The Mogoll, lives in as great state and pomp as may be devised, both for
Majesty and princely pleasure; for he had brought before him every day during
our abode there, 50. Elephants royal, clad in cloth of gold and silver, with
drums fifes and trumpets, whereof, some fight one with another, wounding one
another very deadly, and cannot be parted but with Rackets of wild fire, made
round like hoopes, and so run the same in their faces, and some of them fight
with wild horses, as one Elephant with 6. horses, whereof he has killed 2.
instantly by clasping his trunck about their necks, and so pulling them to
him, with his teeth breaks their necks.

Also there are tame Elephants that will take the viceroyes sons being the
Kings pages with their truncks, gaping as they would eat them, and yet very
gently will set them upon his own head, and having sitten there a good space,
will set them down again one their feet as tenderly as a mother would set
down her own child, doing them no harm at all.

The Elephant will not go out of the sight of his female, nor will he be ruled
if he do, this I can speak by experience having seen trial made thereof,
Also every he Elephant, has 3. or 4. females, and I saw one that had 4.
females and 12. young ones of his own begetting.

There ingendring together is strange, for the female lies down on her back,
and he comes upon her, and so engender. But if he perceive any man to behold
or see him thus ingendring he will kill him if he can.

Also the King has Dear, Rams, Ueruathoes or Beazors, Lions, Leopards, and
Wolves, that fight before him. Also if a Cauilier be condemned for any offense
and judged to die, he may by the custom of the Country, Crave combat with a
Lion for his life, (which the King denies to none that crave it) as for
example, I saw one, that at the first encounter struck the Lion with his fist
that he felled him, but the Lion recovering, returned with great fury and
violence, and caught such hold on him that he rent out his guts, with the heart
and liver and so tore him in pieces, and this was performed before the King.

Also there are horses that fight with Allegators or Crocodiles in Tancks or
ponds of water where I also saw one Allegator kill 2. stone horses at one time.
There is also a fair River called Indawe, running from thence to Mesopotamia,
and carries boats or lighters of 40. tun, and is replenished with fish of all
sorts.

Also there are 4. Basars or markets every day in the week, and great store of
all things to be bought and sold there, and at a very reasonable rate. As a hen
for 2. pence, a Turkey for 6. pence, a live dear for a dollar, a sheep for 2.
shillings, a goat for 2. shillings, a couple of oxen for 4. dollars* being 16.
shillings sterling, a good hog for 2. shillings, but none buy them but
Christians, and none sell them but the Bannyans, who breed them, and as much
fish for 3. pence as will serve 5. reasonable men at a meal.

Also great store of fruit, as Limmons, Oranges, Apricocks, Grapes, Pears,
Apples and Plummes; But with their grapes they make no wines because their
laws forbid it: Also Raisons as great and fair as Raisons of Damasko, with
great store of cloth of gold veluets and silks out of Persia, and silks and
cloth of gold from Chyna, but those are course and low prised; but abundance
are their vended; and Captain Hawkins thinks that our Richer silks,
veluets, and such like would be excellent good commodities there.

But especially our Cloth of light coulors. For there is no Cloth, but a kind
of course Cloth like Cotton, which is made at Lyhore, and at a Town called
Esmeere: and their finest and best, is a kind of course red cloth, like a
Uenice red, and this is the usual wearing for the chiefest Cau^liers; and
these are all the places of clothing that I could by any means hear of in all
that Country.

The word Mogoll, in their language is as much as to say, the great white King;
for he is a white man and of the Race of the Tartares. He is King of many
Kingdoms, and writes himself in his scile* Patteshaw Shelham Sho^h, that is,
the King of all the great coins. For there is a several coin at Lahore,
another at Brampo^t, another at Surrot, another at Cambaia, another at
Sabba^ton, and another at Awgru, And for his several Kingdoms, he is King, of
the Guzarats, of the Bannians of the Bulloits of Callicot and Bengolla which
are Gentiles, of the Inde^^ands of the Mogolles, of the Hendouns, of the
Moltans, of the Puttans, of the Bullochies, and of the Alkeysors, with some
others, which I cannot particularly name. Also he writes himself the nynthe
King from Tamberlaine. And to this his great style he is also of as great
power, wealth and command, yet will he urge none of what Nation soever to
forsake their Religions, but esteems any man so much the better, by how much
the more he is firm and constant in his Religion, and of all other he makes
most account of Christians, and will allow them double the means that he
gives to any other nation, and keeps continually two Christians Friars, to
converse with them in the Christian Religion and manners of Christendom. He
has also the picture of our Lady in the place of his prayer or Religious
proceedings, and has oftentimes said that he could find in his heart to be a
Christian, if they had not so many Gods: There was at my being there an
Armenian Christian that in hope of gain and preferment turned More, which
being told the King, he said, if he thought to save his soul thereby, that
was a sufficient Recompense for him, but he would rather have given him
preferment if he had kept himself still a Chri^stian.

The Mogoll is also very bountiful, for to one that gave him a little dear
he gave 1000. Ruckees, being 100. pound sterling, also to another that gave him
a couple of land spannels, he gave the like reward, and to another that gave
him two Cocks he gave 2000. Ruckees.

Also there be excellent fair Hawks of all sorts from the Goshauke to the
Sparehauke, and great store of game, as Phesants, Partriges, Plouers, Quails,
Mallard, and of all other sorts of foul in great plenty.

There are no great dogs but a kind of Mungrels, whereof two will hardly kill
a dear in a whole day, and yet they are so choice over them, that they make
them coats to keep them warm and clean. Nor have they any parkes but
Forests, and Commons, wherein any man may hunt that will, save only within 6.
miles of Agra round about which is lymitted and reserved for the Kings private
pleasure only.

The King has there begun a goodly monument for his Father, which has been
already 9. years in building, and will hardly be finished in 5. years more,
and yet there are continually 5000. workmen at work thereon.

The substance thereof, is very fine marble, curiously wrought.

It is in form 9. square, being 2. English miles about and 9. stories in
height.

Also, it was credibly reported unto me by a Christian Friar (who solemnly
protested he heard the King him self speak it) that he intended to bestow a
hundredth millions of Treasure on that monument.

And having viewed and seen this great and rich City of Agra with the
pleasures and Commodities thereof; on the 18. day of January, my self with
Joseph Salebancke and John Frencham, went to the King and craved his Pass for
England, who very courteously demanded of us, if we would serve him in his
wars, offering us what maintenance we would ask of him; which we humbly
excused* both in regard of this our voyage, wherein diverse others besides our
selves, were partners, as also, in regard we had Wives and Children in our own
Country, to whom both by Law and Nature, we were bound to make return, if it
were possible; whereupon most graciously ^e granted us his Pass, under his
hand and great Seal, for our safe conduct through al his Kingdoms and
Dominions. Then his chief Secretary, went with us to his third Queen (for it
is said that he has ten Queens, one thousand Concubines, and two hundredth
Euenuches.) And this Queen is keeper of his great ^eale, where it was sealed
and delivered unto us. Then I also went to the chief Friar, and craved his
letters, as well to the Kings and Princes, whose Kingdoms and Dominions we were
to pass through, as also to the Clergy and places of Religion, which he most
willingly granted, being a man of great Credit there, and greatly esteemed and
well known in other Kingdoms.

Also he gave me his letters of commendations to one John Midnall an English
Merchant or Factor, who had lien in Agroe three years: but before I came into
England John Midnall was gone again for the East Indies, and I delivered his
letter to Mr. GREENAVVAY Deputy governor in London for the Company of the East
Indian Merchants.

The one and twentieth day, we took our leave of Captain Hawkins, whom we
left therein great credit with the King, being allowed one hundredth Ruckees a
day which is ten pound sterling, and is entitled by the name of a Can, which
is a Knight, and keeps company with the greatest Noble men belonging to the
King: and he seems very willing to do his Country good. And this is as much
as I can say concerning him.

The 22. day we took our journey toward England, being 5. English men viz, my
self, Joseph Sal^hancke, John Frencham, Richard Martin, and Richard Fox, and
Guilliam As^lee a More our guide, and traveled toward Ispahan in Persia, and
so with 5. horses and 2. Camels, we took the way to Biany, because John
Mid^all had gone the way by La^or before, also this way was but two months
journey, though very dangerous and that by La^or was 4. months journey and
without danger, viz.

From Agra we came to Fetterbarre being 12. course. And from thence to Bianic
being 12. course more. And this is the chiefest place ^or Indico in all the
East Indies, where are 12. Indico Milles.

The Indico grows in small bushes like goosberry bushes and carries a seed
like Cabbege seed. And being cut down is laid on heaps for half a year to rot
and then brought into a vault to be trodden with Oxen to tread the Indico from
the stalks, and so to the Milles to be ground very fine: and lastly, is boiled
in Furnaces, and very well refined and sorted into several sorts.

A seere of Indico in Biany is worth ten pence, which seere does contain
twenty ounces at the least. This I know to be true and brought a sample of the
Indico home with me. And for this Indico and the Anneele that is made thereof,
there is much trading of Merchants, from Agro and Lahore.

The 25. day, we came to Hendowne, being twenty five course, this is an ancient
fair City, where is also good store of course Indico.

The 26. day, we came to Mogoll being 14. course. This is a small market Town,
where are also course Indico and Callicoes.

The 27. day we went some 12. course to a small Uillage called Halstot.

The 28. day, we traveled 12. course to a small Uillage called Chatsoe, where
are sheep and goats great store, and very cheap.

The 29. day, we went 12. course to a small Town called Laddanna, and there are
great store of Cotton Wools.

The 30. day, we went eight course to a small town called Mosabad, where is
great store of corn.

The 31. day we went 12. course to Bandason a small Uillage.

The first day of February we came to a fair River called Paddar that runs
to Guzarat, and this River parts the Dominions of the Indestands and
Hendownes and falls into the gulf of Persia. And from thence we went to the
City of Esmeere, being twelve course from Bandason.

Here the great Mogol has a stately house where are continually kept 600.
Elephants, and 1000. Horses, for the wars to be ready at the Kings command.

There is great store of wools, and much clothing for course cloth and
cottens, also Iauelins, Bows and Arrows, Armor, Swords, and other weapons
for the Wars, and two Basars or Markets every week.

The Indestands are very gallant people, and great Merchants into most parts of
the world.

The second day, we went into the Hendownes Country, some 12. course, and
came to Richmall, where is great store of Game, and a pleasant place for
hawking and hunting.

The fourth day, we went 12. course, to Mearta, a fair City, where I saw three
fair and ancient Tombs or Monuments of the Hendownes, there are three Basars
or Markets every week. Also great store of Indico, cotton wool, yarne, and
cloth.

This City in my judgment is as big as the City of Exceter.

The sixth day we went some twelve course to Hursallo, a small Uillage.

The seventh day we went 14. course to Lauara, a small village, where is great
store of Corn, Cattle, and Sheep and very good cheap.

The eight day, we went 12. course to Towry, a Town of Garrison of the
Hendownes.

The ninth day, we went 11. course to Chummo a small Uillage.

The tenth day, we went 13. course to Moulto a Uillage.

The 11. day, we went 10. course to Pucker a small Uillage.

The 12. day, we went 12. course to Senawra a little Town.

The 13. day, we went but five course to Basonpee a small village.

The 14. day, we went five course more to Gislemeere, a fa^re City, and has in
it a strong Castle, where lies a grand Cauilier. Also there is great trading
of Merchandise by Land, and in the Castle are thirty pieces of Ordinance.

The 18. day, we went from thence some 14. course over the sands, that part the
Hendownes and Multans, and lay in the fields.

The Hendownes are naturally descended from the Gentiles, yet refuse no manner
of meat, flesh, nor fish, and are many of them very notable thieves. They pray
naked, dress and eat their meat naked, and where they dress and eat their
meat, they make a circle, within which circle none must enter, during the time
of their dressing and eating their meat.

Their women are brought up of children with shackles, some of silver, some of
brass, and some of Iron on their legs, and rings in their ears, all which are
still increased or made bigger as they grow in years and bigness, so that in
time they have holes in their ears so great that a man may thrust his hand
through. Also they do wear bracelets of Elephants teeth about their arms from
the wrist to the elbow.

The 19. day, we went eight course and lay in the Fields.

The 20. day, we went 12. cour^e more, and lay in the fields.

The twenty one day, we went 12. course and lay by a well some 60. fathom
deep, where water was very scarce.

The 22. day, we traveled 16. course, where we could get no better water then
was almost half Cowp^sse.

The 23. day we went some 15. course and lay in the fields.

The 24. day, we went some five course and came to three Towns, viz. Roree,
Buckar, and Sucker, where is a gallant fresh River, and small ships that may
go to Armoose, as the Townsmen report. Now the shipping belongs to Roree,
being some fifty or sixty sail, and are of the burden of forty, fifty, and
sixty t^^, whereby there is trade of Merchandise as far as the coast of
Molindee, and as far as Mosembique, and this River falls into the gulf of
P^rsia.

Buckar stands in the middle of the River, which makes it in form of an
Island, and is besides very strongly built.

The Indians call this River, the River of Damiadee. And in this Town of
Bucker, lies All^e Can the Mogols Uiceroy of the Bullochies, who are such a
stubborn and rebellious people that he keeps that strong hold of purpose to
retire unto, and to gather a head and renew his forces, at all assaies, to
subdue and keep them in awe and obedience, which notwithstanding he can hardly
do. Also this All^e Can is a very worthy and bountiful Prince, who gave us
very gallant and kind entertainment, and commanded us to come daily to his
Court, where we had both costly and plentiful diet at all times, and here we
left Io. Frencham (one of our company) sick.

Sucker is a Town consisting most of Weauers and Diars, and live by clothing,
and serve the Country round about, and this is the first Town of the
Bullochies. And Roree the last confine town of the Multans who are good
husbandmen and painful people, and deal much in Merchandise, as Cloth,
Indico, and other commodities, and are very good people to deal withal, yet
their Religion is Mahometicall.

At Sucker we stayed 24. days and more for a Cof^ilo or Conu^y, For the
Captain of the Castle would not suffer us to go without one, because the way
was dangerous and full of Thieves, which afterward we found true, for had we
not (by the great providence of God) escaped their hands, it had cost us our
lives, and yet it cost us some money besides.

The 25. day of March, 1610. we came from Sucker and traveled over the
plains some three course or thereabouts.

The 26. day we traveled through the woods or Deserts some three course more.

The 27. day, we went three course more through the Deserts, and there we
took in water for two days, which was but bad water neither, but there was no
better to be had, nor any town to come to, until we came to Gorra, some eight
course distant from thence, which was on the 28. day at night, where we rested
two days and were very well used, yet being a Town of the Bullochies and
Rebels, we were in great fear, but we found no such cause, God be praised.

The Bullochies are Man-eaters, being men of huge limbs and proportion even
giantlike, nor are they of any Religion at all, save only that they worship the
Sun.

The 21. day, we came to Norry, being about 10. course, and this is the last
Town, of the Bullochies; and so to the Puttans.

The first day of April, we took our journey over the plains early in the
morning, and about break of day we met with ten or twelve men playing on
Fiddles, as if they had come in friendly manner to welcome us, but indeed they
were no better then Thieves that intended to rob and pillege us, for by the Sun
rising we were beset round with them and their companions, whose certain
number we could not discern nor know.

And though we had a Caffeloe or Conuoy of two hundred strong, yet we were
glad to entreat the Captain of that unruly Crew to stand our friend, and both
to bribe him privately, and to pay openly besides in the name of a custom,
twenty Checkeenoes in gold, nor would all this have served the turn, but for
the Mogols Pass under his hand and great seal, which they much feared, but
that all our throats had been cut, as other in greater number had formerly
been; yet at last upon this friendly composition, they guarded and conducted us
through their Country, until we were past all danger, and so departed, and
that day we traveled some nine course over the plains, and ^ooke up our
lodging in the plain Fields.

The second day we traveled some eight course to a Town called Daddor, where
we rested two days.

The fifth day, we traveled eight course over the mountains.

The sixth day, we went ten course over the mountains.

The seventh day, we went eight course over the Mountains.

The eight day, we went eight course to Vachesto, a Town of civil and quiet
Government, where we rested that night.

The ninth day we went three or four course over the mountains and lay in the
fields.

The tenth day we went some eight course in the mountains.

The eleventh day, we went nine or ten course in the Mountains.

The twelfth day we went some nine or ten course in the mountains.

The thirteenth day we went nine or ten course in the mountains.

The fourteenth day we went some fourteen course over

The 15. day we came to Candahar being but two course from thence, where we
stayed 20. or 21. days.

This is a great and gallant City of the Puttans, where Sawdder Conuice^oy of
the Puttans keeps his Court and residence.

There is great and continual traffic by land, from Persia, Indestand,
Mesopotamia, and from all parts between that and China, with all sorts of
merchandise and commodities which those Countries yield; For there are
continually 7 or 8. thousand Camels about the City which trade to and fro with
merchandise.

Also the viceroy has continually 40.^00. horses for the wars in readiness
for fear of Rebellion, because the Puttans are a strong and warlike people,
and inclined to rebellion, by reason they came under the M^gols government and
subjection by force and conquest, and therefore love him not in their hearts,
but obey him for fear.

The 6. day of May we took our journey for Ispahawne in Persia, and traveled
some 8 course that day, and came to a gallant River where were two Towns on
each side of the River one, and at one of these Towns called Langor we rested
that night.

The 7. day we went some 6. or 7. course over the plains.

The 8. day we went in like manner some 7. course more and lay in the fields.

The 9. day we went over the plains some 12. course, and came to a great River
which divides the land of the Puttans from Persia, and there we paid custom
for our Owts or Camels and rested 2. days by the River side.

The 12. day we were ferried over the River, which is called Sabbaa to a castle
a course from thence, and near to a Town called Grees.

This River divides the confines of the great Mogoll and the King.

The Puttans are a warlike and goodly people, and were their beards long, which
the Mogols do hate, also they worship the great God of heaven and despise
Mahomet.

Their Priests go in Sackcloth with great Chains about their middles; And do
fall down and pray continually in Sackcloth and Ashes.

And so passing out of the great Mogols kingdoms and dominions we came to the
Town of Grees being the first Town of Persia, where we rested a day and a
night.

Grees the first Town of Persia.
The Town of Grees is a frontier Town, and therefore the King or (as they call
him) the Shawbash of Persia keeps here a garrison of ten thousand men, and a
governor to command them.

The 14. day we went over the plains 6. forsongs every forsong being a league,
and every league 2. course, and rested in the fields.

The 15. day we traveled over the plains some 6. forsongs more, and came to a
Castle, where we refreshed our selves and our cattle, and the^e we rested our
selves two days to stay for a Coffeloe or conuoy which came to us the 14. day
at night.

The 18. day we went 5. forsongs over the fields or plains and lay in the
fields.

The 19. day at night we traveled some 4 forsongs to a Town called
Doctorcham, where we stayed all the next day and night.

The 21. day we traveled some 5 or 6 forsongs in the night to a Town called
Sehawe, and thus for certain days we traveled al by night by reason of the
extreme heat in the day time.

The 22. day at night we traveled some 6 forsongs over the plains.

The 23. day at night we went 5 forsongs to a Town called V^a. where are great
store of Feltmakers which also make felt Carpets and weauers of Turkey Carpets,
there are also great store of Dates, and all sorts of fruits.

The 24. day we traveled some 6. forsongs to a fair City called Parra,
where we stayed 22. days for a Coffeloe or Conuoy, my self being also sick
there, there is great trade of merchandise, and great store of raw silk which
in the Persian tongue is called Auerisham.

The 6. day we went some 2. forsongs over the mountains.

The 7. day we went 4. or 5. forsongs over the mountains.

The 8. day we went 7. forsongs.

The 9. day we went some 5. forsongs.

The 10. day we went 10. forsongs all in the mountains.

The 11. day we traveled some 3. forsongs to a town called Banda being but a
harbor or lodging place.

The 12. day we went some 3. forsongs over the plains.

The 13. day we traveled some 5. forsongs over the plains and rested till the
14. day at night, and then traveled some 7. forsongs and a half.

The 15. day we came to a Town called Sunday where we rested that night and
all the next day and night.

The 17. day we traveled some 7. forsongs and a half over the plains.

The 18. day we went in like manner some 9. forsongs.

The 19. day we went 5. forsongs to a Town called Beast^.

The 20. day we went some 4. forsongs.

The 21. day we traveled some 6. forsongs to a town called Gusta, where we
rested a day and a night.

The 23. day we traveled 4. forsongs to a watering place.

The 24. day we traveled 10. forsongs and rested in the fields.

The 25. day we traveled 7. forsongs to a Town called Dattee, where was great
store of Muskmillions and there we had good relief.

The 26. day we traveled some 4. forsongs to a place where was a gallant vawlt
with water.

The 27. day we went some 7. forsongs to a Town called Yesday.

The 28. day we went some 5. forsongs to a Town called Pahanauens where we
rested 2. days and two nights.

There is great store of raw silk, or Auerisham as they call it.

The 2. day of July we went 5. forsongs over the plains.

The third day we went 8. forsongs over the barren and wild plains where we
had no water but salt water and the ground all covered ouerwith salt.

The 4. day we traveled 7. forsongs in salt ground and none but salt water.

The 5. day we went 15. forsongs for want of water in a most barren and day
Country and came to a town called Bibe, where we rested two days and two
nights.

The 8. day we truealled some 14. forsongs to a Town called Godanna: where we
rested that night and the next day and night, and here is also great store of
raw silk.

The 10. day we traveled some 20. forsongs to a Town called Hemda, where are
great store of Grapes and Muskmillions.

The 12. day we traveled some 15. forsongs to a Town called Corneta.

The 13. day we went 6. or 7. forsongs to a Town called Orrinkca, a lodging
Town.

The 14. day we went but 4. forsongs to a little village.

The 15. day we went 5. forsongs to a Town called Gowra being a fair great
Town, where is great store of raw silks, bed couerings, silk carpets, cotton
Carpets, and such like commodities; and there we stayed that night, and the
next day and night.

The seventeenth day, we went nine forsongs before we could find any water.

The eighteenth day, we traveled five forsongs to a little Uillage.

The nineteenth day, we went seven forsongs over the plains.

The twentieth day, we went some five forsongs over the plains.

The twenty one day, we traveled some six forsongs over the plains.

The twenty two day, we went two forsongs and a half.

The twenty three day, we came to Ispahawne.

The twenty fourth day, we entered into the City where we stayed eleven or
twelve days.

This City of Ispahawne, is a gallant City, and one of the principal Cities of
Persia, and abounds in traffic of all sorts of Merchandise. There are many
great Surroies, where are houses made of purpose for the laying in and keeping
of Merchants goods, and to harbor and lodge themselves and their Camels Horses
or other Cattle, and provision; the profits of which Surroies redound to the
King only.

The whole Country above a hundred miles round about, do wholly and generally
trade to this City with their chiefest and best commodities. There is also a
place in form like the Exchange, of an inestimable wealth, where is nothing to
be sold but things of great value and worth. As Cloth of gold, silver and
tissue, sattans, veluets, Jewels and pearls. In one end are nothing but raw
silks, in another end are twisted and wrought silks. In another none but
Merchanttailors, who sell, all sorts of apparel ready made, as it is in
Birching lane, but far more rich, and all of the Persian fashion, as, suits
of cloth of gold and silver, velvet, satin, taff^^y, Callico and none almost
of any worser sorts.

Also there is great score of Indico and Anneele, and of all manner of Drugs,
which are sold by Jews and other strangers, that send them thither, and have
continual trading there.

Also there are Camels, the best and strongest that are to be found, with
gallant Horses and Mules abundance. For whereas an ordinary Camels load is five
hundred weight, the Persian Camels load is usually 800. weight.

The Shawbash ^or, as we call him, the King) has there diverse gallant and
stately houses, and banqueting houses, with Orchards, Gardens, Springs, ponds
of water, walks and Galleries, as pleasantly seated and artificially contrived,
as can be thought or devised. But the King himself before my coming thither,
was removed to a place called Tobrin, as it was told me by the Christian Friars.

And at his chiefest house standing over against the great Basar or Market
place, there are good store of brass Ordinance orderly planted before the gase
thereof, for defense if need be, as namely, two D^my Cannons, two whole
Culuerings, two Cannon Pedrars, and thirty other field Pieces.

Also here I made enquiry of Master Robert Sherley, thinking to have had some
assistance, and better directions from him, or by his procurement, in my
Journey, but it was told me directly that he was departed some seven months
before for England, and had his way by the Caspian Seas, being two months
Journey from Ispahawn: That is to say, himself, and his wife, being a woman of
great worth and esteem in that Country, with Camels and Horses to carry his
treasure, stuff, and provision, and many attendants both men and women. And in
his Company, one Captain and six or seven Englishmen more.

Also there are great store of Grapes and Wines, and of all sorts of fruits:
their stronger Wines like unto Canary Sack, their red Wines like high Country
Claret, and their smaller Wines like to Island Wines. Also victuals good store
and good cheap.

And there lies continually a Portugal Ambassador, A Portugal Ambassador
Legier.
and five Portugal Friars, who have a Church, and a house to entertain Roman
Catholics, and other Christians at their pleasures, and have means sufficient
to maintain the same.

Also there are great store of Armenian Christians, and some Greeks, who live
all at free liberty without restraint or control for their Religion. And so
much for the great and rich City of Ispahawne.

The sixth day of August, we departed from thence and traveled some six
forsongs, and lay in the fields close by a river side.

The seventh day, we traveled ten forsongs in the Deserts, and on the eight
day six forsongs* more to the Town of Corronday.

The ninth day to Miskerion, and so directly to Bugdad, or Babylon, being a
months Journey: that is to say, six forsongs to Miskereon.

The tenth day, we went ten forsongs in the Deserts.

The eleventh day, eleventh forsongs in the Deserts.

The twelfe day, nine forsongs more in the Deserts.

The thirteenth day, we went fourteen forsongs to a little Uillage called
Corryn.

The fourteenth day, ten forsongs in the Deserts.

The fifteenth day, nine forsongs in the Deserts.

The sixteenth day, we traveled nine or ten forsongs to a little Town called
Lackeree.

The seventeenth day we traveled eight forsongs in the Deserts.

The eighteenth day, we traveled twelve forsongs in the Deserts to a water
Mill, where we lay all night.

The nineteenth day, we went fourteen forsongs through the Deserts to a
little Town called Corbet.

That twentieth day, we traveled twelve forsongs, to a Cloth town: that is to
say, where all the houses were made of hairy cloth like tents, and there we
rested two days.

The three and twentieth day, we traveled some eight forsongs in the Deserts.

The four and twentieth day, we traveled some nine or ten forsongs over
the Deserts, to another Cloth town.

The twenty five day, we went through a mighty great Wood being fifteen
forsongs in length, where we went down such an extreme steep hill, that we
broke two of our Camels necks, and had much to do to go down the same our
selves without harm, and there were sted all night.

The six and twentieth day, we went some two forsongs to an other Cloth
town, where we rested three days and three nights, and there we paid Custom
for our Camels to a great City being but a forsong from thence and is called
Nezzeret, where, on the top of a mighty great mountain, was a monument of a
great Sultan, or Gentleman: and when we asked, why he was buried there, it
was directly answered, because he was so much the nearer to heaven.

The thirtieth day, we traveled ten forsongs to the River of Synnee, which
runs into the River Euphrates, and deuideth the confines of Persia and
Ar^bia, and by the River side was remaining some old walls of a rumated Town
of Persia, which was rased and destroyed by the Turks and Arabians.

The one and thirtieth day, we traveled eight forsongs in a waste Country
where we lay by a Well al night.

Amongst the Persians the Sultans or Gentlemen, and men of better sort, are
gallant men, and of civil and courteous behavior: but the baser sort, are
^ullen, uncivil, and men of very bad conditions. And generally they do
worship Mahomet, and are common Buggerers, as the Turks are, yet they are
people that labor extremely, as in digging, planting, and sowing, and in
picking of Cotton wool, and other wool, in spinning and making Coats, and
other things of Felt. Nor have they almost any rai^e there, but by extreme
labor, let the water out of the Rivers, into their Pastures and Corn grounds.

There are good sheep and goats plenty, but ^ine and Oxen are very scarce.
Also Turkies and Hens and other sorts of fowls plenty.

And there a man may travel without danger of robbing, for it is there a
strange thing to hear of a thief. And so much for Persia and the Persians.

The first day of September, we traveled twelve forsongs to a great Town
called Sabbercam, being the first town that we came to in Arabia, where are
growing great store of Pomgranats, which the Arabians do call Anarres. This is
a Town of Garrison of the Arabians, and here we stayed a day and a night.

The third day, we traveled ^oureteene forsongs to a town called Buldad where
we also paid custom, and here we stayed a day and a night. This is also a
town of Garrison and full of thieves, and at our coming out of the town,
Joseph Salenbancke one (...) my Companions staying but a little behind the
Co^^s^l^e or Conuoy, was by the Arabians robbed, stripped and extremely beaten
and hurt. So that if by chance I had not reserved some 100. Chickeen^es, we
had (...) been both quite destitute of money to bring us home into our
Country.

The sixth day we traveled eighteen forsongs to the great City of B^gdet, or
Babylon, where we stayed until the twenty two day of October following.

This City stands upon the great River Euphrates, and is a great, rich, and
strong City, with mighty strong walls, whereon are planted 100. and twenty
pieces of brass ordinance.

Also there are ships small and great to the number of 300. sail, belonging to
this City, and great trade of merchandise both by water and land.

It is not past 4. years since the Turk wan this City from the Persians.

Also there is a ^^oting bridge built upon 33. great lighters strongly chained
and fastened together, from Bugdad over Euphrates to old Babylon standing over
against Bugdad on the other side of the River. And within a league from thence
stands the Remainder of the ^^ynated Tower of Babell, being one of the
wonders of the world.

In Bugdad, lies one of the Turks grand Bashawes, called by the name of
Mahomet Patteshogh who is esteemed as a Uiceroy, and is governor of the City
under the great Turk.

There are only two Venetian factors, who trade for inestymable wealth in
merchandise of all sorts. Also some small number of Armenians, which are all
the Christians that are there resident.

The Turk is a valiant and resolute Soldier, as by their proceedings may
appear, both in winning the City of Bugdad, and another City of as great
strength as that, called Towras, and belonged also to the Persian, whereof the
Mahomet Patteshogh had certain intelligence on the 12. day of October whilst
we were there.

And that the great Turk, or (as they call him) the Grand Gushell Bashe,
assuredly thinks and intends in short space to approach to the walls of
Ispahawne being a great and gallant City and stands far within the
kingdom of Persia.

The 10. day of October there came unto us an English man called John white,
John White sent into the East India over land.
who said he was sent for a discovery to the East Indies and was bound for
Ispahawne to meet with John Midnall, who we assured him not to be there, but at
Armoose.

Then did I and Joseph Salebancke persuade him to travel to the red sea of
Cambaia, whether he told us Sir Henry Midleton was bound from England with a
good ship called the Trades increase of the burden of 1000. or 1100. tun, with
another ship called the Cloue, and a Pinnis called the Pepper Corn, and the
cause, why we thus advised him was for that he, ha^uing the Turkish language
might accompany my friend Joseph Salebancke to Sir Henry Middleton to acquaint
him with the true discourse of our whole voyage and travels, whereby he might
beware of and avoid the like dangers that we sustained and were in: As also how
and where to take his best opportunity for his lading as time and occasion
should serve.

And upon the 18. day Joseph Salebancke and John White took their journey
accordingly, to a great City called Balsara standing upon the River Euphrates*
and is 18. days journey from Bugdad, or Babylon, where they were to meet with
a Carranant or conuoy, to conduct them to the City of Iudaia nere unto the Red
Sea.

And although Joseph Salebancke was then very poor, (having been formerly
robbed) yet was he very willing to take this long and dangerous journey upon
(...) for the good of his Country.

And all the good that I could do for him was to procure him a Camel, and to
lend him some part of my small store being in all not above 6. pound ste^ling,
and so I left them to the protection of the almighty.

The 22. day of October we took our journey from Bugdad or Babylon to the City
of Aleppo. And having traveled 60. leagues at the least all thorough the
deserts, which we did in some 8. days, we came to a Town called Mussaw Cosam.

The 31. day we traveled some 4. days iourny through the deserts to the Town
of Ruseele, being only a through fair or lodging place, and some 30 leagues
from Mussaw Cosam.

The 4. day of November we traveled some eight leagues to a small village
called Deesh.

The 5. day we set forwards toward Mussell other wise called Niniuy, being
some 30. leagues or more from Deesh, and traveled thither in 5. days.

This City is now much ruinated, and yet the Remainder thereof is as spacious
and great, as most Cities that I have seen in all my travels, within the City
is a great Bashaw or governor under the great Turk.

Also without the City there stands a fair and strong Castle upon the banks
of the River Tygris, where is also another Bashaw or governor: for the Castle
and Suburbs of the city.

The^e is no trade of merchandise in this City, but it is only kept by the
Turk as a Town of Garrison, yet there are Armenian Christians, who have their
Churches and Friars, and do freely use their Religion without check or
comptroll.

Also there are yet remaining, many ancient monuments which make relation and
show, that it has been a City of great antiquity and famous memory: and in
this City we stayed 4. days.

The 14. day we went 4. leagues to a Castle called N^ssebaw, and rested that
night, and the next day we traveled 12. leagues more and at night came to
Nuss^baw, where the Prophet Jonas preached to all the Countries round about;
and there remains his picture in stone though much defaced by the wars yet
it is kept and maintained by the Christians, whereof there are many dispersed
amongst the Turks, ever since the destruction or overthrow of Niniuie by the
Turks: and are now called by the name of Curgees.

From thence we traveled some 25. leagues in three days, and on the 18. day
at night came to Hamadaine an ancient Town of the Armenians; but much ruinated
by the Turks. Here we saw many ancient monuments, which showed that it had bin
a Town of great antiquity and worth, and at this Town we stayed, one day and
a night.

The 20. day we took our journey toward a town called Goubba being 25.
leagues and 3. days journey, and came thither the 22. day at night, where we
met with a Consul of Venice, and 5. Venetians more, traveling to Bugdad or
Babylon, and there we stayed a day and a night.

The 24. day we traveled toward the great City of Vlfawe being 25. leagues,
and 3. days journey, and came thither the 26. day at night, and there all
travelers pay great custom.

This is a mighty strong City and a continual Garrison kept there by the Turk.

Nor can any Carrauant or Conuoy, or any passenger be suffered to lodge within
the City: But in the day time they may come into it to the Bassart or market,
to b^y necessaries and so depart again: and here we s^^^ed 5. days.

The 2. day of December we took our journey to Beer a great Town upon the
River Euphrates, being ^. days (...), and 25. leagues distant whither we came
the fourth day at night, and stayed there one day.

This is also a strong Town of Garrison.

The 6. day we were ferried over the River and went 2. days journey being
soul 15. leagues to the Town of Lumman, and came thither on the 7. day at
night.

The 8. day we traveled 10. leagues to the City of Aleppo, and came thither
that night, and by the way, we traveled 2. leagues thorough the plains,
where was nothing but figs, or as I may ^earme it a forest of ^ig trees, and
another place of as great length, being all v^ne trees, full of grapes.

And being come to the great and worthy City of Aleppo, we went to the English
house, where I found Ma^ter Paul Pinder to be Consul, a very worthy gentleman,
and well deserving a place of so great credit and esteem, at whose hands we
found very courteous and kind entertainment; for at my coming to him I was
destitute both of money and clothes, and so was my companion Richard Martin.

But he relieved us, first with meat, drink, and lodging during our abode
there, being some 12. days, also he furnished us with apparel, and at our
departure with money for our journey.

Also there was one M. Spike who was both kind and bountiful unto us. And so
were all the rest of the English Merchants, whom I cannot particularly name^
both kind and curi^ous unto us, which was unto us a great refreshing and
comfort in our journey.

Aleppo is a City of wonderful great trading and as well known to England or
at lest to our English Merchants* as Kingstone upon Thames. And thus much I can
say more of it, that within four days after our coming thither, there came
above 20^0. Camels, laden with Silks and all sorts of merchandi^e all or most
whereof I over went in my travels, being in several Carauans, some from
Mesopotamia, some from Agro, some from the (...), and some from Persia, and so
at other times continually they come from thence, and other places whence any
trading can come by Land.

The one and twentieth day, I take my leave of Master Paul Pindar, Master
Spicke and the rest of the Merchants and took my journey, together with my
Companion Richard Martin for Tripolie* and that da^ we traveled some seven
leagues over the Deserts, and res^ed tw^ hours, and then traveled some 15.
leagues farther, to an old Town called (...), w^ere we rested half a day and
ba^^^d, and then traveled some ten leagues more and baited, and res^ed our
selves in the fields some se^^e hours, and then traveled (...) town c^lled
Hama^. And the reason why (...) thus h^rd, was to (...) company will a
Car^^^^nd or Co^n^^ey of 100^. strong, who were bound for (...) there great
(...) me was then resident: w^ereas also we should have traveled in great
danger and h^^ard of our lives, by reason the Country is so full of thieves.

In this town are many Weauers, that make great store of Dimatree, and
scham^tree, and Cottons, also it is a great through fair, and there is a great
O^^s^rie or Inn, which they call a Caan, and there we rested two days.

The six and twentieth day, we traveled some eight leagues to a little town
called Roma, where we lay all night.

The seven and twentieth day, we traveled some eight leagues more to a
Monastery called Huddrea^^ns, which was built by an Armenian Christian, who
g^ue sufficient maintenance to provide, Olives, bread, and Oil for Lamps, for
the harbor and relief of all Christian travelers* and there is the picture
of Saint George on Horse back fighting with the Dragon, and his picture on
foot, and his Cross, and mention in old Roman print of his noble and memorable
acts, which Relic is much honored by many Christians as they travel by the
same, and to that end there i^ a Chapel and Lamps burning therein continually.

The twenty eight day we went some ten leagues to a little Town called Hone,
and lay there that night.

The 29. day, we traveled to Tripolis, being ten leagues from thence, where
we found the good ship, the Great Exchange of London, whereof Master Robert
Bradshawe of Ratliffe was both Captain and Master; who not above ten days
before, was in great danger of shipwrake breaking their Cables and Ancors, so
that the ship drove and was in great distress: So that they were feign to cut
the maine Mast ouerbord, being within twice the ships length of the rocks, yet
by Gods good providence, one Cable and Ancor held, and so both schip and men
were saved, all the men having stripped themselves to save their lives by
swimming, or otherwise, as it would please God to assist and permit them.

In this storm there was a great Venetian ship of 1100. tun cast away, yet
the ship was so set amongst the Rocks, that all her men were saved by the great
and merciful providence of almighty God.

Also there were Frenchmen in the Harbor, that cut there Masts ouerbord and were
in great danger, yet all escaped thanks be given to God.

Also afterward by greawt good fortune the Excharges Mast was found by the
company between two Rocks, and was got on shore, and having an excellent good
Carpenter, he did workemanlike and strongly scarce the same with a piece of an
other Mast, which the Master got from aboard a Flemming, that it brough her
well home into England, God be praised.

At our coming to Tripolie we went to the English house, where we stayed two
days, and were by him very knidly used, and here we ended our long and teious
Land travels.

The first day of January being New years day, we took our leave of Master
Lucas and went aboard, my self and Richard Martin, where Captain Bradshawe
also used us very kindly, and in regard I was very weak, with long and
extreme travel, he allowed me a good Cabin, and caused the Surgeon to deo me
what good he could.

Tripoly is a Town of no great traffic, but only a place whither ships do
come to take in such trading as is brought from other places, and chiefly from
Aleppo.

The cause (I think) is by reason of the dangerous harbor there. For if there
come Easterly winds that ouerblow, there is no safe riding for ships in that
harbor. For that no reasonable ground takle will hold them.

The third day of January, we set sail for England, and the one and twentieth
day following we came to the Island of Zante, where they took in three months
victuals, which they left there, when there were outward bound.

Also they took in Oiles and Currants, being all the Commodities, which the
Island affordes. For of it self it is so poor and barren, that it yields not
victuals to maintain it self, but is for the most part maintained from the
Maine.

The four and twentieth day we set sail again, and about he four and
twentieth day of February the wind took us short, and our Master thinking it
not goo dto beat the ship at Sea with a contrary wind, put into harbor at
Malta, where is a galland harbor, and many galleys and pretty fine shipping
belonging to the same, which go out upon service 200. against the Turk.

Malta is a goodly City of an invincible strength, with gallant walls being
built upon a maine Rock. And upon the walls of the old and new town, are
pieces of excellent good brass Ordinance.

And in this City the ancient order of the knights of Malta, have their
continual residence, who are gallant soldiers, and have fair houses, not
much unlike to our Innes of Court, they are all Christians, and so are all the
inhabitants, viz.

Armenians, Spaniards, Italians, Dutchmen, and very many Frenchmen, the Grand
Master of the whole order being a Frenchman, but I could not hear of any
English amongst them, yet do they all, show themselves very kind, and courteous
to Englishmen.

All the knights do wear white and black crosses on the shoulders of their
cloakes: And any gentleman that comes thither does put in a stock of a 100.
pound or thereabouts, for his maintenance, but is not allowed for a knight,
until by service against the Turk or else where he shall deserve the same, and
here we stayed 5. days.

Somewhat is wanting.
The 10. day of March, we set sail again, and about the 22. day we came to a
watch house where was 2. pieces of Ordinance, and came to an ancor, but because
we came not presently ashore with our boat, they shot at us, whereupon our
Captain sent our boat on shore with our Boatswaine, who was very kindly used,
when they knew what we were, and the Captain of the watch-house came aboard
our ship, and gave our captain a live hog for a present, which he accepted
very thankfully, and requited him with other things of 3. times the value.

And so (as we thought) he rested very well contented.

Then our purser and my self with a knight of Malta, being a passenger for
France, were by our Boatswaine and his gang set on shore, together with the
Captain of the watch-house, we thinking to go to the Town of Callar, to buy
such provision as we wanted: But the Captain took our Purser and the knight of
Malta prisoners, and kept them there: So that our Master not knowing how to
come by ye Purser, waighed ancor and brought the ship up to Callar, Calari a
port Town in Sardinia.
anwent himself, and made complaint to the Grand Seniors, who presently
granted a discharge for them both, and withal promised that the Captain
should be punished for so abusing of his place, and so after four days
imprisonment the Purser and knight were both set at liberty and came aborde.

Calarie is a great Town, Callari a Town of Sardinia.
where a number of Cauiliers do live, and has some small shipping belonging
to it.

It stands in the Island of Sardinia, which is a great and fruitful Island of
corns and fruit, where we lay some six days, and 5. or 6. days more of and
on, about the Island: In which tune we discribed two small men of war, which
we imagined to be some of Captain Wards crew, who at the first chased us, and
then we had them in chase, but when they perceived we were not for their turn,
they made away, as fast as they could, and so we left them.

Then it pleased God to send us a wind, that brought us through the Leuant, and
put us out to the mouth of the Straits of Gebraltar, The Strait of Gibraltar.
from whence we also had a fair wind that carried us to the height of the
Burlans, which is off the Rock going to Lisbone in Portugale, where the wind
took us short: So that our Captain thought it best to put into Cast Cales,
Berelengas.
for beating the ship in the sea, which he did for 23. or 4 days, until it
pleased God to send us a fair wind, and so putting to sea again we arrived
safe in England at the Town and port of Dover in Kent, Dover.
about the latter end of April, 1611.
1611.

For which I gave God thanks, and setting my foot on English ground, I thought
all my miseries to be at an end.

For to me, all the Nations and kingdoms, that in this my travels I passed by
and saw, both by sea and land, seemed nothing comparable to it.

But that in respect of them all, it may be called the only Paradize and
blessed Country of the world.

And so desiring God of his mercy to bless every good man from so great
miseries as we endured by the follies and oversight of a lewd and indiscreet
Master, being both unfit and unworthy to be employed in so great affairs, and
for so worshipful and worthy men as were Masters, Owners, and Adventurers
therein.

For, Phillip de Grove our Master being a Flemming, and an Arch-villaine, who
was not only accused, but it was (by the boy with whom he committed the fact)
confessed to my self, that he was a detestable buggerer: So that had not Gods
mercy been the greater, it was a wonder that in regard thereof, and of others
being offenders in the like, that ourship had not s^nck in the Ocean.

Lastly, praying to the Almighty, for the long and prosperous reign of our
most Gracious Sovereign, King JAMES, with the health and prosperity of the
Queens most Excellent Majesty, and all their Royal Issue, As also for the
Lords of of his most Honorable Privy Council, and for all the Honorable,
Worshipful, and others, the Masters, Owners and Adventurers, of the Company of
the East Indian Merchants, their Factors, Friends, and Welwillers. I cease, and
humbly commit my self and this small Relation of my Travels, to their kind
and favorable Censures.

FINIS.
Printed at London, for Thomas Archer and Richard Redmer. 1612.


