Present Remedies against the Plague.

Showing sundry Preservatives for the same, by wholesome Fumes, drinks, vomits,
and other inward Receipts: as also the perfect cure (by implaisture) of any that
are therewith infected.

Now necessary to be observed of every Householder, to avoid the infection,
lately begun in some places of this City.

Written by a learned Physician, for the health of his Country: And now newly
enlarged by the same Author, with Remedies for the new pestilent Fever.

I D
printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London for William Barley, and are to be sold at his shop in
Gracious street over against Leaden Hall, 1594.

To the Reader.
FOR as much as the force and infection of the ordinary diseas called the
Plague or Pestilence, has hertofore been too well known, and felt, in sundry
places of this Realm: and considering that it has of late begun to increase
in many chief Cities and populous places; I thought it good to publish to you
in time, sundry pro^ues against the said disease, the better to defend t^^^^
that are in health, from the infection of the diseased: And also to cure those
that are any way infected, grieved, or troubled with the same. And to this I
was imboldened, the rather for that it was written by a very learned and
approved Physician of our time, who desires more the health of his Country,
than by discovering his name seem vain glorious to the world. Accept the same
I pray you in good part, and thank God for the Physicians pains, who has his
desire if it may do but that which he wishes: namely to expel sickness, and
increase health to this Land, which God for his mercy sake, prosper and
preserve from all plagues and dangers for evermore, Amen.

These things ought duly to be looked unto. Viz.
IT is very convenient that you keep your houses, streets, yardes, backesides,
sincks, and kennels sweet and clean from all standing puddeles, dunghils, and
corrupt moystures which engender stinking sauoures that may be noisome, or
breed^ infection: nor suffer no doges to come running into your houses, neither
keep any (except it be backewarde, in some place of open air* for then are
very dangerous, and not sufferable in time of sickness, by reason they tun
from place to place, and from one house to another, feeding upon the
vncleanest things that are cast forth in the streets, and are a most apt
cattle to take infection of any sickness, and then to bring it into the house.

For ayring your Rooms.
Air your several rooms with Charcole fires, made in stone pans or
Chaftingdishes, and not in Chimneys: set your pans in the middle of the*
rooms: air every room once a week (at the least) and put into your fire a
little quantity of Frankincense, Juniper, dried Rosemary, or of Bay-leaues.

A Fume of great experience.
Take Rosemary, and put it into strong Vinegar, steep it in a Basin or Bowl,
heat four or five Flintstones red hot, and cast them into the Vinegar, and so
let the Fume ascend into the middle of every room.

Another.
Air your apparel in the same sort and with the same fume and bear in your
hand some handkercher* Sp^m^e^ or both, wetted in the (...) ^ood, H^arbegrace,
and Red Rose-vineger, mixed together.

To smell too.
The root of Enula Campna, steeped in vinegar, and lapped in a handkercher, is
a special thing to smell unto, if you come where the sickness is.

Another.
Hearbegrace and worm wood stieped in vinegar, in some pewter piece close
stopped, is to be used in like sort.

To taste or chewe in the mouth.
The root of Angelica, Setwall, Gencian, Valerian, or Sinamond, is a special
preservative against the plague, being chewed in the mouth.

To eat.
Eat Sorrel steeped in Vinegar, in the morning fasting, with a little bread
and butter, Sorrel sauce is also very wholesome against the same.

Another.
Take the keenell of a Walnut, mince it with three or four leaves of
Hearbegrace, and a corn or two of Salt: then put it into a Fig, warm it and
eat it fasting: fast three hours after, and take it twice a week. A
speaciall thing to eat, found very comfortable.

Take strong red Rose-vineger, sprinkle it upon a tossed of white bread, spread
butter thereon, and then cast the powder of Cinamond upon it, and eat it
fasting: or eat bread and butter with Hearbgrace.

Another.
Give to the diseased for their ordinary food, some broth made with a neck of
mutton: boiled with a good quantity of Burridge, Sorrel, and Buglosse.

To comfore the stomach.
Aleberries are very comfortable made with Cloves, Maces, Nutmegs, Saunders,
Ginuey grains, an^ such like.

To drink.
Take Rue, Wormwood, and Scabias, steep it in Ale a whole night, and drink it
fasting every morning.

Another.
Take the water of Carduus Benedictus, or Angelica, and mix it with
Methridatum,

Another.
The root of Enula Campana, beaten to powder, is a speciall-remedie against
the Plague, being drunk fasting.

Another.
Drink the powder of Turmentill, in Sorrel or Scabias water.

Another.
If any feel themselves already infected, take Angelica-water mixed with
Methridatum, drink it off, then go to bed and sweat thereon.

Another to drink.
Take a spoonefull of Bay erries, and buske them before they be dry, beat them
to powder, and drink it in good stale Ale or Beer, or in white wine: then
sweat upon it then forbear to sleep.

To procure Sweat.
Take posset Ale sodden with Sorrel, and Burridge mixed with Triacle of
Diatesserom, and get you to your naked bed.

A special preservative against the Plague.

Take of the root of great Valerian, a quarter of an dunce: of Sorrel a
handful: an ounce of the root of Butter-bur: boil them in running water,
from a quart to a pint, put two spoonefulls of Vinegar to it, and let the
Patient drink it so hot as he may, and then sweat upon it.

Another special preservative.
Take an egg, make a hole in the top of it, take out the white and the yolke,
and fill the shell only with Saffron, roast the shell and Saffron together, in
embers of Charcoales, until the shell ware yeallow: then beat shell and
altogether in a Mortar, with half a spooneful of mustard seed: Now so soon
as any suspitian in had of infection, dissolve the weight of a French-Crowne in
ten spoonefulls of posset Ale, drink it luke wamne, and sweat upon it in your
naked bed.

Another Preservative to be distilled.
Take half a hundredth green Walnuts being new taken off as they hang green
on the tree, and a pound of the inner bark of an Ash-tree: then take
Petimorrel, Housseeke, Scabias, and Verum, of each a handefull Saffron half
an ounce, and mince all these small together: then put a pottle of the
strongest Vinegar on them boil them over a soft fire in a close pot, and after
distill them in a Limbecke: keep the distill ed water, and give the Patient
two ounces to drink thereof, four times in four and twenty hours, when he
is in his naked bed, and let him be provoked to sweat, and he shall find great
ease thereby.

If the Patient be bound in the body.
Take a suppository made with a little boiled Hunuy, and a little powder of Salt:
let this be put up at the fundament with a little butter, until it move him to
the stool.

Drink for ordinary Diet.
So near as you can, let the Patients ordinary drink be good small Ale of
eight days old.

For Vomitting.
Vomitting is better than bleeding in this case, and therefore provoke to vomit
so near as you can.

To provoke Vomit.
Take three leaves of Eastrabecca, stamp it, and drink it in Rennish wine,
Ale, or posset Ale.

Another.
A little quantity of white Helivor: grater and drunk in the like sort
procures vomit.

A special Vomet.
Take two ounces of Oil of Walnuts, a spoonefull of the iuyte of Celandine,
and half a spoonful of the juice of Reddish raots: Let not the party sleep
for two hours after, and in so doing it is better than any purging.

For Purging.
If the party be full of gross humors, let ^im blood immediateley upon the
right arm, on the Liver veyue, or on the median vein, in the saine arm: so
as no sort appears the first day.

A very ho^some purge.
Put into the pap of an Apple a sixepenny weight of Alloes, and so take it: or
the piss of Rutus.

A very h^lsome water to be distilled.
Steep Sorrel in Vinegar four and twenty hours, then take it out and dry it
with a linneu cloth, then still it in a Limbecke, drink four spoonefuls with
a little Sugar, then walk upon it till you sweat, if you may: if not, keep
your bed and sweat upon it. Use this before supper on any eueuing.

If the Patient happen to be troubled with any swellings, botches, carbuncles,
or Gods tokens: let him sweat moderately now and then.

Outward Medicines to ripen the Sore.
Take the root of a white Lilly, roast it in a good handful of Sorrel,
stamp it and apply it thereto very hot, let it lie four and twenty hours,
and it will break the sore.

Another.
Take of old Swines-grease salted, two ounces, with the yolke of an egg, and
two handfulls of Scabias stamp them together, and lay it warm to the Sore.

Another.
Take a small quantity of Leaven, a handful of Mallows, a little quantity of
Scabias, cut a white Oynion into pieces, with half a dozen heads of Garlic,
boil these together in running water, make a Poultus of it and then lay it hot
to the sore.

Another.
The like may by made of two handfulls of Valerian, three roots of Danwort, and
a handful of Smallidge, sees them in sheeps Suet and Rose water, with a few
crumbs of bread, and apply it hot to the sore.

Another.
Take a hot Loaf, new taken forth of the Oven, apply it to the sore, and it
will doubtless break the same: but afterward bury the same Loaf deep mough
in the ground, for fear of any infection: for if either dog or any other thing
do feed thereon, it will infecte a great many.

Other Observations,
Let the sick and infected persons be separated and kept from the whole,
until the sore be-healed: but generally let them be kept within the space of a
month.

For a Fume.
Take a new burnt Brick, and heat it red hot, then put it into a Basin of
Vinegar, and set the Fume thereof ascend into your houses.

For Ayring Apparel.
Let the Apparel of the diseased persons, be well and often washed, be it
Linen or woollen: or let it be ayred in the Sun, or over pans of fire, or
over a Chasingdish of Coals, and fume the same with Frankensence, Juniper, or
dried Rose-mary

A perfect good Plaster for the Cure of the sore after it is broken.
Take unwrought Wax, white Turpentine, the yolke of an Egg a little fresh
but^^r, and a quantity of English honey, boil all these togeth^^ (...) a salve,
and apply it to the sore, being th^^ spread upon a cloth, in manner of an
ordinary Plaster.

Additions.
To preserve from the Infection of the Plague.
Take Garlic and peele it and mince it small, put is into new milk and eat
it fasting,

To take the infection from a house infected.
Take large Oynions, peele them, and lay three o^ four of them upon the
ground, let them lie ten days, and those peeled Oynions will gather all the
infection into them that is in one of those Roames: but bury these Oynions
afterward keep in the ground.

Another.
Take new milk and set it in a Basin in the middle of the infected Ro^^e, and
the milk will draw the Infectious veno^ ^^to it, letting it stand two daie^
i^ the said Room.

Against the new burning Fever.
If the Patient be in a great heat as most commonly they will, take of fa^^e
running water a pretty quantity, put it on (...) Chafti^^ dish of Coals, then
put thereinto a good quantity of Saunders beaten to powder and let it boil
half an hour between two dishes: that done, put a couple of soft linen
clothes into a dishe, wet the clothes well in water and Saunders, and apply the
same so hot as y^^ can suffer it to your belly.

To drink for the whot Fever.
Take two handful of Sorrel, and a handful of Violet leaves with a bunch of
sour Gr^pes, beat them together stalks and all: then (...) it into
Butter-milke, then make a posset of the same Butter-milke, and let the Patient
drink thereof so much as he will.

To procuresleepe to the sick Persons that are diseased either with the Pague
or the hot Fever.
Take of woman's brest-milke agood quantity, put thereunto of the like quantity
of (...) vite, stir them well together, and moysten the^^^^ith the Temples of
the Patient and his Nosthrils, (...) on with some fe^ther, or some fine thin
ragge,

Butter-milke in this c^ (...) is g^ (...) to be (...), and i^ (...) either the
Plague or the (...) ^er.

FINIS.

