A Direction to the waters of life. Come and behold, How CHRIST shines before
the Law, in the Law, and in the Prophets: and withal the judgments of God
upon all Nations for the neglect of his holy word, wherein they might have
seen the same: Both which are laid before your eyes in this little discourse,
by ROGER COTTON Draper.

Imprinted at London, for Gabriell Simson and William White, and are to be
sold at their house in Fleet lane. 1590.

TO THE GODLY AND LEARNED MASTER HVGH BROVGHTON, TEACHER OF DIVINITY, GRACE
AND peace in Christ.
FOR as much as it has pleased the Lord (Right reverent) to make your self
unto me a most comfortable Father: in that you have begotten me unto Christ,
even as Paul did Tymothie, nay rather as he did Onesimus, that is, much more
then from a servant of Philemon, to be a brother of Pilemon, even from a
servant of sin, to be a servant of Jesus Christ. For as much I say, as it
has pleased the Lord you should beget me after this sort, I thought good to
present unto your learned view some part of the fruits of your own labor in
me begotten, not to the intent in any respect to benefit your self therewith
(saving that you will rejoice to see, that your labor on me bestowed is not
altogether lost) but only to the intent to encourage others to the study of
the most absolute and perfect word of God: because that Satan our old enemy
strives still most like a subtle Serpent, especially to persuade men to the
contrary: Therefore so much as in me lies, I labor to overthrow him therein,
and to stir up others in like sort, to take up the weapon of their warfare
the word of God against him, and to have them constantly to hold on in the
meditation thereof, until such time as they shall have skill to handle that
sword of the spirit aright, and until such time as they shall attain unto
the sound knowledge of every point of that heavenly mystery of our salvation:
unto the which high mystery of salvation you have full often, as a most
heavenly Orator, not only called me, but also many more, to their unspeakable
comfort, ever warnyng us in like manner to give attendaunce for the furtheraunce
thereof, unto the reading of the same most pure and holy word of God: Even for
this cause only have I put forth this little and unlearned Treatise.
Wherefore, seeing the Lord has made you a Paul (from the Apostle Paul, and
other his fellows) to plant in me these things, and that it has pleased his
heavenly majesty to give the increase, I thought it meet to dedicate these
some part of the fruits unto you a special means thereof: humbly beseeching
you to shield them under your most grave and learned protection, that so the
benefit thereof may redownde to them, for whose sakes I brought them forth.
The sum whereof is, to show the brightness of our savior Christ in all ages:
according as it is said by the Apostle, Christ yesterday, and to day, and the
same for ever: As also to what end the Lord has created man: which is, to set
soorth his praise and glory above all the creatures that he has made: and
likewise, how that can not be done but by the knowledge and direction of his
own most perfect word: and how that all nations and people that have
delighted or not delighted herein, have found accordingly the loving kindness,
or the severity of the Lord. And thus I cease, beseeching the Lord to bless
you with a long and happy life even to the begettyng of thousands more, unto
the kingdom of the euer-lyuing God: that so your self may shine as a most
glorious star in the life to come.

Amen.
Yours begotten in the Lord, Roger Cotton.

TO THE READER.
I Find in the Book of GOD, (most gentle Reader) that a Mat. 10 32. 33 and
Psalm. 119. 46.
man should not be ashamed to speak of the testimonies of the Lord, if it
were before Kings: as also a charge given, 2. Tim. 2. 1. 2.
that a man should not let to deliver those glorious things which he has
heard of by many witnesses, to just and faithful men: to the intent that they
also might be able to teach, and to deliver the same unto others, according
Deuteronomy. 4. 9. 10. and. 6 6. to 10. and Joel. 1. 3.
as other Prophets command, saying: Tell you your children of them, and let
your children show to their children, and their children to an other
generation. For as much then as I find such a charge there given, I think it
no shame to speak thereof at this time unto you: but hold my self bound,
according Math. 25. 15. to 31. and Deuteronomy. 6. 6. to 10.
to that talent which God has given me, to make a rehearsal of those glorious
things which to me have been revealed: to the intent that you also may come to
the Book of God, where you shall be compassed with such a cloud of heavenly
witnesses, both of perfect skill and also willingness, that if you will, you may
be made able to describe at large unto others, both the wisdom, praise,
power, glory, and state of that everlasting King and kingdom. Therefore as
some have said unto me: Come and see the Book of God, for there shall you
find the Messiah: yea there shall you find that glorious King, whose wisdom
is so great, that it far exceeds the wisdom 1. Kings 4. 29. to end,
of all the sons of the East, or of Egypt: Nay, there shall you see him whose
wisdom so much excels other men's, that it far surmounteth the wisdom
either of Ethan, Heman Chalcole, or Derda. I say, as some have said unto me:
Come and see the book of God, that so you may behold this glorious King,
whose fame is spread throughout all the nations, even so throughout this little
Discourse, say I unto you: Therefore if you will so do, I doubt not but that
you will say the like unto others, and also say unto me, it was a true report
indeed that we heard of by you, concerning 1. Kings 10.
the wisdom of this King, and also the glory of his kingdom: how be it we
scarce believed it, until we came, and that our own eyes had seen it. But
now we perceive that you told us not the one half of the wisdom of this
great King, nor yet of the glory of his kingdom: for indeed it far
surmounteth the fame that we heard thereof by you. Therefore happy are those men
that stand in the courts of this King: yea thrice happy are his servants,
which always stand before his presence to hear his wisdom: I mean Math.
12. 42. and Luke 11. 31.
in the presence of that heavenly King, who far excels Solomon, even
Solomon, who so far surmounted those aforenamed, and in whose presence is the
fulness of all joy and gladness. But if you will not come to hear the wisdom
of this great King, nor yet to see the glory of his kingdom which so far
excels Salomons, he has pronounced with his own mouth, that the Queen of
the South shall rise in judgment against you. And this is the sum of my
little and unlearned Treatise. Therefore if you look unto the book of God,
whether this my unskillful draught would draw you, I shall think my labor
well bestowed, and you your self shall remain no longer, as that little Sister
which has no breasts: but Can. 8. 8. Can. 4. 2.
you shall be like that flock of Sheep, where not one is barren amongst them:
and as that florishyng Tree fast planted by the River side, whose leaf shall
ever show it self most fresh and green, even Psalm. 1. 1. Kings 7. 21. and
Apoc. 3. 12. Can. 4. 4.
to the bringing forth of fruit in great abundance. And moreover you shall be
then as a Pillar in the house of the Lord your God, and also as the Tower of
David most strongly buylt for your own defense, and shall continually remain
in the eyes of this Solomon as one that finds peace. The which peace, the
Lord grant you Can. 8. 10.
may speedely enjoy.

Amen.
Yours in the Lord, R. C.

The reason why all Creatures ought to praise the LORD, and why Man ought so to
do above the rest.
WHereas the holy Prophet provoke the Heavens, and all things therein, the
Earth and Sea also, Psalm. 148. 5. and. 33. 9.
with all things therein, to praise the Lord: he yields a reason why they
ought so to do, and that is, for that he spoke the word, and they were
created: he commanded, and they were made. And therefore, Acts. 17. 28.
because that all creatures have their breath and being by him, (as the
Apostle says) the Prophet calls them all, to sound forth the praise and
glory of their Creator: but especially he urges Man to advance the same above
the rest, because that he most chiefly above all others, was thereunto
appointed. For, the Lord speaking of his chosen Israel, says, This people
have I formed for my self, and therefore says he, They shall show forth my
praise and glory: as Esai. 43. 7. 21. Deutro. 7. 6. to. 11.
also Moses taught them, that unto that end and purpose they were chosen. And
likewise the Lord speaking of the calling of the Heathen, from all quarters of
the earth, to be his Sons and Daughters in Christ: Them also, says he, have
Esai. 43. 6. 7. 8. Esai. 42. 10. 11. 12. Psalm. 100. and. 117. Romans 15. 9. 10.
1. 12. Psalm. 95.
I created for my glory: and to none other end, but that they should show
forth his praise amongst the rest, as in diverse places of scripture may be
seen. So that for this cause, were all the holy Prophets and Apostles so much
moved to call upon Man, to set forth the praise and glory of God: and not
only because he was thereunto appointed, but also so much the more, for that
he has done for him such wonderful and excellent things: as first, to elect
him in Christ unto salvation Ephesi. 1. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. 1. Pet. 1. 2. Genesis
1. 26. 27.
before the foundation of the world was laid. Secondly, to create him in so
glorious an estate, even after his own image and lykenes, and as Lord and
King over all his creatures. Thirdly, to redeem his soul from the jaws of
Satan 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19 Apo. 1. 5. 6. and. 5. 9. 10.
with the precions blood of Christ his Son, as of a Lamb without spot and
undefiled. Fourthly, to exalt his horn on Ephe. 2. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Apo. 3.
21.
high, even to sit with his Son in the heavenly and highest places. Fifthly,
to sanctify, and to endue him with his holy spirit, whereby he may be led
into all truth. Sixthly, to John. 14. 26. and. 16. 13.
lade him daily with his manifold and gracious benefits. And seventhly, to
sanctify one day of seven for his own Psalm. 68. 19.
glory, and to the end, that man should rest from his own Genesis 2. 2. 3.
Ebre. 4. 4. 10 1^
works, and be workefull unto God, in giving due praise and thanks unto him
for the former benefits received. And therefore as the holy Prophet says, Let
all them that seek Psalm. 40. 16.
the Lord, rejoice and be glad in him: and let them that love his salvation
always say, The Lord be praised.

Man ought daily to consider for what cause the Lord should so bountifully
deal with him: and beholding the Heavens, be driven thereby to confess his
own duty.
SEeing that the Lord has created Man to none other end, but to show forth
his praise and glory: and seeing that he ladeth him daily with his gracious
benefits, to the end to induce him thereunto: O that men would therefore
enter into deep meditation with the holy Prophet, and so consider with them
selves, yea, and consider again, and again: that when they behold the
Heavens, even the Psalm 8. 3.
works of Gods fingers, the Sun, the Moon, and Stars, which he has
ordained, what man should be, that he should be so mindful of him? yea, or
what son of Adam he should be, that he should thus consider of? for he has
made some one to have dominion over the works of his hands, and has put all
things in subjection under his feet: Surely Ebrew. 2. 5. to the end.
therefore I will seek him out, to whom this glory does belong, and I will
also seek the cause, why the Lord has thus advanced me. For he has given me
the use of all these his goodly creatures: and therefore once again say I,
What is man, O Lord, that thou should deal in this sort with him? Surely
thou have thus advanced him for some great purpose: and I can see none other
end, but to advance thy praise and glory, and that in the highest degree: for
when as I behold the Heavens, I see that they have neither toonge nor Psalm. 19.
voice, and yet I see that they declare thy glory, and the Firmament does show
forth the works of thy hands. Day unto day utters the same thing, and night
unto night teaches such knowledge, there is no speech nor language where their
sound is not heard: and surely to none other intent, but that Roma. 1. 20.
men should be without excuse. Wherefore, I for my part will daily say, as the
holy Prophet did, My soul praise Psalm. 103. 1.
thou the Lord, and all that is within me, praise his holy name. My soul praise
thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits. Yea, and I will also call and
say, Let all the nations Psalm. 117.
praise the Lord, and let all the people show forth the glory of God, even
their salvation.

If man be styrred up by all the works of God, to consider his own duty,
which is, to praise the Lord: it must not be according to his own fantasy,
but according to the rule of Gods word.
NOW we have considered, that all the works of God do set forth his praise
and glory, and that man is bound thereunto above the rest, we must consider
one thing farther with the holy Prophet, which is this: My lips, says he,
Psalm. 119. 171.
shall speak thy praise, when thou have taught me thy Statutes. Therefore when
you have learned them, then may you set forth the praise and glory of God in
such sort, as he shall like of, but otherwise it is impossible you should: for
notwithstanding Moses was brought up in all the Acts. 7. 22.
learning of the Egyptians, yet he confesses him self to be ignorant Exodus
10. 26.
concerning the worship of the Lord, until such time as he should be directed
by his own most perfect word: How much more then ought we to confess great
ignorance therein, until such time as we also shall be directed by the same.
Moreover, for as much as no praise or worship is accepted in the sight of the
Lord, but such as shall be done according to the rule thereof, we must learn to
worship him according to the same, and in no case to go one foot farther. For
as Moses was not to do any thing about the Tabernacle, or for the giving of
laws, statutes, ordinances, rites, ceremonies, or whatsoever, according to his
own will or fantasy: but in all things Exodus. 25. 40 and. Hebr. 8. 5.
to do according to the pattern, and prescription showed him in the Mount, and
elsewhere, by the Lord: no more must we in the very smallest thing we take in
hand, concerning the worship of the Lord, but in all things therein must we
also be directed by the most pure and perfect word of God. For as the Cloud
was a direction to their Iornies in the Wilderness, Numb. 9. 15. to the end.
and they not to step one foot forward or backwarde farther, then by it
they were led: Even so the Laws there given by the Lord, are a most perfect
rule for men to walk by while the world shall stand. For wherewithal (says
the Psalm. 119. 9.
Prophet) shall a young man cleanse his way? The holy Ghost does answer: Even
in taking heed thereto, according to the word of God: and therefore did the
holy Prophets and Apostles always pray, that it would please the Lord, to
direct their steps according to the same. For in no case can the Lord abide any
will worship, seem it never so holy: but in all John. 4. 22. 23. 24.
things will he be worshypped according to his holy will, laid down in his
holy word: for otherwise we worship him in vain, as our Savior says, If
insteade of the doctrine Matthe. 15. 9.
of his holy word, we observe the precepts and foolysh traditions of men: so
that, To obey his holy word (as the Prophet Samuel says) is better then al
kind of sacrifice: and 1. Sam. 15. 22.
to hearken thereunto, is better then the fat of Rams. Therefore let us pray
with the holy Prophet, that it would please the Lord, to incline our hearts
unto his law, and not unto covetousness, Psalm. 119. 36
and that we may esteem al his precepts most pure and just, and hate al false
ways, and abhor al vain inventions. Psalm. 119. 113.


Seeing that every man is but as a beast by his own knowledge, we must learn
to be made wise by the word of God.
NOw that we know the Lord has created us to none other end, but to set
forth his praise and glory: and seeing we know also, that no praise or
worship will please him, but that which shall be done according to his holy
word: let us pray unto him with the holy Prophet, that even as it has pleased
him to make us, and to fashion us, even Psalm. 119. 79
so it would please him therefore to give us understanding, that we may learn
his commandments, and choose the way of truth. And again, seeing that every
man is but as a Beast by his own knowledge, as the Prophet Jeremy Jeremy. 10.
14.
does say: and seeing also the Prophet David confessed him Psalm. 73. 22. 17.
self so to be, until he went into the house of the Lord, and so through his
holy word became wise: We ought therefore to pray unto the Lord to give us
grace to leave of from leaning any longer unto our own wisdom, as the holy
Pro. 3. 5.
Ghost us warns, and only to hearken withal the holy Psalm. 85. 8. Micah.
6. 1. Habakuk. 2. 1. Psalm. 119. 105. Psalm. 73. 24.
Prophets and Apostles, what the Lord will say unto us, that so his holy
word may be a Lantern to our feet, and a light unto our paths: and that by
his counsel alone, we may be guyded, as the Prophet says, even unto
righteousness, judgment, equity, and to every good path: which thing being
Pro. 2. 9. 10.
done, and precepts kept, it shall be unto the Lord a sacrifice of a more
sweet smelling sent, then the fat of thousands of Rams, and Goats, or
rivers of Oil. Wherefore I beseech al you, that are as my self, even of the
simpliest sort, unto whom only I direct my speeches, and such as fear the
Lord, that you would cause your ears to hearken unto wisdom, and incline
your hearts to understanding. But what am I, that I should so beseech you,
since that Wisdom her self does entreat you, and daily offers Pro. 1.
her self unto you? And yet because the holy Ghost commaundes that we should
one exhort another, I can not choose Hebrew. 3. 13 1. Thessa. 5. 11
but with the holy Prophet, even desire you to taste and see how sweet the
Lord is. Now if you ask me what this wisdom psalm. 34. 8.
is, that you should hearken so unto her, and this understanding, that you
should so incline your hearts thereto, the Lord himself does tell you: Behold
(says he) the fear of Job. 28. 28.
the Lord is wisdom, and to depart from evil, is understanding. And in an
other place, the Knowledge of holy things Pro. 9. 10.
is understanding: and the only way for you to find the fear of God, which is
to have wisdom, and to find the knowledge of holy things, which is to have
understanding, is, for to repair unto the word of God: for the Lord only
pro. 2. 6. and James. 1. 5.
gives wisdom, and out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding. So
that if you search and seek in the Book of God, you shall be sure to find
the knowledge of the Lord, and then as he is known of you, even so shall you
fear him, and also by your continual meditation therein, you shall be sure to
be made wise unto salvation: for the word of God is fully able so to do, as
says the Apostle: and therefore in any wise, see that you always pray unto
the Lord, that it 2. Timo. 3. 15.
would please him to give you such a taste therein, as that it may be more
sweeter unto your heart, then the Honey, or the Honey comb unto your mouth: yea,
and more desired for your necessity, then gold, yea then much fine gold, or
treasures for your plenty. The which the Lord for his mercies sake grant unto
us every one, whereby we may have such a feeling and knowledge therein, as
that the bryghtnesse of the glorious Gospel, may shine most clearly in our
minds, even to the utter abolishyng of our former and most damnable darkness.

Certain Objections upon the former exhortation, answered.
Peradventure you will now say unto me, The first Objection.
if it be so that we can not attain unto Wisdom, which is to understand
holy things, and those holy things not to be found, unless we read and
meditate in the Book of God: alas, that is so hard, that we cannot attain
unto the understanding thereof: and again, it is for great Clerks, and not
for us simple souls to meddle withal, for many times the unlearned pervert
the Scriptures, even to their own 2. Peter. 3. 16.
destruction, and so I have heard some say, that S. Peter says they do so. But
I may say unto you in the name of God, Be not deceived, for it is the subtlety
of Satan that so persuades you: and not you only, but almost all men
generally throughout the whole world. And wherefore trow you does he so? Surely
to none other end, but that his own kingdom may be the better thereby
maynteyned: for even as the kingdom of God is daily enlarged where his word
is continually taught, and soundly understood: even so also, where that does
want, the kingdom of Satan is daily more and more increased. Hear therefore I
beseech you, what the Lord does speak unto us: He commands that we should
Joshua. 1. 8. Deu. 6. 6. to. 1^
not let his Book depart out of our mouths, but to meditate therein both day
and night, and has also told us that the Psalm. 119. 130.
very entrance thereunto, will show light, and give understanding to the
simple, yea to the very simpliest sharpnes of Pro. 1. 4.
wit, and to the little child (even such a one as Timmothy 2. Timo. 3. 15.
was) knowledge and discretion: yea and that a very wise man shall increase in
learning there, and also a man of great Pro. 1. 5.
understanding, shall attain unto wyser counsels. So that you may see that
wisdom does not only beseech you to hearken unto her, as before I told
you: but also the Lord does straightly command you, if you will obey him:
and does also tell you, if you will believe him: How chat his word will give
you light, and show understanding in greater measure unto all sorts, whereby
the simpliest should have no cause at all of discouragement, nor that the
great wise men should loath, or ouerreach. Therefore, whereas S. Peter says,
that the unlearned do pervert the Scriptures, you must learn to know who
those unlearned be: not the simpliest Clerks (as you would think:) but even
such as have not had their wits as yet exercised in the book of God. For be
it that a man had all the learning in the world in humane Hebr. 5. 13. 14
arts, yet if it be so that such a one be inexpert in the word of God, the
holy Ghost does count him as a Babe: but that simple man, which through long
custom has had his wits exercised therein, the holy Ghost does count him to
be of a most ripe age, and to be such a one, as is able to discern betwixt
good and evil. Therefore, who so ever that he be, until he make the word of
God his continual meditation, he may well be said to be unlearned, and
unstable also: and no marvel is it, though by such the Scriptures be
perverted, even to their own destruction.

Yea, but you will say again, if the Lord have thus bound An other Objection.
us by commandment to read the Scriptures, we must needs then have a
Phillip to be a guide unto us, as the Eunuch Acts. 8. 27. to the end.
had to him. True it is, that you must have a guide, but then your Phillip must
not be such a one, as when you shall ask him what is meant of this place, or
that: or what way Sir, shall I take to find this Christ, of whom you speak,
that so I may believe that he is the Son of God, and may have my conscience
comforted in him, and also my faith so surely settled, as that if trial come,
the very gates of Hell shall not prevail against me? I say, he must not be
such a one, when as you shall ask him these things, that shall appoint you
first to read this man's Book, and then that, upon such, and such places of
Scripture: and when you have read them, then direct you to others, as such, and
such great Uolumes, I know not what, but sure I am, far greater then the
whole Bible, and so entangle your head a thousand ways, yea, and lead you to
such intricate matter, and great time spending: that when you have all done,
you shall be little, or nothing at all the wyser, but rather the co^ntrarie,
even frayght with a thousand fond opinions, and blind conceytes. For I pray
you, what is the cause that there is such a quoile amongst us now adays, as
though there were no certainty of the truth, but such kind of dealing? And I
pray you further, what is the cause that men's heads are filde so full of such
fond, yea and also damnable opinions, but the like? For does not our Math. 22.
29. and. 15. 9.
Savior say? Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures: but are entangled with the
precepts and doctrines of men. Even so is the world now, for the Papist he is
so persuaded of his Writers, that he thinks there is no other truth but what
they write, and upon them he only buyldes his Faith, and Flat against the
commandment of God.
leaves the Scripture altogether, and in no case may the simplier sort therein
look, or read: and we also like wise men, deal in a manner after the same
sort. For notwithstanding we make a great show that we love the Bible, and
only build our faith by it, yet is there not one amongst ten thousand, that
does give him self to the reading thereof, as he ought to do: but rather to
the contrary, even to the readyng of the wrytinges of men, although the Lord
have given them no such commandment, and so delyght themselves a great deal
more in them, then in the word of God: which in deed should be unto them
their only joy, and precious Pearl: and so every one is grounded upon him,
whose Books they are affected to read, or whose fond conceytes by them are
fed: But your Phillip and Guide must not be such a one. For I pray you, was
Phillip the Eunuch his guide such a one? I trow not: for he being demanded a
resolution by that gracious Scholar (whose godly exercise was like to have
good success) began, as the text says, even at that same Scripture where he
was then readyng, and preached Acts. 8. 35.
unto him JESUS. And again, did not the master teacher himself, even our
Savior Jesus, deal in like sort Luke. 24. 13. to 36.
with his two Scholars? yes for sooth: for, whereas they being weak in faith,
and greatly troubled in conscience at the things then happened: and yet like
good Christians conferring and talking together, with a desire to know the
truth, as all men ought to do: I say our Savior dealt in like sort with them.
For S. Luke notes, that he began at Moses, and Luke. 24. 27.
at all the Prophets, and interpreted unto them in all the Scriptures the
things which were written of him, with a great reprofe unto them, that they
for their parts were so slow, and dull of heart, as not to believe that
Christ was to suffer all those things, and so to enter into his glory, seeing
that all the Prophets had of those things so plainly spoken. And furthermore
you see, that even that eloquent man Apollos, Acts. 18. 24. the end.
who had taught diligently the things of the Lord, in a kind not altogether
unprofitable: yet was contented to be taught by a couple of mean persons, to
come to a more perfect way of teaching, then before he had used: And that was,
to prove and show mightily, as he did, by the Scriptures, that JESUS was the
CHRIST. So that you see these Guydes did not send their doubtful Scholars to
this, or that man's book to find out Christ: but they found him out, and
taught him by the Scriptures. Nay you see that Apollos did not teach the right
way to find him out, until he took that course to teach him by: and then S.
Luke tells you, that he mightily confuted all gayne-sayers. For so strong and
mighty is the word of God in operation, that if it be rightly expounded, or
propounded, it is sharper then any two edged sword, and enters through, even
to the dividing Hebrew. 4. 12.
a sunder of the very heart and soul of the hearers thereof, as the Apostle
says. You see also by these former examples of Scholars, and Guydes, what is
both your duty, and also theirs. Yours, how diligent you ought to be in
reading of the holy Scriptures, and also conferring of Christ, and his
kingdom: And your Guydes, what course they ought to take in teaching of you,
when as you shall demand to be resolved of your doubts: and that is, to
teach you Christ by the Scriptures, and thither to send you to find him out
your self, and not else where: for no where else is he rightly to be found. For,
search the Scriptures, says our Savior, for they be John. 5. 39.
they that testify of me. So that when you shall be thus instructed by your
Guide, either privately at home, or publicly abroad, and that you have
performed the one part of your duty: which is, to hear them with all
diligence, and willingness: you must always remember with the Noble men of
Berea, to perform the other part: which is, that having Acts. 17. 11.
heard the word of God with all willingness, went and searched the Scriptures
daily them selves, to see whether those things were so or no: whereby you may
learn, that you are not only to believe that this is Christ, or that is
Christ, or he is here, or there, in the wilderness, I know not where: because
such, and such a man, tells you so. Or if he do tell you aright which is he,
you are not to believe him only because he tells you so: for you see they of
Berea went and searched the Scriptures them selves, to see whether it were so
or no: Even so must you: for otherwise you disobey that which our Savior
Christ has commanded you to do: for says he, Search the Scriptures.

Yea but you will say, he spoke that to such as would not An other Objection.
believe him: but we believe them that tell us. I think so in deed, for a
great many believe too much them that tell them, unless they told them a more
truth. But although they were unbelievers that our Savior commanded to
search the Scriptures: does he therefore command you, that you shall not
search them? Think not so in any wise: for does Psalm. 1.
not the holy Ghost pronounce a blessing on al those that read the word of
God continually? And does not S. Peter will 2. Peter. 1. 19
them, whom he had taught, that notwithstanding they had knowledge, and were
established in the truth: yet to give more heed unto the Prophets, as unto a
most sure word, and as to a light that shines in a dark place, until the day
did dawne, and the Daystarre shine more clear in their hearts. And likewise,
does not S. Paul commend those whom Acts. 20. 32.
he had taught unto the word of God, as unto a Schoolemaister, which was able
to build them further? yes forsooth: So that by these examples, you may see
that you are not only bound to hear the word of God, but you are also bound
to search and read the Scriptures daily your self: for you see in giving
credit only to the Teachers thereof, many thousand souls go to
destruction, as specially amongst the Papists they do. Therefore if you love to
keep your self from destruction, you were best to bear in mind that which
our Savior has given you in charge, that is, to take heed what you hear, as
also to take heed of false Mark. 4. 24. Math. 24. 23. to. 27. Mark. 13. 5. 6.
21. 22. 23. Luke. 8. 18.
Prophets: and that you believe them not, no although their coming will be
with such signs and woonders, as that (if it were possible) the very elect
should be deceived thereby: Yet notwithstanding, I say, he commands you not
to believe them, but to search the Scriptures, because in deed they are the
true touchstone whereby you may easily try the true Christ from the false, as
also the true Prophet from the false Prophet.

Now it may be that you will ask me here again, whether A Question.
you may read no other Book, but the Scriptures only? The answer is, that if
you will you may: but if it be for matters of salvation, the Book of God is
the only Apothecaries shop for you to resort unto, because there you may be
sure to have a most precious medicine for every disease, or curing salve for
every sore. And surely the Prophet David found it so to be: for says he, I had
even perished in the midst Psalm. 119. 92
of mine afflictions, had not the book of God been my delyght: and therefore
made he that his only meditation both day and night. So that when you have
bestowed long time, with like delight and diligence therein, as he did, and
that your wits thereby are quickened, so that you may be well able to
discern of Spirits, that is, betwixt good and evil: then you may, if your
leisure serve you, read other Books and catch no hurt. Or if it be so that
you have not as yet heard of the Book of God, you may also read some books,
and take no harm: for some Books there are which are good, and tend to very
good purpose, because their dryft is (as I suppose) to draw you to the Book of
God, even to that fountain of all joy: but otherwise, if their drift be to
draw your delight unto them selves, they can in no wise be good. For John the
Baptist being told that more Disciples followed John. 3. 26. to the end.
Christ, then followed him, he takes them selves to witness that he had told
them plainly, that him self was not the Christ, but that he was sent to show
them which was he: and having once showed him unto them, that he him self was
then to cease: and therefore when he heard that all men ran to Christ, he
says, that then was his only joy fulfilled, because in deed that was his
only drift and purpose. So that if any man write to that end, as of late most
learnedly one has done, in a little Book called a Consent of Scripture: you
are to be thankful unto God for such a one, and when he, or any other, have
by their wrytinges, thus led you unto Christ, in saying, Come and see the Book
of God: for there we have John. 1. 39. 41 45. 46. John. 4. 41. 4^
found the Messiah: Then may you say also with the Samaritans when you have so
done, Now we believe, not only for your sayings, but also much more because
of his own word: for we have heard him speak our selves now, whom before you
told us of, and we know now by his own word, that this is in deed the very
CHRIST, the only Savior of the world. Again, some Books there are which in
respect of the holy stories contained in the Book of God, we call profane
Stories, as the Macchabees, Josephus, and the Roman stories: the which profane
stories if you read, you may learn thereby (if you know the Scriptures
before) how just the Lord is in all his sayings, because that some Prophecies
in ye holy Scriptures there are, whose event is not altogether in Scripture
showed, and yet by those Profane stories you may see they took effect: as
namely the Prophet Daniel, and also the Revelation of S. John, the which by eye
sight we are also able to witness, how that Book is fulfilled by the Popes in
all their dealinges. But if you think that you can not attain unto perfect
wisdom, and knowledge of Christ, without the help of other Books, then are
you greatly deceived: for the Word of God is an absolute perfect rule, 2.
Timo. 3. 15. 16. 17.
says the Apostle, and fully able to make you wise in Christ, and by it only
may you attain to the perfect knowledge of Christ, without the help of any
other, and is also plain and easy of it self for your understanding: if you
will the Lord Psalm. 119. 130.
believe, as I said before, especially if you will come in simplicity of
heart, and cast off your own wisdom: for in very deed, that is the only
hinderance of the attayning thereunto. Again, some Books there are which take
upon them to lay down precepts for your life and conversation, which books,
if you think you are bound to read as well as the Scriptures, then are you
also as greatly deceived: for the Lord has commanded you upon pain of
damnation, to read the Joshua. 1. 8. John. 5. 39. and. 3. 36. Deutro. 32. 47.
Scripture, because in deed it is the very life and norishment of your soul:
but as for the reading of such kind of Books, you have no such charge,
neither was it needful for you so to have, because there is nothing that the
heart of man can think on, either for virtue to embrace, or vice to eschew, but
the Book of God does contain a rule, and precept for it: and therefore, what
need we the help of man to lay down precepts for our life, when as the
Lord him self has taken upon him to be our Guide, and Teacher. Therefore in
the name of God, take heed of the subtlety of Satan, in this point above all
others: that is, that he deceive you not so herein, as to make you believe that
you shall attain unto as great wisdom or holiness, by the wrytinges of men,
as you shall do by the book of God: or that the book of God is not perfect of
it self, to instruct you fully in all things touching your salvation: for
then has he you even as he would: therefore rather then he should make you
so to think, better were it for you with them of Ephesus to Acts. 19. 19.
burn them all, yea though the price of all such Books were found to be in
value worth fifty thousand pieces of silver. And God does know, a most
heinous sin it is, and reigns most abundantly amongst us here in England,
even this, that we esteem a great deal more of the precepts and doctrines of
men, then we do of the Book of God: so that, as that has been the very cause
of the destruction of all the world, greatly it is to be feared, least the
like plague will befall us, and our Nation: for how few have we that does take
so great delight in the book of God, as to make it the chief joy, and
reiocing of their hearts, as the Prophet Jeremy Jeremy. 15. 16.
did make it unto his. Therefore much more few there be to be found, that do
make so rare account thereof, as the holy man Job did: that is, to esteem of
the words of God, Job. 23. 12.
even much more then he did of his appointed food: but in the contrary,
multitudes do take even that delyght: therefore take heed of that in any wise.

Now it may be that you will ask me again, What A Question.
part of the Scripture it is, that you were best to read? The answer is, even
all: for so you may learn by the last Commandment of our Savior, that I
spoke of: for be commands to search the Scriptures: so that al which is
called Scripture you must search, for all that does testify of him. And so you
see S. Luke says, he began at Moses and all the Luke. 24. 27.
Prophets, that is, from the beginning of Genesis to the end of Malachie for
the old Testament, which only then was written: and all that was nothing else,
but to teach Christ: And now you have also the new Testament, which tends to
none other end then the former did, and that is, to teach Christ. For so the
Apostle says, I taught nothing, but what Acts. 26. 22.
Moses and the Prophets did say should come. And in an other place, I kept
nothing back, but have showed you all Acts. 20. 27.
the counsel of God: and what was that? To wit, that Christ should suffer,
and that he should be the first that should Acts. 26. 23.
rise from the dead, and should show light unto the people, and to the
Gentiles. So that you may see, that all the Scripture tends to none other
purpose, but to teach you that: and therefore you must of necessity read all,
that so you may, as S. Luke says, Acknowledge the certainty of those things
whereof you have been instructed, not only by the Evangelists, and the
Apostles, who have declared unto you the things of Christ, from the day that
Zacharias went into the Temple, and that the Angel told Marie concerning her
conception: but also what you have been instructed by Moses and the Prophets,
even from the day that he was first promised, that so you may be able to
deliver the glory thereof from point to point, and to stand firm your self,
against all the assaults of the Devil.

Yea but you will say again, S. Paul, of whom you An other Objection.
spoke before, forbids us Genealogies, and commaundes that we shall give no
heed unto them, because they are endless, 1. Timo. 1. 4.
and breed questions, rather then godly edifiyng, which is by faith: And so in
deed a great number of our Guydes will tell us. For many times because we find
them very hard, we go to them to ask the meaning thereof: then their answer
is, that the Genealogies tend not to edification, but rather to strife and
contention, and therefore is it that S. Paul forbiddes them. And so likewise
for many other hard places in the Bible, when we go to ask them (whose Mala.
2. 7.
lyppes should preserve knowledge) What is the meaning of such and such
places? in stead of resolving us, they cast them off, as superfluous, and not
tending to our salvation. Therefore why do you say, that all the Scripture
testifies of Christ, and is profitable for our salvation, and must of
necessity of us be read, and learned? I will tell you why: no not I, Psalm. 12.
6. Pro. 30. 5.
but the holy Ghost will tell you, how that all the Words of the Lord, are
most pure words, yea more pure then gold which in the fire seven times is
tried. And moreover, the same Apostle, that you say speaks against them, will
tell Roman. 15. 4.
you the contrary: for says he, What so ever things are written aforetyme
(meaning in the Scriptures) are written for our learning. Therefore, woo be
unto those blind Guydes, that would so lead you into the dytch, as to make
you believe, that y^ Apostle means the Genealogies contained in the holy
Scriptures. In deed, he means that endless Genealogies are unprofitable: but
you must well know, that there is none such in the Scripture, neither any thing
superfluous, or unprofitable for our salvation. Therefore who would think
that men, who pretend to have great zeal and knowledge, should be so beastly
and foolyshe, as to expound the Apostle in that meaning: as though the
Apostle, who spoke by the spirit of God, would speak against the spirit of
God. For I pray you, did not the same spirit set down them, that set down
all the rest: and dare men be so bold then, as to speak against the wisdom
of the holy Ghost: And I pray you, what part of the Bible is there, that does
not thereof consist? be not men the ground and cause of all the matter there?
And how can we know the matter as we ought, unless we know the men of whom
the matter speaks? As for example, if the holy Ghost say, Sheba and Psalm.
72. 10.
Seba shall bring gifts, or Nebaioh and Kedar shall come Esai. 60. 7.
and serve: how can we know rightly what is meant hereby, unless we know the
people of whom the holy Ghost does speak, and also the cause why they were
estranged from the Lord, and now should come again? Or if the Lord do tell
you, how that he will subdue the Canaanites, Heuites, Iebusites, Deutro. 7. 1.
Gergesites, and the rest of those nations, to give unto Israel their
possessions: must you not of necessity (if you will know the cause clearly)
understand what these people are, and of whom they come, and also upon what
former prophecy and promises these matters do depend? Yes you are bound to
know them: for the holy Ghost commands you, and all the world to consider of
it: even of this, how that when y^ most High God divided to the Nations their
inheritance, he appointed Deutro. 32. 8.
the borders of A people (meaning Canaan and his sons, according to the
number of the sons of Israel) that in time they might have it: So that if you
will know any thing in the Book of God clearly (as all things therein you
are bound to know) you must of necessity know the persons that the holy
Ghost does entreat of. For when as the holy Ghost does tell you of
blessedness to befall Sem, and Gene. 9. 26. 27.
his posterity: and likewise the contrary unto Canaan and his posterity: and
also of a reuersion of Sems blessedness to befall Iapheth in the end, and his
posterity, and also how Canaan and his posterity shall be servants unto both
them and theirs: how is it possible, I say, for you to understand any thing
with judgment, unless you be able in some good sort to distinguysh of these
Families? For all the whole Bible from the ninth of Genesis to the end of the
Revelation, depends upon this one Prophecy: even on this, which by the
spirit of God was uttered in the Chapter before cyted. Or again, if the holy
Ghost do tell you of Moab, Ammon, Psalm. 83. 6. to. 9.
Edom, and diverse mo with them, to be joined in league against the people of
God: must you not of necessity also, (if you will know the cause clearly
herein) understand of what roots those wicked branches do also proceed: and
likewise how, and for what cause they became such rotten ones as they were:
and also how, and for what cause the other, the Israelites became the people of
God, and of whom they also come? Yes in deed must you, or otherwise your heart
shall remain Math. 13. 19. 20. 23. Mark. 4. 3. ^o 21. Luke 8. 5. to. 16
that hard way, and stony ground vnfallowed up, upon the which the seed of
the Word being cast, is not able to take root to the bringing forth of
fruits. And why? because without the knowledge of these things, you are
neither able to hear or read the word of God with understanding. Therefore
in the name of God take heed, that you be not so persuaded by them, to believe
that the Genealogies in the holy Scriptures be endless, or unprofitable, or
superfluous: for if you so think, then do you nothing else, but take Revel. 22.
19.
away from the Scripture, and so the curse of God will come upon you, even to
your utter damnation. Therefore if it be so as Moses says, that the things
revealed in the holy Deutro. 29. 29.
Scriptures, are for us, and our children for ever. And also that the same
Apostle that you spoke of, does tell you, that All Romans 15. 4.
things that are therein written, are written for our learning: You must in
any wise take unto you, the whole armor and instruments that God has you
appointed, that so your buylding may be so coupled and knit together, in every
joint of the furniture thereof, and so surely grounded upon that precious
foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Christ him self being the chief
corner stone, as that it may stand firm and sure against all the assaults of
the Devil, in the stormy and evil day. Wherefore seeing that these blind
Guydes, whose lyppes do not preserve knowledge, but would take away the key
thereof, and neither enter in As those in Luke the. 11. 52. and Math. 25. 13.
them selves, nor suffer you that would: Be you careful your self, to lay
your grounde-sieles so sure and fast upon the former Rock, as that your
spiritual buyldyng may grow up as an holy Temple for the Lord: and in any wise
give an entrance to the buylding thereof, by the holy word of God: and assure
your self, the Lord will give you light, yea such exceeding shyning light, as
that the hardest knot, and darkest place therein will seem most clear and
bright, if you will the Lord believe. For you shall understand that he does
tell you, that if you would but seek after knowledge, Pro. 2. 3. 4. 5.
as you would do after silver, and search after understanding, as you would do
after treasures, then you should be sure, not only to find the knowledge of
the hardest Genealogy in his Book contained, but also in them, and by them,
the fear and knowledge of the Lord your God. Therefore leave of so much your
seeking after trashe, which perishes, and seek for that true knowledge which
neither Moth, nor Math. 6. 19. 20 21.
Canker, nor Thief decreaseth, as our (...) you commands.

Yea but you will say, that some of our guydes do also tell us, An other
Objection.
that if we should get this great knowledge and understanding that you speak
of, it would be very hurtful unto us, for it would puff us up, and make us
unreasonable proud: for so say they, the Apostle says: and it is more meet
(say they) that we should learn Mortification, and to do good works: and as
for such great knowledge, it forces not. It is true in deed, that the Apostle
says, that knowledge puffs up: and it is most 1. Cor. 8. 1.
meet also that you should learn Mortification, and also to glorify y^ Lord
through your works. But you must know what knowledge it is that the Apostle
speaks of: a man would think not heavenly knowledge, for who knew more
then he 2. Cor. 12. 11.
him self: or who knew more then Moses, Samuel, David, Daniel, or any of the
Prophets, or Apostles, and yet were they thereby puffed up with pride? I would
think, and if they look well about them, they shall find the more knowledge
they had of the heavenly majesty of God, the more base and vile they became in
their own eyes. Alas how are they deceived, that think the Apostle means,
that true and heavenly knowledge puffs up with pride? Why, how blind are men?
can they not see that he commands the same Corinthians not to be children 1.
Corin. 14. 20
in understanding: but as concerning maliciousnes to be children, but in
understanding to be of a ripe age? Nor can they not see that he tells the
Colossians, that he will not cease to pray unto the Lord, to fill them with
all knowledge Colo. 1. 9.
of his heavenly will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding? Nor can
they not see, that he does the like unto the Ephesians, and to al others, unto
whom he writes? Nor how Ephesians. 1. 16. 17 Romans 10. 1. 2, 3. 4. 5. Roma. 15. 14
1. Cor. 1. 5. and 10. 1. and. 12. 1. 31. and. 14. 1. 12. 15. 20. and 15. 34.
Gala. 4. 19. Psalm. 119. 66.
he tells the Romans, that the Jews had a zeal in deed, but not according
to knowledge: and therefore nothing worth? Nor can they not see how the Prophet
David in like sort prays unto the Lord, that it would please the Lord to
teach him knowledge: and that not once nor twyce, but many and many times? But
what should I speak of one or two examples, when as all the Prophets and
Apostles, and dear children of God, have ever most heartily desired it at the
Lords hands? Since it is so then, that they can not see that, I would they
could see, and consider this: My people, says the Lord, are spoiled for lack
of knowledge: and because they have refused Hosea. 4. 6.
knowledge, I will also refuse them. O most fearful sentence, and most true
and terrible unto all those that have so done, as anonue you shall see at
large. So that by this you may see the Apostle means not, that heavenly
knowledge does pusse up with pride: but he means such like knowledge as some
of the Corinthians seemed for to have, who in deed knew nothing at all, as
they ought to know, because they wanted love: for though a man could speak
1. Cor. 13. 1. to the end.
with the toonges of men and Angels, and had all knowledge, yet if he have
not love, it profits nothing, but is even as a sounding Brass, or tinekeling
Simball. Again he means such like knowledge as the king of Tyrus had, whom
the Lord does floute (as he does all others that are the like) Behold, says
he, thou art wyser then Daniel, there is Ezekiel. 28. 3. to. 8.
no secret, that they can hide from thee: with thy wisdom and thy
understanding have thou increased thy riches, and so thine heart is lyfted up,
because of thy riches. And also such like knowledge as the king of Babel had,
whose heart was lyfted Esai. 14. 13. Dan. 4. 27.
up so high therewith, as that nothing would serve his turn, but to exalt his
throne above the clouds, and so to be Dani. 4 28. to the end.
even like unto the most High: but full soon was he brought down full low,
even to the eating of Grass with Ox and Ass. And likewise such knowledge and
wisdom as 2. Sam. 17. 14. 23.
had that wise Ahithophel, who was puffed up with such swelling pride thereby,
that if good Hushai for wisdom and counsel be better thought of then he, he
goes and hangs him self for very spite: and so the wise counselling
Ahithophel showed him self to be, according to the nature of his name, that
is, even the brother of a very fool. And such wisdom and knowledge the
Apostle means, as the Grecians, 1. Corin. 1. 17 to the end.
and all other worldlinges here amongst us seek after: who, as our Savior
says, attain to wonderful great wisdom in their generation and kind, and
are full of knowledge, and so puffed up with a proud conceit they have thereof,
as that the word of God and preaching of the Gospel, 1. Cor. 1. 18. ^3
as the Apostle says, is but unto them even mere foolishnes. 1. Tim. 6. 17.
And therefore says he unto Timothy, charge them that are rich in this
world, that they be not so high minded, and that they trust not so much in
uncertain riches, but in the living God. So that by this you see what kind of
knowledge it is that the Apostle says, will puff you up with pride: the which
if any of you have, or seek after for to have, let him in any Pro. 23. 4. 1.
Cor. 3. 18.
wise cease from such wisdom, and let him become a fool, that so he may be
made wise in deed, as the Apostle says: Therefore once again I say, take
heed, that Satan do not so deceive you, as to make you believe, that the
knowledge of the word of God will pusse you up with pride: No, if you refuse
to increase your knowledge therein, you show your self to be proud then in
deed, and wicked also: for so speaks the Prophet: The wicked is so proud,
says he, that he Psalm. 10. 3. 4. 5.
seeks not for God, but contenmeth him. And God does know, innumerable there
are amongst us, that do even so. For who can number the troops of those most
vile profane beasts, who notwithstanding do take the name of God in their
mouths, yet do their deeds declare plainly that they say in their hearts,
there is no God, as the Prophet speaks P^alm. 14. 1. and. 53. 1.
of them. And again, who can number the troops of a second sort? Who
notwithstanding their own hearts do tell them there is a God, and as the
Apostle says, they profess also that they know him: and yet by works they
deny him: Titus. 1. 16.
and also say unto him, as Job says they do, Even depart from Job. 21. 14.
us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Again, who can number the
third sort? Which are those unto whom most chiefly I direct my speeches, who
notwithstanding have wonderful great zeal, and also great care of the true
worship of the Lord: yet are so grounded in a blind conceyte they have of
foolysh zeal in mortification, and also in doing well toward men, thinking
that that is the only thing the Lord requires, as that it is greatly to be
feared, least in the end they will fall into the like danger of our blind
Papists, and also of the Jews their predecessoures in that point: whom the
Apostle witnesses of, to have a great zeal, but not Roma. 10. 2. 3.
according to knowledge: and therefore being ignorant of the righteousness
which is in Christ, went about to establishe their own. I say it is greatly to
be feared, least this damnable error should befall this third sort: for
truly for ought that I can perceive, they are come to the same pass of those
in Esai already, that is, even to say unto other men, Stand farther from us,
because we are holyer then you. Esai. 65. 5.
Even so foolyshe they are, according as the Apostle speaks to the
Galathians, that after they have begun in the spirit, Gala. 3. 3.
they would now seem to be made perfect by the flesh. For truly I say, for
ought that can be perceived, they make more account of a little show of
humility and well doing (as they term it) then they do to have their minds
renewed by sound knowledge, that so the darkness that is in them might Luke 11.
35. 36
be turned into light, and that so they might be able, as the Apostle says,
even to comprehend with any, how exceeding Ephe. 3. 18. and 1. Timo. 3. 16.
great that heavenly mystery of our salvation is. Therefore much like they are
unto those blind zealous Scribes and Pharisees, who as our Savior says, made
more account Math. 23. 23. 24. 25. 26.
of tything tryfling toys, then they did of tything judgment, and weightier
matters: that is, they made more account of foolyshe zeal in outward shows
and ceremonies of religion, Mark. 7. 1. to 15. and Luke. 11. 38. to. 43.
then they did to have a sound knowledge of Christ the Son of God: Who was
not only a bare son desended of David, and no more as they thought him, but
also even Math. 22. 42. to the end. And Mark. 12. 35. 36. 37. and Psalm. 110.
1.
David's Lord and God. So that notwithstanding all this their blind zeal, yet
missing of a sound knowledge herein, ^yght most woofull wooes does the Lord
our Savior pronounce against them. Therefore in the name of God (what Matthe.
23. 13. 14. 15. 16. 23. 25. 27. 29.
soever such ignorant Guydes do tell you) take heed how you despise to
increase your knowledge of the Son of God, least the like plague befall you,
that befell them: and take heed also how you suffer such to bear rule over
you, as the Apostle commands. For whatsoever show of humility Colo. 2. 18.
such blind guydes would seem to have: yet you shall find in the end, that
they are such as the Apostle speaks of to the Colossians, whom in flat
words he terms to be puffed up with a fleshly mind, and also to advance
them selves in those things which they never saw: whose fault (as it seems
by the Apostles exhortaion to the Colossians) was much in the same kind of
theirs, who would have you to make no account of knowledge. For the Apostle
greatly urges them, especially to be increasing therein, even so far, as to
Colo. 2. 7. and 1. 9. and. 3. 16.
be rooted, and buylt, and stablished, and still to be abounding in height,
until they became as fit Temples for Christ to dwell in. Even so in the
name of God do you, for you are so bound, as further you shall see a non: and
assure your self, the more knowledge you have in the word of God, the more
shall you be humbled in your own eyes: for it is myghtie through God to cast
down all strong holds, and to bring 2. Cor. 10. 4. 5.
into captivity every high thought, to the obedience of our Savior Christ.

Now whereas they tell you, that of necessity you must The other part of the
last Objection answered.
learn to mortify your self, and also that you must endeavor to do good
works: it is meet you should so do in deed. For mortify your earthly
members says the Apostle Paul. Colo. 3. 5. 1. Pet. 2. 11.
And again, Abstain from the lusts of the flesh, which fight against the
soul, says the Apostle Peter. And again, let your works so shine before
men, that they seeing may glorify your Father which is in heaven, says our
Savior: Math 5. 16.
and reason good you should so do, for to that end tends all your
knowledge. For if you have learned Christ, says the Ephe. 4. 20. 21. to. 25.
Apostle, and have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in
him, then you must of necessity cast off the conversation in times past: for
otherwise your knowledge is in vain, and you remain as yet the servants unto
sin, Romans 6. 16. to the end.
whereunto you were bound, even as slaves, giving your members as servants to
fulfill the will thereof. Wherefore if you will be freed by Christ, and be
servants unto God, you must also give your members as servants unto
righteousness, in obeying his will, unto whom you now stand bound. And for
this cause the Apostle says, cast off the old Ephe. 4. 22. 23. 24.
man, which is corrupt through the deceivable lusts: and be renewed in the
spirit of your mind, says he: and then put on the new man, which after God
is created in righteou^nes, and true holiness. So that you see true
mortification consists in castyng off the old Adam, and putting on the new,
which is Christ. Now if one should ask you what this old Adam is, the which
we are so often commanded to cast off: how can it be answered, I pray you, but
by the book of God? For by no write else in all the world, can you describe
him aright: unless it be so, as that they have learned thence: but there you may
behold him as in a glass most clear, even to his very thoughts, and
intentes of the heart, for the word of God Hebr^. 4. 12.
is a searcher and tryer thereof. If then you can not discern thoroughly what
this old man is which you are to cast off, but by the word of God: How much
les then are you able to discern what this new man is, which you are to put
on, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, but by the
same? For if we be not able in this our corruption, to judge and discern
thoroughly of our corruption: but that the Law came and showed it, that so it
might appear plainly Rom 5. 20. and.. 3. 20. and. 7. 13.
to abound: How is it possible then (being altogether blind in judgment)
that we should discern that exceeding righteousness of Christ, which we are
to put on, but that the same has also showed it? And therefore the Apostle
tells you, Ephe. 4. 23. 24
that you must be renewed in the spirit of your mind before he bid you put
on the new man. For how can you put on Christ, unless you know him? and how
can you know him, but by the book of God where he only is described? So that
the first step you are to make to true mortification, is to mortify your
folly: and that can not be done, but by the quickening of your wisdom:
neither can that be done, but by the word of God. For by thy Statutes have I
been Psalm. 19. 93.
quickened, says the Prophet: therefore as the Apostle says, Colo. 3. 16.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you most plenteously, even in all wisdom,
whereby you may be so changed by the renewing Romans 12. 2.
of your minds, as that you may be able to prove, what is the goodwyll of God,
and acceptable and perfect: and Romans 12. 1.
when you have so done, then in any wise give up your bodies as living
sacrifices, holy, and acceptable unto God, by your obedience in seeking to
fulfill the same: always provided, that the knowledge thereof must first go
before: for so much may you also well perceive by the Apostle Peter his
speeches, which are these: I will not be negligent, says he, to put you 2.
Pet. 1. 12.
always in remembrance of these things, though that you have knowledge.
Whereby you may learn that the Apostles did ever plant the knowledge of Christ
in men's breasts, before they would command them to walk: because that
otherwise their mortification, or walking had been in vain. For if an
unbelieving Jew, or a Turk, or a Papist, or any other what so ever, that
knows not Christ aright, should do all the good works in the world, or
mortify the flesh never so much, yet should none of all these things
profit him any thing at all, unless he knew the virtue of Christ his
resurrection, and also the righteousness which he should have by him: because
it is not the works that makes the man good, but the man that makes the
works good. For you must well know, that if Abraham had not believed the Lord,
he had not been counted righteous: The works which Abraham did, as y^*
offering of his Son made perfect to y^ sight of men that faith which he had
before, and so the works being added, made the former faith to appear to be a
lively faith, and no^ a dead faith, as S. James speaks.
for although he were justified by Genesis 15. 6. and Roman. 4. 3. Read the (...)
Chapter.
works in the sight of men, and thereby had somewhat wherein to rejoice, yet had
he not so in no respect with God. For what says the Scripture: does it not
tell you how that Abraham believed the Lord, and he counted that unto him for
righteousness? So that ye works which he did, had been but as dead works and
rotten in the sight of God, had he not believed the promise of God concerning
the Seed that should come of him. Again, you must as well know that Israel
obtained Romans 11. 7.
not that which they sought through works, but the election obtained it:
neither were they elected unto salvation because of the works which in time
they would do: but they were elected through the grace of God in Christ Jesus,
according as the Apostle also testeth the phesians they were, saying: Ephe. 2.
8. 9.
By grace are ye also saved through faith in Jesus Christ, and not of works
(says he) least any man should boast him self: Romans 3. 9. 20. 23 and. Gala.
3. ^0. 11.
and therefore the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that so men might
see plainly how they are justified freely by the grace of God, and not through
works: for if it were of works, then were it not of grace: but since it is of
grace, Romans 11. 6.
it can not be of works, as says the Apostle. Therefore we Romans 3. 28.
conclude (says he) that a man is justified freely through faith in Jesus
Christ, and not through works: for to him that works, the wages is not
counted by favor, but by debt: Romans 4* 4. 5. (...). 9.
but to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly,
his faith is counted for righteousness: even as David declares the blessedness
of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works, saying: Blessed
are they whose iniquities are forgeuen, and whose Psalm. 32. 1. Romans 4. 6.
sins are covered: blessed is that man to whom the Lord imputes not sin.
And good cause the holy Prophet had so to say, f^r if men should be rewarded
according to their works or desartes, they should be rewarded with everlasting
death, because the wages of sin is death, and there is no Romans 6. 23.
man but he has sinned, and gone a stray: therefore no man, Romans 3. 9. to 24*
and 1. John. 1 8. 9 10. and. 1. King. 8. 46. and 2. Cro. 6. 36. and Dan. 9. 4.
to 20 (...). 6. 23.
but he deserves the wages of hell and death. But if men do look for eternal
life, they must know it comes as a free gift of God through faith in Christ,
and not in any respect as a due debt unto them, because of their works. For as
Abraham received not the promise concerning the heireship Romans 4. 13.
of the world, through the fulfilling of the Law, but through the righteousness
of faith: no more does any man receive the promise of the heireshyp of eternal
life, through the works Romans 4. 16* to the end. Gala. 3 and 1. John. 5. 11
which he can do, but through the faith which he has in Jesus Christ. What
shall we say then concerning good works? Shall we utterly exclude them? No in
no wise: for God has ordained them also even to the end, that those whom he
Ephe. 2. 10.
has elected in Christ, should walk in them: but not in any respect for men
to think, that they should be the cause of their election, neither that they
should think the free gift of eternal life comes as a due debt for them.
But in deed they are as most excellent fruits, which should always floorysh
from those whom God has elected, according as the Apostle says: God has
chosen us in Christ before the Ephe. 1. 4. As it is impossible for a good tree
to be without good fruits, so is it for an elect vessel, or lively faith, to
be without good works.
foundation of the world, to the end that we should be holy and without
blame before him in love. So then ye fruits not being the cause of the goodness
of the tree, but the tree the cause of the goodness of the fruits, it had been
in vain I say, for the Apostles to look for good fruits to come from men, if
they had not first taken care for the sound plantyng of the tree, that is: If
they had not first taught men the sound knowledge of Christ, whereby they might
see plainly wherein Men ought fyr^ to teach others the sound knowledge of
Christ, that so their belief being surely grounded on him* they might be i^
deed trees of righteousness and the planting of the Lord, as it is in Esa^. ^1.
3. Pro. 19. 2.
their goodness stood, it had profited their hearers nothing at all: no
although they should have done all the good works in the world, or have
mortified them selves never so much in the sight of men: because without the
sound knowledge of Christ, the soul can not be good. For I pray you, had not
the Apostle Paul as great cause to rejoice in the flesh, as any man in the
world, if by such things God would have been pleased? Yes in deed had he:
for you see he was Phil. 3. 3. 4. 5. (...). to 11. and Acts. 26. 5. and Gala.
1. 13. 14
circumcised the eight day, and of the kindred of Israel, and of the trybe of
Benjamin, and an Hebrew of Heber, and by the Law of the strictest sect, even a
Pharisee: and also as concerning zeal, no man more fervent then he: yea and as
touching the righteousness which is by the Law, even unrebukable: and yet you
may see that he counts all these things but as dung and dross, in respect
of ye excellent knowledge sake which he had found in Christ: by the which
knowledge he Philip. 3. 9. 10 Gala. 2. 14. to the end. and. 2. 10. 11.
was made to see, that notwithstanding all his former righteousness by the Law,
yet had he gone to eternal destruction, had he not found the righteousness
which is through faith in Christ: and therefore no marvel was it, though he
made small account of his former righteousness in respect of the knowledge he
had now of Christ. Wherefore in any wise see that you always desire the same
thing: for assure your self that is more worth in the sight of God, then all
the burnt offeringes or sacrifices in the world, for so the Lord him self
Hosea. 6. 6.
does tell you. Therefore blame me not, I beseech you, though somewhat longer I
stand upon this point, even upon this, that the sound knowledge of Christ
for us to have, is more accepted in the sight of God, then all the works which
we call good in the world. For I pray you further, was not Cornelius the
Captain that heathen man, a godly man as Act. 12. 1. 2. 3 4. 5. 36, to the
^nde.
well as Paul? Yes even one whom the holy ghost commends to be very devout,
to have the fear of God before his eyes, to pray unto him continually, to have
care to teach his whole householde the like: and besides all this, to be one
that gave much Alms unto the people: and yet you see he was not in that case
as he ought to be, until such time as Peter had made known unto him the Lord
JESUS, that so he might know that by his death and resurrection came remission
of sins, and only unto those that would believe in his name: so that
notwithstanding all his former righteousness, yet was he to be counted a most
grievous sinner, until such time as he apprehended Christ by faith, and
therefore is it that the Apostles say, so sone as they heard of this: We
perceive Act. 11. 17. 18
now that* God has also granted unto the Gentiles repentance unto life. So
that the necessity of this point is far greater then I can well declare,
because men are given generally to think, that if they can frame them selves
to do well (as they term it) and to mortify the lusts of the flesh,
Jeremy. 7. 22. 23. 24. and. 9. 3 24.
that that is the only thing the Lord requires and accepts of: but they
are marvelously deceived. For the Lord delights more that men should have
the sound knowledge of him, then he does in all the works which we call good,
be they never so many by us performed: for if it stood only upon good works
and mortification, wherewith the Lord would be pleased, I am sure you can not
deny, but that all the people in the world were then in as good case one as
an other. For who can deny, but that the very As namely Festus for one
example, for who could have behaved him self better then he in Paul his
cause, and yet you may see how like a profane beast he speaks, when as he
talks ^f our Savior Christ. Read for this Acts 25. 13. to. 22. and in the
same manner spoke y^ stiff necked Jews, as you may see Acts. 17. 7. John. 3.
36. and 17. 2. 3.
Insidels for outward actions behave them selves as well as men can do, and
yet notwithstanding they go to eternal destruction. And why? Because they know
not God in Christ. For this is an eternal rule whch you are bound to hold,
that is, that who soever knows not the Son of God, nor believes in him,
shall never see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Therefore if you be
one of those which love eternal life, you must have an earnest mind to know
him aright, that so your belief in him may stand most firm and constant, and
then assure your self you have performed the chiefest work that God
requires at your hands. For when the people demand of our Savior what they
should do, whereby Therefore if F^lix, or Festus, (...) Agrippa, or any other
such as they were should behave them selves a thousand thousand times better
then they did, yet if they know not Christ no better then for (...) warren^ we
have they did, you may safely say they go to eternal destruction.
they might work the works of God. His answer is, that they should Believe
in him whom the Father had sent: for that in deed was the only work that God
required at their hands, as he also tells them. Again, when the keeper of
the Prison demands of Paul and Silas what he should do whereby he might be
saved. Their answer is in like manner, that if he would believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, he should then be saved.

Now it may be you will say unto me in this place, if that be all in all, to
believe in him, what need you then to bestow such long speech in this point.
For we believe in the Lord Jesus, and know well enough that all the works in
the world will not help us, unless we do so. Then must I say Read for these
three Acts 24. and. 25. and 26. John. 6. 28. 29. Acts. 16. 30. 31.
unto you again, if it be so that you do believe in him, as you say you do, it
must follow then of necessity, that you have a mind to know him: for those
that believe in Christ the Son of God, the Lord has given a mind to know
him, 2. John. 5. 20. and John. 8. 47. and. 10. 26 27.
says the Apostle John* therefore if you have an earnest mind to be increasing
in the knowledge of the Son of God, then may you safely say, that you are one
of those that do believe in him: and then again, if you be one of those that
do steadfastly believe in him, you have then performed the chiefest John. 6. 29.
work that God requires at your hands: yea then have you also learned true
mortification in deed, otherwise you have it not. For true mortification
consists not only in humility, or in not sparing of the body, or in not
satisfiyng of the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. Neither do good
works, as you Colo. 2. 18, to the end.
see, only consist in the doing of that which is required unto men, for so the
Papists, and many others, as the forenamed, would go before you in that
kind: but they both consist chiefly in the soundnes of your knowledge, which
you ought to have of the Son of God. Therefore whereas the most part of
people are brought to this pass, that is, even to think that if they can say
they do believe in Christ, and learn withal to bring forth the fruits of a
christian life, which is to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, to visit
the sick, to relieve the prisoners, to do unto all men, as they would be done
unto, and to mortify the lusts of the flesh: all which in deed are their
duties concerning the second Table, and therefore worthy of commendation for
so much. But whereas they are brought to this pass I say, which is to think,
that if they can perform these things, that they have then performed the only
thing the Lord requires, they are greatly deceived: for the Lord requires a
great deal further matter at their hands then so. For know you not the
answer of our Savior unto the Ruler, who had asked what he might do to
inherit eternal life? if you do not, this is it: Yet lackest thou one thing,
says our Savior. Now what this one thing was that he then lacked, I will show
you. First then the Ruler Math. 19. 16. to 26. and Mark. 10 17. to. 25. and
Luke. 18. 18. to. 26.
demanding of our Savior what he might do to inherit eternal life, and our
Savior reciting the duties of the second Table: and he replying, that he had
kept them all, even from his very youth. Our Savior tries him then with a
further and more chiefer point, that is, with his duty concerning the first
Table, and tells him plainly, that he lacked one thing yet, and that in
deed the most chiefest thing of all, which was his love toward our Savior
Christ: and therefore says our Savior unto him: Sell all that thou have, and
come and follow me, thinking thereby to try his obedience toward the first
Table, that is, to see whether he did so love the Lord in heart, mind, and
soul, as that he could be contented to leave all that he had, and follow him,
as Abraham, Moses, David, Daniel, and diverse others Matthew. 4. 18. to ^3. and
Mark. 1. 16. to 21. and 10. 28. to 32.
in the Gospel did: but when he came to that point, the case was altered:
whereby you may plainly see that if men never so well perform their duties
concerning the second Table, and yet miss therein as touching the chiefest
point of the first, it profits them nothing at all. Therefore this is the
mark the which most earnestly I do shoot at, even this, to have you and all
men well to know, that the Lord requires most chiefly your whole duty, as
touching the first Table, which is not fulfilled only in saying there is but
one God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, nor in saying you believe to be saved
by the second person in the trinity: but you must well know that the Lord
does also require a most entire love to be showed toward him, that is, he will
have Deutro. 6. 5. 6. to the end.
you to love him even with all your heart, with all your mind, with all your
soul, with all your strength, the which love can in no wise be so greatly
expressed, as when you have a most earnest desire to hear his voice, and when
as rather My sheep hear my voice, and I ^nowe we them, and they follow me.
John. 10. ^7.
then you would be hindered from the hearing thereof by worldly matters, you
would rather be contented to forsake them all. Therefore it is not enough
only to say you know this, or believe that, but you must show a willing mind
to know and believe according to Scripture: for the Lord will in no case like
that you should be troubled about many matters Luke. 10. 38. to the end.
with Martha, but will have you without all excuse to choose the best part with
Marie, because that in deed, is ye most excellent thing you can desire: I
mean, the hearing of his voice continually, as Marie did: that so you may have
all his most gracious words printed in your heart, as Moses speaks. And why
so? Even to the intent you may be able to rehearse them continually unto your
children, and that so you may be Deutro. 6. 4 to 10. and Mark. 12. 29. to. 35.
able to teach them and your self, to know aright how that he JEHOVAH your
God is one, and that there is none Mark the conference (...) our Savior and
the Scribe the^.
but he, according as he requires in that first and great Commandment,
saying: Hear O Israel, JEHOVAH, thy God JEHOVAH is one. Therefore if you hold
them happy, as happy and blessed they are, whose God this Jehovah Psalm. 33.
12.
is, and that your self would be of this happy sort, you must learn to know
him aright: that is, you must learn to know according to the Scriptures, how
that under this name and nature, there be three, the Father, the Word, and the
holy 2. John. 5. 7.
Ghost, and that these three are but one God: for the Word is John. 1. 1. 14.
the Son, and yet he is JEHOVAH, as S. John in his twelfth teaches you out
of Esai the sixth. And the holy Ghost ^ohn. 21. 41. and Esai. 6.
is JEHOVAH, as S. Paul in the Acts. 28. teaches you out of the same text of
Esai. And how this name JEHOVAH Acts. 28. 25. to. 28.
is opened, S. John in Apocalips the first shows you in this sort: I am Alpha
and Omega, the beginning and the end, Revel. 1. 8.
says the Lord, even he who was, who is, and who will be. The knowing of this
true God, who is but one: as also that John. 17. 3.
the second person in this Trinity, was to take the nature of man, that so he
might suffer, to the intent that in death he might destroy him that had the
power thereof, and so give life unto the world. The knowing of this I say,
according to the Scripture, the which in all ages most plainly has been
manifested, is the chiefest thing the Lord requires at your hands: therefore
you are to understand that the holy Prophets and Apostles did ever first and
most chiefly labor to set forth this: and afterward exhorted men to walk
according to their duties laid down in the second Table. Consider these
scriptures. Act* 13. 24. to. 42. and 14. 15. 16. 17. and 16. 30. 31. and 20.
21. and. 26. 17. 18. Paul in this. 26. of the Acts shewe^h the sum of all
their doctrine, that is, even that both Jews and Gentiles were to turn from
darkness unto light, ^ from the power of Satan unto God, that so they might
receive forgeuenes of sins, and inheritance amongst them which are
sanctified by faith in Christ: and therefore the Apostle says, that he
witnessed both unto Jews and Gentiles, that they should have repentance
toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Acts. 20. 20. 21.
For you are not to think that when John the Baptist came preaching in ye
wilderness, that his only drift was to bring the people to a more perfection of
works, although after their demand, he tell them, that thus and thus they
were to do: but you are to understand, that most chiefly his drift was to
Zacharias y sather of John shows what was the chief mark that John shot
at, as you may see in Luke. 1. 76. 77. and John. 1 6. to. 9. and Luke 5. 32.
33. Math. 3. 2. Mark. 1. 7 John. 1. 15. Luke. 3. 16. 17 Math. 3. 11. 12
bring them to a change of judgment, and to a more perfection of this
knowledge, and to a repentance of their former ignoraunces, and a belief in
Jesus Christ. For you see he tells them plainly, that the kingdom of God
was even now at hand, and that a stronger then he came presently after him, who
in deed was before him: and that him self was not worthy to stoop down and
unloose the latchet of his Shoes: and that although he baptized but with water,
yet he that came after him would baptize with the holy Ghost and with Fire:
and that he would come with his Fan in his hand, to make clean his floor,
and to gather his Wheat into his Garner, and to burn up the Chasse with
unquenchable Fire: And therefore unless they did believe in him which should
The sum of John his doctrine was that they should repent them of their former
ignorances, and believe in Christ, as you may see Acts. 19. 4. and Math. 21.
32. to the end. and that was the fruits in deed which the Husbandmen should
have brought forth unto the Lord of the Uineyarde. Math. 3 9. Gene. 3. 15. and
John. 8. 33. to the end.
come after him, that is, in Christ Jesus, they would prove to be this
chasse. Wherefore he tells his kinsmen the Jews, that notwithstanding they
for their parts began to say within them selves, We have Abraham to our
Father, and therefore we are the only people, because the couenauntes and
promises of God belong only unto us: and also for that the Oracles of God were
committed chiefly unto us: and also because we are the Circumcision, whereby we
are separated from the sinners of the Gentiles: I say notwithstanding they
began to brag in this sort, of all these outward things, yet he tells
them, that unless they did believe in him of whom all the Prophets before had
spoken, and was now come into the world, they should find them selves to be
this Chasse here spoken of, and not the good Seed of the woman, and of
faithful Abraham: but even the natural seed of that old Serpent, their
father the Devil, and that God was able to raise up sons unto Abraham in
stead of them, even of the very stones. Whereby is meant, that whereas the
Gentiles unto that time had hearts as hard as stones, for as much as they
regarded not to know the Lord aright, Romans 1. 28.
and therefore he regarded not the time of this their ignorance, Act. 17. 30.
and Rom 1. 21. to 29. and. Act. 14 15. 16. 17.
but suffered them to run on in the hardness of their hearts, even to their
own destruction: Yet now he admonishes all men every where to repent them of
their former ignorance, and believe the Gospel. Yea now John tells them,
that the Math. 3. 10.
axe is put even to the very root of the trees: and therefore if these
Gentiles would repent them of their former ignorances, and believe in Christ,
as faithful Abraham did, then should they be counted the sons of Abraham,
and the other should be cut off even according, as the Apostle says: Those As
our savior says of Zacheus Luke. 19. 9. and Gala. 3. 7. Romans 2. 28. 29.
which are of faith, are the children of Abraham. And again, He is not a Jew,
which is one outwardly: neither is that circumcision which is outward in the
flesh: but he is a right Jew which is one within, and whose heart is filled so
full with the knowledge of God, that he can always praise the Lord aright:
and likewise that is true circumcision which is of the heart, and in the spirit,
and not in the letter: and therefore if these Gentiles would be such, they
should then be the Phil. 3. 3. John. 1. 11. 12. 13.
true circumcision in deed: yea, they should then be the true seed of
Abraham, and also the right Jews: and so their praise Romans 2. 29 and Psalm.
24. 6. Hebre. 6. 1.
should be of God, and not of men. Again, whereas the Apostle urges the
Hebrews to be led forward unto perfection: you are not to think he means it
of works (although no man will be so mad as to think otherwise, but that by
those that have knowledge a perfection of works must also be practiced, for
otherwise (because you shall not mistake me) I tell you still, your knowledge
is in vain: For what have Psalm. 50* 16* 17
thou to do with my covenant in thy mouth (says the Lord) if thou hate to
be reformed: And therefore as we are to grow Hebr. 6. 1. 2. Corin. 7. 1.
up in knowledge, so are we also, as the Apostle says, to grow up in holiness:)
but in this place you are to understand that the Apostle means it of the
perfection of knowledge, which not only y^ Hebrews, but also all others ought
to attain unto: that so they might see how Christ was answerable to all the
former types, figures, shadows, and ceremonies in the Law: and how that at y^
very hour of his death, al those were Dan. 9, 24. to the end. Exodus 26, 31.
32. 33. and Matthew. 27. 51. Hebr. 9. 24. and 10. 20.
to cease, according as Daniel long before had told. In token whereof the
veil that separated the two holy places rent a sunder: because then Christ
passed through the veil of his own flesh from the Cross, unto the holiest
of all, even unto the very heaven it self. Wherefore they were to be led
forward unto all such high points of knowledge, and to learn to know how that
Christ entering into that holy place (which was not made with hands) made a
more perfect reconciliation betwixt God and the people, then ever could Aaron
do in the holy places made with hands. And also they were to know that Christ
was a sacrificer after another manner of order Psalm. 110. 4. and Hebr. 5. 5.
6. and 7. to the end.
then was Aaron, even one after the order of Melchizedek: the which Melchizedek
is described in Scripture as though he were without father, and without mother:
and as Genesis 14. 18.
concerning that name, as though he had no beginning of days, nor end of
life, but continuing a Sacrificer for ever. And yet notwithstanding though some
would have him kept in obscurity, because their own wits According as y^
Apostle says, Hebr. 5. 11. to the end, and therefore he gives men a sharp
reproof, for that they continued still as babes, and not able to conceive of
deeper matters. Hebr. 7. 4.
are dull of conceit, and not exercised in the book of God: the Scripture is
plain enough concerning the person who he was, and in what sense he is said to
be without father, without mother, without beginning of days, without end of
life: Therefore what modesty count you that, to forbid where the holy Ghost
has commanded: Nay what boldness is there in you that are not afraid so to do.
yea, and gives a straight commandment to consider how great a man he was:
that so the Hebrews, and all others might see how far he excelled Abraham,
on whom the Jews so much relied: and also how far his Priesthood excelled
the Priesthood of Aaron, or any other of the sons of Levy. For whereas they
had a commandment according to the Law, to take Tithes of the people their
brethren, though they came out of the loins of Abraham: yet he whose kindred is
not counted amongst them, received tithes of Abraham, and blessed him that had
the promises. And moreover here men that die, receive tithes: but there he
received them, of whom it is witnessed that he lives for ever. And to say as
the truth is, Levy also which receives tithes, paid tithes in Abraham, for
he was yet in the loins of his father Abraham when Number. 18* and Deutro. 18.
Genesis 14. 18. 19 20.
Melchizedek met him. After the order of this Melchizedek, I say, were the
Hebrews and all others to know, that our Savior Christ was made a
Sacrificer, who as concerning Number. 20. 28. and Hebre. 7. 23. Genesis 14. 18. 19
20. and. Psalm 110. 4.
his humane nature, was without a father, and as concerning his divine nature,
without a mother: and who also in proper signification, had no beginning of
days, nor end of life: but continues a Sacrifices for ever, and sits at
the right hand H^br 7. 24, 25. and. 10. 12. and Roman. 8. 24.
of God, to make continual intercession for all those that will come unto God
by him: and who also is able perfectly to save them that do so, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for Hebr. 7. 25.
them. Unto these and such like high points of knowledge beseeming a
Christian, does the Apostle urge the Hebrews unto: of the which, two or three
more I will note unto you, as to know how Christ had been proclaimed heir of al
things Hebr. 1. 2. 3.
even from the very day of Adam his creation: and how that by him the father
made the world: and how that he being the bryghtnes of his glory, and the
ingraued form of his person, Exodus 23. 20. 2^, and Colo 2. (...).
bears up all things by his mighty word: and how that he has by him self
and his own blood, purged our sins from dead works to serve the living God:
and how that notwithstanding he was made a little inferior to the Angels,
Hebr. ^. 9. 14.
through the sufferyng of death, yet was he crowned with glory and honor, in
that through death he destroyed him that had the power thereof, that is to say,
the Devil. And is also Hebr. 1. 4. 6. 7. 13.
made much more excellent then the Angels, inasmuch as he has obtained a
more excellent name then any of them: and in as much as they must all do
worship unto him, and are but his messengers: And in as much as it was not said
unto any of them, Sit at my right hand until I make thine enemies Psalm. 110*
1.
thy footestoole, but unto him it was, and so he does, even at the right hand
of God in the heavenly and highest places, Ephe. 1. 20. to the end.
far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every
name that is named, not in this world only, but also in that that is to come,
and has made all things subject under his feet. They were also to know how
that he was worthy of much more glory then was Moses, in as much Hebr. 3. 3. to.
7.
as he which has builded the house has more honor then the house: and in
as much as he was as the son over his own house, and Moses but as a faithful
servant in the house, even a servant to bear witness of those things which
afterward should be done by him. As you may see in the whole (...) to the
Hebrews, as also i^ all other the Epistles of the Apostles.
These, and thousands of such like heavenly points of knowledge were the
Hebrews to be led forward unto: and not only they, but also you and all men
in the world, that look to appear with Christ in glory, must set their
chiefest affection on these Colo. 3. 1. 2.
heavenly things. Therefore when you have subdued your affection from
delighting in the things of this world, and brought it to delight only in the
book of God, that so your heart may be filled with the knowledge of his will in
all these heavenly points of wisdom, and spiritual understanding, Colo. 3.
16.
then may you walk worthy of the Lord, and shall please him in all things,
otherwise it is impossible you should: neither will your mortification be
accepted in the sight of God, no although you never so much pull down your
self: for God delights not in fools, but in those that love to hear
Ecclesi. 5. 3. ^eremy. 9. 24. and John. 10. 27
his voice, and desire to know him aright, in them does he delight. And
therefore to conclude this speech, you must know that of necessity you are
first bound to learn Christ, before you can know how to put him on: and then
when you have by him found light, you must endeavor your self to walk as
children of the light, for otherwise the wrath of God will come upon you, as
upon all the children of disobedience it has: for God is holy, and therefore
must we be holy, or else Leuit. 20. 26. and 1. Pet. 1. 15. 16
be sure he will not spare our misse-deedes, as he speaks un to Moses, but
every transgression and disobedience shall be Exodu^. 23. 2^
sure to find a just recompense of reward. So that the more knowledge you
have in his holy word, wherein you shall understand, that not one jot of his
justice passes unperformed, the more, if any spark of grace you have, will
you learn to mortify your earthly members, and also to do those works that
God requires: for as God is known, even so Psalm. 90. 11.
is he feared, says the Prophet. Therefore in any wise desire to be instructed
in the word of God above all other things, and then no doubt but you will be
ashamed, if any thing be done amiss, yea and often strike upon your thygh with
sorrow of heart, as the Prophet Jeremy also speaks. ^ere* 31. 19.


Now it may be you will say again, Every one can not An either Objection.
read, neither has every one leisure to get such great and perfect knowledge
as you speak of: And moreover many dye before they come to years of
discretion: as also many in their mothers womb: How then shall all these do*
shall none be saved, but those that understand the whole Bible: Yes forsooth,
for if they do in steadfast faith but touch the Math. 9. 20. 21 12. and 14. 36.
and Mark. 5. 27. to 35. and. 6. 56. and 12. 42. 43. 44. and Luke. 21. 1. to 5.
hemme of Christ his garment, they shall be saved: for as well does he accept the
poor Wydowes myte, as the Rich man's great gift, especially if it come with
such willingness of heart, that if they had, or could get more, more they would
give. But seeing that faith is the gift of God: and seeing also 2. Cor. 8. 12.
Ephe. 2. 8. Romans 10. 17. 1. Pet. 2. 2. and 2. Pet. 3. 18.
that the ordinary means that he has appointed to come thereby, is the
hearing and reading of his holy word, we must every one of us desire the
sincere Milk thereof, as the Apostle Peter says: that so we may grow
thereby, both in faith, in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. And most meet and necessary it is that so we should do: for
seeing that Satan goes about like a roaring Lion, continually seeking whom he
may devour: 1. Pet. 5. 8.
How much more needful therefore is it, that we should continually be as
careful, to get such skill in the handling of the sword of the spirit, which
is the word of God, Ephe. 6. 17.
as that we may be able, not only to resist him, but also to wound him most
deadly therewithal: for otherwise, if we shall be found ignorant in the use
of our weapon, we shall be sure to receive most deadly wounds our selves,
because that ignorance therein shall not excuse any man. Therefore whether a
man can read or no, that shall not excuse him: for if he can not, he must have
the more care to be taught by others, that in any wise he may get some
knowledge in this spiritual weapon offered for his help, least when he
should give the wounds, he receive them most deadly him self. And as for
Children which die in their mothers womb, or before they come to be of
discretion to use y^ ordinary means, we must commend them unto the Lord, who
is able without the means to save whom pleases him, being elected in Christ
before the world was made: the which Babes elected it pleases the Lord to
inlighten their minds, by the working of his holy spirit, even in their
mothers wombes: as well you may perceive by John ye Baptist, who, when he heard
but Luke. 1. 44.
only the voice of the mother of our Lord, sprang for joy: as also by the
Prophet Jeremy, of whom the Lord says, before Iere. 1. 5.
thou came out of the womb, I sanctified thee, and so forth. Now as it
pleases the Lord to inlighten such Infantes, as are elected by such secret
means as pleases him, so is he able to do the like unto all others of greater
years. But since that he has appointed an ordinary means for such to come
by the knowledge of his Son, we must look to that, and desire of the Lord,
that it would please him to inlighten our minds thereby. And whereas you say,
that all men have not time and leisure to attain unto skill and knowledge in
the book of God. That is not so: for if they would bestow but that one day
of seven, which the Lord has commanded them, either in hearing the word or
reading therein themselves, they might attain unto very great knowledge: yea
so great, as that they might be able at the least to give a sound reason of
their faith: yea and to avoid the deadly blows of Satan, although not able to
cast off al: especially if that one day were bestowed with like delyght and
desire of the atteyning thereunto, as they would do if it were a worldly
commodity, or vain desire they should seek after. How much more knowledge
trow you, might then be attained unto, if men would bestow all the hours
therein, the which they bestow Esai. 41. 21.
in vain delights: as huntyng, hauking, tabling, dicing, carding, bouling,
shooting, or any such like: no doubt but to a woonderful great knowledge, even
to so great, as that they should be able then, to bring forth (as the Lord
speaks) even their most strong reasons, If men would exercise their wi^s in
ye book of God, as Heb. 5. 14. they should then be able without premeditatio^
before hand to put to silence any adversary whatsoever, according to Luke. 21.
14. 15. Examples you have of Steven in Acts. 7. and diverse others Psalm. 90.
12.
whereby they might so foil Satan and his ministers, as that they would be
ashamed, and afraid to offer combat with them any more. So that if men would
consider with them selves, how short the time of their abode is here, and also
how uncertain: and so learn with Moses to pray unto the Lord, that it would
please him to teach them to number these their few days aright, that so they
might apply their hearts unto wisdom: No doubt but they should attain unto
plenty thereof. For the Lord has so promised. But the Devil has so
bewitched men, and so blinded them, and bears such sway with them, that they
had rather spend a whole year, yea all their life time, in those vain
things, which tend to none other end, then to draw them unto him, who
seeks for them, which is the Devil: then they would bestow one hour, yea
one minute of an hour, in those things that should tend to their salvation,
and to the pleasing of their master and Savior Christ: so that in them is
fulfilled the saying of the Apostle: For in the last days says he, Men shall
be lovers of pleasures more 2. Tim. 3. 4.
then lovers of God. And notwithstanding our Savior does daily call and seek
for them, even to shroude them as the Hen would do her Chickens, yet will
they not come under Math. 23. 37.
the covert of his wings for ought that he can do: but think it is enough, if
they can say (as commonly they do) I believe in Christ, and hope to be saved
by him as well as you, although I take no such pains to get this great
knowledge: for what need I so to do? For is it not said, He that believes in
him shall never perish, but have eternal life? Which is true in deed, if
they knew what they spoke: but they must well know, it is not enough to speak
the bare words, for so much one might make a Parrat to do: but their belief
must be settled upon him, according to the testimony which Moses and the
Prophets have given of him: that so they may say with Peter, We believe, and
also know, John. 6. 69.
that thou art the Christ the Son of the living God: therefore this speech of
theirs does import nothing else, but even to contemn Christ: so, for men to
content them selves with slothfulnes. And therefore the holy Ghost does give
unto such a marvelous great reproof, saying: O you foolyshe, Pro. 1. 22.
how long will you love foolyshnes: and you skornefull, how long will you hate
knowledge? So that by this their hating of knowledge, it may well appear they
are none of Christ's, but are of that wicked sort, who, according as the
Prophet says, have utterly left of to understand, and who in no wise Psalm.
36. 3.
regard to have knowledge. Therefore in any case see that Pro. 29. 7.
you for your parts always remember what the holy Ghost commands you to
beware of: that is, That you be not like Psalm. 32. 9.
the Horse and Mule, which have no understanding, whose mouths are bound up
with byt and bridle: but that you be of that sort, whose mouths are always
open to speak of Psalm. 37. 30.
wisdom, and whose ^oonges are ever ready to talk of judgment. So that by
this it may well appear, that it is not enough for a true Christian to content
him self with a few sentences of Christ, and so think he has enough: but he
that professes him self to be a scholar in the school of Chris^e, must have
a woonderfully desire to learn Christ, even so far as that he may dwell in
his heart most plenteously in all Colo. 3. 16.
wisdom, whereby he may be able to admonish him self in all spiritual
things, as the Apostle says: yea he must desire and thirst after the word of
God, even as the Heart does after the water brooks: that when he comes
thereunto, he may so drink, as that he may be filled with all fulness Ephe. 3.
19. Colo. 1. 10. and Ephe. 4. 15. Ephe. 3. 18. 19.
of God: Yea he must continually desire to be increasyng in the knowledge of
God, that if it be possible for him, he may be able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the breadeth, and length, and deapth, and highth of the glory
that we shall receive by Christ: Yea and to know his love toward us, which
in deed passes all knowledge, as the Apostle says. So that in no wise must
we stand still, but every one must go on forward, either by hearing of
others, or readyng therein him self, even in the unity of faith, to the
knowledge Ephe. 4. 13.
of the Son of God, until he become a perfect man in Jesus Christ. For we
must not in any wise remain as Ephe. 4. 14. and Hebr. 13. 9.
children, waueryng and ready to be carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the deceyte of men, as greatly it is to be lamented we are now
adays: but we must follow Ephe. 4. 15.
the truth in love, and in all things grow up unto him which is the head:
that is Christ. For not to go on forward in religion, is to go backward,
because Satan draws most strongly Ierem. 7. 24. and 9. 3.
that way, and so to remain in our former folly, and contemptuously to cast
off the word of God: yea whatsoever he be, pretend he never so much zeal,
and show of holiness: Yet if his chiefest care be not continually to be
increasing in the knowledge of Christ, he does nothing else but say in his As
Job speaks of them. Job. 2^. 14. 15.
heart unto God: Depart from me, for I desire not the knowledge of thy ways.
For the which cause, as you shall see anon, the wrath of God has been extended
on all the world, even to the utter excluding of them from his presence, and
casting off from their countries. For what thing can men do to please the Lord,
when that his word of them shall be rejected? It is not then an outward show
of foolyshe zeal or mortification, Micah. 6. 6. 7. 8
that the Lord will like of. No, although the Papist do for his part in never
so great zeal, afflict his body either by whypping, or lanching the flesh
with knives until the blood come forth, like unto Baalles Priests, or in
fasting Esa. 29 9. to. 14
forty days together, like foolysh Apes in imitation, or in dropping never
so many prayers, according to the number of his Beads, or in vowing single
life, or in running on pilgrimage, or in punishing the body in what sort so
ever he will: which things in deed have a show of wisdom in them, as the
Apostle says, even in this their voluntary religion, and Colo. 2. 23.
humblenes of mind, and in not sparing the body: but yet they shall find in
the end, that all this is but as an abhomi^ation to the Lord. And why? Because
they have rejected Acoording as the Scribes and Pharisees had done, and
therefore they are worthy of the like condemn^tion that befell them, and also
their foolysh hearts to continue full of darkness, as theirs did and still does.
the word of God, and overthrown the principles thereof, and established in
stead of it the doctrines and precepts of men. And so their fear toward
God is taught by the precepts of men, according as the Prophet Esai speaks:
and also as those nations placed in Samaria, of whom it is said: They feared
the Lord, but served their Images also: Even so, I say, do the Papists. And
therefore notwithstanding all their blind zeal, it must be said of them as of
the other, that is, they neither fear God, nor do any thing after his
commandementes: and therefore whatsoever they do, it must needs be an
abomination Esai. 29. 13. 2. King. 17. 33 to the end.
to the Lord. Or if the Protestant pretend never so great show of religion in
his kind, or never so great a zeal: yet unless it be seasoned with the true
knowledge of Christ, none of all this will the Lord regard, or therewithal be
pleased. For when his word is not delighted and esteemed as it ought to be,
although we now and then do the things that it requires: yet are they not
accepted, because his word was not our rule to square them by. For to what
purpose, says the Lord, do you bring unto me Incense from Sheba, Ierem. 6. 20.
and sweet Calamus from a far country? your burnt offeringes are not
pleasant in my sight, neither are your sacrifices sweet unto me, says the
Lord. And why? Because they had rejected the word of the Lord, therefore did
these their holy ^ere. 6. 10. 11. 19. ^0.
actions turn unto an abomination. So that you see that who so ever he be,
read, or read not, have he time, or have he not, no excuse shall serve him,
to be ignorant in the word Romans 2. 12.
of God, and so of Christ. For the Lord that knows best what is good and
fit for man, knew well enough in the beginning, that when he appointed but
one day of seven to be Genesis 2. 2 3.
sauctified unto his glory, that that was enough to make man void of all
excuse. And why? Because that if they would bestow but that one day of seven,
according as he has commanded, that is, not in any respect to do their own
wills, Esai. 5 8. 13. and Exodus. 20. 8. 9. 10.
or to follow their own affairs, no nor so much as to speak one vain word:
but to call the Sabbath a delight to consecrate it as glorious unto the Lord:
They might I say, if they would bestow it in this sort, soon learn by his
holy word to honor him with such worship as he requires: and also to know
a right how Christ is JEHOVAH their God, who Exodus 20. 1. 2. and. 1. John. 5.
20. and Leuit. 26. 4. 45. and Dani. 9. 23. to the end. and Apoc. 5. 9. and
Hebr. 2. 14. 1^ Ephe. 2. 3. John. 17. 3.
brought them not only from the bondage and slavery of ^gypt, Babell* or Rome,
but also from the bondage and thraldom of hell and death. But since it is so,
that all men as they are borne of Adam, are the children of wrath, and still
remain in this captivity: and seeing there is no means neither in heaven nor
earth, to redeem them thence but only by Christ: and he likewise not beneficial
unto any, but such as know him aright by his holy word: And having most
graciously bestowed this his holy word upon us, and we like most brutyshe
beasts, having as yet refused the same, and taken no delyght at all therein:
let us harken what he says unto us. Unto Iere. 6. 10.
whom shall I speak and admonish, says the Lord, that they may hear?
Behold, their cares are uncircumcised, and they can not hearken: behold the
word of the Lord is unto them as a reproach, and they have no delight at all
therein. For the Pastores, they are become as beasts, and have not sought the
Jeremy. 10. 21.
Lord, therefore have they none understanding: And the wise Jeremy. 8. 9.
men of the world, they are ashamed of the word of God: Lo, says the Lord.
They have rejected the word of the Lord, and therefore what wisdom can there
be in them: And the people Hosea. 4. 6.
likewise, they are spoiled for lack of knowledge, and have also refused it.
Therefore hear O earth, says the Lord, Ierem. 6. 19. and Hosea. 4. 6.
I will cause a Plague to come upon this people, even the fruit of their own
imaginations, and because they have refused knowledge, I will also refuse them:
and as they have not taken heed unto my word, but cast it off, even so will I
cast off them. Wherefore seeing that the Lord has commanded the earth to
hear, what a controversy he has therewith, and ever more has had, and only
for the contempt and rejecting of his holy word: and we as full of impiety in
that kind, as ever any Nation was: My purpose is to bring to your remembrance
his judgments of old, and to lay them Psalm. 119. 30 52.
before your eyes, as the Prophet says he did before his: to the end that who
so is wise amongst you (as says the same Prophet) Psalm. 107. 43
may observe and understand these things: and also behold with the Apostle,
both the loving kindness, and the severity Roman. 11. 22.
of the Lord: His loving kindness toward all those that have delighted in his
holy word, and by faith embraced his couenantes therein contained, and with
willingness obeyed his commandementes: and his severity against all those that
have rebelled against him, and the same. That so when you have heard and seen
how severe a Judge the Lord is, you may with all speed (even while it is
called To day) get you to the Hebr. 3. 7. 8. and Esai. 55. 6.
Book of God: that so you may hear his voice, and to plough up the fallowe
ground of your heart: that so that immortal Jeremy. 4. 4. and Hosea 10. 12. 1.
Pet. 1. 23.
seed of the word of God may take such deep root therein, as that it may
beget you anew even to the bringing forth of fruit, not only of thyrty, or
sixty fold, but also even Math. 13. 23.
of a full hundredth. The which the Lord for his mercies sake, grant unto us
every one.

Amen.
The Judgments of God upon the Angels that sinned, and likewise upon our
first Parents, and the rest of the old world.
SO far forth as the Scripture speaks of Angels, or of other creatures,
or of any other matter else whatsoever, so far may we be bold to speak, and
not further: For the hid things belong Deutro. 29. 29.
unto the Lord, but the revealed things belong unto us and our children for
ever, says Moses. First then for those Angels, which through rebellion against
the Lord began to exalt them selves, not being contented with their first
estate, but grudging thereat, Jude. 6. and 1.* Pet. 24. and Job. 4. 18.
and also repining at the glorious estate of Mankind, and so leaving their
own habitation and calling: them the Lord has not spared, but cast them down
even into the bottomless pit of Hell, and has delivered them into cheynes of
darkness to be kept unto damnation, even unto the Judgment of the great and
terrible day of the Lord. Again, our first Parents whom the Lord had
created in so glorious an estate, Gene. 1. 26. 27.
even after his own image and lykenes, and given them rule over the works of
his hands, and dominion and Lordshyp over all his creatures, yet full sone
forgate they his precepts, and cast off his commandments: Wherefore he
suffered not them to continue in this their first honor, but presently took
he away even all their glory: and so they became like Psalm. 49. 12. 20
unto the Beasts that peryshe. And through that one offense Romans 5. 12. to the
end.
of theirs sin entered into the world, and death by sin: which death went
over all men, for as much as all men have sinned: for by that one offense the
fault came on all men, to their utter condemnation. And Kain their eldest Son
1. John. 3. 12.
who was of the wicked, even that seed of the Serpent, that Genesis 3. 15.
should begin to bruise the heel of the seed of the woman, he I say, made
plain their corruption: for he continued in striving against the Lord, and
despised the covenant of salvation pronounced to his father Adam in Paradise:
the which Genesis 3. 15.
cou^nant he was taught as well as his brother Abell, and yet would he not
embrace the same by faith, as his brother did: but made a mock thereat, and
trod under foot the Son of God: So that this his great wickedness by the
event appeared, in that he murdered his own brother, whereby he Gen 4. 8.
showed himself to be of his Father the Devil, who as our Savior says, was
a murderer from the beginning: that is John. 8. 44.
to say, from the very first day of Adam his creation: for the which cause this
Ka^n had an open curse, and was excommunicated Genesis 4. 11. to 15.
from the presence of the Lord, even as a vacabonde and a runnagate given over
to his own ways. His wicked posterity, as rotten branches of an evil
ro^te, hold on in the Genesis 4. 19. 23. 24.
like ungodly dealings and evil sayings: Unto whom Henoch the seventh from
Adam prophesied, saying. Behold Jude. 14. 15.
you wicked ones, the Lord comes with thousands of his Sainc^s to give
judgment against al men, and to rebuke all the ungodly amongst them of all
their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their
cruel speakings, which wicked sinners have spoken against the Lord. Now if
you will know what they said, the holy Ghost does tell you, how that they said
unto God, Depart from us, for Job. 22. 17. 18.
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: and likewise they asked what the
almighty cold do for them, notwithstanding he had filled their houses with
all good things. Yea and moreover, though Noe were a Preacher of righteousness
2. Pet. 2. 5. and Gene^is. 6. 3. and Hebr. 11. 7.
unto these wicked ones, by the space of six score years, all which time he
prepared himself to the making of the Arc, through the which he condemned the
whole world: yet notwithstanding they made but a floute of the threatninges of
the Lord, saying: Where is the promise of his coming: for 2. Pet. 3. 4. 5. 6.
ever since the fathers died, all things continue alike from the beginning of
the creation. And moreover, tush say they, let us eat, and drink, and take
our pleasure: Let us marry, Math. 24. 37. 38. 39.
and give in marriage: Let us build our houses huge and high and so forth. And
thus were these wicked wretches willingly ignorant, even unto the very day that
Noe went into the Arc, and would not know how that the same word, 2. Pet. 3.
5. 6. and Genesis 1. 9.
which in the begeinning caused the waters to uncover the earth, might command
them to ouerflow the same again. But yet they found it most true: for in the
seventh age of this Genesis 4. 1. 17. to. 23.
wicked generation, the wrath of the Lord was well known amongst the sons of
men: for they were cut down before Job. 22. 16.
the time, and their foundation was as a River that ouerflowed. 2. Pet. 2. 5.
So that he spared not this old world, which now You may cast these years
in Genesis 5. and. 7. Chapters.
had continued one thousand six hundred fifty and six years, but only
saved Noe with seven more of his family, and brought in the flood upon the
rest of the world of the ungodly: yea he commanded the fountains of the
great deep to Genesis 7. 11.
be broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened, so that all the high
mountains that were under the whole heaven were covered, because that the
wickedness of man was Genesis 6. 5.
great on earth, and all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were
only evil continually. And therefore did the Lord smite the earth with the
rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips did he destroy the wicked:
Yea he made them to perish as though they had been doung: so that they which
had seen them, might say, where are they now? But if you will know what is
become of their souls, Saint ^. Pet. 3. 19. 20
Peter will tell you, how that they are now in prison, that is, in hell, for
disobeying the spirit of Christ, who then preached unto them by the mouth of
Noe, while the Arc was in making. Again, if you will know how they might know
that the spirit of Christ did so: the answer is, that even the very same
Gospel that was preached unto Adam and Eve in Paradise: and afterward to
Abell, to Seth, and the rest of the godly, was also preached unto them. And
this preaching was, that the Seed of the woman should break Genesis 3. 15.
the head of the Serpent: which notwithstanding being but a very short Sermon,
yet was it so effectall, and so full of matter, as that all the whole book of
God is no more then that. But as the preaching of this Gospel was a savor of
life unto life, to all those that laid hold thereon, even so was it also a
savor of death unto death, to all those that rejected the same. So that for
this first age, you see both the loving kindness, and the seucritie of the
Lord.

The judgments of God on Chams posterity, as also on their confederats until
the giving of the Law.
NOtwithstanding now the former desolation of all things breathing on earth,
the which a man would think should have been a terror unto men for ever
after, yet full soon do they forget it: For an As you may cast it in Gene. 11.
10. to. 20. and Gene. 10. 25. Genesis 10. 6. to 11. and Genesis 11. 1. to. 10. Micah.
5. 6. Genesis 9. 8. to. 18 Gene. 9. 26. Genesis ^1. 1. to 10.
hundredth and about some thirty years after the flood, in the days of Peleg,
do the posterity of Cham with their adherents, revive the old impiety of
Kain, and his wicked race, in that they also despise the covenants of God, and
the blessing pronounced unto Sem: And so go about to buyld a City and a
Tower, whose top (as they thought) should reach unto heaven, whereby they might
get unto them selves a Sem, or name: But full soon was the holy Trinity aware
of this their wicked intent, and so he came down from heaven in his fierce
wrath, to confound their most foolish devices: and also to scatter them from
thence over the whole earth. And therefore the name of it was called Babell, or
Confusion, because the Lord did there confound the language of all the earth:
so that they were not only cut from the holy Language of Sem, but also from
the religion and true worship of the blessed God of Sem, the which continued in
his tents. Again, in the These. 10. you may reckon in Gene. 11. from the. 10.
to. 27.
tenth age after the flood, in the days of Abraham, the wickedness of those
five Cities in Canaan (as Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, These five cities are cy^ed
together in Genesis 14. 2.
Zeboiim, and Zoar) brake out into such filthiness, as that the stincke
thereof ascended up into heaven, and cried for vengeance to be powered upon
them. And notwithstanding Gene 18. 17. to the end.
the Lord being merciful, and was entreated to have spared them for ten^e
righteous men their sakes, yet could they not therein be found: so that their
sins being so great and grievous in the sight of GOD, his great anger was so
kindled against them, that in his fierce wrath he overthrew them, and turned
four of them into ashes, and condemned Deutro. 29. 23. 2. Pet. 2. 6.
them, and made them an e^sample of eternal fire unto all ages that afterward
should live ungodly: So that here the curse of Noe upon Cham extending to
Canaan, took Genesis 9. 22. 24. 25. 27.
effect on these some part of his wicked branches. Likewise in the seventh age
from Abraham, in the days of Moses, These seven ages you shall find thus. Genesis
21. 5 and 25. 26. and. 29 34. and. 46. 11. and Exodus 6. 18. 20.
the wrath of the Lord was manifested also in most vehement sort in Egypt even
in that land of cursed Cham, upon that proud Pharaoh and his country: the
which were other branches even of Cham himself that wicked root: I say the
wrath of the Lord was manifested upon them in most vehement Exodus 3. Psalm. 78.
51. and 105. 23. By these places you may see that Egypt was the land of Cham.
Exodus 7. 19. and 8. 6. 16. 17. 24. and 9. 3. 10. 23. and 10. 13. 22. and. 12.
29. and 14. ^. 28. Exodus 5. 2. 9. Exo. 15. 6. 7. 8.
sort, by ten several plague^ bestowed upon man and beast, and at last
Pharaoh and all his host overwhelmed in the Red Sea. For says he unto Moses
concerning the Lord: Who is he that I should hear his voice, and let Israel
go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go: neither do I regard
his words by you spoken, for they are but vain. But the right hand of the
glorious Lord ouerthrewe these rebellious treatours, which in this sort rose
against him, and sent forth his wrath, which consumed them as the stubble: and
also by the blast of his Nosethrils the waters were gathered, and the floods
stood still as an heap: yea, the depthes congealed together in the heart of
the Sea, to entice them in: Exodus 15. 5. and Psalm. 106. 11.
but presently the waters covered them, and they sancke to the bottom as a
stone. And why so? because indeed they had forsaken the hope of Israel, even
that most precious fountain ^ere. 17. 1^.
of living waters. But he brought forth them his chosen Israel, through the
midst of the Sea on dry ground, and Exodus 14. 19.
made the waters unto them a wall both on the one side, and on the other. So
that here you may see again, both the loving kindness, and the severity of
the Lord: his loving kindness on Sem and his posterity, as also on all others
that held the same faith: His most severe severity on Cham and his posterity,
as also on all other their confederats. Now if you will know the chief cause
why these horrible plagues befell them: the answer is, because they regarded
not the preaching of the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. For as
he was made the author of eternal salvation unto all Hebr. 5. 9.
them that did believe in him, and obey him, even so is it said, John. 3. 36.
that he that believes not in ye Son of God, nor gives due obedience unto
him, shall never see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. But the very
same Gospel that was preached unto Sem, ^aphet, and their posterity, was also
preached unto Cham and his posterity. Now if you will know again what this
preaching was: it was no more but even this: Blessed be the Lord God of Sem.
And ten ages after that, Genesis 9. 26.
an other, In thy seed O Abraham shall all the nations of Genesis 12. 3^.
the earth be blessed. Now out of all doubt two meruellous short Sermons as
possible can be heard, and yet so full of virtue and grace, that whosoever
wroung out the juice thereof, and applied it to his sores, found everlasting
life thereby: but he that trod them under foot, a biting Serpent, whose sting
was unto eternal death and destruction.

The judgments of God upon the Israelits, in the time of their being in the
wilderness, and also upon their successors, unto the time of Samuel and Saul.
THus you see then the loving kindness of the Lord toward the Israelites, the
seed of Abraham, the seed of Sem, in that he delivered Ierem. 11. 4.
Exodus. 20. 2.
them from the Iron furnace, the land of Egypt, the house of bondage,
according to his promise made unto Abram: which was, That they should Genesis 15.
13. 14 16.
be strangers in a land that was not theris, where they should be afflicted
and evil entreated for the space of four hundredth years: But in the end he
would judge that nation, and bring them again to the land of Canaan in the
These 4. were Rohath, Amra^, Aaron, and Eliazar, for Rohath was one of y^. 70.
that went down unto Egypt, as you may see in Genesis. 46. and Elyazar is one
that parted the land of Canaan, as you may see in Joshua. 14. 1.
fourth generation: even so it came to pass. For all the host of Israel came
out of the land of Egypt by the blood of a Lamb, figuring the seed that was
promised to Abraham, even the self same day four hundredth and thirty years
before, by whose blood they were delivered from that spiritual Pharaoh the
Devil. Yet notwithstanding all this, this grudging Israel the sons of
Jacob, the seed of Abraham, who had seen the meruellous works of God in the
land of Exodus 12. Genesis 12. 3. Gala. 3. 16. 17. Psalm. 78. 12. 43. Exodus 19. 4.
Exodus 13. 21. and Nehe. 9. 12. Exodus 19. 18. and Nehe. 9. 13. to 16.
Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan: and how he had brought them
thence, as upon the wings of an Eagle: and how he went before them by day in
a pyller of a cloud, to lead them the way, and by night in a pyller of fire,
to give them light: and how he came down upon mount Sina, and spoke unto them
from heaven, and gave unto them right judgments, and true laws, ordinances,
and good commandments, and declared unto them his holy Sabothes, Exo. 16. 15.
and Nehe. 9. 15. Exodus 17. 6. and Nehe. 9. 15.
and commanded them precepts, ordinances, and laws by the hand of Moses his
servant: and how he gave them bread from heaven for their hunger, and brought
forth water for them out of the rock for their thirst: and how he rayned
flesh Exodus 16. 13. 15. and Psalm. 78. 27.
upon them as dust, and fethered foul as the sand of the Sea: and how he
suffered them to lack nothing, for their clothes Deuteronomy. 8. 4. and Nehe. 9. 21.
Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
waxed not old, and their feet swelled not: And all this he did to teach
them, that man lives not by bread only, but by Psalm. 78. 11. Psalm. 78. 4. and
Exo. 14. 11. 12 and 15. 23. 24. and 16. 2. 7. 8. and. 17 2. 6. and 32. 1. and
Number. 11. 4. 5. 6 and 14. 2. and 16. 13. 14. 41. and 21. 5.
every word that proceeds from him. Yet notwithstanding I say, all these
his great benefits bestowed upon them, full soon did they forget his noble
acts, and the wonderful works that he had showed them, and still they
rebelled against him: yea, full often did they provoke him in the wilderness,
and grieve him in the Desert: they made a Calfe in Horeb, and woorshyped the
molten Image: and thus they turned their glory into the similitude of a Calfe
that eats Exodus 32. 4. and Psalm. 106. 10. 20
Hay. Wherefore his wrath was so greatly kindled against Psalm. 106. 18.
Deutr. 1. 32. and Number. 13. 32. 33 and. 14. 11.
them, that the fire burnt up the wicked: yea, they provoked him so grievously
in misbeleeuyng still his word, that he swore in his wrath, that only two of
six Number. 14. 28. to 36. and Psalm. 95. 8. to the end.
hundredth thousand should enter into his rest, which by the time that forty
years was expired in the Wilderness, their children whom they had said should
be a pray for the Numb. 14. 3.
enemy, they I say, saw the performaunce of this oath: For they saw this
wicked company consumed, and their Carkeises Numb. 14. 35. and Io^hua. 5. 6.
overthrown in the Wilderness. So that not one of the Numb. 26. 65.
six hundredth thousand was left, save Caleb the son of Iephunneh and Joshua
the son of Nun. Here then might you pause a little, and consider with your
self of the ingratitude of man, and how that if the Lord should deal with us
according to our deserts, we should be sure to find, that we should deserve
no better then here you see: because as the Apostle says, these men are even
as very stampes of our own natures. But because I would not have you to tarry
in this Book, I will proceed to the rest, that when you have heard all, you
may consider the drynes of your own soul, and so get you with all speed to
the fountain it self, wherein you may drink, if you will, even your fill of
those waters of life, the which sprang out of the Rock that here followed 1.
Cor. 10. 4.
them: and also learn to avoid that unwholesome pit of mistrust, the which
became unto them their only poison. Joshua. 3. and. 4. Chap. and Act. 7. 45.
Again then, when as now it had pleased the Lord to bring in the younger sort
(as all under twenty by Joshua or Jesus) even into the borders of his
Sanctuary, and to the holy Psalm. 78. 54. 35
Mountain, which his right hand had purchased (that so he Gene. 12. 7. and 13.
14. 15. 16. and 26. 4. and. 28. 13. 14.
might perform his promise made unto their fathers) and had cast out the
Heathen before them, and given them their possessions: and likewise had filled
them with all good Psalm. 105. 44. Nehem. 9. 25. Deutr. 9. 4. to the end.
things in great abundance, although not of their own deserts Iwis, but
through his great goodness: Yet notwithstanding they also became disobedient,
and rebelled against Nehe. 9. 26. and Judge. 2. 10. to 15.
the Lord, and cast his heavenly Laws behind their backs: yea they tempted
and provoked him, and kept not his testimonies, Psalm. 78 56. 57
but turned back, and dealt falsely like unto their fathers: yea they turned
even like unto a deceitful Bow: So that he gave them unto the hands of most
cruel oppessours, Judge. 2. 14. Judge. 3. 8. 14. and. 4. 2. and 6. 1. and 10. 7.
8. and. 13. 1.
that greatly vexed them, as unto the Aramites, Moabites, Canaanites,
Midianites, Ammonites, and the Philistimes. Yea they provoked him to anger in
such sort with their high places, and moved him to wrath with their graven
P^alm. 78. 58.
Images, that in the end he greatly abhorred Israel, even so far, as that in
the days of Ely he forsook the habitation 1. Sam. 4. 18. to the end. P^alm.
78. 60. 61. 62.
of Shilo, even the Tabernacle where he dwelled amongst them: and so he
delivered his power (the Arc so called) into captivity, and his beauty into
the enemies hands: Yea he gave up his people to the sword, and was marvelous
angry with his own inheritance. For six times now since they came into the
Land, had the Lord suffered them to be most cruelly oppressed by the a
forenamed: So that here we may say again: O behold both the loving kindness,
and the severity of the Lord. His loving kindness toward Israel, while they
took good heed unto the covenant that he the Lord their God made with them:
and his severity when so ever they began to tempt Christ, in not obeying his
voice, according 1. Cor. 10. 9. Exodus 23. 20. 21.
as the Lord had told them. Now if you will know in what sort Christ was
preached unto them, that they were thus destroyed for not obeying his voice:
The answer is, even in as plentiful sort as the Apostles, and the rest of the
Jews in our Saviors time had, for so says the Apostle in these words: As
the Gospel was preached unto us, even so Hebre. 4. 2.
was it also unto them. Now in this place he has only relation unto the
Hebrews, in the time of their being in the Wilderness: but in the same sort
that he was preached unto them, who left their carkeises there, was he also
preached unto the younger sort that went into the Land: and in like manner to
their successors for the first seven Jubilees, or three hundredth and fyfty
years: the which I have here joined together as one speech. So that it will
not be amiss, if we consider here in what sort Christ was preached unto these
Hebrews or Israelites of both these times. First then they were to consider
with them selves while they were in Egypt, Eze^. 20. ^. Gen 1. 2. 3 chap
and there served Idols, that they were not bond slaves for a time only in
body unto Pharaoh, but they were also to look back unto their first father
Adam his story: that so they might see how they were bond slaves both in body
and soul unto the spiritual Pharaoh the Devil. Now if you ask how they
might know this, seeing those Books of Moses which should show it were not
written, till they came into the Wilderness: The answer is: they might, and
also did As you may cast in Genesis 11. 10. to. 27. but when you come at the. 26.
verse, where it is said, Terahat. 70. Y. begat Abram. you must cast Terah to
be. 130 for so he was, as you may proueby these places.
know it very will: for you shall understand, that Adam he lives As you may
cast your self in Genesis 5.
two hundredth forty three years with Methusalah to teach him: Methusalah he
lives one hundredth wanting but two years with Sem to teach him: Sem he lives
unto the As you may cast your self in Genesis 5. 25. 26. 27. 32. and 6. 6. and
11. 10. 11.
hundredth and fifty year of Abraham's life to teach him: Abraham he lives to
teach his own son Isaak, and also Jacob his graundchylde: Jacob he lives in
Egypt seventeen years, and there dies: and as he foretold his sons at his
death of their redemption by Christ, and also of which of them Genesis 11. 32. and
12. 4. and Acts 7. 4.
Christ should come: even so you may be sure he would, and also had taught them
of the creation, and the story of their first Abram was an. 100. y. old when
Isaak was borne Genesis 21. 5 and lives. 75. y. after. Genesis 25. 7 And Isaak at.
60 y. begat Jacob Genesis 25. 26. so that Abram might teach Jacob. 15. years.
father Adam, and what intolerable bondage both of body and soul by his
means they were brought unto: that so they might receive such comfort, as they
ought, of their redemption by Christ. And to put you out of all doubt that they
were thus taught before the law, you have Job and those that dispute with him
for an example: for those matters fell out before Moses wrote the law, and the
story of the creation, and yet you see how plentiful they are in the handling
of ye creation, and likewise of the corruption which they had by Adams fall:
and For the time that Jacob lived in Egypt you may read Gen 47. 28.
also how Job for his part saw Christ in most clear sort. For notwithstanding
all the assaults of Satan, yet was he fully assured that his redeemer lived,
and that he should see him with his own eyes, though worms destroyed that
tabernacle Genesis 49. 8. to 13.
which he then carried about him: so that by these men you may see how
careful Abraham was (according as the Lord Job. 4. 17. to the end, and 9. 20.
and 31. 33. and. 19 23. to. 28. Gnn. 18. 19.
gives commendation of him) to teach his sons the knowledge of the Lord. For
of him by Keturah (as most like it is) comes Job: and as he was careful to
teach his sons he had by her, both of their captivity by Adam, and
redemption by Christ: so you may be sure he was as careful to teach his other
sons by Sarah, which are those of whom we now speak. So then these
Israelites being thus taught as well of the captivity by Adam, as of the
redemption by Christ, as of nec^ssitie so it must be, they were I say to
consider with them selves, that they were not only in bondage of body for a
time unto Pharaoh: but also in most intolerable bondage of body and soul unto
that spiritual Pharaoh the devil: and that not for four hundredth years, but
eternally, unless they had some one to redeem them thence. So that having well
considered with themselves of this double bondage and captivity, they were
also as well to consider and know being come out of Egypt, that as they were
delivered from that outward bondage and destroyer by the blood of a silly poor
lamb, even so should Exodus 12. John. 1. 2^. Heb. 2. 14. 15. and 9. 13. 14. 15
1. Pet. 1. 18. 19 20. and Reave. 1. 5 and. 5. 8 to the end. and. 1. Cor. 5. 7.
they be delivered from that spiritual bondage, and destroying destroyer the
devil, by the blood of Jesus Christ, as of that immaculate lamb of God, which
was slain from the beginning of the world: that is to say, from the very day
of their father Adams his creation to recover then his fall. Now if you ask how
they might know that this lamb did signify Christ: the answer is, very well:
for many of them did know it, and all the rest might, and ought to have known
as well: for if they had but thought upon one sermon made to their father
Abraham, Genesis 12. 3. and Exodus 12. 40. 41. and Gal. 3. 16. 17.
even the very self and same day four hundredth and thirty y^eres before,
they might have found therein a seed promised, in whom all the nations of the
earth (if they would put their trust in him) should be blessed. And to make the
matter more plain, that this lamb did signify Christ that seed then
promised, says Moses unto them: It is a day to be kept holy to Exodus (...).
41. 42.
the Lord, because he brought them out of the land of Egypt: This is that day
of the Lord, says he, Which all ye children of Israel mu^t keep throughout al
their generations: And why* Even to put them still in remembrance not only of
their outward, but also of their spiritual redemption: and for this Exodus, 13.
1. to 17.
cause were the fathers bound to teach their children the use hereof. For
unless they saw the spiri^uall meaning herein, as well as the outward, it
profited nothing: because the veil that covered Moses face that they could
not behold the brightness thereof, remained also over their hearts, and so they
went to eternal destruction. But that Moses taught this matter plainly, that
Christ that Lamb of God should suffer, it is manifest: for so says the
Apostle. Now it Act. 26. 22. 23
must needs be that herein it is to be considered, for you see he appoynteth
this day to be observed throughout their generations: and he also tells them,
that when they shall neglect their Sabaothes, and fall from the Lord, he will
carry them into their enemies Land, and they shall be there until their own
Land have enjoyed her Sabaothes. But if there they be humbled, and turn unto
the Lord their God, then will he remember his covenant of old made unto their
father Abram: which is even this, by the which he brought them from the land of
Egypt. So that if you cons^r the ninth of Daniell with the twenty six of
Leuiticus, you shall see how Moses saw Christ plainly to be that Lamb of
God that should be killed: that so he might confirm this covenant for Genesis 12.
3. and 17. 1. to the end. and. 26. 4. and. 28. 13. 14.
the Many of all nations that would trust herein: even this covenant of old
made unto Abraham, to Isaak, and to Jacob, and there does the Angel Gabriel
tell Daniel, even the * From the time that y^ commandment came forth to
return the Jews from Babell, unto the hour of Christ his death is. 70.
seuens, or four hundredth and nintie years. Danie. 9. 21. to the end. U^tyll
whi^he hour the Jews could have no power to kill Christ, as y^u may see in
Luke 22. 53. 54. and John. 8. 20. and 11. 23.
very year, week, day, and hour, of the day when Christ the King the most
holy that Lamb of God should be killed: which was the end and sum of all
Moses sactifices and ceremonies: and therefore they should cease, according
as the Angel says, when Christ should perform this: the which fell out
according to Gods decree upon the very same day that the Lamb we now speak of
was killed. And likewise that the promise was made to Abram: and also that the
commandment came forth for the Jews to return from Babell: and therefore
no marvel, though Moses tell them it is a wonderful day, yea such a day, as
is to be obscru^d throughout their generations. So that if they should have
had no more teaching but only this, to have led them unto Christ, they might
have seen him most clecrely herein, and had been enough to have made them
void of all excuse. But many and manifold ways besides this, was Christ
preached unto them, as in all other their bloody sacrifices: For Leuit. 16.
and Numb. 19. and Hebre. 9.
they might well know, that notwithstanding the blood of bulls, and of
goats, and the ashes of an heifer being sprinkled, sanctified, as touching
the purifiyng of the flesh: yet was it not able, be it never so often
^princkled, to purge and make clean their consciences: and therefore they were
driven to look for one to come, who through his eternal spirit would offer
himself without spot to God: that so he might purge their consciences from
dead works, to serve the living Lord. P^al. 40. 6. to 11. and Heb. 10. 5. to.
11.
Again, they might well know it was neither burnt offering, nor sin offering,
that the Lord required or delighted in: For what great pleasure could it be
unto the Lord to have the body of a poor beast wholly burnt: and therefore
they were driven to look for one to come, who would fully do the will of God,
and in whose heart his whole law should fully rest: and who by offering his
own body once for all, should run through all the fire of afflictions and
torments due unto man. Leuit. 16. 5. 7. 8 9. 10. 20. 21. 22 and Esai. 53. 4. 5.
6. 10. 11. 12. and Heb. 9. 1. to the end.
Again, he was preached unto them by ye escape Goat, for they might well know
it was not the back of a poor goat that could so carry away their sins,
as never to be burdensome again upon their own backs: and therefore they
were driven to look for one to come, who should be able, being cast down with
the burden thereof, to raise himself up again, and to carry them so clean
away upon his back, as that their Exodus 13. 21. John. 1. 8. 9. and Exodus 23.
20. to 24.
own backs should never be troubled again with the weight thereof.
Furthermore, he was preached unto them by the cloud and pillar of fire in the
wilderness: for they might well know that he was that pillar that gave them
the true light, and also that cloud that led them the right way. Again, Exodus
17. 6. and Number. 20. 8. to 12. and Exo. 16. 15. and 1. Cori. 10. 3. 4. and John.
6. 31. to the end, and ^ohn. 4. 13. 14.
he was preached unto them by the rock that followed them, and also by the
Manna: for they might well know that he was that spiritual rock, from whom
flow and gush out waters of life to all those that ask of him: and likewise
they might as well know, that he was that true Manna which came down from
heaven, of the which who so eats spiritually, shall live for ever. Again, he
was preached unto them by the brazen serpent, Number. 21. 6. to 10. and John. 3.
14. 15.
for they might well know it was he that must so ^e lifted up, as that he that
believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life. Again, he was
preached unto them by the high sacrificer his whole office, for they might well
know Exodus 28. and 29 and Leuit. 16. and Hebr. 4. 14. to the end, and 5. 6.
7. 8. 9. and 10. chapters.
that he was but a figure for the time present, because he was not suffered to
endure, by reason of death: and therefore they were driven to look for one to
come, which should not be made priest after the law of the carnal
commandment, but after the power of the endless life: that is, one who should
live for ever, after the order of Melchisedech, being made with an oath by him
who will not repent. Again, seeing there came no such perfection by the
gifts and sacrifices, which their high priest once a year offered, as to take
away either his own sins, or the sins of the people: but that every year
there must be a remembrance again: because of this imperfection, I say, they
were driven to look for one to come, who should be able perfectly to save
those that would come unto God by him, and who would in the end appear to take
away their sins by the sacrifice of his own body once made: and so enter
not into the holy places made with hands, but even into y^ very heaven it
self, to appear in the sight of God, and there to sit for ever to make
intereession for them: and by whose blood they might be bold to enter into that
holy place themselves, even by that new and living way which he would prepare
for them, not through the veil of silk, but even through the very veil of
his own flesh. And thus was Christ preached unto them by all the sacrifices
and ceremonies done according to the law: for they might well know, that they
were al but as shadows of those good things which were to come. Again, he
was preached unto them in most plain speeches, even in the first saying
delivered on the mountain: for whereas the Lord says unto them, I am Jehovah
thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
boudage: it must needs be in respect Exo. 20. ^.
of Christ, that he calls himself their God: for otherwise Hebr. 12. 29.
he is unto men even A consuming fire. Again, and so to conclude this speech,
Christ was preached unto them in most comfortable, and also most terrible sort,
as by the effect they found it. Behold, says the Lord, I send an angel before
thee, Exodus 23. 20. to the end.
to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have
prepared. Beware of him (says the Lord) and hear his voice, for I tell thee,
he will not spare your misdeedes, because my name is in him. But if thou
hearken unto his voice, and do all that I speak, then I will be an enemy
unto thine enemies, and will afflict them that afflict thee: for mine angel
shall go before thee, and bring thee into the land of the Ammorites, y^
Hethites, the Peresites, the Cananites, the Heuites, and the Iebuzites, and I
will destroy them: but if ye turn from me, and serve their Gods, surely it
shall be your destruction. Now here you see again in what plain words Christ
was preached unto the^, for they might well know that this Angel must needs be
Christ the son of God: and so the 1. Corin. 10. 9.
Apostle expounds it, even of this Angel of the covenant which Malachie also
speaks of. For who is the brightness Mala. 3. 1.
of the glory, or the^ engraven form, or the very character of Hebr. 1. 3.
the person of the father, but only Christ? In whom, as the Colo. 2. 9.
Apostle says, dwells all the fullness of the Godhead even corporally. Who
although he had not as yet taken the nature of man, yet he appears to Joshua
in the form of a man, to Joshua. 5. 13. to the end.
show that in time he so would be: and therefore does Joshua do worship unto
him, as acknowledging him to be his only God and savior Christ. So that by
this they might well know, it was not Jesus the captain son of Nun, that
conquered the land for them: but Jesus the son of God, even that noble
captain of the Lords host, who not only settled them in the rest of that
earthly Canaan, but also in the heavenly. So that if the six hundredth thousand
in the wilderness, and all the other, for the space of three hundredth and
fifty years in the land, had but considered well of these few sermons of
Christ (which I have here laid down amongst many more) their carkeises had
escaped the wrath of God, and they had entered into the rest of Canaan, which
through Hebr. 3. 19.
unbelief they did not: and also the other in the land had remained as Lords
over their enemies, where as now they Psalm. 106. 41.
became Lords over them: and therefore in any wise see that you always
remember the loving kindness and the severity of the Lord, and the chief
cause of both.

The judgments of God upon the house of Israel and Judah for the time of
seventy seuens of years, that is, from the time of Samuel and Saul, to the
captivity of Babylon.
THe Lord now being full of compassion, and not willing to hide the light of
his countenance over long from his people, causes such horrible plagues to
befall 1. Sam. 5. and. 6. chapters.
the Philistians while y^ Ark was amongst them, which was seven months, as
that full glad are they to be rid thereof: For as there can be no agreement
betwixt God and Belyall, no more 2. Corin. 6. 15. 16.
could there be betwixt the Arc of Gods presence and Dagon the God of the
Philistians. So that home again do they send it by a couple of milch kyne,
who have more wit to show the cause of all those plagues that befell them, then
all the priests of Dagon had: by these two kyne then to Bethshemesh the Ark of
God is brought. Where you have a most notable example of foolish zeal running
before wit, punished: for there does the Lord kill even of his own people
fifty 1. Sam. 6. 19.
thousand threescore and ten men, because they had looked into the Arc, which
was not lawful for them to do. So that even Numb. 4. 15. 20.
at this first entrance of Gods presence again amongst them, they had a good
warning (a man would think) to take better heed unto the book of God then
before they had done: that so they might hear his voice, and in hearing learn
thereby to do that which he commands, and no more: yet nevertheless they
rebelled still against the Lord, even as they had done ever since he brought
them from the land of Egypt. For notwithstanding all the great things the Lord
had done for them, as still to raise up deliuerers to deliver them from the
cruelty of their oppressors, which through their own idolatry befell them:
Notwithstanding all this I say, and many other his great benefits bestowed
upon them, they continued still in that great sin of infidelity and mistrust
of the Lord his goodness. Although he had often told them that so long as they
did worship him according to his holy will laid down in his word, he would
defend them from all their enemies round about: yet no sooner comes Nahash
the king of the children 1. Sam. 12. 12.
of Ammon against them, but they cry out upon Samuel, that they might have a
king forsooth, yea a king to reign over them, as al other nations had, when as
yet the Lord Jehovah of hoastes was their king. So that their wickedness, as ye
holy ghost records, was marvelous great herin, for they 1. Sam. 12. 17.
cast not away only Samuel and such other judges or deliuerers, 1. Sam. 8. 7.
but also the Lord himself, that he should not reign over them: wherefore
his wrath for this was so kindled against them, that he gave the^ a king
indeed, even according to their 1. Sam. 8. 7. to the end. Hose. 13. 11.
desire: but out of all doubt in his very great anger, and therefore took him
away in his sore displeasure: and so establishes his covenant with David, unto
whom the crown and kingdom did belong, as being a figure of Christ their king
even that true David, who should reign over them for evermore. Yet
notwithstanding all this, and although rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft,
and transgression is wickedness and idolatry, in the days of Rehoboam ten of
the tribes despise this 1. King. 12.
son of Ieshai of the tribe of Judah, from whence their glory Genesis 49. 8. to
13.
was to arise: and so became children of fornication in following Hose. 1. 2.
1. King. 12. 25. to the end.
the ways of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who erected two calves, and set the
one in Dan, and the other in Bethel, and made the people to confess that those
were their Gods that brought them out of y^ land of Egypt. And thus Ephraim
under whom is named the ten tribes, joined themselves unto Hose. 4. 17.
Idols, and so became children of fornication, even worse then an harlot,
committing whoredom with all the chosen men of Ezekiel. 23.
Ashur, and with all on whom they doted: neither left they their fornications
learned of the Egyptians: for in their youth they lay with them, and they
bruised the breasts of their virginity. Wherefore the wrath of the Lord was so
greatly stirred up against them, that he gave them into the hands of the
kings of Ashur, as unto Pull-ashur, Tiglath Pilesser and 2. King. 15. 19 29.
and 17. 3. 6.
Salmanesar, even into the hands I say, of the kings of Ashur, upon whom they
doted: and they discovered their shame, and Ezekiel. 23. 9. 10.
took away their sons and daughters, and slew them with the sword: and why?
because they would not obey the voice of 2. King. 18. 12.
the Lord their God, but transgressed his covenant: that is all that Moses the
servant of the Lord had commanded them, and would neither obey them nor do
them. And therefore Ephraim became unto the Lord as an abominable branch, and
Hosea. 5. 12. and 13. 7.
he unto them as a moth, and as a very Lion: yea they became Hose. 1. 9.
unto him Loammy, that is, not his people, and therefore would not he be their
God. For when he saw that this rebellious Israel, Ierem. 3. 8. Ezekiel. 23. 4 5.
even Aholah which is Samaria, had played the harlot when she was his, he cast
her away, and gave her a bill of diuorcement. And yet for all this was not her
rebellious sister Iere. 3. 8.
Judah afraid, but she went and played the harlot likewise, even Jerusalem,
which is a holy bath, the other two tribes, Ezekiel. 23. 4.
Judah and Beniamen, even they his pleasant plant defiled Esai. 5. 7.
Ezekiel. 23. 11.
themselves with inordinate love more then the other, and with their
fornications more then the other with their fornications: for according to ye
number of their Cities were their Gods, Iere. 11. 13.
and according to the number of the streets of Jerusalem did they set up
altars of confusion, even altars to burn incense unto Baal: and also committed
their abominations in the Iere. 32. 34. and 2. Cron. 33. 3. 4. 5.
house of the Lord, whereupon his name was called, to defile it. Being
altogether disobedient to receive doctrine, though he taught them rising up
yearly and instructed them continually, Iere. 32. 33.
yet would they not hear, neither would they remember Iere. 7. 13. and 25. 3.
8. Iere. 7. 12. 14.
what he had done unto Shilo: but still provoked him unto the like anger with
the works of their hands: for they Iere. 32. 30.
became such rebellious traitors, that the Lords ministers Iere. 6. 10. 28.
the prophets knew not unto whom they should speak and admonish, because
the word of the Lord was unto them, as a reproach, and they had no delight at
all therein: neither would they take any heed thereto, nor to his laws: but
cast them off, and rather inclined to the statutes of Omry, and kept all Micha.
6. 16.
the manner of the house of Ahab. And therefore because they cast off the law of
the Lord of hosts, and contemned the word Esai. 5. 24. 25. and Iere. 6. 19.
of the holy one of Israel, his wrath was so kindled against them, that as a
flame of fire deuoureth the stubble, and as the chafe is consumed of ye flame,
even so became their root as a rottenness, so that their land shook them
clean off: for 1. King 24. 1.
in the days of Iehoiakim, Iehoakin, and Zedekias, the wrath 10. and. 25. 1.
of the Lord was so kindled, that he stirred up the spirit of the Haba. 1. 6.
Caldeans that bitter and furious nation against them, and gave them into the
hands of Nebuchadnezar king of Babel, Iere. 25. 9. Dan. 1. 2. and Genesis 11.
who carried them into the land of Shinar, even to the place where the Hebrew
toonge at the first was confounded by the foolish building of the seventy
families, and so likewise at this time almost utterly lost: and the Lord caused
them to remain Ezekiel. 37. 2. Cron. 36. 20* 21. and Leui. 26 33. 34. 35. and
that whole chapter.
there as dead bones for the space of seventy years, until their own land
had paid her sabbothes, according as ye Lord long before by Moses had told
the^. For says he, If ye will not obey me; but walk stubbornly against me, and
despise mine ordinances, and abhor my laws: then will I walk stubbornly
against you, and I will scatter you amongst the heathen, and will draw out a
sword after you, and your land shall be wast, and your cities desolate: then
shall the land enjoy her sabbothes as long as it lies void, and ye shall be in
your enemies land: that so your land may rest and enjoy her sabbothes, even all
the days that it lies void it shall rest* because it did not rest in your
sabbothes, when ye dwelt upon it: and even so it came to pass: for having
neglected their sabbothes of every seventh year, they were carried unto their
enemies land, until their own land had her fill of her sabbothes: for all the
days that she lay desolate, she kept sabbath to fulfill seventy years,
according, as the prophet Jeremy did likewise tell them: who for 2. Cro. 36.
21. and. Iere. 25. 11. 12.
the space of forty years labored amongst them before he could make them
beeleue that so it should be: but yet in y^ end they found it most true: for
the Lord of hosts bent his bow Lament. 2. 4.
as an utter enemy against them, and his right hand was Lamen. 2. 4.
stretched out as an open adversary: so that he powered out his fierce wrath
like fire, and consumed all his palaces, and destroyed Lamen. 1. 5.
his strong holds, and made her adversaries the chief, and her enemies to
prosper against her, even against Jerusalem the perfection of beauty, did he
cause the Chaldeans to prosper, who brake down the walls thereof, and burnt
the house of the Lord, and the kings house, and all the great houses in
Jerusalem burnt they with fire: and the holy vessels, and Read. 2. King. 25.
and. 2. Cron. 36. and. Iere. 39. and. 52. and. Lam.
all the instruments of the house of the Lord by these profane were carried to
Babell. So that notwithstanding the kings of the earth, and all the
inhabitants of the world would not have believed (as the prophet says) that
ever the adversary and the enemy should have entered into the gates of
Jerusalem: yet now did they enter even into the very sanctuary, and made a
noise in the house of the Lord, as in the day of solemnity, and stretched out
their hands upon all her pleasant things: and thus was this famous city
made solitary, that was full of people: yea she that was great amongst the
nations became now as a widow, and she that was as a princes amongst the
provinces, was now made tributary, and the Lord caused her feasts and
sabbothes to be forgotten: yea he utterly forsook his altar, and abhorred his
sanctuary: so that the ways of Sion, as it were lamented, because no man came
to her solemn feasts, but in stead thereof the enemies that passed by,
clapped their hands at her, hissing and wagging their heads at the daughter
of Jerusalem: saying, Is this the city that men call the perfection of beauty,
and the joy of the Lament. 2. 15
whole earth? yea all her enemies opened their mouths against her in ye day of
her destruction: saying, Let us devour her, for certainly this is the day that
we looked for, we have Psalm. 137. 7. and Amos. 1. 11. and Obad. 10. to. 15
Zechar. 1. 15. Ezekiel. 25. 6. 8. 12. 15 and 26. 1 and 28. 21. to 25 and 29. 2. 6.
7. and 35. 5. 15. and. 36. 2. ^*
found it, and seen it: therefore down with her say the sons of Edom, and
raze her walls, yea raze the^ even to the very foundation thereof. And thus
most despitefully did all her enemies help forward her affliction, and rejoice
over her in this her visitation: and those that were the tail, are now become
the head, and advance themselves as Lords over them: but from the daughter of
Sion is all beauty departed, and her princes are now become as hearts that
find no pasture, yea all the noble princes of Sion, which were comparable to
fine gold are now esteemed but as earthen pitchers: and all those that were
brought up in skarlet are now driven to embrace the doong, and those that fed
most delicately, perish now in the streets: yea the toonge of the suckling
child cleaves to the roof of his mouth for thirst, and the young children
ask bread, but no man breaks it unto them: but rather the hands of the
pitiful women are upon their own children to sees ^em to be their meat,
even upon the fruit of their own bo^ children of a span long. So that here we
may say again, (...) behold both the loving kindness and the severity of the
Lord: his loving kindness toward the house of Israel and Judah, so long as
they delighted to hear his voice, and were willing to obey his commandementes:
and his severity, so soon as they rejected the same: according as by all his
prophets Dan. 9. 11. 13. 14. and Leui. 26 and Deuteronomy. 27.
he had told them, even so came the curse upon them, as it is written in the
law of Moses.

The judgments of God upon the Jews, after their return from Babell unto
our savior Christ his birth, and also of their utter reiection within seventy
years after, for not receiving him.
THe prophet Daniel, being carried into Babylon in the third year of Iehoiakim
The end of Iehoiakims third year, and the beginning of his fourth, makes
Nebuchadnezer his first, as you may see in Dan. 1. 1. and Iere. 25. 1. and 2.
King. 24. 1.
king of Judah, and continuing there unto the first year of Cyrus king of
Persia, and understanding also by the scriptures, the number of years whereof
the Lord had spoken unto the prophet Jeremy, how that he would accomplish
seventy years in the desolation of Jerusalem: knew very well, that in the
first year of Darius of the Iere. 25. 11. 12. and 27. 6. 7.
seed of the Medes, as also of Cyrus king of Persia, these Both of y^ Empire
of Babel, and to that desolation which (...) wrought in his first year. Dan.
1. 2.
seventy years were expired: Whereupon he turns himself unto the Lord with
fasting, and in sackcloth and ashes, making his confession, and praying: This
is it. Dan. 9. 4. to. 20
O Lord God which art great and fearful, and keep covenant and mercy
toward all them which love thee, and toward them which keep thy
commandementes: but we have sinned, and have His whole prayer wylbe no small
ornament to my Book, and light to my Discourse.
committed iniquity and have done wickedly: yea, we have rebelled, and have
departed from thy precepts and from thy judgments. For we would not obey thy
servant the prophets, which speak in thy name to our kings, to our
princes, to our fathers, and to all the people of the land. O Lord,
righteousness belongs unto thee, and to us open shame, as appears this day
unto every man of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem: yea unto all
Israel, both near and far off, through all the countries whither thou have
driven them, because of their offenses that they have committed against thee: O
Lord, unto us appertains open shame, to our kings, to our princes, and to
our fathers, because we have sinned against thee. Yet compassion and
forgiueuesse is in the Lord our God, albeit we have rebelled against him. For
we have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his laws which
he had laid before us, by the ministry of his servants the prophets. Yea
all Israel have transgressed thy law, and are turned back, and have not heard
thy voice: therefore the curse is powered upon us, and the oath which is Mark
well that Daniel confesses here that the cause of all these plagues that befell
them, was for that they understood not the truth, the word of God.
written in the law of Moses the servant of God, because we have sinned
against him, and he has confirmed his words which he spoke against us, and
against our judges that judged us, by bringing on us a great plague: for under
the whole heaven has not been the like, as has been brought upon Jerusalem.
All this plague is come upon us, as it is written in the law of Moses: yet
made we not our prayer before the Lord our God, that we might turn from our
iniquities, and understand thy truth, therefore has the Lord made ready the
plague, and brought it upon us. For the Lord our God is righteous in all his
works which he does: for we would not hear his voice. And now O Lord our God
that have brought thy people out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and
have gotten thee renown, as appears this day, we have sinned, we have done
wickedly: yet O Lord according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee, let
thine anger and thy wrath be turned away from thy city Jerusalem thine holy
mountain, for because of our sins, and for the iniquities of our fathers,
Jerusalem and thy people are a reproach to all that are about us. Now therefore
O Lord our God hear the prayer of thy servant, and his supplications, and
cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that lies wast: for the Lords sake,
O my God, incline thine care, and hear: open thine eyes and behold our
desolations, and the city whereupon thy name is called: for we do not present
our supplications before thee for our own righteousness; but for thy great
tender mercies. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider and do it,
defer not for thine own sake, O my God: for thy name is called upon thy
city and upon thy people.

So here you see a prayer framed upon a sound ground, Leuit. 26. 40. to the
end, and 1. King. 8. 46. to. 54.
and squared by that just rule of Moses, and according to the form of that by
Solomon, with full assurance (being done according to that rule) that the Lord
would show himself a righteous judge: and therefore whiles he was speaking
and praying, and confessing his own sins, and the sins of his people
Israel, and presenting his supplications before the Lord his God for the holy
mountain of his God: even while he was thus praying (which was about the time
of the evening Dani. 9. 21. 22. 23. 24.
oblation) came the Angel Gabriel unto him to give knowledge and understanding
of their deliverance: and not only, how that at the very beginning of his
supplications, the commandment came forth to return them from Babylon: but
also that from that very hour, the former seventy years were to be
multiplied by seven, and then should Christ the king the most holy be killed:
and not for himself, but to confirm Genesis 12. 3. and 17. 7. to (...) Esai. 56.
^. 1^. and Romans 4. (...). 12. 16. 17. 23. 2^.
the covenant of old, made for the many of all nations that would embrace the
same. By the blood of which covenant, they should be freed from confusion, and
redeemed not only from the bondage of the outward, but also of the spiritual
Egypt and Babell: and which blood being shed for the Math. 26. 28.
remission of sins, and for a reconciliation of all their iniquities, should
cause all sacrifice and oblation to cease. So that Dan. 9. 27. and Hebr. 10.
here this well-beloved prophet, who always abode constant in the true worship
of his God, notwithstanding the rage of the Dan. 1. 8. to end and 6. 1. to
end. The sum of Mos^s doctrine was to show that Christ was to su^fer, and
being risen from the dead, should gene life to the people and to the Gentiles,
as you may see in Acts. 26. 22. 23.
enemy, was showed the sum and effect of all Moses: and was also heard in
that which he required: for the Lord ever in wrath remembering mercy, does also
at this time remember his mercy, and promise of old, made unto their fathers:
and so brings them to the holy hill of Sion again, even to that fresh
springing mountain, from whence such gracious streams of doctrine
continually issued as were sufficient (if rightly used) to cool the
intolerable heat of all the souls that ever were, or shall be in ye world:
thither I say, were these Jews the people of God again brought. And from
whence? Even from a most filthy pit, and that without any such water: Zacha. 9.
11.
which deliverance was so great and myraculous, as that from this time forward
they were not to say any more, the Lord lives, that brought the Children of
Israel out of the ^ere. 16. 14. 15
land of Egypt: but the Lord lives, that brought them out of the land of the
North, and from all the lands where he had scattered them: yea it was so
strange, and so far beyond their expectation, as that when it came to pass,
they were even like unto men that dreamed, or as men amassed at so sodayn Psalm.
126.
a decree, and their mouths were then filled with laughter, and their toonges
with joy: yea they confessed that the Lord had done great and wonderful
things for them. But full soon do they forget it, for notwithstanding all
this his great mercy and judgments showed unto them: yet still they rebelled
against him, profaning his holy Sabbaothes again, Nehe. 13. 15. to. 22.
and making them days of marchandice: and also joined themselves with strange
women of y^ land, contrary to Ez^a. 10, 10. to end^.
the law: yea they greatly neglected the work of his holy temple and city,
saying: The time is not yet come, that y^ Lords Hagg. 1. and 2. chapters.
house should be built: but they thought it was high time to build for
themselves: that so they might be settled again in their sieled houses, though
the Lords house lay wast. Wherefore he was again so displeased with them,
notwithstanding all their pretense of zeal, and show of holiness, that they
were but as a polluted and an vncleaue people in his sight: yea Hagg. 2. 15.
all the works of their hands, and that which they offered, was unclean in
the sight of the Lord: so that he caused the Hag. 1. 6. to. 12
heaven over them to stay it self from dew, and the earth stayed her fruit:
for when they had sown much, they brought little in: yea, and when they came
to their heaps of twenty measures, they found but ten: and to their wine
presses, thinking to draw out fifty vessels, they found but twenty: and thus
the Lord smote them with blasting, with Meldewe, and with Hayle, in all the
labors of their hands, and only to teach them to look better unto his holy
word, that so they might obey his will. And yet for all this, would they not
try thereby wherein they had done amiss, but think they should well Zacha.
7. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
please the Lord, if they wept and fasted, in the first and seventh month,
as they had done the seauenty years before, which was a thing that the Lord
had not, neither would now approve: but tells them, they should rather give
care unto his word, which by the ministry of his Prophets he had delivered
unto them. But in stead thereof they harden their hearts, and give stout
words against the Lord, saying: It Mala. 3. 13. 14. 15.
is in vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we have kept his
commandementes, and walked humbly before him? Do we not see that the proud
are blessed, and that even they that work wickedness, are set up over us, and
how they that tempt God are delivered? As if they should have said, Do we not
see that the Babylonians reigned over us for seauentie years, and then we were
delivered? But what are we the better for that? for all the time since, the
Medes and Persians reign and rule over us. And likewise we are cursed in all
the labors of our hands. But whereas they should have looked into the book
of God, to see the cause of all this, they are as men blind: Yea, and although
the Lord give them a special commandment, even in the last elause of the
old Mala. 4. 4.
Testament, to remember the law of Moses, which should lead them as it were
by the hand unto Christ, even to that Angel of the covenant whom they
desired to behold: yet Mala. 1. 1.
most rebelliously do they reject the same, and so grow worse According to
D^n. 2. 31. to 46. and 7. 1. to the end, and 8. 1 to the end, and 11. 1. to
the end, and 12.
and worse, even till at length they become Pharisees, Sadduces, and such like
beasts: wherefore the Lord suffers most vile beasts, like unto them selves
to reign still over them, even until the coming of his son our Savior
into the world. And then who so blind (as the Prophet speaks) as they? for
whereas he that Word, which in the beginning Esa^. 42. 19. 20 21.
commanded all things to have a being, was now Genesis 1. and John 1.
become Flesh, and dwelt amongst them, whose glory they might have beheld, as
the glory of the only begotten Son John. 1. 11. Luke. 1. 78.
of the father, full of grace and truth: yet would they not receive him, no
although he were the day spring which was John. 1. 9.
now come from on high to visit them, and the true light John. 3. 19.
which lighteneth every man that comes into the world: Iere. 30. 9. 10. and
Ezekiel. 37. 22 24. 25. and Iere. 23. 5. 6. and Psalm. 132. 11. to the end, and
Luke 1 68. to the end. and Hose. 13. 14 and John. 1. 49. Hebre. 5. 16. 26
Hebr. 9. 9. 10. 11. 12. 24.
yet loved they darkness more then light, and to walk in the shadow of death,
rather then in the way of life: yea and although he were that true King of
Israel, by whom they should have had delyuerance, not only from their mortal
enemies, but also from their spiritual, even hell and death: and also that
high Sacrificer, whose priesthood was not made after the law of the carnal
commandment, but after the power of the endless life, even that most holy and
just one: which was separate from sinners, and was now come to enter Math. 27.
28. to. 32. Mark. 6. 3. according to Isai. 53.
for them, not into the holy places made with hands, but into the true
Sanctuary, even the very Heaven it self, and there to appear in the sight of
God, to make intercession for Math. 2. 7. and 23. 33.
them: yet would they not acknowledge him so to be, but Math. 27. and Mark.
15. and Luke 23. and John. 18. and 19 and Acts 3. 13. 14. 15. and Mar. 10. 33.
34. and Luke 23. and Act. 4. 25. to. 30.
despised him, and most shamefully rejected him, counting him most base and
vile, and had no desire at all unto him, but drew away their shoulders, and
became styfnecked, and of uncircumcised hearts and ears: yea a generation of
very Uypers, still stopping their ears like deaf Adders, and hardening their
hearts against him, until at length they utterly denied him to be their king,
in the presence of Pylate the Roman Luke 23. 4. 13. 14. 15. and John 19 14.
15. 21.
governor, saying, We have no king but Caesar. And so join with the Romans to
crucify the king of Glory, even the Lord of life, who^ Pylate, as bad as he
was, could not choose but confess him to be their king, and also to pronounce
him guiltless, and to say he could find no cause at all of death in him: yea
and although the devils themselves, could not choose but confess him to be
that holy one of God, yet desired Mark. 1. 24. and 3. 11. and 5. 2. to 18. and
Luke. 4. 34.
they rather to have Barrabas a murderer given them, then the Lord of life:
saying. Let him be crucified, let him be crucified, and let his blood be upon
us, and upon our children for ever. Luke. 23. 21. Math. 23. 13. to the end. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16.
And so according to their own wish it befell them: for most woeful curses
has the Lord pronounced against them, and his wrath (as the Apostle says) is
come on them, even to the very uttermost, and has scattered them as vagabondes
detested Math. 24. 34.
over the whole earth: for before that generation passed, they fell on the
sword of the Romans, who as with a flood wrought a final consummation of
them, their city, and sanctuary, even to utter desolation, according as our
Savior standing on mount Oliuet had told them, and referred them Math. 24. 15.
and Dan. 9. 27.
to Daniel the ninth: saying, When you see the abomination of desolation
spoken of by the prophet Daniel, standing in the Luke. 21. 20.
holy place: Let them that read it, consider of it: that is, when you see
Jerusalem besieged by the abominable camp of the Roman infidels, then know
that your destruction is near: which before that age passed came to pass,
even those days of vengeance, of wrath, and of great distress to that land
and people. So that here we may say, especially with the Apostle, Romans 11. 22.
O behold both the loving kindness and the severity of the Lord: his loving
kindness toward the sons of Abraham, so long as they continued in the faith
of Abraham: his severe severity so soon as they became bastardes, reuolting
from the faith of Abraham: for as our savior cold them, if they John. 8. 39.
had been the sons of Abraham, they ^ould have done the works of Abraham,
that is, they would have believed in him, Gene. 12. 3. and 15. 6.
as Abraham did: but says he, you go about to kill me, and John. 8. 40. 56.
so did not Abraham: but contrariwise he saw my days, and Math. 13. 17. and
Luke 10. 24.
greatly rejoiced: yea and many others desired greatly to have seen these
days that you see, and would also have rejoiced: but you seeing will not see,
and hearing so many testimonies given of me, ye^ will you not understand that
the sayings of the prophets might be fulfilled.

Now if you ask me in what sort the prophets before time had testified of
Christ, whereby they might have known him to be that Messiah that should come
into the world: the answer is very plentiful, and very plain, and many of
them did know that then was the time that the kingdom of God Mark. 15. 43.
and Luke 23. 51. and Luke 2. 25. 38.
was to appear, and all the sort of them might have known as well, if they
had considered well of the ninth of Daniel: for there does the angel Gabriel
tell Daniel when Christ the Dan. 9. 21. to end.
king should be killed, even to the very hour of the day wherein he dyed.
Likewise they had Moses and all the prophets Math. 11. 13. 14. 0 20. and
Acts. 3. 24. Hebr. 1. 1.
even unto John, to lead them as it were by the hand unto Christ, and that at
sundry times, and in diverse manners: so that it will not be amiss to run
briefly them over, to show you in what sort as I near as I can, he was
described unto them. First then, where as Adam by his disobedience brought not
Genesis 2. 16. 17. and 3. 1. to end.
only death upon himself, but also upon all his posterity, and withal lost
that dominion and Lordship he had over the creatures of God, even the very day
of his creation, the very and Romans 5. 12 to end.
same day was Christ proclaimed heir of the world, and a full conqueror of
Satan, in these words: I will put enmity Genesis 3. 15. and Revel. 12. 7. to 11.
and John. 16 33. and Romans 16 20. and Colo. 2. 15
(says the Lord unto Satan) between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed: thy seed shall bruise the heel of the seed of the woman:
but her seed, even he that special seed, meaning Christ, shall break thy
head: the which came so to pass, when as the fullness of time was come: that
is, when as our savior took the nature of man upon him, Hebr. 2. 14. 15. and
12. 31.
and so through death destroyed him who had the power thereof, Genesis 9. 26. and
Romans 9. 5.
that is to say, the devil this old serpent. The which seed of the woman was
also said by Noe, to be the blessed God of Genesis 12. 3. and 26. 4. and 28. 14.
and Acts. 3. 25. and Luke 19. 9.
Sem, whom also Sem resembled. He was also said by the Lord himself, to be
that special one seed of Abraham, Isaake and Jacob, in whom all the nations
of the earth should be blessed. Likewise he was spoken of by Jacob to be that
special Genesis 49. 10. and Reave. 5. 5. and Ma^h 5. 1. and John. 6. 5. 10.
child Shillo, the Lion of y^ tribe of Judah, who if he did but lie down and
couch, none durst stir him up, and that unto him Job. 19. 25. 26. 27. and. 1.
Cor. 15. 12. to end. Exodus 23. 20. and Heb. 8. 6. and 13. 20.
the people should be gathered: the which Lion of the tribe of Judah, that holy
man Job saw to be his redeemer, and was most assured to see him one day with
his own eyes, and none other for him, although worms should destroy that
body. He Number. 24. 17. and Math. 2. 2.
was also said by the Lord himself, to be that angel of the covenant that kept
their fathers in the way, and brought them Deu. 18. 15. 18 19. and Acts. 3.
22. 23. and John 12. 47. 48. and Math. 17. 5. 2. 2. Sa. 7. 13. 14. and Luke 1.
32. 33. and Heb. 1. 5.
into the land of Canaan, as also that star of Jacob, whom Balam, prophet
false though he were, saw to strike the costs of Moab, and to subdue all the
sons of Seth. He was also said by Moses to be that great prophet, whom the
Lord would raise like unto him, unto whom all the world should hearken: as also
by the Lord himself, that he should build an house unto Psalm. 2. 7. and Heb.
1. 5. Acts 13. 32. 33.
his name, and that he would establish the throne of his kingdom for ever, and
that he would say unto him, I will be thy Psalm. 40. 6. 7. 8. to 12. and Hebr.
10. 5. to 10.
father, and thou shall be my son. Likewise it was said of Christ by the
prophet David, that the Lord said unto him: Psalm. 22. 22. and Hebr. 2. 12. and
John. 17. 26.
Thou art my son, this day begat I thee: and that forasmuch as the Lord
delighted not in sacrifices, he should come to do the will of God: That in his
heart his whole law should fully Psalm. 2. and Acts 4. 25. and Revel. 2. 27.
and Luk 23. 6. to 13. and Acts, 4. 25. to 29.
rest: That he would not conceal the righteousness thereof, but declare it in
the great congregation, even in the midst of the congregation would he
declare the name of the Lord amongst his brethren, and how that
notwithstanding, that, yet Psalm. 22. 6. 7. 8. 12. 16. ^8. and Math. 27. and. 9.
24. and 26. 66. 67* 68. and Mar. 15. and. Luke 22. and, 23.
would the kings and princes of the earth assemble themselves together against
him: That they would make him the contempt of the people, have him in
derision, mock him and nod their heads at him. That they would hit him in the
teeth with the trust he had in the Lord, as though his hope therein Math. 12.
14. and Mark. 11. 18. and. 14. 1. John. 19. 34. and Exo. 12. 46. and Zach. 12.
10.
had been frustrate: That they would like bulls of Bashan, nay like dogs
compass him about, pearce his hands and feet, give him vinegar to drink,
cast lottes upon his garments, and part them amongst them: and yet
notwithstanding all this their spite, the Prophet shows that the Lord Luke
23. 34. 36 and. John. 19. 23. 24.
would laugh them to skorne, and break them to pieces like a potters vessel.
That he would set Christ as king upon y^ holy Psalm. 2. 6. 8. 12 and 18. 43* and
Reave. 14. 1.
hill of Sion, and deliver him from the contentions of the people: That he
would grant him the heathen for his inheritance, Psalm. 2. 8.
Psa. 72. 10. 11.
and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession: Math. 2. 1. 2. 10
Psalm. ^ 8. 44.
That he should be the head thereof, and that a people whom he had not known,
should serve him, even such as were the Math. 8. 5. to 14. and. 9. 18.
kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles, who should bring him presents, and also
such as were the kings of Sheba and Seba, who should bring him gifts: yea and
that all kings upon earth should worship him, and all nations serve him: and
that as soon as they should hear him, they should obey him, and be in
subjection to him: and that whosoever would not Psa. 2. 12 But not with an
hipocriticall kiss, as Judas, Mark 14. 44. but with such a one as was Mary's
in Luke 7. 45. and John II. 2.
kiss the son should be sure to perish: but those that would put their trust
in him, should be blessed for evermore. Psalm. 45. 7.


Again, it was said of him by the same prophet, that he Psalm. 69. 9.
Math. 21. 12. 13. and Mark 11. 15. 16. 17.
would so love righteousness and hate iniquity, and be so careful for the
house of the Lord, that the zeal he would have thereof would even eat him up:
and that the Lord would Psalm. 45. 7. and John. 3. 34.
therefore annoint him with the oil of gladness above his Psalm. 45. 17. and
17. 18. 19.
fellows: That he would cause his name to be remembered throughout all
generations, even his glorious name for ever Psalm. 91. 11. 12. Math. 4. 6.
and ever: And that all nations should bless him, and be blessed Psalm. 118.
22. and Acts. 4. 10. 11 Psalm. 16. 10. and Acts. 2. 22. to 37. and 13. 35. to
40.
in him, and give thanks unto him world without end. And that notwithstanding
all the r^ge of the devil and his ministers, yet should none evil come near
unto him, for the Lord would give his Angels charge over him, to keep him in
all his ways, that he should not hurt his foot against a Psalm. 8. and Hebr.
2. 6. to end.
stone. And that notwithstanding himself should be that stone Psalm. 68. 18.
and Ephe. 4. 8. and Acts. 1. 9. 10. 11. and* 2. 34. 35. 36.
which the builders would refuse, yet should he be made the head of the
corner. Moreover this holy Prophet shows, that the Lord would not leave the
soul of Christ in grave, neither suffer him his holy one to see corruption:
That he Psalm. 110. 1. and Math 22. 42. to end, and Luke 22 69. 70. and Acts 7.
56.
would raise him up from death to life, and crown him with glory and honor:
That he should ascend on high, and lead captivity captive: That he should
sit at the right hand of God, until he had made his enemies his fotestoole:
And lastly, Psalm. 110. 4. and Heb. 5. 6. and. 6 20. and. 7. 1. to end, and.
10. 12. 13.
that he should continue there a Sacrificer for ever after the order of
Melchisedech. And therefore not only this prophet, but also the whole church
desired him whom their soul most Cant. 1. 6.
dearly loved, that it would please him to show them where Cant. 1. 3.
his abiding was, and to draw them after him, that so they might run and
behold king Solomon, even run and behold Cant. 3. 11.
him with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his
marriage, and in the day of the gladness of his heart.

Again, it was said of Christ by the prophet Esaiah, that Esai. 11. 1. 2. and
Romans 15. 12.
there should come a rod forth of the stock of Ishai, and a graffe should grow
out of his roots, upon whom the spirit of the Lord should rest, even the
spirit of wisdom and understanding, Esai. 7. 14. and Math. 1. 22. 23
the spirit of counsel and courage, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear
of the Lord. That a virgin should conceive and bring him forth: That they
should call his name Esai. 9. 6. and Luke 1. 31. to 34.
Emmanuel, that is, even God with us: That they should call his name
wonderful, councellor, the mighty God, the everlasting father, the prince of
peace. And that whereas the faithful Esai. 1. 21.
Esai. 9. 7. and Luke 1. 32. 33.
city had lost both judgment and justice, Christ should come and sit upon
the throne of David to order it, and to establish Esai. 40. 3. 5. and Math. 3.
1. 2. 3. and Mark. 1. 3. and Luke 3. 4.
both judgment and justice thereon for ever. Moreover, it was said by the same
prophet, that a voice should go before him in the wilderness: That it should
cry, prepare the Esai. 42. 1. and 61. 1. 2. 3. and John. 1. 33.
way of the Lord, make straight in y^ desert a path for our God: That the glory
of the Lord should be revealed by him, and Math. 3. 16. 17 and Mark. 1. 10. 11.
and Act. 10 38.
that all flesh should see it together. That the Lord would say of him, Behold
my servant, upon whom I will stay, mine elect, in whom my soul delights:
That the Lord would Math. 9. 35. and 11. 1. and Mark. 1. 38. 39. Esai. 35. 5.
and Math. 15. 30. 31.
annoint him with his holy spirit, and send him to preach good tidinges to
the poor, to bind up the broken hearted, to preach liberty to the captives,
and to them that were bound the opening of the prison: That by him the eyes of
the blind Esai. 61. 1. 2. 3. and Luke 4. 17. to 24.
should be lightened, and the ears of the deaf be opened: That the lame man
should leap as an heart, and the dumme man's toonge should sing for toy. That
he should preach that most acceptable year of the Lord, even that great
Iubilee, whereby they might enjoy beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, and the garment of gladness in stead of the spirit of Esai. 25. 6.
7.
heaviness. And moreover, that he should make unto all people a feast of fat
things, even a feast of fined wynes, and of Math. 26. 26. to 31. and Mark. 14*
22. to 27. and Luke 22. 14. to 22. and Math. 22 2. to 15. and Reave. 19. 9.
fat things, full of marrow, and of wynes, fined and purified. And that he
should destroy the covering that covered all nations, that so the people that
walked in darkness might see great light, and that they that dwelled in the
land of the shadow of death, might say, that upon them great light had shined.
Esai. 9. 2 and Math. 4. 13. to 18.
And that not only should he be given for a light of the Gentiles, but aso
for a covenant of the people, even to be the Esai. 42. 6. and 49 6. 8.
full glory of them, and the joy of the whole earth: because that like sheep
they had all gone astray, and for that they had turned Luke 2. 32.
Esai. 53. 6.
every one unto their own ways: Therefore the prophet Esai. ^3 and ^ Pet. 2.
24. 25. Acts. 8. 26. to 40.
shows, that Christ should be wounded for all their transgressions, and broken
for their iniquities. That the chastisement of their peace should be upon him,
and that with his Esai. 50. 6. 7. 8. and Math. 26. 66. 67. and Mark. 15. 18. 19.
stripes should they be all healed. That he should be oppressed, afflicted,
brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and yet would he not open his mouth
against them. That his back should meet with smyters, his cheeks with
nippers, his face with Esai. 53. and Math. 8. 17. and Mar. 9. 12.
shame and spitting, and yet would he not hide it from them, but put it
forward as a flint. That notwithstanding Christ would pour out his soul unto
death as an offering for their sins, A far greater and more grievous burden
to be (...), then ever bare the escape Goat in Leu^t. the. 16. 21. (...).
bear all their infirmities, carry all their inquities and sorrows on his
back: yet would they judge him as one plagued and smitten of God: yea the
prophet shows that they would condemn him amongst the transgressors, and
make his grave with the wicked. That they would despise Esai. 53. 12. and Mark.
15. 28. and Luke. 22. 37.
him, reject him, and account him as one without form or beauty: yea and
although he should be as a sanctuary, yet would they make him as a But who so
ever stumbleth thereat, as they did, it grindeth him to powder, as you may see
in Luke 20. 18. Act. 4. 10. 11. 12. Esai. 11. 10. to end.
stone to stumble at, and as a rock Mark. 6. 3.
to fall upon, even to both the houses of Israel should he become Esai. 8. 14.
as a snare, and as a net.

Again, the prophet shows, that notwithstanding they for their parts would
forsake him, yet should he the root of Ishai stand up for a sign unto the
people, to the intent that all nations should seek unto him, because his rest
should be glorious. And that the Lord would stretch out his hand again the
second time, that so he might possess the remnant of his people, even of his
people which should be left of Ashur, of Egypt, of Pathros, of Ethyopia, of
Elam, of Shinar, of Hamah, and of the Isles of the sea, and that he would
destroy the toonge of the Egyptian sea, and with his mighty wind lift up his
hand over the river, and smit him in his seven streams, and cause men to walk
therein with shoes: that so there might be a path to the remnant of his people
which should be left of Ashur, even a path to seek unto this sign that should
be set up, not only for the natural Israel dispersed, but also for all Esai.
56. 8.
nations and strangers that would cleave unto the Lord: as for them of Medyan,
of Ephah, of Sheba, of Nebaioh, and Keder, Esai. ^1 1. to end.
and that all these would bring gifts of gold, of incense, Math. 2. 1. ^. 10.
11. and 8. 10. 11.
and of all their riches to the house of the Lord, and set forth his praises
therein, to the intent they might be accepted upon Mark. 11. 17.
him the holy altar, and that by them the house of the Lord might be
bewtified. That they should say of him, Lo this Esai. 25. 8. 9. and Reave. 7.
17 and Luke. 2. 26. to. 33.
is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us: Lo, this is the Lord,
we have waited for him, we will rejoice and be joyful in his salvation,
because as says this Prophet, he should destroy death for ever, and wype away
tears from all faces, and because he would take away the rebuks of his people
from all the earth. And moreover, for that he should Esai. 22. 2o. to end, and
R^ue. 3. 7.
have the key of the house of David committed to his charge, and power given
him to shut, and no man to open, and to open, and no man to shut against him:
and for that in mercy should his throne be prepared, and for that he should
sit Esai. 16. 3.
upon it in stedfastnes in the tabernacle of David, judging, and seeking
judgment and hasting justice: and for that he would not be discouraged,
until he had brought forth judgment in truth, and until he had established
both judgment Esai. 42. ^. 4. and Math. 1^. 17. to 22.
and justice in the earth, that so the Isles might wait for his law, though
Israel would not so: and therefore says this Prophet: Though Israel would not
be gathered by him, yet should he be most glorious in the eyes of the Lord,
and Esai. 40. 5 6. and Acts. 1^. 46. 47.
be given as a light of the Gentiles, that so he might be their salvation unto
the end of the world.

Lastly, Christ was seen by this euangel^ call Prophet, sittyng upon his
glorious and high throne, and the Seraphims Esai. 6.
John. 12. 41.
standing before him, and crying holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God of hosts,
the whole world is full of thy glory. And therefore the Prophet makes a
proclamation, saying: Behold Esai. 62. 11.
thou daughter Sion thy Savior comes unto thee: behold his wages is with
him, and his work before him. Arise therefore O Jerusalem, and be bright, for
thy light is Esai. 60. 1.
come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.

Again, it was said of Christ by the Prophet Micheas, Mich. 5. ^. and Math 2
5 6. and John. 7* 41. 42.
that notwithstanding Bethlehem were but little amongst the thousands of Judah,
yet should there come one thence who should rule in Israel: even one, whose
goinges forth had been from the beginning, and from everlasting. And by the
Prophet Hose. 3. 5.
Hosea to be that king David, unto whom the Israelites should seek, and of
whom the Lord would say, Out of Egypt Hose. 11. 1. and Math. 2. 14. 15 Iere.
30. 21.
have I called thee my Son. The which Son by the Prophet Jeremy, was said
to be that noble Ruler that should Iere. 23. 5. and 3^. 14. 15. and Romans 1. 3.
4. and Luke. 2. 68. to 76.
arise from amongst them selves: as also that ryghteous branche which should
grow up unto the house of David, to perform those good things promised to
the house of Israel and Judah. And by the Prophet ^zekiel, to be that one He came
not only to feed their bodies, but also their souls with the true bread of
life, which was him self. Ioh. 6. Ezekiel. 21. 26. 27 Dan. 12. 1.
Sheephearde, which should be set over them to feed them, Ezech. 34. 23. 24.
29. and Mark. 6. 34. to 45.
and to be a Prince amongst them, and to be that plant of renown, unto whom
the crown and diadem did specially belong: as being that Michael their
chiefest Prince (as says the Prophet Daniel) who would stand up for their
defense, and so deliver them, not only from those beastly kingdoms that long
time ouerruled them here on earth: but also as the Prophet Hosea says, even
from the kingdom of hell and death.

Moreover, it was said of Christ again by the Prophet Dan. 7. 17. 22. 26. 27.
Daniel, that notwithstanding Nabuchadnezzer saw him to be but as a base stone
in his base eyes, yet such a stone he was Hose. 13. 14.
Dan. 2. 34. to 46.
in the eyes of Daniel, as should dash those beastly kingdoms all to powder.
That he should become a great mountain, and that the whole earth should be
filled with his glory: That Dan. 7. 13.
he should come in the clouds of heaven, and approach again unto the Ancient
of days: That the Lord God would give Dan. 2. 44. 45. and 7. 14. and Luke 1.
33.
him dominion, honor, and a kingdom, that should never be destroyed, and
that all people, nations, and languages should serve him.

Again, it was said of Christ by the prophet Amos, that he Amos. 9. 11. and
Acts. 15. 15. 16. 17.
should raise up ye tabernacle of David that was fallen down, That he should
raise up the ruins thereof, as in the days of Aggi. 2. 5. 6. 7.
old. And therefore says the prophet Aggai unto the people, be not
discouraged, but have patience yet a little, and you shall see, that even he the
glory and desire of all nations, will speedily come: Wherefore rejoice greatly
O daughter Sion, Zach. 9. 9.
says the prophet Zachary: shout for joy O daughter Jerusalem, because thy
king comes unto thee: even he does come to thee, whose name is called the
branch, and he by whom Zach. 6. 12. 13.
thy temple shall be built: even one that shall bear the glory of the Lord,
that shall sit and rule upon his throne, and be a priest thereon for ever:
even one, who notwithstanding will Zach. 9. 9. and Math. 21. and Mark. 11.
come but poorly, as riding on an Ass, yet shall all mountains be made as
plains, that against him will stand up: one that shall be able to bring forth
the head stone of thy temple, and Zach. 4. 7.
that with shoutinges, and crying grace, grace unto it: one that Zach. 9. 9.
11. and John. 10. 17 18. and. Act. 5. 31.
shall be able to save not only himself, but Jerusalem also: even to save
Jerusalem, says this prophet, should Christ be able through the blood of his
everlasting covenant.

Moreover, it was said of Christ by the prophet Jeremy, Iere. 23. 6. and 33.
16.
that in his days Judah should be saved, and Israel should dwell safely: That
they should be no more divided into two kingdoms, Ezech. 37. 15. to end.
as says the prophet Ezechiel, but that they should be as one people, and have
one king to reign over them, even Iere. 23. 6. and 33. 16.
one king whose name, as says the prophet Jeremy, they should call the Lord
our righteousness. And therefore says the prophet Mich. 4. and 5. chapters.
Micheas, why do thou cry out with lamentation, O daughter Sion, as though
there were no king in thee? Be not afraid, for one shall reign in thee
forever: even one that shall and yet would they not know him that was their
peace, as you may see in Luke. ^9. 42.
stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, and in the majesty of the name
of the Lord his God: even one, who shall be thy peace, when Ashur, or any such
like comes against thee. And yet for all this would they value him for naught,
says the Zach. 10. 12. 13. 16. 17. and Math. 26. 15. and 27. 9.
prophet Zachary, even value him for thirty small pieces of silver. And that
because they would so do, he shows that the Lord would raise up a
shepherd, even a shepherd y^ would not look the thing was lost, neither
would he heal the thing But y^ true shepherd would do both, and came ^o
that end, as y^u may see in Luke 19. 10. and John. 10. 11.
was hurt: that would not feed the thing that would stand up, but eat the
fat, and leave the flock: even one that would in no wise lay down his life
for his sheep. And therefore it was said by the prophet Daniel, that when
Christ the true shepherd should come: That he would lay down his life for
John. 10. 12. 13. Dan. 9. 24. to end, and Math. 20. 28. and Mark 10. 45. and
John 10. 15. 17. 18. and Romans 5. 8.
his sheep, and not for himself: That he would confirm the covenant for
them, and seal it with his blood: That he would cause all sacrifice and
oblation to cease: That he would consume wickedness, and abolish sins: That he
would make reconciliation for iniquities, and bring in everlasting
righteousness: That he would seal up vision and prophecy. And lastly, that
the whole common weal of Judea should be consumed, by that abominable camp
of the Roman infidels, even consumed and washed away as with a flood, if they
would not regard this true king, priest, and shepherd. And therefore it Mala.
3. 1. 2. 3. and Mar. 1. 1. 2.
was said by the prophet Malachie that the Lord would send his messenger before
him to prepare his way, and that the Lord whom they sought, should speedily
come to his temple: even that messenger of the covenant whom they desired to
behold. But yet says the prophet, like a purging fire, and like fullers soap,
that so he might try them even as silver is tried. And therefore the Lord gave
them a special commandment Mala. 4. 4.
even in the last clause of the old testament to remember the law of Moses his
servant, which he commanded him in Horeb for all Israel, with all his
statutes and judgments: all which should lead them (if they would) unto
Christ this Angel of the everlasting covenant.

And thus you see in part, after what sort the prophets did paynt out Christ
unto them, who when he came, did al things that before were written of him,
that so all thse sayings of Luke 24. 25. 26 27. 44. 46. and Acts. 13. 29.
John. 12. 37.
the prophets might be fulfilled: and yet believed they not in him, no although
he had done so many great works and miracles before them, but still despised
the council of God Luke. 7. 30. 31.
against themselves, and would not dance nor leap for joy, no although y^
prophets, as you see, had continually piped unto them. Now if you marvel how
they could be so blind as not Read Acts. 7. 51. 42.
to see, since the light was so bright, and Christ so plainly manifested unto
them: I will show you why in few words: that is, because they knew not the
scriptures: for so our savior Math. 22. 29. and Mark. 12. 17 Math. 15. 6. 7.
8. 9. and Mar. 7. 7. 8. 9. to 14.
does tell the^, saying: Ye err not knowing the scriptures. For whereas they
should have made the word of God their only meditation, they had established
in stead thereof the precepts and doctrines of men, and so made the word of God
of no authority, as our savior also tells them. Besides, it was so far from
their delight, as that they had skarce read so much thereof, as that one part
which told them that the stone which Mark. 12. 10.
they would refuse, should be made the head of the corner. And therefore
because they had thus cast off the law of the Lord of hosts, and would not
believe the writings of Moses and the John. 5. 45. 46. 47.
prophets, all which would have lead them unto Christ: No marvel was it
though he cast off them: neither that he should take from them, that little
understanding which they seemed to have, according as he tells his Disciples:
saying, To him that has, shall be given in more abundance, and to him Math.
13. 12. 13. 14. 23. and Mark. 4. 23. 24 25.
that has not, shall be taken away even that little which he seems to have.
So that to those that had a desire to know the book of God, which painted them
out the Messiah, to them it was given to know the secrets of y^ kingdom of
heaven: but to al those that cast it off, to them it was not given. So that in
them was fulfilled y^ prophcie of Esaias, which prophecy says, Esai. 6. 9.
10. and Math. 13. 14. 15. and Mark. 4. 11. 12.
by hearing they should hear, but not understand, and seeing they should see,
but not perceive. And the reason was, for that their hearts were waxen fat, and
their ears were dull of hearing: and also with their eyes they winked, least
they should see, and stopped their ears, least they should hear, and so
understand with their hearts, and should have returned, that he might Romans 1.
28.
have healed the^. And therefore as y^ apostle says, when men regard Psalm. 81.
11. 12. Pro. 1. 29. 30. 31.
not to know the Lord aright by his holy word, no more does he regard to know
them, but gives the^ up into reprobate minds, and also to follow their own
inventions in all things, and so to run to their own destruction, for not
obeying the son of God. For as it is eternal life to know one true and
John. 17. 3.
everliving God, and to believe in his son whom he the father would, or now
has sent: so he that believes not in the John. 3. 36.
son, nor obeys his voice shall never see life, but the wrath Deu. 6. 6. to
10 and 11. 18. 19. 20. and Josh. 1. 8 and Deuteronomy. 32. 46 47. and Psalm. 1. and
Mala. 4. 4.
of God abides on him. Now his voice was, that they should continually
meditate in his law, the which should lead them unto Christ: but they did
not, and therefore well worthy to be blinded as you see: for men must learn to
hear the voice of the Lord, while it is called to day, and to take heed how
Psalm. 95. 7. 8. and Hebr. 3. 7. 8.
they harden their hearts when the voice of God does call, least when they
would they shall often call them selves, and Esai. 55. 6.
Pro. 1. 28. 29.
not be hard. Now if judgment began at the house of the Lord in this sort as
you see, what shall we think befell the rest of the nations before the
coming of our savior into the world? Surely they escaped not: for the Lord
has rendered vengeance unto all those that have not known him, and which have
not obeyed unto the Gospel of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ: not only unto
the Jews and the city Iersusalem where his name should have been called on,
who most of all deserved it, because most graces were offered unto them: Iere.
25. 12. to end.
but also unto all nations in the world has he sent the cup of the wine of
the greatness of his indignation, and has entered into judgment with all
flesh: forasmuch as they have not desired the knowledge of his holy laws: and
for as much as he Act. 14. 16. 17
left not himself without witness to any nation, in as much as he gave them
rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, and filled them with all good things
in great abundance. Therefore all those nations or people that have refused the
knowledge Romans 1. 18. to end.
of him, he has also refused them. And as they regarded not to know him a
right by his holy word, neither had any delight at al therein, but cast it off:
even so has he cast off them, and given them up into reprobate minds, as the
apostle says. And thus having laid his judgments before our eyes hitherto,
Psalm. 119. 30. 52.
we see what is become of all those that have said unto God, depart from us,
and have not desired (above gold) ye knowledge Job. 21. 14. 15.
of his holy laws, the which laws should have been esteemed of them above
gold, yea above much fine gold: and also have been more sweeter unto their
hearts then the honey or the honey comb unto their mouths: and look how
precious it should have been unto ye Jews, so ought it to have been to all
other nations in the world, for all nations heard thereof, Romans 10. 18.
or at leastwise might have done: and thus much of the judgments of God from
the beginning of the world, to the utter casting off of the Jews.

The judgments of God upon the Roman Emperors the first beast, Apoc. 13.
as also upon the Popes their successors the latter beast, and on all them that
receive the beasts mark.
SInce we have seen the judgments of God from the beginning of the world
hitherto, and also the cause why, which was the neglect of his holy word, in
the which word they might have seen his will, and so have known his true
worship: let us proceed in brief sort, and lay the like before our eyes even
from our savior his time unto the end of the same. First then we are to
remember, that after the destruction of y^ low Jerusalem was that to be
fulfilled which was spoken of by the prophets, that is. That a Jerusalem Ezekiel.
48. 35.
should be built, the name whereof should be called, The Lord is there: and
that this city should be lifted up above al mountains: Esai. 2. 2. 3. and
Mich. 4. 1. 2.
and that from the Sanctuary thereof should go waters Ezekiel. 47. and Zach. 14. 8.
of life, which should run to the east sea, and to the west sea: and that
there should be plenty thereof both in summer and winter: and that whatsoever
tree should be planted by the river of waters which should run out of the
sanctuary of this Ezekiel. 47. 12.
city, the leaf thereof should never fade, neither should the fruit thereof
at any time fail: and that the waters of this river Ezekiel. 47. 8. 9.
should be so wholesome, that whither soever they should run, the fi^h that
should be nourished therewith should live thereby: whereby is meant, that
whosoever were a tree planted Esai. 61. 3. and 55. 1. 2. 3. and Apo. 22. 17.
and Psalm. 1. 2. 3. and 1. Corin. 3. 6. 7 Math. 4. 19. and John. 4. 10.
by the doctrine of the prophets and Apostles, and watered with the graces of
the holy spirit, should be a fruitful tree indeed, and whosoever were a
fish nourished by the same waters of the holy spirit, should be sure to live
for ever. And likewise it was further said, That whosoever they were of all the
families of the earth, that would not go up to this city to Zach. 14. 17.
18. 19.
worship the king Jehovah of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles,
that upon them should come no rain: whereby is also meant, that upon them
that would not worship the Lord according to the rule of his own most perfect
word (as the faithful company of christians ought to do) upon them I say,
that would not so do, should fall no part of that gracious Deuteronomy. 32. 1. 2. and
Esaias. 55. 10. 11.
rain the doctrine of the prophets and apostles. And moreover it was further
said, That whosoever they were that should be found fighters against this city
and the king thereof, Zacha. 14. 12.
should be smitten with a very great plague, even with so great a plague, as
that it should consume both their flesh, eyes, Reave. 1. 2. 3. and 21. chapters.
and toonges: and therefore according to these prophesies it was revealed unto
John presently upon the destruction of the low Jerusalem, in what sort the
heavenly should be built, and who they were that fought, and still would fight
against the Reave. 12. 13. chapters.
same: which were the Roman Emperors, and the popes 2 Thessalonians. 2. and Reave.
17.
their successors, which popes most vehemently should continue afflicters of
the high Jerusalem, as y^ former had begun with Dan. 9. 27. and Math. 24. 1. 2.
15. 16. 34. and Luke 21. 20. 21 Reave. ^3. 5.
the low: and likewise a certain time should continue it against the high.
Therefore we are here to consider the state of Rome, and to mark how the Lord
has reserved them as a corporation of most filthy beasts, and as a cage of
vnleane Reave. 18. 2.
kytes for his wrath to aim at while the world shall stand. And why so? Even
because that by their policy was the king of this high Jerusalem the Lord of
life crucified, and because that this his city the company of faithful
Christians, by them should continually be persecuted: and likewise for that
they would refuse to be norished by those waters of life, even the most pure
doctrine of the holy prophets and apostles: and for that by them the
brightness thereof should be continually darkened, even darkened by the smoke
that should arise from that bottomless It is said in Apoc. the 8. that out of
the pit came a smoke that darkened the sun and the air: whereby is meant
that all brighnes of Scripture should be darkeaed by the precepts and
doctrines of men, which y^ rabbiement of Popes would urge upon the Church.
Reave. 18. 4. and 14. 9. 10. 11. 12.
pit of their own doctrines, precepts, and foolish traditions: and so by that
means turn those lively fountains the doctrines and precepts of the holy
prophets and apostles from waters of life into waters of bitter gall and
wormwood, yea even unto filthy salt pittes of eternal death and destruction.
For these and such like causes, I say, has the Lord set that cage of Roman
infidels, as a mark for his wrath to aim at while the world shall stand, and
has also described them and their villainies, by the most horrible villainies
of all ages throughout the old testament, and only to the intent to give us
warning to avoid them, as also their manners and their condemnation.

First then I will show you in what sort saint John describes the Roman
Emperors, and afterward in what sort the corporatio^ of filthy popes. The
Emperors he describes in this sort. I saw a beast, says he, arise out of the
sea, having Reave. 13. 1. 2.
the mouth of a Lion, the feet of a Bear, the color of a Leopard, seven
heads also and ten horns. As if he should have said, I saw even one most
ugly and monstrous beast Dan. 7.
A shur does here signify y^ Babilonians, Medes, and Persians: but you are not
to think they came of A shur, for the Babylonians came of Nimrod of Chush of
Cham: and the Medes of Madai of Iaphet: and the Persians of Elam of Sem: but
here these three nations are called A shur in respect that they overcame the
Assyrians who are properly of A shur.
compounded of those four, the which my fellow servant the prophet Daniel saw
in the seventh of his book: the which beast has not only borrowed from Ashur,
that is, from the Babylonians, Meedes and Persians, the lions mouth and bears
feet, nor from Kittim all ready dead, that is, from the Grecians, the
Leopards color, nor from Gog and Magog, that is, from Syria and Egypt the
ten horns and teeth: but has also the Dragon that old serpent ready, even
to give him his whole throne, power, and authority likewise: and only to the
intent he might be the more able to make war against this city of faithful
Christians, and that so he might be able to overcome them, and to force them
to forsake the word of god, and the testimony which the mayntayned: and so to
have them to do worship unto him, and to the Dragon who gave him his power:
but yet notwithstanding all this his strength he could not overcome them, no
although he persecuted them daily, even to the loss of their goods, lands,
life, and all: for the which cause the wrath of God, and of the lamb, was so
stirred up against these profane Emperors, as that they were forced in these
days to wish the mountains to fall upon Apoc. 6. 14. to end.
them, and to desire the hills to cover them, even to cover them from the
presence of him that sat upon the throne, and from the wrath of the lamb:
for the great day of his wrath was come, and therefore they were not able to
stand before him. For as the Lord Jesus was that Michael, that stood up Dan.
10. 13. 21 and. 12. 1.
for the desence of his people against those tyrants in Daniel, even so was
he in like manner in the days of these profane Emperors: for he fought
against them as riding upon a Reave. 6. 2. and Psalm. 45. 5.
white horse, and as having a bow in his hand with sharp arrows, to pearce
the hearts of them his enemies. And moreover, as he was a judge sitting upon
a fiery throne, from Dan. 7. 9. to 15
whose presence rivers of fire ishued to consume those beasts Apoc. 4. 2. 3.
and 1. 14. and 6. 16. 17.
in Daniel: even so was he in like manner in the days of this beast ye Roman
Emperors: for he sent his threefold judgments upon them, as sword, famine
and death altogether: the Apo. 6. 4. 5. 8.
which plagues were expressed by three horses, red, black, and pale. So that
like as these profane Emperors had shed the Apo. 6. 9. 10. and. 16. 5. 6. 7.
blood of his servants the holy martyrs, even so the holy and just Lord was
stirred up with revenge to spill and shed their blood, and to give it them in
great abundance to drink: and in ye end utterly to root them out. So then
this beast having now the wound of a sword, and one head cut off, and Satan
not Apo. 13. 3.
able by him to prevail against the Church: you are to look for that other
instrument of his to appear in his likeness, that is, you are to look for a
description of that corporation of beastly popes, who are not less in strength
and mischief, then the former were, but rather far exceeding them in both: and
therefore most fitly is their power described by a beast of the same form of
the other. But before I come to saint John to show you that, I will give you a
note or two from the Apostle Paul, that so you may see how fitly they agree in
the discovery of this latter beast, and that so you may the better hereafter
beware and take heed least you be deceived by them.

Saint Paul tells the Thessalonians, who had been put in mind that the last
day of judgment was at hand, that, that 2 Thessalonians. 2.
day should not come until there came a departing from the faith, and until
that man of sin the son of perdition should be disclosed: the which, says
he, shall come to pass, when the withholder (meaning the Roman Empire) shall
be taken away: even then, says he, shall this man of sin appear, whose
coming shall be by the power and working of Satan as the formers was, yea and
in a far more dangerous sort then the former did, because he will come with
lying signs and great woonders, yea and with all sleightes of deceit and
guile, even with such as, if it were possible, the ver, elect should be
deceived therewith: yet notwithstanding mark you well what follows, and then
if you will not take heed of them, well worthy are you to be deceived by the^.
He tells them further then, that this man of sin or company of beastly
popes would set themselves as adversaries to the truth ^. Thessa. 2. 4.
the word of God, and that they would set themselves in the temple of God as
if they were God, and that they would forbid 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3
marriages and the eating of meats, which things God had commanded to be
done: even thus, says the Apostle, will they teach the doctrine of that old
serpent their father the devil: therefore if you should have had no more marks
given you to know the^ by then these, they had bin sufficent for you: but since
it has pleased the holy ghost to give you more, you were best to take notice
of them all. Hear you therefore in what sort saint John has described them:
he tells you, that he saw another beast of the same form of the Empire
beast, Apo. 17.
that is, with seven heads and ten horns, and with some addition more, to
betoken further cruelty: that is, he saw this beast to be of a skarlet color,
and to have a woman sitting upon him full of names of blasphemy: which woman
was arrayed also in purple and skarlet, and a cup of gold in her hand, full of
abominations and filthiness of her fornications: and besides in her forehead
was a name written, a mystery, great Babylon the mother of whoredoms, and
abominations of the earth: and that with her should the kings of the earth
commit fornication, and that the inhabitants of the earth should be drunke^
with the wine of the same. And moreover that this whore her self should be
drunken with the blood of saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus:
so that here you have a description of the Empire beast again revived by the
popes, yea and that in so plain a manner, that every little child may know who
is meant hereby. For the angel expounds it in this sort: The seven heads of
the beast, which thou have seen (says y^ angel unto John) are vii. kings, You
may see in Dan. 7. ver. 17 that by a king is meant any polliticall government.
And so here of Rome as first they had Kings. 2. Consuls. 3. Decemuires. 4.
Dictators. 5. Triumuiris. 6. Caesar's. Popes and Emperors make the 7. which
after a sort are the 8.
whereof five are fallen, and one is, and another is not yet come, and when he
comes, he must continue but a short space. And the beast that was, and is
not, is even the eight, and yet is one of the seven: the which beast shall go
into destruction with the former: so that all the world whose names were not
written in the book of life, wondered at this mystery, that is, they wondered
to see the beast that was, and afterward was not, and yet now to be again. For
indeed here is the mind, as saint John says, that has wisdom, which to
him that can dig out the meaning thereof, and beware of the policy here
described, it shall be far more worth then the gold which he can dig,
either out of the East or West Indies. Thus it is, you are to understand that
Rome had her policy, or government altered five times before the Caesar's, and
they made the sixth, which was the government when John had this revelation
showed him. The which Caesar's or part of Kittim was the son of Ianan, of whom
came the Grecians and Italians, but the Italians are they who here are meant.
Kittim began to afflict the chiefest of the sons of Heber our savior
Christ, and continued it upon his sons by faith the Christians, about the
time of three hundredth years, the which three hundredth years was noted by
two and forty months by an allusion to the time of our savior his
affliction, the which was also two and forty months, Apoc. 13. 5. Dan. 9.
27.
or three years and an half, being the full time of his preaching and
public life: so that all ages after that half seven wherein our Lord
finished all ceremonies, and all Apo. 12. 14. and 13. 5. and 11. 2. 3.
things touching our salvation, and wherein he suffered intolerable
affliction, are called by an allusion unto that time, either a time, two times
and half, or months two and forty, or days a thousand two hundredth and
sixty: the first for Satan The third num^er signifies the time of the (...)
of the Gospel, by an allusie^ also to our sauieur his time.
his whole rage, the second for the Roman Empire, and the popes: for it is
said, that both of them had power given them to do hurt unto the holy city
two and forty months. So that as our savior y^ head of y^ Church, was
himself most cruelly afflicted by the Dragon, and also by his ministers, for
these three years and a half, the which began at his baptism, and ended at
his death: even so should his members be after the same manner while the world
should stand. For whereas this sixth government these profane. Emperors were
rooted out, as if the beast had had the wound of a sword, and one head cut off,
or as if he had been dead for a long time by means first of Constantinus that
good christian Emperor, and afterward of other nations who greatly spoiled
Rome: yet now by these popes is he revived again. For they setting themselves
in the temple of God, as if they were God, and causing all nations to worship
them in the same manner that they had done the former beast, and ruling
themselves over the Empire, are said here to make the seventh policy in
Rome, and likewise after a sort to be an eight: the which policy is said to
have the whole power of Satan, as the former had, even to have the strength as
it were of warlike horses, to make battle against y^ city of Saints. Now if
you think that the former exposition by the angel concerning the seven heads
of the beast be not plain inought, he will let you have it yet more plain:
for he tells you further, that ye seven heads are also seven hills, whereon
the woman sits: and Apoc. 17. 9. 18
he also tells you, that the woman is the great city that reigns over the
kings of the earth. If this be true as most true it is, then can you not doubt
of the plainness hereof: for you are to understand that Rome stands upon
seven hills: and you are to understand also, that when saint John had this
revelation showed him, that Rome was then the great city that raygned over the
kings of the earth: and likewise that now it is: and therefore most fitly was
it said, that the latter beast had ten horns, as well as the former: forasmuch
as the popes had ten nations or kingdoms to yield obedience unto their power
as the former had to theyrs. And to make the matter more plain, that
Idolatrous Rome was revived again by these popes: saint John has another
vision showed him, which is this: He sees a beast arise out of the earth,
having Apoc. 13. 11.
two horns like unto the lamb. Meaning thereby, that these popes would come
as pretending great show of religion, and as if they were the vycars of Christ
that lamb of God, but he tells you that he spoke like the Dragon, and that
he did all that the first beast could do that was before him: yea and that
he caused the image of the former beast to be made, and gave him spirit and
life, and made all the earth to worship him, whose deadly wound by them was
healed. And furthermore Apoc. 13. 13. 14.
for their help therein, saint John shows you that this lamb should work
great signs and wonders, even so great as if it were to bring fire from
heaven, as Elyas did: 1. Kings 18. 21. to 41.
to the end that as he thereby caused all Israel to turn from the worship of
Ieroboams calves unto the Lord to worship him, even so in a contrary sort
would this lamb seek with the signs which were permitted him to do, to
turn all men both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, from the
worship of the Lord, to the worship of the beast, and to force them thereby to
receive his mark, either in their right hands or in yt forheads, or at
leastwise to bear his name, or the number of his name: for unless they would
so do, they should Apoc. 13. 15. 16. 17.
neither buy nor sell, but be killed. So that here you see, how fitly this
agrees with the other vision for the popes to be reuiuors of the former beast,
and also how fitly it falls out according to that which our savior and
saint Paul before had told you, that is: that there should come false prophets
which Math. 7. 15. and 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9. 10.
would come in sheep clothing but inwardly be ravening Wolves, and that they
would come with all lying signs, woonders and sleightes of deceice, and
therefore is it that our savior gives us so great charge to take heed of
them. And moreover therefore is it, that it pleases him to paynt them out so
plain unto us: for although they would seem never so much to bear the
horns of a lamb, or never so much to pretend religion, or show of holiness,
yet the Lord has so plainly noted them by one especial mark above the rest,
as that every simple man may know them, howsoever Revel. 13. 11. Genesis 3. and
Revel. 13.
they would seem to change their shape: and that is, their voice: the which
you see, saint John says, is all one with the Dragons. 2. Cor. 11. 13. 14. 15.
And therefore although Satan come not now as unto Genesis 3.
Adam and Euah, nor as in the days of the primitive Church: Revel. 13.
That is, although he come not now in y^ carkas of a luttle serpent, Exodus 20.
4 and Deuteronomy 5. 8. and 4 15. to ^0.
nor yet in the form of a seven headed beast: but contrariwise even in the
skin of a poor and simple lamb, yet the Psalm 50. 15. and 1. Kings. 8. 22.
to 55. and 2.
voice being the self and same, you may know him howsoever he transformeth
himself. It is good for you here then to Chro. 6. 13. to end, and D^. 9. 3. to
20. and 2. Kings. 19. 15. to 20. and 2. Chro. 14. 11 and Esaias 63. 16. and Psalm.
65. 2.
consider the voice both of the one and of the other: The voice of the serpent
and of the beast commands that which God forbids, and forbids that
which God commands: even so does the voice of this counterfeit lamb. as for
example, The voice of God forbids the making of graven images to bow down
unto them: but the voice of this counterfeit Note well the two last and Math.
6. 6. to 14.
lamb commands the making of them and the bowing unto them. The voice of God
commands prayer to be made unto him alone, and not unto any other: but the
voice of this John 3. 16. 17. 18. and Math. 26. 28. and Acts 10. 43. and 1.
Pet. 1. 18. 19.
counterfeit lamb forbids prayer to be made unto God alone, and commands
it to be made unto Saints withal. The voice of God says, that whosoever he
be that believes in Christ his son shall be sure to have pardon of his
sins through the shedding of his most precious bloudbut 1. Cor. 14. For when
the word of God is brought in a language that the people understand not, it is
a sign of the wrath of God upon that people as you may see in this 14. of the
first of Cor. 21. 22. verse.
the voice of this counterfeit lamb says, that whosoever he be that will
believe him, he shall be sure to have pardon for his sins through the blood
of the leaden bulls, which for his money he will send him. The voice of God
says, that better were it for his ministers to speak five words in the
church to the understanding of his people, that so they might say Amen
thereunto, then to speak ten thousand in a strange toonge, unto the which the
people cannot say, Amen: but the voice of this counterfeit lamb says, better
is it for his ministers to speak ten hundredth thousand in a strange language
Esaias. 58. and Math. 15. 11. 17. 18. 19.
unto the which the people cannot say Amen, then to speak one word to their
understanding, least so they should spy out their knauerie. Again, the voice
of God commands Esai. 58. and Math. 15. 11. 17. 18. 19.
us not to abstain from meats, but to abstain from sin, and celleth us
that it is not the meat which a man eats that can defile him, but the sin
that rests in his heart: and yet dare the voice of this counterfeit lamb
command men to abstain 1. Tim. 4. 3. 4.
from meats: and to make them believe that unless they do so upon such days
as he appoynteth, they shall not only be defiled therewith, but also be damned
for evermore thereby, especially if they eat but a bit upon good Friday.
Furthermore the voice of God commands marriage as a most Genesis 2, 24.
lawful thing unto all men: but the voice of this counterfeit 1. Tim. 4. 3.
lamb forbids it as an unlawful thing unto some men. The Math. 20. 26. and
^3. 11. 12. and Mark. 9. 34. 35 and 10, 42, 43. 44.
voice of God forbids his ministers the exalting of themselves above their
brethren, but the voice of this counterfeite lamb exalts himself not only
above his brethren, but also above all that are called Gods, and most
presumptuously sets ^. Thessalonians. 2. 4. That is, above ^ll Kings and Lords, and
other magistrates which are called Gods, as you may see, 1. Cor. ^. 5. 0.
himself in the temple of the Lord God, as if he were God, commanding what
him likes, and forbidding what him li^teth: as most like a subtle serpent in
one thing, which is to be noted above all others, that is, whereas the voice of
the Lord God commands all men to read and meditate in his holy word, that so
they might wear his cognizance, and be retayners unto his kingdom: the voice
of this counterfeyte Iosha. 1. 8. and Deu. 6. 6. to 10 and. 11. 18. and John.
5. 39. and Psalm. 1. 2.
lamb forbids it, that so they might wear his mark and be retayners unto
his kingdom. And therefore is it that he deals most impudently, as
follows, that is, whereas the voice of the Lord God commands us to worship
and fear him that Reave. 14. 7.
made heaven and earth, the sea and all fountains of water: and that we
should give glory to him, and to the Lamb that Reave. 1^. ^. and 5. 9.
stands on mount Sion, because he only was worthy, forasmuch as he has
redeemed us unto God by his blood: I say, whereas the voice of the Lord God
commands us thus to do, and contrariwise forbids us the worship of the
Beast or Reave, 14* 9* to 10.
his image, threatening withal, that if any man do worship the beast or his
image, or receive his mark, either in his hand or in his forhead, yea or so
much as the prynt of his name in any part, they should then drink of the
pure wine of the wrath of God, and should have no rest neither day nor night,
but be tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the
lamb of God for ever and ever. And yet dare the voice of this counterfeit
Lamb command and forbid the Reave. 13. 11. to end.
contrary, saying unto al men: See that you worship the beast and the image of
the beast, and that you receive his mark either in your right hand or in your
forheads, or at leastwise bear his name or the number of his name: for as many
as will not thus do, shall neither buy nor sell, no nor live upon y^ earth. And
thus you see how plainly God has noted unto you, the marks not only of the
first beast, but also of this counterfeyte Reave. 13.
Lamb the second, whose voice is all one with the third that Genesis 3.
Reave. 12. 3. 9. and 20. 2.
deceived Adam, and all three speak the words of the Dragon, that is, of the
very devil himself, whose rage notwithstanding Reave. 4. 7. and 6. 9.
was most fiercely exercised in the first beast the Roman Reave. 20. 2.
Emperors for the space of three hundredth years: yet could Reave. 13. 11. to
end. and 2. These. 2. 4. to 13.
he not so prevail by them, but that many stood as courageous Lions most
manfully to y^ truth. But after that he had Reave. 14. 8. and 17. 2.
been thus tied by good christians for the space of a thousand years from the
days of our Lord, so that he could not have Reave. 17. 12. 13. 16. 17.
his full sway, yet then does he so prevail by the second beast Numb. 24. 24.
this lamb the popes, whose commings were as you see, with Kittim does
conteyne the Grecians and Italians. Now as the first part the Grecians perished
before the first coming of Christ, being one part of y^ afflicters of his
people in Dan. 7. so shall this latter part the Italians by his second coming
being the only afflicters of y^ high Jerusalem, as you may see Reu. 11. 2. and
Luke 21. 24.
all lying signs and wonders, and under the pretense of religion, that all the
world was made drunken with the wine of their fornication, and deceived with
their inchantmentes. But as kings then gave their power and authority unto
this second beast, so God has told us that in the end he will put into the
heart of kings to hate the beast, and to eat her flesh, and to make her
desolate, naked and bare. The which we give him thanks for, we see begun in
diverse countries, and I trust we daily more and more shall see for
notwithstanding all their strength hitherto, yet know you that they are but
that Kittim that shall perish in the end, even as Moses the servant of the Lord
from Baalam does tell you, who although he were but a false prophet like unto
these we now speak of, yet the Lord made him to speak the truth herein in
spite of his heart. Know you again, that the Lord will consume them 2. These.
2. 8.
with the spirit of his mouth, as that holy Apostle saint Paul does also tell
you: yea and know you once again, that the holy Ghost does assure you, that
he will give unto them and their mountain, the discomfiture of Sisera at
Magedon: yea Revel. 16. 16. 19. 21. and Judge. 4. 17. to end. and 5. 19. 20. 21.
and that he will give unto them the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his
wrath, and that the devil which deceived them, I mean the Romans the first
beast, as also the false prophets the second beast with all that have received
y^ beasts Revel. 14. 8. to 12 and 18. to end.
mark, I say, all these with their author the devil shall be cast into a lake
of fire and brimstone, where they shall be tormented Revel. 20. 10. and 19. 19.
20.
even day and night for evermore. So that here we may say again with the holy
Apostle: O let us often behold, and behold Romans 11. 22.
again the loving kindness, and the severity of the Lord: his loving
kindness toward us in that it has pleased him so graciously and lovingly to
give us his most holy word, by the which we may see as by a glass the
spots of this most filthy state of Rome: And his severe severity toward
all those that are deprived of the same.

Now if you will know the cause here, why the Lord does so deal, as to take
his holy word from so many thousands of people, and so by that means to
suffer them to run headlong to eternal destruction. The answer is: because
they themselves have not a love of the truth, for so speaks 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.
11. 12. and John. 17. 17.
the Apostle, when men have not a love to the truth (says he) which is the
word of God, by the which word they might be saved, it pleases the Lord to
send them strong delusions, that so they should believe lies: and also to
suffer them to give 1. Tim. 4. 1.
heed unto the spirits of error and doctrines of devils: and so by that
means to deprive themselves of the true light which should give them life:
whereby in y^ end they might be damned: and only because they would neither
receive nor believe the truth, but rather delighted in the precepts and
doctrines of men: and as concerning the doctrine of life had no courage to go
on forward, but rather delighted to remain therein, as children ever ready to
wauour, and to be carried about with every wind of strange doctrine, and to
be as wandering stars who easily fall from their standing. And therefore
well worthy is the blackenesse of darkness reserved to such for ever.
Wherefore let us that account our selves Christians be thankful unto the Lord,
that it has pleased him to call us from the power of this damnable darkness,
even to the most clear light of the glorious Gospel, and let us not only be
thankful unto the Lord, for that it has pleased him to call us out of this
mystical Babylon: but let us also be much more Apoc. 18. 4.
careful then heretofore we have been, to let the heavenly lerusalem come
into our minds: and let us in any wise give an entrance to the building of
this spiritual work by the most Ephesians. 6. 17.
holy word of God, and evermore hold fast that sword of the spirit in the one
hand, while we work with the other: that so we may put in fear al such
enemies as would hinder or keep back this spiritual building. And let us also
give more diligent heed, as the Apostle commands us, unto the things Heb.
2. 1. 2. 3.
which we have heard, least at any time we should let them slip: for if the
words spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense of reward, as before we have seen, how then shall
we Heb. 1. 1. 2. and 2. 3. 4.
escape, if we neglect so great salvation, since the Lord has spoken unto us
in these last days by the son himself, whose doctrine was further confirmed
unto us by them that heard him: Therefore let us in any wise, I say, give more
abundant heed unto the things which we have heard of him, least we also be
plucked away with the error of the wicked, and so ^. Pet. 3. 17.
fall from our own steadfastnesse: for assuredly in the same condemnation are
all they, who live in ignorance of his truth, and despise the knowledge of his
holy word. Therefore it is meet you learn to redeem the time, even this very
hour, and not to move the patience of God any longer: for assure your self,
if he spared not the Jews, which were the natural Romans 11.
branches, but has cut them off even from their natural root, from whence
they should have had their life, and y^ through their unbelief, which
unbelief befell them through the hardness of their own hearts, and the
hardness of their hearts through the contempt of the word of God: much more
then will he not spare us, if we harden our hearts against the delight we
should take therein, because that we by nature are but as a wild Olive tree,
and are but graft upon their stock: and therefore let us take heed in what
case we stand, for fear least we also fall by the like example of
disobedience, and so bring the wrath of God upon us, as the former have done
upon the^. For you must not be ignorant of this one thing in any wise, that
is, that the Lord will be slack concerning his threatenings (as some men count
slackenesse) but that he is patient toward us, and would have no man to
perish, but would that all men should come to repentance, because he is a
merciful God, and full of compassion. And to assure men that he is so, he has
given his most holy word unto them, Psa. 147. 19. 20 Deuteronomy. 32. 47. and John. 5.
39.
whereby they may perceive that he greatly loves them, because thereby he
offers eternal life unto them: so that if they will embrace that, they may
find eternal life: but if not, they shall be sure to find eternal death,
because they can not see without that in what sort to walk, as to please the
Lord therewith: neither can they without that see the love wherewith the Lord
loves them: that is, without that they cannot see how that God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten so^ to suffer for their sins: To the
intent, that if they would John. 3. 16.
believe in him they should not perish, but have eternal life. Therefore al
those that have delighted in his most holy word, and laid hold on his promises
therein contained, and by faith embraced his couenantes concerning Christ, and
thought upon his commandments to endeavor to do them, he has never failed
to thousands of generations.

For when as our first parents had brought upon themselves swift damnation by
reason of their own disobedience, yet nevertheless Genesis 3. 15.
embracing the holy word of covenant, wherein all grace consisted, by faith
received life again. In this faith Genesis 4. 4. and Hebr. 11. 4.
Abell offered unto God a greater sacrifice then Kaine, by the which he
obtained witness that he was righeous, God testifiyng of his gifts: by the which
faith also he being dead yet speaks. In this faith was Enoch taken away that
he should not see death, being a figure of ye resurrection, by the which faith
Genesis 5. 21. 22. 23. 24. and Hebr. 11. 5.
he was reported of to have pleased God. In this faith Noe being warned of God
of the things which were as yet not seen, Genesis 6. 13. 14. to end. and Heb.
11. 7.
being moved with reurence, prepared the Arc to the saving of his household:
through the which Arc he condemned the world, and was made heir of the
righteousness which is by faith. In this faith Abram when he was called obeyed
God, Genesis 12. 1. 4. and Heb. 11. ^.
to go into a place which afterward he should receive for inheritance, and
he went out not knowing whether he went, and in this faith he abode in the land
of promise as in a strange country, as one that dwelt in tents with Isaak and
^acob heirs with him of the same promise, and looked for a City having a
foundation, whose builder and maker is God. In this faith also Sara received
strength to conceive seed, and Genesis 17. 19. and 18. 10. and. 21. 2 to 8. and
Hebr. 11. 11.
was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him
faithful which had promised, and therefore sprang thereof one, even of one which
was dead, so many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand of the
sea shore which Genesis 22. and Heb. 11. 17. and Genesis 17. 19. 20
is innumerable. In this faith Abraham offered up Isaak when he was tried, and
he that had received the promise offered his only begotten son, to whom it
was said, in Isaak Shall thy seed be called: for he considered that God was
able to raise him up even from the dead, from whence also after a sort he had
received him. In this faith Isaak blessed Jacob and Genesis 27. and Heb. 11. 20.
Esau concerning things to come. In this faith Jacob when he was a dying
blessed both the sons of Joseph. In this faith Joseph Genesis 48. and Hebr. 11. 21.
when he died, made mention of the departing of the children Genesis 50. 24. to
end, and Heb. 11 12.
of Israel out of y^ land of Egypt. In this faith Moses when he came to age,
refused to be called the son of Pharaohes Exodus 2. 2. 3. and Acts. 7. 20.
21. and Heb. 11. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28.
daughter, and chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the rebukes of Christ
greater riches then all the creasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the
recompense of the reward. And in this faith he forsook Egypt, and feared not
Exodus 2. 11. to end, and Acts. 7 23. to 31. and Hebr. 11.
the kings fierceness, for he endured as he that saw him which is invisible:
and in this faith he ordained the passover and the effusion of blood, least
he that destroyed the first borne Exodus 12. and Heb. 11. 20.
should touch them. In this faith they passed through the red Sea as on dry
land, which when the Egyptians assayed to Exodus 14. and Hebr. 11 29.
do, they were drowned. In this faith Joshua or Jesus (...). 1. 1. 2. and 3
and. (...). chapt. and Acts. 7. 45. I sh 1. 12. 24. Josh 1. 6. and H^br 11.
30. soshu. 2. and Hebr. 11. ^1. Judge. 6. 11. and (...) 8 chap. and (...). and
11. and 13. and 14. and 15. and 16. chapters. Dan. 3. 25. and Esai. 43. 2.
brought in the people of God into the land of promise, and in this faith he
conquered one and thirty kings. In this faith the walls of Jericho being
compassed about seven days fell down. In this faith Rahab the harlot perished
not with them which obeyed not, when she had received the spies peaceably. In
this faith Gedeon, Barac, Samp^on, Iephte, David, Samuel, and all the prophets
subdued kindgdomes, wrought righteousness, obtained the promises, and stopped
the mouths of Lions. In this faith Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego quenched
the heat of fire. And in this faith Daniel refused the glory of Babell and
Paras, by the which faith he abode constant in the true worship of his God,
though Dan. 6.
amongst the Lions he should be cast. In this faith many that were weak in
the days of Antiochus were made strong Dan. 8. 9. to (...) and H^br. 1. 35.
and waxed valiant in battle, and turned to flight the armies of the allients.
In this faith women received their dead raised to life, and others also were
racked, and would not be delivered, because they looked for a better
resurrection. In this Ieb. 11. 36. 37. to end.
faith others have been tried by mockinges and scourginges: yea moreover by
bonds and imprisonmentes, they were staned and hewn asunder, and were tempted
and slain with the sword, and wandered up and down in sheep skins, and in
goat skins, being destitute, afflicted and tormented, whom the world was not
worthy of, they wandered in wilderness, and mountains and dens, and caves of
the earth. And these all through faith obtained good report, and received not
the promise, God providing a better thing for us, that they without us should
not be perfect. Yet al these dyed in faith, and saw Heb. 11. 13. 14 15. 16.
the promises a far off, and received them thankefully, and confessed that
they were strangers and pilgrims on earth, for they that say such things,
declare plainly that they seek a country not hereupon earth, but the desire a
better, that is, an heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed of them to be called
their God, and has prepared for them an heavenly eitie. Now then, seeing that
faith is the ground of things hoped Hebr. 11. 1.
for, and the evidence of things which are not seen: Let us in any wise use
the means that God has appointed to come thereby. And seeing we are compassed
with so great a cloud of Heb. 12. 1. 2.
witnesses, Let us also cast away every thing that presses down, and the
sin that hangs on so fast: and let us run the race with patience that is
set before us: still looking unto our Lord and Souiour Jesus Christ, who is the
author and finisher of our faith. And let us above all things take heed that
we despise not him that speaks: For if all these which before I spoke of,
and many more escaped not which refused those that spoke on earth, much more
shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven. And
seeing we know that the judgments of God are according to truth against all
them that have so lightly regarded to hear and know, and have counted them
worthy of death which have done so: let us not think if we do the same, that
we shall escape the judgments of God: but that the like famine will befall us
and our nation that has befallen others: I do not Amos. 8. 11. 12
mean a famine of bread, as made of corn, but of that heavenly bread the
word of God.

Therefore seeing his word is no vain word (as Moses says) Deuteronomy. 32. 47.
concerning men, but is even their very life: Let us (as y^ Apostle says) as
newborn babes desire the sincere milk thereof, 1. Pet. 2. 2. and 2. Pet. 3.
18.
that so we may grow thereby, both in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord
and savior Jesus Christ, especially forasmuch as that in the knowledge of him
stands our eternal life: and no where else is he to be found, but in the holy
scriptures, for so he himself has said in these words: Search the scriptures,
for in them ye think to have eternal life: and so you John. 5. 39.
shall, for they are they that testify of me, by who^ you have your life,
breath and being, and that eternally: but you will not come Acts. 17. 28.
John. 5. 40. John. 3. 36.
unto me (says he) that ye might have life: Therefore has the holy Ghost
said in another place, he that obeys not the son of God shall never see
life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Seeing therefore that the son has
given John. 5. 39. Joshua. 1. 8.
commandment to search the Scriptures, and the father that we should not let
them depart out of our mouths, and the holy Ghost has pronounced a blessing
only on them which Psalm. 1.
do therein delight: Let us in any wise take unto us (as the Apostle
commands) even the whole armor thereof, and Ephe. 6. 10. to 19.
with the holy Prophet make it our only meditation continually, then shall we
be sure to prosper and to have good success: Ioshu. 1. 8.
for so the Lord himself has told us: yea then shall we be like a tree that
florisheth being planted by the river side, Psalm. 1.
which brings forth her fruit in due season: yea then shall our prosperity
be as a flood, and our righteousness as the waves Esai 48. 18.
of the sea, for then will the son of righteousness himself ouershadow us,
under whose wings we shall be sure to find Psalm. 91. 4.
everlasting health and safety, whereas otherwise we see that God is a
consuming fire, and has trodden down the wicked Deuteronomy 4. 4. and Heb^. 12. 29.
that would not delight herein, as we have seen in all ages. Therefore most
heartily I beseech you, yea and beseech you again and again, that you will
always remember that great commandment of the Lord our God, which is this:
Even to remember the law of Moses his servant, the which he Mala. 4. 4.
has commanded, with all his statutes and judgments: and also that most sure
word of the holy prophets with the commandementes 2. Pet. 1. 19. and 3. 2.
of the apostles of our Lord and savior: and to labor therein both day and
night: that so you may remain no longer as children without understanding, but
to be of a most ripe age therein, and that so it may be said of you, This
Deuteronomy. 4. 6. 7. 8.
people is only wise, and of an understanding heart: For they have known the
holy scriptures from their childhood, which 2. Timo. 3. 1t.
are only able to make them so to be. Come therefore I beseech you, and let
us with the holy prophet confess before all men and say, Oh how love we the
law of the Lord: It is our Psalm. 119. 97.
only meditation continually: we have had as great delight in Psalm. 119. 14.
the way of his testimonies as in all manner of riches. Therefore shall our eyes
prevent the night watches to meditate in Psalm. 119. 148.
his word, because the law of his mouth is better unto us then Psalm. 119. 72.
thousands of gold and silver: yea we his servants will continually meditate in
his statutes, and his testimonies shall be our Psalm. 19. 23. 117.
delight, and our only counselors. And because that by his Psalm. 119. 24.
precepts he has quickened us, we will never forget his Psalm. 119. 93.
word: but we will still hearken unto his voice, that so we Psalm. 119. 16.
Deuteronomy. 26. 17.
may learn to fear it, and diligently to obey it all the days of our life.
And we will also set up the Lord this day to be our God, and we will walk in his
ways, and keep his ordinances, his commandments and his laws for ever,
and his voice Ioshu. 24. 24.
alone will we obey. And so doing the Lord our God will set Deu. 26. 18. 19
up us to be a precious people unto himself, as he has promised: yea so shall
we be set on high above all nations of the earth in praise, in name, and in
glory: yea so shall we be counted an holy people unto the Lord, which in time
past were not a people: so shall our enemies that daily rise against us Deuteronomy.
28. 7.
fall before our faces: yea where as they come out one way against us, they
shall fly before us seven ways: yea so shall five of us chase an hundredth of
them, and an hundredth of us put Leuit. 26. 8.
ten thousand of them to flight, as in good part, of late we have Deuteronomy. 28. 12.
seen: yea so will the Lord open unto us his heavenly treasure Leui. 26. 45. 6.
and give us rain in due season, whereby our land shall yield her increase,
and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit: yea so shall our thressing
reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto sowing time: yea so
shall we eat our bread in great plenteousnesse, and dwell in our land in
safety: yea so shall we have peace in our land, and our sleep be in quiet,
and none shall make us afraid: yea so shall all the Deuteronomy. 28.
blessings contained in the whole book of God come upon us and overtake us,
if we shall hearken unto the voice of the Lord our God, and obey it, and
delight in his holy word as in the chiefest treasure, and in delighting
therein learn thereby to keep his commandments, and endeavor to do them.
Then blessed shall we be in the City, and blessed in the field, blessed shall
be the fruit of our body, and the fruit of our ground, the fruit of our
cattle, the increase of our kine and flocks of our sheep. Yea so shall we
find blessedness in all things we set our hands unto: And above all other
blessings, Reave. 2. 7. and 22. 2. 7.
our right shall be in the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of
God, and we shall enter in through the gates into the City. Therefore this one
thing I wish you to understand, and always to bear it mind, that is, that
even Jesus our savior, who is the root and the generation of David, and Reu.
22. 16. 17 and Esaias. 55.
the bright morning star has sent his Angel to testify unto you, and to all
men, that who so thirsts, and will come, he may be bold to come, and drink
of the waters of life freely. And thus I end at this time my direction unto
them: beseching the Lord Jesus Christ, that his grace may be with you, Apo.
22. 21.
and to direct you thither, who is the only guide thereunto. Apo. 7. 17.


Amen.
FINIS.
Yours in the Lord, Roger Cotton.

Imprinted at London, for Gabriell Simson and William White. 1590.


