THE MIRROR OF MARTYRS. IN A SHORT VIEW lively expressing the force of their
Faith, the feruency of their Love, the wisdom of their Sayings, the patience
of their Sufferings, etc. With their Prayers and preparation for their last
farewell. Whereunto is added two godly Letters written by M. BRADFORD, full of
sweet consolation for such as are afflicted in conscience.

They loved not their lives unto the death. Revel. 12.11. AT LONDON, Printed by
T. P. for Io: Budge, and are to be sold at his Shop at the great South door of
S. Paul's, and at Britains Bursse. An. 1613.

Deuteronomy. 15.15. Remember that thou wast a bondman in the Land of EGYPT: and that
the Lord thy God redeemed thee.

Deuteronomy. 16.3. Remember the day thou came out of the Land of EGYPT, all the
days of thy life.

TO ALL SVCH as from a true heart delight to see the mighty power of CHRIST
magnified in his Martyrs, salvation.
Dear Christian Reader, who either want leisure to read, or ability to
buy that rich and plentiful Storehouse of Story, Doctrine, and Comfort, the
Acts and Monuments: penned by the most innocent hearted man of God, and true
NATHANAELL, Mr. JOHN FOX: and yet knowing th'incomparable worth of the things
contained therein, do often wish thy self some of that precious store for
thy present use, Lo here, a Mirror fitched thence, which how so ever in regard
of the smalnesse, it cannot show thee all; yet may thou here behold the
choice of many memorable things, which will yield thee sound comfort, and
profitable delight.

Accept then (good Reader I pray thee in stead of the greater) this little
Institution of a Christian Martyr, with the same mind with which it is now
offered unto thee, and use it to the same ends for which it was at the first
framed into this so small a Volume and if in reading the whole or any part
thereof, thou, or any of thine, do reap but the least good; be thankful
therefore to thy good God, and help me with thy prayers.

Thine ever in Christ, C. C.

THE FAYTHFVLL Soul, to her spouse CHRIST.
Cant. 6.
I Am my welbeloveds, and my welbeloved is mine. 2.


Cant. 8.
Set me as a seal on thine heart, 6.
and as a signet upon thine arm: for Love is strong as death: Jealousy is
cruel as the grave: the coals thereof are fiery coals, and a vehement flame.

Much water cannot quench Love, Verse. 7.
neither can the floods drown it: if a man should give all the substance of
his house for Love, they would greatly contemn it.

A PREAMBLE before the Book.
HAppy, happy, yea thrice, and everlastingly happy is that Soul which by Faith
feels it self handfasted unto Christ! Though it meet with a prosperous estate
in this world, it easily swells not: and if it meet with th'adverse things of
the world, it easily quails not. For it has the word of Christ, and the
Spirit of Christ residing and dwelling in it. She is not to learn in whom
she has believed: neither can she ever be finally forced from believing.
Bring her to trial, and prove whether of the two, Christ or Belial she will
embrace; offer her Gold to forgo CHRIST she greatly contemns it: Let the
mighty terrify with threats, she fears not their fear, nor is careful upon
the peril of life, to give them a direct answer: she regards not whippings;
she dreads not rackings: upon honorable conditions she esteems the prison a
Palace; fetters of jron, Ornaments of fine Gold: the darkest dungeon, a
delightsome dwelling; rather then she will violate the chastity of her faith
to CHRIST her only Spouse, she will willingly endure headding and hanging; yea
burning and broyling: In a word, nothing can be able to separate this sweet
soul from that love of GOD to her; which is in CHRIST Jesus her Lord. Now the
jmage of such a soul who desires to see, and by sight thereof to be
transformed inro the same jmage: Let him often with a spiritual eye pry into
this Mirror of Martyrs, following: Where he shall behold their Faith
victorious, their Hope lively, their peace passing al understanding, their Joy
unspeakable and glorious: their Speech always gracious, their prayers full of
Fervor, their lives full of Beauty, their ends full of Honor: This Honor
shall be to all the Saints.

Revel. 7.13. WHat are these? And whence come these?

Verse 14. THese are they that came out of great tribulation, and have washed
their long white Robes in the blood of the Lamb.

Verse 15. THerefore are they in the presence of the throne of God, and serve
him day and night in his Temple, and he that sits on the throne will dwell
among them.

Verse 16. THey shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the
sun light on them, neither heat.

Verse 17. FOr the Lamb which is in the midst of the thron shall govern them,
and shall lead them to the lively fountains of waters, and GOD shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes.

Revel. 14.12. Here is the patience of Saints: here are they that keep the
Commandemets of God, and the Faith of Jesus.

Verse 13. ANd I heard a voice from Heaven saying unto me, write, Blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth; yea says the spirit, that they
may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them.

Psalm. 116.15. PRecious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

Psalm. 72.14. ANd dear shall their blood be in his sight*

Revel. 6.10. HOw long Lord, which art holy and true! do thou not judge and
avenge our blood on the^ that dwell on the earth?

Verse 11. ANd it was said unto the^ that they should rest for a little season,
until their fellow servants and their brethren that should be killed even as
they were, were fulfilled.

TO THE RIGHT Noble and Virtuous Princess, the Lady ELIZABETH'S Grace, Eldest
daughter to our Sovereign Lord King James.
THat neither this poor and weak service which is here to be offered to the
Church of Christ, nor the memory of his faithful Martyrs which in this small
Brief I endevor to reviue, and celebrate, might be the less esteemed of the
good, or any way vilified of the bad, by coming abroad without the Patronage
and protection of some person of Eminency in the said Church: it was needful
for me most Noble Lady, to make choice of such a Patron as for Eminency of
place, and virtues, might have large romth in the hearts of the former; and
also whose sole authority might suffice to put to silence the jgnorance of the
foolish. All which meeting together in your Grace, my humble suit is, that
through your Princely hands this poor Mite may now be cast into the Lords
Treasury. Wherein your Grace shall walk in her Royal stepps, who (though
dead, Qu: Eliz.
yet now seems to live in you) by her sacred hands did first consecrate the
larger volume, whence this Epitome is extracted, to the use of the Church and
people of God.

Be pleased then most Gracious Lady (for the matter belongs unto you) to
receive under your favorable protection this Mirror or memorial of the
Martyrs, who living, had the protection of Angels: and when the Lord shall have
performed to your Grace all the good that he has promised, and of all loyal
hearts is earnestly expected, it shall then be no offense unto your Princely
mind that you have so done.

That great GOD who by his Omni-presence fills Heaven and Earth with his
Glory, fill and replenish your Graces heart with all the gifts and graces of
his blessed Spirit; which may beautify and adorn your person in the sight of
God and Man in this life: and hereafter Crown you with jmmortall Glory for
ever and ever in his Kingdom of Glory, Amen.

Your Graces most humbly devoted In all humble and dutiful affection, CLEM:
COTTON.

THE MIRROR OF the Martyrs. In a short view lively expressing and showing the
force of their Faith, the feruencie of their Love, the wisdom of their
Sayings, the patience of their Sufferings, their Constancy, Comforts, and sweet
meditations in the midst of all their Conflicts.
With their Prayers and preparation for their last farewell.
Bishop Hooper.
THE Godly Bishop HOOPER being brought unto the place where he should suffer,
seeing a Pardon lying upon a stool to be tendered unto him if he would recant,
cried to them that stood by, If you love my soul, away with it: If you love my
soul, away with it.

A blind Boy being suffered to come unto him (after much entreaty) to confer
with him: Mr. HOOPER hearing his talk, the water stood in his eyes: Ah poor
Boy said he, GOD has taken from thee the sight of thy bodily eyes, for what
cause he best knows: but he has given thee another sight much more
precious; for he has endued thy soul with the eye of knowledge and faith. GOD
give thee grace that thou loose not that sight: for the^ should thou be
blind both in body and Soul.

The day before his Martyrdom, he spent the most of the day in prayer, unless
any were licenced to speak with him, amongst the which Sr. Anthony Kingston
was one: who being brought into his Chamber found him at prayer, and at the
first view of him, burst forth into tears. Mr. HOOPER at the first blush knew
him not. Then said Sr ANTHONY why my Lord, know you not me, an old friend of
yours, Anthony Kingston?

Yes Mr. Kingston I know you well said Mr. HOOPER and I am glad to see you in
good health, and do praise GOD for it.

KINGSTON, But I am sorry to see you in this case: for as I understand, you are
come hither to die: But alas consider that life is sweet, and death is bitter.
Therefore seeing life may be had, desire to live: for life hereafter may do
good.

HOOPER. Indeed it is very true M. Kingston I am come hither to die, and to end
this life here; because I will not gainesay the former truth I have
heretofore taught in this Diocese amongst you: and I thank you for your
friendly counsel, though not so friendly as I could have wished it. Life
indeed is sweet, and death is bitter; but alas consider that the death to come
is more bitter, and the life to come more sweet. Therefore for the desire and
love I have to the one, and the fear and terror I have of the other, I do not
so much regard this death, nor esteem this life: but have settled my self
through the strength of Gods Spirit, patiently to pass through the torments
and extremities of the fire now prepared for me; rather then to deny Gods word
and truth.

The night before he suffered, his desire was to go to bed that night betimes,
saiing, that he had many things to think on: and so did at 5 of the clock, and
slept one sleep soundly, and bestowed the rest of the night after in prayer.
Being got up in the morning, he desired that none should come unto him, that
he might be solitary till the hour of his death.

Bishop Ridley.
Worthy Bishop RIDLEY going to his burning at Oxford, looking back, espied
Mr. LATIMER coming after: to whom he said, Oh be ye there? yea said Father
LATIMER, have after as fast as I can. Bejng come to the stake, he ran to Mr.
LATIMER, jmbraced him and kissed him, and as they that stood near reported)
comforted him, saying: Be of good comfort Brother; for GOD will either assuage
the fury of the fire, or else strengthen us to abide it.

Being at the stake, he held up both his hands to Heaven, and said: Oh heavenly
Father, I give thee most hearty thanks, that thou have called me to be a
professor of thee even unto death.

A Faggot being brought which was kindled with fire and laid down at M. RIDLEYS
feet, Father LATIMER spoke on this manner to him: Be of good comfort M. RIDLEY,
and play the man: we shall by Gods grace light such a Candle this day in
ENGLAND, as I trust shall never be put out.

By reason the fire was ill made, M. RIDLEY continued long in his torments, in
so much as he often cried, I cannot burn, I cannot burn: for Christ's sake let
the fire come to me: Lord have mercy upon me: let the fire come to me, I
cannot burn.

M. John Philpot.
THE valiant servant of Christ M. John Philpot having the news of his death
brought him by one of the Sheriffs men, that he must the next day be burned
at a stake, said, I am ready: God grant me strength, and a joyful
resurrection. And so went to his chamber and powered out his spirit unto the
Lord, giving him most hearty thanks, that had made him worthy to suffer for
his truth.

As he was entering into Smithfield, the passage was somewhat foul, and two
Officers took him up to bear him to the stake. The^ he said merrily, What?
will ye make me a Pope? I am content to go to my iourneys end on foot. But
first coming into Smithfield, he kneeled down there, saying these words, I
will pay my vows in thee O Smithfield.

John Bradford.
HOly BRADFORD having news brought him in great haste by the Keepers wife of
the Counter, that he should be burned the next day, and that his Chain was a
buying: with that put off his Cap, and lifting up his eyes to Heaven, said: I
thank God for it: I have long looked for this time, and therefore it comes
not to me now suddenly; but as a thing expected every hour, the Lord make me
worthy thereof. After which he went alone, and prayed secretly a long time.

A little before they carried him from the Counter to Newgate, he made a
notable prayer of his farewell, with such plenty of tears, and abundance of
the spirit of prayer, that it ravished the minds of the hearers.

Also when he shifted himself with a clean shirt that was made for his
burning, he made such a prayer of the wedding Garment, that some there present
so admired him, that their eyes were no less thoroughly occupied in beholding
him, the^ their ears gave place to the hearing of his prayers.

At his departing the chamber, he made in like sort a prayer, in which he
vehemently desired of God that his words might not be spoken in vain.

His behavior at his death.
MR. Bradford coming to the stake fell flat upon his face, praying the space
of one minute of an hour, the Sheriff willed him to make an end, because the
press was great: at that word standing upon his feet, he took a Faggot in his
hand and kissed it, and so likewise the Stake: so putting off his raiment, he
went to the Stake holding up his hands, and casting up his countenance to
heaven, said thus, O England, England, repent thee of thy sins, repent thee of
thy sins, etc.

To the young man that suffered with him he said, Be of good comfort Brother,
for we shall have a merry Supper with the Lord this night, and spoke no more
words that any man heard, but jmbracing the Reeds, said thus, Straight is the
way and narrow is the gate that leads unto life eternal, and few there be
that find it.

M. William Tims.
WIlliam Tims being convented before Bonner and Winchester: Tims said the
Bishops; thou have a good fresh spirit, it were well if thou had learning to
thy spirit: Yea my Lords said TIMS, and it were well also that as you be
Learned men; so ye had a good Spirit to your learning.

Bishop Latimer.
Reverend LATIMER writes thus to Bishop RIDLEY, Lo Sir, I have blotted your
papers and played the fool egregiously: but so I thought it better, then not
to fulfill your request at this time. Pardon me, and pray for me: pray for me,
pray for me I say. For I am sometimes so scarefull that I could creep into a
mouse hole: Sometimes God does visit me again with his Comforts. So he is
coming and going, coming and going; to teach me to know mine own infirmity,
that I might thank him who is worthy, least I should rob him of his glory, as
many do, and almost all the world, fare ye well.

The 3 requests which Father Latimer was wont to make.
THe first was, that as GOD had appointed His blood violently gushed out of his
heart, at his burning at Oxford.
so also he would give him grace to stand to his doctrine unto the death, and
that he might give his heart blood for the same.

The second was, that GOD of his mercy would restore his Gospel to Enggland
once again: and these words once again, once again, he did so inculcate and
beat into the ears of the Lord, as though he had seen god face to face, and
would have no nay.

and even with tears begged of God, that she might live to be a comfort to
this comfortless Realm.

Bishop Ridley.
RIDLEY writes thus in a Letter to Bradford, we look every day to be called
on: I ween I am the weakest many ways of our company: and yet I thank our
Lord God and heavenly Father through Christ, that since I heard of our dear
Brother ROGERS departing, and his stout Confession of Christ and his truth even
unto death, mine heart blessed be God rejoiced so in it, that since that time
(I say) I never felt any lumpishnesse nor heaviness of heart, as I grant I
have felt sometimes before: O good Brother Bradford blessed be God for thee,
and blessed be the time that ever I knew thee.

John Rogers.
MASTER ROGERS that Morning he should be burned, being in a sound sleep, was
hardly awaked with much shogging, when the keepers wife came suddenly up to
give him warning of his burning. At length being awaked, and bid to make have,
Nay then said he, and if it be so, I shall not need to tie my points.

The Sunday before he suffered, he drank to M. HOOPER being then in a Chamber
underneath him in Newgate, and bad them commend him to him, and to tell him,
that there was never little fellow would better stick to a man, then he would
stick to him: supposing they should have been burned together.

Laurence Saunders.
MR. SAVNDERS at the time of his first examination before STEVEN GARDENER,
reporto his bedfellow that lay with him the night following, that in the time
of his examination, he was so wonderfully comforted, that not only in his
spirit, but also in body he received a certain taste of that holy Communion of
Saints; whilst a most pleasant refreshing issued from every part and member of
his body unto the seat of the heart, and from thence did ebb and flow to and
fro unto all the parts again.

In a Letter to his Wife: feign would this flesh make strange of that which the
spirit does embrace. Oh Lord how loath is this loytring sluggard to pass forth
into Gods path? It fancieth forsooth much fear of fraybugs? and were it not
for the force of Faith, which pulls it forwards by the raines of Gods most
sweet promise; and hope which pricketh on behind; great adventure there would
be of fainting by the way. But blessed and everlastingly blessed be that
heavenly Father of ours, who in his Christ our sufficient Savior, has
vouchsafed to shine in our hearts by the light of his knowledge in the face of
Jesus Christ.

His Wife coming to visit him in prison, was forbidden to enter the prison; by
reason whereof the keeper took the little babe she had in her arms and
carried him to his Father. LAVRENCE SAVNDERS seeing him rejoiced greatly,
saying, that he esteemed more of such a boy, then if 2000 pound should be
given him. And to the standers by which praised the goodlinesse of the child,
he said, what man fearing God, would not loose this life presently, rather then
by preserving it here, he should adiudge this boy to be a bastard, and his
wife an Whore, and him-sefe an Whoremonger, yea were there no other cause why a
man of my estate should loose his life, yet who would not give it to avouch
this child to be legitimate, and his marriage to be lawful and holy.

Being come to the stake where he was burned, he fell prostrate to the
ground and prayed: And rising up again, he took the stake in his arms to
which he should be chained, and kissed it, saying, Welcome the Cross of
Christ: Welcome everlasting life.

Robert Glouer Genesis
MR. GLOVER a day or two before he should be burnt, felt his heart so
lumpish and heavy, that he found in himself no aptnes not willingness to
die, but rather a dullness of Spiritfull of much discomfort to bear the bitter
Cross of Martyrdom ready now to be laid upon him: Whereupon, fearing in
himself least the Lord had utterly withdrawn his wonted favor from him; he
made his moan to one AUGUSTINE BERNHERE his dear friend, signifying unto him
how earnestly he had prayed unto the Lord, and yet could receive no motion nor
sense of any comfort from him.

To whom the said Austen answering, desired him patie^tly to wait the Lords
leisure, howsoever his present feeling was; and to play the man, nothing
doubting but the Lord in due season would satisfy his desire with plenty of
Consolation, whereof he said he was right certain and sure: and therefore
desired him whenever any feeling of GODS heavenly mercies should begin to
touch his heart, that he would give him some sign thereof.

The next day when the time of his Martyrdom was come, and as he was going to
the stake and come to the sight of it, albeit all the night before prayjng for
comfort and courage, he felt no answer of his prayer: suddenly he was so
mightily replenished with the comfort of Gods holy Spirit and heavenly joies,
that he cried out clapping his hands to Austen sayjng these words, he is come
Austen, he is come, he is come: and that with such joy and alacrity as one
seeming rather to be risen from some deadly danger to liberty of life, then as
one passing out of this world by any pains of death.

M. John Lambart.
JOHN LAMBART having his nether parts consumed with fire, lifting up such hands
as he had, and his fingers ends flaming with fire, cried to the people, None
but Christ, None but Christ.

Adam Damplip.
THIS good man beejng advertised by his keeper that his execution drew near,
was never seen to quail, but was as merry, and eat his supper that night as
chearefully as ever he did in all his life; at which his keeper and the rest
of the prisoners wondering, asked him how he could take such news so
chearefully: Ah my Masters says he, do ye think I have been thus long
Gods prisoner in the Marshalsey, and have not yet-learned to die? Yes, yes, I
doubt not but God will strengthen me therein.

Kerby Martyr.
ONE KERBY being councelled by M. WINKFIELD to pity himself, and to take no
more upon him then he should be able to perform: the fire says he is hot,
the terror is great, the pain will be extreme, and life is sweet. To whom
KERBY answered, M. WINKFIELD be at my burning, and you shall say, there
stands a Christian Soldier in the fire. For I know that Fire, and Water,
Sword, and all other things are in the hands of God, who will suffer no more to
be laid upon us then he will give strength to bear.

Thomas Bilney.
MR. THOMAS BILNEY being put in mind, that though the fire which he should
suffer the next day should be of great heat unto his body, yet the comfort of
GODS spirit should cool it to his everlasting comfort and refreshing: At those
words putting his finger toward the flame of the candle the^ burning before
them (as also he diverse times did) and feeling the heat thereof, O said he I
feel by experience and have known it long by Philosophy, that fire by gods
ordinance is naturally hot, but yet I am persuaded by Gods holy word, and by
the experience of some spoken of in the same, that in the flame they felt no
heat, and in the fire they felt no consumption: And I constantly believe* that
howsoever the stubble of this my body shall be wasted by it, yet my Soul and
Spirit shall be purged thereby. A pain for the time: after which
notwithstanding follows unspeakable Joy. And then entreated notably upon the
first and second verses of the 43 Chap. of Isaias, which sentences for the joy
and comfort some of his friends took in them, caused them to be fair written
out; the comfort whereof they left not to their dyjng day. The said BILNEY
being visited by certain of his friends the night before he suffered, they
found him eating an Alebrew with such a cherefull heart and quiet mind, as
made them wonder thereat, sayjng, they were not a little glad to see him at
that time so cheerfully to refresh himself. To whom he made this answer,
Oh said he, I follow the example of the Husbandmen in the Country, who having
a ruinous house to dwell in, do yet bestow cost as long as they remain in it,
to uphold the same: And so do I now with this ruinous house of my body;
refreshing the same as you see, with these good creatures of God.

James Baynam.
THis BAYNAM as he stood at the stake in the midst of the flaming fire, which
fire had half consumed his arms and his legs, he was heard to speak these
words, O ye Papists. Behold ye look for Miracles, and here ye may see a
Miracle: for in this fire I feel no more pain then if I were in a bed of
down; but it is to me as sweet as a bed of Roses.

An. 1525.
Henry Voes.
THe like speech I find of a young man burnt at Bruxels, who when the fire was
kindled at his feet, said, me thinks you strew Roses under my feet.

Hugh Laverocke.
THis Laverocke a lame Creple, and JOHN APPRICE a blind man, being chained both
of them to the stake; LAVERCOCK casting away his Crutch, and comforting his
fellow. Martyr, fayd, Be of good comfort my brother, for my L. of London is our
good Physician, He will shortly cure us both: thee of thy blindness, and me of
my lamenesse.

William Hunter.
WILLIAM HVNTER appre^tice of the age of 19 years standing at the stake, said,
Son of God shine upon me: and jmediately the Son in the Element shone out of a
dark cloud (for it was a glomie day) so full in his face, that he was
constrained to turn his face an other way. The said WILLIAM HVNTER being
brought down from London to be burnt: remained by the way two days at
Burntwood, whether his Father and Mother came to comfort him, who heartely
desired of GOD that he might continue in the good way he had begun, unto the
end; and his mother said unto him, that she was glad she was ever so happy as
to bear such a Son who could find in his heart to loose his life for Christ's
sake. Then said WILLIAM to his mother: For my little pain which I shall suffer
which is also but for a moment, Christ has promised me Mother (says he) a
Crown of life. And may not you be glad of that Mother? With that his Mother
kneeled down on her knees, sayjng, I pray GOD strengthen thee my Son unto
the end. And I think thee as well bestowed as any Child that ever I bare. At
which words M. HIGBED (one that was then to suffer for the same cause) took
her in his arms, sayjng, I rejoice much to see you in this mind, and you have
good cause so to do.

Robert Samuel.
MR. ROBERT SAMVEL Minister, was kept in straight prison by the Bishops
Chancellor of NORWICH: Wherein he was chained boult upright to a great post,
in such sort, that standing only on tip-toe, he was feign to stay up the whole
poyse of his body thereby. And to make amends, they added a far greater
torment, keeping him without meat and drink, whereby he was miserably vexed
with hunger and thirst, saving that he had allowed him every day 2 or 3
mouthfuls of bread and 3 spoonfuls of water, rather to reserve him to further
torment, then to preserve his life. O the worthy constancy of the Martyr! O
pitilesse hearts of the Papists, worthy to be complained of before god and
nature! O the wonderful strength of Christ in his Martyrs! How oft-times would
he have drunk his own water, but his body was so dried up with long
emptines, that he was not able to make water, no not so much as one drop.

Now after he had been thus long famished with hunger (see a strange thing
that happened to him, of which himself was the reporter) he fell as it were
into a slumber, at which time one clad all in white, seemed to stand before
him: which ministered comfort unto him, by these words, Samuel, Samuel be of
good cheer, and take a good heart unto thee: for after this day, thou shall
never hunger nor thirst: Which thing came even to pass accordingly: for
speedily after he was burned, and from the time till he should suffer he felt
neither hunger nor thirst.

Cut. Simpson, Deacon.
CVtbert Sympsons patience was thus commended by Bishop Boner: ye see says
BONER what a personable man this is: and touching his patience, I say unto you,
that if he were not an Heretic, I would affirm that he were a man of the
greatest patience that ever yet came before me. For I tell you, he has been
thrice racked in one day. Also in my house he has felt some sorrow, and yet I
never saw his patience broken.

The day before he was condemned (being in the stocks in the Bish: colehouse)
Cloney his keeper came in with the keys about 9 of the clock at night after
his usual manner, to view his prison, and to see whether all were present: who
when he spied the said Cutbert to be there, departed again, locking the doors
after him.

Within 2 hours after at a 11 of the clock toward midnight (whether awake or
in a slumber I cannot say) he heard one coming in, first opening the outward
door, then the second, and after the third door, and so looking in to the
said CVTBERT, having no Candle nor Link that he could see, but giving a
brightness and light most comfortable and joyful to his heart, saying, Ha, unto
him; and departed away again. Who it was he could not tell. But this he
declared 4 or 5 times with his own mouth to one M. AUSTEN, to his wife, and
THOMAS SAMPSON, besides many others in Newgate, a little before his death. At
the sight whereof he received such a joyful comfort, that he also expressed
no little joy and solace in telling of it.

John Rough.
MR. JOHN ROVGH Minister, having bin at the burning of one AVSTO in Smithfield,
returning homeward met M. FARRAR a Merchant of Halifax, who asked where he
had been? I have bin says he where I would not for one of mine eyes but I had
bin. Where have you been said M. FARRAR? Forsooth says he, I have been to
learn the way. And so told him the whole matter of the burning of AVSTO, where
shortly after he was burned himself.

D. Rowland Tailor.
MR. Doctor TAILOR being come to Chelmesford in the way toward his
Martyrdom, was received there of the Sheriff of SVFFOLKE to conduct him to
HADLEY to be burnt. At supper the Sheriff of ESSEX labored him with might and
maine to have him return to the unity of the Catholic Romish Church,
affirming that that which he spoke proceeded of a good heart and good will
toward him, and thereupon drank to him: The Yeomen of the Guard also said,
upon that condition M. Doctor we all drink to you. When they had all drank,
and the Cup was come to him, he stayed a while as one studyjng what answer
he might give. At length he spoke thus to them, M. Sheriff, and my Masters
all, I heartely thank you of your good will. I have given ear to your words.
And to be plain with you I do perceive that I have bin deceived my self, and
am like to deceive a great many at HADLEY of their expectation. At which speech
they all rejoiced, yea good M. Doctor said the Sheriff, it is the
comfortablest word you spoke yet. Why should ye cast away your self in vain,
play a wise man's part, and I dare warrant you, you shall have favor. And then
they began to pray him to explain his meaning further unto them.

Then said Doctor Tailor, I will tell you how I am deceived my self, and how I
think I shall deceive a great many. I am as you see a man that has a great
Carcass whicht I though should have been buried in Hadley Churchyard, had I
dyed in my bed as I well hoped I should have done: but therein I see I was
deceived: And there are a great many of Worms in HADLEY Churchyard that
should have had jolly feeding upon this Carcass, which they have long looked
for. But now I know we be deceived, both I and they: for this Carcass must
be burnt to ashes, and so shall they loose their bait and feeding which they
expected.

The same Morning in which he was called up by the Sheriff to go to his
burning about 3 of the clock in the morning, being suddenly awaked out of his
sound sleep, he sat up in his bed and putting on his Shirt, he had these
words; speaking somewhat thick after his accustomed manner, Ah horson thieves,
ah horson thieves, rob God of his honor, rob God of his honor.

Being risen and tyjng his points, he cast his arms about a balke which was in
the chamber between M. BRADFORDS bed and his, and clasping his hands about it;
o M. BRADFORD said he, what a great swing should I give, if I were hanged?

Beejng come within 2 miles of HADLEY, he desired to light off his horse to
make water: Which done, he lept and fecht a friske or twain as men commonly
do in daunsing, why M. Doctor said the Sheriff, how do ye now? well I thank
God M. Sheriff said he, never better, for now I know I am almost at home, I
lack but 2 styles to go over and I am even at my Fathers house. But M.
Sheriff, shall we not go through HADLEY? Yes, you shall said the Sheriff.
The^ said he, O God I thank thee that I shall yet once ere I dye see my
flock, whom thou Lord know I have most dearly loved, and truly taught.
Good Lord bless them, and keep the^ steadfast in thy truth.

At the time of his degrading by Bishop Boner, bejng furnished fully with all
his attire according to their ridiculous custom, he set his hands by his side
walking up and down, and said: How say ye now my Lord, am I not a goodly fool?
How say ye my masters? If I were now in Cheap, should I not have boys enough
to laugh at these apish toys, and toying trumperies? when all his trinkets
were taken from him, he said, good Lord deliver me from you: and gojng from
them up to his chamber, he said, good Lord deliver me from you, good Lord
deliver me from you.

John Leaf.
THis JOHN LEAF a prentise to one HVMPHREY GAVVDY tallow Chandler, who was
burned with M. JOHN BRADFORD, had 2 bills sent him into the Counter in
breadstreet after his judgment, the one containing a recantation, the other his
confession: to know to which of them he would subscribe. Hearing first the
bill of his recantation read unto him, (because he could nether write nor read
himself) that he refused: and when he heard the other read unto him, which
he liked well off, in stead of a pen, he took a pin, and so pricking his
hand, sprinkled the blood upon the said bill, willing the reader thereof to
show the Bishop, that he had sealed the same with his blood already.

Richard Woodman.
THe conflicts whieh Richard Woodman had with the fear of death, recorded in
his own words, as follows.

Then 3 days after, my Lord Chamberlain sent 3 of his men to take me, whose
names were Deane, Ieffrey,, and Frauncis, I being at plough with my folks,
right in the way as they were coming to my house, least mistrusting them of
all other, came unto them and asked them how they did. And they said they
arrested me in the King and Queens name, and that I must go with them to my
Lord Chamberlain their Master. Which words made my flesh to tremble and quake
in regard the thing was sudden. But I answered them, that I would go with
them. Yet I desired them to go with me to my house that I might break my fast,
and put on some other gear: And they said I should. Then I remembered my self,
saying in my heart, why am I thus afraid? They can lay none evil to my charge,
If they kill me for well doing, I may think my self happy. I remembered how I
was contented gladly to dye before, in that quarrel, and so have continued
ever since, and should I now fear to die? God forbid I should, for then were
all my labor in vain. So by and by I was persuaded I praise god, considering
it was but the frailty of my flesh which was loath to forgo my wife, children,
and goods: for I saw nothing but present death before mine eyes. And as soon
as I was persuaded in mine heart to die, I regarded nothing in this world, but
was as merry, glad, and joyful I praise God as ever I was. This battle
lasted but a quarter of an hour, but it was sharper for the time then death I
dare say.

M. Glouer.
ROBERT GLOVER had a contrary effect in his troubles, as his own words
testifye. After I came into prison says he and had reposed my self a while,
I wept for joy and gladness my bellyfull, musing much of the great mercies of
GOD, and as it were, saying thus unto my self, O Lord who am I, on whom thou
should bestow thus thy great mercy, to be numbered among thy Saints, which
suffer for thy Gospel sake? And so beholding on the one side my jmperfection,
unableness, sinful misery, and unworthiness; and on the other side the
greatness of Gods mercy, to be called to so high promotion, I was as it were
amazed and overcome for a while with joy and gladness, concluding thus with my
self in mine heart, O Lord thou show power in weakness, wisdom in
foolishnes, Mercy in sinfulness: who shall let thee to choose where and whom
thou will? As I have ever zealously loved the profession of thy word, so have I
ever thought my self unworthy to be partaker of th'afflictions of the same.

The same ROBERT GLOVER, at an other time was much discouraged by Satan, not to
persevere in his suffering, suggesting to him his unworthiness to suffer for
Christ and his Gospel, but these his suggestions were thus repelled by him.

What were all those whom GOD in former time chose to be his witnesses? were
they not men subject to sin and imperfection as other men be? All we says
John have received of his fulness. They were no bringers of any goodness to GOD:
they were altogether receivers. They chose not GOD first, but he chose them.
They loved not GOD first, but he loved them, yea, when they were enemies to
him, and full of sin. He is and will be the same God still. As rich in mercy,
as mighty, as ready, as willing to forgive sins now without respect of
persons, as he was then; and so will be to the worlds end, to all that call
upon him. It is no arrogancy, nor presumption in any man to burden God with
his promise, chalenging his aid and assistance in all perils and dangers;
Calling upon him in the name of Christ, for whose sake, whosoever comes to
the Father, is sure to receive more then he can wish or desire.

I also answered the enemy on this manner: I am a sinner, and therefore
unworthy to be a Martyr. What then? must I deny GODS word, because I am a
sinner; and not worthy to profess it? What bring I to pass in so doing, but
adding sin to sin? What is a greater sin, then to deny the truth af
Christ's Gospel? I might also by the like reason, forbear to do any of GODS
commandments, when I am provoked to pray, the enemy may say unto me, thou
art not worthy to pray, and therefore I shall not pray. I shall not forbear to
steal, etc. because I am not worthy to do any of GODS commandments. These be
delusio^s of the Devil, which must be overcome by continuance of prayer, and
with the word of GOD applied according to the measure of every man's gift.

George Wise-heart.
THis WISE-HEART a Scottishman (rightly so called in regard of that true
wisdom of the spirit wherewith his heart was filled,) beejng come to the
place of execution, the hangman came unto him upon his knees, craving
forgiveness of him. To whom he answered, come hither to me: when he was come
nie him, he kissed his cheek, and said, lo here is a sign that I forgive
thee; my heart do thine office. And by and by he was put upon the Gibbet and
martyred.

Walter Mill.
WALTER MILL a Scottish Minister beejng disturbed in his prayer in the time of
his examination, having ended the same, said; we ought more to obey GOD then
Men. I serve one more mighty, even th'omnipotent Lord. And where ye call me
Sr. Walter, they usually call me WALTER, and not Sr. WALTER. I have been one
of the Popes Knights too long.

Beejng threatened with the sentence of death: I know I must die once says he,
and therefore as Christ said to Judas, Quod facis, fac citius. Ye shall know,
that I will not recant the truth; for I am Corn, I am no Chafe: I will not be
blown away with the wind, nor burst with the flaile: I will abide both.

Patrick Hamleton.
MR. Patrick Hamleton beejng in the fire, was heard by certain faithful men
of credit then alive, there to cite and appeal the black friar campbell that
accused him, to appear before the high GOD as general Judge of all men, to
answer to the innocence of his death, and whether his accusation were just or
no, between that and a certain day of the next month which he there named.
Moreover, by the same witness it is testified, that the said Friar dyed
immediately before the same day came, without remorse of conscience that he
had persecuted the poor Innocent.

Robert Farrar.
BIshop FARRAR being visited of a Knights son called RICHARD JONES a little
before his death, the said RICHARD seemed much to lament the painfulnes of the
death he had to suffer. To whom the Bishop answered, that if he saw him once
to st^r^e in the pains of his burning, he should give no credit to his
doctrine. And as he said, so he right well performed the same: For so patiently
he stood, that he never moved, but even as he stood holding up his stumps
of his hands, so he still continued, till one RICHARD GRAVEL with a staff
dashed him upon the head, and so stroke him down into the fire.

Rawlins Whight.
THis Whight a fisherman, a very aged man in the Town of Cardiffe in Wales,
grew very expert in the Scriptures by the help of a little boy he had, beejng
his own Son, who daily read the same, to him every night after supper,
Summer and Winter, and now and then some other good Book. In which kind of
virtuous exercise the old man had such delight and pleasure, that as it seemed,
he practiced himself rather in the study of the Scripture, then in the trade
or Science which before time he had used: so that RAVVLINS within few years,
in the time of King EDWARD, by the help of his little boy, as a special
Minister no doubt appointed by GOD for that purpose, profited and went forward
in such sort, that he was not only able to resolve himself touching his
former blindness and jgnorance (for by all likelihood he was before King
EDWARD'S days a Papist) but was also able to admonish and jnstruct others. So
as when occasion served, he would go from one place to another visiting such
as he had best hope in. And thus in that Country became a notable professor of
the truth, beejng at all times and in all such places not without the help of
his little boy. And to this his jndustrie GOD added to him a singular gift of
memory, so that by the benefit thereof he could and would do that in
alleging and rehearsing the text, which men of riper knowledge by their notes
and other helps of memory could hardly accomplish. In so much that upon
alleging some place of Scripture, he was able very often to cite the Book,
the leaf, yea and the very sentence: such was the wonderful work of GOD in
this simple and unlearned Father.

In the days of Queen MARIE it so fell out, that GOD called him not only
formerly to believe in him, but then to suffer for his sake: in which his
sufferings, the Lord endued him with invincible co^sta^cie, in so much as being
convented before the Bishop of Landaffe, The Bishop would needs with his
company fall to prayer in his Chapel, to see (as he said) if GOD would turn
the poor Man's heart: which RAVVLINS hearing, said, now you deal well my Lord,
and like a good Bishop indeed. Go to therefore my Lord, pray you to your God,
and I will pray to my GOD: I know that my GOD will hear my prayer, and perform
my desire. By and by the Bishop and his men fell to prayer. And RAVVLINS
turning him to a pew somewhat near, fell down upon his knees; covering his
face with his hands. Bejng all risen from prayer: The Bishop said, now Rawlins
how is it with thee? will it thou revoke thine opinions, or no? Surely said
Rawlins; my Lord, Rawlins you left me, and Rawlins you find me, and by GODS
grace Rawlins I will continue.

The Bishop seejng his prayers took none effect, was persuaded by some about
him (before he read the sentence) to have a Mass, thinking that GOD would
thereby work some Miracle upon the old man, when RAVVLINS heard the sacring
bell ring, (as the use is) he rose out of his place and came to the quier
door, and there standing a while turned himself to the people, speaking these
words, Good people, if there be any brethren amongst you, or at the least, if
there be but one brother amongst you, let that same one bear witness at the
day of judgment, that I bow not to this Idol, meaning the host the Priest held
over his head.

Hearing that the time of his burning drew near, he sent to his wife willing
her to provide him his wedding garment, in which he meant to be burned, meaning
his Shirt. Beejng brought out of prison and seejng himself guarded with a
great company of bills and gleaues, he said, alas what needs all this ado? I
will not start away by GODS grace: but with all my heart and mind I give unto
GOD most hearty thank that has made me worthy to abide all this for his holy
names sake.

At the light of his Wife and Children whom he saw in the way as he went to
be burnt, it so pierced his heart, that the tears trickled down his cheeks:
but suddenly misliking his jnfirmitie, he began to be angry with himself,
and striking himself on the breast with his hand, used these words, Ah flesh,
stayest thou me so? would thou feign prevail? well, I tell thee do what
thou can, thou shall not by GODS grace get the victory.

When he came to the sight of the stake, he set himself forwards very
boldly, but in going toward it, he fell down upon his knees and kissed the
ground, and in rising again, the earth a little sticking upon his nose, he
said these words, Earth unto Earth, and dust unto dust: thou art my Mother, and
unto thee shall I return. Then went he cheerfully and very joyfully unto the
stake, setting his back close unto it, and when he had stood there a while,
casting his eye upon the Reporter of this history, and call^ng him to him,
said, I feel a great fighting between the flesh and the Spirit, and the flesh
would very feign get the masterie: And therefore I pray, if you see me any
thing tempted, hold up but your finger to me, and I trust I shall remember my
self.

The reporter.
THere was observed in this good Father going to his death, and standing at the
stake, a wonderful change in nature. For whereas he was wont before to go
stooping, or rather crooked through the jnfirmitie of age: and having a sad
countenance, and feeble complexion, and withal a feeble and soft voice and
gesture: Now he went and stretched up him self and bare withal a most
pleasant countenance, not without great courage, both in speech and behavior.

Thomas Spurdance.
THis SPVRDANCE being asked of the Bish. when he was at mass, and received
the ceremonies of the Church, answered,

Never said he since I was borne.

No? said the Bishop, how old art thou?

He said, I think forty.

Why, how used you your self 20 years agone said the Bishop?

as ye do now, said he.

And even now quoth the Bishop, he said, he used not the ceremonies since he
was borne.

No more I have my Lord said he, since I was borne again. John. 3.

Elizabeth Folks.
ELIZABETH bejng examined if she believed not that Christ's body was in the
Sacrament Substantially, and really, yes says she I believe it is a real lie,
and a substantial lie indeed.

Julius Palmer.
PALMER showing his immovable constancy in standing to the truth, and beejng
now ready to yield up his life for the same truth, Sr. RICHARD ABRIDGES said
unto him, well PALMER says the Knight, I perceive that one of us two must be
damned, for we be of 2 sundry faiths, and sure I am there is but one Faith
that leads to life and salvation.

Pal. O sir I hope that both of us shall be saved.


Brid. How may that be PALMER?


Pal. Very well sir. For as it has pleased our Merciful Savior according to
the Gospels parable, to call me at the third hour of the day, even in my
flowers, at the age of 24 years; even so I trust he has called, and will
call you at the 11 hour, in this your old age, and give you everlasting life
for your portion.


Brid. Sai'st thou so? well Palmer, well, I would I might have thee but one
month in mine house, I doubt not but I would co^vert thee, or thou should
convert me.


Bradbegs Wife.
THis good woman had 2 children named Patience and Charity. At the time of her
condemnation she told the Bishop that if he would needs burn her, yet she
trusted he would take and keep Patience and Charity, (meaning her two
children) Nay by the Faith of my body says the Bishop will I not: The By: of
Dover.
I will meddle with neither of them both.

M. Frith.
John Frith after much trouble, bejng at length sent for to CROYDON from the
tower to appear before th'archbishoppe of Canterbury, Thomas Cranmer, sitting
therewith other Bishops, to receive his last doom; was earnestly labored
withal by one of his Gentlemen, and his Porter, who were the messengers that
set him, to free himself out of the Bishops hands. For they greatly lamented
FRITHS case, beejng sure if he came to CROYDON he would be cast away, such
was his constancy: in regard whereof upon Bristow Causie, the Gentleman
plotted a way for FRITH to escape, and drew the porter to his part. In the end
they acquaint Frith with their purpose, who with a smiling countenance made
them this answer, And is this the effect of your secret consultation so long
continued between you? Surely you have lost a great deal more time then this
ere now: and so are ye like to do at this time, for if you both should leave
me here alone, and should go tell the Bishops that you had lost FRITH, and
that he had escaped away from you, I would surely follow you as fast as I
could, and would bring them news of Friths finding. Do ye think (said he) I
am afraid to declare mine opinion to the Bishops of England in a manifest truth?

Agnes Bongeor.
THis dear Servant of Christ bejng condemned to be burned, had prepared her
self to go with her fellow Martyrs to the stake, the same morning they went:
but it was her hap of all the rest to be kept back, in regard her name was
wrong written, to wit, Agnes Boyer, for Agnes Bongeor: What piteous moan this
good woman made, how bitterly she wept; what strange thoughts came into her
mind, how naked and desolate she esteemed her self, into what plunge of
despair and care her poor Soul was cast; it was lamentable to behold;
because she went not with her fellows to give her life in the defense of her
Christ and his Gospel, for of all things in the world she least expected this
restraint. For that very Morning in which she was kept back from burning,
she had put on a smock which she had prepared only for that purpose: and
also having a little jnfant sucking on her, she likewise sent it away to
another nurse; So little looked she for life. Bejng in this great perplexity
of mind, a friend of hers came to her, demanding of her whether ABRAHAM'S
obedience was accepted before GOD, for sacrificing his Son ISAAK, or in that
he would have offered him, unto which she made this answer, I know that
Abraham's will before God was allowed for the deed, for he would have done it,
if the Angel of the Lord had not stayed him: but I said she am unhappy, the
Lord thinks me not worthy of this dignity, and therefore ABRAHAM'S case and
mine is not alike.

Friend. Why? you were resolved to go with your company, if GOD had been so
pleased.


Agnes. Yes with all my heart, and for that I went not with them, it is my
chiefest grief.


Friend. Dear sister I pray thee consider ABRAHAM and thy self well, and thou
shall see, thou nothing differest from him at all.


Agnes. Alas sir, there is a far greater matter in ABRAHAM then in me: for
Abraham was tried with the offering of his Child, but so am not I; our cases
therefore are not alike.


Friend. Good sister weigh the matter jndifferently: Abraham I grant would
have offered his own Son: and have not you done the like in your little sucking
babe, which you were content to part with? But consider that whereas Abraham
was commanded but to offer his Son, you are heavy and perplexed because you
cannot offer your self; which goes somewhat more near you, then Abraham's
obedience did, and therefore in Gods sight and acceptance is assuredly no less
allowed. After which talk between them she began a little to stay her self,
and gave her self wholly to th'exercises of prayer, and reading, wherein she
found no little comfort, waiting for the time of her Martyrdom, which at
length she obtained.


Thomas Hudson Martyr.
SEaman, Carman, and Hudson, beejng all three fastened to the stake in a pit
called the Lolards pit without Bishops-gate in NORWICH: HVDSON suddenly
slippeth from under the chame from his two fellows, to the wonder of many,
whereby arose much doubtfulnes in men's minds. But sweet HVDSON felt not his
Christ. He felt more in his heart and conscience, then they could conceive off.
In the mean while his 2 companions at the stake cried out to him to comfort
him, what they could: exhorting him in the bowels of Christ, to be of good
comfort. But alas good soul he was compassed (GOD knows) with great dolor
and grief of mind, not for his death, but for lack of feeling the comfort of
the holy ghost, the comforter. And therefore beejng very careful, he humbly
fell on his knees praying vehemently and earnestly unto the Lord, who at length
according to his mercies of old sent comfort, and then rose he with great joy,
as a man new changed even from death to life, saying, Now I thank God I am
strong and pass not what man can do unto me. So went he to the stake to his
fellows again, who all suffered together most joyfully.

Roger Holland.
HOLLAND having leave given him to speak after sentence pronounced by BONER
Bishop of LONDON, uttered these words. I told you even now that your authority
was from God, and that by his sufferance you do these things: and now I tell
you, God has heard the prayers of his servants, which has been poured out
with tears for his afflicted Church which daily you persecute, as now ye do
us. But this I dare be bold in God to say, (which by his spirit I am moved to
speak) that God will shorten your hand of cruelty, that for a time you shall
not molest his Saints: and this shall you in short time well perceive my dear
brethren to be most true: for after this day in this place, This was spoken in
the Month of June 15 8, and Q. Mary dyed Sep. following the 1.7.
shall there not be any by him ( Boner he means, put to the trial of fire and
Faggot. And after that day, was there never any that suffered in Smithfield for
the testimony of the Gospel, God be thanked.

WIlliam Pickes somewhat before his apprehension, went into his Garden and
took with him a Bible of Rogers translation, where he sitting with his face
toward the South, reading on the said Bible, suddenly fell down upon his
Book between 11 and 12 a clock at noone, 4 drops of fresh blood, not knowing
from whence they came. Then he seeing the same was sore astonished, and could
by noe means learn from whence they should fall: and wiping out one of the
drops of blood with his finger, called his wife and said, In the virtue of God
wife what: me^neth this? Will the Lord have 4 Sacrifices? I see well enough the
Lord will have blood. His will be done, and give me grace to abide the trial.
Afterward he looked daily to be apprehended of the Papists, which came to
pass accordingly.

Prests Wife.
ONe PRESTS Wife of Exeter, being asked of the Bishop whether she had an
husband and children, or not, answered, I have an husband and Children, and I
have them not. So long as I was at liberty, I refused neither husband nor
children: but standing here as I do in the cause of Christ and his truth,
where I must either forsake Christ, or my husband, I am content to stick only
to Christ my spiritual Husband, and to forsake the other.

Being oft-times offered money to relieve her necessities, she would for the
most part refuse it, saying, That she was going to a Country, where Money
bears no Masterie.

Elizabeth Young.
ELIZABETH YOUNG beejng committed to close prison, the keeper was charged by
Doctor MARTIN in her hearing, to give her one day bread and an other day Water,
to which she made this answer, Sir, If you take away my meat, God I trust
will take away my hunger.

John Cardmaker.
MR. CARDMAKER disputing with one about the Real presence, asked the party
whether the Sacrament whereof he spoke had a beginning or no. Which he
affirmed. The said Mr. CARDMAKER thus inferred therevppon: If the Sacrament
(said he) as you confess have a beginning and an ending, then it cannot be
God: for GOD has neither beginning nor ending, and so willing him to note it
well, he departed from him.

John Bradford.
MR. BRADFORD beejng solicited by one PERCIVALL CRESVVEL to make suit for him,
after many words, said.

Cres. I pray you let me labor for you.


Brad. You may do what you will.


Cres. But tell me, what suit I should make for you.


Brad. Forsooth that that you will do, do it not at my request, for I desire
nothing at your hands. If the Queen will give me life, I will thank her. If
she will banish me, I will thank her. If she will burn me, I will thank her.
If she will condemn me to perpetual prison, I will thank her.


Out of a Letter of Bradfords, to Cra^mer, Ridley, and Latimer.
THis day I think, or to morrow at the uttermost. Hearty HOOPER, sincere
SAVNDERS, and trusty TAILOR, end their course, and receive their Crown. The
next am I, which hourly look for the porter to open me the gates after them,
to enter into the desired rest.

Cranmer Archbishop.
SVch was the patience and mildnes of that worthy Martyr Thomas Cranmer toward
his enemies, that it was grown to a common proverb: Do my L. of Canterbury a
shrewd turn, and the^ you may be sure to have him your friend for your labor,
while you live.

Laurence Saunders.
Out of a Letter written to his wife.
TO number the mercies of God unto me in particular, were to number the drops
of water which are in the Sea, the sands on the shore, the stars in the sky.
O my dear wife, and ye the rest of my friends, rejoice with me I say, rejoice
with thanksgiving for this my present promotion, in that I am made worthy to
magnify my God, not only in my life by my slow mouth, and uncircumcised
lips, bearing witness unto his truth: but also by my blood to seal the same
to the glory of my GOD, and confirmation of his true church. And as yet I
testify unto you, that the comfort of my sweet Christ, does drive from my
fantasy the fear of death. But if my dear Husband Christ do for my trial,
leave me alone a little to my self, alas, I know in what case I shall be
then: but if for my proof he do so, yet am I sure he will not be long or
far from me. Though he stand behind the wall and hide himself as Solomon
says in his mystical song, yet will he peep in by a crest to see how I do.
He is a very tender hearted Joseph: though he speak roughly to his brethren,
and handle them hardly, yea and threaten grievous bondage to his best beloved
Benjamin: yet can he not contain himself from weeping with us, and upon us,
with falling on our necks, and sweetly ^issing us* Such, such a brother is our
Christ unto all etc.

Out of another Letter to his wife.
WE be shortly to be dispatched hence to our good Christ, Amen, Amen. Wife, I
would have you to send me my Shirt: you know whereunto it is consecrated, let
it be sowed down on both sides, and not open. O my heavenly Father look upon
me in the face of thy Christ, or else I shall not be able to abide thy
countenance, such is my filthiness. He will do so, and therefore I will not be
affrayd what sin, death, hell, and damnation, can do against me.

Out of a Letter written to M. ROBERT GLOVER the same morning he was burned.
OH dear Brother, whom I love in the Lord, being loved also of you in the
Lord, be merry and rejoice for me, now ready to go up to that mine
jnheritance, which I my self jndeede am most unworthy of, but my dear Christ
is worthy, who has purchased the same for me with so dear a price. Oh
wretched sinner that I am, not thankful unto this my Father, who has
vouchsafed me worthy to be a vessel unto his honor. But O Lord, now accept
my thanks, though they proceed out of a (not enough) circumcised heart. Salute
all that love us in the truth, Gods blessing be with you always, Amen. Even
now toward the offering up of a burnt Sacrifice. O my CHRIST help, or else I
perish.

Bishop Hooper.
Out of a Letter consolatory, which he writ to certain godly Brethren taken in
Bow Churchyard at prayer, and laid in the Counter in Bread-streete.
REmember what lookers on you have to see and behold you in your fight; God and
all his holy Angels, who are ready always to take you up into Heaven, if you
be slain in his fight. Also you have standing at your backs all the multitude
of the faithful, who shall take courage, strength, and desire to follow such
noble and valiant Christians as you be. Be not afraid of your adversaries: for
he that is in you, is stronger then he that is in them. Shrink not although
it be pain to you: your pains be not now so great, as hereafter your joys
shall be. Read the comfortable Chapters to the Romans 8 10.15. Heb. 11.12. And
upon your knees thank God that ever you were accounted worthy to suffer any
thing for his names sake. Read the second of Lukes Gospel, and there you shall
see how the Sheapheards that watched upon their Sheep all night, as soon as
they heard that Christ was borne at Bethlem, by and by they went to see him.
They did not reason or debate with themselves, who should keep the Wolf from
the sheep in the mean time, but did as they were commanded, and committed their
Sheep unto him, whose pleasure they obayed. So let us, now we be called,
commit all other things to him that calls us. He will take heed that all
things shall be well. He will help the Husband, he will comfort the Wife. He
will guide the Servants, he will keep the house, he will preserve the goods.
Yea, rather then fail, if it should lie undone, he will wash the Dishes, and
rock the Cradle. Cast therefore all your care upon him, for he cares for you.

Out of another Letter of Mr. HOOPERS to his friends, persuading them to
constancy.
IT was an easy thing to hold with Christ whiles the Prince and the World held
with him, but now the world hates him, it is the true trial who be his. In the
name and in the virtue the^ of his holy spirit prepare your selves to
adversity and constancy. Let us not run away when it is most time to fight.
Remember none shall be crowned but such as fight manfully. You must now turn
all your cogitati^ns from the peril you see: and mark the felicity that
follows the peril: either victory of your enemies in this World, or else a
surrender for ever of your right in the inheritance to come. Beware of
beholding to much the felicite or misery of this world: for the consideration
and too earnest love or fear of either of them draws from God. Think with
your selves: the felicity of the world is good: but yet none otherwise then it
stands with the favor of God. It is to be kept: but yet so far forth as by
keeping of it we loose not God. It is good abiding and tarrying still among
our friends here: but yet so that we tarry not therwithall in Gods
displeasure, and to dwell hereafter with Devils in fire everlasting. There is
nothing under God but may be kept, so that God, being above all things we
have, be not lost.

Of Adversity judge the same. Long imprisonment is painful, but yet liberty
upon evil conditions is more painful. The prisons stincke: but yet not so
much as sweet houses whereas the fear and true honor of God lacks: loss of
goods is great, but loss of Gods grace and favor is greater. I must be alone
and solitary: it is better to be alone and have God with me, then to be in
company with the wicked, and want his presence. I am a poor simple creature,
and cannot tell how to answer before such a great sort of Noble and learned
wen: it is better to make answer before the pomp and pride of wicked men,
then to stand naked in the sight of all heaven and Earth, before the just GOD
at the latter day. I shall die then by the hands of the cruel man: he is
blessed that loses his life full of miseries, and finds the life of
eternal joys. It is pain and grief to depart from life and friends: but yet
not so much as to depart from grace and Heaven it self. Felicity nor
adversity then can apreare to be great, if it be wayed with the joys or pain
of the life to come.

The last will and testament of Doctor Rowland Tailor.
I Say to my wife, and to my Children: the Lord gave you unto me, and the Lord
has taken me from you, and you from me: blessed be the name of the Lord. I
believe they are blessed that dye in the Lord. God cares for sparrowes, and
for the hairs of our heads. I have ever found him more faithful and
favorable, then is any Father or husband. Trust ye therefore in him by the
means of our dear Savior Christ's merits: believe, love, fear and obey him:
pray to him, for he has promised to help. Count me not dead for I shall
certainly live, and never die. I go before you, and you shall follow after to
our long home. I go to the rest of my children Susan, George, Ellen, Robert,
Zachary: I have bequeathed you to the only omnipotent.

I say to my dear friends of HADLEY, and to all other which have heard me
preach: that I depart hence with a quiet conscience, as touching my doctrine:
for the which I pray you thank God with me, for after my small tallent, I have
declared to you those lessons I gathered out of Gods blessed book the Bible.
If I therefore or an Angel from Heaven should preach unto you any other
Gospel then that ye have received, Gods great curse upon that preacher.

Beware for gods sake that ye deny not God, neither decline from the word of
Faith, least GOD decline from you, and so ye do everlastingly perish.

For Gods sake beware of Popery, for though it appear to have in it unity,
yet the same is in vanity, and Antichristianitie, and not in Christ's faith and
verity.

Beware of the sin against the holy Ghost, now after such a light opened so
plainly and simply, truly, thorowlie, and generally to all England.

The Lord grant all men his good and holy spirit; increase of his wisdom,
contemning this wicked world, hearty desire to be with God and the heavenly
company, through Jesus Christ our only Mediator, advocate, righteousness,
life, sanctification, and only hope. Amen, Amen, pray, pray.

Rowland Tailor, departing hence in sure hope without all doubting of eternal
salvation, I thank God my heavenly father through his Son Jesus Christ my
certain Savior.

John Warren.
IN the confession of his Faith has this sweet speech, Without Christ no
heavenly gift is given, nor sin forgiven.

John Warren Vpholster.

Alice Binden.
Of the Parish of Staple Hurst in ^he Cou^^y of Ke^t.
She being at the stake, took forth a shilling of Phillip and Marie, which
her Father had bowed and sent her, (when she was first sent to prison) desiring
her Brother (there present) to return the same to her father again, with
obedient salutations: and to tell him It was the first piece of money that he
sent her after her troubles began, which (as she protested) she had kept, and
now sent him: to do him to understand, that she never lacked money while she
lay in prison.

And yet what extremity she endured in prison, this brief Relation following
may testify. Her constancy being such in the profession of the truth, that
she could no way be remooved from it, her fond husband (who first had
procured her jmprisonme^t, and had also taken money of the Constable to carry
her to prison himself) told the Bishop that she had a Brother called Richard
Hale, Ian. 22. 1556.
who if his Lordship could keep from her, she would turn: for he comfort
her (said he) and gives her money, and persuades her not to relent.

This council being as soon apprehended as tendered; was forthwith put also
in execution. For thereupon the Bishop gave commandment she should be
committed to his prison called Mondayes hole, giving also straight charge that
if her Brother at any time came at her, he should be laid hold on.

This prison was within a Court where the Prebends Chambers were, being a
vault beneath the ground, and the window being jnclosed with a pale; of height
by estimation 4 foot and a half, and distant from the same three foot, so that
she looking from beneath might only see such as stood at the pale. Her
Brother in the mean while sought her, with no less danger of life, then
diligence. But in regard of many impediments he could never know where she
lay, till coming by gods unsearchable providence very early thither in a
morning (her Keeper being the^ gone to Church to ring, for he was Bel-ringer)
chanced to hear her voice as she poured out her sorrowful complaints unto
God; saying the psalms of David: in which place he could none otherwise
relieve her, but by putting money in a loaf of bread, and sticking the same on
a pole, and so reached it unto her; for neither with meat nor drink could he
sustain her. And this was 5 weeks after her coming thither. All which time
no creature was known to come at her, more then her keeper.

Her lyjng in that prison was only upon a little short straw, between a pair
of stocks and a stone wall: being allowed 3 farthings a day; that is a half
penny bread, and a farthing drink: neither could she get any more for her
money: wherefore she desired to have her whole allowance in bread, and used
water for her drink. Thus did she lie 9 weeks, during all which time, she
never changed her apparel: whereby she became at the last a most piteous and
loathsome creature to behold.

At her first coming into this place, she did greevously bewail her state
with great sorrow and lamentation, reasoning with her self: Why her Lord God
did with so heavy justice suffer her to be sequestered from her loving
fellows, into so extreme misery. In these dolorous mournings did she
continue, till on a night, as she was in her sorrowful supplications,
rehearsing this verse of the Psalm: why art thou so heavy O my soul? And
again, The right hand of the Lord can change all this: she received comfort in
the midst of her miseries: and after that, continued very joyful until her
deliverance from the same.

Ma. 25 Anno 1557.
In March following the Bishop called her before him: demanding of her
whether she would go home and go to Church or no, promising her great favor
if she would be reformed.

To whom she answered, I think, and am thoroughly persuaded by the great
extremity that you have already showed me, that you are not of God, neither
can your doings be godly, and I see says she, that you seek my utter
destruction, showing how lame she was of the cold she had taken, and for lack
of food while she lay in that painful prison.

Then did the Bishop deliver her from that filthy hole, and sent her to
West-gate, where after she had been changed, and for a while been clean kept,
her skin did wholly pill and scale off, as if she had been poisoned with
some mortal venom, where she continued till the 19 of June, on which day she
was bereaved of life by the terrible fire.

One thing more touching this good woman is to be noted, that while she was in
prison she practiced with a prison fellow of hers, the wife of one Potkin, to
live both of them with 2 pence halfe-penny a day, to try thereby how well they
could sustain penury and hunger, before they were put to it, for they had
heard, that when they should remove from thence to the Bishops prison, their
allowance should be but 3 farthings a day a piece, and thus they lived 14 days
ere she was removed.

Thomas Wats his farewell to his Wife and children.
AFter his private prayer made to himself, he came to his Wife and six
Children being there, and said these words in effect: Wife and my good
Children, I must now depart away from you. Therefore henceforth know I you no
more: but as the Lord has given you unto me, so I give you again unto the
Lord; whom I charge you see you obey, and fear him: aad beware ye turn not
to this abominable Papistrie, against the which anon you shall see me by Gods
grace give my blood. Let not the murdering of Gods Saints cause you to relent,
but take occasion thereby to be the stronger in the Lords quarrel, and I doubt
not but he will be a merciful Father unto you. In the end he bad them
farewell, and kissed them all and was carried to the fire.

BRADFORDS Mementoes to the Lord RVSSELL, afterward called the good Earl of
Bedford.
REmember LOTS Wife which looked back. Remember that none are Crowned, but
such as strive lawfully. Remember FRAVNCIS SPIRA. Remember that all you have,
is at Christ's commandment. Remember he lost more for you, then you can loose
for him. Remember that it is not lost which you loose for his sake, for you
shall find much more here, and elsewhere. Remember you shall dye; when, where,
and how, ye cannot tell. Remember that the death of sinners is terrible.
Remember that the death of Gods Saints is precious in his sight. Remember the
multitude goes the wide way, which windeth to woe. Remember the straight way
which leads to life, has but few travelers. Remember Christ bids you
enter in thereat. Remember he that trusts in the Lord, shall receive
strength to stand against all the assaults of his enemies.

Be certain, all the hairs of your head are numbered. Be certain, your good
Father has appointed your bounds, over which the devil dare not look. Commit
your self to him: he is, has been, and will be your keeper. Let Christ be
your mark and scope to prick at: Let him be your pattern to work by: Let him
be your ensample to follow: give him as your heart, so your hand: as your mind,
so your tongue: as your Faith, so your feet: And let his word be your Candle to
go before you in all matters of Religion. Blessed is he that Walks not to
these Popish prayers, nor stands at them, nor sits at them: glorify God
both in soul and body.

Fifteen short sentences left by Robert Smith Martyr, to ANNE SMITH his wife.
1 Seek first to love God dear wife with your whole heart, and then it shall
be easy for you to love your neighbor.

2 Be friendly to all creatures, but especially to your own Soul.

3 Be always an enemy to the Devil and the world, but chiefly to your own
flesh.

4 In hearing of good things, join the ears of your head and heart together.

5 Seek unity and quietness with all men, but specially with your
conscience: for it will not easily be pacified.

6 Love all men, but specially your enemies.

7 Hate the sins that are past, but especially those to come.

8 Be as ready to further your enemy, as he is to hinder you, that ye may
be the child of God.

9 Defile not that which Christ has cleansed, least his blood be laid to your
charge.

10 Remember that god has hedged in your tongue with the teeth and lips,
that it might speak under correction.

11 Be ready at all times to look to your brothers eye, but especially to your
own eye. For he that warns an other of that he himself is faulty, gives
his neighbor the clear Wine, and himself the dregs.

12 Beware of riches and worldly honor: for without understanding, prayer, and
fasting, it is a snare, and like to consuming fire, of which if a man take a
little it will warm him, but if too much, it will consume him.

13 Show mercy to the Saints for Christ's sake, and Christ shall reward you for
the Saints sake.

14 Among all other prisoners, visit your own Soul: for it is enclosed in a
perilous prison.

15 If you love GOD, hate evil, etc.

Your Husband TO: SMITH.

If ye will meet with me again,
Forsake not Christ for any pain.

CERTAIN devout Prayers, which some of the godly Martyrs made at the hour of
their death.
The Prayer which Mr. HOOPER Bishop of Gloucester, made at his death.
LORD, said he, I am Hell, but thou art Heaven: I am swill and a sincke of
sin, but thou art a gracious GOD, and a merciful Savior and Redeemer. Have
mercy therefore upon me most miserable and wretched offender, after thy great
mercy, and according to thine jnestimable goodness: thou art assended into
Heaven; receive me Hell to be partaker of thy joys, where thou sit in
equal glory with the Father. For well thou know Lord wherefore I am come
hither to suffer, and why the wicked do persecute this thy poor servant: not
for my sins and transgressions committed against thee, but because I will not
allow of their wicked doings, to the contaminating of thy blood, and to the
denial of the knowledge of thy truth wherewith it did please thee by thy holy
spirit to jnstruct me: the which with as much diligence as a poor wretch
might (being called thereto) I have set forth to thy glory. And well thou see
my Lord and God what terrible pains and cruel torments be here prepared for
thy poor Creature: such Lord as without thy strength none is able to bear or
patiently to pass. But all things that are jmpossible with man, with thee are
possible. Therefore strengthen me of thy goodness, that in the fire I break
not the bounds of patience; or else assuage the terror of the pains as shall
seem most to thy glory.

Here the party who heard thus much of his prayer, being espied of the Mayor,
was commanded away and could be suffered to hear no more.

The Prayer of Doctor CRANMER Archbishop of Canterbury: when it was thought he
would have made his Recantation.
O Father of Heaven: O Son of GOD, redeemer of the world: O holy Ghost three
persons and one GOD have mercy upon me most wretched Caytiffe, and miserable
sinner: I have offended both against Heaven and Earth, more then my tongue can
express. Whether then may I go, or whether should I flee? To heaven I am
ashamed to lift up mine eyes, and in Earth I find no place of refuge or
succor. To thee therefore o Lord do I run; to thee do I humble my self,
saying. O Lord my GOD, my sins be great, but yet have Mercy upon me for
thy great Mercy. The great mystery that God became man, was not wroght for
small or few offenses. Thou did not give thy Son O Heavenly Father unto
death for little sins only, but for all the greatest sins of the world: so
that the sinner return to thee with his whole heart, as I do here at this
present. Wherefore have mercy upon me o GOD, whose property it is always to
have mercy: have mercy upon me o Lord, for thy great mercy. I crave nothing
for mine own merits, but for thy names sake, that it may be hallowed thereby,
and for thy dear Son Jesus Christ's sake. And now therefore, O our Father,
etc.

His repentance for subscription; uttered a little before his death.

And now I come to the great thing, that so much troubles my conscience more
then any thing that ever I did or said in my whole life, and that is, the
setting abroad of a writing contrary to the truth: which now I here renownce
and refuse as things written with my hand contrary to the truth which I thought
in mine heart, and written for fear of death, and to save life if it might be;
and that is, all such bills and papers which I have written or signed with mine
hand since my degradatio^: wherein I have written many things untrue. And for
as much as my hand offeded in writing contrary to my heart; mine hand shall be
punished therefore: for may I come to the fire, it shall first be burned: which
accordingly he did. For being at the stake, when the fire began to flame, he
put his right hand unto it, which he held so steadfast and jmmoueable (saving
that once with the same hand he wiped his face) that all men might see his
hand burned before it touched his body.

The Prayer of Steven Knight, made upon his knees at his death.
O Lord Jesus Christ, for whose love I willingly leave this life, and desire
rather the bitter death of the Cross, with the loss of all earthly things,
then to abide the blaspheaming of thy most holy name, or to obey men in
breaking thy holy Commandment. Thou see (oh Lord) that where I might live in
worldly wealth to worship a false God and honor thine enemy, I choose rather
the torment of the body and loss of this my life, and have counted all things
but vild, dust, and dunge, that I might win thee: which death is dearer unto
me then thousands of Gold and Silver. Such love (oh Lord) have thou laid up
within my breast, that I hunger for thee as the Dear that is wounded desires
the soil. Send thy holy Comforter (O Lord) to aid, comfort, and strengthen
this weak piece of earth, which is empty of all strength of it self. Thou
remembrest (Oh Lord) that I am but dust, and able to do nothing that is good.
Therefore (O Lord) as of thine accustomed goodness and love, thou have bidden
me to this banquet, and accounted me worthy to drink of thine own cup amongst
thine elect: even so give me strength (Oh Lord) against this thine element,
which as to my sight it is most yrksome and terrible: so to my mind it may at
thy commandent (as an obedient servant) be sweet and pleasant, that through
the strength of thy holy spirit, I may pass through the rage of this fire into
thy bosom according to thy promise: and for this mortal, receive an
jmmortall; and for this corruptible, may put on jncorruption. Accept this burnt
offering (O Lord) not for the sacrifice, but for thy dear Sons sake my
Savior. For whose testimony I offer this free will offering, with all my
heart, and with all my soul. O heavenly Father forgive me my sins, as I
forgive all the world: O sweet Son of God my savior, spread thy wings over me.
O blessed Holy Ghost, through whose merciful inspiration I come hither to dye:
conduct me into everlasting life. Lord into thine hands I commend my spirit.
Amen.

A Prayer which Master George Marsh used daily to say,
O LORD Jesus Christ which art the only Physician of wounded consciences, we
miserable sinners trusting in thy gracious goodness, do briefly open to thee
the evil tree of our hearts, with all the roots, boughs, leaves, knots and
snags, all which thou know: for thou thoroughly perceiuest as well th'jnward
lusts, doubtings, and denyings of thy providence; as these gross outward
sins which we commit in words and deeds. Wherefore we beseech thee
according to the little measure we have received, we being far unable and
unapt to pray, that thou would mercifully circumcise our stonye hearts, and
for these old hearts, create within us and replenish us with a new spirit: and
water and moysten us with the juice of heavenly grace and Wels of spiritual
waters, whereby the jnward venom and noisome juice of the flesh, may be dried
up, and custom of the old man changed: and our hearts always bringing forth
Thorns and Briars to be burned with fire; from hence forth may bear
spiritual fruits in righteousness and holiness unto life everlasting, Amen.

Beloved, among other exercises I do daily on my knees use this confession of
sins, willing and exhorting you to do the same, and daily to acknowledge
unfeignedly to God your unbelief, unthankfulness, and disobedience against him.
This shall you do if you will diligently consider and look upon your selves,
first in the pure glass of Gods Commandments, and there see your jnward
evils, filthiness, and uncleanness, and so learn to vanquish the same, that is
to wit, to fall into hearty displeasure against sin, and thereby be provoked
to long after Christ. For we truly are sinners: but he is just and the
justifier of all them that believe in him. If we hunger and thirst after
righteousness, let us resort to his table, for he is a liberal feast-maker.
He will set before us his own holy body, which was given for us to be out
meat, and his precious blood which was shed for us, and for many, for remission
of sins, to be our drink. He bids, wills, calls for guests which
hunger and thirst: Come (says he) all ye that are laden and labor unto me
and I will refresh, cool and ease you, and you shall find rest unto your
souls.

A Prayer of Nicholas Sheterden before his death.
O Lord my God and Savior, which art Lord in heaven and earth, maker of all
things visible and jnvisible. I am thy creature and work of thine hands. Lord
look upon me and other thy people which at this time are oppressed of the
worldly minded men, for thy laws sake, yea; for thy Law it self is now
trodden underfoot, and men's jnventions exalted above it; and for that cause do
I, and many of thy creatures refuse the glory, praise, and commodities of this
life, and do chose to suffer adversity, and to be banished, yea to be burnt
with the Books of thy word, for the hopes sake that is laid up in store. For
Lord thou know, if we would but seem to please men in things contrary to
thy word, we might by thy permission enjoy these commodities as other men do;
as Wife, Children, goods, and friends, which all I acknowledge to be thy gifts,
given unto the end I should serve thee. And now Lord, that the world will not
suffer me to enjoy them except I offend thy Laws, behold I give unto thee my
whole Spirit, Soul, and body. And lo I leave here all the pleasures of this
life, and do now leave the use of them, for the hopes sake of eternal life
purchased in Christ's blood, and promised to all that fight on his side, and are
content to suffer with him for his truth, whe^soever the world and the Devil
shall persecute the same. O Father, I presume not to come here to thee
trusting in mine own righteousness: No, but in the only merits of thy Son my
Savior. For the which excellent gift of Salvation, I cannot worthilye praise
thee, neither is any sacrifice worthy or to be accepted with thee, in
comparison of our bodies mortified and obedient to thy will. And now Lord
whatsoever rebellion has been, or is found in my members against thy will, yet
do I here give unto thee my body to the death, rather then I will use any
strange worshipping, which I beseech thee accept at my hands for a pure
sacrifice. Let this torment be to me the last enemy destroyed, even death the
end of misery, and the beginning of all joy, peace, and solace: And when the
time of the resurrection comes, let me enjoy again these members then
glorified, which now be spoiled and consumed by the fire. O Lord Jesus receive
my spirit into thine hands. Amen.

George Tankerfield.
GEorge Tankerfield sitting before a fire, a little before his death at ST.
ALBANS, after he had put off his hose and shoes, stretched out his leg to
the flame and when it had touched his foot, he quickly withdrew his leg,
showing how the flesh did persuade him one way, and the spirit an other. The
flesh said, o thou fool, will thou burn and needst not? The spirit said, be
not afraid, this burning is nothing to eternal fire. The flesh said, do not
leave the company of thy friends and acquaintance which love thee, and will let
thee lack nothing. The spirit said, the company of Jesus Christ and his
glorious presence, does far exceed all fleshly friends. The flesh said, do
not shorten thy time now, for thou may if thou will, live much longer. The
spirit said, this life is nothing to that which is to come, which lasts for
ever and ever.

The Prayer of Richard Brown, Anno. 1518.
who standing at the stake and holding up both his hands said.
O Lord I yield me to thy grace,
Grant me pardon for my trespass.
Let never the feend my soul chase.
Lord I will bow, and thou shall beat,
Let never my soul come in hell heat.
Into thy hands I commend my spirit.

A Godly and devout Prayer mentioned in the story of Mr. Philpot Martyr, fit
for such as suffer at the stake.
Merciful God and father to whom approached our Savior Christ in his fear
and need by reason of death, and found comfort: Gracious God, and most
bounteous Christ, on whom Steven called in his extreme need and received
strength: Most benign and holy spirit, who in the midst of all crosses and
death did comfort The Apostle ST. Paul with more consolations in Christ the^
he felt sorrows and terrors; have mercy upon me miserable, vild, and wretched
sinner, who now draws near unto the gates of death, deserved both in body
and soul eternal, by reason of my manifold, horrible, old, and new
transgressions, which to thine eyes o Lord are open and known. Oh be merciful
unto me for the bitter death and bloodshedding of thine only son Jesus
Christ. And though thy justice do require in respect of my sins, that thou
should not hear me, measuring me with the same measure I have measured thy
Majesty, conte^ning al thy gracious calls: yet let thy mercy which is above
all thy works, and wherewith the earth is filled, let thy mercy I say prevail
toward me through and for the Mediation of onr Savior, for whose sake it
has pleased thee now to bring me forth as one of thy witnesses, and a record
bearer to thy verity and truth taught by him, to give my life therefore; (To
which dignity o Lord and dear father I acknowledge there was never any so
unfit nor unworthy, no not the thief that hanged upon the Cross) so I
therefore most humbly beseech thee, that thou woldst accordingly aid, help, and
assist me with thy strength and heavenly grace, that with Christ thy Son I
may find comfort: with Steven I may see thy presence and gracious power: with
Paul and all others which for thy names sake have suffered affliction and death,
I may find thy sweet consolation so present with me, that I may by my death
glorify thy name, propagate and ratify thy truth, comfort the hearts of the
heavy, confirm thy Church in thy verity, convert some to be converted, and so
depart forth of this miserable life, where I do nothing but heap sin daily
upon sin, and so enter into the fruition of thy blessed presence and mercy:
whereof give and increase in me a lively trust, sense, and feeling, where
through the terrors of death, the torments of the fire, the pangs of sin, the
darts of Satan, and the dolours of hell, may never depresse me; but may be
driven away through the working of thy most gracious spirit, which now
plenteously endew me withal that I may offer (as I now desire to do in Christ
by him) my self wholly, Soul and body, to be an holy, lively, and acceptable
sacrifice in thy sight. Dear Father whose I am, and always have been even
from my Mothers womb, yea even before the world was made to whom I commend my
self, soul, and body, family, friends, Country, and all thy whole Church,
yea, even my very enemies according to thy good pleasure: beseeching thee
entirely to give once more to this Realm of England the blessing of thy word
again, with godly peace, to the teaching and setting forth of the same. Oh
dear Father now give me grace to come unto thee, purge and so purify me by
this fire in Christ's death and passion, through thy spirit, that I may be a
burnt offering of sweet smell in thy sight, who live and raignest with the son
and holy Ghost, now and for ever more, Amen.

M. Bartlet Green.
A Sweet description of the miseries of this life, and of the joys of the life
to come, written by Mr. Bartlet Green.
BEtter is the day of death (says Solomon) then the day of birth. Man that is
borne of a woman lives but a short time, and is replenished with many
miseries, but happy are the dead that dye in the Lord.

Man of a woman is borne in travel to live in misery: man through Christ does
dye to live. Straight as he comes into this world, with cries he utters
his miserable estate: straight as he departs, with songs he praises God for
ever. Scearce yet in his cradle, 3 deadly enemies assail him: after death no
adversary can annoy him: whilst he is here, he displeases GOD: when he is
dead, he fulfilleth his will. In this life he dies through sin: In the
life to come he lives in righteousness. Through many tribvlations on earth he
is still purged: with joy unspeakable in heaven, he is made perfect for ever.
Here he dies every hour: there he lives continually. Here is sin;
there is righteousness. Here is time, there is eternity. Here is hatred: there
is love. Here is pain: there is pleasure. Here is misery: there is
felicity. Here is Corruption: there is jmmortalitie. Here we see vanity:
there we shall behold the Majesty of God, with triumphant and unspeakable joy,
in glory everlasting. Seek therefore the things that are above, where Christ
sits on the right hand of GOD the Father, to whom with the holy Ghost be all
glory and houour world without end, Amen.

Lady Jane.
An effectual Prayer made by the Lady JANE in the time of her trouble.
O Lord thou god and father of my life, hear me poor and desolate woman, who
flies unto thee only in all troubles and miseries. Thou (O Lord) art the
only defender and deliverer of those that put their trust in thee: and
therefore I being defiled with sin, encombred with affliction, unquieted with
troubles, wrapped in cares, overwhelmed with miseries, vexed with temptations,
and grievously tormented with the long jmprisonment of this vilde mass of
Claye my sinful body: do come unto thee O merciful Savior craving thy mercy
and help: with the which so little hope of deliverance is left, that I may
utterly despair of any liberty. Albeit it is expedient, that seeing our life
stands upon trying, we should be visited sometime with some adversity,
whereby we might be tried whether we be thy flock, or no, and also know thee
and our selves the better: yet thou that sayd'st thou would not suffer us to
be tempted above our power, be merciful unto me now a miserable wretch I
beseech thee; that I may neither be too much puffed up with prosperity,
neither to much pressed down with adversity: least I being too full should
deny thee my God, or being too low brought, should despair and blaspheme thee
my Lord and Savior. O merciful God, consider my misery, best known to thee,
and be thou now unto me a strong Tower of defense, I humbly require thee,
Suffer me not to be tempted above my power, but either be thou a deliverer to
me out of this great misery, or else give me grace patiently to bear thy
heavy hand and sharp correction. It was t^y right hand that delivered the
poor people of Israel out of the hands of Pharaoh, which for the space of
Forty years did oppress and keep the^ in bondage. Let it therefore seem
good to thy fatherly goodness to deliver me sorrowful wretch (for whom thy
Son Christ shed his precious blood on the Cross) out of this miserable
captivity and bondage wherein I now am. How long will thou be absent, for
ever? Oh Lord have thou forgotten to be gracious, and have thou shut up thy
loving kindness in displeasure? will thou be no more entreated? Is thy mercy
clean gone for ever, and thy promise come utterly to an end for evermore? Why
do thou make so long tarrying? Shall I despair of thy mercy O God? far be
that from me. I am thy workmanship created in Christ Jesus: give me grace
therefore to tarry thy leisure, and patiently to bear thy works: assuredly
knowing that as thou caust, so thou will deliver me when it shall please thee,
nothing doubting or mistrusting thy goodness toward me: for thou know
better what is good for me, then I do: therefore do with me in all things
what thou will. Only in the mean time arm me I beseech thee with thy armor,
that I may stand fast, my loins being girt about with verity, having on the
breast plate of righteousness, and shodde with the shoes prepared in the Gospel
of peace, above all things taking unto me the shield of Faith, wherewith I may
be able to quench all the fiery darts of the devil, and taking the helmet of
Hope, and the sword of the Spirit, which is thy most holy word: praying always
with all manner of Prayer and Supplication, that I may refer my self wholly
to thy will, abiding thy pleasure, and comforting my self in those troubles
that it shall please thee to send: seeing such troubles be profitable for me,
and seeing I am assuredly persuaded, that it cannot but be well, all that thou
dooest. Hear me o merciful Father for his sake whom thou would should
be a sacrifice for my sins, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all
honor and glory, Amen.

A Prayer of the Lord Cromwell which he at the hour of his death.
O Lord Jesus which art the only health of all men living, and the everlasting
life of them which die in thee: I wretched sinner do submit my self wholly unto
thy most blessed will, beejng sure that the thing cannot perish which is
committed unto thy mercy: willingly now I leave this frail and wicked flesh,
in sure hope that thou will in better wise raise it up and restore it to me at
the day of the resurrection of the just. I beseech thee most merciful Lord
Jesus Christ that thou will by thy grace make strong my soul against all
temptations, and defend me with the buckler of thy mercy against all the
assaults of Satan. I see and acknowledge that there is in my self no hope of
Salvation, but all my hope and trust is in thy most merciful goodness. I have
no merits nor good works which I may allege before thee: of sins and evil
works alas I see a great heap: but yet through thy mercy I trust to be in the
number of the^ to whom thou will not jmpute their sins, but wilt accept me for
just and righteous, and to be th'inheritor of everlasting life. Thou merciful
Lord wastborn for my sake, thou did suffer both hunger and thirst for my
sake: thou did teach, pray, and fast for my sake: all thy holy actions and
works thou wroughtest for my sake: Thou suffred'st most grievous pains and
torments for my sake: finally, thou gave thy most precious body and blood to
be shed upon the Cross for my sake. Now most merciful Savior, Let all these
things profit me, that thou freely have done for me. Let thy blood cleanse
and wash away the spots and foulenes of my sins. Let thy righteousness hide
and cover my unrighteousness. Let the merits of thy passion and blood shedding
be a satisfaction for my sins. Give me Lord thy grace, that the faith of my
salvation in thy blood waver not, but may be ever firm and constant: that the
hope of thy mercy and life everlasting never decay in me. that love may not
be cold in me.

Finally, that the weakness of my flesh be not overcome with the fear of
death. Grant me merciful Savior, that when death has shut up the eyes of my
body, and has taken away the use of my tongue, yet the eyes of my Soul may
still behold and look upon thee, and my heart may still cry and say unto
thee, Lord Jesus into thine hands I commed my Soul, Lord receive my spirit.
Amen.

The Prayer that Martin Luther said at his death.
MY Heavenly Father and eternal and merciful GOD, thou have manifested to me
thy dear son our Lord Jesus Christ. I have taught him, I have known him, I
love him as my life; my health, and my redemption: whom the wicked have
persecuted, maligned, and with jniurie afflicted. Draw my soul to thee. After
this he said, I commend my spirit into thine hands, thou have redeemed me o
GOD, of truth God so loved the world, etc.

Anne Askew.
The Prayer of Anne Askew.
O Lord I have more enemies then there be hairs on my head: yet Lord let them
never overcome me with vain words, but fight thou Lord in my stead, for on
thee cast I my care. With all the spite they can jmagine they fall upon me
which am thy poor creature: Yet sweet Lord let me not set by them, which are
against me: for in thee is my whole delight. And Lord I heartely desire of
thee, that thou will of thy merciful goodness forgive them that violence
which they do and have done to me. Open also their blind hearts that they may
hereafter do that thing in thy sight which is only acceptable before thee, and
to set forth thy verity aright without all fantasies of sinful men. So be
it O Lord, so be it.

By me Anne Askew.

William Flower.
The Prayer and confession which William Flower made at his death.
OH Eternal God, most mighty and merciful Father, who have sent down thy
son upon the earth to save me, and all mankind, who ascended up into heaven
again, and left his blood here upon the earth behind him, for the redemption
of our sins: have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, for thy dear Son
our Savior Christ's sake, in whom I confess only to be all salvation, and
justification, and that there is none other mean nor way, nor holiness, in
which, or by which any man can be saved in this world. This is my faith, which
I beseech men here to bear witness off. Then said he the Lords Prayer, and so
made an end. Fire being set unto him and burning therein, he cried thrice with
a loud voice, O Son of GOD have mercy upon me, O Son of GOD receive my
soul: and so his speech being taken from him, he spoke no more, lifting up
notwithstanding his stumpe with his other arm as long as he could.

Here follows two worthy and godly Letters full of heavenly consolation,
written by that holy man of God M. John Bradford Martyr: fit for all such to
read and observe as feel in them a wounded spirit.
The first Letter written to Mistres H. a godly Gentlewoman, comforting her in
that common and godly sorrow which the feeling and sense of sin works in
Gods children.
I Humbly and heartily pray the everlasting good God and Father of mercy to
bless and keep your heart and mind in the knowledge and the love of his truth,
and of his Christ through th'jnspiration and working of the holy spirit, Amen.

Although I have no doubt but that you prosper and go forwards daily in the
way of Godliness, more and more drawing toward perfection, and have no need
of any thing that I can write; yet because my desire is that you might be more
fervent and persevere unto the end, I could not but write something unto you,
beseeching you both often and diligently to call unto your mind as a mean to
stir you hereunto, yea, as a thing which god most straightly requires you to
believe, that you are the beloved of God, and that he is your dear Father,
in, through, and for Christ and his deaths sake* This love and tender kindness
of God toward us in Christ is abundantly herein declared, in that he has to
the godly work of Creation of this world, made us after his jmage, redeemed us
being lost, called us into his church, sealed us with his mark and sign
Manuel of Baptism, kept and conserved us all the days of our life, fed,
nowrished, defended, and most mercifully chastised us, and now has kindled in
our hearts the sparkles of his fear, faith, love, and knowledge of his Christ
and truth: and therefore we lament because we can lament no more our
unthankfulness, our frailenes, our diffidence, and wavering in things whereof
we should be most certain.

All these things we should use as means to confirm our faith of this, that
God is our God and Father, and to assure us that he loves us as our Father in
Christ* to this end I say, should we use the things before touched, especially
in that of all things God requires this faith and persuasion of his Father by
goodness as his chiefest service. For before he ask any thing of us, he
says, I am the Lord thy God, giving himself, and all he has to us, to be our
own. And this he does in respect of himself, of his own mercy and truth, and
not in respect of us, for then were grace no more grace. In consideration
whereof, when he says, Thou shall have none other Gods but me, thou shall love
me with all thy heart, etc. Though of duty we are bound to accomplish all
that he requires, and are culpable and guilty if we do not the same, yet he
requires not these things further of us, then to make us more in love, and
more certain of this his covenant that he is the Lord our GOD. In certainty
whereof, as he has given this world to serve our need and commodity: so has
he given us his son Christ Jesus, and in Christ, himself to be a pledge and
gage: whereof the Holy Ghost does now and then give us some taste and sweet
feeling and smell to our eternal joy.

Therefore as I said, because God is your Father in Christ, and requires of
you straightly to believe it, give your self to obedience, although you do it
not with such feeling as you desire. Note.
First must faith go before, and then feeling will follow. If our
jmperfection, frailty, and many evils should be occasions whereby Satan would
have us doubt; as much as in us lies let us abhor that suggestion as of all
others most pernicious: for so indeed it is. For when we stand in doubt whether
God be our Father or no, we cannot be thankful to God, we cannot heartily
pray, or think any thing we do acceptable to God; we cannot love our
neighbors and give over our selves to care for them, and do for them as we
should do: and therefore Satan is most busy hereabouts, knowing full well that
if we doubt of gods eternal sweet mercies in Christ, we cannot please God, or
do any thing as we should to man. Continually casts he into our memories our
jmperfection, frailty, folly, and offenses, that we should doubt of gods mercy
and favor toward us.

Therefore my good Sister, we must not be sluggish herein, but as Satan
laboreth to loosen our faith, so must we labor to fasten it by thinking on the
promises and covenant of god in Christ's blood, namely, that God is our God
with all that ever he has; which Covenant depends and hangs upon Gods own
goodness, mercy, and truth only, and not on our obedience and worthiness in any
point; for then should we never be certain. Note.
Indeed God requires of us obedience and worthiness, but not that thereby we
might be made his children, and he our Father: but because he is our Father and
we his children through his own goodness in christ, therefore requires he faith
and obedience. Now, if we want this obedience and worthiness which he
requires, should we therefore doubt whether he be our Father? Nay, that were
to make our obedience and worthiness the cause, and so to put Christ out of
place, for whose sake God is our Father. But rather because he is our Father
and we feel our selves to want such things as he requires we should be
stirred up to an holy blushing and shamfastnesse, because we are not as we
should be: and thereupon should we take occasion to go to our father in
prayer on this manner.

Dear Father, thou of thine own Mercy in Christ Jesus have chosen me to be
thy child, and therefore thou would I should be brought into thy Church and
faithful company of thy children: wherein thou have kept me hitherto, thy name
be praised therefore. Now I see my self to want faith, hope, love etc. which
thy children have and thou requirest of me; wherethrough the devil would have
me doubt, yea, utterly to despair off thy Fatherly goodness, favor and
mercy. Therefore I come to thee as to my merciful father through thy dear
Son Jesus Christ, and pray* thee to help me: good Lord help me, and give
me Faith, Hope, love, thankfulness, etc. and grant that thy holy spirit may
be with me, for ever, and more and more to assure me that thou art my father:
that this merciful covenant that thou made with me in respect of thy grace
in Christ, and for Christ, and not in respect of any my worthiness, etc.

On this sort I say you must pray and use your cogitatio^s when Satan would
have you to doubt of your Salvation. He does all he can to prevail herein
against you. Do you all ye can to prevail herein against him. Though you
feel not as you would, yet doubt not, but hope beyond hope as Abraham did. For
always as I said, faith goes before feeling. As certain as God is Almighty,
as certain as GOD is merciful, as certain as God is true, as certain as
Jesus Christ was crucified, is risen, and sits on the right hand of God his
Father, as certain as this is Gods commandment, I am the Lord thy GOD, etc.
so certain ought you to believe that God is your Father. As you are bound to
have none other Gods but him: so are ye no less bound to believe that god is
your God. What profit should it be to you to believe this to be true, I am the
Lord thy god, to others; if you should not believe that this is true to your
self? The Devil believes on this sort. Note.
And whatsoever it be that would move you to doubt of this whether God be your
God through Christ, that same comes undoubtedly of the Devil. Wherefore did
god make you, but because he loved you? might he not have made you blind,
dumb, deaf, lame, frantic? might he not have made you a Jew, a Turk, a
Papist? And why did he love you? what was there in you to move him to love
you? surely nothing moved him to love you, and therefore to make you, and so
hitherto to keep you, but his own goodness in Christ. Now the^ in that his
goodness in Christ still remains as much as it was that is, even as great as
himself (for it cannot be lessened) how should it be but that he is your God
and Father? Believe this, believe this my good sister, for god is no
changeling: them whom he loves, he loves to the end.

Cast therefore your self wholly upon him, and think without all wavering,
that you are Gods child, that you are a Citizen of heaven, that you are the
temple of the holy Ghost etc. If hereof you be assured as you ought to be,
then shall your conscience be quietted, then shall you lament more and more
that you want many things which God loves: then shall you labor to be holy in
soul and in body: then shall you endeavor that Gods glory may shine in all
your words and works: then shall you not be afraid what man can do unto you:
then shall you have wisdom to answer your adversaries, as shall serve for
their shame, and to your comfort: then shall you be certain that no man can
touch one hair of your head further then it shall please your father, to your
everlasting joy: then shall you be most certain, that God as your good father
will be more careful of your children and make better provision for the^, if
al you have were gone, then you can: then shall you (being assured I say of
Gods favor toward you) give over your self wholly to help and care for
others that be in need: then shall you contemn this life, and desire to be at
home with your good and sweet Father: then shall you labor to mortify all
things that would spot either soul or body. All these things spring out of
this certain persuasion and faith, Note.
that God is our Father and we his children by Christ Jesus. Al things should
help our faith herein: but Satan goes about in all things to hinder us.

Therefore let us use earnest I am the Lord thy God: let us look upon blood
shed for the obsignation and sealing of this covenant: let us remember how he
has often beaten chastised, and fatherly corrected us: how he has spared us,
and now does spare us, giving us time, space, place, and grace. This if you do
and use earnest and often prayer, and so flee from all things which might
troble the peace of your conscience, giving your self to diligence in your
vocation, you shall at length find that (which god grant me with you) a sure
certainty of Salvation, without all such wavering as should hinder your peace
with GOD in CHRIST, to your eternal joye and comfort, Amen, Amen.

Yours to be used in Christ John Bradford.

The second Letter written to a faithful Woman in her heaviness and trouble
of mind: most comfortable for all to read that are afflicted or broken hearted
for their sins.
GOD our Father for his mercies sake in Christ, with his eternal consolation
so comfort you, as I desire to be comforted in my most need: yea, he will
comfort you my dear Sister, only cast your care upon him, and he never can
nor will forsake you. Whom he loves, he loves to the end: none of his chosen
can perish. Of which number I know your self to be one my dearly beloved
Sister. GOD jncrease the faith thereof daily more and more in you: he give
unto you to hang wholly on him, and on his providence and protection. For who
so dwells under that secret thing and help of the Lord, he shall be
Cocke-sure for evermore. He that dwells I say: for if we be flitters as was
Lot a flitter from Zoar, where God promised him protection if he had dwelled
there still, we shall remove to our loss, as he did into the Mountains.

Dwell therefore, that is trust, and that finally to the end in the Lord, my
dear Sister; and you shall be as Mount Syon. As the Mountains compass
Jerusalem: so does the Lord all his people. How then can he forget you who are
as dear to him as the apple of his Eye, for his dear Sons sake. Ah dear
heart that I were now with you to be a Simon to you, to help and carry your
Cross with you. God send you some good Simon to be with you and help you.

You complain in your Letters of the blindness of your mind and the troubles
you feel. My dearly beloved, GOD make you thankful for that which God has
given you: he open your eyes to see what and how great benefits you received,
that you may be less covetous or rather jmpatient for so (I fear me) it
should be called, and more thankful. Have you not received at his hands sight
to see your blindness, and thereto a desirous and seeking heart to see where he
lies in the midde day, as his dear Spouse speaks of her self in the
Canticles? Ah Joyce, my good Joyce, what a gift is this? many have some sight,
but none this sighing, none this sobbing, none this seeking which you have (I
know) but such as he has married to himself in his eternal sweet mercies.
You are not content with the Magdalen to kiss his feet, but you would with
Moses see his face: forgetting how he bids us seek his face, Psalm 27.
yea, and that ever more, Psa. 105. which signifies no such sight as you desire
to have in this life, who would see God now face to face, whereas he cannot be
seen, but covered under some thing, yea, something which is as you would say
clean contrary to God: as to see his mercy in his anger. In bringing us to
Hell, Faith sees him bringing us to Heaven: in darkness it beholds
brightness: in hyding his face from us, it beholds his merry countenance.
How did Job see God, but you would say under Satan's cloak? For who cast the
fire from Heaven upon his goods? who overthrew his house, and stirred up men
to take away his Cattle, but Satan? And yet Job pierced thorough all these and
saw Gods working, saying, The Lord has given, the Lord has taken, etc.

In reading the Psalms, how often do you see that David in the shaddowe of
death saw Gods sweet love? And so my dearly beloved I see that you in your
darkness and dimnes by faith do see charity and britnes: by faith I say, because
faith is of things absent, of things hoped for, of things which I appeal to
your own conseience whether you desire not. And can you desire any thing which
you know not? And is there of heavenly things any other true knoledge, the^ by
faith?

Therefore my dear heart, be thankful, for before God I writ it, you have
great cause. Ah my Joyce how happy is that state in which you are. Verily,
you are in the blessed state of gods dear children: for they mourn, and do
not you so? and that not for worldly weal, but for spiritual riches; Faith,
Hope, and Charity. Do not you hunger and thirst for righteousness? And I pray
you, says not Christ, happy are such. How should GOD wipe away the tears
from your eyes in heaven, if on earth you shed no tears? How could Heaven be
a place of rest, if on Earth you did find it? How could you desire to be at
home, if in your journey you found no grief? How could you so often call upon
God and talk with him as I know you do, if your enemy should sleep all the
day long? How should you elsewhere be made like unto Christ, I mean in joye,
if in sorrow you sobbed not with him? If you will have joye and felicity, you
must needs feel sorrow and misery. If you will go to heaven, you must sail by
hell. If you will embrace Christ in his robes, you must not think scorn of
him in his rags. If you will sit at Christ's table in his Kingdom, you must
first abide with him in his temptations. If you will drink of his Cup of
glory, forsake not his cup of jgnominie.

Can the head corner stone be rejected, and the other more base stones in Gods
building be in this world set by? you are one of his living stones in this
building: be content therefore to be hewn and snagged at, that you may be made
more meet to be joined to your fellows which suffer with you Satan's snatches,
and freats of the flesh, wherethrough they are enforced to cry, Oh wretches
that we are, who shall deliver us? you are of Gods corn, fear not therefore
the flayle, the fan, millstone, nor oven. You are one of CHRIST'S Lambs: look
therefore to be fleeced, halled at, and even slain. If you were a market
sheep, you should go in more fat pasture. If you were for the fair, you
should be stalled and want no meat: but because you are for GODS own use,
therefore you must pasture upon the bare common, abiding the storms and
tempests that will fall. Happy and twice happy are you my dear sister, that
God haleth you now whither you would not, that you might come whither you
would. Suffer a little and be still. Let Satan rage against you, let the world
cry out, let your conscience accuse you, let the law lead you, and press you
down, yet shall they not prevail, for Christ is Emanuell, that is, GOD with
us. If God be with us, who can be against us. The Lord is with you; your
Father cannot forget you; your spouse loves you. If the waves and surges
arise, cry with Peter, save Lord I perish, and he will put out his hand and
help you. Cast out your ankor of Hope, and it will not cease for all the
stormy surges, till it take hold on the rock of Gods truth and mercy.

Think not that he which has given you so many things corporally, as
jnductions of spiritual and heavenly mercies, and that without your deserts or
desire, can deny you any spiritual thing desiring it. For if he has given you
to desire, he will give you to have and enjoy the thing desired. The desire to
have, and the going about to ask, ought to certify your conscience, that they
be his earnests of the things which you asking, he will give you: yea, before
you ask, and whilst you are about to ask, he will grant the same as Isaiah
says, to his glory and your eternal consolation. He that spared not his own
Son for you, will not, nor cannot think any thing too good for you, my heartely
beloved. If he had not chosen you as certainly he has, he would not thus have
called you: he would never have justified you: he would never have so
glorified you with his gracious gifts which I know to be in you, praised be his
name therefore: he would never have so exercised your faith with temptations
as he has done, and does, if I say he had not chosen you. If he have chosen
you (as doubtless dear heart he has don in Christ, for in you I have seen
his earnest, and to me you could not deny it, I know both where and when) if I
say he have chosen you, then neither can you, nor ever shall you perish. For
if you fall, he puts under his hand: you shall not lie still: so careful
is Christ your keeper over you. Never was Mother so mindful over her child, as
he is over you. And has he not always been so?

Speak woman, when did he finally forget you? And will he now trow ye in your
most need do otherwise, you calling upon him and desiring to please him? Ah my
Joyce, think you God to be mutable? Is he a changeling? Does not he love to
the end the^ whom he loves? Are not his gifts and calling such as he cannot
repent him off the^, for else were he no God. If you should perish, then wanted
he power: For I am certain his will toward you is not to be doubted off.
Has not the spirit, which is the spirit of truth, told you so? And will you
hearken with Eve to the liing Spirit which would have you to despair? God
forbid it, for to doubt and stand in a ma^mering, would cause you that you
should never truly love God, but ever serve him of a servile fear, least he
should cast you off for your unworthiness and unthankfulness, as though your
thankfulness, or worthiness, were any causes with God why he has chosen you, or
will finally keep you.

Ah my own dear heart, Christ only, Christ only, and his mercy and truth.
In him is the cause of your election. This Christ, this Mercy, this Truth of
God remains for ever, is certain for ever, I say for ever. If an Angel from
Heaven should tell you contrary, accursed be he. Your thankefulnes and
worthiness are fruits and effects of your election, they are no causes. These
fruits and effects shall be so much the more fruitful and effectual, by how
much the more you waver not.

Therefore dearly beloved, arise and remember from whence you are fallen. You
have a Sheapeheard who neither slumbereth nor sleeps, night nor day. No Man,
nor Devil can pull you out of his hands. Night and day he commands his
Angels to keep you. Have you forgotten what I read to you out of the Psalm,
The Lord is my Shepherd, I can want nothing. Do you know that GOD sparred
Noah into the Arc on the one side, so that he could not get out? So has he
done to you my good Sister, so has he done to you. Ten Thousand shall fall
on your right hand, and two Thousand on your l^ft hand yet no evil shall touch
you. Say boldly therefore, Many a time from my youth up have they fought
against me, but they have not prevailed, no nor never shall prevail, for the
Lord is round about his people. And who are the people of God, but such as hope
in him? Happy are they that hope in the Lord: and you are one of those my
dear heart, for I am sure you have hoped in the Lord: I have your words to
show most manifestly, and I know they were written unfeignedly.

I need not say, that even before God you have simply confessed to me, and
that oftentimes no less. And if once you had this hope, as you doubtless had
it, though now ye feel it not, yet shall ye feel it again: for the anger of
God lasts but for a moment, but his mercy lasts for ever. Tell me my dear
heart, who has so weakened you? surely not a persuasion which came of him that
called you. For why should ye waver? Why should ye waver, and be so heavy
hearted? whom look ye on? on your self? on your worthiness? on your
thankfulness? on that which God requires of you, as Faith, Hope, Love,
Fear, Joy, etc. Then can ye but waver indeed: for what have you as God
requires? Believe you, hope you, love you, etc. as much as ye should do? No,
no, nor never can in this life. Ah my dearly beloved, have you so soon
forgotten that which should be had in memory? namely, that when you should be
secure and quiet in conscience, the^ should your faith burst throghout all
things, not only that you have in you, or else are in Heaven, Earth, or Hell,
until it come to Christ crucified, and the eternal sweet mercies of God, and
his goodness in Christ. Here, here is the resting place, here is your
Spouses bed: Creep into it, and in your arms of faith embrace him, bewail
your weakness, your unworthiness, your dissidence: and you shall see he will
turn to you. What said I you shall see? Nay, I should have said you shall
feel he will turn to you.

You know that Moses when he went into the Mount to talk with God, he entered
into a dark cloud: and Helias had his face covered when GOD passed by. Both
these dear friends of God heard God, but they saw him not, but you would be
preferred before them. See now my dear heart, how covetous you are? Ah, be
thankful be thankful; but God be praised your covetousness is Moses
covetousness: well with him you shall be satisfied, but when? Forsooth when he
shall appear. Here is not the time of seeing, but as it were in a glass*
Isaak was deceived because he was not content with hearing only.

Therefore to make an end of these many words, wherewith I fear me I do but
hinder you from better exercises: in as much as you are indeed the child of
God, elect in Christ before the beginning of all times: in as much as you are
given to the custody of Christ, as one of GODS most precious jewels: in as much
as Christ is faithful, and hitherto and for ever has and shall have al power,
so that you shall never perish, no; one hair of your head shall not be lost: I
desire you, I crave at your hands with all my very heart, I ask of you with
hand, pen, tongue and mind, in Christ, through Christ, for Christ, for his
names sake, blood, mercies, power, and truths sake (my most entirely beloved
sister) that you admit no doubting of gods final mercies toward you, howsoever
ynu feel your self: but complain to God, and crave of him as of your tender
Father, all things and in that time which shall be most opportune, you shall
find and feel far above that your heart or the heart of any creature can
conceive, to your eternal joy, Amen, Amen, Amen.

The good spirit of God always keep us as his dear children: he comfort you
as I desire to be comforted my dearly beloved for evermore. The peace of
Christ dwell in both our hearts for ever Amen. Gods holy spirit always comfort
and keep you Amen, Amen. This 1. of January by him that in the Lord wishes
to you as well and as much felicity, as to his own heart.

JOHN BRADFORD.

FINIS.
A TABLE DIRECting to the names of the Martyrs, and to the special matters
that are mentioned in this Book.
A
Fol. Adam Damplip, his speech to his keeper. 27. Agnes Bongeor, her complaint.
80, 81. She is comforted. 83. Alice Bindon, her straight handling. 110, 118.
Anne Askew, her prayer. 170.
B
Bartlet Green, his description of temporal miseries, etc. 155, 156, 157.
Bradbegges Wife, she commends her two children Patience and Charity, to the
Bishop. 76.
C
Fol. Cutbert Simpson. Boner commends his patience. 39. His comfortable vision.
40.
D
Doctor Tailor, Page 44.
E
Elizabeth Folks, her answer, pretily retorted. 73 Eliza: Young, her sweet
speech. 90, 91.
F
Father Latimer. 7, 14, 15.
G
George Wise-hart, his speech to his executioner. 58. George Marsh, his prayer.
140. George Tankerfield, his conflicts with the flesh. 147.
H
Hugh Latimer, his speech to M r. Ridley at the stake. Fol. 7. His comforts
were going and coming. 14. His 3 requests. 15. Hugh Laverocke, his speech. 33.
Henry Voes, his speech. 32.
I
James Baynham, his speech at his death. 32. John Hooper, his speech at the
stake. 2. His speech to a blind boy. 2. His answer to S r. Ant: Kingston. 3,
4, 5* Notes out of his letters, from 99, to 227. John Bradford, how he took
the news of his death. 10. With what efficacy he made his prayers in the
Counter. 11. His behavior at his death. 12. His answer to Creswell. 92, 93.
His Mementoes. 120 A note out of a Letter of his to Cranmer. 93. His two
Letters. 174, 193. John Cardmaker, his question and answer to it. Fol. 91.
John Philpot, how he took the news of his death. 8. His speech he used in
Smith-field. 9. A Prayer mentioned in his story. 149. Ioh: Rough, his speech
to one Farrar. 42. John Warren, his sweet sentence. 100. John Frith, his
answer to them that would have wrought his escape. 78. John La^bart, his
speech at the stake. 26. John Rogers, his saying when he heard of his burning.
18. His saying to Bishop Hooper. 19. John Leaf, he liked better the bill of
his confession, then that of his recantation. 50. Iulins Palmer, his charitable
answer to Sir Richard Abridges. 74, 75.
K
Kerby, his speech to M. Wink-field. 28.
L
Laurence Saunders Preacher, his comfort at his first convention. Fol. 19. What
a sluggard he found of his flesh. 20 His speech upon the sight of his child. 21
His speech at the stake. 22. Notes out of a Letter to his wife. 95.96, 97. Out
of a Letter to M. Glouer. 98. Lady Jane, her Prayer. 158 Lord Cromwell, his
Prayer. 164. Letters of M. Bradfords. 174, 193.
M
Martin Luther, his Prayer. 169.
N
Nicholas Ridley, his saying to Latimer. 6, 7. His mournful complaint in the
fire. 8. What comfort he felt after the news of M. Rogers burning. 17.
Nicholas Sheterden, his Prayer. 142.
P
Patrik Hamleton, he foretells the death of his persecut^r. Fol. 60.61. Prests
Wife, her answers. 89, 90.
R
Rawlins White, expert in the Scripture. 64. Sundry of his speeches. 68.69.70.
Richard Woodman, his conflict with the fear of death. 51. Richard Brown, his
Prayer. 148. Robert Farrar, his speech to M. Richard Jones. 61. Robert Glover,
his lumpishnes before his death. 23, 24. With supply of comfort. 25. His
comfort and conflict. 53, 55, 56, 57. Robert-Samuell, his extreme handling.
36, 37. His vision of comfort. 38. Robert Smith, his sentences 23. Roger
Holland, his prophecy. 86, 87. Rowland Tailor, his pleasant answer to the
Sheriff. 44. Fol. His speech when he came near Hadley. 47. To Boner when he
was degraded. 48. His last will and Testament. 106, to 109.
S
Steven Knight, his Prayer. 134.
T
Thomas Bilney, his saying to his friends. 29, 31. He puts his finger in
the Candle to try his strength. 28. Thomas Spurdance, his answer to the
Bishop. 72, 73. Thomas Hudsons conflict and comfort. 84, 85. Thomas Wats, his
farewell. 199. Thomas Cra^mer, a proverb of him. 94. His Prayer. 130. His
Repentance. 132, 133. He burns his right hand first. 133.
W
Fol. William Hunter, his Mother thinks him well bestowed on Christ. 35. Walter
Mill, he would not be called Sir Walter, and why. 59. His constancy. 60.
William Pickes, foretells his troble. 88. 89. William Flower, his Prayer. 172.
FINIS.

