VERA EFFIGIES. ABRAHAMI COWLEY. REGII ALVMNI SCHOLAE WEST:

LOVES RIDDLE. A PASTORAL COMAEDIE; Written, At the time of his being Kings
Scholar in Westminster School, by A. Cowley.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson, for Henry Seile, and are to be sold at the
Tygres head in Fleet street over against St. Dunstans Church. 1638.

To the truly Worthy, and Noble, Sir KENELME DIGBIE Knight.
THis latter Age, the Lees of Time, has known,
Few, that have made both Pallas arts their own.
But you, Great Sir, two Laurels wear, and are
Victorious in Peace, as well as War.
Learning by right of Conquest is your own,
And every liberal Art your Captive grown.
As if neglected Science (for it now
Wants some defenders) fled for help to you.
Whom I must follow, and let this for me
An earnest of my future service be.
Which I should fear to send you, did I know
Your judgment only, not your Candor too.
For it was a Work, stolen (though you will justly call
This Play, as fond as those) from Cat, or Ball.
Had it been written since, I should, I fear,
Scarce have abstained from a Philosopher.
Which by Tradition here is thought to be
A necessary Part in Comedy.
Nor need I tell you this; each line of it
Betray's the Time and Place wherein it was writ*
And I could wish, that I might safely say
To the Reader, that to was done but the other day.
Yet it is not stuffed with names of Gods, hard words,
Such as the Metamorphosis affords.
Nor has't a part for Robinson, whom they
At school, account essential to a Play.
The style is low, such as you will easily take
For what a Swain might speak, and a Boy make.
Take it, as early fruits, which rare appear
Though not half ripe, but worst of all the year.
And if it please your taste, my Muse will say,
The Birch which crowned her then, is grown a Bay.
Yours in all observance, A. COVVLEY.

The Scaene Sicily.
The Actors names.
Demophil two old folk of a Noble family. Spodaia two old folk of a Noble
family. Florellus their Children. Callidora their Children. Philistus two Gent.
both in love with Callidora. Aphron two Gent. both in love with Callidora.
Clariana, sister to Philistus. Melarnus a crabbed old Shepherd. Truga his
Wife. Hylace their Daughter. Aegon -- an ancient Country man. Bellula -- his
supposed Daughter. Palaemon -- a young Swain in love with Hylace. Alupis -- a
merry Shepherd. Clariana's Maid.
Actus I.
Scaena I.
Enter Callidora disguised in man's apparel. Mad feet, ye have been
traitors to your Master:
Where have you lead me? sure my truant mind
Has taught my body thus to wander too;
Faintness and fear surprise me; Ye just gods,
If ye have brought me to this place to scourge
The folly of my love, (I might say madness)
Dispatch me quickly; send some pitying men
Or cruel beast to find me; let me be
Fed by the one, or let me feed the other.
Why are these trees so brave? why do they wear
Such green and fresh apparel? how they smile!
How their proud tops play with the courting wind!
Can they behold me pine and languish here,
And yet not sympathize at all in mourning?
Do they upbraid my sorrows? can it be
That these thick branches never seen before
But by the Sun, should learn so much of man?
The trees in Courtiers gardens, which are conscious
Of their guilt Masters stateliness and pride,
Themselves would pity me; yet these -- Who Is there?
Enter Alupis singing. 1.
Rise up thou mournful Swain,
For it is but a folly
To be melancholy
And get thee thy pipe again.
2.
Come sing away the day,
For it is but a folly
To be melancholy,
Let Us live here whilst we may.

Call. I marry Sir, this fellow has some fire in him,
Me thinks a sad and drowsy shepherd is
A prodigiein Nature, for the woods
Should be as far from sorrow, as they are
From sorrows causes, riches and the like.
Hail to you swain, I am a Gentleman
Driven here by ignorance of the way, and would
Confess my self bound to you for a courtesy,
If you would please to help me to some lodging
Where I may rest my self.

Alu. For it is but a folly, etc.

Call. Well; if the rest be like this fellow here;
Then I have traveled fairly now; for certainly
This is a land of fools; some Colonie
Of elder brothers have been planted here,
And begot this fair generation.
Prithee, good Shepherd, tell me where thou dwelst?

Alu. For it is but a folly, etc.

Call. Why art thou mad?

Alu. What if I be?
I hope it is no discredit for me Sir?
For in this age who is not? I Will prove it to you,
Your Citizen he is mad to trust the Gentleman
Both with his wares and wife. Your Courtier
He Is mad to spend his time in studying postures,
Cringes, and fashions, and new complements;
Your Lawyer he is mad to sell away
His tongue for money, and his Client madder
To buy it of him, since it is of no use
But to undo men, and the Latin tongue;
Your Scholars they are mad to break their brains,
Out-watch the Moon, and look more pale then she,
That so when all the Arts call him their Master,
He may perhaps get some small Vicaridge,
Or be the Usher of a School; but there is
A thing in black called Poet, who is ten
Degrees in madness above these; his means
Is what the gentle Fates please to allow him
By the death or marriage of some mighty Lord,
Which he must solemnize with a new song.

Call. This fellows wit amazeth me; but friend,
What do you think of lovers?

Alu. Worst of all;
Is It not a pretty folly to stand thus,
And figh, and fold the arms, and cry my Coelia,
My soul, my life, my Calia, then to wring
Ones state for presents, and ones brain for Sonnets?
O! it is beyond the name of Phrenzie.

Call. What so Satyricke Shepherd? I believe
You did not learn these flashes in the Woods;
How is it possible that you should get
Such near acquaintance with the City manners,
And yet live here in such a silent place,
Where one would think the very name of City
Could hardly Enter.

Alu. Why, I Will tell you Sir:
My father dyed, (you force me to remember
A grief that deserves tears) and left me young,
And (if a Shepherd may be said so) rich,
I in an itching wantonness to see
What other Swains so wondered at, the City,
Straight sold my rural portion (for the wealth
Of Shepherds is their flocks) and thither went,
Where whilst my money lasted I was welcome,
And lived in credit, but when that was gone,
And the last piece sighed in my empty pocket,
I was contemned, then I began to feel
How dearly I had bought experience,
And without any thing besides repentance
To load me, returned back, and here I live*
To laugh at all those follyes which I saw.
Song.
The merry waves dance up and down, and play,
Sport is granted to the Sea.
Birds are the queristers of th'empty air,
Sport is never wanting there.
The ground does smile at the Springs flowery birth,
Sport is granted to the earth.
The fire it is cheering flame on high does rear,
Sport is never wanting there.
If all the elements, the Earth, the Sea,
Air, and fire, so merry be;
Why is man's mirth so seldom, and so small,
Who is compounded of them all?

Call. You may rejoice; but sighs befit me better.

Alu. Now on my conscience thou have lost a Mistress;
If it be so, thank God, and love no more;
Or else perhaps she'has burnt your whining letter,
Or kissed another Gentleman in your sight,
Or else denied you her glove, or laughed at you,
Causes indeed, which deserve special mourning,
And now you come to talk with your God Cupid
In private here, and call the Woods to witness,
And all the streams which murmr when they hear
The injuries they suffer; I am sorry
I have been a hindrance to your meditations,
Farewell Sir.

Call. Nay, good Shepherd, you mistake me.

Alu. Faith, I am very chary of my health,
I would be loath to be infected Sir.

Call. Thou need not fear; I have no disease at all
Besides a troubled mind.

Alu. Why that is the worst, the worst of all.

Call. And therefore it does challenge
Your piety the more, you should the rather,
Strive to be my Physician.

Alu. The good Gods forbid it; J turn Physician?
My Parents brought me up more piously,
Then that I should play booty with a sickness,
Turn a consumption to men's purses, and
Purge them, worse then their bodies, and set up
An Apothecaries shop in private chambers,
Live by revenew of close-stooles and urinals,
Defer off sick men's health from day to day
As if they went to law with their disease.
No, I was borne for better ends, then to send away
His Majesty's subjects to hell so fast,
As if I were to share the stakes with Charon.

Call. Your wit erres much:
For as the soul is nobler then the body,
So it is corruption asks a better medicine
Then is applied to Gouts, Catarrs, or Agues,
And that is counsel.

Alu. So then: I should be
Your souls Physician; why, I could talk out
An hour or so, but then I want a cushion
To thump my precepts into; but tell me 'pray,
What name bears your disease?

Call. A fever, shepherd, but so far above
An outward one, that the vicissitudes
Of that may seem but warmth, and coolness only;
This, flame, and frost.

Alu. So; I understand you,
You are a lover, which is by translation
A fool, or a beast, for I Will define you; you're
Partly Chamaeleon, partly Salamander,
You're fed by the air, and live in the fire.

Call. Why did you never love? have you no softness,
Naught of your mother in you? if that Sun
Which scorched me, should cast one beam upon you.
It Would quickly melt the ice about your heart,
And lend your eyes fresh streams.

Alu. 'Faith, I think not;
I have seen all your beautyes of the Court,
And yet was never ravished, never made
A doleful Sonnet unto angry Cupid,
Either to warm her heart, or else cool mine,
And no face yet could ever wound me so,
But that I quickly found a remedy.

Call. That were an art worth learning, and you need not
Be niggard of your knowledge; See the Sun
Though it have given this many thousand years
Light to the world, yet is as big and bright
As e're it was, and has not lost one beam
Of his first glory; then let charity
Persuade you to instruct me, I shall be
A very thankful scholar.

Alu. I shall: for it is both easily taught and learned,
Come sing away the day, etc.
Mirth is the only physic,

Call. It is a way which I have much desired
To cheat my sorrow with; and for that purpose
Would feign turn shepherd, and in rural sports
We are my life's remnant out; I would forget
All things, my very name if it were possible.

Alu. Pray let me learn it first.

Call. It Is Callidorus.

Alu. Thank you; if you your self chance to forget it
Come but to me I Will do you the same courtesy,
In the mean while make me your servant Sir,
I will instruct you in things necessary
For the creation of a Shepherd, and
We two will laugh at all the world securely,
And fling jests'gainst the businesses of state
Without endangering our ears.
Come, come away,
For'tis but a folly
To be melancholy,
Let Us live here whilst we may.

Exeunt. Enter Palaemon, Melarnus, Truga, Aegon Bellula, Hylace. Pa. I see I am
undone.


Mel. Come no matter for that, you love my Daughter? By Pan; but come, no
matter for that; you my Hilace?


True. Nay good Duck, do not vex your self; what though he loves her? you
know she will not have him.


Mel. Come, no matter for that; I will vex my self, and vex him too, shall
such an idle fellow as he strive to entice away honest men's children? let him
go feed his flocks; but alas! he has none to trouble him; ha, ha, ha, yet he
would marry my daughter.


Pa. Thou art a malicious doting man,
And one who cannot boast of any thing
But that she calls thee father, though I cannot
Number so large a flock of sheep as thou,
Nor send so many cheeses to the City,
Yet in my mind I am an Emperor
If but compared with thee.

True. Of what place I pray?
It Is of some new discovered Country, is it not?

Pa. Prithee good Wintor if thou will be talking,
Keep thy breath in a little, for it smells
Worse then a Goat; yet thou must talk,
For thou have nothing left thee of a woman
But lust, and tongue

Hyl. Shepherd, here is none so taken with your wit
But you might spare it; if you be so lavish,
You Will have none left another time to make
The song of the forsaken Lover with.

Pa. I Am dumb, my lips are sealed, sealed up for ever
May my rash tongue forget to be interpreter,
And organ of my senses, if you say,
It has offended you.

Hyl. Troth if you make
But that condition, I shall agree to it quickly:

Mel. By Pan well said Girl; what a fool was I
To suspect thee of loving him? but come
It Is no matter for that; when e're thou married
I Will add ten sheep more to thy portion,
For putting this one jest upon him.

Aegon. Nay now I must needs tell you that your anger
Is grounded with no reason to maintain it,
If you intend your Daughter shall not marry him,
Say so, but play not with his passion,
For it is inhumane wit which jeeres the wretched.

Mel. Come it is no matter for that; what I do, I do;
I shall not need your counsel.

True. I hope my husband and I have enough wisdom
To govern our own child; if we want any
'Twill be to little purpose, I dare say,
To come to borrow some of you.

Aeg. It Is very likely pretty Mistress Maukin,
You with a face looks like a winter apple
When it is shrunk up together and half rotten,
I Would see you hanged up for a thing to skare
The crows away before I Will spend my breath
To teach you any.

Hyl. Alas good shepherd!
What do you imagine that I should love you for?

Pal. For all my services, the virtuous zeal
And constancy with which I ever woed you,
Though I were blacker then a starlesse night,
Or consciences where guilt and horror dwell,
Although splay-legd, crooked, deformed in all parts,
And but the Chao's only of a man;
Yet if I love and honor you, humanity
Would teach you not to hate, or laugh at me.

Hy. Pray spare your fine persuasions, and set speeches,
And rather tell them to those stones and trees,
'Twill be to as good purpose quite, as when
You spend them upon me.

Pa. Give me my final answer, that I may
Be either blessed for ever, or die quickly;
Delay's a cruel rack, and kills by piece-meales.

Hy. Then here it is, you're an ass,
(Take that for your incivilitie to my mother)
And I will never love you.

Pal. You're a woman;
A cruel and fond woman, and my passion
Shall trouble you no more; but when I Am dead
My angry Ghost shall vex you worse then now
Your pride does me, Farewell.

Enter Aphron mad meeting Palaemon going out. Aph. Nay stay Sir, have you
found her?

Pa. How now? what is the matter?

Aph. For I will have her out of you, or else
I Will cut thee into atoms, til the wind
Play with the shreeds of thy torn body. Look her
Or I will do it.

Pal. Whom; or where?

Aph. I Will tell thee honest fellow; thou shall go
From me as an Ambassador to the Sun,
For men call him the eye of heaven, (from which
Nothing lies hid) and tell him -- do you mark me -- tell him
From me -- that if he send not word where she is gone,
-- I will -- nay by the Gods I will.

Aeg. Alas poor Gentleman!
Sure he has lost some Mistress; beauteous women
Take notice of him, (pray) your speaking is
Worth more then all the rest.

Bell. You're very welcome

Call. Thank you fair Nymph, this is indeed a welcome Salutes her,

Bell. I never saw, beauty and affability
So well conjoined before; if I stay long
I shall be quite undone.

Alu. Nay come, put on too.

Hyl. You are most kindly welcome.

Call. You bless me too much;
The honor of your lip is entertainment
Princes might wish for.

Hyl. Bless me how he looks!
And how he talks; his kiss was honey too,
His lips as red and sweet as early cheryes,
Softer then Bevers skins

Bell, Bless me, how I envy her!
Would I had that kiss too!

Hyl, How his eye shines! what a bright flame it shootes!

Bell. How red his cheeks are! so our garden apples
Look on that side where the hot Sun salutes them.

Hyl, How well his hairs become him!
Just like that star which ushers on the day.

Bell. How fair he is! fairer then whitest blossoms?

Trug. They two have got a kiss;
Why should I lose it for want of speaking?
You're welcome shepherd.

Alu. Come on: For it is but a folly, etc:

True. Do you hear? you are welcome.

Alu. Oh! here is another must have a kiss:

True. Go you're a paltry knave, I, that you are,
To wrong an honest woman thus.

Alu. Why he shall kiss thee, never fear it, alas!
I did but jest, he will do it for all this,
Nay, because I will be a Patron to thee
I Will speak to him.

True. You're a slandering knave,
And you shall know it, that you shall*

Al. Nay, if you scould so loud
Others shall know it too; He must stop your mouth,
Or you will talk on this three hours; Callidorus
If you can patiently endure a stink,
Or have frequented ere the City Beare-garden,
Prithee salute this fourscore years, and free me,
She says you're welcome too.

Call. I cry you mercy Shepherdess,
By Pan I did not see you.

True. If my husband and Alupis were not here
I Would rather pay him back his kiss again,
Then be beholding to him.

Al. What, thou have don't?
Well if thou do not dye upon it, hereafter
Thy body will agree even with the worst
And stinking'st air in Europe.

Call. Nay, be not angry Shepherdess, you know
He does but jest as it is his custom.

True. I know it is his custom; he was always
Wont to abuse me, like a knave as he is,
But I Will endure't no more.

Al. Prithee good Callidorus if her breath
Be not too bad, go stop her mouth again,
She Will scould till night else.

True. Yes marry will I, that I will, you rascal you,
I Will teach you to lay your frumps upon me;
You delight in it, do you?

Al. Prithee be quiet, leave but talking to me
And I will never jeere thee any more,
We two will be so peaceable hereafter.

True. Well upon that condition.

Al. So, I Am delivered, why how now Ladds?
What have you lost your tongues? I Will have them cried,
Palaemon, Aegon, Callidorus, what?
Are you all dumb? I pray continue so,
And i will be merry with my self.
Song.
It Is better to dance then sing,
The cause is if you will know it,
That I to my self shall bring
A Poverty
Voluntary
If once I grow but a Poet.

Aegon. And yet me thinks you sing,

Al. O yes, because here is none do dance,
And both are better far then to be sad.

Aegon. Come then let us have a round.

Al. A match; Palaemon whither go you?

Pa. The Gods forbid that I should mock my self,
Cheat my own mind, I dance and weep at once?
You may: Farewell. Exit.

Al. It Is such a whining fool; come, come, Melarnus.

Mel. I have no mind to dance; but come no matter for that, rather then break
the squares. --


Call. By your leave, fair one.


Hill. Would I were in her place.


Al. Come Hilace, thee and I wench I warrant thee,
You and your wife together. God bless you; so --
For it is but a folly, etc. Dance.

True. So there is enough, I Am half a weary,

Mel. Come no matter for that,
I have not danced so much this year.

Al. So farewell, you will come along with me.

Call. Yes, farewell gentle Swains.

True. Farewell good Shepherd,

Bell. Your best wishes follow you.

Hyl. Pan always guide you.

Mel. It Is no matter for that, come away. Exeunt.

Finis Actus primi.
Actus II.
Scaena I.
Enter Demophil, Spodaia, Philistus, Clariana. DEmo. Nay, she is lost for
ever, and her name
Which used to be so comfortable, now
Is poison to our thoughts, and to augment
Our misery paints forth our former happiness,
O Callidora, O my Callidora!
I shall never see thee more.

Spo. If cursed Aphron
Has carried her away, and tryumphs now
In the destruction of our hoary age
'Twere better she were dead;

Them. 'T were better we were all dead; the enjoying
Of tedious life is a worse punishment
Then losing of my Daughter; Oh! my friends,
Why have I lived so long?

Cla. Good Sir be comforted: Brother speak to them.

Spo. Would I had dyed, when first I brought thee forth
My Girl, my best Girl, then I should have slept
In quiet, and not wept now.

Phi. I am half a statue
Freeze me up quite ye Gods, and let me be
My own sad monument.

Cla. Alas! you do but hurt your selves with weeping;
Consider pray, it may be she will come back.

Them. Oh! never, never, it is impossible
As to call back sixteen, and with vain Rhetoric
Persuade my life's fresh April to return,
She Is dead, or else far worse, kept up by Aphron
Whom if I could but see, me thinks new blood
Would creep into my veins, and my faint sinews
Renew themselves, I doubt not but to find
Strength enough yet to be revenged of Aphron.

Sp. Would I were with thee, Girl, where ere thou art.

Cla. For shame good Brother, see if you can comfort them,
Me thinks you should say something.

Phi. Do you think
My griefs so light? or was the interest
So small which I had in her? I a comforter?
Alas! she was my wife, for we were married
In our affection, in our vows; and nothing
Stopped the enjoying of each other, but
The thin partition of some ceremonies.
I lost my hopes, my expectations,
My joys, nay more, I lost my self with her;
You have a son, yet left behind, whose memory
May sweeten all this gall.

Spo. I, we had one,
But fate's so cruel to us, and such dangers
Attend a traveling man, that 'twere presumption
To say we have him; we have sent for him
To blot out the remembrance of his sister:
But whether we shall ever see him here,
The Gods can only tell, we barely hope.

Them. This news, alas!
Will be but a sad welcome to him.

Phi. Why do I play thus with my misery?
It Is vain to think I can live here without her,
I Will seek her where e're she is; patience in this
Would be a vice, and men might justly say
My love was but a flash of winged lightning,
And not a Vestall flame, which always shines
His woing is a complement, not passion,
Who can if fortune snatch away his Mistress,
Spend some few tears, then take another choice,
Mine is not so; Oh Callidora!

Cla. Fie Brother, you're a man,
And should not be shaken with every wind,
If it were possible to call her back
with mourning, mourning were a piety,
But since it cannot, you must give me leave
To call it folly:

Phi. So it is;
And I will therefore shape some other course,
This diolefull place shall never see me more,
Unless it see her too in my embraces,
You sister may retire unto my Farm,
Adjoining to the woods;
And my estate I leave for you to manage,
If I find her, expect me there, if not
Do you live happier then your Brother has:

Cla. Alas! how can I if you leave me? but
I hope your resolutions may be altered.

Ph. Never, farewell: good Demophil,
Farewell Spodaia, temper your laments;
If I return we shall again be happy.

Spo. You shall not want my prayers.

Them. The Gods that pity Lovers (if there be any) attend upon you.

Cla. Will you needs go?

Ph. I knit delays; 'twere time I were now ready,
And I shall sin if I seem dull or slow
In any thing which touches Callidora,

Them. Oh! that name wounds me; we will bear you company
A little way, and Clariana look
To see us often at your Country Farm,
We Will sigh, and grieve together. Exeunt.

Enter Alupis and Palaemon. Alu. Come, come away, etc.
Now where are all your sonnets? your rare fancies?
Could the fine morning music which you waked
Your Mistress with, prevail no more then this?
Why in the City now your very Fiddlers
Good morrow to your worship, will get something,
Has she denied thee quite?

Pa. She has undone me; I have plowed the Sea,
And begot storming billows,

Al. Can no persuasions move her?

Pa. No more then thy least breath can stir an oak,
Which has this many years scorned the fierce wars
Of all the winds.

Al. It Is a good hearing; then
She Will cost you no more payres of Turtle Doves,
Nor garlands knit with amorous conceits,
I do perceive some rags of the Court fashions
Visibly creeping now into the woods,
The more he shows his love, the more she slights him,
Yet will take any gift of him, as willingly
As Country Justices the Hens and Geese
Of their offending neighbors; this is right;
Now if I loved this wench I would so handle her,
I Would teach her what the difference were betwixt
One who had seen the Court and City tricks,
And a mere shepherd.

Pa. Lions are tamed, and become slaves to men,
And Tygres often forget the cruelty
They sucked from their fierce mothers; but, a woman
Ah me! a woman! --

Al. Yet if I saw such wonders in her face
As you do, I should never doubt to win her.

Pa. How pray? if gifts would do it, she has had
The daintiest Lambs, the hope of all my flock,
I let my apples hang for her to gather,
The painful Be did never load my hives,
With honey which she tasted not.

Al. You mistake me Friend; I mean not so.

Pa. How then? if Poetry would do it, what shade
Has not been Auditor of my amorous pipe?
What banks are not acquainted with her praises?
Which I have sung in verses, and the sheepheards
Say they are good ones, nay they call me Poet,
Although I am not easy to believe them.

Al. No, no, no; that is not the way.

Pa. Why how?
If show of grief had Rhetoric enough
To move her, I dare swear she had been mine
Long before this, what day did ere peep forth
In which I wept not dulier then the morning?
Which of the winds has not my sighs increased
At sundry times? how often have I cried
Hylace, Hylace, till the docile woods
Have answered Hylace; and every valley
As if it were my Rival, sounded Hylace.

Al. I, and you were a most rare fool for doing so,
Why 'twas that poisoned all; Had I a Mistress
I Would almost beat her, by this light, I would,
For they are much about your Spaniels nature,
But whilst you cry dear Hylace, o Hylace!
Pity the tortures of my burning heart,
She Will always mince it, like a Citizens wife,
At the first asking; though her tickled blood
Leapes at the very mention; therefore now
Leave off your whining tricks, and take my counsel.
First then be merry; For it is but a folly, etc.

Pal. It Is a hard lesson for my mind to Iearne,
But I would force my self, if that would help me*

Al. Why thou shall see it will; next I would have thee
To laugh at her, and mock her pitifully;
Study for jeeres against next time you see her,
I Will go along with you, and help to abuse her,
Till we have made her cry, worse then e're you did;
When we have used her thus a little while,
She Will be as tame and gentle. --

Pa. But alas!
This will provoke her more.

Al. I Will warrant thee: besides, what if it should?
She has refused you utterly already.
And cannot hurt you worse; come, come, be ruled;
And follow me, we will put it straight in practice.
For it is but a folly, etc.

Pa. A match; I Will try always; she can but scorn me,
There is this good in depth of misery
That men may attempt any thing, they know
The worst before hand. Exeunt.
Enter Callidorus. How happy is that man, who in these woods
With secure silence wears away his time!
Who is acquainted better with himself
Then others; who so great a stranger is
To City follyes, that he knows them not.
He sits all day upon some mossie hill
His rural throne* armed with his crook, his scepter,
A flowery garland is his country crown;
The gentle lambs and sheep his loyal subjects
Which every year pay him their fleecy tribute;
Thus in an humble stateliness and majesty
He tunes his pipe, the woods best melody,
And is at once, what many Monarchs are not
Both King and Poet. I could gladly wish
To spend the rest of my unprofitable,
And needless days in their innocuous sports,
But then my father, mother, and my brother
Recurse unto my thoughts, and straight pluck down
The resolution I had built before;
Love names Philistus to me, and of the sudden
The woods seem base, and all their harmless pleasures
The daughters of necessity, not virtue.
Thus with my self I wage a war, and am
To my own rest a traitor; I would feign
Go home, but still the thought of Aphron frights me.
How now? who is here? o it is fair Hylace
The grumbling shepherds daughter. Enter Hylace.
Brightest of all those stars that paint the woods,
And grace these shady habitations,
You're welcome, how shall I requite the benefit
Which you bestow upon so poor a stranger
With your fair presence?

Hyl. If it be any courtesy, it is one
Which J would gladly do you, I have brought
A rural present, some of our own apples,
My father and my mother are so hard,
They watched the tree, or else they had been more,
Such as they are, if they can please your taste,
My wish is crowned.

Call. O you're too kind,
And teach that duty to me which I ought
To have performed; I would I could return
The half of your deserts! but I am poor
In every thing but thanks.

Hy. Your acceptance only is reward
Too great for me.

Call. How they blush?
A man may well imagine they were yours,
They bear so great a show of modesty.

Hyl. O you mock my boldness
To thrust into your company; but truly
I meant no hurt in it; my intents were virtuous.

Call. The Gods forbid that I should nurse a thought
So wicked, thou art innocent I know,
And pure as Venus Doves, or mountain snow
Which no foot has defiled, thy soul is whiter
if there be any possibility often)
Then that clear skin which clothes thy dainty body.

Hy. Nay my good will deserves not to be jeered,
You know I am a rude and country wench.

Call. Far be it from my thoughts, I swear I honor
And love those maiden virtues which adorn you.

Hy. I would you did, as well as I do you,
But the just Gods intend not me so happy,
And I must be contented -- I Am undone. Ent. Bellula
Here Is Bellula; what is she grown my rival?

Bell. Bless me! whom see I? Hylace? some cloud
Or friendly mist involve me.

Hy. Nay Bellula; I see you well enough.

Call. Why does the day start back? are you so cruel
To show us first the light, and having struck
Wonder into us snatch it from our sight?
If Spring crowned with the glories of the earth
Appear upon the heavenly Ram, and straight
Creep back again into a grey-hayr'd frost,
Men will accuse its forwardness.

Hy. Pray heaven
He be not taken with her, she is somewhat fair;
He did not speak so long a speech to me
I Am sure often, though I brought him apples.

Bell. I did mistake my way; Pray pardon me.

Hyl. I would you had else.

Call. I must thank fortune then which lead you hither,
But you can stay a little while and bless us?

Bell. Yes (and Love knows how willingly) alas!
I shall quite spoil my garland ere I give it him,
With hiding it from Hylace, 'Pray Fan
She has not stolen his heart already from him,
And cheated my intentions.

Hy. I would feign be going, but if I should leave her
It may be I shall give her opportunity
To win him from me, for I know she loves him,
And has perhaps a better tongue then I,
Although I should be loath to yield to her
In beauty or complexion.

Bell. Let me speak
In private with you; I am bold to bring
A garland to you, it is of the best flowers
Which I could gather, I was picking them
All yesterday.

Call. How you oblige me to you!
I thank you sweetest, How they flourish still!
Sure they grow better, since your hand has nipt them.

Bell. They will do, when your brow has honored them,
Then they may well grow proud, and shine more freshly.

Call. What perfumes dwell in them?
They owe these odours to your breath.

Hy. Defend me ye good Gods, I think he kisses her,
How long they have been talking? now perhaps
She Is woing him; perhaps he forgets me
And will consent, I Will put him in remembrance;
You have not tasted of the apples yet,
And they were good ones truly.

Call. I will do presently best Hilace.

Hy. That Is something yet, would he would speak so always.

Call. I would not change them for those glorious apples
Which give such fame to the Hesperian gardens.

Bell. She has out-gone me in her present now,
But I have got a Beechen cup at home
Curiously graven with the spreading leaves,
And gladsome burden of a fruitful vine,
Which Damon, the best Artist of these woods
Made and bestowed upon me, I Will bring that tomorrow
And give it him, and then I Will warrant her
She will not go beyond me.

Hy. What have you got a chaplet? oh!
This is I see of Bellula's composing.

Bell. Why Hylace? you cannot make a better,
What flowers' pray does it want?

Call. Poor souls I pity them, and the more,
Because I have not been my self a stranger
To these love passions, but I wonder
What they can find in me worth their affection
Truly I would feign satisfy them both,
But can do neither; it is fates crime, not mine.

Ball. Weither go you shepherd?

Hyl. You will not leave us will you?

Call. Indeed I ought not,
You have both me bought with your courtesies
And should divide me.

Hy. She came last to you.

Bell. She has another love,
And kills Palaemon with her cruelty,
How can she expect mercy from another?
In what a Labyrinth does Love draw mortals
And then blindfolds them! what a mist it throws
Upon their senses! if he be a God
As sure he is (his power could not be so great else)
He knows the impossibility which Nature
Has set betwixt us, yet entangles us,
And laughs to see us struggle. Do You both love me?

Bell. I do I Am sure.

Hyl. And I as much as she.

Call. I pity both of you, for you have sowed
Upon unthankful sand, whose dried up womb
Nature denies to bless with fruitfulness,
You are both fair, and more then common graces
Inhabit in you both, Bellula's eyes
Shine like the lamp of Heaven, and so does Hylaces.
Hylaces cheeks are deeper died in scarlet
Then the chaste mornings blushes, so are Bellula's,
And I protest I love you both. Yet cannot,
Yet must not enjoy either.

Bell. You speak riddles.

Call. Which times commentary
Must only explain to you; and till then
Farewell good Bellula, farewell good Hylace,
I thank you both. Exit.

Hyl. Alas! my hopes are strangled. Exit.

Bell. I will not yet despair: He may grow milder,
He bade me farewell first; and looked upon me
With a more steadfast eye, then upon her
When he departed hence: 'twas a good sign;
At least I will imagine it to be so,
Hope is the truest friend, and seldom leaves one.
Exit. Enter Truga. I doubt not but this will move him,
For they are good apples, but my teeth are gone,
I cannot bite them; but for all that though
I Will warrant you I can love a young Fellow
As well as any of them all: I that I can,
And kiss him too as sweetly. Oh! here is the madman.

Enter Aphron. Ap. Hercules, Hercules, ho Hercules, where are you?
Lend me thy club and skin, and when I ha'done,
I Will fling them to thee again, why Hercules?
Pox on you, are you drunk? can you not answer?
I Will travel then without them, and do wonders.

True. I quake all over, worse then any fit
Of the palsy which I have had this forty years
Could make me do.

Ap. So I have found the plot out,
First I Will climb up, on Porter Atlas shoulders,
And then craule into Heaven, and I Am sure
I cannot choose but find her there*

True. What will become of me if he should see me?
Truly he is a good proper Gentleman,
If he were not mad, I would not be so 'fraid of him.

Ap. What have I caught thee fairest of all women?
Where have thou hid thy self so long from Aphron?
Aphron who has been dead till this blessed minute?

True. Ha, ha, ha, whom does he take me for!

Ap. Thy skin is whiter then the snowy feathers
Of Leda's Swannes.

True. Law you there now, --
I thought I was not so unhandsome, as they would make me

Ap. Thy hairs are brighter then the Moons,
Then when she spreads her beams and fills her orb

Trug. Beshrew their heart that call this Gentleman mad,
He has his senses I Will warrant him, about him,
As well as any fellow of them all.

Apu. Thy teeth are like two Arches made of Ivory,
Of purest Ivory.

True. I for those few I have,
I think they are white enough.

Ap. Thou art as fresh as May is, and thy look
Is picture of the Spring.

True. Nay, I am but some fourscore years and ten
And bear my age well; yet Alupis says
I look like January, but I Will teach the knave
Another tune I Will warrant him.

Ap. Thy lips are cheryes, let me taft them sweet?

True. You have begd so handsomely.

Ap. Ha! ye good Gods defend me! it is a Witch, a Hag.

Trug. What am I?

Ap. A witch, one that did take the shape
Of my best Mistress, but thou could not long
Belie her pureness.

True. Now he is stark mad again upon the sudden;
He had some sense even now.

Ap. Thou lookst as if thou were some wicked woman
Frighted out of the grave; defend me, how
Her eyes do sink into their ugly holes,
As if they were afraid to see the light.

True. I will not be abused thus, that I will not
My hair was bright even now, and my looks fresh:
Am I so quickly changed?

Ap. Her breath infects the air, and sowes a pestilence
Where e're it comes; what has she there?
J! these are apples made up with the stings
Of Scorpions, and the blood of Basiliskes;
Which being swallowed up, a thousand pains
Eat on the heart, and gnaw the entrails out

True. Thou lie; J, that thou do,
For these are honest apples, that they are;
I Am sure I gathered them my self.

Ap. From the Stygian tree; Give them me quickly, or I will --

True. What will you do? pray take them.

Ap. Get thee gone quickly, from me, for I know thee;
Thou art Tisiphone.

True. It Is false; for I know no such woman.
I Am glad I am got from him, would J had
My apples too, but it is no matter though,
J'le have a better gift for Callidorus
To morrow.

Ap. The fiend is vanished from me,
And has left these behind for me to taste of,
But I will be too cunning; Thus I Will scatter them,
Now I have spoyld her plot; Unhappy he
Who finds them. Exit.

Finis Actus secundi.
Actus III.
Scaena I.
Enter Florellus. THe Sun five times has gone his yearly progress,
Since last I saw my Sister, and returning
Big with desire to view my native Sicilie,
I found my aged parents sadly mourning
The funeral (for to them it seems no less)
Of their departed Daughter; what a welcome
This was to me, all in whose hearts a vein
Of marble grows not, easily may conceive
Without the dumb persuasions of my tears.
Yet as if that were nothing, and it were
A kind of happiness in misery
If It come without an army to attend it,
As I passed through these woods I saw a woman
Whom her attire called Shepherdess, but face
Some disguised Angel, or a Silvan Goddess;
It struck such adoration (for I durst not
Harbor the love of so divine a beauty)
That ever since I could not teach my thoughts
Another object; (In this happy place
(Happy her presence made it) she appeared,
And breathed fresh honors on the smiling trees,
Which owe more of their gallantry to her
Then to the musky kisses of the West wind.
Ha! sure it is she; Thus does the Sun break forth
From the black curtain of an envious cloud.
Enter Alupis, Bellula, Hylace. Al. For it is but a folly, etc.

Hyl. We did not send for you; pray leave us.

Alu. No, by this light, not till I see you cry;
When you have shed some penitential tears
For wronging of Palaemon, there may be
A truce concluded betwixt you and me.

Bell. This is uncivil
To thrust into our company; do you think
That we admire your wit? pray go to them
That do, we would be private.

Al. To what purpose?
You Would ask how many shepherds she has strooken,
Which is the properest man? which kisses sweetest?
Which brings her the best presents? And then tell
What a fine man wooes you, how read his lips are?
How bright his eyes are? and what dainty sonnets
He has composed in honor of your beauty?
And then at last, with what rare tricks you fool him?
These are your learned discourses; but were all
Men of my temperance, and wisdom too,
You should woo us, I, and woo hardly too
Before you got us.

Flo. Oh profaneness!
Can he so rudely speak to that blessed virgin,
And not be stricken dumb?

Al. Nay, you have both a mind to me; I know it,
But I will marry neither; I come hither
Not to gaze on you, or extol your beauty;
I come to vex you.

Flo. Ruder yet? I cannot,
I will not suffer this; mad fellow, is there
No other Nymph in all these spacious woods,
To fling thy wild, and saucie laughter at,
But her, whom thy great Deity even Pan
Himself would honor, do not dare to utter
The smallest accent if not clothed with reverence,
Nay, do not look upon her but with eyes
As humble and submissive as thou would
Upon the brow of Majesty, when it frowns,
I speak but that which duty binds us all to,
Thou shall not think upon her, no not think,
Without as much respect and honor to her
As holy men in superstitious zeal
Give to the Images they worship.

Bell. Oh! this is the Gentleman courted me the other day.

Al. Why? have you got a Pattent to restrain me?
Or do you think your glorious suit can fright me?
'Twould do you much more credit at the Theater,
To rise betwixt the Acts, and look about
The boxes, and then cry, God save you Madame,
Or hear you out in quarreling at an Ordinary,
And make your oaths become you; have you shown
Your gay apparel every where in town,
That you can afford us the sight often, or
Has that Grand Devil whose eclipped sergeant,
Frighted you out of the City?

Flo. Your loose jests
When they are shot at me, I scorn to take
Any revenge upon them, but neglect,
For then it is rashness only, but as soon
As you begin to violate her name,
Nature and conscience too bids me be angry,
For then it is wickedness.

Al. Well, if it be so,
I hope you can forgive the sin that is past
Without the doleful sight of trickling tears,
For I have eyes of pumice; I Am content
To let her rest in quiet, but you have given me
Free leave to abuse you, on the condition
You will revenge it only with neglect,
For then it is rashness only.

Flo. What are you biting?
Where did you pick these fragments up of wit.

Al. Where I paid dear enough a conscience for them,
They should be more then fragments by their price,
I bought them sir, even from the very Merchants,
I scorned to deal with your poor City pedlers, that sell
By retayle: But let that pass; For it is but a folly:

Flo. Then you have seen the City.

Al. I and felt it too, I thank the Devil; I Am sure
It sucked up in three years the whole estate
My father left, though he were counted rich,
A pox of forlorn Captains, pitiful things,
Whom you mistake for soldiers, only by
Their sounding oaths, and a buffe jerkin, and
Some Histories which they have learned by roate,
Of battles fought in Persia, or Polonia,
Where they themselves were of the conquering side,
Although God knows one of the City Captains,
Armed with broad scarf, feather* and scarlet breeches,
When he instructs the youth on Holy Days,
And is made sick with fearful noise of Guns,
Would pose them in the art Military; these
Were my first Leeches.

Flo. So, no wonder then you spent so fast.

Al. Pish, these were nothing:
I grew to keep your Poets company
Those are the soakers, they refined me first
Of those gross humors that are bred by money
And made me straight a wit, as now you see,
For it is but a folly.

Flo. But have thou none to fling thy salt upon
But these bright virgins?

Al. Yes now you are here;
You are as good a theme as I could wish.

Hy. It Is best for me to go, whilst they are talking
For if I steal not from Alupis sight,
He Will follow me all day to vex me. Exit.

Al. What are you vanishing coy Mistress Hylace?
Nay, I Will be with you straight, but first I Will fetch
Palaemon, now if he can play his part
And leave off whining, we will have princely sport,
Well, I may live in time to have the women
Scratch out my eyes, or else scould me to death,
I shall deserve it richly: Farewell Sir:
I have employment with the Damsel gone
And cannot now intend you. Exit.

Flo. They Are both gone,
Direct me now good love, and teach my tongue
The enchantments that thou woo'dst thy Psyche with.

Bell. Farewell Sir.

Flo. Oh! be not so cruel,
Let me enjoy my self a little while,
Which without you I cannot.

Bell. Pray let me go,
To tend my sheep, there is none that looks to them,
And if my father miss me, he will so chide.

Flo. Alas! thou need not fear, for the Wolf himself
Though hunger whet the fury of its nature,
Would learn to spare thy pretty flocks, and be
As careful as the shepherds dog to guard them,
Nay if he should not, Pan would present be,
And keep thy tender lambs in safety for thee,
For though he be a God he would not blush
To be thy servant.

Bell. Oh! you're courtly Sir.
But your fine words will not defend my sheep,
Or stop them if they wander; Let me go.

Flo. Are you so fearful of your cattels loss?
Yet so neglectfull of my perishing,
(For without you how can I choose but perish?)
Though I my self were most contemptible,
Yet for this reason only, that I love
And honor you, I deserve more then they do.

Bell. What would you do, that thus you urge my stay?

Flo. Nothing I swear that should offend a Saint,
Nothing which can call up thy maiden blood
To lend thy face a blush, nothing which chaste
And virtuous sisters can deny their Brothers,
I do confess I love you, but the fire
In which Jove courted his ambitious Mistress,
Or that by holy men on Altars kindled,
Is not so pure as mine is; I would only
Gaze thus upon thee; feed my hungry eyes
Sometimes with those bright tresses, which the wind
Far happier then I, plays up and down in,
And sometimes with thy cheeks, those rosy twins;
Then gently touch thy hand, and often kissed it,
Till thou thy self should check my modesty
And yield thy lips, but further, though thou should
Like other maids with weak resistance ask it,
(Which I am sure thou will not) I Would not offer
Till lawful Hymen join us both, and give
A license unto my desires.

Bell. Which I
Need not bestow much language to oppose,
Fortune and nature have forbidden it,
When they made me a rude and homely wench
You (if your clothes and carriage be not liars,)
By state and birth a Gentleman.

Flo. I hope
I may without suspicion of a boaster
Say that I am so, else my love were impudence
For do you think wise Nature did intend
You for a Shepherdess, when she bestowed
Such pains in your creation? would she fetch
The perfumes of Arabia for your breath?
Or ransack Pestum of her choycest roses
T'adorne your cheeks? would she bereave the rock
Of coral for your lips? and catch two stars
As they were falling, which she formed your eyes of?
Would she her self turn work-woman and spinne
Threeds of the finest gold to be your tresses?
Or rob the Great to make one Microcosme?
And having finished quite the beauteous wonder,
Hide it from public view and admiration!
No; she would set it on some Pyramide,
To be the spectacle of many eyes:
And it does grieve me that my niggard fortune
Raised me not up to higher eminency,
Not that I am ambitious of such honors
But that through them I might be made more worthy
To enjoy you.

Bell. You are for ought I see
Too great already; I will either live
An undefiled virgin as I am
Or if I marry, not belie my birth,
But join my self to some plain virtuous shepherd
(For Callidorus is so, and I will be either his or no bodies.) Aside.

Flo. Pray hear me.

Bell. Alas! I have Sir, and do therefore now
Prepare to answer, if this passion
Be love, my fortune bids me to deny you;
If lust, my honesty commands to scorn you,
Farewell.

Flo. O stay a little! but two words: she is gone,
Gone like the glorious Sun, which being set
Night creepes behind and covers all; some way
I must seek out to win her, or what is easier
(And the blind man himself without a guide
May find) some way to dye; would I had been
Borne a poor shepherd in these shady woods.
Nature is cruel in her benefits
And when she gives us honey, mingles gall.
She said that if she married, the woods
Should find a husband for her. I will woo her
In Sylvan habit, then perhaps she will love me --
But yet I will not, that is in vain; I will too,
It cannot hurt to try.

Exit. Enter Alupis, Palaemon, after them Hylace. Al. Nay come, she is just
behind us, are you ready?
When she scoulds, be you low deft, if she cry
Then laugh abundantly, thus we will vex her
Into a good conceit of you.

Pal. I Will warrant you; you have instructed me enough,
She comes.

Hyl. Is It possible that Bellula --

Pal. Fair creature --

Hyl. Sure thou were borne to trouble me, who sent for thee*

Pa. Whom all the Nymphs (though women use to be)
As you know, envious of another beauty)
Confess the pride and glory of these woods.

Hyl. When did you make this speech? it is a most neat one
Go, get you gone, look to your rotting cattle,
You Will never keep a wife, who are not able
To keep your sheep.

Al. Good! she abuses him
Now it is a miracle he does not cry.

Pal. Thou whom the stars might envy 'cause they are
Outshone by thee on earth.

Hyl. Pray get you gone,
Or hold your prating tongue, for whatsoever
Thou say, I will not hear a syllable,
Much less answer thee.

Pa. No; I Will try that straight
I have a present here --
Which if you will give me leave, I shall presume
To dedicate to your service.

Hy. You're so cunning,
And have such pretty ways to entice me with,
Come let me see it.

Pa. Oh! have you found a tongue?
I thought I had not been worth an answer?

Hy. How now; what tricks are these?
Give it me quickly, or --

Pa. Pray get you gone, or hold your prating tongue;
For whatsoever thou say I will not hear
A syllable, much less answer thee.

Al. Good boy'faith: now let me come.

Hy. This is some plot I see, would I were gone,
I had as lief see the wolf as this Alupis.

Al. Here Is a fine Ring, I faith, a very pretty one,
Do your teeth water at it Damsel? ha?
Why we will sell our sheep, and oxen, girl,
Hang them scurvy beasts, to buy you pretty knacks
That you might laugh at us, and call us fools
And jeere us too, as far as your wit reaches,
Bid us be gone, and when we have talked two hours,
Deny to answer us; Nay you must stay She offers to be gone.
And hear a little more.

Hy. Must I? are you
The master of my business? I will not.

Al. Faith but you shall; hear therefore and be patient.
I Will have thee made a Lady, yes a Lady,
For when thou'st got a chain about thy neck
And comely bobes to dandle in thine ears;
When thou'st perfumed thy hair, that if thy breath
Should be corrupted, it might escape unknown,
And then bestowed two hours in curling it,
Uncovering thy breast hither, thine arms hither,
And had thy Fucus curiously laid on;
Thou Would be the finest proud thing, I Will warrant thee
Thou would outdoe them all. So, now go thee to her
And let me breathe a little; For it is but a folly, etc.

Hy. Oh! is it your turn to speak again? no doubt
But we shall have a good oration then,
For they call you the learned shepherd; well
This is your love I see.

Pa. Ha, ha, ha,
What should I love a stone? or woo a picture?
Alas! I must be gone, for whatsoever
I say, you will not hear a syllable
Much less answer; go, you think you are,
So singularly handsome, when alas,
Galla, Menalca's daughter, Bellula,
Or Amaryllis overcome you quite.

Hy. This is a scurvy fellow; I Will fit him for it,
No doubt they are; I wonder that your wisdom
Will trouble me so long with your vain suite,
Why do you not woo them?

Pa. Perhaps I do;
I Will not tell you, because you will envy them,
And always be dispraising of their beauties.

Hy. It shall appear I will not, for I Will sooner
Embrace a Scorpion, then thee, base man.

Pa. Ha, ha, ha.
Alupis do thou hear her? she will cry presently,
Do not despair yet girl, by your good carriage
You may recall me still; some few entreatyes
Mingled with tears may get a kiss perhaps.

Hy. J would not kiss thee for the wealth of Sicily
Thou wicked perjured Fellow.

Pal. Alupis, oh!
We have incenst her too much! how she looks?
Prithee Alupis help me to entreat,
You know we did but jest, dear Hylace,
Alupis, prithee speak, best, beauteous Hylace,
I did but do it to try you, pray forgive me,
Upon my knees I beg it.

Al. Here Is a precious fool.

Hyl. Do thou still mock me? have thou found more ways?
Thou need'st not vex thy wit to move my hate,
Sooner the Sun and stars shall shine together,
Sooner the Wolf make peace with tender lambs
Then I with thee; you are a disease to me
And wound'st my eyes. Exit.

Pal. Eternal night involve me! if there be
A punishment, (but sure there is not any)
Greater then what her anger has inflicted,
May that fall on me too? how have I fooled
Away my hopes? how have I been my self
To my own self a thief?

Al. I told you this,
That if she should but frown, you must needs fall
To your old tricks again.

Pa. Is this your art?
A lovers curse upon it; Oh! Alupis
Thou have done worse then murdered me: for which
May all thy flocks pine and decay like me,
May thy cursed wit hurt all; but most its Master,
May thou (for I can wish no greater ill)
Love one like me, and be, like me, contemned.
Thou'ast all the darts my tongue can fling at thee,
But I will be revenged some other way
Before I dye, which cannot now be long.

Alu. Poor Shepherd, I begin to pity him.
I Will see if J can comfort him; Palaemon, --

Pal. Nay, do not follow me, grief, passion
And troubled thoughts are my companions,
Those I had rather entertain then thee,
If you choose this way let me go the other,
And in both parts distracted error, thee
May revenge quickly meet, may death meet me. Exit.

Alu. Well, I say Pan defend me from a lover
Of all tame madmen certainly they are the worst,
I would not meet with two such creatures more
For any good, they without doubt would put me,
If it be possible into a fit of sadness,
Though it Be but a folly, etc.
Well; I must find some plot yet to salve this
Because I have engaged my wit in the business,
And 'twould be a great scandal to the City
If I who have spent my means there, should not be
Able to cheat these shepherds. How now, how now,
Have we more distressed lovers here? Enter Aphron.

Aph. No, I Am a mad man.

Al. I gave a shrewd guess at it at first sight
I thought thee little better.

Aph. Better? why?
Can there be any better then a madman?
I tell thee, I came here to be a madman,
Nay, do not dissuade me from't, I would be
A very Madman.

Al. A good resolution!
It Is as gentile a course as you can take,
I have known great ones have not been ashamed often,
But what cause pray drove you into this humor?

Aph. Why a Mistress,
And such a beauteous one -- do thou see no body?
She sits upon a throne amongst the stars
And outshines them, look up and be amazed
Such was her beauty here, -- sure there do lie
A thousand vapors in thy sleepy eyes,
Do thou not see her yet? not yet, nor yet?

Alu. No in good troth.

Aph. You Are dull and ignorant,
Not skilled at all in deep Astrology.
Let me instruct thee?

Alu. Prithee do, for thou
Art in an admirable case to teach now,

Ap. I Will show thee first all the celestial signs,
And to begin, look on that horned head.

Al. Whose is it? Jupiters?

Ap. No, it is the Ram!
Next that, the spacious Bull fills up the place.

Al. The Bull? it is well, the fellows of the Guard
Intend not to come thither; if they did
The Gods might chance to lose their beef.

Ap. And then,
Yonder Is the sign of Gemini, do see it?

Alu. Yes, yes, I see one of the zealous sisters
Mingled in friendship with a holy Brother*
To beget Reformations.

Ap. And there sits Capricorn.

Al. A Welchman is it not?

Ap. There Cancer creepes along with gouty pace,
As if his feet were sleepy, there, Do you mark it?

Al. I, I, Alderman-like a walking after dinner,
His paunch orechargd with capon and with white broth.

Ap. But now, now, now, now, gaze eternally
Had thou as many eyes as the black night
They would be all too little; see thou Virgo?

Al. No by my troth, there are so few on earth,
I should be loath to swear there is more in heaven,
Then only one.

Ap. That was my Mistress once, but is of late
Translated to the height of deserved glory,
And adds new ornaments to the wondering heavens.
Why do I stay behind then, a mere nothing
Without her presence to give life and being?
If there be any hill whose lofty top
Nature has made contiguous with heaven,
Though it be steep, rugged as Neptunes brow,
Though armed with cold, with hunger, and diseases,
And all the other soldiers of misery,
Yet I would climb it up, that I might come
Next place to thee, and there be made a star.

Al. I prithee do, for amongst all the beasts
That help to make up the celestial signs
There Is a Calfe wanting yet.

Ap. But stay --

Al. Nay, I have learned enough Astrology.

Ap. Hunger and faintness have already seaz'd me,
It Is a long journey thither, I shall want
Provision; can thou help me, gentle shepherd?
And when I am come thither I will snatch
The Crown of Ariadne, and fling't down
To thee for a reward.

Al. No doubt you will;
But you shall need no victuals, when you have ended
Your toylesome journey, kill the Ram you talk of,
And feed your self with most celestial mutton.

Ap. You Are in the right, if they deny me that
I Will pluck the Bear down from the Artique Pole,
And drown it in those waters it avoids,
And dares not touch; I Will tugge the Hyades
And make them to sink down in spite of Nature;
I Will meet with Charles his Wayne, and overturne it
And break the wheels of 't, till Boots start
For fear, and grow more slow then e're he was.

Al. By this good light he will snuff the Moon anon,
Here Is words indeed would fright a Conjurer
It Is pity that these huge Giganticke speeches
Are not upon the stage, they would do rarely
For none would understand them, I could wish
Some Poet here now, with his table-booke.

Ap. I Will cuffe with Pollux, and out-ride thee, Castor,
When the fierce Lion roares I Will pluck his heart out
And be called Cordelion; I Will grapple with the Scorpion,
Take his sting out and fling him to the earth.

Al. To me good Sir,
It may perhaps raise me a great estate
With showing it up and down for pence apiece

Ap. Alcides freed the earth from savadge monsters,
And I will free the heavens and be called
Don Hercules Alcido de secundo.

Al. A brave Castilian name.

Ap. It Is a hard task,
But if that fellow did so much by strength,
I may well do it armed both with love and fury.

Alup. Of which thou have enough.

Aph, Farewell thou ratte.
The Cedar bids the shrub adieu.

Al. Farewell
Don Hercules Alcido de secundo.
If thou scar'st any, 'twill be by that name.
This is a wonderful rare fellow, and
I like his humor mightily -- who is here?
Enter Truga. The Chronicle of a hundred years ago!
How many crows has she outlived? sure death
Has quite forgot her; by this Memento mori
I must invent some trick to help Palaemon.

True. I am going again to Callidorus,
But I have got a better present now,
My own ring made of good Ebony,
Which a young handsome shepherd bestowed on me
Some fourscore years ago, then they all loved me,
I was a handsome Less, J wosse in those days.

Al. I so thou were I Will warrant; here is good sign often
Now I Will begin the work, Reverend Truga,
Whose very Autumn shows how glorious
The springtime of your youth was --

True. Are you come
To put your mocks upon me?

Al. I do confess indeed my former speeches
Have been too rude and saucy; I have flung
Mad jests too wildly at you; but considering
The reverence which is due to age, and virtue,
I have repented, will you see my tears?
And believe them? Oh for an onyon now!
Or J shall laugh alowd; ha, ha, ha!) Aside.

True. Alas good soul I do forgive you truly;
I would not have you weep for me, indeed
I ever thought you would repent at last,

Al. You might well,
But the right valewing of your worth and virtue
Has turned the folly of my former scorn
Inro a wiser reverence, pardon me
If I say love.

True. I, I, withal my heart,
But do you speak sincerely?

Al. Oh! it grieves me
That you should doubt it, what I spoke before
Were lies, the offspring of a foolish rashness,
I see some sparks still of your former beauty*
Which spite of time still flourish.

True. Why, I am not
So old as you imagined, I am yet
But fourscore years. Am I a January now?
How do you think? I always did believe
You Would be of another opinion one day;
I know you did but jest.

Al. Oh no, oh no, (I see it takes) Aside.
How you belly your age -- for -- let me see --
A man would take you -- let me see -- for --
Some forty years or thereabouts (I mean four hundred)
Not a jot more J swear. Aside.

True. Oh no! you flatter me,
But I look something fresh indeed this morning.
I should please Callidorus mightily,
But I Will not go perhaps; this fellow is
As handsome quite as he, and I perceive
He loves me hugely, I protest I will not Aside
Have him grow mad, which he may chance to do
If I should scorn him.

Al. I have something here
Which I would feign reveal to you, but dare not
Without your license.

True. Do in Pans name, do; now, now.

Al. The comely gravity which adornes your age,
And makes you still seem lovely, has so stricken me --

True. Alas good soul! I must seem coy at first,
But not too long, for fear I should quite lose him.

Al. That I shall perish utterly, unless
Your gentle nature help me.

True. Alas good Shepherd!
And in troth I feign would help you
But I am past those vanities of love.

Al. Oh no!
Wise nature which preserved your life till now
Does it because you should enjoy these pleasures
Which do belong to life, if you deny me,
I am undone.

True. Well you should not win me
But that I am loath to be held the cause
Of any young man's ruin, do not think it
My want of chastity, but my good nature
Which would see no one hurt.

Al. Ah pretty soul! Aside.
How supple it is like wax before the Sun*
Now cannot I choose but kiss her, there is the plague of 't,
Let Us then join our hearts, and seal them with a kiss

True. Well, let us then:
'T were incivility to be your debtor,
I Will give you back again your kiss, sweetheart,
And come in th'afternoone, I Will see you;
My husband will be gone to sell some kine,
And Hylace tending the sheep, till then
Farewell good Duck ( Offers to go.)
But do you hear, because you shall remember ( Turns back.)
To come I Will give thee here this Ebon ring
But do not wear it, lest my husband chance
To see it: Farewell Duck.

Al. Lest her husband chance
To see it; she cannot deny this, here is enough;
My Scoene of love is done then, is she gone?
I Will call her back; ho Truga; Truga ho:

True. Why do you call me Duck?

Al Only to ask one foolish question of thee:
Have Not you a husband?

True. Yes, you know I have.

Al. And do you love him?

True. Why do you ask? I do.

Al. Yet you can be content to make him cuckold

True. Rather then to see you perish in your flames.

Al. Why art thou now two hundred years of age,
Yet have no more discretion but to think
That I could love thee? ha, ha, were it mine
I Would sell thee to some gardener, thou would serve
To scare away the thieves as well as crows.

True. Oh, you're disposed to jest I see, Farewell.

Al. Nay, I Am in very earnest; I love you?
Why thy face is a vizard.

Trug. Leave off these tricks, I shall be angry else,
And take away the favors I bestowed.

Al. It Is known that thou have eyes by the holes only,
Which are crept farther in, then thy nose out,
And that is almost a yard; thy quarreling teeth
Of such a color are, that they themselves
Scare one another, and do stand at distance.
Thy skin hangs loose as if it feared the bones
(For flesh thou have not) and is grown so black
That a wild Centaure would not meddle with thee.
To conclude, Nature made thee when she was
Only disposed to jest, and length of time
Has made thee more ridiculous.

True. Base villain, is this your love?
Give me my ring again?

Al. No, no; soft there:
I intend to bestow it on your husband;
He Will keep it better far then you have done.

Trug. What shall I do? Alupis, good Alupis,
Stay but a little while, pray do but hear me.

Al. No, I Will come to you in the afternoon
Your husband will be selling of some kine
And Hylace tending the sheep.

True. Pray hear me, command me any thing
And be but silent of this, good Alupis;
Hugh, Hugh, Hugh.

Al. Yes, yes, I will be silent,
I Will only blow a trumpet on yon hill,
Till all the country swains are flockt about me.
Then show the ring, and tell the passages
'Twixt you and me.

Trug. Alas! I am undone.

Al. Well now it is ripe; I have had sport enough
Since I behold your penitential tears
I Will propose this to you, if you can get
Your Daughter to be married to Palaemon
This day, for I Will allow no longer time;
To morrow I Will restore your ring, and swear
Never to mention what is past betwixt us,
If not -- you know what follows -- take your choice.

True. I Will do my best endeavor.

Al. Go make have then,
You know your time's bnt short, and use it well:
Now if this fail the Divel's in all wit.
Exit Truga. I Will go and thrust it forward, if it take,
I Will sing away the day,
For it is but a folly
To be melancholy,
Let Us live here whilst we may.
Exit.
Finis Actus Tertij.
Actus IIII.
Scaena I.
Enter Callidorus, Bellula, Florellus. Call. Pray follow me no more, me thinks
that modesty
Which is so lively painted in your face
Should prompt your maiden heart with fears and blushes
To trust your self in so much privatnesse
With one you know not.

Bell. I should love those fears
And call them hopes, could I persuade my self,
There were so much heat in you as to cause them;
Prithee leave me; if thou do hope success
To thine own love, why interrupt'st thou mine?

Flo. If love cause you
To follow him, how can you angry be?
Because love forces me without resistance
To do the same to you?

Bell. Love should not grow
So subtle as to play with arguments.

Flo. Love should not be an enemy to reason.

Call. To love is of it self a kind of Folly,
But to love one who cannot render back
Equal desire, is nothing else but madness:

Bell. Tell him so; it is a lesson he should learn.

Flo. Not to love is often self a kind of hardness,
But not to love him who has always wooed you
With chaste desires, is nothing less then tyranny.

Bell. Tell him so; it is a lesson he should learn.

Call. Why do you follow him that flies from you?

Flo. Why do you fly from him that follows you?

Bell. Why do you follow? Why do you fly from me?

Call. The Fates command me that I must not love you.

Flo. The Fates command me that I needs must love you.

Bell. The Fates impose the like command on me,
That you I must, that you I cannot love.

Flo. Unhappy man! when I begin to cloth
My love with words, and court her with persuasions,
She stands unmoved, and does not clear her brow
Of the least wrinkle which sat there before;
So when the waters with an amorous noise
Leap up and down, and in a wanton dance
Kiss the dull rock, that scorns their fond embraces,
And darts them back; till they with terror scattered,
Drop down again in tears.

Bell. Unhappy woman!
When I begin to show him all my passion,
He flies from me, and will not clear his brow
Of any cloud which covered it before;
So when the ravishing Nightingale has tuned
Her mournful notes, and silenced all the birds,
Yet the deaf wind flirts by, and in disdain
With a rude whistle leaves her.

Call. We are all three
Unhappy; borne to be the proud example
Of Loves great Godhead, not his God-like goodness.
Let us not call upon our selves those miseries
Which love has not, and those it has bear bravely,
Our desires yet are like some hidden text,
Where one word seems to contradict another,
They are Loves nonsense, wrapped up in thick clouds
Till Fate be pleased to write a Commentary,
Which doubtless 'twill; till then let let us endure,
And sound a parlee to our passions,

Bell. We may join hands though, may we not?

Flo. We may, and lips too, may we not?

Bell, We may; come let us sit down and talk.

Call. And look upon each other.

Flo. Then kiss again.

Bell. Then look.

Call. Then talk again,
What are we like? the hand of Mother Nature
Would be quite posed to make our simile.

Flo. We are the Trigon in Loves Hemisphere.

Bell. We are three strings on Venus dainty'st Lute,
Where all three hinder one another music,
Yet all three join and make one harmony.

Call. We are three flowers of Venus dainty garden,
Where all three hinder one another odor,
Yet all three join, and make one nosegay up.

Flo. Come let us kiss again.

Bell. And look.

Call. And talk.

Flo. Nay rather sing, your lips are Natures organs,
And made for naught less sweet then harmony.

Call. Pray do.

Bell. Though I forfeit
My little skill in singing to your wit,
Yet I will do it, since you command.
Song.
It is a punishment to love,
And not to love a punishment does prove;
But of all pains there is no such pain,
As it is to love, and not be loved again.
Till sixteen parents we obey,
After sixteen, men steal our hearts away
How wretched are we women grown,
Whose wills, whose minds, whose hearts are never our own!

Call. Thank you.

Flo. For ever be the tales of Orpheus silent,
Had the same age seen thee, that very Poet,
Who drew all to him by his harmony,
Thou would have drawn to thee.

Call. Come shall we rise?

Bell. If it please you, I will.

Call. I cannot choose
But pity these two Lovers, and am taken
Much with the serious trifles of their passion.
Let Us go and see, if we can break this net
In which we all are caught; if any man
Ask who we are, we will say we are Loves riddle.

Exeunt. Enter Aegon, Palaemon, Alupis. Pa. Thou art my better Genius, honest
Aegon,

Al. And what am I?

Pa. My self, my soul, my friend,
Let me hug thee Alupis, and thee Aegon,
Thee for inventing it, thee for putting it
In act; But do you think the plot will hold?

Alu. Hold? why I Will warrant thee it shall hold,
Till we have tied you both in wedlock fast,
Then let the bonds of Matrimony hold you
If 'twill, if that will not neither, I can tell you
What will I Am sure; A Halter.
Then sing, etc. --

Aegon Come, shall we knock?

Al. I do; For it is, etc. --

Aegon. Ho Truga; who is within there?

Al. You, Winter, Ho, you that the grave expected
Some hundred years ago, you that intend
To live till you turn Skeleton, and make
All men aweary of you but Physicians,
Pox on you, will you come.

Enter Clariana and her Maid. Cla. Did you command the servants to withdraw?

M. I did forsooth.

Cla. And have you shut the doors?

M. Yes.

Cl. Is there none can over-heare our talk?

M. Your curious enquiry much amazeth me,
And I could wish you would excuse my boldness
If I should ask the reason.

Cl. Thou know well
That thou have found me always liker to
Thy Kinswoman then Mistress, that thy breast
Has been the Cabinet of all my secrets,
This I tell thee, not as an exprobration,
But because I must require thy faith
And counsel here. And therefore prithee swear --

M. Swear? to do what?

Cl. To be more silent then the dead of night,
And to thy power to help me.

M. Would my power
To assist you were as ready as my will,
And for my tongue that Mistress I Will condemn
Unto perpetual silence, ere it shall
Betray the smallest word that you commit to it.
By all --

Cl. Nay do not swear, I will not wrong thy virtue
To bind it with an oath. I Will tell thee all;
Does not my face seem paler then 'twas wont?
Does not my eye look as it borrowed flame
From my fond heart; could not my frequent weepings,
My sudden sighs, and abrupt speeches tell thee
What J am grown?

M. You are the same you were,
Or else my eyes are liars.

Cl. No, I Am a wretched Lover; could thou nor
Read that out of my blushes? fie upon thee;
Thou art a novice in Loves school I see;
Trust me I envy at thy ignorance,
That can not find out Cupids characters
In a lost Maid, sure thou did never know him.

M. Would you durst trust me with his name,
Sure he had charms about him that might tempt
Chaste Votaries, or move a Scythian rock
When he shot fire into your chaster breast.

Cl. I am ashamed to tell thee, prithee guess him,

M. Why it is impossible.

Cl. Thou saw the gentleman whom I this morning
Brought in to be my guest.

M. Yes, but am ignorant, who, or from whence he is;

Cl. Thou shall know all;
The freshness of the morning did invite me
To walk abroad, there I began to think
How I had lost my Brother, that one thought
Like circles in the water begat many,
Those and the pleasant verdure of the fields
Made me forget the way, and did entice me
Farther then either fear or modesty
Else would have suffered me, beneath an oak
Which spread a flourishing Canopy round about,
And was it self alone almost a wood,
I found a Gentleman distracted strangely,
Crying alowd for either food, or sleep,
And knocking his white hands against the ground,
Making that groan like me, when I beheld it,
Pity, and fear, both proper to us women,
Drove my feet back far swifter then they went,
When I came home, I took two servants with me
And fetched the gentleman, hither I brought him,
And with such cheer as then the house afforded,
Replenished him, he was much mended suddenly,
Is now asleep, and when he wakes I hope
Will find his senses perfect.

M. You did show
In this, what never was a stranger to you,
Much piety; but wander from your subject;
You have not yet discovered, who it is
Deserves your love.

Cl. Fie, Fie, how dull thou art,
Thou do not use in other things to be so;
Why I love him; His name I cannot tell thee;
For it is my great unhappiness to be
Still ignorant of that my self. He comes,
Look, this is he, but do not grow my rival If thou can thuse.

M. You need not, fear't forsooth. Enter Aphron.

Cl. Leave me alone with him; withdraw.

M. I do. Exit Maid.

Ap. Where am I now? under the Northern Pole
Where a perpetual winter binds the ground
And glazeth up the floods? or where the Sun
With neighboring rays bakes the divided earth,
And drinks the rivers up? or do I sleep?
Is It not some foolish dream deludes my fancy?
Who am J? I begin to question that.
Was not my country Sicily? my name
Called Aphron, wretched Aphron?

Cla. Ye good Gods
Forbid; is this that man who was the cause
Of all the grief for Callidora's loss?
Is this the man that I so often have cursed?
Now I could almost hate him, and me thinks
He is not quite so handsome as he was;
And yet alas he is, though by his means
My Brother is gone from me, and heaven knows
If I shall see him more, Fool as I am,
I cannot choose but love him.

Ap. Cheat me not good eyes,
What woman, or what Angel do I see?
Oh stay, and let me worship e're thou go,
Whether thou be a Goddess which thy beauty
Commands me to believe, or else some mortal
Which I the rather am induced to think,
Because I know the Gods all hate me so,
They would not look upon me.

Cl. Spare these titles
I am a wretched woman, who for pity
(Alas that I should pity! t'had bin better (Aside)
That I had been remorslesse) brought you hither,
Where with some food and rest, thanks to the Gods
Your senses are recovered.

Ap. My good Angel!
I do remember now that I was mad
For want of meat and sleep, thrice did the Sun
Cheer all the world but me, thrice did the night
With silent and bewitching darkness give
A resting time to every thing but Aphron.
The fish, the beasts, the birds, the smallest creatures
And the most despicable snor'd securely.
The aguish head of every tree by Aeolus
Was rockt asleep, and shook as if it nodded.
The crooked mountains seemed to bow and slumber,
The very rivers ceased their daily murmur,
Nothing did watch, but the pale Moon, and I
Paler then she; Grief wedded to this toil
What else could it beget but franticknesse?
But now me thinks, I am my own, my brain
Swimmes not as it was wont; O brightest Virgin
Show me some way by which I may be grateful,
And if I do it not, let an eternal Phrenzie
Jmmediatly seize on me.

Cl. Alas! 'twas only
My love, and if you will reward me for it,
Pay that J lent you, J'le require no interest;
The Principall's enough.

Ap. You speak in mists.

Cl. You're loath perhaps to understand.

Ap. If you intend that I should love and honor you,
I do by all the Gods.

Cl. But I am covetous in my demands,
I am not satisfied with wind-like promises
Which only touch the lips; I ask your heart
Your whole heart for me, in exchange of mine,
Which so I gave to you.

Ap. Ha! you amaze me.
Oh! you have spoken something worse then lightning,
That blasts the inward parts, leaves, the outward whole,
My gratitude commands me to obey you,
But I am borne a man, and have those passions
Fighting within me, which I must obey.
Whilst Callidora lives, although she be
As cruel, as thy breast is soft and gentle;
It Is sin for me to think of any other.

Cl. You cannot love me then?

Ap. I do I swear,
Above my self I do: my self? what said I?
Alas! that is nothing; above any thing
But heaven and Callidora.

Cl* Fare you well then,
I would not do that wrong to one I love,
To urge him farther then his power and will;
Farewell, remember me when you are gone,
And happy in the love of Callidora. Exit.

Ap. When J do not, may I forget my self,
Would I were mad again; then I might rave
With privilege, I should not know the griefs
That hurried me about, 'twere better far
To lose the senses, then be tortured by them.
Where is she gone? I did not ask her name,
Fool that I was, alas poor Gentlewoman!
Can any one love me? ye cruel Gods,
Is It not enough that I my self am miserable,
Must I make others so too? I Will go in
And comfort her; alas! how can I though?
I Will grieve with her, that is in ills a comfort.

Exit. Enter Alupis, Melarnus, Truga, Palaemon, Aegon. Pa. Before when you
denied your Daughter to me
'Twas Fortunes fault, not mine, but since good Fate
Or rather Aegon, better far then Fate
Has raysd me up to what you aimed at, riches,
I see not with what countenance you can
Coin any second argument against me.

Mel. Come, no matter for that:
Yes, I could wish you were less eloquent,
You have a vice called Poesy which much
Displeases me, but no matter for that neither.

Al. Alas! he will leave that straight
When he has got but money; he that swims
In Tagus, never will go back to Helicon.
besides, when he has married Hylace
Whom should he woo, to praise her comely feature,
Her skin like falling snow, her eyes like stars,
Her cheeks like roses (which are common places
Of all your lovers praises) oh! those vanities,
Things quite as light, and foolish as a Mistress,
Are by a Mistress first begot, and left
When they leave her.

Ra. Why do you think that Poesy
An art which even the Gods --

Al. Pox on your arts,
Let him think what he will; what is that to us?

Aegon. Well, I would gladly have an answer of you,
Since I have made Palaemon here my son,
If you conceive your Daughter is so good,
We will not press you, but seek out some other
Who may perhaps please me and him as well.

Pa. Which is impossi' --

Al. Rot on your possibles --
Thy mouth like a cracked fiddle never sounds
But out of tune; Come, put on Truga
You Will never speak unless I show the ring.

True. Yes, yes, I do, I do; Do ye hear sweet heart?
Are you mad to fling away a fortune
That Is thrust upon you, you know Aegon's rich.

Mel. Come, no matter for that,
That Is thrust upon me? I would feign see any man
Thrust ought upon me; but's no matter for that,
I will do that which I intend to do,
And it is no matter for that neither, that is thrust upon me?

Pa. Come, what say you Melarnus?

Mel. What say I? it is no matter what I say,
I Will speak to Aegon, if I speak to any,
And not to you; but no matter for that;
Hark you, will you leave all the means you have
To this Palaemon?

True. I Duck, he says he will.

Mel. Pish, it is no matter for that, I Will hear him say so.

Aeg. I will, and here do openly protest,
That since my Bellula (mine that was once)
Thinks her self wiser then her father is,
And will be governed rather by her passions,
Then by the square that I prescribe to her,
That I will never count her as my Daughter.

Al. Well acted by God Pan, see but what it is
To have me for a tutor in these rogueries.

Mel. But tell me now, good neighbor, what estate
Do you intend to give him?

Aeg. That estate
Which Fortune and my care has given to me,
The money which I have, and that is not much,
The sheep, and Goats.

Mel. And not the oxen too?

Aeg. Yes; every thing.

Mel. The Horses too?

Aeg. I tell you, every thing.

Al. By Pan he will make him promise him particularly
Each thing above the value of a Beanes-straw.
You Will leave him the pailes too, to milk the Kine in,
And harness for the horses, will you not?

Mel. I, I, what else; but it is no matter for that,
I know Palaemon's an ingenious man,
And love him therefore; But's no matter for that neither

Aeg. Well, since we are both agreed, why do we stay here
I know Palaemon longs t'imbrace his Hylace.

Mel* I, I, it is no matter for that, within this hour
We will be ready, Aegon, pray be you so,
Farewell my son in Law that shall be,
But's no matter for that: Farewell all:
Come Truga. Exeunt Melarnus and Truga.

Aeg. Come on then, let us not stay too long in trifling,
Palaemon go, and prepare your self against the time.
I Will go acquaint my Bellula with your plot,
Lest this unwelcome news should too much grieve her,
Before she know my meaning.

A. Do, do; and I Will go study
Some newfound ways to vex the fool Malernus.
For it is but a folly,
To be melancholy, etc.
Enter Florellus. Whilst Callidorus lives, I cannot love thee.
These were her parting words; I Will kill him then;
Why do I doubt it Fool? such wounds as these
Require no gentler medicine; me thinks Love
Frowns at me now, and says I am too dull,
Too slow in his command: and yet I will not,
These hands are virgins yet, unstained with villainy,
Shall I begin to teach them? -- me thinks Piety
Frowns at me now, and says, I am too weak
Against my passions. Piety! --
'T was fear begot that Bugbeare; for thee Bellula
I durst be wicked, though I saw Jove's hand
Armed with a naked thunderbolt: Farewell,
If thou be any thing, and not a shadow
To fright boys and old women) Farewell conscience,
Go and be strong in other petty things
To Lovers come, when Lovers may make use of thee,
Not else: and yet, -- what shall I do or say?
I see the better way, and know it is beteer,
Yet still this devious error draws me backward.
So when contrary winds rush out and meet,
And wrestle on the Sea with equal fury
The waves swell into mountains, and are driven
Now back, now forward, doubtful of the two
Which Captain to obey.

Enter Alupis. Al. Ha, ha, I Will have such excellent sport
For it is but a folly, etc.

Flo. Why here is a fellow now makes sport of every thing,
See one man's fate how it excels another,
He can sit, and pass away the day in jollity,
My music is my sighs, whilst tears keep time.

Al. Who Is here? a most rare posture!
How the good soul folds in his arms! he dreams
Sure that he hugges his Mistress now, for that
Is his disease without all doubt, so, good,
With what judicious garb he plucks his hat
Over his eyes; so, so, good! better yet;
He cries; by this good light, he cries; the man
Is careful, and intends to water his sheep
With his own tears; ha, ha, ha, ha.

Flo. Do thou see any thing that deserves thy laughter,
Fond swain?

Al. I see nothing in good troth but you,

Flo. To jeere those who are Fates May Game
Is a redoubled fault; for it is both sin,
And folly too; our life is so uncertain
Thou can not promise that thy mirth shall last
To morrow, and not meet with any rub,
Then thou may act that part, to day thou laugh'st as

Al. I act a part? it must be in a Comedy then,
I abhor Tragedyes: besides, I never
Practiced this posture; Hey ho! woe, alas!
Why do I live? my music is my sighs
Whilst tears keep time.

Flo. You take too great a license to your wit;
Wit, did I say? I mean, that which you think so.
And it deserves my pity, more then anger.
Else you should find, that blows are heavier far
Then the most studied jefts you can throw at me.

Al. Faith it will be but labor lost to beat me,
All will not teach me how to act this part;
Woe's me! alas! I Am a dull rogue, and so
Shall never learn it.

Flo. You're unmannerly
To talk thus sawcily with one you know not,
Nay, hardly ever saw before, be gone
And leave me as you found me, my worst thoughts
Are better company then thou.

Al. Enjoy them then,
Here Is no body desires to rob you of them.
I would have left your company without bidding,
It Is not so pleasant, I remember well,
When I had spent all my money, I stood thus
And therefore hate the posture ever since.
Do You hear? I Am going to a wedding now;
If you'ave a mind to dance, come along with me,
Bring your hard-hearted Mistress with you too,
Perhaps I may persuade her, and tell her
Your Musick's sighs, and that your tears keep time.
Will you not go? Farewell then, good Tragical actor.
Now have at thee Melarnus; For it is but a folly, etc. Exit

Flo. Thou art a Prophet, Shepherd; She is hard
As rocks which suffer the continual siege
Of Sea and wind against them; but I will
Win her or lose (which I should gladly do)
My self: my self? why so I have already:
Ho! who has found Florellus? he is lost,
Lost to himself, and to his parents likewise,
(who having missed me, do by this time search
Each corner for to find me) oh! Florellus,
Thou must be wicked, or for ever wretched,
Hard is the Physic, harder the disease.

Finis Actus Quarti.
Actus V.
Scaena I.
Enter Alupis, Palaemon, Aegon. PA. The Gods convert these omens into good:
And mock my fears; thrice in the very threshold,
Without its Masters leave my foot stood still,
Thrice in the way it stumbled:

Al. Thrice, and thrice
You were a fool then for observing it.
Why these are follyes the young years of Truga
Did hardly know; are they not vanished yet?

Pa. Blame not my fear: that is Cupids Usher always;
Though Hylace were now in my embraces,
I should half doubt it.

Al. If you chanced to stumble.

Aeg. Let him enjoy his madness, the same liberty
he will grant to you, when you're a Lover too.

Al. I, when I am, he may; yet if I were one
I should not be dismayed because threshold --

Pa. Alas! that was not all, as I came by
The oak to Faunus sacred, where the shepherds
Exercise rural sports on Festivalls,
On that trees top an inauspicious Crow
Foretold some ill to happen.

Aeg. And because Crows
Foretell wet weather, you interpret it
The rain of your own eyes; but leave these tricks
And let me advise you.

Melarnus speaking to Hylace within his door. Mel. Well come, no matter for
that; I do believe thee; Girl
And would they have such sport with vexing me!
But's no matter for that; I Will vex them for it.
I know your fiery lover will be here strait,
But I shall cool him; but come, no matter for that!
Go get you in, for I do see them coming.

Aeg. Here comes Melarnus.

Pa. He looks cheerfully, I hope all is well?

Aeg. Melarnus, opportunely: we were a coming
Just now unto you.

Mel. Yes, very likely; would you have spoken with me?

Aeg. Spoken with you?
Why, are you mad? have you forgot your promise?

Mel. My promise? oh! it is true, I said indeed
I would go with you to day to sell some kine,
Stay but a little, I Will be ready straight.

Pa. I am amazed; Good Aegon speak to him.

Al. By this good light,
I see no likelihood of any marriage,
Except betwixt the Kine and oxen. Hark you hither;
A rotte upon your beasts; is Hylace ready?

Mel. It Is no matter for that! who is there? Alupis?
Give me thy hand 'faith, you are a merry fellow,
I have not seen thee here these many days,
But now I think on it, it is no matter for that neither.

Al. Thy memory's fled away sure with thy wit.
Was not I here less then an hour ago
With Aegon, when you made the match?

Mel. Oh! then you will go along with us,
Faith do; for you will make us very merry.

Al. I shall, if you thus make a fool of me.

Mel. Oh no! you will make you sport with vexing me,
But mum; no matter for that neither: there
I bob'd him privately, I think. Aside.

Aeg. Come, what is the business?

Al. The business? why he is mad, beyond the cure
Of all the herbs grow in Anticyra.

Aeg. You see we have not fayl'd our word Melarnus,
I and my son are come.

Mel. Your son! goodlack!
I thought, I swear, you had no other child
Besides your Daughter Bellula.

Aegon. Nay, then
I see you are disposed to make us fools, --
Did not I tell you that 'twas my intent
To adopt Palaemon for my son and heir?

Al. Did not you examine
Whether he would leave him all, lest that he should
Adopt some other heir to the cheese-presses,
The milking-pailes, and creame-boules? did you not?

Mel. In troth it is well; but where is Bellula?

Aegon. Nay; prithee leave these tricks, and tell me
What you intend, is Hylace ready?

Mel. Ready? what else? she is to be married presently:
To a young shepherd, but's no matter for that.

Fa. That Is I, hence fears;
Attend upon the infancy of love,
She Is now mine own.

Al. Why I; did not the crow on the oak foretell you this?

Mel. Hylace, Hylace, come forth,
Here Is some are come to dance at your wedding,
And they are welcome. ( Enter Hylace.)

Pa. The light appears, just like the rising Sun,
When over yon hill it peepes, and with a draught
Of morning dew salutes the day, how fast
The night of all my sorrow flies away,
Quite banished with her sight!

Hy. Did you call for me?

Mel. Is Damaetas come? Fie, how slow he is
At such a time? but it is no matter for that;
Well get you in, and prepare to welcome him.

Pa. Will you be gone so quickly, oh! bright Hylace
That blessed hour by me so often begged,
By you so often denied, is now approaching.

Mel. What, how now? what do you kiss her? ( Exit Hylace.)
If Damoetas were here, he would grow jealous,
But it is a parting kiss, and so in manners
She cannot deny it you; but it is no matter for that.

Al. How?

Mel. What do you wonder at?
Why do you think as soon as they are married,
Damoetas such a fool, to let his wife
Be kissed by every body?

Pa. How now? Damoetas?
Why what has he to do with her?

Mel. Ha, ha!
What has the husband then to do with his wife?
Good: it is no matter for that though; he knows what.

Aeg. You mean Palaemon sure, ha, do you not?

Mel. It Is no matter for that, what I mean, I mean,
Well, rest ye merry gentlemen, I must in,
And see my Daughters wedding, if you please
To dance with us; Damaetas sure will thank ye;
Pray bring your son and heir Palaemon with you,
Bellula's cast away, ha, ha, ha, ha!
And the poor fool Melarnus must be cheated,
But it is no matter for that; how now Alupis?
I thought you would have had most excellent sport
With abusing poor Melarnus? that same coxcombe,
For he is a fool; but it is no matter for that,
Aegon has cheated him, Palaemon is
Married to Hylace, and one Alupis
Does nothing else but vex him, ha, ha, ha!
But it is no matter for that; farewell gentles,
Or if yee'le come and dance, ye shall be welcome,
Will you Palaemon? it is your Mistress wedding.
I am a fool, a coxcombe, gulled on every side,
No matter for that though; what I have done, I have done*
Ha, ha, ha! Exit.

Aeg. How now? what are you both dumb? both thunder-strooke?
This was your plot Alupis.

Al. I Will begin.
May his sheep rotte, and he for want of food
Be forced to eat them then; may every man
Abuse him, and yet he not have the wit
To abuse any man, may he never speak
More sense then he did now; and may he never
Be rid of his old wife Truga, may his son
In Law be a more famous Cuckold made
Then any one I knew when I lived in the City.

Pa. Fool as thou art, the Sun shall lose his course*
And brightness too, ere Hylace her chastity.
Oh no! ye Gods, may she be happy always,
Happy in the embraces of Damoetas;
And that shall be some comfort to my Ghost
When I am dead; and dead I shall be shortly.

Al. May a disease seize upon all his Cattle,
And a far worse on him; till he at last
Be carried to some Hospital in the City,
And there killed by a Surgeon for experience.
And when he is gone, I Will wish this good thing for him,
May the earth lie gently on him -- that the dogs
May tear him up the easier.

Aeg. A curse upon thee!
And upon me for trusting thy fond counsels!
Was this your cunning trick? why thou have wounded
My conscience and my reputation too,
With what face can I look on the other Swains?
Or who will ever trust me, who have broke
My faith thus openly?

Pa. A curse upon thee,
This is the second time that thy persuasions
Made me not only fool, but wicked too;
I should have dyed in quiet else, and known
No other wound, but that of her denial;
Go now, and brag how thou have used Palaemon,
But yet me thinks you might have chose some other
For subject of your mirth, not me.

Aeg. Nor me.

Al. And yet if this had prospered (as I wonder
Who it should be, betrayed us, since we three
And Truga only knew it, whom, if she
Betrayed us, I --) if this, I say, had prospered,
You would have hugged me for inventing it,
And him for putting it in act; foolish men
That do not mark the thing but the event!
Your judgments hang on Fortune, not on reason*

Aeg. Do thou upbraid us too?

Pa. First make us wretched,
And then laugh at us? believe, Alupis,
Thou shall not long have cause to boast thy villainy.

Al. My villainy? do what ye can: you're fools,
And there is an end; I Will talk with you no more,
I had as good speak reason to the wind
As you, that can but hiss at it.

Aeg. We will do more; Palaemon, come away*
He has wronged both; and both shall satisfy.

Al. Which he will never do; nay, go and plod,
Your two wise brains will invent certainly
Politic ginnes to catch me in. Exeunt.
And now have at thee Truga, if I find
That thou art guilty; mum, -- I have a ring. --
Palaemon, Aegon, Hylace, Melarnus
Are all against me; no great matter: hang care,
For it is but a folly, etc.
Exit. Enter Bellula. This way my Callidorus went, what chance
Has snatched him from my sight? how shall I find him?
How shall I find my self, now I have lost him?
With ye my feet and eyes I will not make
The smallest truce, till ye have sought him out.
Exit. Enter Callidorus and Florellus. Come, now your business.

Flo. It Is a fatal one,
Which will almost as much shame me to speak,
Much more to act, as 'twill fright you to hear it.

Call. Fright me? it must be then some wickedness,
I am accustomed so to misery,
That cannot do it.

Flo. Oh! It Is a sin young man,
A sin which every one shall wonder at,
None not condemn, if ever it be known?
Me thinks my blood shrinkes back into my veins,
And my affrighted hayres are turned to bristles.
Do not my eyes creep back into their cells*
As if they seemed to wish for thicker darkness,
Then either night or death to cover them?
Does not my face look black and horrid too?
As black and horrid as my thoughts? ha! tell me.

Call. I am a novice in all villanyes,
If your intents be such, dismiss me, pray,
My nature is more easy to discover
Then help you; so, Farewell.

Flo. Yet stay a little longer; you must stay*
You are an actor in this Tragedy.

Call. What would you do?

Flo. Alas! I would do nothing; but I must --

Call. What must you do?

Flo. I must. -- Love thou have got the victory --
Kill thee.

Call. Who? me? you do but jest,
I should believe you, if I could tell how
To frame a cause, or think on any injury
Worth such a large revenge, which I have done you.

Flo. Oh no! there is all the wickedness, they may seem
To find excuse for their abhorred fact;
That kill when wrongs, and anger urges them;
Because thou art so good, so affable.
So full of graces, both of mind and body,
Therefore I kill thee, will thou know it plainly,
Because whilst thou art living, Bellula
Protested she would never be another,
Therefore I kill thee.

Call. Had I been your rival
You might have had some cause; cause did I say?
You might have had pretense for such a villainy:
He who unjustly kills is twice a murderer.

Flo. He whom love bids to kill is not a murderer.

Call. Call not that love that is ill; it is only fury.

Flo. Fury in ills is half excusable:
Therefore prepare thy self; if any sin
(Though I believe thy hot and flourishing youth,
As innocent as other men's nativities)
Has flung a spot upon thy purer conscience
Wash it in some few tears.

Call. Are you resolved to be so cruel?

Flo. I must, or be as cruel to my self.

Call. As sick men do their beds, so have I yet
Enjoyed my self, with little rest, much trouble:
I have been made the Ball of Love and Fortune,
And am almost worn out with often playing.
And therefore I would entertain my death
As some good friend whose coming I expected;
Were it not that my parents --

Flo. Here; see, I do not come ( Draws two swords from under his garment and
offers one to Call.)
Like a foul murderer to entrap you falsely,
Take your own choice, and then defend your self.

Call. It Is nobly done; and since it must be so,
Although my strength and courage call me woman
I will not dye like sheep without resistance,
If innocence be guard sufficient,
I Am sure he cannot hurt me.

Flo. Are you ready? the fatal Cuckoo on yon spreading tree
Has sounded out your dying knell already.

Call. I am.

Flo. It Is well, and I could wish thy hand
Were strong enough; it is thou deservest the victory,
Nay, were not th'hope of Bellula engraven
In all my thoughts, I would my self play booty
Against my self; But Bellula -- come on. Fight
Enter Philistus. This is the wood adjoining to the Farm,
Where I gave order unto Clariana
My sister, to remain till my return;
Here it is in vain to seek her, yet who knows?
Though it be in vain I Will seek; to him that does
Propose no journeys end, no path's amiss.
Why how now? what do you mean? for shame part Shepherds,
I thought you honest shepherds, had not had Sees them fighting.
So much of Court, and City follies in you.

Flo. It Is Philistus; I hope he will not know me,
Now I begin to see how black and horrid
My attempt was; how much unlike Florellus,
Thanks to the juster Deityes for declining
From both the danger, and from me the sin.

Phi. 'Twould be a wrong to charity to dismiss ye
Before I see you friends, give me your weapons.

Call. It Is he; why do I doubt? most willingly,
And my self too, best man; now kill me shepherd --

Phi. What do you mean? (Swounds)
Rise, prithee rise; sure you have wounded him.
Enter Bellula. Deceive me not good eyes; what do I see?
My Callidorus dead? It Is impossible!
Who is it that lies slain there? are you dumb?
Who is it I pray?

Flo. Fair Mistress --

Bell. Pish, fair Mistress, --
I ask who it is; if it be Callidorus --

Phi. Was his name Callidorus? it is strange.

Bell. You are a villain, and you too a villain,
Wake Callidorus, wake, it is thy Bellula
That calls thee, wake, it is thy Bellula;
Why Gentlemen? why shepherd? fie for shame,
Have you no charity? o my Callidorus!
Speak but one word --

Call. It Is not well done to trouble me,
Why do you envy me this little rest?

Bell. No; I will follow thee. ( Swounds.)

Flo. O help, help quickly,
What do you mean? your Callidorus lives.

Bell. Callidorus!

Flo. And will be well immediately, take courage,
Look up a little: wretched as I am,
I am the cause of all this ill.

Phi. What shall we do? I have a sister dwells
Close by this place, let us have to bring them thither.
But lets be sudden.

Flo. As winged lightning is.
Come Bellula in spite of Fortune now
I do embrace thee.

Phi. I did protest without my Callidora
Never to return, but pity has overcome.

Bell. Where am I?

Flo. Where I could always wish thee: in those arms
Which would enfold thee with more subtle knots,
Then amorous Ivy, whilst it hugges the oak.

Call. Where do ye bear me? is Philistus well?

Phi. How should he know my name? it is to me a riddle
Nay Shepherd find another time to court in,
Make have now with your burden.

Flo. With what ease should I go always were I burdened thus! Exeunt
Enter Aphron. She told me she was sister to Philistus*
Who having mist the beauteous Callidora,
Has undertook a long, and hopeless journey
To find her out; then Callidora's fled,
Without her parents knowledge, and who knows
When she will return, or if she do, what then?
Lambs will make peace, and join themselves with wolves
Ere she with me, worse then a wolf to her:
Besides, how durst I undertake to court her?
How dare I look upon her after this?
Fool as I am, I will forget her quite,
And Clariana shall henceforth -- but yet
How fair she was! what then? so's Clariana*
What graces did she dart on all beholders?
She did; but so does Clariana too,
She was as pure and white as Parian marble,
What then? She was as hard too; Clariana
Is pure and white as Ericina's Doves,
And is as soft, as gallesse too as they,
Her pity saved my life, and did restore
My wandering senses, if I should not love her,
I were far madder now, then when she found me,
I will go in and render up my self,
For her most faithful servant.
Wonderful! Exit. Enter again.
She has locked me in, and keeps me here her prisoner.
In these two chambers; what can she intend?
No matter, she intends no hurt I Am sure,
I Will patiently expect her coming to me. Exit.

Enter Demophil, Spodaia, Clariana, Florellus, Callidora, Bellula, Philistus.
Them. My Daughter found again, and son returned!
Ha, ha! me thinks it makes me young again.
My Daughter and my Son meet here together!
Philistus with them too! that we should come
To grieve with Clariana, and find her here.
Nay, when we thought we had lost Florellus too
To find them both, me thinks it makes me young again.

Spo. I thought I never should have seen thee more
My Callidora; come wench, now let us hear,
The story of your flight and life in the woods.

Phi. Do happy Mistress for the recordation,
Of fore past ils, makes us the sweetlier relish
Our present good.

Call. Of Aphrons love to me, and my antipathy
Toward him, there is none here ignorant, you know too.
How guarded with his love, or rather fury,
And some few men he broke into our house
With resolution to make me the prey
Of his wild Just.

Sp. I, there is a villain now; oh! that I had him here.

Cla. Oh! say not so:
The crimes which Lovers for their Mistress act
Bear both the weight and stamp of piety.

Them. Come girl; go on, go on. His wild lust --

Cla. What sudden fear shook me, you may imagine,
What should I do? you both were out of town,
And most of the servants at that time gone with you.
I on the sudden found a corner out,
And hid my self, till they wearied with searching,
Quitted the house, but fearing lest they should
Attempt the same again ere your return,
I took with me money and other necessaries;
And in a suit my Brother left behind
Disguised my self, thus to the woods I went,
Where meeting with an honest merry Swain,
I by his help was furnished, and made Shepherd.

Sp. Nay, I must needs say for her, she was always
A witty wench.

Them. Pish, pish: And made a Shepherd --

Call. It happened that this gentle Shepheatdesse,
(I can attribute it to naught in me
Deserved so much) began to love me.

Phi. Why so did all besides I Will warrant you,
Nor can I blame them, though they were my rival.

Call. Another Shepherd with as much desire
Wooed her in vain, as she in vain wooed me,
Who seeing that no hope was left for him,
Whilst I enjoyed this life to enjoy his Bellula,
(For by that name she is known) sought to take me
Out of the way as a partition
Betwixt his love and him, whilst in the fields
We two were struggling, (him his strength defending.
And me my innocence.)

Flo. I am ashamed to look upon their faces.
What shall I say? my guilt's above excuse.

Call. Philistus; as if the Gods had all agreed
To make him mine, just at the nick came in
And parted us, with sudden joy I sounded,
Which Bellula perceiving (for even then
She came to seek me) sudden grief did force
The same effect from her, which joy from me.
Hither they brought us both, in this amazement,
Where being straight recovered to our selves,
I found you here, and you your dutiful Daughter.

Spo. The Gods be thankt.

Them. Go on.

Call. Nay, you have all Sir.

Them. Where Is that Shepherd?

Flo. Here.

Them. Here, where?

Flo. Here, your unhappy sonne's the man; for her
I put on Sylvan weeds, for her fair sake
I would have stayn'd my innocent hands in blood,
Forgive me all, 'twas not a sin of malice,
'Twas not begot by lust, but sacred love;
The cause must be the excuse for the effect.

Them. You should have used some other means, Florellus.

Call. Alas! 'twas the Gods will Sir, without that
I had been undiscovered yet; Philistus
Wandered too far, my Brother yet a Shepherd,
You groaning for our loss, upon this wheel
All our felicity is turned.

Sp. Alas! you have forgot the power of love, sweetheart.

Them. Be patient Son, and temper your desire,
You shall not want a wife that will perhaps
Please you as well, I Am sure befit you better.

Flo. They marry not, but sell themselves t'a wife,
Whom the large dowry tempts, and take more pleasure
To hug the wealthy bags then her that brought them.
Let them whom nature bestows nothing on
Seek to patch up their want by parents plenty;
The beautiful, the chaste, the virtuous,
Her self alone is portion to her self.
Enter Aegon. By your leave; I come to seek a Daughter.
O! are you there, it is well.

Flo. This is her Father,
I do conjure you Father, by the love
Which parents bear their children, to make up
The match betwixt us now, or if you will not
Send for your friends, prepare a coffin for me
And let a grave be dig'd, I will be happy,
Or else not know my misery to morrow;

Spo. You do not think what ill may happen husband,
Come, let him have her, you have means enough
For him, the wench is fair, and if her face
Be not a flatterer, of a noble mind,
Although not stock.

Aeg. I do not like this straggling, come along,
By your leave Gentlemen, I hope you will
Pardon my bold intrusion.

Cl. You're very welcome.
What are you going Bellula? pray stay,
Though Nature contradicts our love, I hope
That I may have your friendship.

Aeg. Bellula!

Bell. My father calls; farewell; your name, and memory
In spite of Fate, I Will love, farewell.

Flo. Would you be gone, and not bestow one word
Upon your faithful servant? do not all
my griefs and troubles for your sake sustaynd.
Deserve, Farewell Florellus?

Bell. Fare you well then.

Flo. Alas! how can I, Sweet, unless you stay,
Or I go with you? you were pleased ere while
To say you honored me with the next place
To Callidorus in your heart, then now
I should be first: do you repent your sentence?
Or can that tongue sound less then Oracle?

Bell. Perhaps I am of that opinion still,
But must obey my Father.

Aeg. Why Bellula? would you have ought with her Sir?

Flo. Yes, I would have her self; if constancy
And love be meritorious, I deserve her.
Why Father, Mother, Sister, Gentlemen,
Will you plead for me?

Them. Since't must be so, I Will bear it patiently,
Shepherd you see how much our son is taken
With your fair Daughter, therefore if you think
Him fitting for her husband speak, and let it
Be made a match immediately, we shall
Expect no other dowry then her virtue.

Aeg. Which only I can promise; for her fortune
Is beneath you so far, that I could almost
Suspect your words, but that you seem more noble.
How now, what say you Girl?

Bell. I only do depend upon your will.

Aeg. And I Will not be an enemy to thy good fortune.
Take her Sir, and the Gods bless you.

Flo. With greater joy then I would take a Crown.

Al. The Gods bless you.

Flo. They have don't already.

Aeg. Lest you should think when time, and often enjoying
Has dul'd the point, and edge of your affection
That you have wronged your self and family,
By marying one whose very name, a Shepherdess,
Might fling some spot upon your birth, I Will tell you,
She is not mine, nor borne in these rude woods:

Flo. How! you speak misty wonders.

Aeg. I speak truths Sir,
Some fifteen years ago, as I was walking
I found a Nurse wounded, and groaning out
Her latest spirit, and by her a fair child*
And, which her very dressing might declare,
Of wealthy parents, as soon as I came to them
I as'kd her who had used her so inhumanly:
She answered Turkish Pirates; and withal
Desired me to look unto the child,
For it is, said she, a Noblemans of Sicily,
His name she would have spoke, but death permitted not.
Her as I could, I caused to be buried,
But brought home the little Girl with me,
Where by my wives persuasions we agreed,
Because the Gods had blessed us with no issue,
To nourish as our own, and call it Bellula
Whom now you see, your wife, your Daughter.

Spo. Is It possible?

Flo. Her manners showed her noble.

Aeg. I call the Gods to witness, this is true.
And for the farther testimony of it,
I have yet kept at home the furniture,
And the rich mantle which she then was wrapped in,
Which now perhaps may serve to some good use
Thereby to know her parents.

Them. Sure this is Aphrons sister then, for just
About the time he mentions, I remember,
The governor of Pachinus, then his Father
Told me that certain Pirates of Argier
Had broke into his house, and stolen from thence
With other things his Daughter, and her Nurse,
Who being after taken, and executed,
Their last confession was, that they indeed
Wounded the Nurse, but she fled with the child,
Whilst they were busy searching for more prey.
Whom since her father, neither saw, nor heard of.

Cla. Then now I Am sure Sir, you would gladly pardon
The rash attempt of Aphron, for your Daughter,
Since fortune has joined, both of you by kindred.

Them. Most willingly:

Spo. I, I, alas! 'twas love:

Flo. Where should we find him out?

Cla. I Will save that labor. Exit Clariana.

Call. Where Is Hylace pray shepherd? and the rest
Of my good Silvan friends? me thinks I would,
Feign take my leave of them.

Aeg. I Will fetch them hither.
They Are not far off, and if you please to help
The match betwixt Hylace and Palaemon,
'Twould be a good deed, I Will go fetch them.

Exit. Enter Aphron, Clariana. Ap. Ha! whether have you led me Clariana?
Some steepy mountain bury me alive,
Or rock intombe me in its stony intrayles,
Whom do I see?

Cla. Why do you stare my Aphron?
They have forgiven all.

Them. Come, Aphron, welcome,
We have forgot the wrong you did my Daughter,
The name of love has covered all; this is
A joyful day, and sacred to great Hymen
'Twere sin not to be friends with all men now.

Sp. Methinks, I have much ado to forgive the rascal. (Aside.)

Ap. I know not what to say; do you all pardon me?
I have done wrong to ye all, yea, to all those
That have a share in virtue. Can ye pardon me?

All. Most willingly.

Aph. Do you say so fair Virgin?
You I have injured most: with love,
With saucy love, which I henceforth recall,
And will look on you with an adoration,
Not with desire hereafter; tell me, pray,
Does any man yet call you his?

Call. Yes; Philistus.

Ap. I congratulate it Sir.
The Gods make ye both happy: fool, as I am,
You are at the height already of felicity,
To which there is nothing can be added now,
But perpetuity; you shall not find me
Your rival any more, though I confess
I honor her, and will for ever do so.
Clariana, I am so much unworthy
Of thy love. That --

Cl. Go no farther Sir, it is I should say so
Of my own self.

Phi. How Sister? are you two so near upon a match?

Ap. In our hearts Sir,
We are already joined, it may be though
You will be loath to have unhappy Aphron,
Style you his Brother?

Phi. No Sir, if you both
Agree, to me it shall not be unwelcome.
Why here is a day indeed; sure Hymen now
Means to spend all his torches.

Them. It Is my Son Sir,
New come from travail, and your Brother now.

Ap. I understand not.

Them. Had you not a sister?

Ap. I had Sir; but where now she is none knows,
Besides the Gods.

Them. Is It not about some fifteen years ago
Since that the Nurse escaped with her from the hands
Of Turkish Pirates that beset the house?

Ap. It is Sir.

Them Your sister lives then, and is married
Now to Florellus; this is she, you shall be
Enform'd of all the circumstances anon.

Ap. It Is impossible.
I shall be made too happy on the sudden.
My Sister found, and Clariana mine!
Come not too thick good joys, you will oppress me.

Enter Melarnus, Truga, Aegon, Hylace, Palaemon. Call. Shepherds you're welcome
all; though I have lost
Your good society, I hope I shall not
Your friendship, and best wishes.

Aegon. Nay, here is wonders;
Now Callidorus is found out a woman,
Bellula not my Daughter, and is married
To yonder Gentleman, for which I intend
To do in earnest what before I jested,
To adopt Palaemon for my heir.

Mel. Ha, ha, ha!
Come it is no matter for that; do you think
To cheat me once again with your fine tricks?
No matter for that neither. Ha, ha, ha!
Alas! she is married to Dametas.

Aeg. Nay, that was your plot Melarnus,
I met with him, and he denies it to me.

Hy. Henceforth I must not love, but honor you -- to Callidora*

Aeg. By all the Gods I will.

True. He will, he will; Duck.

Mel. Of everything?

Aeg. Of every thing; I call
These gentlemen to witness here, that since
I have no child to care for; I will make
Palaemon heir to those small means the Gods,
Have blessed me with, if he do marry Hylace.

Mel. Come it is no matter for that, I scarce believe you.

Them. We Will be his suretyes.

Mel. Hylace
What think you of Palaemon? can you love him?
H'as our consents, but it is no matter for that,
If he do please you, speak, or now, or never.

Hyl. Why do I doubt fond Girl? she is now a woman.

Mel. No matter for that, what you do, do quickly.

Hyl. My duty binds me not to be averse
To what likes you. --

Mel. Why take her then Palaemon; she is yours for ever.

Pa. With far more joy
Then I would do the wealth of both the Indyes,
Thou art above a father to me, Aegon.
We Are freed from misery with sense of joy,
We are not borne so; oh! my Hylace,
It is my comfort now that thou were hard,
And cruel till this day, delights are sweetest?
When poisoned with the trouble to attain them.
Enter Alupis. For it is but a folly, etc
By your leave, I come to seek a woman,
That has outlived the memory of her youth,
With skin as black as her teeth, if she have any,
With a face would fright the Constable and his watch
Out of their wits (and that is easily done you will say) if they
should meet her at midnight.
O! are you there? I thought I smelt you somewhere;
Come hither my she Nestor, pretty Truga,
Come hither, my sweet Duck.

True. Why? are you not ashamed to abuse me thus,
Before this company?

Al. I have something more;
I come to show the ring before them all;
How durst you thus betray us to Melarnus?

True. It Is false, 'twas Hylace that overheard you;
She told me so; but they are married now.

Al. What do you think to flam me? why ho! here is news.

Pa. Alupis art thou there? forgive my anger,
I am the happiest man alive, Alupis,
Hylace is mine, here are more wonders too,
Thou shall know all anon.

True. Alupis, give me.

Al. Well, rather then be troubled.

Aeg. Alupis welcome, now we are friends I hope?
Give me your hand.

Mel. And me.

Al. With all my heart,
I Am glad to see ye have learned more wit at last.

Call. This is the Shepherd, Father, to whose care
I owe for many favors in the woods,
You're welcome heartily; here is every body
Payr'd of a sudden; when shall's see you married?

Al. Me? when there are no ropes to hang my self,
No rocks to break my neck down; I abhor
To live in a perpetual Belfary;
I never could abide to have a Master,
Much less a Mistress, and I will not marry,
Because, I Will sing away the day,
For it is but a folly to be melancholy,
I Will be merry whilst I may.

Phi. You're welcome all, and I desire you all
To be my guests to day; a Wedding dinner,
Such as the sudden can afford, we will have,
Come will ye walk in Gentlemen?

Them. Yes, yes,
What crosses have ye borne before ye joined!
What seas past through before ye touched the port!
Thus Lovers do, ere they are crowned by Fates
With Palm, the tree their patience imitates.

FINIS.
Epilogue Spoken by Alupis.
THe Author bid me tell you -- 'faith, I have
Forgot what 'twas; and I Am a very slave
If I know what to say; but only this,
Be merry, that my counsel always is.
Let no grave man knit up his brow, and say,
It Is foolish: why? 'twas a Boy made the Play.
Nor any yet of those that sit behind,
Because he goes in Plush, be of his mind.
Let none his Time, or his spent money grieve,
Be merry; Give me your hands, and I Will believe.
Or if you will not, I Will go in, and see,
If I can turn the Authors mind, with me
To sing away the day,
For it is but a folly
To be melancholy,
Since that cannot mend the Play.

