COTTA CONTRA ANTONIVM OR AN ANT-ANTONY: OR AN ANT-APOLOGY, manifesting Doctor
Antony his Apology for Aurum potabile, in true and equal balance of right
Reason, to be false and counterfeit.

By JOHN COTTA Doctor in Physic.

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD and JAMES SHORT for HENRY CRIPPS. Anno
Dom. 1623.

THe Author does advertise the Reader, that except he first read, and
diligently consider both the prefixed Epistles, before he enter upon the Work,
he cannot escape mistaking, both in many particulars, and in his maine scope.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Eminent, Learned, and Reverend Doctors in Physic
resident in the Renowned University of Oxford.
Most Honored Gentlemen,
IT is a faithful and true saying of that peerless Physician, and
Philosopher Galen. lib. 8. de compos. Med. secund. Loc. sect. 4. Impossible
est invenire pharmacum ad plures affectiones optimum. Invenitur enim in
vnaquaque ipsarum id quod proprie ipsis destinatum est praestantius esse. It is
impossible to find one, and the selfsame medicine equally the most excelling
for many or diverse deseases. For it is by experience discovered, that that
medicine which is properly and peculiarly destined unto every disease, is the
most fit, proper, and absolute for it. The same Author in another place
averreth, Medicina sexties aut septies probata non facit vniversalem
propositionem. One medicine or kind of medication though often approved, does not
notwithstanding make good or assured any universal or general proposition or
promise of his effect to be at all times the same. Dr Anthony his ignorance
hereof in his Apology is palpable, who because he may happily have imagined his
golden medicine effectual or succesfull in some kinds of maladies; he does
thence infer an universal rash pronunciate thereof, that it is an universal
medicine and most excelling in all cases. Th s is the usual deceaved
rauoci^ation of an Empiricke, trusting his own partial observation not
calling unto counsel therewith the ancient tried rul^s of reason, knowledge,
and judgment, Non possibile est ^t ali^^^^s rei facult^tes ex^erientia c^mmode
explores, si non p i^s exa^te compertum habu^ris affectum cui adb betur id quod
exploratur, sieve id potus si^e cib^s, sieve p^armacum si^. Ga^end. 1. de Al^n
facultat^^.
from all preceding learned times unto men industrious, studious, and
ingenuous, derived. This knowledge brings assurance from evidence of reason:
observation or particular experience alone without knoweledge brings
uncertain collection only or wavering guessing; since to make pronunciates
certain or assured by one man's observations alone, requires not only many
days, M gnum decus e^t and ornamentum ex erie^ ia o^^^nal^s, se^ experientia
doctrine atque rationi co^iuncta. E^ vero quae sine art and d^ctrina est, cum
Hippocrate (...) and p^r^iciosu^ statuo. Crat^ epist. med ^d Henric. Herwart.
patricium Augustanum.
but years and ages. Unto this effect says Galen in pro^rhet. 1. sect. 15.
Qui speculationem medicinalem empir^ce congerit, is non centum sed mill annis
opus habet. He that propounds unto himself to compile an art of Physike,
from his own observation or experience alone, has need of the allowance not
of an hundred, but of a thousand years. And herein is evidently seen the
plain difference between the learned Physician and the Empiricke. The learned
Physician by studious contemplation and assiduous and select reading makes
prompt and diligent use of all learned writers and authors, who as glorious
lamps or lights through all ages have brightly shone in t^ere guidance and
direction unto all succeeding times, and thereby enjoys not only their time
honored knowledge, but the rich experience of all foregoing learned
generations. The Empir^ck contrariwise trusts cheifely his own wit and
private observation, and therewith serves other men's necessities, with care of
his own gain, but without conscience or sense of their inevitable deadly For
this cause, ^a^^h Hipocra^^s, Api^. ^. l. 1. (...). Emp^rica peric^tatio
perniciosa.
wounds, by his as unavoidable defects in want of knowledge. The reason why men
generally are so insensible hereof, and of their own secrett and hidden
insnaring of their health and life thereby, is for that ever among all sorts
and kinds of men, the fewest possess the truest judging. For this cause says
Galen de praenot. Si contingat vt apud pueros and imprudentes Medicus and
Coquus ferat iudicium, Coquus non paulo plus suffragiorumferet. If among
children or common judging men, any mean affected Cook should contend for
prioritie by most voices with the learned Physician, their Childish silly
judging would in suffrages happily prefer by many degrees the iollie Cook. By
this usual error (to the perdition Perd^re quo^ vul Iup^ter hos dementat.
Se^ec.
of those whom God has blinded) oftimes do diverse sorts of men defectiuely
or deprauedly learned, our ordinary Omnipotent Promisers, Universal
undertakers, witty Proiectours, loud and endless Historians of their own
praise, and other learned bubles, half lettered Huiu^mo ^ihomunc^o^es
semidogma^ieo^^emicto^^os appellat Galen. lib. de Meth. Med.
and lowly learned Practisers, prodigiously clime unto a wondered and undeserved
height of popular fame and common esteem. Diverse kinds also of improvident
idiotes, not secured by any safe conduct of likelihood or reason in their
actions, nor provided by any forethought so much as in sense or reason to
prevent the usually dangerous sequel of their rash attempts, and blindly only
led by witless confidence in a causeless hope of undeserved good hap (as
being merely ignorants senslesly welmeaning) do notwithstanding often times grow
largly noysed and (unto the wonderment and amazement of reason) fame spread.
Oftimes also even luglers, Fortune tellers, Figure casters, and Witches do
exceed all these kinds in spaciousnes of vulgar worship and largeness of
renown. Thus blind, partial, and false, Contemn famam, fama vix vero fauet.
Sen. Trag. 4. Tam ficti prauique tenax quam nuntia very. Virg. Aeneid. 4.
is fame, a factor for cousnage, a baud to deceit, the misgouerned brute, the
impure air and breath of the unlearned, rash, and inconsiderate multitude, and
therefore by generous worthy minds disdainfully valewed as uncertain, giddie,
vagabond. The judicious report and true testimony of good men, solidly learned,
uprightly judging, and truly understanding, is that true fame and glory which
the wiseman Viri boni habere possunt gloriam, id est bonorum testimonium suorum
operum comitem, and bic in terris eo velut melle temperare id quoq in virtute
est amarum. At vulgi famam and auram quis sapiens ^aptat? Lips. Ep. (...) Ital.
and Hisp.
does alone esteem, which only generously and virtuously can be affected, and
whereof solely virtue can be ambitious, whereunto wisdom solely does listen
and judgment give ear; Whether then Dr Antony do by partial and false fame
usurp only, or among learned men by true worth in right possess, that exalted
high name which in his Apology he does vaunt and challenge; I do by this my
Antapologie present and offer unto your truly judicious, equal, and
impartial doom. I do in this cause rather appeal unto your censure, then
unto my dear and honored mothers sons, my reverend brothers of that
coexcelling, famous, and beauteous sister university of Cambridge: first for
that the wrong imposed by Dr Antony is common unto some of your selves together
with me: secondly for that some of you are witnestes of the vniustnesse of the
imputation cast upon me by Dr Antony in his Apology. As you are in your
selves, so in a public cause express your selves, the noble true heirs of
the thrice excellent, ancient, and incomparable Prince and father of learning
Hippocrates, in generositie and liberty of spirit, in love of truth, and of
your own free ingenuous and honorable profession. The reason why in this
common provocation I alone do deigne to undertake Dr Antony his just
castigation, by other learned men despised and held in deserved scorn, is for
that the ridiculous, insulting, and vnchecked insolence of some of his abettors
more near unto me, has more frequently presented it self unto my view, and
thereby has galled me out of the same resolved contempt of opposing his
senseless and trifling pamphlet. Since then I am thus compelled into these
lists, vouchsafe your just eyes to behold me with prosperous vows, wherein as I
can not fear, so shall I not be proud of the victory.

An unfeigned lover and true homage^ bearer unto the ancient and most
infallible Hippocratical learning JOHN COTTA.

Errata sic corrigenda.
Page 1. line 2. at Dr An dele the? p. 3. in the marg. note * Forma in the 3
line read sunt unum. p. 4. l. 17. for Synodius read Synochus, and in the same
line for Augnia read Augina. p. 9. l. 15. dele the Latin sentence which should
stand in the margent, and read, devil, man, and imposture. p. 21. l. 21. for I
hang in so equal balance, read I hang you in so equal balance. p. 31. l.
16. for Areanum read Arcanum. p. 33. l. 31. for thee read the. p. 35. l. 27.
for is the read in the. p. 46 l. 27. in the mar. for fervore read fervore^. p.
48. l. 26. for Sayton read Gayton. p. 55 l. 15. for Attaliu^ read Attalus. p.
32. l. 19 for Dissimulas qui sis, dum nolis quem scis haberi, read Dissimulas
qui sis, dum quem scis prodere nolis.

TO THE READER.
THis Antapologie (worthy Reader) was addressed unto the Press Anno 1616 as
may be testified by letters then dated from some worthy and eminent Doctors of
London, concerning the same, upon a view thereof to them presented. It was
committed or offered unto the press, and a while pawsed in the hands of the
Printer of the University of Oxford, as will appear by letters likewise from
some illustrious and learned Doctors of the same famous University. It was
thence again recalled home, and has now by my self been diverse years
silenced upon solicitation of some worthy Gentlemen my friends, who in the
behalf of D. Anthony, promised a fair and equal satisfaction from him. My
indulgence unto them has hitherto been deluded. I do therefore now judge it
full time no longer to tolerate, that so scandalous an imputation, as the
Apology does impose upon me falsely, should still in public brave so
impudently without as open and public rebuke. And for this cause I have now at
last set at large this Antapologie, thus long injuriously restrained.
Understand then that by the three first domestical Testimonies, or emissarie
letters of the Apology, Dr Co. (so curtally styled by the Apologist) is
charged with an unexpected Alarm. The challenge is that Aurum potabile solely
and wholly recovered the Gentleman in them mentioned, not only without any
worth or use in Dr Co. his endeavor, but rather with error and wrong thereby.
The contrary hereto shall in due time and place be maintained by a discharge of
Dr Co. his just defense as well appointed as the enemies brauing charge, and
onset in their rash and unadvisedly given offense. It may be obi^cted, how can
the private quarrel against the three first Testimonies, infer offense taken
against the Apologist? The answer is, because his Apology can admit no
Apology for his indiscreet publishing other men's private spleenes unto Dr C.
his p^eiudice, and for bringing his name upon the stage, and there acting that
part which befitteth no honest or sober man, in a cause and person unknown. Dr
C. never infringed his Aurum, nor wronged himself, notwithstanding in vain
and fantastical dream of a triumph, and for the idolizing of his Aurum
potabile, Doctor Antony, or rather Doctor An (if I may without solecisme
abbreviate him, as he in the same kind has first p^esumed with me) Dr An (I
say) injuriously makes himself the false trump of Doctor Co. his reproach,
insinuated in the three first domestical Testimonies. They are subscribed by
two Gentlemen, and a Minister (so rightly rather termed for ministering the
occasion of such scandal, then for any eminence or noted worth in his own
function.) The Gentlemen Dr Co. will not so mainly oppose, persuading himself,
that they are only transported by others malicious instigation. His maine scope
shall be at those two materially opposing marks. Marke-Antony, and
Antony-Marke, in this their simple conversion, not doubting to retribute a
double attenuation of their boasting follies. Antony, since in the golden
flagge of the vainglorious praise of his Aurum potabile, he does bear in
triumph Dr C. his injured name before the victory, he therefore will first
arm himself to strike at the plume of his pride, his counterfeit colors, his
armor of best proof, by the general demolition of his whole Apology. As for
Mark, since he does only join his subsidiarie help by an incendiarie
Epistle, he will only by the way buckle with him, as they shall meet in the
battery of the proofs of the forementioned Testimonies. The challengers have
disgorged themselves in two Languages, for their greater boast. The Defendant
will begin with the mother tongue, most fit for the satisfaction of his
Contrymen. He will hereafter give demonstration, that he has learned to
speak as like an ancient The Latin Antapologie has diverse years since
been seen and vewed by some learned Docto^s of Oxford, London, and other
parts.
Roman; as either Antony in his Apology or Mark in his Epistolicall busy
meddling out of his Apostolical charge. In the interim (friendly Reader) that
thou mistake not, know that this Antapologie has singled out D. Antony his
Latin Apology, as supposing it the more authenticke. The matter or substance
being the same with the English, obscureth nothing thy understanding thereof,
though in some few things they are differing. To ease and refresh thy pains in
the perusing of the more serious matters, I have here and there cast and
scattered in thy way, some witty and elegant sayings of some Latin Poets, and
that I might exclude no man's reading, have englished them unto a vulgar
capacity. Concerning the matter it self, deliberately view and read, embrace
the truth for it self and for none other end. Be not preiudicate, but free and
true unto thy own heart, and judge sincerely between truth and the lying
visor, and impudent face of seeming truth.

Maxima pars vatum pater and iuuenes patre digni,
Decipimur specie recti, says Horace.
Or old or young more or less wise,
Shadows for truths, often gull our eyes.
If any man deem me ouerbold or overbitter with the Apologist let him read and
ponder duly the uncivil and rude prouocations of all honest and learned
minds, in his vilifying of all true learning, comparatively, or compared with
his own, as also of all wholesome medicines of all other Artists, not yielding
unto his the sole supremacy. The sum or epitome thereof let any man view in
his Preface in the beginning, and in his Appendix in the end of his English
Apology. If that proud flesh require not a corrosiue, let equal and just men
judge; If the app^ication be necessary, pardon the medicinal hand; Distinguish
(gentle Reader) I hate railing or scurrilitie, which with the Apologist in his
Apology has been frequent and common. The importune prouocations of his
ridiculous absurdities, I sometimes make merry and smile at, and sometime check
with free, yet ingenious In ^oco quimodum adh^bet, is fest^vus seu vrbanus
habendus. Qui mod^m excedit, scurra. Quia iocis omnino abhorret, is rustici^^
and a ^estis. Arist Eth. lib. 2 cap. 7.
jest, the matter and occasion so requiring. His proud insultings only,
stupiditie, senseless security, and lethargy with needful Castigare licet
atque etiam expedit, immo necessarium est. Scal.
gall, I also rowse and awake, not touching the person but the vice. Unto proud
folly within moderate latitude exceeding, suffices a modest curb or quip
discreetly falling. Obstinate and wilful excess therein urges and justifies
a greater bitterness, with caution it be not sordid nor impious. Thus far upon
just incitement to proceed is not Scurra is est qui risum magis qu m opo^tet
mouet, and risum magis mouet quam vt honest loquatur. Cicero.
scurrilitie or Maledictum nihil habet propositi preter contumeliam. Contumelia
petusantius iactata convitium, facetius vrbanitas nominatur. Cic.
railing (as men not discerning, or the Apologist may mistraine) scurrilitie
properly including ribaldrie, indecent jest, foul, or unseemly scoffing,
exceeding that comely mediocritie wherein consists the allowed virtue of
vrbanity, elegant, witty, sportiue, close taxing, or reproof of palpably
exposed foolery, whose insufferable rankness in due and well husbanded time,
or place, not to nip or top, is idly and dully to suffer, and needlessly to
continue or encourage. Know again, and lastly (good Reader) That in this
Antapologie I intend not to meddle with the materials, or fabric of Aurum
potabile, nor with the manuarie exploration thereof by others more professedly
therein exercised, exquisitly satisfied, but with the true touch and trial in
right reason of D. Antony his promised demonstration, and of his Philosophical
and Logical proofs, continually professed, and endlesly boasted in his
Apology: which how childishly, rudely, and rawly he has performed shall now
appear in the Treatise following, Farewell.

Thy true friend warning both the public and thy private good from sly
Imposture, JOHN COTTA.

CAP. I.
WHETHER your Aurum (Dr An?) be as truly potable as pottable, that is, as
truly converted into potable liquor the content, as it may into pott the
Continent, I mean not to dispute. Whether likewise your aurum be aurum, I do
therein permit you unto those learned Censors who have undertaken you, who have
already taken the even scales into their hands and have proved your light
weight therein. I will not rob them of their due praise. I will only levill at
your Apology, being thence injuriously awaked from my sleepie thoughts
thereof. You have divided it into two parts, the first is reason, the second is
testimonies. I will therefore first declare all your reasons jointly and in
general, to be void and of noe use, to prove the worth of your Aurum potabile
to be allowed, or authorized. I will after descend into every single reason and
position apart: some of your testimonies I will last call unto their strict
account. Concerning the invaliditie of your reasons in general, know that
^^ose things which are properly directed and immediately to be judged and
witnessed by the Necesse est in his a vi extrinseca and viso assentionem
commoveri. Cicero de Fato.
sense, it is indirect and vain to build their proof upon reasons. It were
madness at noone day when the sun shines in his brightness to offer the
proofs thereof by reason unto an open and wellseeing eye. The right
preparations of medicines and their compositions are to be judged properly and
approved by the eye, by the taste, and by the coulor, and other outward
testimonies from a iuditious view thereof, and by the outward senses. Reasons
therefore herein are insufficient and deceivable satisfactions of the goodness,
truth, number of ingredients and right workmanship, in which the outward sense
was ever chief Justice and sole proper Judge. Since then no man but your self
has as yet in every single concealed part, nor in your menstruall water (as
you confess) viewed or seen the right preparation and composition of your
medicine, do not vainly hope by the miste of needless and sophistical
reasons to move the iuditious to give credit thereto. Just Cauendum est ne
incognita pro cognitis habeamus, ijsque temere assentiamus, sed adhibeamus ad
considerandas res and tempus and diligentiam. Cic. Offic. 1.
men cannot be blamed in making doubt, howsoever men unlearned, or not
practiced, or not exercised in judging herein, may and are commonly persuaded
and easily drawn. Thus much in general concerning the want of reason in your
reasons to satisfy reasonable men, for that excellency of your Aurum potabile.
Now let us singly draw forth your several weaknesses in your reasons and lame
positions a part, halting through every scattered part of your whole work.
First for the vain profession of that unlimited universality in your Aurum
potabile: understand that all things universal are of three kinds. The first
is universal in substance, in which sense no creature, but one only Deus est
principium universal non de essentia vniuersi, sed supra vniuersum Scaliger,
Creator of all things can be called universal. The second is universal in
predication, and thus only Genus and Species the general and special kinds of
all things created are called universal. In this sense Aurum potabile can be
no more universal then in the first, since it is a particular and individual
substance. The third is universal in power and in the generality and
multiplicitie of diverse ends and uses therein. In this sense only Aurum
potabile can be universal. Now let us see how far this universality in this
understanding may extend. All things that are created have their several ends
and uses for which they were created, and in those ends some are more proper
unto one Creature, some unto another. Many ends and uses are common unto many
of them. But every one has his own proper Natura nihil fecit* frustra Aristot.
inseparable end and use unto it self above and beyond all the rest. For this
cause Philosophers say and truth does justify, that every particular has his
own distinct form in it self by which it has a peculiar Hinc illa (...).
being in it self, by which it is that it is solely unto it self, and
different from all other. As every thing has his distinct and separate form
unto it self, so necessarily must it have his special and proper qualities,
ends and Forma and finis in naturae operibus sunt vsola differunt ratione.
uses, from thence derived unto it self, by which it is different from all
other uses, since God has created no form Nec frustra ac sine causa quid
facere dignum Deo est quod abhorret ab hominis constantia. Cicero 2. de
without his own proper and special indowment. This is the reason of
Aristotle his (...) vnum ad vnum, that is, every thing was made unto one main
end or Vnius causae vna est actio per se, plures per accidens. Vnius rei vnica
forma, vnias artis vnus finis.
use, although thereof might be made many common uses besides: as is instanced
concerning the Gladius Delphicus. If this be a truth that never was nor can be
denied, then is it manifest and certain that Aurum potabile cannot yield or
afford any of those special properties or virtues which God and nature have
only made and tied appropriate unto other special forms alone, be they of
medicinal use or whatsoever else. For forms are infinite and extend as far as
Ens it self, since there is, nor can be no being without a form. A necessary
conclusion from hence does vnavoidably and unanswerably issue that Aurum
potabile granted his own peculiar virtue proper unto his own form,
whatsoever virtues it has beside it, it has in common with many other
medicines, and therefore cannot challenge the properties of all other unto it
self alone, nor exclude other from the participation in common with it. And
hence it is also evident that Aurum potobile can have no other universality
then is equally contingent unto other things, creatures or medicines as well as
unto it self. Unto this infallible proof of reason, it is easy by infinite
instances to give illustration. It is clear that in many common cases Aurum
potabile is dross and counterfeite with many vulgar things compared. In a
vehement burning thirst a cupp of small beer, nay a cup of water is both more
useful and more necessary. In a consumption there are many better
restauratiues, yea a mess of porrage well ordered without comparison is more
proper, and in hunger and necessity of nourishment far more precious. In a
dangerous surfeit all the gold in the world reduced into whatsoever potability,
spirit or essence is nothing so ready, so prosperous, so present a remedy, as
any common vulgar matter, that may procure in the beginning the disgorging of
the cause. The like may be said concerning any mortal poison, swallowed into
the stomach. Will any man be so madd as to trust unto the glorious
universality of Aurum potabile, who can procure the present revomition of the
substance of the poison, by any small trifle procuring vomitt? In an exquisite
Synodius, Frenzy, Peripueumonia, Augnia Pluresie, and in many innumerable
other peracute diseases, rising from the offensive quantity and corrupt quality
of the blood, that little Iron and small instrument wherewith the Surgion does
phlebotomize, is a much more speedy, sovereigne and saving remedy: Thus what
nature, what reason, what instances do manifest we manifestly see. Now let us
return to view what the Myntmaster and Coyner of Aurum potabile does
presumptuously pronounce. Speaking of his Aurum potabile page 4 he utters
these prodigious words Id nimirum omnes iam dictorum, nec non aliorum simplicum
facultatis aequat, nec hoc salum, sed multis modis superat, that is, It does
not only equal, but exceed many degrees the virtues and faculties of al those
things before mentioned and of other simples. Those things which were before
mentioned were Vinegar, Rhubarbe, Nitre, Lead, Quicksiluer, Vitriol, Champhre,
including with these innumerable more. Here we see his open and expressed
profession that* Aurum potabile does not only contain in it self the uses and
virtues of all medicines in general, but of every special throughout the
general, and of every particular comprehended under the specialls, for these
particulars before mentioned are all of several kinds and species. This is a
wonder, a miracle, a mystery. Many uses indeed God has given unto many
particular things under the same kind, but all the several specificall uses of
all other things of the same kind given unto any one particular alone, nature
did never know, nor the Sun it self in this sublunary world did ever
behold, Look through all the Coasts and Corners of the world, pervse the
Catalogue of all the infinite bounties and gifts of God and nature in all
kinds, among them all, is not to be found, such an universality in an unity, or
an unity of such universality. No man, no age, no art, no science has at any
time known it. Of the impossibility also thereof as in reason, so in religion
the demonstration is evident. God has created nothing in vain nor needlessly.
All things are good which he has made, and certainly if good, then good for
some good end and for some good use. If every particular thing created, has
his particular good particular use and end, Aurum potabile his use is likewise
but particular and can exclude no one thing created whatsoever from a
particular goodness and use, contained in it self and not in another. This all
ages, all times, all nations and people long before Aurum potabile was borne,
have ever witnessed, and are able to give the contrary affirmation, the lie
unto the face of the devil and the Apologist, creating so foul a monster, out
of the order and rule of all things created by God. Many excellent things has
God created for man, which have many excellent uses; He has created the
medicines of the earth Ecclesiasticus 36.4. and among them many have their many
excellent uses, but any one creature or medicine whatsoever containing in it
self alone all the uses of all other things of the same kind or frustrating or
making needless any one use or good quality given by God to any one particular
whatsoever, as to affirm it, is in reason impossible, in nature monstrous, so
in religion most impious. Now let us hear what the Apologist says. It is not
sufficient (says the Apologist page 5 ^ine 8) to call Aurum potabile
Polycreston, but it must be Pancreston that is, restrictiuely to be a thing
having variety and multiplicitie of uses, is not attribute competent or equal,
but it must be absolute of infinite uses, excluded out of no use. In his
preface unto the Reader he terms it Materia vniuersalis perse, that is a
thing materially or in the material substance by it self alone universal.
Behold the face of Idolatry page 61 of the English coppie, he likewise above
the capacity or reach of reason avowcheth that his Medicine never hurt any but
ever profited all. The same he iterateth page 107 and page 122. He further
avowcheth, page 97 of the Latin coppie that if it happen into the hands of an
unskillful dispensor, it cannot notwithstanding by the most envious, be once
instanced in any particular to have given so much as occasion of hurt, which is
incident to other excellent remedies. From abuse by man there was never as yet
any sublunary thing created by God for man absolute or free, how then can this
Creature alone of his creation be excepted without impiety and intolerable
arrogancy. page 55: he appropriateth this divine and miraculous medicine unto
himself, saying that after God it brings most present remedy. Thus he
makes himself and his medicine, or himself in his medicine solely God his
second; In the same place he does proclayme it to have place where no Physician
or Physic humane can give remedy or help, but only the Celestial and
divine or heavenly, page 121. of the English coppie he says it is of general
and extraordinary effects in all diseases, sexes, ages, circumstances. The
impossibility of these assertions in reason in nature, in Gods decree, all
honest and wise men consider. Now let us duly examine whether his own
conscience also do not check it self herein; certainly in many places his own
falfe tongue, betrayeth his double and guilefull thoughts. Read page 15. line
2. 3. 4. 5. of the latin copy. Nihilominus hic considerari velim, and caetera.
There he confesses that there is no such necessity of Aurum potabile but that
by other means as well as by it, men may aspire unto the top and perfection of
physical curation, as also that there are other ways unto the same wood for
health as well as by that. These words are left out in the english Coppie, see
page 18 thereof. Read his preface also unto the Reader, there he confesses
that he uses and mixeth other Vegetables in the administration and
dispensation of his Aurum potabile, and he commends the same use and custom
unto the rational and learned physician. Behold how truth here unawares
steals out of his own mouth. How far in diverse other places his tongue has
overrunne his wit, in the reasonles and boundles adoration of his golden
incomparable universality, is not before obscure. Here now see how by his own
mouth that Pancreston, that unlimited universality that adaequation of temper
in it self, reducing all other things into temper page. 4. 5. is here
contented in it self not to be so absolute, but to borrow assistance, and many
uses of other discrepant and different things or natures. Yea he does in the
same place acknowledge it to be requisite prudence to adioyne them unto his
universal medicine: and commends it unto the rational and iuditious
physicians discretion therein. Thus usual and easy is it for men who either
desire to dissemble those things they know, or intend to justify those things
which they know unjust, to be betrayed by their own memory and to contradict
themselves. And thus by nature, by reason, by his own positions and
confession, is the universality of the Apologist his Aurum potabile from the
unlimited styles, the intolerable titular transcendence and sole supremacy
reduced unto more modest and moderate terms, yea even by pronunciates out of
his own mouth. Mistake not (worthy Reader) I do not deny that gold it self
in medicine has many excellent uses. I deny not diverse ways of the
profitable and useful preparation. I do ingeniously grant that gold in his
own kind (although questioned in Dr Anth. his preparation) may be, and is an
excellent medicine, as diverse other excellent medicines in other kinds are, but
his excessive and unreasonable extolling thereof beyond measure and mean, and
the slanderous derogation thereby from all other blessed remedies, unto which
God their Creator has given their several distinct specifical virtues as well
as unto Aurum potabile, is that which modest ears do abhor, and I cannot but
justly tax. I will therefore conclude with that necessary castigation of
Libauius no obscure Alchymist, and who has described and taught diverse ways
of the fabric of Aurum potabile in diverse kinds and manners. Aurum dicitur
(says he Alchem. part 2. lib. 1.) adversus omnes morbos Alexiterium
catholicum. Sed cum non peccetur vno modo, nec morbi fint vnius naturae
nequeantque omnes ad commune principium sanativum reduci, apparet Paracelsicos
transgressos esse veterum sensa, and hiperbolica laud, aurum infame
reddidisse. That is gold is said a general Cordial against all diseases, but
since errors happen not all after one way or manner, neither are all diseases
of one kind or nature, nor can be brought all into one kind, principle or way
of cure, it is apparent that the Paracelsians have transgressed the rules,
sense and meaning of the Ancients, and with their unmeasurable and
hyperbolicall praises have now procured the very name of gold to be in disgrace
and infamous. Look upon this glass (Dr Anth.) and view therein the face of
your own folly. Assuredly if all your pronunciats before mentioned concerning
your Aurum potabile, might be in proof and trial found true, it must
necessarily be convinced to be magical. Omnis materia subijcitur vicissitudini
mutationum (says Aristotle) that is, whatsoever is compounded of an elementary
matter is subject unto variation, mutations and alterations of all kinds.
Nothing can be so generally or universally unto all uses in any kind the same,
but it must vary, differ, and be mutable in his use and virtue according to
every circumstance which usually does happen unto all things mortal. Casus and
tempus, omnibus rebus accidit says Ecclesiastes 9.11. Chance and time
happens unto all things. If you will therefore prove that your potabile aurum
is the same ever in all diseases not variable therein, not failing or
immutable, always by it self fit, in all sexes, ages and distempers, then is
it exempt from the course, order and nature of all sublunarie things. Upon this
ground and proposition, will invincibly follow a conclusion: that it is a
diabolical and inchaunted medicine. Your own lips have been your accusers,
and out of your own mouth men will judge you. Now bring forth your medicine to
prove your self an honest man. Conceal it not, make it known in every part
and particle, in your Aqua menstrualis as well as in all other parts, since the
devil Si Medicus paret remedia domi suae poterit, impune pro melle, aconitum
praebere aegro, ignis enim poterit fraude^ detegere? Riolanus in liban. Man and
imposture may hide themselves therein, as well as in any other parcel belonging
thereto. Let your rich merchandise, therein your unlimited commodity persuade
you no longer to conceal it. Bring it forth (I say) put it upon the trial,
let it undergo no secret nor privy, but the open verdict of all good men. You
have (no doubt) greater worth in your self, then that, to uphold and maintain
you; your trust is not soly therein: For your own justification, for your
credit, for the common good publish and comunicate it unto all. Let it prove it
self by it self, and no longer hide the face for any private respect. There
is no good man will or can conceal any secret, upon so just and requisite
challenge. Thus much concerning your straggling proiects in praise of Aurum
potabile. Now let us descend into your particular reasons in order as they are
proposed to defend his universality and the arrogation of supreme worth and
dignity.

CAP. II.
The first Reason.
IN a golden subject behold a leaden argument, thus the Apologist does reason.
The rational Physicians deny not Polycreston, therefore why may there not be
Pancreston? that is the rational Physicians have their diverse medicines to
serve generally for many uses and causes, and therefore why may there not be
one single medicine so noble, above and beyond all other, as to serve for all
uses, An excellent sequel; his proposing his argument in form of a question
intimates his own mistrust thereof. It was not safe to trust it with a
Syllogism, and therefore (there being no other possible way to leave it
unanswerable) he runs away without an answer, and omitting his assumption,
swiftly concludes his Aurum potabile to be that Pancreston, not equalling, but
far exceeding the virtues and qualities of all other medicines, and in all
kinds and uses, particularizing in Rhubarb, Vinegar, Quicksiluer, and including
in these innumerable more. For the better apprehension of the dangerously
pointed sharpnes and keen edge of this fierce argument, let us according to
the laws of regular combat in all disputes require him to enter within the
Syllogisticall lists. Therein thus does the argument advance it self.

The Argument.
Mayor.
If there are in nature, and allowed among the dogmaticall Physicians many
single medicines that are of manifold uses, then there may be one medicine more
noble then all the rest, that may not only equal, but excel all the rest in
all uses.

Minor.
But there are in nature, and allowed among Physicians many single medicines
that are of manifold uses, Ergo There may be one single medicine more noble
then the rest, that may not only equal but exceed all the rest in all uses,

The Answer.
Ad veritatem conditionalis affirmatiuae requiritur vt consequens ex antecedete
recte inferatur, as says Aristotle (...), that is in an hypotheticall or
conditional affirmative proposition, it is required that the consequent be
rightly inferred upon, or from the Antecedent. How different the former mayor
is herein, every mean wit does wott. His scope is to evict such a noble
medicine, as might exceed all other medicines in all properties and uses. This
evicted or proved, the next intention is to prove Aurum potabile to be that
noble medicine. The first, how slenderly he has proved is not obscure. The
second he does not so much as touch or nominate. And thus concluding nothing,
he notwithstanding presumes all, that every vulgar may discern the slendernes
of this reason though his first, and planted in the forefront. This is the
wholl substance thereof in the plainest terms. There are in some or diverse
particulars many excellent qualities or properties. Ergo there may be one
particular wherein alone may be all those excellent qualities conjoined. That
there are some or diverse particulers which have excellent qualities need not
any proof, nor is serviceable unto his purpose at all, since though it be
true, it does not necessarily infer, that there is any one particular that
has all these qualities or properties unto it self. If it were likewise
granted that there may be such a particular in which may be all those
properties, yet does not that prove the particular by him named to be that
particular. For example, let the Apologist thus reason concerning himself.
There have been or are many Antonyes in whom are many excellent qualities,
therefore there may be one Antony in whom alone all these qualities may be
conjoined. It may be granted true that there have been many Antonyes of
excellent qualities, yet does not that prove that there is any one Antony in
whom are all those qualities. And if it were proved that there is one such
Antony, yet does it not prove Dr Antony, to be that one Antony. The like may be
said concerning his Aurum potabile. It is not denied that there are some
medicines in which are many excellent qualities and uses. This notwithstanding
does not prove that there is any one medicine in which are all those qualities
or uses. And if it were confessed that there might be one such medicine, yet
does it not necessarily infer that Aurum potabile is that medici^e. And thus
does the folly and falla^y of this first reason appear, disputing from a
known real being in one thing, unto an imagined posse or possibility in
another. A great cry and a little woll. This argument seems like unto that
monster in Martial.

Si solum spectes hominis caput, Hectora credes
Sistantem videas Astianacta putes.
Behold the head (the heady daring pride)
Mounts like a giant frightfully espide.
But view the legs (which are the reasons small)
Alas poor Titt, it cannot stand withal.
The Second Reason.
Most diseases consist (says the Apologist) in distemper, Ergo the most
temperate medicines are the best remidies to reduce them into temper. A man by
this your argumentation, may guess that you either never read, or now forgett
to distinguish that part of Physic which is called (...) from that which is
called (...). The first does serve properly to direct to keep or conserve the
body in health. The second does guide unto the reductio^ of the body into
health again, being therein decayed. As while the body is in health it is
against reason and rule to assume thereinto things that are intemperate, for
fear of begetting distemper thereby, so when the body is sick and
distempered, it is not only art, but common sense and reason to endeavor to
bring it into health and temper, by such differing and contrary things as
manyfestly alter and change the distemperature. It is true, in the conservation
of health, those things which are most temperate are most fit. First because
they breed no excess. Secondly because they being more near and like with
less offense and alteration they are at any time added or conjoined where use
and need is. For this cause it is as truly, as anciently said Similima,
Similimis conservantur. In diseases and distempers the case is otherwise. There
the maine respect and indication is the reduction of distemper into temper.
This is not done by things alike or temperate, but by things contrary, So says
Hypocrates Aph. 19. lib. 5. Contrariorum contraria est ratio? I pray tell me
(good Sr) in a cold stomach is a draught of temperate ale, better, or a ginger
spiced cup? If your brain have lost his common sense, ask your stomach when
it is oppressed with cold. Is there not a manifest difference of benifitt unto
a cold digestion between a draught of temperate bear or other like liquor and
a cup of wine that does manyfestly heat? Does not experience avouch that
Diatrion-piperion, Diaga langa, Diacumini, things of a sensible excess in
heat do far more happily and presently warm a cold, raw, and windy belly
then Aromaticum Rosatum or any other compounds of the like more temperate
simples. Who will deny that methridat is hott and in the same use, diascordium
more temperate. In a case wherein they are both in the general, profiittable,
if there be in some one particular respect a more special necessity of
heating. Who will not prefer the first before the second, and the second also
before the first, where is more danger or fear of heat? It is not therefore
the even temper of qualities, but the manifest odds of qualities that usually
in contrary distempers of the body does both indeed and really and also to the
sense and feeling of every man, profitt himself and correct his distemper.
Thus far has better reason then (it seems is known unto your self)
offered unto you spectacles through which it is easy to see and consider the
slender weight and worth of this your worthless reason. Let us now review it
with better eyes, thus must your reason necessarily reason syllogised.

If most diseases consist in distemper, then that which is most temperate is
the best remedy. But most diseases consist in distemper Ergo That which is
most temperate is best remedy.

The vacillation and falsehood both of Mayor and Minor is evident; for if all
or most diseases did alone consist in distemper (as they do not) yet would not
that rightly infer, that therefore those things which are most temperate, are
the best remedies, since it is apparent (as is before proved) that by
contraries those things which are intemperate, are only reduced or brought to
be temperate. The weakness and untruth of the Minor also, is undoubtedly
mantfest unto all well exercised Physicians, who most seldom meet with such
diseases as solely and simply grow from distemper alone, no disease almost, or
generally, or for the most part presenting it self, which beside the
distemper, has not an offensive quantity or burden of evil and vicious
humors, as true cause thereof. Thus the Mayor and Minor, failing the hope of
any good conclusion, is very slender. And thus also is the second reason of
the Apologist like unto the first, and both like himself, all in shows and
boasting shadows, nothing in truth and substance. Notwithstanding because we
will not altogether dispoile him, and leave him naked, having already disarmed
him, we will out of our tender hearts, yield and allow unto the temperate
remedies, in distempers some place or respect, although he neither does or can
win it, or deserve it at our hands. We must necessarily here distinguish,
concerning distempers. There is a distemper far exceeding temper, and there
is a distemper within the latitude of temper, that is not much wanting or
differing from temper, though perfectly or strictly no temper. In that
distemper Iutemperies quae non long a mediecritate recessit, similibus
conservatur, quae absit longius contrariis corrigitur, and ad temperiem
reducitur. Galen. lib. de constit. Artis.
which is within some latitude of temper, that is, within some reasonable
terms of temper, or not too much exceeding temper, temperate remedies, or not
exceeding in any manifest quality, may happily help to reduce unto temper.
But in that distemper, wherein is manifest excessive odds, it is beyond all
latitude extremely false, that remedies within the latitude of temper, or
that are temperate, should reduce the temper. For example, if a man be
distempered with an excessive, violent, or furious heat, there temperate
remedies between heat and cold are soon mastered and made frustrate, or
profit little, or for a short time. But where a man is distempered with heat,
in a small excess, or very slender degree, there temperate things, though they
cannot manifestly cool, yet may they somewhat refresh by their propinquitie
and nearenesse unto requisite and desired cooling. If these like temperate
things in such a case, carry with their temperature a Cordial quality, then
may they much more in that respect be prosperous. Thus it is clearelie
distinguished how far forth that which is temperate, may reduce into temper
that which is intemperate, as also where it shall be so far from giving temper,
that it shall be overcome of the distemper. This may now be applied unto Aurum
potabile. His excellent temper (if it be so temperate in Antonie's
preparation, as it is in his predication) may in some degrees of distemper
profit; but in^ a manifest excess of any grand distemper in true reason and
nature, the temperature must necessarily be so far from reducing into
temper, that it may rather therein loose his use and temper, and never find it
self like it self. Thus you have good reason for your money, for your gold,
for your liquor, which out of reason, and beyond reason, you would extol. As
your reasons in their proof come lame, halting and limping home, so your
flourishing shows of some scholasticall terms, are mere terms without their
true sense, and rightly apprehended fubstance. This is seen in your palpable
ignorance, endeavoring to salve that oracle of Hyppocrates, Contraria
contrarijs curantur. That you may not disparage your Aurum potaebile from the
opinion of curing contrary distempers (which you avouch thereof) and yet may
withal hold it to be temperate, you pronounce (extreme contrary to all
learning) that the mean or temper is contrary unto the extremes. As if
understanding men could be so blinded or enchanted by your mists of seeming
learning, as not to distinguish how a mean and temper, unto an extreme or
distemper, may in a large or loose sense be termed contrary; and yet in the
true and exquisite nature of contraries, be indeed no contrary. I will in few
words, make this your gross error more plain. The question is, whether Aurum
potabile by it self do cure contrary distempers, do actually resist in cold
diseases, cold; in hot diseases, heat. You affirm it, and thus you would prove
your affirmation. Contraries (say you) do cu e contraries. Auru^ potabile is a
contrary, and therefore it does cure contraries. Your Minor, viz. that Aurum
potabile is a contrary you thus prove. It is a thing temperate, therefore it is
contrary to that which is intemperate. See now the fallacy. You hold the word
contrary, but you are already run beyond the sense of your proposed contrary.
Our project and mention was concerning such contraries, as directly,
immediately, and actually oppose and resist each other, (as heat, cold;
dryness, moisture; in the question first propounded do oppose really one the
other) and now you slip from that contrary unto another kind of contrary, and
in another respect so called, namely unto such a contrary as is no real active
contrary, but a mere Non contrarium sed contradictorium. vide Scalig. exercit.
5. sect. 1.
negative contrary, as you may learn out of Aristotle in his tract de
contrary oppositis. Either you are herein a cunning Iuglar, or else you simply
and ignorantly offer this confusion of understanding. If it be simplicity, then
it were needful you went again unto school to learn Logic. If it be in
you intended deceit and cosonage, then ought it be sent to the house of
Correction. Reuiew now your reasoning. If it should be compelled into the
form of a Syllogism, according unto the laws of disputation, it would be
seen evidently to hault or rather to be a monster standing upon four legs. It
must needs have four terms. Notwithstanding you are so blindly proud and
confident herein, that for a farther proof or illustration of your assertion,
of a mean to be a contrary, you insist in the moral mean between the two
contrary extremes, vice and virtue. Liberality, say you, is contrary unto both
his extremes, both unto niggardly tenacity, and prodigal profusion. They are
contraries indeed, but as negatiues merely, not in real excess of operative
qualities, since the mean has no excess at all and is of another kind from
the extremes, and truly properly and immediately comprehended under mediocrity,
as his true and immediate kind. As is said concerning the moral contraries,
so may be said of the mediocrity of temper in Aurum potabile. As it is
temperate, it is in a sort contrary unto those things that are intemperate,
that is, it is in contradiction unto h^s extremes contrary, but that does not
prove it in real active force, or resistance of manifest qualities contrary.
Thus where you should have proved Aurum potabile chaulke, you go about to
prove it cheese, yea and cheese because chaulke. This is cheese to choke a
Daw, as says the country proverb. The case is alike: Aurum potabile is
temperate, Aurum potabile is contrary, and therefore (say you) contrary because
temperate. That you may hereafter in this matter reason more pertinently
without such confusion, and may more distinctly therein apprehend your self, I
will give you some few observations. First, know what Aristotle says
concerning things temperate, Qua ad mediocritatem redacta sunt, non amplius
agunt, quippe adepta sunt finem, that is, things temperate in any manifest
quality have no real action or resistance, because they have already gained
the end of their strife or opposition, which is perfection in temper. Touch the
temper of your gold with this touchstone. Secondly, remember that true and
real contraries do extremely, or in an extreme degree or distance, actually
in manifest qualities, oppose each other with vehement resistance, Mutuo se
expellunt, maxim a se invicem distant. Weigh your gold in this balance.
Thirdly, rub your memory, and call to mind, that contraries properly so
called, are both contained under the same kind or genus contraria sunt sub
eodem genere posita, vt Aristotle's (...). Here again examine your gold does it
now prove it self unto reason, truly and really such a contrary, as according
to nature, and ordinary course of nature, does actually and immediately resist
and oppose contrary distempers? Reason does deny, and just proof has forsaken
it. Ponder then and consider your trifling argumentation. Be ashamed of such
shameful juggling with God, with truth, with men. God does see you, truth
shall judge you, and wise men shall laugh you to scorn. If knowingly you have
proposed it, you are an Impostor and deceiuer, if simply and unadvisedly, the
fault is less, but the folly and ignorance is more remarkable and notorious.
I might here mark (in way of corollary to conclude) your overplus of
attributes, unto the good temper of Aurum potabile. The use and force of the
manifest elementary qualities therein, have been proved (like it self) in the
mean, and limited within a mediocrity. The occult properties do immediately
issue from the specificall form, unto the better exertion Temperamentum est
quasi instrumentum formae ad conservationem, sed non est per se causa. Scal.
ex. 204. se. 2
and conservation whereof the good temper does only give the better
vigoration. For this cause (says Aristotle) the bone is bone; the flesh,
flesh; the muscles, muscles; the contemper of the Elements, or their temperate
mixture, is not the cause, but some more divine and excellent gift, or
indowment of Nature, which notwithstanding requires a due proportion of temper
in elementary qualities to concur therewith. Who is so mad as to imagine,
that those several distinct properties in Pearl, Amber, Coral, Bezar, and
innumerable more, are to be attributed unto their temper. There is a a certain
fit proportion of temperature, necessary unto every one of them, but it is
their several forms, and not the temper, which gives unto them their
distinct beings and uses apart. Your praise therefore was ouer-flowingly
unadvised, that attributes altogether unto the adequation of temper in Aurum
potabile, and so sparingly mentions, and silently omitteth the specificall
form, wherein more truly and properly consists the true worth thereof. Let
us now come to your third Reason.

The third Reason.
The 3. Reason enters with the praises of Aurum potabile. It tempereth (says
Dr An) the distempers of the heart, which bring sicknesses and death it self.
It communicates temper and comfort unto the heart, by which the heart does
defend it self, both from the distempers derived thereto from all other
ill-disposed parts of the body, and also communicates unto all other parts
howsoever affected, the communion and participation with it of his refreshing
and strength. Aurum potabile possesses many occult properties in nature. For
further collaudations and powers therein, he transmitteth us unto his former
Tractate, unto classical Authors, unto Arnoldus de villa nova more
particularly, and lastly turns himself about again, and returns to relate
his own opinion, and there adds, that it excels all other things in the
most exquisite temper; that it is a thing incorruptible, either by water, or
fire, or earth, and it is the image of terrene eternity. That there is in it a
double temper, an Arithmeticall, and a Geometrical. He displayeth the
difference between gold potable, and gold in the solid substance: as
concerning the formal and agent qualities in the one, much more energeticall
then in the other. He testifies the familiarity, friendship, love and
sympathy between it and the heart, the incomparable power thereof in
repairing the decayed humidum radicale usually induced by the consuming secret
fire of the life's natural heat, and the staving of, and retardation of the
irresistible and fatal ingruence of old age. Thus swallowed with oblivion, he
never draws out or vnsheatheth his third argument at all, but presumes it
sufficient solely to have obtruded the Crambe, of the so often and weariesomely
inculcated praises of Aurum potabile. Good Sir, though you extol your Aurum
with the tower of Babel to reach to the heavens, it will in the end
notwithstanding, of the own natural accord, descend unto the proper place. We
will spend no time in making reply thereto, you cannot be ignorant, that every
vulgar Antidotarie or dispensatorie, does afford laudatorie lectures, as
liberally concerning multitudes of other medicines, as you do of this. Every
Mountbanke in this kind, will stare you out of countenance. Praises are windy
bables. It is easy upon a Mould-hill, to found a Mountain of vaineglorious
terms. View Virgill his Culex or Gnat. Your course Genius can never aspire
unto that terse, elegant, witty, pretty contriuement, poetical sweet
strain, wherewith he has tuned, and most delightfully sung the exuberant
praise of that small-creeping fly, or flying worm. How ingeniously does he
make the praises exceed the matter, and yet the matter no more then it self,
the jest seeming serious, and the serious no jest. Read Cornelius Agrippae de
laud stultitiae, you shall see with how sportiue a wit, or witty sport, he
jesteth with good earnest, in extolling that quality, wherein through your whole
Apology you do exceed and riot. Let praises therefore pass, you promised a
third argument, we expect that, since praises are not proofs. Perhaps you will
say, that you had come unto your argument at last, if your memory had not met
with a rub, which carried your byas out of the way. An abject objection
forsooth, did take you aside, and whispered in your ear, that Aurum potabile
being a thing in manifest qualities, manifestly temperate, could not possibly,
or in any true or sound reason or judgment, produce or exercise any manifest
operation. In ouer-zealous desire of answer of the objection, you cast away
the matter in hand utterly, and forgetting both your self and it, run
headlong into an old song, often before chatteringly chaunted, videlicet, that
Aurum potabile is temperate in qualities, and yet so excelling therein, that it
is able to master, or quell any opposing or resisting contrary whatsoever. This
is an ugly monster in reason or nature. If you had once sollidly proved this
assertion, the hated repetition might be better digested, but in your proofs
hitherto so slightly trifling and performing shadows, the grosnesse of your
contradictions must needs beget a loathing of the rankness of such raw
learning. You do not understand what it is, petere principium, or to dispute
ex non concessis, otherwise you might conceive, how unsavory it is unto men
learned, to hear you so often and rudely harping upon one and the same iarring
string, and yet suppose that it is sufficient pleasing music. I will
therefore in this your inculcation of the same former error, confute you
likewise by referring you unto my former confutation thereof in your second
reason. Mark it well, and if you mean to make it your mark whereat to shoot
your bolt, look you miss it not, nor take it amiss, least as you have in
this your Apology injuriously quartred me, so in the next replication, I hang
in so equal balance, that your least want of weight shall not escape the
seuerest censure. Your concluding here without premises, merely upon praises,
your reasoning without reason, your iterated iugling of Simile unto Contrarium,
and Contrarium into Simile: of Aurum potabile sometimes into both, sometimes
into neither, sometimes into either, I do with equal reciprocation answer
and not answer. In your second reason I answer the third, and therefore the
third because the second. It is true, and not true: and therefore true because
not true. And this is according unto your excellent temper, and yet contrary,
and therefore contrary because temper. Thus have I answerably, or as fitteth in
answer, toied with your toies, and put a trick upon your tricks, hoping as
it is in me, only of your image and example, the representative, so it may be
in your use, as in my end instructiue, and that your own folly in a third
person, may better, and more impartially appear unto your self. If
notwithstanding all this my care and pains you will not be reformed, I end
with that of Quintilius in Horace.

Quin sine rivali teque and tua solus amato.
Your self-love be it nere so much
There Is no competitour need grutch.
The fourth Reason.
Aurum potabile (says our disputant) is an universal medicine, in
consideration of the nature of the sick, or of the disease or sickness. For
if the disease does lie upon the patient as a burden, and the strength is not
sufficient to bear or endure it unto the end, what is here to be done? Whether
is the strength to be maintained and cherished, that it may endure and bear
the burden, or to be overthrown, or perish by attempting to remove the
burden? This is his wise propose to no purpose. What if it should be granted
unto him that every disease is a burden which nature is not sufficient to
endure, and that in such a case the strength of nature is to be altogether
cherished and fostered, and not by any endeavor of remouall of her burden to
be injured or oppressed? What will he infer hereupon? It does not follow from
hence, Ergo, Aurum potabile is an universal medicine, which he propounds as
his intended conclusion. It only from hence can follow, or infer, ergo Aurum
potabile, in the proposed particular case may do good. But he frames from
his former discourse this consequence, or collection, forsooth that every
disease may be mastered, or cured, through the strength of nature, by the
help of Cordialls. And from hence happily he hops it may be with some
likelihood conceived and granted that Aurum potabile being a Cordial, may be
hereby concluded an universal medicine. This is far fetched and about the
bush. If we should bountifully, or rather prodigally yield unto him both the
former propositions, yet do they neither jointly nor apart infer his
conclusion, which notwithstanding, in them both he promised and propounded in
the very first words of his reason. Thus therefore failing and wandering out of
the way, at length he borrows the help of Mules to draw him out of the
mire of his fowly confused, and inexplicate reason. As it falls out (says
he) with Mules that carry burdens, so does it with the sick. It is not fit
always to take of the burden that they may feed. It is more trouble and
hinderance indeed unto the idle driuer (as in his own experience the Apologist
has happily sometimes found) it is more trouble, I say, to the driuer, in
feeding or refreshing his Mules, to take down their packes or burdens, but if
the poor Mules could speak, they would tell you from their own manifest
sense, that it were more ease and pleasure unto them, to feed without the
encumbrance of their loads upon their backs in the interim. And common
experience does tell us that burdens are usually removed from the traveling
or laboring beast, not only when they go daily unto their rest, but upon many
other occasions. The Apologist compares his sick patients unto Mules, but he
uses them worse, if he tie them perpetually unto their burdens, and tell
them for their comforts, that Aurum potabile shall refresh them, and enable
them to bear them still. No doubt but they had rather be rid of their
burdens, then comforted to bear them. Every disease is not such a burden as
is impossible to be removed, and in those kinds, they are nor only made Mules,
but Asses, that for Aurum potabile his sake will bear them still. Many
diseases there are exceeding tolerance, and greater then can long be borne, if
not either in part lightened, or lessned, or wholly removed; and Aurum potabile
cannot make them less. In both these cases, or kinds of diseases, Aurum
potabile is of small use. In the one, the burden being wholly removed, is of
no use at all. In the other, until the burden be otherwise removed, it can be
only a comfort or relief in the misery, but no release from the misery. This,
all Physicians know to be undoubted in their patients, howsoever Grooms do
practice in their mules. There is a plethora ad vasa, and a plethora ad vires.
The first is a weight or burden so far above measure, that the vessel
cannot often hold it without danger of breaking. The other exceeds not the
capacity of the continent vessels, but is more then the strength can tolerate,
except in some part unloaded. The like may be said of Cacochymia, or excess of
vicious humors out of the vessels. All these sorts of burdens are common in
most diseases. In all these it is better to be delivered from their encumbrance
and oppression, then to be comforted and refreshed to bear their load. It is
true, where it is not possible to remove them securely with any safety, there
it remains only unto confirmation and comfortation of the strength with more
ease to endure them. But this is not an usual or ordinary condition in all,
or most diseases. In many diseases the cause remoueable being removed, health
does follow spontaneously, and until it be removed, there can be otherwise no
possibility thereof. In many diseases it is impossible to remove the cause,
and that remaining, there is no possibility in Cordials, or any other means
to cure them. Where they may be removed, shall Aurum potabile persuade to keep
them? Where they are not to be removed, can Aurum potabile be esteemed any more
then a Palliatiue, a Flatterer, a Iuggler, a Cosner of opinion or pain for a
time? It is a wonder to see how these drivers of Mules suppose the world a
generation of fools, and study to beget and multiply (as they suppose) among
asses soles, for the propagation of their vainglorious heresy, and grand
imposture. We have not hitherto found the least weight or worth in any one
reason. This last reason offered in form of a question (as is his mystical
guilefull manner in them all) is for want of good delivery, so deformed and
disfigured, that it can hardly be reduced into any form or figure of right
dispute, or the unmeasurable indefinities thereof be fashioned into any mood
or measure, that may contain his promised purpose in any sort. It is far more
easy to drive one of his Mules into a pinfold, then to draw him into a
Syllogism that may hold him within his lists. Let us notwithstanding, with
best favor and advantage unto himself that is possible, thus fashion for him
his confused Chaos of dispute, into some shape of likely reason. Thus happily
he may most fairly argue. If some Cordialls are necessary in all diseases, and
Aurum potabile contain in it self the use and virtue of all Cordialls, then
is it an universal medicine in all diseases. But some Cordialls are necessary
in all diseases, Ergo, Aurum potabile is an universal medicine.

We will grant that some Cordialls are necessary in all diseases in respect of
the due care of natures preservation, but we will deny that all Cordialls are
necessary in all diseases, or for all different uses, or for all seasons in any
disease. We deny also that Aurum potabile is any such Cordial wherein is
comprehended the virtue and power of all Cordialls. These points remain still
to be proved as at the first beginning. Until therefore the Apologist have
first manifestly proved them, we do ask the good behavior against this
trifling and brabling intrusion upon a common and universal right, for which
he hitherto has not, or ever can show any good evidence. It fitteth not a man
reputed learned, so often to affirm that he does not demonstrate, nor so often to
iterate and inculcate that thing, which irresistibly and inuincibly he has not
clearly founded upon scientificall grounds. He that is herein defective, is no
better then a babbler, a pratler, a tatler, Homo in verba proiectus locutuleius
blattero, says Gellius, Noct. Attic lib. 1. It is not the sound of words
(says the same Author in the same place) it is not the sound of words, but the
profundirie of the sententious, and pithie thought, that is true science and
learning, Non sonns habitusque vocis, sed sententiarum penitius conceptarum
altitudo. And this undoubtedly of your whole Apology, as well as of this your
fourth Argumentation is most true: It is full of great words and bubling
seeming reasons, but it is seasoned with little true and sound reason. As
therefore Catullus says of Quintia, Nulla in tam magno est corpore mica salis.
No eye can spy in that bulks space
One jot of sweet or comely grace.
So may I justly conclude of your grand Apology. If you do happily like my own
poetry rather then that is borrowed, I may thus truly say of your whole
work, Verborum ingentem cumulum miramur, and vsque
Verbosum verbis nil nisi verba dare.
We view a wordy world of chatter,
All words, no word unto the matter.


The fifth Reason.
Aurum potabile, says our disputant, does open obstructions, which are the
causes of infinite diseases. From this proposition he imagines the conclusion
must issue irresistibly, Ergo, Aurum potabile is an universal medicine. If our
bounty should extend to grant all, it proves no more universality in Aurum
potabile then is usual unto other deoppilatiues or openers of obstructions.
But hereto he does promptly reply, that there are no other deoppilatiues,
either so effectual as this, or so permanent or certain in their effects, or
so little disquieting nature in their operations, or after their use leaving
behind them so small evil relic, or remaining inconvenience, nor that are so
easy or pleasant to take. Our experience of your perpetual want and
insufficiency in every proof or reason of your assertions, confidently by you
notwithstanding promised in the former part of the Treatise, and as yet in
nothing performed, does warrant us to deny unto you common credit, until you
have, or can by some merit exceeding all exception, vanquish and extort our
discreet belief. Your partial proiects or reports of your own experience, we
know not to be inuiolate decrees. I have often seen long continuations, and
knotty obstructions with as much pleasure and expedition (as any patient can
hope or think) enodate and dissolved. They have never again returned, nor the
remedies in that work employed, been stained with the least suspicion of
either mixing with the cure, or leaving after the cure the least doubt or
questioned imputation. Concerning the pleasure and facility in their taking,
there was never quarrel heard, and the sound of praise has often awaked envy,
and after driven her with fury into an Apoplecticke amazed silence. For this
therefore your felony and robbing of al men and medicines of their undoubted
rights, your deserved suspension in every sound judgment, cannot be avoided,
except you can read like a Clarke, far better then hitherto it seems you
have done. Read then the histories of all times and ages past, wherein Aurum
potabile being unknown, excellent counsels have produced admirable cures in all kinds of diseases. Read any practiser of note or celebritie in any age, or
time, and you shall therein read (if you can read with judgment) your own
injurious insolence and unrighteous presumption. But (say you) there is an
inexplicable divinity in the temper that gives unto Autum potabile, the
incomparable pre-eminence. If this be true, then first soundly refute the
former confutation thereof, and next salve the present contradiction of your
self, in your professed practice. As you do affirm in this place concerning
Lullius his custom, so do you in your testimonies, and elsewhere acknowledge
concerning your own, that you mix your Aurum potabile sometimes with Cichory
water, sometime with wine. If your Aurum potabile be in it self sufficient
both to cool and heat, (as elsewhere you affirm) what use then is there of
Cichory water to cool, or of wine for warmth, or comfort? Either your own
action does stab your assertion with the lie, or your assertion pronounces
your action needless or vain. This is your true temper through every vein
and pulse of your former work, namely to pronounce contraries, and yet affirm
them to be all truths. And thus is your last reason detected, as your first, to
be the lively and perfect image, and picture of your most imperfect self, of
whom I may truly say as Martial of Thais, Cum been se tutam per frauds mill
putavit,
Omnia cum fecit, Thaida Thais olet.
Thais by wiles does plot that she
(Though Thais) yet no Thais seem to be.
When musk-like most perfumed she is,
All fumes orefumeth still Thais.


Through your secure triumph in so many your cunning couers, adulterate colors
painted, adequate complexion and counterfeit guilt of golden temper,
notwithstanding is perfectly sented your fained worth by the proper ill savor
in it self. It remains now only and alone to consider your inconsiderate
proposing of an objection against your self, and therein blindly leaving your
self entangled. Aurum potabile (say you) page 11. latin Copy, being a
Cordial (for so now you confess it in your lethargy of the former
universality) being properly a Cordial (say you) how can it alone be
sufficient unto the necessary euacuation of the superfluous or oppressing load
of humors in the body. The immediate co^tinent and antecedent causes of diseases
remaining within (say you again) health is scarcely, or not at all to be hoped
merely to follow upon Cordials. Upon the precedent grounds you conclude, that
if the nature of the sick and of the universal medicine be furthered and helped
by some gentle purge, so much the rather and the sooner shall the natural
strength and the propulsation of the disease succeed. Now let the Reader behold
Anth. against Anth. In the very next words immediately following the former in
the Latin copy thus he adds. Notwithstanding (says he) if this come not to
pass.i. that the nature of the sick, and of the universal medicine, be not
helped or furthered by purging in due consideration of reason, Nature will find
a means, and way for her self better the^ the Physician, who is not Natures
master, but Minister and helper. For the Physician (says he) in all diseases
ought thither to direct all his evacuations, where nature does regularly and
critically intend them. How now will Anthony satisfy and answer Anthony?
Anthony first said, that without purging or evacuation of the immediate
continent and antecedent causes of diseases, (which is the proper, ordinary,
and usual office, skill, and direction of the Physician) health could hardly,
scarcely, or hopefully follow. Now lastly, Anthony again says, that Nature
without the Physician, will better find help and means for her self. The
cause of this difference between Anthony and himself, is the want of right
distinction. That therefore I may mediate between his meaning and himself, I
will thus help him to distinguish. Nature is to be considered two ways: The
first way is as she works regularly, perfectly, or sufficiently, and there
the Physician is solely to imitate Nature, and to be directed by her, and her
minister, and and no master. The second way is, as Nature irregularly,
inconveniently, or inperfectly works, and then and there must the Physician
be her directer, master, commander, and orderer. This may be manifestl^ proved
out of Hippocrates Aph. 20. 21. 22. lib. 1. If beside rule and reason, example
and instance be demanded in way of illustration, we might be infinite herein,
but one or two are no less sufficient then a multitude. In the scorching
flame, and furious fire of an exquisite peracute, or perperacute pleuresie,
frenzy, Angina Peripuenmonia, Synochus, and diverse other like, if Nature
demonstrate her self completely, and effectually able to vent sufficiently, or
competently by any prompt or convenient natural passage, the fiery smoke and
fume of the boiling veins, menacing her suffocation, then is there no use but
an abuse in any use of Physic or Physician. But if Nature in her strength
fundadamentally quail, by the oppression of her enemy, the disease in the
quantity of the humor, and be beyond the extent of her durance or toleration
grieved, though the cordial may flatter or ease for a miserable time, the
Physician must then either enable or help Nature, in her self helpless, or
she must perish remediless. This is usually observed, when ordinarily and ofr,
the Physician is manifestly seen to recall the yielding ghost, against the
before irresistible impediments, and encumbrances of Nature in her self. Does
not the Physician often and usually by giving a vent solely unto the blood and
veins, as is before said, immediately thereby reviue and reduce Nature, before
this happy succor and supply, eternally and unrecoverably sinking? In these
like cases, Nature having no power in her self, while the oppression and
invincible burden remains upon her, the life or benefit of any the most
excellent Cordials, necessarily do perish with her. But let the Physician lend
his hand to remove the oppressor, and the oppressed is often seen able either
to raise and comfort it self, or at least to receive comfort and refreshing
from without, which before was offered in vain unto her, in her
insusceptibilitie thereof. For this cause says Galen, Mirum est quomodo se
abijcit Natura, cum quod tentat, excludere nequeat. It is a wonder (says he)
how Nature is dejected, and how she as it were despairing, casts away all
hope or care of her self, when being ouer-loaded beyond her strength, she
attempteth by any kind of evacuation, or excretion, to cast her burden off,
and cannot. Therc is no man so stupid, as to think that in these cases there
is any hope in Cordials, since they cannot give unto Nature strength above her
strength, and Nature to bear burdens importable, intolerable, and impossible
unto her. That usually such burdens do fall upon Nature, every man's eye and
daily experience does behold. And thus it is made manifest, how in many
diseases, Nature absolutely must perish, and cannot subsist without the
Physicians hand or help, by due evacuations to remove her oppressions, which
exceed the extent of her utmost power and strength to endure, bear, or resist.
Although therefore sometimes Nature is alone, and by her self, able perfectly
to enodate her own health and recovery. And although the Physician, when
Nature is not able of her self, does and ought to help and assist her, by the
imitation and direction of her own course and custom in her own regular and
perfect works, yet simply, generally, absolutely, and without distinction to
pronounce, that Nature is better able to help her self without the Physician,
is a palpable testimony of inconsideratnesse, confusion, and ignorance of
understanding. And this has been the common custom of the Apologist, through
the whole Apology, in all parts and places thereof without difference or
distinction, from a raw and undigested knowledge and learning, perpetually
belching extremely contraries. Now last of all, that he may make up all his
creeping, shifting, and starting holes and evasions, he d^wbeth up with the
untempered mortar of Raymundus Lullius, his learning and authority concerning
Areanum Philosophicum, which he interprets to be an universal medicine, and
either the very same, or very like unto his Aurum patabile, because they are
both (says he) propagating gold, or propagated from gold. We doubt not but as
gold has propagated your Aurum potabile, so in your own good feeling and
sense, your Aurum potabile does propagate gold. Nay, we will grant it possible,
that as into Aqua menstralis, it gently and slowly glideth, so it may happily
run back again amain in solid substance, into the devouring Ocean of your
purse. If we should freely grant thus much, yet will it propagate no direct
eviction, that Areanum Philosophicum is your Aurum potabile, or universal
medicine, since you do but guess and conjecture at it, although you
pronounce, as if your guess were authority, or sufficient reason. The due
praises which you infer of Raymundus Lullius, beget in me no indignation. I
will only recite what a learned man with witty gravitie in Poesy has taxed,
concerning his unprofitable studies and labor in curiosities, and especially
about the Philosophers stone; Dum lapidem quaris (Lulli) quem quaerere nulli
Profuit, haud Lullus, sed mihi nullus eris,
If Lully dully seek that stone,
Which never could nor can be known;
Then no man needs must Lully be,
Since no man nothing seeks to see*


How often Anthony has lost Anthony in his former Apologizing work, perpetually
tautologizing, sometimes contradicting and denying himself, sometimes in the
clouds and mistes of his own inex plicate meaning, hiding himself even from
himself, and sometimes appearing contrary and opposite unto himself, and
ever vnchangeablie changeable from himself, unto the diligent and judicious
Reader, has not been obscure to observe. I will now leave him with his friend
Lullius, for his better institution and instruction, and now taking my leave,
thus part with the first part of his Apology. I will only in one Dislicke of
my own sudden Muse, friendly warn him, that he is espied: Dissimulas qui
sis, dum nolis quem scis haberi.
Scimus at hoc, nec enim quem simules, simules.
Skilled are you to A man is properly said to resemble that is not, and to
dissemble that which is, as if it were not Simulamus esse que non sunt, inqu^t
Cicero. Dissimulamu^ non esse quae sunt. Sic Virg. Dissimulare etiam sperasti
perfide tantum Posse nefas?
resemble fair,
And to distemble that you are.
But you can not be, well we know,
Your self, and that you would seem too.


CAP. III.
THus carried with a prosperous gale, and willing sail, we are at length
arrived upon the margin or skirts of your second part of the Apology. In your
very first entrance you complain of the indocilitie and incredulity of men,
concerning your doctrine of the universal medicine. Although you have (as you
say) persuaded, yet can you not persuade. Certainly you persuade your self of
your self too well, and therefore of others so ill. See whether you can see no
fault in your seife, and your own persuasions in the first passed part of your
Apology. You shall there find me your friend to help you therein. As there,
so in the second part you boast of reason and experience. Your reasons are
short, as you confess, as I will declare, and as all men may see. In your
experiences (which really and indeed are rather other men's testimonies) you
abound. So it befitteth him who wants true reason and judgment, and builds
upon such inartificiall arguments, merely arising from the fancies and sense
of distressed patients, transported usually by their affection, most seldom by
reason and true judgment guided. You tell us, let the envious bark, and say
that your gold is no gold: but this you say is more certain, then that is most
certain, that a medicine an hundredth times more precious then gold, is by you
out of gold deduced. If your proof hereof be only equal unto that which
formerly with the same titles and terms you have exalted, and falsely
dignified, it is less then nothing, since out of nothing cannot issue any
thing. We will now attend how according to your promise, you do prove your
self master and maker of the genuine, true and no counterfeit Aurum potabile.
Unto this purpose you produce three reasons. The first is this, That medicine
which is made of gold, dissolved without corrosiues into a substance or
co^sistence, like honey potable, easily dissolved in any liquor, is the most
excellent medicine liquor, and true undoubted Aurum potabile. This is the
Mayor, the Minor follows. But (say you) my medicine is such, namely gold
dissolved without Corrosiues, into a substance or consistence, like honey
potable, easily dissolved in any liqor: Erg. my medicine is the true Aurum
potabile. We deny your Minor, and expect it by you proved. In stead of thee
expected proof: you tell us that you have formerly demonstrated it in a former
treatise, and refer us thereto. In that treatise, according to my promise in
the beginning, I must remit you unto those learned men, who have there, and for
that already taken you into their handling. I will therefore only make a
serutinie and trutinie of those your reasons and proofs, which I do find
here. In your Minor you say, that your medicine is gold, dissolved without
Corrosiues. This I do deny, and you cannot prove it, except you make your
concealed Aqua Menstrualis known, I will not credit you, but that there are
Corrosiue virtues and powers therein. Except therefore you do make known that
your grand secret, your totum scire, and secretum, your argument and proof is
for all hope of progress, lost and drowned in your Aqua Menstrualis. And there
we leave your first proof, cowardly hiding it self. I need not tell you, that
Aurum potabile, per aquam fortem, per fraudem compositum, solutum aquis regijs,
is reproved and damned of Chymicks themselves. That that Aurum potabile, which
is debite modo and comprobato sapientibus, is known unto you, you do not make
known unto us, but leave it obscured and sunk in the puddle of your
menstruall water. We come unto your second proof, by which you would convince,
that your universal medicine is the true Aurum potabile. The medicine, say
you, which have the genuine, proper, and inseparable effects of Aurum potabile,
is to be taken and esteemed the same. But your universal medicine has those
universal and solely proper effects of Aurum potabile, Ergo it is the same. We
deny not your Mayor from the immediate and proper effects, unto the true
immediate cause, the sequel is most certain and necessary. Your Minor we
doubt and think false, and therefore we urge and require your proof and
manifestation thereof. But you homely and plainly tell us, that your medicine
has given and yielded sufficient evidences, testimonies, and effects, only
worthy Aurum potabile. And thus except we will take your bare word and credit
therein, or stay for further proof out of your succeeding testimonies, the
promised present proof is not performed. Your third proof is taken out of the
admirable and wonderful manner, falling out in the workmanship of your Aurum
potabile, that is, the permanent and perfect dissolution thereof, the ascent in
an exceeding red shape or form by the Alembike. When we have seen the Gold
in solid substance first put into the Alembike, and after without fraud closed
therein; lastly, ascending in the mentioned form, and withal do know your
Aqua menstrualis, we are then Chrysopaeidare possunt alijs metallis qualitates
accidentarias auri very, colorem, duritiem, pondus etc. Essentiales non
possunt, nempe crasim, formam, proprietates Riolan.
and not before, in any reason or equity, tied to take your report in your
own cause. Thus you see how you persuade your self too well of your self.
You think better of your credit then it is, and trusting thereto overmuch,
your last proof is as the first and second, void and annihilate. But you
reply, that you have many learned Physicians, eyewitnesses of this your
experience. We answer and oppose your own confession, viz. that your Aqua
menstrualis is known unto no man. If no man know it but your self, then no
man but your self can satisfy us, whether there be therein any corrosiue
power or virtue, and (as we said before) we are resolved not to credit you.
Therefore your last proof or argument is dissolved, and with the former void.
Thus have you by force and argument gained nothing. Let us now familiarly, yet
seriously, confer together. Suppose we should yield unto you the honor of
possessing, and the prerogative of the first inventing and finding out of Aurum
potabile. You cannot thereby prove your self more generally learned, or more
truly honest, both which, are more chiefly and mainely required in every man,
in every faculty. General learning or knowledge consists not in any one
particular alone. As for honesty, your presumption is the unlimited, and so
universal monopoly of your medicine, not usually tolerated or allowed in a
commonweal, and your reserved and concealed private gain therein, do
minister just occasion and matter to Si medicus paret remedia domisuae, exigat
si placet^ centum aut mill aureos^ quis precio statuet modu^? Ri^^.
suspect you. In your third proof, you seem to praise your self by the way
of answer to an objection, for your communicating unto many, so excellent a
medicine, that should not be made (say you) so common. And you say, that like
the sun it is nothing less precious, because the shining glory and
brightness is communicated unto all. It is true indeed, your Aurum potabile is
nothing less precious for the communication, but it may be happily less
communicabie for the price. I would think your comparison not to hold in the
sun so fitly, as in the moon, since your communication is nothing so clear,
nothing so free or bright, but dim and clouded in much darkness. You shine not
but in part, nor fully; the beams of aqua menstrualis altogether eclipsed.
Neither do you shine gratis. Deal plainly and uprightly. If your
communication thereof be honest, without extortion therein, without robbing and
spoil, without deceit, ingeniously, apertly, freely communicate the whole
preparation, that other men Magistratus in publicum consulit, ut sciatur quae
medicamenta praescribunt Medici, ut public fiant and examinentur. Libavius in
Giammanu^.
may know as well as your self, what errors and abuses there are hidden secret
in that reserved watrish and menstruall orb or aspect. It is not sufficient
for you to say, that you have by the grace and gift of God obtained the secret
of secrets, the soie Jewel of Art and Nature, but other men must know that you
came truly and honestly unto it; as also, that honestly and truly you use it.
Otherwise there ought no more thereof remain with you, but the punishment of
your fault and sin therein. Learn of Esops cock, he found a Gemme, you know
where, and you know how. Dum vertit stercoraerium offendit gemmam, says the
fable. He stirred up the muckhill, and found a gemme. It added nothing unto his
worth, yet he showed a more honest affection then you, he made no profit of his
good hap, he wished it freely unto the Goldsmiths. You crow louder, and make
more cackle, but you are nothing so ingenuous. You sell the grace and gifts,
which you say, God has given unto you, and after such a rate and proportion,
as no man knows but your self. And thus indeed you communicate it unto every
man, but the truly golden sup or sap therein, no man tastes but your self.
Thus far we have launched into the depth, and have sounded and fadomed the
profundity of your proofs, both in the 1 and 2 part of your Apology. We will
now cast anchore a while, and prepare and repair our tackle, that with
prosperous winds, and fresh gales, we may also give a new charge upon your
testimonies. As you formerly in your reasons and arguments, professed your
self a Champion of truth; and it has solely proved a guilefull shadow of
truth, serving only unto your commodity and benefit. So in the preface unto
your testimonies also you now promise that you will publish no letter or
testimonies unto any man's disgrace; but how false and dissembling your prom^se
and purpose is herein, let all men judge, who may manifestly behold how
injuriously and scandalously many of your testimonies make a footstool and
ladder of other men's names and depraved worth, that thereby your golden
medicine may clime unto the usurped top and height of supremacy. It is a wonder
how so suddenly you are start up so learned, so famous, so brauingly
audacious, since (as it is well understood) not not many years since
dispairing of thriuing by your learning, you became a Traffiquer, or trader in
woolls, or cloth, a long time together. Is it possible that you can so swiftly
lay aside your Mechanicke thoughts, and so prowdly and daringly, not only
encounter, but triumph upon learned men, your self so late so obscure and
despicate in your own eyes? I will not say with the Poet, Quid Domini facient?
But good Sr tell me; What shall your grand Theophrasts do,
If wool packs conjure thus in you?


The insolence is unmeasurable in so mean a Philosopher, as you have proved
your self, and therefore just indignation does afford you no better nor other
answer but this contempt.

CAP. IIII.
WE are now come to buckle with your testimonies. First, I will make manifest
that they are all in general of no validity, to prove the worthiness of
authorization in your Aurum potabile. Secondly, I will prove and manifest that
some of your testimonies are known unto my self to be false, and other some
in all possible reason apertly impossible. Thirdly, I will produce testimonies
concerning other medicines in their worth and success, nothing inferior to
your testimonies of Aurum potabile, and for the most part in the same kinds.
Lastly, I will oppose unto your testimonies blazed in honor of Aurum potabile,
such counter-testimonies, as shall sound as much in dishonor. First, for the
invaliditie in general of your testimonies, and jointly they are all defective
in one of these two kinds. Some are directly false. All the rest witness no
more but the felicity, good success, and happy issues and events of your
medicine, which is no sufficient or complete satisfaction for the authority,
lawfulness, or allowance of your medicine. Many diseases have been by sleight
means prudently guided, admirably cured. Many diseases likewise have been
cured by chance, when all humane help has utterly been dispaired. I did my
self know a Gentleman cured of a long and Cronicall head-ake and giddiness,
by a rude blow with a staff upon his head, plentifully causing him to bleed,
with great danger of his life. I knew another by taking ratsbane unwillingly
from a poysner, dispatched of an inueterate and incurable french pox, many
years before settled in his bones all useful help in that kind wearied, and
a long time made frustrate. I have read an history of a woman, who being
wearied with her husbands* long and chargeable sickness (thinking thereby to
dispatch him of his misery) gave him the powder of a Toad, whereby he was
presently recovered. I do read of another woman in whom the dropsy had
ouergrown the reuocation thereof by any ordinary course, at length she chanced
from an high place to fall, and hitting her belly upon a sharp stone, it made
way and passage for the hidropicall water, and the woman was thereby delivered.
These good issues or events, do not commend these medicines, or their use, nor
for that cause can give them a supremacy or principality above all others.
Neither can the multitude of testimonies, or reports of their admirable
success justify their prescriptions. If the testimonies of good events, or
issues were sufficient, the hardy Empericke, the Magitian, and Impostor would
prove the most excellent Physicians, who in all ages have abounded, the one
with wondrous, the other with supernatural and miraculous successes.
Concerning the one I have known my self (and it is not difficult at this day
to produce innumerable known witnesses of the best worth and estimation, both
in Northampton shire, and in other Countries) I have known diverse practisers
in this kind, who with certain secret words, crossed Napl^ns, and the like,
have often and usually found good success in desperate diseases, when Art has
given place, or could not prevail. Concerning the multitude of testimonies,
touching good issues in impostures, and deceitful curations, in regard both of
the honor and eminence of personages, it would be tedious and scandalous to
write. Reginald Scot does fulfill more then measure in this kind in his
discovery. How easy it is also to gain fame and a high name among vulgars,
let Tobacco vaunt and boast it self. In his first arrival into this kingdom,
there was scarce one mouth which did not open in his praise, and all diseases
did quake at his fearful rumor, whiles it menaced their general ruin and
exile from men. The diseases which it was then said to have cured, were
infinite, and administered admirable matter of laughter in this kind. Our late
Welling borroughe well had in a short time gained for every drop thereof almost
a flood of praises. No man departed from thence uncured. Aurum potabile does
now play the same descant at an higher rate, but cannot strain unto an higher
note, then the harmonious applause and noise of that wells praise as long as
the music lasted. I might abound in many more, and in more then too many
examples in these kinds. These sudden glorious puffes of praises howsoever in
men full of wonder and easily blasted with admiration they obtain a violent
obsession of their vulgar opinions, wise men are more slowly surprised with
such rash incursions of vain credulity and self conceit. These
considerations well weighed how can you expect to ^aue your universal medicine
esteemed worthy authorization or to be pure and vncounterfeit merely in
respect of his fame, spreading renown, and common voice, or in regard of the
glorious ostentation of happy add succesfull issues alone amongst men, who know
not, nor can acknowledge, or take notice of the reason, workmanship, and
composition thereof, and thence assure themselves of the due and right
accommodation. No truly advised Physician can think either the credit of
testimonies in the succesfull events, or another man's experience and
information equal or equivalent unto his own knowledge, since every judicious
Physician for his own justification in all his upright actions, ought in
himself, and not in another, to know the temper and constitution of all
things, which he shall lawfully apply or use; and to examine seriously and
duly, how it consents first generally with allowance of reason, and also is
proportioned to his particular. Thus every honest and upright Artist is bound,
and will be ready to give account of all his actions in every circumstance, and
in each particular. It is not the good issue or event of a medicine, that does
or can alone commend a Physician, but his own precise knowledge of the
anatomy thereof, guided and governed by rule and likely reason unto the likely
issue. He is an Idiot or fool that merely judges by events. That Physician
therefore does not answer his duty and required worth, who led like a blind
ignorant by the opinion of another man, and not knowing himself the nature and
quality of a medicine, does traditionally at a second hand, and upon another
commendation prescribe it. He that applaudeth himself herein, howsoever in his
own golden opinion, proud of a gay new knowledge, he supposes that he
out-strippeth other meaner wits, and howsoever with glittering shadows he may
for a time amaze vniudging men, yet unto him, who is substantially and truly
wise, and can discern the miraculous illusions, which rash lightness is able
to work in common brains, he shall clearly appear through a fair
superficial show without, a substantial fool within. How can you then alone,
above, or beyound reason, challenge a prerogative of imposing your Aurum upon
other Physicians, or how can you iustl^ blame them if they be wary in trusting
it, while unknown unto them? If you have obtained such a secret, you that
know it, may knowingly use it, they that know it not, may be justly
doubtful; since where is not knowledge must and ought be doubt If therefore
you will ingeniously make your secret known, then they that know it with you,
may iudiciously use it, and justify it with you. If you will keep it
niggardly unto your self, or dare not show it, as therein only holding your
priu^te or monoplized gain for your own base commodity, then enjoy it your
self, and understanding it your self, commend it your self, but arrogate
there in not too much to your self, nor derogate in the pride of one
instrument from the whole excellency of all good workmanship, as if all art
were now lately coniured w^thin the circuit of Aurum potabile. Know God your
self and othe^s as well as your self, yea to be not only in many things
equal, but better then your self; though in this one thing happily you had or
could evidently prove your deserving beyond the ordinary measure of all desert.
Look not to build your own true worth upon others testimonies of your
medicine. There are other more true testimonies and undoubted evidences of true
worth, then are to be seen in the excellencies of a dead instrument; the true
liuelyhood and perfection whereof, consists in the prudence, guidance, and
government of the learned Physician. Your universal and general medicine, can
be but a material and sublunary body: but the discreet and artificial
accommodation thereof, is a spiritual virtue, and power of the soul. In the
better part thereof all other Physicians participate with you, yea you cannot
deny that many exceed you. How dare you then so much adore and worship a
senseless and earthly instrument, as in the ouerflowing praise thereof, to
drown the true praises, which God above and beyond it has g uen to his own
gifts graces and heavenly endowments of true science, prudence, sagacity, and
judgment, which he has ordained to rule, guide, order, and dispose the right
dispensation of all such outward means, and instruments of what excellency
soever. Contract then your swelling pride in so small a merit. Let it not so
ranckly ouerflowe the banks of modesty and reason. I see among your testimonies
the names of some honorable, and worthy personages, and I may, and do justly
suspect, that many of their private letters are published without their consent
and priuitie. I there meet also the names of diverse me^ of eminent learning and
wisdom; and therefore it does induce me to persuade my self that you have
been ouerbold to subscribe them, when I compare with their worth and gravitie,
your intolerable ridiculous arrogancy in an unknown fabrication, which when
known (for ought is as is yet known) may hereafter prove a trifle, if not
worse. I do not say so, but if it be so, trust not too much unto praises,
which consist in others gift and prodigality, but in true virtue, standing by
it self. I doubt it not, nor think it impossible, that some of your inserted
letters are permitted by the Authors in dirision of your boundless insolency,
if with their allowance printed.

Vt qui conducti plorant in funere dicunt
Et faciunt prope plura dolentibus ex animo, sic Horac.
Derisor vero plus laudatore moretur.
As he that hired is to mourn
To counterfeit a true forlorn,
Does shower more tears and sigh more deep,
Then he whose breast does inly weep.
So a close scorn swells most of all
In praises Hyperbolicall.
Let me then conclude, if your universal medicine had traveled through as
many guts, as Mr Coriats shoes have trampled Countries, it could not return
laded with more See the Odcombian banquet.
worthy praises, nor more praises of worthies. Your merits are equal, and
therefore your praises may well be equalled. He and only he with one pair of
shoes, or santals (a peerless pair and never pared) has trodden out the
vnpaced spaces of this worlds universe. You, and you alone, with one alone
medicine, yea, with one alone, and one your own, do cure all the wide worlds
maladies. As therefore the Poet does determine between the two Sheepheards,
contending for the waged heiffer; so may we justly say, or rather sing,
concerning your friend Odcombe, and your self, Vitula tu dignus and hic.
You both deserve nor part, nor half,
But each apart to have the calfe.


Is it possible so many Worthies (if not in jest) should with such amazed
wonderment spend so many immoderate praises in a matter out of the element of
their own skill, only upon good successes, or issues by your self conceived,
without true knowledge of the cause or reason, which only discerns and
puts just difference between an apparent good, and an appearing only? We
can not think so unworthily of men so worthy. We may rather with good manners
impute it unto your own well known vain glorious corrupting, or straining of
their facility.

CAP. V.
THus much in general, concerning the defection of all your testimonies for
the proof of worthiness in your Aurum potabile, to be authorized, allowed,
and approved. Now I descend from the insufficiency of all unto the falsehood of
some. I will begin with that trinity of letters first marching in the
Apology the three first domestical testimonies. The maine end and scope in
them is the praise of Aurum potabile, unto whose worship is sacrificed Dr C.
his unjust slander and reproach. The partial arrogating unto the one, and
injurious derogating from the other. I will now make evident for the honor and
vendication of truth. I will not, according unto the Apologist his example, ^e
over busy to entermeddle with men, and matters out of my own knowledge, nor
rashly and inconsiderat^ly to p ecipitate my self into particular quarrels,
the subject, the circumstance, the occasion, and persons unknown, as in the
three first domestic testimonies he has done. I do therefore omit all other
testimonies, and will only undertake those, whose authors and matter is known
unto my self, by the errors and mistaking therein detected, displaying the
likelihood, contingence, and possibility of the same defects, and insufficiency
in many, if not in most, or all the rest.

The first domestical testimony is this.
Worthy and learned friend, I write unto you later then I intended, because I
thought it not fit to deliver my opinion before manifold experience made in a
matter of such worth and consequence. Experimentum fallax, as our Master
Hipocrates teaches. But now I will briefly show you the virtue and excellency
of your medicine.

The second trial that I made thereof, was upon a very worshipful Gentleman
Sr William Samwell knight. He had a burning fever with great violence of
continual heat, so that he utterly lost all sleep. He had withal a weakness
in his kidneyes, and could not make water. Sundry Glisters were administered
unto him, Purgations, vomits, and he was also let blood, all which, in my
observation, were so far from giving him any ease, that the disease did still
grow stronger, and all the Symptoms, or accidents every day worse and worse
and more grievous. I persuaded the giving of your medicine. But at the first I
could not obtain that he should take a new and unknown thing. At last by the
importunity of his friends, and the necessity of his disease still increasing,
he yielded and took it. In an instant almost he felt a gentle remission of
his heat and a mild cooling, his spirit comforted, his kidneyes strengthened,
so that he made water in a reasonable good quantity. Since which time he never
ceased to extol this medicine, though in troth, having been long afflicted
with a most violent disease, he has not as yet fully recovered his strength.

Your loving friend John Marks.
Gayton the 10th of September. 1611.
The refutation of the first domestical testimony.
THe disease of the Gent. concerning whom, the controversy in these
testimonies does arise, is here described to be a burning seaver. The remedies
likewise used by Dr Co. are set down to have been purging, bleeding,
vomiting; unto both these both parts apart, agree and acknowledge the report
true. The difference is, whether the chief desert and worth in that imperfect
cure which followed, is truly and properly to be given and granted unto the
forementioned remedies, or unto Aurum p^tabile coming after; or rather
unseasonably interrupting them. The author of this testimony tells us, that
the first remedies, namely purging, bleeding, vomiting, were so far from
giving ease, that the disease and accidents grew worse. After the taking of
Aurum potabile, there was a remission of pain, the spirits were comforted,
parts oppressed relieved. From hence we may easily collect his opinion, viz.
that Aurum potabile deserved before the other remedies, the praise and
pre-eminence. Dr Co. has, and does oppose it. The maine argument in the
behalf of Aurum potabile (as you may here see) is the patients ease and
refreshing, without any perfect recovery or cure, as witnesses the Author
himself of this testimony. The argument in the behalf of the other named
remedies of purging, bleeding, Vomitio praecordiorum impuritatem, supervacuos
humores in ventriculi capaci^ate, and tunicis haerentis, a cava iecoris and
lienis, and ex pancria synceros elicit, quo splerunq. nec a hiera, nec aliud
vehementissimum medicamentum exturbare potest. Fernei de Meth. Med. lib. 3 ca.
3. Hyppocrai. Aph. 17. lib 4. Aph. 18. lib. 4. Gal. in lib. 1. Hypp. de Morb.
vul^ar* sect. 55. 56.
vomiting, is reason, and the euer-knowne property, ordinary custom, nature,
and infallible proof and experience of their usual necessity and manifest
benefit in all burning Febrium ardentium incendia servore vehementem ex
tinguit, accelerat vene sectio. Interiores instammat^ones idem auxilii genus
initio radicitus eruit. Fern^l de Meth. Med l. 2. c. 13. Gal de curatione per
venae sectionem, 18. 20. 7. sect. 11 19, De Meth. Med. l. 11. se. 15.
fevers, in all inward inflammations of back, kidneyes here mentioned, as also
all other parts. Now mark Mr Marks his Logic. After bleeding and purging,
the disease and accidents grow worse. After Aurum potabile, they were presently
mitigated. Ergo the first remedies did no good, and the last remedy did the
good. Stay your gallop (swift-witted Sir) pause and know that ease and goodness
are seldom necessary companions. Pain is sometimes more truly profitable,
though more seldom welcome, It falls out in diverse cases and respects, the
better the worse, and the worse the better. As in true parsimonie, cost is
sometimes better spent then spared; so in many diseases pain and anxietie is
better borne then forborne. Observe your own argument once again. After Auru^
potabile, the disease and accidents were mitigated; after purgation and
phlebotomie, they grew worse. Ergo, Aurum potabile did good, phlebotomie and
purgation did no good. In like manner you may thus reason. My Stomach is sick
after meat, and good nourishment, and best when fasting, therefore fasting does
good, and good nourishment does no good. In the same kind is this reasoning. A
good conscience is often sick and troubled, an ill conscience is often, or for the
most part, merry, and without trouble. Ergo a good c^nscience does no good, and
an ill conscience does good. As in the first you shall prove an evil Physician
thus reasoning, so in the other an impious and ungodly divine. Are these things
wonders unto you? Do you not know that there is a growing better unto sense,
which is growing worse in reason? Does not a good in one kind, prognosticat an
evil in another? Are you ignorant of a false-seeming, momentanie, uncertain,
and vain good? Is a languishing, and a long continued disease and danger,
flattered with palliation, momentanie refreshings, and ease, good? Is the
pain, patience, labor and anxietie that purchafeth perfect health and
deliverance therefrom, evil? In the weakness of your argument, you may see a
manifest argument of weakness in your self; The weakness both of your argument
and yourselfe, learn then by this argument following, against which, in the
judgment of the learned, you shall not be able to answer one word, one
syllable, (...).

Whosoever does draw a reason or proof of goodness in remedies from their
prospering success alone, or does draw a reason or proof of their illnes and
unfitness, from their want of fortunate events or operation, he is in himself
and in his reason, weak and ignorant. But Mr Marks does draw a reason or
proof of goodness in Aurum potabile, from the prospering success alone: and
does also draw a reason of the illnes and unfitness of Phlebotomie and
purgation, from their want of fortunate events or operation. Ergo Mr Marks in
this testimony, is both in his reason and in himself, weak and ignorant.

The Mayor is Hyppocrates Aph. 27. lib. 2. His quae sine certa ratione,
deprehensaque causa levant, acquiescendum non est, neque vereri admodum deijs,
qua abs reprava apparent. Horum enim plurae sunt instabilia.

The Minor is manifest in the testimony it self unto any that reads it. The
conclusion cannot be denied in any rule or reason. Conclusiones negari non
oportet. In this Syllogisticall, and Scholasticall complete armor does Mr
Marks compel us to oppose, while he will needs make proof of his wits upon
us poor Physicians, and so bravely challenge us at our own weapons. Behold
notwithstanding the profound reason, whereupon he bears himself so lofty
and confidently, in the end jadeth, and here leaves his Masters lame learning
in the mire. As I have here manifested Mr Marks his reason vain and weak, by
which he would extol Aurum potabile, and depresse the praise and worth of the
other remedies, so will I next prove manifestly and briefly, that he himself
and his Aurum potabile, were ignorant and injurious unto the patient, in
intetrupting, and causing to be discontinued so abruptly, purgation and
Phlebotomie, howsoever after their use, the disease and accidents grew worse.

I dare not encounter so learned a Clarke without a Syllogism, thus then I
reason. In every disease where the same reason and cause does remain the same,
of the continuance of the same remedies, there those remedies ought not to be
discontinued, howsoever after their use, the disease and accidents grow worse.

But in the forementioned disease of the named Gent. in in this testimony, the
same reason and cause did still remain the same of phlebotomie and purgation:
Ergo phlebotomie and purgation ought not to have been discontinued, although
the disease and accidents grew worse. The Mayor is Hyppocrates 52. Aph lib. 2.
Omnia facienti secundum rationem, licet non succedat secundum rationem, non
ideo desistendum est, dummodo manet quod a principio visum est.

The Minor is Mr Parsons of Sayton, who in his Epistle to the Apo^ogie, says,
Neque per Purgationes, Clysteres, Vomitum, sanguinis missionem, incendium
mitigare potuit. Morbus indies ingravescebat* that is, the burning heat, the
flame or inward inflammation was nothing cooled, but the disease, (which he
himself confesses a burning fever) and his accidents, grew worse and worse,
which are manifest causes and reasons, indicating both Purgation and
Phlebotomie. Thus the Minor appears to be the Parson his own, and the Mayor
his great Masters, for so forsooth he professes Hyppocrates in the English
Copy of this testimony. As he cannot for shame deny himself in the one, so
can he not be so perfidious in the other, as to deny his Master. The conclusion
therefore does stand inviolat and infallible. The Syllogism is legal and
regular in the second figure, and couched in Camestres. I do now therefore
boldly proclaim and divulge with authority, reason, rule, and manifest proof,
that Mr Marks in this testimony is an ignorant undertaker, that his
insinuation into the Patient by Aurum potabile (howsoever pleasing his ease)
was injurious and unseasonable, that the general remedies beforementioned and
administered by D. Co. (howsoever by the Parson slighted and vilified) were in
art and reason more proper, pertinent and material unto the Patients health
and recoverie, if untimely they had not by Aurum potabile, and by Mr Marks his
unlearned intrusion, been discontinued. Here happily the Parson will object: If
there were so manifest a reason of iterated phlebotomie and purgation, why did
Dr C. omit when he did phlebotomize and purge, to do it unto a more sufficient
module and measure? Why did not he thereby prevent the use of such iteration in
his administration thereof? Understand (worthy Reader) that Mr Marks had
purged and let blood the Patient before D. Co. came unto him, and was also gone
from him. The quantities which he had evacuated in either kind, being unto Dr
Co. unknown, discretion imposed a caution upon him, to perform that which
remained, rather under then over competence. The reformation of this safe and
needful error, afterward the immediate abrupt succeeding of Auru^ potabile did
furiously kick at, and reject. How necessary it was at that time to have been
done again, is before proved, and the truth thereof is confirmed by the
following imperfect Crisis, through the defect thereof, and by the plentiful
decumbence of humors, and painful swellings of the nether parts (whereof is
neither want nor obscurity of witnesses) as also by the patients long
continuance languishingly sick the space of half an year together,
notwithstanding, the fair ease and pleasure done by Aurum potabile. His
languishing so long is evident, reckning from Dr C. his departure from the
patient in March going before, unto the date of this testimony September 10.
after which time he was not as yet fully recovered says this testimony. The
Parson may happily as yet object farther. The strength of nature was not able to
bear or endure the iteration of the former remedies when Aurum potabile came
with his succor and refreshing. The contrary hereto did offer it self unto
every vulgar and common eye. For it is undoubted in common sense and reason,
that the same ability which was sufficient to endure that expressed tedious and
painful length of a languishing sickness, by the imperfect Crisis arising
from the imperfect euacuations, and of the dangerous decumbence of humors,
perpetually vexing and launcing the nether parts with perpetual fear and
doubt, It is undoubted (I say) that this strength might have better endured a
moderate evacuation in short time done with facility, and without difficulty,
or danger. The likely good reason and use of such evacuations, the words of
this testimony do offer apparent, that is a burning fever, continual
estuation, burning, boiling, all want of rest and sleep in the Gentleman;
inward flame, or inflammation by these words in the Latin copy expressed,
Ardens febris, Aestus continuus, flagratio, incendium. Unto these we might add
(though not here mentioned) a plethoricall body, urine red intense, thick,
troubled. As these were manifest reasons and causes, moving, and urging
phlebotomie and purgation, so that these still remained the same after their
second use, besides their first known moderation, and small quantity, it is
evident by these words in the first testimony before mentioned, Neque per
Clisteres, Vomitum, Purgationem, sanguinis missionem, quae omnia tentata sunt,
incendium mitigari potuit, that is, Notwithstanding purging, vomiting, bleeding
(says M. Marks) the heat, the flame or burning, could not be quenched. It may
here happily be objected and imagined that without Aurum potabile giving strength
and refreshing, the patient could not have endured either the languishing long
sickness (as he did) nor the iteration of any the former general remedies, if
they had been continued. If this be granted, yet does it not excuse his foul
error and ignorance, who because Aurum potabile did give this comfort and
ability, therefore he perversely and ignorantly rejected other remedies, no
less necessary in other kinds, as was this in that. Neither is it to be
doubted that if Aurum potabile were able to enable nature, to endure the
terror and torment of the fore mentioned languishing sickness, but that in
reason other remedies of the same kind, and of the same created use, might
have done the same, howsoever at this time, and in this particular Aurum
potabile alone happened to be acceptable, and therefore had the opportunity solely
unto it self. It may happily yet be further enquired what manifest indication
there was of vomit before mentioned. I need not give thereof any other reason,
then that inseparable accident or symptom of a burning fever; namely the
excessive ebullition of putrified choler abounding in the stomach and liver,
which was in this patient manifest, accompanied with that stoppage of the back
and kidneyes, by the Parson witnessed, which did indicate that revulsion and
deriuation, which usually and manifestly vomit does perform. The Parson will
happily as yet reply. If phlebotomie and purgation were so needful to be again
iterated, why did not the other learned, and worthy succeeding Doctors insist
in that course? The answer is twofold. First I do by my own proof and
experience know, that the hope of their preualence therein against Aurum
potabile, and his preiudicate anticipation, was impossible. Secondly, I know
it manifest, and out of doubt, that the decidence from the sharpness of the
disease, and the settling of humors, and their decumbence into the nether
parts, or at least their irreuocable entrance into the way of decumbence,
before the other two Doctors coming, did deny unto them the opportunity of the
use of those remedies, their season being by delaying now passed, and a new
indication offering another and different counsel through Aurum potabile his
preoccupation, and tyrannous usurpation of their due time and season. The
parson may as yet move a doubt, whether Aurum potabile be not in it self able
to supply the use of purgation and phlebotomy? The contrar hereto is manifest,
first by the proof and trial thereof made, wherein by his own testimony it
is evident, that after the forsaking of the former remedies of phlebotomy and
purgat on, and the adherence unto Aurum potabile, there immediately followed a
plentiful decumbence of humors, swelling and possessing diverse parts, a long
and languishing time. Secondly, that Aurum potabile cannot be able to perform
or supply the use of the former remedies, is evident, for that no particular
medicine of what universality soever, has ever as yet been found by
experience, or known by reason, to draw the blood electiuely, or immediately,
in the proper mass and substance from the several fit veins. For this cause
therefore, where the mass and substance of the blood is either corrupted, or
is grown an importable burden unto nature, Aurum potabile can neither
certainly, nor speedily (as is often requisite) remove it, or euacuate it.
Concerning purgation also, since it is manifest that the purgative virtue, or
quality, is a proper, certain, immediate, and ordinary operation of such
things as are in their true nature purgatiues; Aurum potabile except, proved
among the kind and nature of purgatiues (which cannot agree with the nature of
so perfect and absolute cordial) cannot, nor does not in it self purge or
euacuate. It may be objected, how came it then to pass, that in this Gentleman
it is said to purge so easily, pleasantly and plentifully? Hereto we answer,
that this purging issued not from any certain, or ordinary property in Aurum
potabile, though then, or at some other times it may so happen thereto. For
while Aurum potabile, happily as a Cordial, dispelled from the heart offensive
humors, some of them it is likely, through their abundance, might fall into
the common sink or passage, and so by accident be purged away; but this kind
of purging is uncertain, doubtful, and not equally, according to use and
necessity, sufficient against the fullness and turgescence of humors, which
unto a certain module and measure require their certain remoueall and
euacuation. That Aurum potabile has properly his place among Cordialls, both
all general descriptions, and also the Apologist his own particular
confession in many places does prove. And thus objections satisfied, the fixed
manifestation remains of M. Parsons ignorance in this testimony, as also his
insolence in undertaking above his reach, prowdly daring beyond his station,
without any likelihood or liuelyhood of performance. How void he is of true
judgment herein, as also of any lively sap of true learning, the demonstration
has not been obscure. Now as his presumption in his supposed learning,
overdaring beyond the slender muscles, is fowly fallen unto the ground: so let
us view his unnecessary, dishonest, uncivil, and crafty dealing, which has
solely ministered the matter, and occasion of all the scandal. Let me put you
in mind M. Parson, that the Gentleman mentioned was first your patient. You
had purged him and once let him blood before Dr C. came unto him, and were gone
from him. After Dr C. was come, had again purged him, vomited, and once more
let him blood (the supposed doubt and fear of those remedies being past) you
then secretly came unto him again, secretly communed, and gave unto him Aurum
potabile, were you not herein a Fox? Non redoles sed oles: It is no borrowed
smell, it is your own rank savor. Let me yet farther tell you, that after
Aurum potabile was thus secretly given by Master Marks unto the patient,
immediately the patient, together with his wife (contrary unto their former
courteous and friendly usage of Dr C. before, in his many fortunate employments
amongst them many years together) now accuse him unto his face of erroneous
judging and practicing in this one particular, with constant asseueration, that
this assertion was avouched by some, both honest and learned, whom they would
not name. No other reputed learned, or any Physician, but M. Marks his marked
self, had as yet been with them. Thus remarkable was M. Marks his second
secret undertaking and return unto the patient. Let me yet once more rub your
galled memory. When upon the former just reason of suspicion Dr C. did write
unto M. Marks, requiring him to justify, or deny with the patient the former
imputation, his answer was by letter (the copy whereof is to be seen at the
end of the confutation of this testimony) his answer (I say) was that in his
understanding Dr C. had proceeded according unto art and reason, as are his own
express words. If M. Marks be an honest and plain dealing man, let him
reconcile that letter with this testimony. The letter professes D. C. his
counsel and endeavors with the forementioned Gent. to have been according to
art and reason. This testimony attributes altogether unto Aurum potabile, and
extenuateth, casts behind, or rather accuses the means and remedies by D.
C. administered, as after which the disease grew worse. Your meaning herein (M.
Marks) is plain, but plainness was not your meaning. If you did dissemble
in your writing unto D. C. it was very dishonest and pusillanimous. If you
therein did not dissemble, why do you here oppose that which you then did
write? Your opposition is manifest; first, in making your self in the
Apology, the Captain and leader unto the contradictory Epistles of the
Gentlemen: Secondly, by the same song or Paean, which perpetually in all places
you sing unto the ptaise of your Aurum potabile: Thirdly, by your divulging the
Apology in my knowledge, wherein against your former letter, and your
profession therein, you have consented and concurred with the Gentlemen in the
publishing of their deceived testimonies, unto the prejudice of D. C. his good
deserts, and better meriting at their hands, acknowledged by your own writing.
Lastly, your contrary affection and opposition unto your former letter and
profession, is manifest by your ever since continued custom and practice of
the same abuse in all places of your access, for the venting and glory of
Aurum potabile, perverting thereby the cures of all other men by what other
means soever, while by the insinuation of supreme felicity therein, you
swallowe up time and opportunity, discreet respect or care of all other mature
or due counsel in any other kind. Plato and Aristotle have taught you better
divinity. As for humanity, this your practice does prove you never educate
thereto, nor touched therewith. Touching your threefold learning, your treble
profession, of a Physician, a Chemist, a Divine. Give me leave to acquaint you
what Martial writes of one Attalius a busy fellow much like your self.

Componis belle mimos Epigrammata belle.
Bellus Grammaticus, bellus es Astrologus.
Et belle cantas, and saltas Attale belle.
Bellus es art lyrae, bellus es art pilae.
Nil been cum facias (facis attamen omnia belle)
Vic dicam quid sis? Magnus es Ardelio.
Attall can compose and rehearse
Both Epigrammes, Mimikes, and Verse,
Somewhat in Grammar he is seen,
And in Astrology does ween;
Somewhat at song, harp, dance, and bal^*
In brief by somewhats he is all.
But shall I tell you and not spare,
In all these somes summed you are:
In no some good, in some few pretty,
In busy meddling only witty.
You would one while seem a Physician, now a Chemist, then a Divine, but like
Attall at all you give unto the world no true evidence of the price and
estimation of your worth in either, except in the sale and praise of Aurum
potabile at a second hand. Since then you will needlessly play the Physician,
give me leave a little also to play the necessary divine. Let me convert my
speech (Mr Marks) for your conversion, from your formerly proved ignorant
practice (though by the Patients opinion and good event salued) from your grand
dissembling, from your open denying, and secret affirming the same contrary
thing, from your vain trust in such close and covert wrong, from your
guilefull hoping to hide your dishonest drifts, from your busy deviation out of
your own calling. Like unto that creature which Aristotle calls (...), and
Cicero terms ancipitem bestiam (that is, a mixed, imperfect, or a mongrell
beast) you shiftingly live a miscellaneous life, and being by sacred vows unto
God and his service consecrate, you intrude your busy ignorance into the
office and property of other men, and obtrude your mercenarie counsel into
every cure almost of every Physician. Were it equal, think you, that
Physicians should at pleasure, in Churches and pulpits, preach and pray, yea
though happily they might sometimes perform unto God no less devout worship and
adoration, and unto men no less acceptable duty? Divines would tell you it
were profane, and justly. If this intrusion in them were profane, certainly
yours is no less inhumane. It fitteth you not to intermit your bounden duty
of assiduous and entire study, and endeavor, in your own vocation, nor to be
so ignorant of the weight and worth of your own profession, as to ouer-value
your whole worthles self, as more then sufficient for that calling, unto which
no man's sufficiency was ever sufficient. It were in you a more proper praise
and study, diligently to compare your own apparent meanness and defects, with
the eminence and excellence of other more learned and reverent Divines, and to
borrow your unnecessary vacation from your own vocation, to perfect your
imperfections therein. Then should you not in your own calling so often rob God
of his magnificate, nor sing out of your calling unto man Magnifico in scarce
good Latin, or at least true herauldie, as you do line 8, of your testimony in
the Latin Copy. Then should you not be at leisure to serve two Masters, nor to
call Hippocrates your great Master, as you are not ashamed to do in the same
testimonic in the English Copy. God requires his servants totally and wholly
to be his. Hippocrates also can very well spare you. Consider then, it is not
malice or envy that thus reproves and admonishes you, but your own unjust
wrong and provocation, equal complaint, and the Laws of God and men: unto
which therefore, I will now commit and leave you, for your correction,
reformation, and amendment. Worthy Reader, how much the sinews and strength of
this first domestical testimony are shrunk and weakened, I appeal unto thy
just censure, as also how far therein Mr Marks has taken his marks amiss.
I will now only present unto thee a true Copy of his dissembling letter unto
Dr C. forementioned, before, according to promise, I come to unfold and view
the other two succeeding Testimonies.

The true Copy of Mr Marks his letter unto Dr C. according unto the original
in Dr C. his hand.
Good Master Dr, I hope you will not impute or lay any blame upon me for
visiting Sr W. S. being requested thereto; or for commending that medicine,
which many of good worth have allowed and commended. As for wronging you by
such imputations as you speak of, assure your self that I am far from it.
For I must yield to you your right, as to a man learned in your faculty. And I
know how unfit it is for me to contradict your course, and do in my
understanding think that you have proceeded according unto Art and reason. And
therefore let me request you to conceive better of me, then so to have me in
suspicion upon that challenge, which you complain of, for I protest that I
have always thought worthily of you, and so rest always

Your loving friend John Marks.


It may seem not easily understood, why before I taxed Mr Marks his Latin and
Herauldrie. It was for that in his Latin Copy he ignorantly and simply gives
the Epithete of Magnificus, Magnifici est in quocunque genere, quod faciat
magnifice id splendideque facere. Arist. Eth. lib. 4. cap. 2. Inter liberaiem
and magnificum, hoc interest, quod hic in magnis, ille in parvis cernitur.
Arist. Eth. l. 2. c. 2.
as an ordinary style to every Knight, whereas Magnificence is properly
attributed unto Princes, and Princely sumptuousness. Because it seems not
just to reprove Latin without Latin, nor his but by my own, I will give him a
taste of my Latin, until I can better feast him therewith.

Magnificus non est quem magni tu facis, ipse
Nam sic magnifico milite mayor eris.
Magnificat qui non intelligis and legis, usque
Qui fici faciet Magnifice faciet.
I have bestowed upon you the Latin (Mr Marks) now give me leave to give my
contrymen the sense in their own language also.

Were it within your own extents
(Sir) to create Magnificents,
Your self would be the first create,
Old Adam sure would come too late
Your martialling Magnifico
Is Herauldrie, whereby we know,
You daily sing Magnificat
And know not the significat.
So dull a brain, so base a sense,
To scorn is true Magnif^cence has only high and heroic thoughts, not
looking down upon mean objects. Animo amplo res magnas and excelsas
administrat, and honorifice cogitat. Cicero.
Magnificence.
Since I have begun, it will be now fit before I depart, that I bid farewell
likewise unto Mr Marks his triple learning, in the learned Language. Thus then
saluteth him the same Author, Quod Chymicam, quod Divinam, Medicamque facis rem,
Rem facis omnino praetereaque nihil.
Sed tua res non est. Nam debes rapta Sacerdos,
Quae rapis Ardelio, si been vota facis.
A gainefull trade you make Physic,
Thrive by the Divine and Chymicke,
In two merely you are carnal,
And in but one spiritual.
It Is two to one (we may fear it)
The world and gain choke the splrit.
The gain thus got, you back do owe
From whence you stole it, and then know
A true Divine does not well pray,
Till that is stolen he first repay.


The second Testimony.
Mr Doctor Anthony, though I have no acquaintance with you at all, yet being an
eyewitness of your general charity extended to the whole world, in bringing
to the use of men the most excellent quintessence for the rectifying of Nature,
that the world (as I think) yet ever had: I am thereby emboldened to presume
of your favor for some few grains of the same, which for the several
operations that I have seen thereof in two special friends of mine, both at
the point of death, shall in my esteem for ever be held in most precious
account. For you shall understand that about a twelve months since, I came to
a brother-in-lawes house of mine, one Sr W. S. Knight in Northamptonshire, whom
I found in great extremity of sickness, and thereby so weakened with the
continual torments he was in, that all which were about him feared him
greatly. He had three Doctors in Physic, yet could none of them minister any
thing to him, to give him any ease of his torments, but rather tormented him
more; until at last himself remembered that one Mr Marks had commended this
memorable medicine of yours, which being brought, he took it, and it wrought
so miraculous an effect within the compass of two hours, as neither he or I
ever saw before. For it instantly delivered him of his pain, which seemed
before intolerable. It gave him rest, which for many days and nights before he
had been barred of. It drew on an appetite by little and little, all meat
before being loathsome unto him. And which is most marvailous, whereas formerly
by his medicines excoriating those passages, he seemed to endure great torture
upon every provocation to the stools he had now in the day and night five
stools, and every provocation was now as delightful unto him, as the other
were tormenting. Then did one of his Physicians advise, that now he should take
some Cordial, to assist the faculties of nature, being very weak. But when
this was propounded unto my brother by his wife, he utterly refused it, the
Physician bearing him in hand, that it was nothing else but Unicorns horn,
Bezoar stone, and such like. But after taking thereof, my brother fell again
into his former tortures, and more vehement then before, whereby he was
enforced the selfsame night to send again unto Mr Marks, who relieved him,
as formerly he had done. Since which time (by Gods blessing) he has continued
well. After this manner an obstructed body was cured. It has wrought a great
effect in S. John Hunt Knight of Leichestershire, who late was very low brought
into a flux, together with a burning fever, and being near unto death, and
void of all other help, he was relieved by the selfsame medicine only,
and perfectly restored. M. Doctor Ashworth, who partly had seen, and partly
heard these miraculous effects of this your medicine, lying dangerously sick
at Oxford this last Summer, sent his son in very greatest haste to Mr Marks
for some portion of this your medicine: his said son feared that at his
return he should not find him living. But thanks be to God he lives, and is
well, which is to be attributed unto your medicine, although peradventure he
will not acknowledge the same, etc.

Kingthorpe in Leicestershire, January 20. 1612.
The refutation of the second Testimony.
IT may be wondered (gentle Reader) that gentlemen of reputed worth and
understanding, should so much disparage their own esteem, as in a profession
or faculty, wherein they themselves are neither enabled, or in reason or
decorum allowed, should be so confident as to oppose publicly their private
opinion against any man in his own Art, wherein he professes, and is able to
prove by infallible knowledge and demonstration, and has daily proof and
exercise thereof. The reason hereof (as I friendly in the behalf of the
Gentleman, with good reason interpret) was their kind trust unto the broken
reed of Marks his shivered learning, and his iuggling transportation thereby,
of their imaginations, through the flattering momentanie ease and pleasing,
found in Aurum potabile. As therefore I have in the refutation of Marks his
testimony, given demonstration of his ignorance therein, so will I in these
testimonies, declare their errors and mistaking; from him, not intending the
men, but the matter, nor purposing their offense, but my own just defense. In
this second testimony, first view (good Reader) how confidently it avoucheth an
excoriation of the passages by other medicines, before Aurum potabile came. The
quality of the medicines were unknown unto them, whether carrying any
possibility of any such effect in their nature and custom. As for the
supposed effect and excoriation it self, reason did give no demonstration
thereof, and therefore they cannot affirm it from any knowledge or certainty.
The outward sense could thereof give no testimony, because it cannot pierce
into the inward and hidden passages within. Likelihood or probability thereof,
artificial conjecture could not afford unto them, because Art is not subject
unto them, nor within their reach. And therefore without probability they
publish bare confidence and their own conceit. Now (worthy Reader) see
again, how affection transporting without judgment, does offer manifest
contradictions unto it self. Here it is said, that after the giving of Aurum
potabile, the Patient was immediately refreshed, and his obstructed body from
that time cured. This appears manifestly contradicted by Mr Marks his
testimony, who says, that after Aurum potabile (which was given in March) the
Gentleman continued grievously sick until the 10. of September following, and
after that time. Another contradiction like this, observe here also. Three
Doctors of Physic could not minister any thing to give unto the patient ease
(says this testimony.) Observe (worthy Reader) the incongruity hereof. The
one of these three Doctors was Dr C. (so by them styled.) The other two
succeeded after him, that is, the second upon Dr C. his point of departure; the
third after it. Aurum potabile was given unto the Patient while as yet Dr C.
was present, as appears by the third testimony, where it was said, that
after Dr C. was gone unto his rest, the Patient in the night did send unto M.
Marks for Aurum potabile. After the receiving of this Aurum potabile, says
this testimony, the Patient was relieved as formerly, since which time, by
Gods blessing, he has continued well. The third testimony confirms the
same, saying that immediately after Aurum potabile, the Patient found
alleviation, corroboration, and operation, as his soul would desire. If this
be true, why are the two last Doctors accused for giving no ease unto the
Patient. It appears that the Patient by their own testimonies, had taken
Aurum potabile before they came, and that Aurum potabile had relieved him,
corroborated and operated, as the Patients soul could desire. If Aurum
potabile had relieved him before, what need or use was there to be expected of
that office from the Physicians, and how injuriously and unjustly are they
taxed. Again, if it were true, that after Aurum potabile, the Patient was
relieved, and continued after well, as says this testimony, and had such
corroboration and operation thereby, as he could desire (as faith the third
testimony) why did they then send after this professed satisfaction, given
first for the second Doctor, and after for the third, after* Dr C. was gone?
Any man may here see, how inconsiderate passion does confute it self. Now once
more (good Reader) observe the maine complaint and moan of these testimonies,
namely forsooth, that the Gentleman had no ease so speedily and promptly as he
desired. It is no wonder nor unusual in sick men, to find uncertainty of
benefit and relief in remedies applied. Time, and their own patience, as well
as medicines, do work therein. The sick in the variation and interchange of
many excellent medicines, finds often little ease, and sometimes by hap in
unhoped, unaffected, and unexpected means, obtains present and unthought
delivery. It is not in the Physicians power always to foresee, where God in
his secret decree has set and appointed the time, manner, or particular
instrument of ease and deliverance. That is unto humane reason and
understanding casual. His upright and reasonable endeavor, and not the
felicity, or infelicity of the medicine, is the proper, true, and thank-worthy
merit. Neither is it the Physicians so proper office, so much to attend the
Patients pleasing ease, as to intend the cure of the disease. Many pains are
necessary, though grievous, and seeming intolerable. If the patient shall be
always presently pleased with ease, there shall never be Vomits given unto
sick men, nor purging administered, that shall grieve and make weak the sick,
nor shall any man be let blood until he faint, which in many and diverse cases
is so necessary, that without it can be no life. In these cases the Patient is
no competent judge, nor ought floting fancy, wanting Art and true reason for
Pylot, make sense his card. That thou may more perfectly and infallibly know
the partial affection of these testimonies (ingenious Reader) see here lastly
in this testimony, a needless diligence and officiousness toward Aurum
potabile, in the oblique nomination of a learned, grave, and reverend Doctor
unto no use or purpose. In a great exigent of sickness forsooth, he did send
from Oxford for Aurum potabile. What is this unto the matter? In extremity of
sickness, who knows not, that the most wise and learned that ever lived, do
oft-times want their free election and apprehension, being distracted by
sickness, not only from their own true worth, but from themselves. It is not
therefore material, whether the Doctor upon his own sudden motion, or others
mention, did send or invite this golden guest. The sending does not necessarily
infer the use; nor the use, the commendations: and whether the Doctor
himself do attribute ought thereto, the blazers themselves do there doubt,
as appears by their own words. That we may give unto them herein, complete
and undoubted satisfaction; I will here insert that worthy Doctor his own
answer unto me therein, solicited by my letter therewith, craving his
judicious view of my reply unto Doctor Anthony his false, injurious, and
scandalous Apology. This is the true Copy of his Answer.

Salutem in Christo.
Sr, I have seen and perused your answer to a late Apology written by D.
Anthony, I think it worthy to be published, and convenient to be printed,
both for the maintenance and defense of your estimation and credit, which in
that Apology seems to be aimed at, and for the better information of them,
who by the superficial arguments and incredible vaunts made in that book for
the universality and efficacy of his Aurum potabile, may be deluded and drawn
to an undeserved admiration of it. The vniu^rsality of this medicine is well
and sufficiently refuted by you. The efficacy thereof is set forth with such
words and commemoration of miraculous effects, as to a natural Philosopher and
sensible Physician, and to any judicious person may seem to surpass humane
reason. I think not that miracles are in these times so frequent and many of
the proposed examples are not so miraculous, as they seem. For belike D.
Anthony would have us believe, that who so has taken of his Aurum potabile and
escaped death, escaped by the virtue and efficacy thereof. This is a fallacy,
non causa pro causa. I purpose not now to examine other particular examples
wherein his fallacies may be displayed, but because I my self am brought in to
be a spectacle in this stage, I would make it known both by word and writintg,
hat I was sick 1612. as M. Hen. Skipwith writes. I fell sick in the latter
end of August. A semitertian ague possessed me, and grievously afflicted me (as
the condition of it is) with faintness and weakness, besides other accidents
usual to agues as lothsomnesse and distaste of all kind of meats and drinks,
vomiting, unequal and greiuous distempers, loss of sleep, suppression of
urine, lightness of head in the heat of the fit. In time of some ecstasy, or
otherwise, upon the famous mention and commendation which not long before I had
heard Sr William Samwell knight, give to Aurum potabile for present releiuing
him in extreme faintness, and qualifying his outrageous distempers; I sent my
son, or he went to Sr William Samwell for some of that medicine, and by his
means to M. Marks: he got some for his money, and at that time also some of
my friends procured some of it from D. Anthony. So I did take some of it twice,
but (as God knows) with so little fruit, either of ease of my maladies, or
cure of my ague, that their grieuousnesse increased many days after, and
continued from that time viz. 14h September until the end of October,
notwithstanding all the aid that many my good friends, as learned (in my
judgment) as Doctor Anthony, and more learned in Physic (I dare say) then M.
Marks, could afford unto me. I thank God I recovered yet hardly and slowly. I
marvel that M. Skipwith does so confidently write, that my life and health is
to be attributed to D. Anthonies medicine, seeing nether presently I found any
ease by it, nor in forty days after any beginning of recovery or declination
of my disease. And although the 20 of January following I was alive, as M.
Skipwith writes, yet I was not well, as he avouches, for many impressions and
infirmities of that ague did then stick grievously in my body, and long time
afterward, so that for the most part of the spring following, and of the next
Autumn, I continually used Physical rules. He notwithstanding argues thus. I
did take Aurum potabile, and therefore thereby I recovered. This is an Elench
and fallacious argument, such as are many of those which by testimonies are
recited in D. Anthonies Apology. Whereas M. Henry Skipwith says, that I had
partly seen, and partly heard the miraculous effects of this medicine. I have
often said, and do now protest, that I never yet did see any miraculous effect
of it, except he will thus argue. I did see S. William Samwell, on whom it was
thought to work miraculously, therefore I did see the miraculous work and
effect of this medicine. Elenchus est compositionis.

Whereas the same Gentleman says, that peradventure I will not acknowledge
that my recovery is to be imputed to this medicine: He calls my good mind
and thankfulness toward God and man into question, beyond any commission
known to me to be granted unto him. And I confess that in this duty of
thankfulness for Gods merciful and bountiful blessings and benefits, as in
other duties I have been and am defective. But I see no cause, why in writing
and in print I should be noted and published faulty or suspected, especially
in a matter which is rather put upon me, then true in it self, and by them who
can challenge no more sincerity and holiness to themselves (for ought I
know) then other men that live under the burden and infection of humane
condition. I did never give to my remembrance, by word, writing, or usage,
occasion of offense to M. Henry Skipwith, yet it seems that he had a mind to
set upon me particularly and by name in the end of that his letter, when as
covertly, and without name he had taxed, or rather wounded me with others
without name in the fore part of it. S. William Samwell fell sick about the end
of March, or beginning of April, 1611. M. Marks was his first Physician, and
used remedies of purging and phlebotomie, as appears by the answer to his
letter the first domestical testimony. D. C. being afterward sent for, used
his endeavor and convenient remedies. M. Marks exhibited Aurum potabile once,
and afterward again. Since that time, as M. Skipwiths words in his letter
sound, he continued well. It is then marvel that he sent for Dr Lapworth and
for me. At Dr Lapworths coming to him he was very ill before Whitsontide. At
my coming to him after Whitsontide, he was somewhat relieved, but yet groaning
under the burden of many infirmities, as also long time afterward. So that I
see not how it might be justly said that he continued well after the twice
taking of the Aurum potabile unto the date of M. Skipwith his letter 1612,
January 20. A saying more unjust is avouched in that letter, viz: that at M.
Skipwiths coming to Vpton to visit his brother in his extremity, he had three
Doctors with him. Dr. Lapworth came thither many days after; and my coming
was many days after Dr Lapworth. And before our commings we did not hear
that any Dr of Physic was there beside D. Cotta. If any, or so many Doctors
were there, it behooves them to quit themselves of this imputation, viz: that
they tormented the patient. D. C. has answered sufficiently for himself.
Oftentimes profitable medicines exasperate the disease and increase pain for a
while. Nulla remedia tam faciunt dolorem quam quae sunt salutaria. If M. Marks
was one of those Doctors, he tormented first and healed afterward. Vna
eademque manus vulnus opemque ^alit. It were fitter for M. Marks, and men of
the ministry, and of that excellent profession, especially such as have cures
and charge of souls, for which they receive Tithes, and other annual profits,
to harken to S. Paul, who counsels them to attend their reading, to attend
their flock, to attend their office and function, rather then to watch at the
furnace as Laborants, or to keep a shop of medicines as Apothecaries, or to
practice Physic as intruders, or to wander abroad unlawfully as vagrant
persons, seeing they may be and are Parsons at home, or to give doubtful
answers as Wizards, or to erect false figures as Impostors; or to profess
soothsaying as Magitians, or to pervert sick men from religion as dissemblers;
or to leave their function as Apostates; or to do the work of the Lord
negligently, as they which in holy Scriptures are accursed. Vale egregie
Doctor, Et spartam quam nactus es tueri ne dubites.

Your assured friend Henry Asbworth.


By this letter and counter-testimony, it is not obscure how nimble and prone
^in the Authors of the three first domestical testimonies is their needless
arrogation unto Aurum potabile; supposing their understanding awake, when
indeed it is only in a dream. This is the usual disease or coma of these
days. Thus men that are in love with their own partial thoughts, usually itch
at every light occasion to offer these like loue-trickes unto the Lady and
Mistress of their fond affection, their self conceit. I doubt not but by that
which I have here manifested, and apertly produced and proved, every vulgar eye
may discover the evident partiality, and error of this second testimony. I
will omit further to take occasion to call it unto so strict account, or
sifting, as is warranted by the unjust provocation therein offered. It is
sufficient that the maine matter and question is sufficiently cleared to be
out of question, by the confutation of the first testimony, as also that in
this second is nothing worthy confuting, but that which has confuted it self.

The third testimony.
MActe vir probitate and scientia singulari. My wives brother, Mr* H.S. lately
told me how friendly mention of me you made to him. He might very well have
reciprocated, and said, how often mention he has heard me make of you^ yet
howsoever I must ever acknowledge my self obliged unto you in double bonds.
For in my last grievous and long languishing sickness, when my then Physician
Dr C. staggered in his judgment of my disease, and in the hope of my recovery,
he seemed to quail, yea when my self, and al my beholders did despair of my
life, then by Gods providence, a friend telling the rare virtues of your Aurum
potabile, caused two grains of the same to be dissolved into five spoonefulls
of Endine water, and so to be ministered unto me. After receiving thereof,
within one hours space, it is incredible to be spoken, what alleuiation I
found of my languishing, and what corroboration of all my vital, parts. In the
morning I took it, and until night I felt a most happy operation thereof. It
procured stools all that day so pleasingly as my soul could desire, until
such time as my Physician, after he had taken his leave of me for that night,
and that I had now composed my self to rest, came again unto me, having upon
the point of a knife somewhat, which he did put in my mouth, being then almost
asleep. But about midnight when I did awake, I found my self relapsed as
before. Then utterly difpairing of my life, I called (as I thought my last
call) unto my wife, entreating her to send again to my foresaid friend, to
entreat him to consider, whether in his judgment two grains were not too
small a proportion to overcome the malignity of so dangerous a disease. He
therefore gave me this second time three grains, which speedily, as before,
and wonderfully did refresh my spirits, and thereby my body was very soluble
for the space of Seven days after. And notwithstanding sundry evocations,
every day my strength daily increased. Then was that Doctor exceedingly angry
that I did entertain his counsel no longer, since which time he has wrote an
English book, uncharitably defaming me, and cavilling against that famous
medicine, which by the providence of God, restored me both life and health. Now
concerning the chief intention of these my letters, I pray you send me 12
grains of your potable gold, in such form as my brother lately received from
you. This bearer my friend shall give you satisfaction for the same, etc. The
author of health is God, who perpetually preserve you, unto whom he has
vouchsafed such favor as to attain unto so great a restorer of health, and
prolonger of life as this Aurum potabile appears to be. Farewell Rev: Dr.

Your most loving friend VV. S.

The Refutation of the third Testimony.
THe maine in tent of this testimony is the praise and honor of Aurum
potabile, and the vilification of Dr C. his endeavor. Aurum potabile was
prosperous, other medicines were offensive and unfortunate unto the patients
case. How then? Is this sufficient simply to contemn the one, or exalt the
other? Is this in true reason justly to be exprobrated against the Author or
dispenser of the one, or truly adding worth unto the Author of the other? Who
is ignorant that the variation, election, or preferring by the Physician of one
medicine, rather then another of the same kind, is ever as touching the event
uncertain, and in every small circumstance still changeable and variable. The
proof also of true Sympathy between this or that medicine, and this or that
particular person, consists in no certainty of infallible direction founded
upon any vndeceauing or assured ground of art or rrason, but upon special
trialls thereof alone, and such as are altered upon every change or differing
circumstance. For this cause in just balance weighed unto art it self, or the
Physicians merit or worth, there is nether praise due, when a medicine so given
succeeds weil, nor disparagement deserved when it falls out ill.
Unavoidable casualtie of good or ill indifferently in these cases is usual,
and all men the most excellent, exquisite, and scientificall that ever were are
subject thereto. No man whatsoever can foresee the secret and hidden sympathy,
which that or this particular nature rather has with this then that particular
medicine. It is only the long and often observed proof and trial that must
give demonstration thereof. Aurum potabile, in this patients sense, in his
Physicians profession was a Cordial. So was that which D. C. did administer,
and in many other bodies has been nothing inferior unto Aurum potabile, even
to the utmost extent of the praise and worth which the patient does att^ibute
thereto. At this time, and in this Gentleman, it happened not to be fortunate,
as was Aurum potabile. Is this sufficient reason contemptibly to mention D. C.
his means carefully and artificially applied with good intention in himself,
and good indication in the disease and cause? Nay is this sufficient matter to
revile, to hate D. C. to charge him him with loathed insufficiency, openly and
secretly to prosecute him with all interior malice. This is a secret I
understand not. It is here said that D. C. was angry sorsooth, because his
counsel was refused. He did never obtrude his counsel, nor would have
daigned it, if he could have foreseen such inordinate and intemperate manner.
If he were angry, his anger was only for that the counsel, by which the
patient had in reason received the first and maine good (as I have proved in
the confutation of the first testimony) was against reason so indignely forgot
and vilified. For this cause he did justly disdain the unjust wrong, and did
openly and professedly no less readily refuse, that he was refused in the view
and hearing of many witnesses. Whereas it is said that D. C. staggered in his
judgment, and quailed in the hope of recovery. It was no more then occasion
did require, as may appear first in the patients aduersnesse unto himself:
Secondly, in Marks his description of the patients estate, as also by the
deliberation and pause which Aurum potabile did take for his imperfect recovery
which was from D. C. his desertion of the cure in March unto the date of the
first domestical testimony September 10th. Whereas it is objected that D. C.
did write a book inhumanely handling the patient with calumnies. It is mere
misprision. The patient was never in any treatise by him nominated nor so much
as described in any such sort, as he can justly any way appropriat unto
himself. There was never any wrong really done unto him, but only in his own
opinion. What in any private speech has passed that might seem to touch him,
it was extorted and unavoidable for the wronged his necessary and just defense,
being provoked by all extremity of dispite. As for the book which is termed
vain, it is able to answer for it self, and was never as yet put to silence.
Now unto the matter it self. It is doubted whether the patient be beholding
unto D. C. in any part for his care and precedent pains, or soly and totally
unto Aurum potabile succeeding after. It does not follow that because Aurum
potabile pleased the patient his ease, sense and desire; therefore it does
perform the real true benefit in right understanding unto the health. It were
ridiculous if any man should thus reason. This way is a fair way, a pleasant
green way, pleases and refreshes me, Ergo, it is my way home. This is a
thorny, ragged, crooked way, and much troubles and discontenteth me, Ergo, it
is not the way unto my intended journey. The way unto health is often times as
the way unto heaven, smally pleasing. It is not the pleasures or refreshing in
the way, but the true end and expected issue thereof, which indueeth the
judicious with content, perseverance, and patience, to walk therein. In the
right method of regular cure, and according unto art and reason D. C. did
proceed, by the confession of M. Marks his letter going before at the end of
the confutation of the second testimony. The truth thereof likewise does prove
it self by demonstration, in the same forementioned confutation. Common
reason, and the general course and custom of all Physicians in the like case
or occasion, do vncontrouersly confirm the same. How can it then be just or
reasonable that D. C. guiding his honest intention, and care of the patients
good, by true art, by likely reason, and in all artificial order and course
confessed, should notwithstanding, be blamed and blasted with an evil breath,
because the present or speedy event was not according unto expectation equally
prosperous and happy; or because the patient thereby found not ease. What the
disease was is apparent by Marks his description, namely a burning fever. The
remedies in that disease ever requisite and necessary in ordinary regular cure,
were by D. C. administered according unto art and reason, as says the same
Marks. The Patient complains in this course, he as yet found no ease,
Plethore vnicum ac pro^^^um remedium venae sectio. Fernel. de Meth. M^d. b. 2.
c. 4.
but rather increase of pains. Upon this ground and reason Aurum potabile
undertakes and the former proceeding confessed according unto art and reason
is repelled and interrupted. What reason can be herein, or wi^h what reason can
any cunning fix any just blame upon D. C. or derogate from his desert, being
by true reason and rule justified, whatsoever was the present issue or success
thereof, which more truly consists in God his holy designement, then in man's
endeavors though never so fair or likely. And thus is the injury and wrong
done unto D. C. made palpable unto any common, and vulgar indifferent view. It
is objected that Aurum potabile gave ease, which the other remedies did not.
First, herein it is requisite to consider, that those likely and reasonab^e
remedies before mentioned, although their present benefit did not attend or
accompany their use (as is not always or ever expected) yet their Humores a
natura i^ constitutione eousque recedentes, vt neque victu neque a^terati ne
sol^ emendari, neque c^loris naturalis beneficio in bonitatem p^istina^ reduci
possunt, purgat one sunt auferendi Fe^n. de Meth. Med. 3 cap. 1.
certain and usual known profitting in ordinary course, in certain trial
and common experience does yield infallible ground of likely reason, that they
did not only their usual comodious benefit in that ease and happiness, which
did befall the sick, but prospered and enabled the possibility of that reputed
good in Aurum potabile. Secondly, let us herewith compare and examine what that
good was which unto Aurum potabile is so gloriously ascribed, namely ease,
corroboration, and refreshing unto the patient. Notwithstanding these reputed
grand benefits, the Patient continued the space of half an year (as appears
by Marks his testimony) languishing, sick, and grievously vexe^ with pains
and swellings in many parts. Au^u^ potabile therefore gave ease and refreshing,
but cured not the disease being still atte^ded with the decumbence and
superfluity of humors. This is ever a manifest argument of an imperfect
Crisis, or cure, the perfect Crisis and cure never leaving behind any part of
the old disease nor matter, or occasion of new, (which Physicians call
Empyrheuma) but by manifest, perfect, and complete evacuatio^s, sufficiently
removing the superfluity and excess of vicious humors, which are the causes
of disease. Since then after the use of Aurum potabile, plenty of humors still
remain, afflicting and oppressing diverse parts, therefore manifestly Aurum
potabile was, as insufficient and defective in true and perfect cure, so also
in due evacuation of humors, necessarily conductiue unto cure. And thus does
manifest reason inform, that Aurum potabile did unseasonably intrude it self,
and abruptly discontinued more reasonable and necessary remedies. This hurt and
injury, in reason Aurum potabile apertly committed, the only good it did, was
reputed ease and refreshing unto the Patient. This is indeed a pleasure and
benefit in the interim, in cure, but no effecting, or effectual perfecting of
cure. Here may a question be moved, whether we may not safely trust Cordials
(among which Aurum potabile is one) without phlebotomie or purgation, for the
relieuing of nature, and cure of diseases, considering many diseases are seen
to be so cured sometimes. When diseases thus happen to be cured, (which is very
rare and seldom, and ever uncertain) that it comes by accident, and is
casual, no man is ignorant. It is true, that after Cordials, Nature is found
sometimes enabled or stirred unto many spontaneous expulsions, sometimes by
bleeding, sometimes by vomiting, sometimes by sweat, sometimes by purging, as
in the aboue-named Gentleman, by his testimony of such like effects, in his
Aurum potabile, may be happily granted. But we must observe and distinguish,
when, and how, Nature is hereto accustomed, and enabled; as also when she has
power, and when she has no power thereto. For where the cause of the disease
is absolute Lord or Master over Nature; as touching her own daring to
encounter, or as touching her possibility to resist, as also where she does
unto her uttermost, resist and strive in vain, (for that the causes of
diseases, have before gotten so strong holds within her, that she can never
raise or remove them,) there the power of Nature is of no force by Cordials,
nor can the most assiduous application of the most excellent Cordials prevail,
but are in all reason vainly obtruded, or at least used for a short time of
slender releiuing only, except the Ideo in valde acutis purgandum, ait
Hippocrates, eadem die si materia turgeat: d^fferre enim inquit in talibus
malum. Aph. 10. sect. 4.
general remedies give more promptly the more proper supply, by the conquest,
remouall, qualifying, or at least competent diminution and lessening of the
causes, by which solely diseases, collect, hold, and maintain their vnmastered
and irresistible greatness against Nature. But where the cause of the disease is
not absolute Lord or Master, but Nature is able in some degree or sort, to
struggle and contend therewith, there she may be, and is, often enabled by
Cordials, sometimes to put by the present fury and malignity of a disease,
sometimes to make an exchange of a more tolerable disease, for a more
intolerable; a more dull, for a more sharp; a chronick, for a more acute: yet
still in these cases, or for the most part, or usually, she remains a
prisoner unto diseases, though happily seeming sometimes, somewhat refreshed, or
enlarged, by exchange of the diseases. There only solely and truly, Cordials
do effectually prevail to good or benefit, where the disease is not in it
self unto Nature importable, nor in the cause, does totally depresse and sway
her down. For Cordials, although they do manifestly repair the decayed
strength of Nature, yet can they not give unto Nature strength above that,
which radically fundamentally, and originally she before had, and possessed in
her self. Nor can they enable her to bear any weight or load of affection,
above that Ideo pleniorem habitum bonam statim solvere monet Hippocrates,
tanquam periculosum vaide. Aph. 3. sect. 1
her strength. Nor can they by repairing, or reducing her unto her most perfect
and able strength in her self thereby, give always suffic ent provocation, or
needful stimulation (when she is oft-times forgetful, dull, or idle) to
resist and expel from her, those nward and secret hidden enemies of her life,
which remaining within her, do commonly by secret vnder-myning, without their
expulsion, swiftly, and suddenly, often strangle and kill her. We see for this
cause, that upon manifest comfortation and assistance by Cordials, Nature is
often encouraged, and lightened for a short time, to make offer of resistance of
expelling her disease, of enlarging her self; but in the end, the Humores
copia suavires premunt, suffocant temperamenti mediocritatem, alterant,
corrumpuat, hisque nominibus sunt exitiales. Gal. de Meth. Med. 12. sect. 5.
cause of her oppression, and therewith the oppression it self, remaining
still unremoved, after some struggling and striving in vain, she is conquered,
and yields up the ghost. He is no Physician, nor so much as a man injoyning
common sense, that is hereof ignorant, or will deny it. And thus it is
apparent, that unto Cordials (as touching the certain profligation of
diseases) it is no prudence or wisdom, ordinarily, or usually to trust,
although sometimes the strength of Nature, when she is manifestly superior
unto the vehemence of the disease, being assisted and revived by Cordials, does
casually wind her self out of some imminent and present dangers. If any man
shall object, that Aurum potabile has a larger property or virtue, then is
comprehended in a Cordial alone, let him peruse the description, which any
learned Writer or Author has given thereof. Let him read Raymundus Lullius,
and Arnoldus de villa nova their descriptions, alleged and produced by the
Apologist. Read the first in the 5. reason, of the first part of the Apology;
the second in the third reason of the same part. Read his own ample
description also, of the natures, qualities, and use thereof, succeeding
immediately Arnoldus his praises thereof, beforementioned. Read the beginning
of his 5. reason. There most manifestly, as also in other places of this work,
and in the former Authors, it ^ppeareth without all doubt or question, simply,
and in it self, to be solely a Cordial. Now (worthy Reader) vouchsafe to call
to mind from the former discourse, upon what an ayrie foundation, the praises
of Aurum potabile in the three first testimonies, has built her nest, namely,
the Patients flattering ease, Marks his ignorant susurration, and a strong
opinion, bewitched with Aurum potabile. And thus is apparent, how the Authors
of the three first domestical testimonies, that they might wrest out somewhat,
which might sound or tune unto the disgrace of Dr C. for his thank-worthie
pains, and undeserved good will toward the Patient, have studiously in their
testimonies, set nothing upon the rack, and out of nothing, have extorted
nothing. Their partiality, error, and wrong, is not therein obscure, nor can
any obseruer be ignorant, upon how false things therein, does hang the supposed
worth of Aurum potabile. According unto my former promise, and the common rule
of discretion, I will intermeddle with no other testimonies of the Apology,
that concern me not. These which do concern me, and whose reason and
affection, Authors, and other circumstances, are well known unto me, I have
here iufficiently sifted, winnowed, and found mere chafe. By the ignorance,
untruth, error in judgment, want of right distinction, intemperance of passion,
misprision, contempt and abuse of right reason manifested in them, the
possibility and likelihood of the worthlesnesse, trifling, or insufficiency of
many other, is not obscure. As for the maine scope, whereat they all do aim,
which is the boast of happy issues in Aurum potabile; if all the testimonies
were granted true, and none were false or mistaken in that kind, (as I have
evidently proved some) yet were not that sufficient to justify the common,
rash, and precipitate trust, and use of Aurum potabile, since good successes
and events, are alone no sound arguments, or evidences of any perpetuity of
excellency in any kind. Neither do good successes necessarily infer true Art,
or evict the merit or praise of the workman, but where therewith his worth is
clearly likewise proved, either directive thereto, or operative therein. For
this cause says the Poet, -- Careat successibus opto
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat. Ovid.
Ill him betide in his intents,
Who judges works by their events.


Nor can Dr An: be ignorant, that ill attempts do oft-times well prosper:
Prosperum ac faelix scelus
Virtus vocatur. says Seneca.
While some men do thrive well in ill,
Most men a virtue deem the skill.


It is not therefore the good success that does prove any thing or action
good, either in the nature, end, or use. This argument therefore for Aurum
potabile his goodness, is so far from good, that it is unlearned, temerarious,
rotten, and unsound.

CAP. VI.
NOw having declared the falsitie, and depraved end and use of some of your
testimonies, best known unto my self, I will next according unto promise,
recite other some, which in true reason, in Art, in the general counsels,
decrees, and experience of all Physicians, are infallibly, and altogether void
of credit, or possibility in themselves. This is evident by your proposing your
curation of such diseases as are incurable. See page 86. where you report your
curation of a Marasme, as says your Latin Copy. Your English Copy page 94.
ignorantly translateth your word Marasmus an extreme debility. We must needs
take the Latin for the text, and the original. The impossibility of curation
of Marasme, is evident unto him who knows what Marasmus is Galen in his book
de Marcore, does teli you that it is corruption corporis viventis propter
siccitatem, that is, the curruption, wasting, or destruction of a living body,
thorough drynes, or privation of the radical and life-giuing moisture. Marasme
is the highest degree of a consummate consumption. For this cause he says in
the same place, that it is incurable. Marasmus omnes corporis parts similiter
absumit. Attenuatos vero sanarunt, qui Marasmum se sanasse putarunt, circa
affectionum genera errantes: that is, a Marasme consumes all parts of the
body alike. They have only cured lean and extenuate bodies, who ignorantly
erring and mistaking the different kinds of diseases, have thought that they
have cured bodies consumed with the Marasmus. Thus your gross ignorance, in
not putting true difference between the kinds of consumptions, does
necessarily convince the falsehood of your reports and testimonies of their
curation, since no man can affirm truth, concerning things by him not truly
distinguished. Thus your affirmation of your curation of Marasmus, does appear
unto all learned men, unlearned, and not true. Concerning your reports of the
curation of other kinds of consumptions likewise, observe the weakness, page 86
of the Latin Copy, you avouch a man cured in few days, page 87 of the Latin
Copy, you report another cured brevissime, that is, most speedily. The English
Copy, 95 page, translateth it timorously, as doubting the Latin was too bold,
and ill advised. Who knows not, that knows least in Physic, that all
consumptions are Chronick, and bringing diseases, and necessarily, and
vnavoidably requiring length of time unto their restoration, repairing or
reducing unto former health, cannot be in any reason or possibility, truly said
brevissime, that is, very speedily, or in few days cured. Observe yet further,
that Aurum potabile must needs be ignorantly and fal^ely reported, to be the
proper remedy unto consumptions, except it be a restauratiue, since in
restoration consists the true cure of consumptions. How far Aurum potabile
is discrepant herefrom, let these words of the most subtle Scaliger determine,
Exercit. 272. Is vero qui auro vescitur Aurum fiet. Cuius natura cum longissime
diste^ a natura nostra, neutiquam nostrae licebit per illam restaurari: that
is, he that feeds upon gold, must needs be a golden substance, or gold it
self: the nature thereof since it is so far remote from humane nature, it is
impossible for our nature to be restored thereby. Observe yet once more, that
some doubt may be justly made whether Aurum potabile alo^e, may not do hurt in
consumptions, since it seems a thing inclining unto dryness and heat, by his
Maste^s mixture thereof with cooling things in hot diseases. Things inclining,
though moderatly, unto drynes or heat, are adverse unto consumed and wasted
bodies. Ill would it fare with Antony, if his flesh unto the bone consumed,
were only to be restored by Aurum potabile, which yields in quantity, so
unlikely a pittance unto restoration (since in so few and small grains only
administered) and in the quality rather hard metal, then tender fl sh, or
ought thereinto (...) etc. Aurum and argentum, aut metalla, a calore nostro
concoqui aut dissolvi non pofsunt. Aristot. ^. Probl. 42. Aurum est incoctile
Scaliger Exercit. 272.
convertible. Let him try and trust it, if he think good Let him dine, suppe,
breakfast, frolic, feast therewith alone some few weeks. I doubt he sooner
shall turn into Midas, then gold into him, to nourish him, and in the end with
Midas may say, as the Poet of him does sing.

Cop^a nulla famem relevat, sitis arida guttur
Vrit, and inviso semper torquetur ab auro.
Gold store, nor's thirst, nor throats heat quell,
But gnawes his heart with hunger sell.
Beware then (Doctor An) lest if you make trial, that which of the same Poet
is said of the same Mulas, be verified of both: Induiturque aures lent
gradientis aselli.
For want of fore-advised fears
There steal upon him Asses ears.


Thus much concerning the falsehood, in reason of your curation of consumptions
by Aurum potabile. As loosly likewise elsewhere, you either ignorantly miscall,
or mistake continual fevers, or else speak not truth of their curation. Read
this foul lapse page 50 of the Latin Copy, which as the most Authentike I
have wholly followed. There the Latin Copy in the margi^ note says, continua
febris, that is, a continual fever, which notwithstanding afterward in your
relation of the manner thereof, proves a manifest intermitting ague, ending
with a plain infebricitation, or (...). The cold, say you, did not hold long,
the burning 3 or 4 hours. The English Copy page 56, translateth as ignorantly
continua febrie, in the margin aforesaid of the Latin Copy, a continuing
Quotidian. To leave your barbarous improprietie of terms and speech, let us
come unto your assertions themselves, concerning your curations by Aurum
potabile, of continual fevers, and burning fevers specified page 58, 59, of
the English Copy. Galen in his 9 book de Meth. Medendi, does demonstrate the
Prime and maine necessity of Phlebotomie in all continual or continent
fevers, which the Greeks distinguish by these terms of (...) and (...).
Maximum and praecipuum remedium, says he, est missio sanguinis, sine qua
plerunque sequitur aut Suffocatio, aut Syncope lethalis. He indeed in the same
place grants, that Nature being strong, and the inflammation within
mediocrity, sometimes by some large spontaneous profusion of blood, at nose, or
at some other part, sometimes by some large or copious breaking forth of sweat,
or the like, Nature may happily free and deliver her self in some continual
fevers. But where Nature is overcome by many degrees of the fever, or of the
abundance of putrified humor s in the blood or veins, or of their excelling
boiling inflammation, without Phlebotomie, Nature can never be relieved, and
the fever must needs be killing, deadly, and mortal. For this cause and
reason, says the same Author, lib. 3. de Crisib. cap. 9. Plurimi in
accessionum principijs propter materiae multitudinem, aut inflammationis
magnitudinem, intereunt. Many sick men do die even in the beginning of the
exacerbations of their sickness, through the mighty oppression of the abundance
of humors, or the excelling greatness of their inflammation. Who then does not
see the inevitable necessity and ingruence of certain death in these exigent if
the discreet administration of Phlebotomie be not suffic^^^t in time to prevent
it? Can Aurum potabile here play the Surgeon, or let blood? or can it so
comfort Nature, that above Natures fundamental and radical power, she shall
perform in the power thereof, that which is impossible? Is he worthy to be a
licensed Physician, who maintains, and closely sows these serpentine
errors and absurdities, so mortal and pernicious unto the life of man? Did
ever any learned Physician, with such enormious ouer-plus of attributes, fixed
upon any one particular medicine, seek and endeavor to rob and spoil the
sick so totally, and wholly, of all mature care, respect, or consideration of
the general necessity and use of the general remedies, never safely nor
prudently of any age, time, learned writers, or Physicians omitted? Who beside
your self has ever in any age, or time persuaded simply, or without careful
addition to trust alone in burning or continual feauers, unto any one single
help or medicine? Look and view Rulandus in his Centuaries, who although in
the Chymicke preparation of many excellent remedies (as Quercitanus reports
and judges of him) he far excelled your excellence, that is feign to praise it
self in one medicine alone. Although I say in multiplicity of excellent
Chymicke preparations, he universally and in many has excelled your own
single universality, yet shall you not find in any one curation among so many
hundreths at any time, any of those his Famespread particular medicines used
without the precedence of the general remedies, Phlebotomie and Purgation. View
any other Chymicke-Phisitians, Libauius, Gunitherius, Andernacus, Quercitanus,
or whosoever else has obtained any note or name among the learned, and you
shall find no man but your self in continual fevers to attribute absolute,
certainty, perfection, or safety of cure in any one mean or medicine
whatsoever, omitting the careful and circumspect regard of the mature
administration of Phlebotomie. You will answer that toward the conclusion of
your Apology, and in that your last farwell, or Chapter of the use of Aurum
potabile, you do admit Phlebotomy in convenient time, as also purging. This is
your ordinary practice to abuse the simple and vulgar reader, to entice by
confused proiects at large scattered, his trust and belief, and afterward in
some obscure sort or manner, and in some less observed place sparingly to
insert a cunning limitation, or contradiction thereof, thinking thereby to
salve the doubt and question of your falsehood and deceit, which you do
foresee that the better advised may in reason justly make. To what other end
do you without difference or distinction, profess simply, pronounce, and
iterate in so many places your curations of continual Feauers by Aurum
potabile, mentioning it merely, solely, and by it self, but that when the
credit of that profession so often inculcated, has fully settled it self in the
vulgar brain without addition or consideration of other respect, You may then
speakingly, and more vnobservedly thrust in that, which may serve you for
caution against just challenging: that thus not easily espied of those whom
you purpose to make a monopoly, by their inchaunted and deceived trust in your
Aurum potabile, you may still continue the^ inthralled unto fraud, under
pretense of extraordinary love and care of the general good and humane health
which you seem to profess.

Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nomen. Ovid.
The fairest way to fowlest deed,
Most frequent, safe, and sure to speed,
Is in bright shape of friendly hue,
To cloth deceit, but still seem true.
Thus have I briefly detected the fraud, ignorance, and impossibility of some
of your testimonies in true and sound reason, in the common reception of art
and exercise of true learning. I now come to show unto you, that there are
other m^dicines and remedies, nothing inferior, but equal in their effects,
unto your testified praises, and praised testimonies of Aurum potabile.

CAP, VII.
AS in your exaltations of the effects and successes of Aurum potabile, you
draw forth solely, or for the most part, such testimonies as testify within
your own experience of your own trial, so will you happily expect that I
should hold the same even proportion and equal such issues unto Aurum
potabile, as may match it with medicines in my own practice and proof. This I
will therefore accordingly do, that thereby you may the better conceive that
it is not so difficult, or so praise-worthie (as you deem it) for any
practiser in his own private course, to take just occasion to magnify his
medicines, and their manifold wondered issues, if wise men did not consider that
too much wonder does argue ignorance, and ignorance more usually then true
science does dote upon such vain glory. Your ordinary and common curations
performed by Aurum potabile, I will omit as not worthy a second mention. Those
only wherein consists extraordinary note, I will match with the like. The
cures most remarkable which you have recorded are the delivery of the
difficulty and danger of Childbirth, the delivery of dead children in the
English Copy, page 72. 73. 74. the Dropsy page 78. of the English copy.
Small pox 87-88. of the same copy. Diverse kinds of Convulsions, Epilepsies,
Palsies, 85. 92. 93. of the same copy. Deplorate estates reputed dead and
unrecoverable, page 85. 81. 82. of the same copy. Unto the first I equal
first these two cures following. In the year 1604, there happened to be my
patient a worthy Lady then lying in Hartwell Park in Northamptonshire She was
left by a former beneficed Physician, as also by her Midwiues in a deplorate
abortion, without hope in their combined resolutions, and with prediction of
impossibility of delivery with life. There augmented the former doubt and
fear the presence of a continual fever, the double Iaundes, the yellow, and
the black. By one only medicine, contrary unto all expectation, and against
much opposition, I immediately recovered her decayed power and strength, The
Lady Coke of Hartwell Park.
and within an hour or two after the assumption thereof, she was with
gladsome facility delivered, her child living until the next day, with very
good likelihood of continuance in life, being notwithstanding borne twelve
weeks before the time. The history is not obscure, nor the witnesses of the
meanest worth and eminency. The Iaundes of both kinds was shortly* with
wonder unto the beholders cured, at which time also she avoided from her guts
a stone the bigness of an hasle nutte, round, smooth, white, as hard as a
flint, full of holes as if bored through.

Many years before the former success, I had made proof of the same medicine,
but especially in a virtuous Lad e dwelling two miles distant from Northampton
westward. She had then been distressed very near the space of a sortnight,
in doubt of strength and hopeful delivery in childbed. Within an hour, or
thereabout, after the taking of the same medicine at my hand, earnestly by her
desired against the opposition of other women present, she sensibly recovered
her lost strength, and obtained speedily her wished deliverance of her living
burden: I know not whether the Agents for Aurum potabile may now have
prevailed to beget an oblivion, and extenuation of this and diverse other my
willing and fortunate endeauours in that family.

Unto the third Curation by Aurum potabile, and your boast therein, I do
oppose the wife of one Edward Owen, dwelling in the city of Couentree; she was
vexed the space of a week with the head of a dead child, remaining in her
womb after the body was gone diverse days before. All other means in vain
varied, this one medicine (when she was almost spent and ready to yield the
Ghost) gave unto her comfort and strength, and within few hours after the
receaving thereof a speedy delivery of that dead part. She lived after it two
days with some hope of recovery: but her former labor, pains, and toil,
first with the first divided part, and after with the second, and the treble
vexation and weakness in the time of interim between the one and the other
did deprive her of that hope; the woman her self, notwithstanding, being very
thankful and joyful of her received ease, and comfort without expectation of
life.

In Northampton this last passed year, the wise of one Maude, vexed by
multitudes of other medicines, in vain after the receiving of this selfsame
medicine beyond all hope or opinion, within few hours was disburdened of her
dead and before mangled burden, and suruiueth the misery, and is now since that
time again with child.

Your wonders acted by Aurum potabile in the small pox, I will parallel with as
wonderful issues by other medicines. It is now about ten years past, since
a poor man of Northampton required my advise concerning his child, being about
4 or 5 years of age. She had been partly by much former Physic, and partly
by the long continuance of her disease about half a year extremely weak and
macerate. I prescribed only unto her the assiduous use of Carduus benedictus
boiled in posset drink. After this drink used two or three days, the child
did cast forth an incredible number of worms, and after the worms issued the
small pox plentifully. Thus was the child perfectly, and instantly recovered,
and grew in strength, bigness, and feeding. For the praise and worth of this
mean medicine sensibly unto the child it self, it is worthy the recording,
that the child after the recovery, did take such liking and love unto Carduus
benedictus, that spontaneously and of the own accord she could cry and call
for it, and greedily eat it sometimes alone by it self in the very bitter
substance.

I will follow this cure of the small pox with another only, Anno 1601. A
young Gentleman, my very worthy friend H. T. was dangerously surprised by the
last mentioned disease, upon which after they were fully broken out, did
freshly again start out and creep another kind of pox of a less high
color. After the pox were thus plentifully and doubly broken forth, and had
spread and settled themselves in every part, beyond all possibility of return
back again inward (the Gentleman notwithstanding still continuing sick) I
gave unto him an ordinary lenitiue. Before the receiving thereof, he continued
still very sick and weak, unable to move, or to be moved out of his bed.
After the first operation thereof, in the same instant, he was discharged of
his sickness, continual heat, the noisome fume and smoke of his disease, and
wearisomnesse of his bed, and so perfectly and presently reduced unto his
former healthful temper, that immediately without my knowledge, he adventured
down into the house and air, with the fresh heat and glowing of the pox in
his face. Notwithstanding he did never after find any sickness, weakness, or
inconvenience at all therein, the fresh remembrance, or marks only of the pox
in his face, outfacing the wonder. Here you may see what rare successes may
oftentimes happen unto mean trifles and toys in their vulgar esteem, giving
occasion of wonder unto men, whose defective knowledge is unable to check and
limit the too much wandering of wondering. Concerning the cures by Aurum potabile
of Convulsions, Palsies, Epilepsie, or falling sickness, I know you cannot
equal those wonderful kinds, which in a former Treatise I have published. In
that See the discovery of erroneous practisers in Physic likewise Chap 9. and
10. of the Trial of witchcraft, as by a second edition it is to be enlarged,
partly for more perspicuitie, partly for some points formerly omitted, or
unsatisfied.
discovery you may discover page 37. 38. page 61. 62. 63. 64. 65. many wonders
of nature in the former kinds, and by over wondering vulgars esteemed above
nature, yet by natural means sometimes cured, sometimes qualified and
mittigated, in all which I was my self alone employed with no less happy
success then can happen to Aurum potabile.

Concerning Dropsies by Aurum potabile related in the Apology to have been
vanquished, I will bound my self (as in all the former) unto the equalling
them within two instances. A Gentlewoman of my name and family, happened to be
suddenly and extremely swollen in her belly, and extenuate in all other parts
of her body except her legs. After three quarters of a year continuance in
this estate, with some hope of childbirth, in the end finding her self
deceived, and likewise her midwiues, and some also learned (able in as great
difficulties to judge and discern) she resolved her self to be Hydropicall.
She did hear the counsel, and had the conference of diverse worthy and learned
Doctors, and Physicians, yet resolved to be a patient to my self alone, and
yet so my patient, as to have no further patience then with one only medicine,
and but once endured, or at most twice. After the receiving hereof without any
molestation unto her, the first day within few hours all her humors and
hydropicall swellings immediately did fall, and she has ever since that day and
time been perfectly recovered, and so has remained now 4 or 5 years. If
Aurum potabile had effected this, it had been chronicled as a wonder, but let
Aurum potabile learn not to be 100 swift unto wonder. Every ordinary
Physician that has the opportunity by any competence of practice to view the
works of nature, cannot choose but often meet with many rare and wonderful
contingents. It behooves a Physician to make rather his use then his boast
thereof. I affect not with the Apologist the indiscreet publication of every
particular man and name. This report has the testimony of learned Physicians,
as concerning the disease, and of many neighbors in Northampton touching the
forementioned effect.

There was Patient unto me this last year, a very aged Gentleman, one Mr
Wiseman, in his own account more, in the common esteem of other men nothing
less, then foureskore years. I found him extremely swelled in legs, thighs,
back, belly, ^tomack, as largely as the skin was able to stretch and distend it
self. His senses were so benumbed, that he oftentimes did not (though being
awake) take notice of usual or ordinary objects. His sleeps were unquiet with
groans and starting, his respiration very short, thick, and full of
difficulty, his reason and memory very often by fittes, and times forraking him.
He very earnestly desired my presence, and counsel. After my first view of
him I departed, leaving him in my opinion (which was grounded upon the
occasion, which his estate before described did yield) out of any likelihood of
help. I returned again the second time notwithstanding, being again
solicited, and then I administered unto him a tentatiue purge, hidden from his
taste or sight in a little caudle. The effect thereof was admirable. All his
swellings wholly descended from his upper parts into his legs and thighs,
the extreme sickness of his stomach, shortness of wind, and difficulty of
breathing and suffocation, departed; his outward and inward senses returned
perfect, and after the first operation of his purge by the usual passage, he
did also cast up by vomit at least one pint of mere blood, without the mixture
of the least moytie of any other matter or humor, being an accident, which in all his life never formerly had happened. So perfect an alleviation, did so
presently follow the same also, that he found himself in strength and ability
the same that he was in his former health, and forsaking his Chamber, walked
into his house after his wonted manner, the space of a fortnight or three
weeks, or thereabouts, complaining solely of his swelling in his legs. The
mentioned time passed, he relapsed into the former dangerous estate: first
described, and had the same delivery with the same accidents, by the same
medicine The third time he relapsed, and then discouraged with the short stay
of the two former alleviations, he demanded not help, and thus extremely
swelling in all parts, was soon suffocated. With his death, the rare and
extraordinary operation of the medicine does not die, nor is thereby obscured,
or justly to be extenuated. I^ this rare event or issue had fallen unto the
Apologist, he would have dedicated the memory thereof unto the worship of Aurum
potabile, and his own praise. I know this medicine excellent for the
expulsion of hydropicall waters, or swellings: but unto any necessary sequel
therefrom, of that evomition of blood, with such swift and admirable
alleviation and recovery thereby, from all the former evil accidents at once,
instant and movent, I vaine-gloriously ascribe nothing, being a thing that
happened by accident, and without foreknowledge or hope of such event in the
first intent thereof. I come now to offer unto view the last pair of
evidences, for the matching of other medicines, to be comparable with Aurum
potabile, and that is, in derelict and deplorate estates, as the Apologist has
termed it, Anno 1609. a noble and worthy Lady happened to be my Patient, The
Lady Clifton, wife unto the Lord Clifton.
noble in true worth and virtue, wife unto a Barron. Her disease was unknown,
as unto my self, so unto many other her Physicians* but her danger was
manifest unto us al. She was continually afflicted with a vehement palpitation
of the heart, fainting, perpetual want of rest and sleep, and implacable
pain and excruciation and anxietie in her stomach, as accidents and
concomitants. When now in mine opinion, and in the decree of all the other
learned and reverent Physicians (some being then present with her from Oxford,
some from London) as also when in all likely reason, it was impossible with
that fury and vehemency of her pains, she should surviue beyond one day at
the most, not by any merit in my self, in my skill or better judgment, but by
Gods only goodness, I did casually happen to administer unto her, in way of
variation and proof, only a medicine procuring sleep, which beyond my
expectance in reason, happened to be so fortunate in the often iterated use, as
exceeds credit. Upon the first assumption thereof, she did fall into a more
then ordinary sound sleep, from that evening, until the next morning. In the
morning she awaked free from all pain and ill accidents, so continuing the
space of a week together, being all that interim able to ride and walk abroad
to visit her friends, sometimes in a calm evening to take the air in her
Coach, without any noted sense or complaint of the former accidents or pain.
After a few days of this Halcyonian tranquillity and ease, the violence and
fury of her pains usually again returned, until the same medicine required
and received, produced the selfsame effect, which in this manner at the same
times it failed not to do constantly almost a quarter of a year by continued
courses or vicissitudes. In this manner was she admirably preserved alive so
long space. After that time passed, it then failed, and lost his former virtue
and wont, and then within few days, the intolerable cruelty and fiercenes of
pain, made an end of her days. There are diverse Ladies and Gentlewomen in
Northamptonshire witnesses hereof. This example of the manifest, excellent
power and efficacy of a medicine, in such an estate, by so many iterations
approved, is not easily paralleled. I do not notwithstanding with the
Apologist, exalt it above measure, nor arrogate unto my self thereby beyond
others, nor deprave other men or medicines in the pride thereof, nor impute
unto it above reason, remembering the sage counsel of Hippocrates, lib. 2.
Aphoris. 27. not to trust, or rely, or give too much credit or honor unto
medicines or diseases, that for a time, or without reason do give refreshing.

The year 1615. by a very worthy noble Knight in Bedfordshire, I was required
to visit his sick daughter, Sir Richard Chetwood.
who having been diverse days vexed with a fever, in the end was suddenly
deprived of all her inward and outward senses, and in that shape of death,
continued 42 hours, both speechless and senseless. Her recovery, before my
coming, by her Parents and friends as a thing impossible, was not so much as
imagined, but her grave intended. That remedy which has been formerly
mentioned, to relieve in danger and difficulty of childbirth, and in expulsion
of the dead infant, first revived her, and after restored her by the grace of
God unto her perfect health, other means only concurring, to remove the
recrudescence of her fever.

Thus in that number which cannot be less, nor for this purpose, needs to be
more, that is, in a duality of instances in every particular (which is
sufficient for demonstration, though happily not for ostentation) I have
manifested that other medicines are equal unto Aurum potabile his best
perfections and performances, as also that although in pride and presumptions
predication, it may seem superior, yet in true proof and practice, other
remedies in the bl^ssing of God, and their own specificall virtues, are nothing
inferior. This advantage only Aurum potabile may happily have, that when the
cause of diseases has been first by other remedies removed, or at least
qualified, it remaining always, or for the most part behind, as the Vltimum
refugium, the last hope or refuge (as I observe by the current of the whole
Apology) where Nature beyond all hope of sense, is now left, derelict, and
without hope (as it often falls out) and yet insensibly does recollect her
self by little and little, as is often seen, and is usual, when at such times
she is also easily raised and helped by any mean Cordial or corroboratiue)
there Aurum potabile may alone (being left alone) participate with nature in
the praise of her own work. And thus gold, the common object of a thief, is
herein a thief it self, and robs Nature of her own right. As for Natures
relief therein, or thereby, in the same manner other mean medicines in like
sort used, have likewise often times as well performed. In both, the true praise
in the happy success is only due to God, and not to either instrument.

Non haec humanis opibus, non art Magistra
Proveniunt, etc.
Mayor agit Deus.
That our endeavors fall out fit,
Vain is the boast of Art or Wit,
If Gods free goodness guide not it.
Thus far the necessary use and requisite convenience of confronting your
arrogant and insolent boast in your own works and worth through Aurum
potabile, has transported me necessarily to forget that modest silence, which
in every man's own fortunate successes, does more truly prove him worthy
praise, then all his praises can prove him truly worthy. Excellent is that
saying of Scaliger in his poetry, lib. 3. concerning a good Physician. Medicum
effinges (says he) doctum, probum, lenem, diligentem, maturum, fortunatum, Deo
fretum, non sua vel opera, vel successu tumidum: that is, Thou shall describe a
good Physician to be a man learned, of prob^ty in life and conversation, of
fair and myld demeanure, diligent in the execution of his power and office, of
ripe judgment and understanding, fortunate in his actions, relying and trusting
in God above all, not proud, nor puffed up with his own knowledge, his works or
happy successes. Least therefore in farther opposing or answering your boasting
folly, I may happily be reputed like unto your self, I have, and do omit farther
by instance, to show how easy it were to exceed you therein, I will only
conclude concerning your boasting of your excellent knowledge of so rare a
medicin (if it so prove) with that witty reproof of Persius: Scire tuum nihil
est, nisi te scire, hoc sciat alter.
Deem you your knowledge not your own,
Except your pride do make it known.


CHAP. VIII.
I Will now briefly conclude according unto promise with such
counter-testimonies against your Aurum, as for the most part my own knowledge
and experience can avouch and testify. It is now 8 or 9 years since a worthy
Gentlem^n Mr John Hales Esquire, my honored friend in true piety, generosity,
integrity of life, in love of Virtue and Learning, leaving behind him a happy
memory with all that did know him. It is, I say, now 8 or 9 years since he was
prisoner or captive unto an immedicable dropsy. He was by some friends
persuaded unto Aurum potabile, as unto the sole sacred anchor of remaining
hope. After he had committed himself thereto, in the very first assumption
thereof, he instantly changed his former looks, his spirit quailed, and death
immediately succeeded. It may be happily replied, that this was a deplorate
disease, and therefore death was no more then was expected, as the Apologist
does in some places give us to consider thereof. But we could give him also to
consider a little further, viz. that in deplorate diseases, it is against Art
to defame any noble remedy, as De Meth. Med. lib. 10. c. 9. Hip. lib. 2. aph.
36. 37.
Galen admonishes, by giving it, and administering it in vain, and without
hope, use, or profit. Secondly, no Physician ought to assume unto himself a
privilege, to shorten one hour or moment of the shortest date of any man's
life, howsoever Aurum potabile does plead custom therein.

It happened their last year, that my very worthy friend, and loving neighbor Dr
Hickman, Chancelour of the Diocese of Peterborough, having by my endeavor the
year before, cast off a dangerous dropsy, now this last year was suddenly
surprised with a Consumption, which in him could never admit hope of curation,
in regard of many fatal and unremovable contradictions thereof. He was
persuaded notwithstanding by some M. Marks.
factors for Aurum potabile unto the use thereof by their directions. He
expended therein 3 or 4 pounds. After he had a while applied himself thereto,
besides the sense of greater pains then before: there succeeded, (which before
were unseen) swellings in the belly, legs, back, secret parts, a general
decay in the former vigor of his spirits, and death it self, not so speedily
before expected. If good hap could here have wrought impossibility of life unto
possible, or could have cast death out of possession, then had the attempt
thereof been useful and commendable, but not to distinguish where and when,
vselesly, and usefully within or without the latitude of hope, or the posse of
contingence, to administer the most excellent remedies whatsoever, is certain
and infallible testimony and evidence of want of true judgment, Art and
prudence.

It was reported, in my hearing, to the reverend Doctor mentioned in the second
domestical testimony, by one Mr Bernard Esquire, my loving neighbor and
friend, that an honorable Gentlewoma^ in the family of the Markhams (where this
gentleman was then present) being surprised by a deplorate disease, but without
pain, or at least with tolerable sense of pain, after the receiving of Aurum
potabile, interchanged thereby for her former easy passage unto death, a
miserable durance of intolerable torture, not only grievous unto all beholders
and friends, but unto the Master of Aurum potabile himself, who professed his
own sorrow and repentance for the dispensation thereof. The truth of this
history, the mentioned worthy Doctor, according unto the Gentleman his former
relation by his letter unto me does thus confirm. Whereas, says he, you make
report from Mr Bernard what unhappily happened to the young Lady Markham, I
will here relate unto you what Sr James Harrington said concerning that matter,
unto my self in presence of many others, viz. that the said young Lady being
(as I remember) his own daughter, and languishing so long under sickness,
that no hope of recovery was left, D. Antony sent unto her some part of his
Aurum potabile, which prevailing nothing at all for her amendment or ease, he
came himself to her in person, and did give her some (belike) of the purest
and strongest of that medicine, or a greater quantity. Within short time it
wrought such an alteration in her, that the Knight, as he himself said, wished
he had given 500l rather then she should have endured the torment and
continual vexation, which from that time afflicted her unto her death. It
seems that her disease was a consumption, whereof (said her father) as she
long languished pati^ntly, she might have died quietly to her self, and
comfortably to her friends. It was not hoped that she could have lived 2
weeks, but she departed within two days, and that short time was also
tedious and greiuous unto the beholders.

Henry Ashworth.
There came lately unto my hands a letter subscribed by one Mr Edward Reed, and
directed unto Dr Warner, an ancient, grave, and venerable Doctor, and sometime
a public Reader in the University of Oxford. The letter concerns a
Gentlewoman, mother unto the Author of the letter, who for an ague had received
Aurum potabile from M. Marks, with this advertisement, that she should take no
other either medicine or Cordial, but that alone. After the use and
prescription thereof, thus says the letter. My mother does find great offense
in her mouth and throat, swelling and soreness in her face, lips, and mouth.
Upon sunday last came 4 Ounces more from M. Marks, which was so strong that the
heat of it did almost fetch the skin of my lips, and others that tasted it.
My judgment is that some venomous drink has been the cause of it, and if
upon this imperfect description of her estate, you please to judge so, I pray
you be pleased to do her the favor, as to counsel what may be good for her.
She cannot now swallowe any thing but a spoonefull of drink.

Your respectfull friend Ed. Reed.


It is now 3 or 4 years since an old Gentleman of great estate and wealth,
dwelling at Billing in Northamptonshire, M. Freeman.
being grieved with obstructions of his back and kidneyes, and the stoppage of
his urine by grauill, desired my counsel and advise. He had before used Aurum
potabile, by the advice and direction of a M. Marks.
grand dispenser thereof, whom I found present with him. He did not only
find no ease or benefit thereby, but (as he said himself often in the frequent
hearing of diverse witnesses) such distemper, heat, and offense, that
continually afterward the space of two or three years together, upon any
light occasion, he would fall into such detestations, execrations, and
impatience with the very mention thereof, that it was a very difficult matter
suddenly to pacify his choler. The cause he found in himself and would relate
unto his friends. This I can witness with others, that by Aurum potabile he
received no ease or benefit, which notwithstanding other succeeding medicines
did immediately at that time unto his complete satisfaction yield.

It were an endless labor to produce innnumerable instances. In all places
almost where I happen to come within the short circuit of my practice, I find
Aurum potabile without blushing in the absence of the dispenser, usually
outfacing the present Physician, contrary to all reason, art, good manners, or
due respect of the ilfare, or welfare of the patient. Sometimes it preuenteth
good counsel, sometimes circumventeth, sometimes interrupteth, sometimes
corrupts, sometimes peruerteth, or inuerteth. This cannot seem strange unto
any man, who can consider how full of danger and inconvenience in reason it
necessarily must be to trust an unreasonable creature, or senseless instrument
(of what excellency soever) by it self alone, without accommodation or d
^ection thereof, by knowledge, judgment, and due disc^at on, unto a
proportioned aptness and fit proportion, with requisite circumstances. This
abuse notwithstanding, and custom is generally usual in all places through
this kingdom, into which so universally the maker and architect of this
universal medicine does send, sell or make sale of it. The unavoidable
consequent of mischief and inconvenience in this license and liberty, although
every man is not able to observe, yet no man can be thereof ignorant, who
having common understanding, will lend and accommodate it unto due
consideration of reason. Thus far have I equalled the praises of diverse other
medicines unto Aurum potabile. I have encountered also those br^uing testimonies
of the Apologist, with a counterbuffe of other testimonies. I will now descend
from the top and pride of his testimonies, unto his sudden precipitation and
rash descent in his conclusion unto his vain re^^pitulation of all his former
errors.

CAP. IX.
AFter the Apologist his testimonies at large gloriously displayed, he
mustereth up again, and offers a review of al his passed positio^s in the
Apology, adding with a fair flourish a proclamation of his defense of truth, of
charity, of love and care of humane kind, and the health of man. I will
therefore now dismantle the face of his iugling and circumuention, by the
manifestation, first of his own contradictions of himself therein: secondly,
of his apparent falsehood, in his counterfeit profession of truth. Concerning
his contradictions, read page 111, of the english. Thus you say, Let
Electuaries, Syrrupes, Pills, Powders, remain, and retain their account and
worth by long time and experience approved. Reconcile this with the page 106,
where in skorne you call these kinds of remedies popular Recipies and
Benedicta medicamenta that do no good, and page 104, seplasiasticke
preparations. Reconcile also those words page 103, of the Latin copy left out
in the English, with the page 120 of the English. In the first named place you
say Aurum potabile resists all diseases by what name soever called, and
remoueth the antecedent causes by convenient natural passages. In the second
place you say that in a repleat body euacuation is necessary by purging to be
had, as also that blood-letting in convenient time is not to be neglected. See
your confusion and contradiction herein. If you speak truth in the first place
that Aurum potabile remoueth the antecedent causes of diseases, that which you
say in the second place is false, frivolous, and needless; namely that there
is necessity of purgation or phlebotomie for that purpose page 101 of the
Latin copy, again read: In our country (say you) Aurum potabile mixed with
wine is sufficient without any other mixture or addition in all diseases. A few
lines after this you say in the same place of the Latin copy; Notwithstanding
where the air is intemperate, or the discretion of the Physician, or the
necessity of the person shall persuade it may be tempered with fit and proper
waters. See your folly and contradiction. If there be a fitness and property
in the waters (as you here confess) then is not the mixture of Aurum potabile
with the^ arbitrarie (as before you said) but necessary. If it be necessary
then is not Aurum potabile sufficient by it self, or in wine alone. Thus much
concerning your contradictions. Now let us view your manifest falsehoods. Read
page 97 before mentioned, namely Aurum potabile never did hurt. This falsehood
has appeared by the counter-testimonies: Read again page 103, there you do
avouch that Aurum potabile removes the antecedent causes of diseases by
convenient natural passages. If Aurum potabile be able to remove the
antecedent causes (unto which end phlebotomy and purging do chiefly and
mainely serve) then may they be omitted, nor are they so absolutely necessary.
This is the self same falsehood and contradiction, which formerly has been by
you avouched, and by me in some part confuted. Notwithstanding, for the better
evidence of so necessary consideration for the life and health of man kind,
against this harmefull error and illusion, I will clear and make evident the
incomparable necessity and prerogative of the general remedies in the manifest
disburdening of antecedent causes, above all other means or remedies
whatsoever. If happily you do not know what the antecedent cause is in
diseases; Read Galen de sanitate tuenda l. 6. cap. 7. Quic quid corpus
afflig^it ex ijs qua in ipso sunt, duplici id occasion oritur, aut
redundantia, aut succi vitio: that is, whatsoever afflicts the body, or
causes it to be diseased, of such things which are within it self, is two
ways thereto occasioned; namely by the abundance, or by the vitiousnesse of
humors. Unto the same distinction in the antecedent causes, the general voice
of all Physicians does subscribe by those terms of Plethora and Cacochymia.
Plethora, Galen in diverse places does again distinguish to be ad vasa, and ad
vires, and in his book de plenitudine, cap. 15. he declares that there is
Plethora ad vasa, mayor and minor, that is, a greater, and a less. Mayor quae
tunicas venarum etiam distendit, minor quae cauitatem in venis tantum replet.
That is, the greater is that which with the abundance stretches out the
veins: The lesser without distention does only fill the veins. Concerning
Plethora ad vires, commenting upon the seventeenth Aph of Hyppocrates lib. 2.
he says, Non potest diu permanere, sed processu temporis corrumpitur. That is,
a Plethora, or fulness, simply, in regard of the imparitie and inequality of
the sickmans strength to endure and bear it, cannot continue long, but it
turns into corruption, or in time is corrupted. From the former grounds and
principles by the assistance of vulgar reason, may any man collect the
necessity of Phlebotomy in a Plethora, which is one antecedent cause of all
material, or humorall diseases. If you desire illustration of the former
necessity, and explication of the reason of the necessity, read the same
author in his 3 book de Meth. Med. cap. 15. in his comment upon the 7 Aph. of
Hipocrates the 2 book: in his book de venae sectione contra Erisistratum. As
there the necessity and reason of necessity of Phlebotomie, in Plethora* (which
is a maine and chief occasion of diseases, or the antecedent mouer, fautor,
fuel, matter or cause thereof) so in other places likewise, does he give
demonstration of the necessity of purgation in the Cacochymia and vicious
abundance of humors that are without the veins. Read for this purpose his
tractate entitled Quos purgare, etc. whom, when, and by what means it is fit
and convenient to purge; his Comment also upon the second Aph: of Hip: first
book, his book de purgantium medicamentorum facultate, de Meth. Med. 1. lib.
de Morborum causis. In all these places and many more the necessity of
purgation in a Cacochymia does evidently appear, as likewise did before the
necessity of Phlebotomi^ in Plethora, the reason of both is plain. An
immediate cause in act remaining, the immediate effect must necessarily attend
Effectus immediatus est signum (...) suae causae. Scal. de Subtle.
it. The immediate cause in diseases, is that which the Physicians call causa
coniuncta. This cause cannot be without some matter or humor whereof it
breeds, which humor therefore is called causa antecedens, in regard of the
necessity of a precedence thereof, before that immediate cause can possibly be
produced. The matter or humor in the body which necessarily goes before the
disease, is there congregated in more or less quantity, and either within the
veins or without. From within the veins to the outward sense Phlebotomie does
immediately manifest it self to euacuate. From the other passages, purgation is
by the eye witnessed directly to draw. For this cause Purgation and Phlebotomie
are called general remedies, because in all diseases generally they do
manifestly euocate the humors or superfluities, whereof all diseases do ever
breed. Now examine your Aurum potabile. Is it possibly sufficiently to remove
the antecedent causes of diseases, as you report thereof, without distinction?
If it be hereto sufficient, then it must so be either in it self simply, or
by accident. Simply nothing can be sufficient or effectual thereto, except
those things which have a purgative nature or quality. If it include such a
property or quality in the nature thereof, then it is not simply and truly a
Cordial: and if not simply and truly a Cordial, then is it inferior, and
not to be compared with many other things, which are truly, merely, solely
Cordialls, corroboratiues, and comforters of nature, without any mixture with
another nature different and adverse thereto as all purges are. If you say that
your Aurum potabile does by accident remove the antecedent cause of diseases,
then is it no way equal, or to be compared with Phlebotomie or Purgation,
which always do certainly, immediately, manifestly, speedily, and promptly
euacuate superfluities, which ever are, and ever were the antecedent causes of
diseases, as is above said. That which is, or happens only by accident is
casual and uncertain, nor can there be therein any certainty, trust,
assurance, or necessary expectation. And thus your leuitie, your fallacy, your
insidiation, and insinuation into credulous minds, by confused and ambiguous
pronunciatiues does detect it self. How vainly, and falsely therefore you
make Aurum potabile his insufficiency sufficient in the remoueall of antecedent
causes, is most clear and evident. The danger hereof also is as evident, while
men in their necessitie^ trusting unto the uncertainty, and casual
sufficiency hereof, may for ever in the interim omit and lo^se the
opportunity, and date of life and recovery, by the certain manifest and
assured remoueall of antecedent causes in the general remed^es never failing,
although in their indiscreet, ignorant, and vnartificiall administration,
errors and mischiefs may often happen, as is usual in all other affairs
likewise, as well as in this. Another manifest falsehood is page 106. where you
say, that you do impose or prescribe nothing against reason, whereas in all
your former proposed proofs in your Apology, you have not produced any one
solid or substantial reason among them all. Equal unto this is that page 94.
of the Latin copy alone, where you proclaim Aurum potabile availeable in
deplorate diseases; and where all humane help is denied. This must necessarily
be an Hyperbole, or a lie. It is not material which it be. I will not here
tell you, that D. Anthony does contradict you herein, page 97. Latin Copy,
where he says (if you do remember or mark the place) that Aurum potabile in
derelict or mortal diseases can do no good. The last falsehood, or rather that
which I have reserved unto the last, is the great mother of all the rest,
namely your counterfeit profession of truth, of charity, simplicity, simple
truth, which you predicate, page 109. and 94. Latin copy, likewise your
profession of contempt of fame or glory, page 61. English copy; Is it contempt
of glory to proclaim, that God would have you alone honored with this great
secret, which you do expressly in your Latin Preface? Is it contempt of glory
to publish, that the hand of God does miraculously above all other created
medicines, work by your Aurum potabile, as you do page 91. of the Latin
copy? Is it contempt of glory to rank your medicine next unto God, as above
all other, the most present succor from God, which in express words you do
page 55. Latin copy? The excellency of the workmanship, necessarily
infers the praise of the workman, being maker and master thereof. Your open
praising of the one, does secretly praise the other. There is no doubt
howsoever your mouth dissembleth it, that your vain heart does foolishly
glory with the sot Damaetas in the worthy Sidney, And if my man such praises
have.
What then shall I that keep the knave?


Thus says he, thus think you. Veritas (says Julius Scaliger exercit. 307.
sect. 9.) est adaequatio notionum quae sunt in iutellectu cum rebus; that is,
Truth is, adequatio^ of the right notions of the understanding, unto the things
themselves as they are in themselves. Truth does neither come short, nor exceed
the matter it self. It is not then truth to speak contraries, to call things
temperate, positive contraries, and therefore contraries, because temperate. Can
truth speak contradictory things? Can truth maintain such an universality in
an individual substance, as is not subject unto the common and ordinary
variation and mutation of all other things, by circumstance and time? Do you
call it truth, to confound ignorantly things different? Do you call it charity,
to pervert the ancient ever received truth of all ages and times, by all men
allowed and approved as authentical oracles, and the unchanged decrees of God
and Nature? Obtrude not in this manner the Name of God, of truth, of charity.
While you publish such absurd incongruities, erroneous passages, depraved
principles, cracked and unsound reasons, and crasie testimonies, as wildly
overrun the face of your whole work, we will and can esteem you no better
then a deceiuer, a Seducer of men. Think not that Aurum potabile can be any
protection for you in your insidiation and insnaring of vulgar opinion, with
the vainglorious baits and pretexts of a new learning or revelation, never
gained before, and now forsooth, infused into you alone. It is not unknown,
that these like allectations and intisements, are usual introductions unto
common illusion. There was never as yet seen famous Heretic, Impostor, or
Magitian, who was not able with the pollicitations of some more then ordinary
remarkable graces, qualities, or beauties, to veil and hide his foul acts and
intentions, by the excellence of some good parts, holding earnestly and
intently men's minds and fancies, while their eyes therewith dazzled, might not
epsy their covert frauds. If your heart be upright, let your tongue speak
the plain truth. Truth does not need her defense by untruth, by false grounds,
sophistical reason, trifling argumentations, such as you hitherto have solely
offered unto our view. If you could prove your Aurum potabile to be the true
Aurum, not adulterate, spurious, nor sophisticate, but indeed the very true
genuine selfsame preparation, which your grand Lullius, and other
Philosophers have hunted after (as is impossible) yet ought you not to make an
Idol thereof, nor lift it up above the nature and confines of an earthly
medicine, and senseless creature. You affirm it heavenly and no humane thing,
page 53 of the Latin copy, and page 91. you bid the envious behold the
miracles of God therein, saying, that the divine hand of God does work
miraculously therein. Thus you say in the Latin copy, but in the English are
ashamed thereof, as doubting lest the vulgars should hiss and point at this
your dangerous, subtle, cunning, and secret insinuation. Modesty rather
becomes truth, then these hyperbolicall ostentations. You cannot excuse it
with your distinction of emphaticall terms only, since you do not only here,
but in all other places, apparently justify, as properries real in the nature
of Aurum potabile, these like wonders. And thus far is sufficient to have
pointed out unto you your contradictions of your self, and manifest falsehoods
in themselves, which although you may now labor for shame of men to hide, At
cum fateri furia iusserit verum
Prodente clames conscientia. Martial.
Your now wronged conscience when you die,
May galle your guilty memory.


CAP. X.
We have now, according unto promise, declared the invaliditie of the
Apologist his testimonies in general, by good successes, merely advancing the
praises and worth of Aurum potabile. We have proved some testimonies manifestly
false, some in reason impossible. We have discovered the hyperbolicall
assertions, false positions and praises of Aurum potabile above sense and
reason. We have opposed some counter-testimonies, to qualify the pride and
swelling of the ouer-flow of his testimonies. Worthy Reader, mistake me not, I
do not deny unto the honorable personages, nor unto any other learned and
reverent men, their dues and rites of honor, esteem and credit, who have
daigned their testimonies in the behalf of Aurum potabile. My desire, scope,
and performance has solely been to moderate the immoderate and unlimited
arrogation of Aurum potabile unto it self, the injurious extenuation of the
true worth of all other remedies, which God has not given idly, nor in
vain, endowed with so many several specificall virtues and powers. I have
therefore indeavored to draw aside the curtain and cover of illusion, hiding
the true face and view of the false, deceitful, and erroneous reasons of the
Apology, the equivocations therein, and contradictions of it self. This has
been no more then requisite and just in me, being by unjust wrong, provoked to
maintain truth against error. I have not denied (although justly I may) that
Aurum potabile may be proved an excellent medicine. I do with patience expect
until Dr An. do prove himself the right author of the right preparation. I
will notwithstanding in the interim admonish him, that he may be absolute in
the dissolution of Aurum potabile, and yet dissolute in the most absolute
respects of a scientificall Physician, yea of no worth in any other worth. Thus
says Martial of Charinus unto his friend Severus, Quo fieri possit modo Severe
Vt vir omnium pessimus Charinus,
Vnam rem benefecerit requiris?
Dicam, sed cito; quid Nerone peius,
Quid Thermis melius Neronianis.
Charine that eu'r was naught
(Quoth Severe) eu'r be good for ought?
(Severe) does not say no,
Example ample proves it so.
Nero (not nere) but mere the worst
Of all that merely ere were cursed,
Yet blessed in him was one good deed,
Since his Bathes were a blessed meed.


Apply this, Dr An. we are content to reserve you for that golden purpose (if
you can prove your Aurum potabile so irrefragable and incomparable (as you have
promised) we are content, I say, you shall make our general provisio^, yet
know that you may be excellent herein, and good for nothing else. Know also that
no man that has true reason, will trust his life upon the praise, yea, or upon
the proof of any one medicine simply alone, since God, Nature, difference
inavoydable of circumstances and common necessities do continually teach us to
vary in most parriculars, of what kind soever, or supreme excellence.

Lastly let me tell you, that from the natural predominance of a mechanical
humor, you publish your encomiastick tractates and books, burdened only with
the praises of your own workmanship. Yea you are so far transported with the
pride thereof, that you advance opprobrious terms, and oppose the calumnious
imputation of malice and envy, against those who present you with the just
reproof of your At illud ante oculos habendu^ esse censeo te, meque aliosque
omnes nos homines esse meminisse. Qui si quid homo sit scias, facite te nihil
esse inte^liges. Scal. Exerc. 148.
boundless boasting. The writings of your adversaries in presumptuous,
uncivil, base, and rustic phrase, you term mere froth, the deceitful
insides of rotten eggs, p. 107. of the Eng. copy: waste paper to stop mustard
pots, or other base offices. Are you not ashamed of this rural rude
scurrility? In vulgar clownish terms also, you call your adversaries (unto
whom notwithstanding you do not, nor can deny the dignity and rites of learned
men) A b c darie comicall Raylers: and p. 106 of the Eng. copy, calumniating
bablers, and p. 95. liuid Vipers: and p. 107, learned Scolds. Has your charity
(predicated page 94. of the Lat. copy) no milder temper? Is your simple truth
(professed p. 109. of the lat. copy) so choleric, so indiscreetly provoked?
(...), Know and consider your self. Think not to protect your self therein,
by taking the Judge and searcher of hearts in vain into your mouth. Your hear^
we see by the rude and unlearned messenger thereof, your barbarous voice,
through your whole work. We have manifested all your principles therein, or
false, or confused, and your practice built upon so erroneous foundation, must
necessarily be dangerous. We have displayed in the right and true colors, your
bundle of absurdities in the Apology, your assertions in Nature impossible and
prodigious, your metaphysicall elation and extolling of your universal
medicine above all natural or Physical condition. We have before plainly set
before your eyes, your rules out of rule, your reasons without reason, your
truths, in your own mouth, untruths. Now setting aside verbal trifling, the
ouer-loue, and ouer-valuing of your self, come unto the matter, and materially
answer, if your conscience do witness unto you, that truth is your buckler. In
the mean season I will retire my self, until your second Herald (as did
your first) do again as unmannerly thrust upon me, hoping happily, because his
exorbitant ascent, had many months been seen in our Climate (as I hear)
before the abortiue elevation thereof had presented it self unto the eye of my
notice, that he might now safely attempt and dare my supposed fear or
sideration, with the sudden blaze of so misshapen and ugly a meteor.

FINIS.

