THE INTERPRETER: OR BOOK CONTAINING the Signification of Words: Wherein is
set forth the true meaning of all, or the most part of such Words and Terms,
as are mentioned in the Law VVriters, or Statutes of this victorious and
renowned Kingdom, requiring any Exposition or Interpretation.

A Work not only profitable, but necessary for such as desire thoroughly to be
instructed in the knowledge of our Laws, Statutes, or other Antiquities.

Collected by JOHN COWELL Doctor, and the Kings Majesty's Professor of the
Civil Law in the University of Cambridge.

In Legum obscuritate captio. HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA
ALMA MATTER CANTABRIGA
printer's or publisher's device

AT CAMBRIDGE Printed by JOHN LEGATE. Anno 1607.

Collegium Jesus Cantabrigiense 1700


To the most reverend Father in God, his especial good Lord, the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and one of
his Malesties most Honorable Privy Council.
AFTER long deliberation, I hardly induced my self to crave your gracious
protection toward this simple work: valewing it at so low a price, as I
think it hardly worth the respect of any grave man, much less the favorable
aspect of so honorable a personage. Yet the remembrance of those your fatherly
prouocations, whereby; at my coming to your Grace from the University, you
first put me upon these studies, at the last by a kind of necessity enforced
me to this attempt: because I could not see how well to avoid it, but by
aduenturing the hateful note of unthankfulness. For I cannot without
dissimulation, but confess my self persuaded, that this poor Pamphlet may
prove profitable to the young Students of both Laws, to whose advancement that
way, I have of late addicted mine endeavors: else were I more then mad to
offer it to the world: and to offer it without mention of him, that by
occasioning of this good, more or less, deserves the prime thanks, were to
prove my self unworthy of so grave advice.

And therefore howsoever I account this too much boldness in respect of the
subject yet could I be exceedingly glad, it might please your Grace to ascribe
mine intention to the integrity of my duty. For he that means truly well, and
cannot perform much: must needs rejoice at the good acceptance of that little
which he ^erformeth.

All I crave for (...) at your Graces hands, is patience and pardon for this
enterprise, with the continuance of those your many favors, that hitherto to
inygreat comfort I have enjoyed. And so my long observation of your judicious
disposition, having caught me, what small delight you take in affected
complements and verbal commendation, without more words, in all true
humblenes, I beseech the Almighty long to continue your Grace in health and
prospetitie, to his glory, and the good of his Church.

Your Graces at all Commaundment, IO. COWELL.

To the Readers.
GENTLE Readers, I here offer my self to your censures, with no other
desire, then by you to be admonished of my faults. For though I do profess
the amplifying of their works, that have gone before me in this kind, and
have both gathered at home, and brought from abroad some ornaments for the
better embellishing of our English laws: yet am I neither so vain, as to
deny mine imperfections, nor so passionate, as to be offended at your
charitable reformation. Nay, my true end is the advauncement of knowledge;
and therefore have I published this poor work, not only to impart the good
thereof to those young ones that want it: but also to dravve from the learned
the supply of my defects: and so by degrees, if not my self to finish this
model, yet at the least, by the heat of emulation to incense some skilfuller
architect thereunto. Yea, I shall think my pains sufficiently recompensed, if
they may be found but worthy to stir up one learned man to amend mine
errors.

The Ciuilians of other nations, have by their mutual industries raised this
(...) of work in their profession, to an inexpected excellency. I have seen
many of them that have bestowed very profitable and commendable pains therein
and lastly one Caluinus a Doctor of Heidelberge, like a laborious Be, has
gathered from all the former, the best juice of their flowers, and made up a
hiue full of delectable honey. And by this example would I gladly incite the le
arned in our common laws and antiquities of England, yet to lend their advice
to the gayning of some comfortable lights and prospects toward the beautifying
of this ancient palace, that hitherto has been accoumpted (howsoever
substantial) yet but dark and melancholy.

Whosoever will charge these my trauiles with many (...)sights, he shall need
no solemn pains to prove them. For I will easily confess them. And, upon my
view taken of this book sithence the impression, I dare assure them that shall
observe most faults therein, that I by gleaning after him, will gather as many
omitted by him, as he shall show committed by me. But I learned long sithence
out of famous Tullie; that as no man's errors ought to be followed, because he
says some things well: so that which a man says well, is not to be rejected,
because he has some errors. No man, no book is void of imperfections. And
therefore reprehend who will, in Gods name: that is, with sweetness, and
without reproach. So shall he reap hearty thanks at my hands: and by true
imitation of the most judicious that ever vvrote, more soundly help on this
point of learning to perfection in a fevve months, then I by tossing and
tumbling my books at home, could possibly have done in many years. Experience
has taught me this in mine Institutes lately set forth: by publishing whereof
I have gained the judicious observations of diverse learned gentlemen upon them,
which by keeping them private I could never have procured. By which means I
hope one day to commend them to you again in a more exact purity, and so
leave them to future times for such acceptance, as it shall please God to give
them.

I have in some tovvardnes a tract (de regulis iuris) wherein my intent is, by
collating the cases of both laws, to shevve, that they both be raised of one
foundation, and differ more in language and terms then in substance, and
therefore were they reduced to one method (as they easily might) to be
attained (in a manner) with all one pains. But my time imparted to these
studies, being but stolen from mine emploiments of greater necessity, I cannot
make the have I desire, or perhaps that the discourse may deserve. Wherefore
until my leisure may serve to perform that, I entreat you lovingly to accept
this.

One thing I have done in this book, whereof, because it may seem strange
to some, I think to yield my reason: and that is the inserting not only of
words belonging to the art of the law, but of any other also, that I thought
obscure, of what sort soever; as Fish, Cloth, Spices, Drugs, Furs, and such
like. For in this I follovv the example of our Ciuilians, that have thought it
their part to expound any thing they could meet with in their walk. And in
deed a Lawyer professes true Philosophy, and therefore should not be
ignorant (if it were possible) of either beasts, fowls, or creeping things,
nor of the trees from the Cedar in Lebanon, to the Hyssop that springs out of
the wall. And therefore, if I have either omitted any hard word within my
circuit, or set it down not expounded; I give you good leave to impute the
one to my negligence, the other to mine ignorance: and so commend these my
pains to your best profit, and you unto God.

November. 3. 1607. IO. COVVELL.

These faults I have noted (according to the words alphabetically) which of
necessity require emendation.
IN the word Rawnge, for Pouralleeses, read Pourallees. In the word Reasonable
aid, read Claims of his tenants, houlding etc. For the word Remittere, read
Remitter. In the word Returno habendo, for Expleuied, read Repleuied. In the
word Scot and Lot, for Aulote and Auscote, read Anlote and Anscote. For the
word Statutum de laboriis, read Laborariis. In the word Term, for Certify,
read Rectify. For the word Third with hawan man, read Third nith. For the
word Tossed, read Toft In the word Toll, for (...), or (...), read (...), or
(...). For (...), read (...). In the word Verdour, for Verdioir, read Verdeur.
For the word Vicountie, read Vicountiel. In the word Watlingstreat, for Toss,
read Fosse: in the word Widow, for Vide, read Vuide. For the word Woolferthfod,
read Wolferhefod.

The signification of Words.
A B
ABATE (Iutrudere) seems to be taken from the French Abatre, i. decutere,
destruere, prosternere. It is in the Writers of the Common law used both
actiuely and passiuely, or rather neuterly: as to abate a castle or a fortlet,
Old. Not. br. fo 45. which in Westminster. 1. cap. 17. is plainly interpreted to be
as much, as to beat down. And to abate a Writ, is by some exception to
defeat or overthrow it, Britton. cap. 48. And in this Active voice it has two
significations: one general, another special: general, as in the former
examples: and again in Kitchen fol. 173. Abater meason, is to ruin or cast
down a house: especial, as in the Old. Not br. fol. 115. A stranger abateth,
that is, enters upon a house or la^d void by the death of him that last
possessed it, before the heir take his possession, and so keeps him out.
Wherefore as he that puts out him in possession, is said to disseise: so he
that steppeth in between the former possessor and his heir, is said to abate.
In the neuter signification it is used, ann. 34. Edw. 1. stat. 2. of joint
tenants, viz. the Writ of the demandant shall abate, that is, shall be
disabled, frustrated or overthrown. So in Stawnfords plees of the crown, fol.
148. In this case a man may say, that the appeal abateth by covin, that is,
that the accusation is defeated by deceit. See Intrusion.

Abatement (Intrusio) comes also of the French (abatement) i. deiectio,
decussio, prostratio, and is likewise used as the verb (abate) both actiuely
and passiuely: sometime signifying the act of the abator; as the abatement of
the heir into the land before he has agreed with the Lord. Old not. br. fol.
91. Sometime the affection or passion of the thing abated, as abatement of the
writ. Kitchen. fol. 214. And in this signification it is as much as exceptio
dilatoria with the Civilians, Brit. cap. 51. or rather an effect of it. For the
exception alleged, and made good, works the abatement. And this exception
may be taken either to the insufficiency of the matter, or to the incertaintie
of the allegation by the misnaming of the plaintiff, defendant, or place, to
the variance between the Writ and the specialtie, or record, to the
incertaintie of the Writ, count, or declaration, or to the death of the
plaintiff or defendant: new terms of the law, verbo, Abatement of Writ. And
he that will read more of this, may look upon the new book of Entries,
verbo, Brief.

Abatour (Intrusor) is he that abateth, that is, thrusts into a house or
land, void by the death of the former possessor, and not yet entered or taken up
by his heir. Old. not. br. fol. 115. Perkins fol. 76. If there be a
disseissor, abator, or intrudor upon any land by the deceit of the woman, etc.

Abbot (Abbas) in French Abbe, is by skillful Linguists said to come from the
Syriacke word (Abba) i. pater, and in our common law is used for him that in
the covent or fellowship of Canons has the rule and pre-eminence. He is by
Justinian. novel. constitut. 115.. (...). termed Archimandrita, of others
Coenobiarcha, vel Archimonachus, Hoto. in verbis feuda. Of these some here in
England were mitred, some not: Stowes annals, pa. 442. And those that were
mitred, were exempted from the jurisdiction of the diocesan, having in
themselves episcopal authority within their precincts, and being also Lords of
the Parliament. Of this kind thus says Corasius; Aliqui Abbates habent
iurisdictionem episcopalem, ad quos cum Ecclesia pleno iure pertineat, in eorum
Monasteriis Episcopus nihil exercet, cap. Ea quae. Vbi Panor. extra de statu
Monacho. Haec dictus author in Paraphrasi de sacerdotio. materia, part pri.
cap. 9. And these were called Abbots sovereign, anno 9. R. 2. cap 4. and
Abbots generals, as M. Fearne notes in his glory of generositie. page 126. The
other sort were subject to the diocesan in all spiritual government, cap.
Monasteria, 18. quaest. 2. cap. Abbas. and cap. visit andi, cum quatuor
sequentibus ibidem. ca. Omnes. 16. quaest. 7. and cap. Cum venerabilis. extra
de religiosis domibus. And as Abbots, so were there Lord Priors also, who both
had exempt jurisdiction, and were Lords of the Parliament, as appears by S.
Edward Cook de iure Ecclesiastico, fol. 28. a.

Abeyance, seems to be derived from the French (Abayer. i. allatrare,) to
bark at, as dogs do against a stranger, or spaniels at a Fesant put to the
pearke. So children are said (bayer a la mamme) when seeing the dug, they
struggle and make means toward it. And they likewise (bayer a l'argent) qui
spe atque animo incumbunt pecuniae. This word in Litleton, cap. Discontinuance,
is thus used. The right of Fee-simple lies in abeyance: that is, (as himself
interprets) all only in the remembrance, intendme^t, and consideration of
the law. Also in the same place: the Francke tenement of the glebe of the
parsonage, is in no man during the time that the parsonage is void, but is in
abeyance. And again: It is a principle in law, that of every land there is
Fee-simple in some man, or the Fee-simple is in abeyance. Considering these
places, and comparing them with the signification of the French word, I am
driven to think, that our ancient Lawyers would signify hereby a kind of
hope, or longing expectance: because that those things that be in abeyance,
though for the present they be in no man, yet they are in hope and expectation
belonging to him that is next to enjoy them. For I find also in the French,
that un bayard, is avidus spectator, a greedy beholder. I cannot in mine own
opinion better compare this, then to that which the Civilians call haereditatem
iacentem. For as Bracton says (lib. 1. cap. 12. nu. 10.) Haereditas iacens
nullius est in bonis ante aditionem. Sed fallit in hoc quia sustinet vicem
personae defuncti, vel quia speratur futura haereditas eius qui adibit. So that
(as the Civilians say) goods and lands do iacere, whilst they want a
possessor, and yet not simply, because they had lately one, and may shortly
have another: so the common Lawyers do say, that things in like estate are in
abeyance. Read farther of this in the new terms of law, and in Plowdens
reports, casu Walsingham, fol. 554. a.

Abet (Abettare) may without absurdity be said to proceed from the French
(bouter) i. ponere, apponere, impellere, propellere. It signifies in our
common law as much as to encourage or set on. The substantive (abetment,
abettum) is used for an encouraging or setting on, Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 105.
And also (abettour) for him that encourages or sets on, Old not. br. fol.
21. But both verb and noune is always used in the evil part.

Abishersing (according to Rastall in his Abridgement, titulo Exposition of law
words) is to be quit of amerciaments before whom soever of transgression. The
author of the new terms calls it otherwise (Mishersing) and says it is to
be quit of amerciaments before whom soever of transgression proved. I am of
opinion that the word originally signifies a forfeiture, or an amerciament,
and that it is much transformed in the writing by misprision and ignorance of
Clerks: thinking it very probable, that it proceeds from the Germane verb
(Beschetzen) which is as much as fisco addicere vel confiscare. It seems by
the former authors to be termed a freedom or liberty, because he that has
this word in any charter or grant, has not only the forfeitures and
amerciaments of all others within his fee for transgressions, but also is
himself free from all such control of any within that compass.

Abiuration (Abiuratio) signifies in our common law asworne banishment, or an
oath taken to forsake the realm for ever. For as Stawnford pl. cord. li. 2.
cap. 40. says out of Polydore Virgils eleventh book of Chronicles, the
devotion toward the Church first in S. Edward a Saxon king, and so consequently
in all the rest until anno 22. H. 8. was so earnest that if a man having
committed felony, could recover a church or church yard before he were
apprehended, he might not be thence drawn to the usual trial of law, but
confessing his fault to the Justices at their coming, or to the Coroner,
before them, or him give his oath finally to forsake the realm. Of this you
may read a touch, anno 7. Hen. 7. cap. 7. But the form and effect of this you
may have in the old abridgement of Statutes, titulo. Abiuration. nu. 3. taken
out of the ancient Tractate entitled, De officiis coronatorum: as also in
Cromptons Tractate of the office of the Coroner, fol. 206. b. and in the new
book of entries, verbo, Abiuration: and in Andrew Horus myrror of Justices,
lib. 1. cap. del office del coroner. This part of our law was in some sort
practiced by the Saxons, as appears by the laws of king Edward set out by M.
Lamberd, nu. 10. but more directly by the Normans, as is evident by the grand
customarie, cap. 24. where you have these words in effect: He that flies to a
Church, or holy place, may stay there for eight days. And at the ninth day he
must be demanded, whether he will yield himself to secular justice, or hold
him to the Church. For if he will, he may yield himself to the lay Court: if
he will cleave to the Church, he shall forswear the country before the
Knights and other people of credit, which may witness the act, if need
require. The form of the oath is likewise there set down with the rest of the
proceeding in this matter very agreeable with ours. This mercy as well of the
Saxons as Normans derived unto us, something resembles that of the Roman
Emperors toward such as fled to the Church, lib. 1. Co. titulo 12. or to the
images of themselves, eodem. titulo 25. And also that of Moses touching the
cities of refuge, Exodus cap. 21. verse. 13. Numb. cap. 35. verse. 6. 11 12. Deuteronomy.
19. verse. 2. Ios. 20. verse. 2. But as it was in our ancestors days larger by
great odds in this realm, so had it less reason, as it may appear to all
that will compare them. Of all circumstances belonging to this abiuration, you
may farther read the new terms of law: Stawnford vbi supra, and such
others. But this grew at the last upon good reason to be but a perpetual
confining of the offender to some Sanctuary, wherein, upon abiuration of his
liberty and free habitations, he would choose to spend his life, as appears,
anno 22. Hen. 8. cap. 14. And this benefit also by other statutes is at the
last wholly taken away. So that abiuration at this day has place but in few
cases: and if it be inflicted upon any, it is not a confining to a Sanctuary
(for there be no Sanctuaries remaining amongst us) but a sworn banishment out
of the Kings dominions. This the Civilians call exilium, or deportationem, lib.
28. Digest. titulo 22. de interdictis, relegatis and deportatis.

Abridge (Abbreniare) comes of the French (abreger) and in one general
language signifies as much as to make shorter in words, holding still the
whole substance. But in the common law it seems (at the least for the most
part) to be more particularly used for making a declaration or count shorter by
subtracting or seuering some of the substance therein comprised. As for
example: a man is said to abridge his plaint in an Assise, or a woman her
demand in an action of dower, that has put into the plee or demand any land
not in the tenure of the tenant or defendant: and finding that by his answer,
razeth those parcels out of the plee, praying answer to the rest. So that here
(abridger) is not (contrahere) but rather subtrahere. Terms of the law.
Broke. titulo, Abridgement. and anno 21. Hen. 8. cap. 3. Of this the Civilians
have no use, by reason of certain cautelous clauses, they ordinarily have at
the end of every position or article of their libell or declaration to this
effect: Et ponit coniunctim, divisim, and de quolibet, and de tali and tanta
quantitate vel summa qualis and quanta per confessionem partis adversae, vel
per probationes legitimas in fine litis apparebit. And again, in the
conclusion of all: Non astringens se ad singula probanda, sed potens,
vtquatenus probauerit in praemissis, aut eorum aliquo, eatenus obtineat. By
virtue of which clauses the plaintiff fails not in the end by any over or
under demand, neither is driven to begin his action again, but obtains for
so much as he proves to be due, though not to the heithe of his demand.

Abridgement (abbreuiamentum) see Abridge.

A C
ACcedas ad Curiam, is a Writ that lies for him, who has received false
judgment in a court Baron, being directed to the Sheriff, as appears by
Dyer, fol. 169. nu. 20. Like as the writ De falso iudicio lies for him that
has received false judgment in the county Court: the form whereof you may
see in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 18. d. and in the Register fol. 9. b. where it is
said, that this writ lies for justice delayed, as well as falsely given. It is
a species of the writ called (Recordare) Register original, fol. 5. b. and
Fitzh. vbi supra.

Accedas ad Vicecomitem is a writ directed to the Coroner commanding him to
deliver a writ to the Sheriff, that having a (pone) delivered unto him, does
suppress it, Regist. origin. fol. 83.

Accessory (Accessorius vel Accessorium) is used in our common law, otherwise
then among the Ciuilians. For whereas with them it is generally taken for any
thing depending upon another: here though it be so likewise, yet most commonly
and notoriously it signifies a man that is guilty of a fellonious offense,
not principally, but by participation: as by commandment, advice, or
concealment. And a man may be accessorie to the offense of another after two
sorts: by the common law, or by statute: and by the common law two ways
also: that is, before or after the fact. Before the fact, as when one
commands or advises another to commita felony, and is not present at the
execution thereof. For his presence makes him also a principal: wherefore
there cannot be an accessorie before the fact in manslaughter, because
manslaughter is sudden and not prepensed, Cook lib. 4. fol. 44. a.
Accessorie after the fact, is when one receives him, whom he knows to have
committed felony. Accessorie by statute is he that abetteth, councelleth, or
hides any man committing or having committed an offense made felony by
statute. For though the statute make no mention of abettours, etc. yet they are
by interpretation included. Of all these consult with Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 1.
cap. 45. 46. 47. 48. There is also an accessorie of an accessorie, as he that
wittingly receives an accessorie to felony. lib. Assis. 26. pl. 51. Coron.
Fitzh. 196. Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 1. cap. 48. And the law of England is, that
so long as the principal is not attainted, the accessorie may not be dealt
with, Stawnf. vbi supra. The reason whereofyou may see, Cook lib. 4. fol. 43.
b. And this is also true by the civil law. Claudius de Battandier. in pract.
crim. regula 101. at the least until the principal be certainly known. Of
this subject read M. Cromptons Justice, fol. 37. b. 38. 39.

Acceptance, is a receiving of a rent, whereby the receiver binds himself
for ever to allow a former fact done by another, whether it be in it self good
or not new terms of law.

Account (computus) is in the common law taken for a writ or action brought
against a man, that by means of office or business undertaken, is to render
an account unto another: as a bailife toward his Master, a guardian in socage
toward his ward, and such others, as you shall find particularly named by
Fitzh. in his not. br. fo. 116. where you may also have the form and further
use of this writ. See ex part talis.

Accroche. See enchrochement. This word accroche is used. ann. 25. Ed. 3. Stat.
3. ca. 8.

Achat. comes of the french (achet. 1. emptio, nundinatio) and is used for a
contract or bargain. Broke. tit. contract.

Acquitall, signifies in our common law most ordinarily a deliverance and
setting free from the suspicion or guiltines of an offense: and is twofold:
acquitall in law, or acquital in fact. Acquitall in law is, when two be
appealed or endicted of felony, one as principal, the other as accessorie, the
principal being discharged, the accessorie by consequent is also freed. And in
this case as the accessorie is acquitted by law, so is the principal in fact.
Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 168.

Acquittance (Acquietantia) comes from the french (quicter or quitter. i.
accepto far, or quictance. i. acceptitatio, apocha.) and signifies a release
or discharge from a dept formerly due. But the verb (acquit), the participle
(acquitted) and the nowne (acquital) signify also a discharge or clearing from
an offense objected, as: acquitted by proclamation. Smith de rep. Anglo. pa. 76.
Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 168. Broke. tit. Acquitall. See the new terms of law.
verbo, acquitall and acquittance.

Acquietandis plegiis, is a Writ lying for a surety against the creditour that
refuses to acquit him, after the debt is paid by the debtour, Register ori.
fol. 158. where it appears that this is a Iusticies.

Acre (acre) is a certain quantity of land containing in length 40. perches,
and four in breadth, or to that quantity, be the length more or less. And if
a man erect any new cotage, he must lay 4. acres of land to it after this
measure, anno 31. Eliza. cap. 7. and with this measure agrees M. Crompton in
his jurisdiction of Courts, fol. 222. though he say also, that according to the
diverse customs of diverse countries the perch differs, being in some places,
and most ordinarily, but 16. foot dimid. But in the Counties of Stafford 24.
foot, as was adjudged in the case between Sir Ed. Aston, and S. John B. in
the Exchequer. In the Statute made of sowing of Flax, ann. 24 H. 8. cap. 4.
eight score perches make an acre, which is 40. multiplied by 4. See also the
ordinance of measuring land, made anno 34. Ed. 1. Stat. 1. which agrees with
this account. The word (acre) seems to come from the Germane word (acker)
which is all one with the Latin (ager.)

Action (actio) is defined by Bracton lib. 3. cap. 1. as it is by Justinian.
li. 4. Instit. titulo. de actionibus, viz. Actio nihil aliud est quam ius
perseque^ds in iudicio quod alicui debetur. Action is principally divided by
Justinian, in personalem and realem: by Bracton, into personal, real, and
mixed: action personal is that, which belongs to a man against another by
reason of any contract, offense, or cause of like force to a contract or
offense made or done by him or some other, for whose fact he is by law to
answer, Bract. lib. 3. cap. 3. nu. 2. Action real is defined to be that which
is given to any man against another, that upon any cause possesses or
occupies the thing required or siewed for in his own name, and none other
man's: and in this only respect, that he possesses or occupies the thing, and
none other. Bract. ibid. nu. 3. and his reason is this: quia habet rem vel
possidet, quam restituere potest vel dominum nominare. This definition and
reason he farther exe^plifieth in the words there following, which he that will
may read at large. Action mixed is that, which lies as well against or for the
thing which we seek, as against the person that has it: and is called mixed,
because it has a mixed respect both to the thing and the person, Bract. lib. 3.
cap. 3. nu. 5. For example, the division of an inheritance between coheyres or
copartners, called in the civil law (actio familiae exciscunde:) secondly,
the division of any particular thing being common to more, called likewise
(actio de communi dividundo:) this kind of action (says Bracton) does seem to
be mixed, because it lies as well against thing, as the person: and indeed so
do other excellent Civilians, as Cuiacius and Wesenbecius in their Paratitles.
P. finium regund. And though Justinian in his first division omitteth the third
member: yet afterward in the same title,. 20. he says as these men do, viz.
that there be certain actions (naming these and other of like nature) that
seem to have a mixture, etc. Of this you may also read Britton at large in
his chapter 71. And this division of action springs from the object or
matter, wherabout it consists, Wesenb. parat. (...). de actio. and obliga.
The author of the new terms of law defines a mixed action to be a suite given
by the law to recover the thing demanded, and also the damages for wrong
done: as in Assise of nouel disseysin: the which writ, if the diffeisour make a
feofment to another, the disseiseur shall have remedy against the disseisour
and the feoffer, or other land tenant, to recover not only the land, but the
damages also. See the rest. These words occasion me to show, that actio is by
the civil law called mixta in two respects: Nam quaedam mistae sunt quod in
se, and actionis in rem, and actionis personalis nature am habeant, and in iis,
and actor and reus vterque sit, l. actionis verbo.. fina. P. de obliga, and
actio. Tales sunt actio familiae ercise. communi diuidun. and finium regun.
quaedam vero mistae sunt, quod remsimul and poenam persequantur, vt in action
vi bonorum rapt. legis Aquiliae, and ea quae datur contra eos qui legata vel
fidei commissa sacrosanctis Ecclesiis relicta soluere distulerunt. And of this
later sort is the example that the said author brings of a mixed action.

Action, is also by the Civilians divided, of the efficient cause, in civilem
and praetoriam. Whereof the one rises out of the common civil law, the other
from some edict of the Pretour. Who being chief Iusticer, had authority for
his year, to supply the defects of the general law by his especial edicts. And
a division not unlike this may be made in the common law of England, one
growing from the ancient qustomary law, the other from some statute. Broke.
tit. Action sur le statut.

Action of the final cause, is divided into civil, poenal, and mixed. Cook
vol. 6. fo. 61. a. Action civil is that, which tends only to the recovery
of that which by reason of any contract or other like cause, is due unto us: as
if a man by action seek to recover a sum of money formerly lent, etc. Action
penal is, that aims at some penalty or punishment in the party sued, be it
corporal or pecuniarie. As in the action legis Aquiliae in the civil law:
whereby in our common law the next friends of a man feloniously slain or
wounded, shall pursue the law against the murderer, or him that wounded him, to
condign punishment. Bract. li. 3. ca. 4. Action mixed is that, which seeks
both the thing whereof we are deprived, and a penalty also for the unjust
deteyning of the same: as in an action of tithe upon the statute. anno. 2. and
3. Ed. 6. ca. 13.

Action is also, according to the form of petion divided into such as are
conceived to recover either the simple value of the thing challenged, or the
double, the triple, or quadruple. Bract. li. 3. ca. 3. nu. 6. So does Decies
tantum lie against embracers. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 171. and against jurors that
take money for their verdict of one part, or the other, or both. And to be
short, any other action upon a statute that punishes any offense by
restitution, or fine proportionable to the transgression.

Action is prejudicial (otherwise called preparatorie) or else principal:
prejudicial is that which grows from some question or doubt in the
principal: as if a man sue his younger brother for land descended from his
father, and it be objected unto him that he is a bastard. Bract. li. 3. ca. 4.
nu. 9. For this point of bastardie must be tried before the cause can farther
proceed, and therefore is termed preiudicialis, quia prius iudicanda.

Action is either awncestrell, or personal. Stawnf. pl. cor. 59. Auncestrel
seems to be that, which we have by some right descending from our auncester
upon us: and that personal, which has the beginning in and from our selves.

Action upon the case (actio super casu) is a general action given for
redress of wrongs done without force against any man, and by law not
especially provided for. For where you have any occasion of suite, that neither
has a fit name, nor certain form already prescribed: there the clerks of
the chauncerie in ancient time conceived a fit form of action for the fact
in question: which the Civilians call actionem infactum, and our common lawyers
action upon the case. In factum actiones dicuntur ideo, quia quod nomine non
possunt exprimere negotium, id rei gestae enarratione declarant citra formula^
ac solennitatem vlla^: Cuiacius and Gothofredus ad Rubricam de praescriptis
verbis. And whereas in the civil law there are two sorts (actionis in factum)
one termed actio in factum ex praescriptis verbis, the other actio in factum
praetoria. We semb. parat. de praescrip. verb. the former growing upon words
passed in contract, the other more generally upon any fact touching either
contract or offense formerly not provided against, this action upon the case
seems in use to bemore like to the pretours action in factum, then to the
other: because in the perusal of the new book of entries, and Brooks his
abridgement heerevpon, I perceive that an action upon the case lies as well
against offenses, as breach of contract. Of this see more in the word Trespass.

Action upon the statute (actio super statuto) is an action brought against a
man upon breach of a statute: to be resembled in mine opinion to any action
given in the law imperial, either upon edictum praetoris, plebiscitum, or
senatusconsultum. For as the Pretour, so the common people in comitijs
tributis, and the Senators or nobility in curia vel senatu, had power to make
laws, whereupon the Pretour or other Judges permitted action. And even so our
high court of Parliament makes Statutes against such offenses, as are either
newly grown, or more and more increased: and our Judges intertaine their plees,
that commence actions against the breakers of them.

Action is perpetual or temporal (perpetua vel temporalis) and that is called
perpetual, the force whereof is by no time determined. Of which sort were all
civil actions among the ancient Romans, viz. such as grew from laws,
decrees of the Senate, or constitutions of the Emperors: whereas actions
granted by the Praetor, died within the year, de perpet. and tempor. actio. in
Institut. So we have in England perpetual and temporary actions: and I think
all may be called perpetual, that are not expressly limited. As diverse Statutes
give actions, so they be pursued within the time by them prescribed, namely,
the Statute anno 1. Ed. 6. cap. 1. gives action for 3. years after the
offenses therein shall be committed, and no longer: and the Statute anno 7. H.
8. cap. 3. does the like for four years, and that anno 31. Eliz. cap. 5. for
one year and no more. But as by the civil law no actions were at the last so
perpetual, but that by time they might be prescribed against: as actiones in
rem, december aut viginti terminantur annis, personales vero triginta.. 1. de
perpet. and temp. actio. in Institutio. and l. 3. Co. de praescript. 30.
annorum: so in our common law, though actions may be called perpetual in
comparison of those that be expressly limited by statute: yet is there a means
to prescribe against real actions within five years, by a fine levied, or a
recovery acknowledged, as you may see farther in the word, Fine, and
Recovery. And for this also look Limitation of assise.

Action is farther divided, in actionem bona fidei and stricti iuris. Which
division has good use in our common law likewise, though the terms I find
not in any of their writers. But of this, and such like divisions, because they
have as yet no apparent acceptance amongst our Lawyers, but only a hidden use,
I refer the reader to the Ciuilians, and namely to Wesenb. in his Paratitles.
P. De obligatio. and actio.

Addition (additio) is both the English and French word made of the Latin, and
signifies in our common law a title given to a man over and above his
Christian and surname, showing his estate, degree, occupation, trade, age,
place of dwelling, etc. For the use whereof in original writs of actions
personale, appeals, and indictments, it is provided by Statute anno 1. H. 5.
cap. 5. upon the penalty therein, expressed. Terms of the law. Broke farther
adds, that it is likewise requisite in towns, and gates of towns; parishes
in great towns and cities, where there may be any doubt, by reason of more
towns, gates, or parishes of the same name, titulo Addition. See also M.
Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 95. 96.

Adeling was a word of honor among the Angles, properly apertaining to the
Kings children, whereupon king Edward being himself without issue, and
intending to make Eadgare (to whom he was great Uncle by the mothers side) his
heir to this kingdom, called him Adeling. Roger Houedine, part poster.
suorum Annal. fol. 347. a.

Adiournment (adiurnamentum) is almost all one with the French (adiounrement.
i. denunciatio vel diei dictio) and signifies in our common law an assignement
of a day, or a putting off until another day, Adiournment in air, (anno 25.
Ed. 3. Statute of pourveyers, cap. 18.) is an appointment of a day, when the
Justices in eire mean to sit again. Adiourn. anno 2. Edw. 3. cap. 11. has
the like signification. And this whole title in Broke his abridgement proves
the same. The bastard Latin word (adiurnamentum) is used also among the
Burgundians, as M. Skene notes in his book De verbo signi, verbo, Adiurnatus,
out of Chassaneus de consuet. Burg.

Ad inquirendum, is a writ judicial, commanding inquiry to be made of any
thing touching a cause depending in the Kings court, for the better execution
of justice, as of bastardie, of bondmen, and such like: whereof see great
diversity in the Table of the Register judicial, verbo, Ad inquirendum.

Admeasurement (admensuratio) is a writ, which lies for the bringing of those
to a mediocritie, that usurp more then their part. And it lies in two cases:
one is termed admeasurement of dower (admensuratio dotis) where the widow of
the deceased, holds from the heir or his guardian more in the name of her
dower, then of right belongs unto her. Register orig. fol. 171. a. Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 148. The other is admeasurement of pasture (admensuratio
pasturae) which lies between those, that have common of pasture appendant to
their freehold, or common by vicenage, in case any one of them, or more, do
surcharge the common with more cattle then they ought, Register. orig. fol.
156. b. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 125.

Administer (administrator) in our common law is properly taken for him, that
has the goods of a man dying intestate, committed to his charge (...)y the
ordinary, and is accountable for the same, whenever it shall please the
ordinary to call him thereunto. I find not this word so used in all the
civil or canon law, but more generally for those, that have the government of
any thing, as the Decrees. can. 23. quaest. 5. c. 26. Administratores plane
saecularium dignitatum. etc. and extrava. com. ca. 11. Grangias autem, and alia
loca Cisterciensium ordinis, and aliorum Regalium, in quibus Gubernatores, seu
custodes vel administratores ponuntur, etc. Howsoever the signification of this
word grew to be restrained amongst us, it greatly booteth not. But there was a
statute made anno. 31. Ed. 3. ca. 11. whereby power was given to the ordinary
to appointe these administratours, and to authorize them as fully as executors,
to gather up, and to dispose the goods of the deceased: always provided, that
they should be accountable for the same, as executors. And before that, viz.
Westminster. 2. anno 13. Ed. 1. ca. 19. it was ordained, that the goods of those that
died intestate, should be committed to the ordinary his disposition, and that
the ordinary should be bound to answer his debts, so far forth as the goods
would exte^d, as executors. And I persuade myself that the committing of this
burden unto Bishops, and to those that derive ecclesiastical authority from
them, grew first from the constitution of Leo the Emperor. Co. de Episco. and
cleri. l. nulli licere. 28. Where it is said, that if a man dying bequeath any
thing to the redeeming of captives, etc. and appoint one to execute his will in
that point, the party so appointed shall see it performed: and if he appointe
none to do it, then the Bishop of the city shall have power to demand the
legacy, and without all delay perform the will of the deceased.

Admiral (Admiralius) comes of the french (amerall) and signifies, both in
France and with us, an high officer or magistrate that has the government of
the Kings navy, and the hearing and determining of all causes, as well civil
as criminal belonging to the sea. Cromptons diverse iurisd. fo. 88. and the
statutes anno 13. R. 2. ca. 5. and anno. 15. eiusdem. ca. 3. and an. 2. H. 4.
ca. 11. and anno. 2. H. 5. ca. 6. and an. 28. H. 8. ca. 15. with such like.
This officer is in all kingdoms of Europe that border upon the sea: and his
authority in the kingdom of Naples is called, magna Curia Admirariae quae
habet iurisdictionem in eos qui vivunt ex art maris. Vincent de Franch.
descis. 142. nu. 1. This Magistrate among the Romans was called praefectus
classis, as appears by Tully in Verrem. 7. but his authority was not
continual, as the Admirals is in these days, but only in time of war.
Neither do I find any such officer belonging to the Emperors in our Code.
And M. Guyn in the preface to his reading, is of opinion that this office in
England was not created until the days of Edward the third: His reason is
probable. Britton that wrote in Edw. the firsts time, and in the beginning of
his book taking upon him to name all the courts of Justice, makes no mention
of this court or magistrate. And again Richard the second finding the
Admiral to extend his jurisdiction over far, ordained by statute made the
10. year of his reign, that the limits of the admirals jurisdiction should be
restrained to the power he had in his grandfather Edward the thirds days,
whereby the said Master Gwin coniectureth that he did naught else but reduce
him to his original. But contrarily to this it appears by ancient records,
the copies whereof I have seen, that not only in the days of Ed. the first,
but also of King John, all causes of Merchants and mariuers, and things
happening within the fludde mark, were ever tried before the Lord admiral.

Adiura Regis, is a writ for the Kings Clerk against him that seeks to eiect
him to the prejudice of the Kings title in the right of his crown. Of this you
may see diverse forms upon diverse cases. Register. orig. fo. 61. a.

Admittendo clerico, is a writ granted to him that has recovered his right
of presentation aagainst the Bishop in the common bank: the form whereof read
in Fitzh. not. br. fo. 38. and the Register. orig. fo. 33. a.

Admittendo in socium, is a writ for the association of certain persons to
Justices of assizes formerly appointed, Register. orig. fol. 206. a.

Ad quod damnum, is a writ that lies to the escheater to inquire what hurt it
will be to the King, or other person, to grant a Fair or market, or a
mortmaine for any lands intended to be given in fee simple to any house of
religion, or other body politic. For in that case, the land so given is said
to fall into a dead hand, that is, such an estate and condition, that the chief
Lords do leese all hope of heriots, service of court, and escheates upon any
traitorous or felonious offense committed by the tenant. For a body politic
dies not, neither can perform personal service, or commit treason or
felony, as a singular person may. And therefore it is reasonable, that before
any such grant be made, it should be known, what prejudice it is like to work
to the graunter. Of this read more in Fitzh. not. breu. fol. 221. and look
Mortmaine.

Ad terminum qui praeteriit, is a writ of entry, that lies in case where a
man having leased lands or tenements for term of life or years, and after the
term expired, is held from them by the tenant, or other stranger that
occupies the same, and deforceth the leassour. Which writ belongs to the
leassour and his heir also, Fitzh. not. br. fol. 201.

Aduent (aduentus) is a certain space of time comprising a month or
thereabout, next before the feast of Christ's nativity. Wherein it seems that
our ancestors reposed a kind of reverence for the neerenesse of that solemn
feast: so that all contentions in law were then remitted for a season.
Whereupon there was a statute ordained Westminster. 1. cap. 48. anno 3. Ed. 1. that
notwithstanding the said usual solemnity and time of rest, it might be
lawful in respect of justice and charity, which ought at all times to be
regarded) to take assizes of novel disseisin, mort d'auncester, and darrein
presentment, in the time of Aduent, Septuagesima, and Lent. This is also one of
the times, from the beginning whereof unto the end of the Octaues of the
Epiphany, the solemnizing of marriage is forbidden, by reason of a certain
spiritualioy that the church, and so consequently every member thereof, for
that time, does or ought to conceive in the remembrance of her spouse Christ
Jesus, and so abandon all affections of the flesh. See Rogation week, and
Septuagesima.

Advocatione decimarum, is a writ that lies for the claim of the fourth part
or upward, of the tithes that belong to any Church, Register orig. fol. 29. b.

Advow, alias avowe (advocare) comes of the French (advouer, alias avouer,
and signifies as much as to justify or maintain an act formerly done. For
example, one takes a distress for rent or other thing, and he that is
destreyned, sueth a Replevin. Now he that took the distress, or to whose use
the distress was taken by another, justifying or maintaining the act, is said
to avowe. Terms of the law. Hereof comes advowant, Old. not. br. fol. 43.
and advowrie, eodem folio. Bracton uses the Latin word in the same
signification, as (advocatio disseisiuae) li. 4. cap. 26. And I find in
Cassauaeus de consuet. Burg. pa. 1210. (advohare) in the same signification,
and page 1213. the Substantine (desavohamentum) for a disavowing or refusal to
avowe.

Advowzen (advocatio) signifies in our common law a right to present to a
benefice, as much as (ius patronatus) in the canon law. The reason why it is
so termed, proceeds from this, because they that originally obtained the
right of presenting to any Church, were maintainers and vpholders, or great
benefactors to that Church, either by building or increasing it: and are
thereupon termed sometime patroni, sometime Advocati, cap. 4. and cap. 23. de
iure patronatus in Decretal. And advowzen being a bastardly French word is used
for the right of presenting, as appears by the Statute of Westminster. the second
anno 13. Ed. 1. ca. 5.

Advowsen is of two sorts: advowsen in gross, that is, sole or principal, not
adhering or belonging to any manner as parcel of the right thereof: advowzen
dependant, which depends upon a manner as appertinent unto it, termed of
Kitchen an incident, that may be separated from the subject. Of this M. John
Skeene de verbo. sig. has these words: dicitur advocatio Ecclesiae, vel quia
patronus alicuius Ecclesia ratione sui iuris advocat se ad candem Ecclesiam,
and asserit se in eadem habere ius patronatus, ^amque esse sui quasi clientis
loco, vel potius cum aliquis (nempe^patronus) advocat alium iure suo ad
Ecclesiam vacante^, eumque loco alterius (veluti defuncti) praesentat and quasi
exhibet. See Advowe next following:

Advowe, alias avowe (advocatus) is used for him that has right to present to
a benefice, an. 25 Ed. 3. st at. 5. ca. vnico. There have you also (Advowe
paramount) which is as much as the highest patron, and is spoken of the King.
Advocatus est ad quem pertinet ius advocationis alicuius ecclesia, vt ad
ecclesiam, nomine proprio non alieno, possit praesentare. Fleta li. 5. ca. 14..
i. Fitzh. in his not. br. fo. 39. uses it in the same signification. See
Advowsen. and Avowe.

Aetate probanda, is a writ that the Kings tenent holding in chief by
chivalrie, and being ward by reason of his nonage, obteineth to the eschetour
of the county where he was borne, or some time, where the land lies, to
enquire, whether he be of full age to have deliverie of his lands into his owe
hand. Register orig. fo. 294. and 295. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 253. Who also fo.
257. says that this writ is some time directed to the Shirei^^ to empanell a
jury for this inquiry against a day certain, before commissioners authorized
under the broad seal to deal in such a cause.

Aerie of Goshawkes (aeria accipitrum) comes from the french (aiere)
signifiing so much as (par) in latin or (a pair) in English For the french
man saying that one is (un houme de boun aiere) signifies that he comes of a
good pair, that is, a good father and a good mother. It is in our language the
proper word in hawks, for that which we generally call a nest in other birds.
So is it used anno 9. H. 3. ca. 13. in the charter of the forest, and in diverse
other places.

Affeerours (afferatores, alias affidati) may probably be thought to proceed
from the french (affier. i. confirmare, affirmare) It signifies in our common
law, those that be appointed in court leetes, etc. upon oath to mulct such as
have committed faults arbitrablely punishable, and have no express penalty
set down by statute. The form of their oathe you may see in Kitchen. fo. 46.
The reason of this appellation mayseeme to be, because they that be appointed
to this office, do affirm upon there oaths, what penalty they think in
conscience the offendour has deserved. It may likewise probably be thought,
that this comes from (feere) an old english word signifying a companion, as
(gefera) does among the Saxons by M. Lamberds testimony, verbo
(contubernalis) in his explication of Saxon words. And so it may be gathered
that M. Kitchen takes it. ca. Amercements. fo. 78. in these words. (Mas si le
amercement soit affire per pares) where pares) be put for affeerors. And there
may be good reason of this, because they are in this business made companions
and equals. You shall find this word used. an. 25. Ed. 3. sta. 7. viz. And the
same Justices before their rising in every sessions, shall cause to be affeered
the amercements, as pertains, and also to the same effect. an. 26. H. 8. ca.
6. Kitchen. fo. 78. joins these. 3. words together as synonyma. (Affidati,
amerciatores, affirours. Affidare in the canon law is used for fidem dare. ca.
fina. de cognatio. spiritua. in Decretal. and ca. super eo. de testibus.
Bracton has affidare mulierem, for to be betrothed to a woman. li. 2. ca. 12.
But I find in the customarie of Normandy. ca. 20. this word (affeurer) which
the latin interpretour expresses by (taxare) that is, to set the price of a
thing, as (astimare, indicare, etc.) which etymology of all the other pleases
me best, leaving every man to his own judgment.

Affirm (affirmare) comes either of the latin, or french (affirmer) It
signifies in our common law, as much as to ratify or approve a former law or
judgment. So is the substantive (affirma^ce) used anno. 8. H. 6. ca. 12. And
so is the verb it self by M. West. part. 2. symbolai. titulo, Fines. sect.
152. And if the judgment be affirmed, etc. as also by M. Crompton in his
diverse Iurisd. fo. 166.

Afforest (afforestare) is to turn ground into forest. charia de foresta. ca.
1. and 30. an. 9. H. 3. What that is, look more at large in Forest.

Affraye (affreia) comes of the french (effraier. i. horrificare, terrere) It
signifies in our common law a skirmish or fighting between two or more. M.
Lamberd in his eirenarcha. lib. 2. cap. 3. faith, that it is often times
confounded with an assault, but yet he is of opinion that they differ in this,
that where an assault is but a wrong to the party, an affray is a common
wrong: and therefore both enquirable and punishable in a leete. It might be
said likewise, that an assault is but of one side, and an affray of two or
more. I think this word (affray) to be two ways used, one, as I have already
described it, another, for a terror wrought in the subjects by any unlawful
sight of violence, or armor, etc. tending toward violence. For so is it used,
anno 2. Ed. 3. cap. 3.

Age (atas) comes from the French (aage) and signifies in our language that
part of a man's life, which is from his birth unto his last day. But it is in
the common law particularly used for those especial times, which enable men
or women to do that, which before for want of age, and so consequently of
judgment, they might not do. And these times in a man be two, in a woman six.
The age of 21. years is termed the full age in a man, the age of fourteen
years, the age of discretion, Litleton li. 2. ca. 4. In a woman there are six
several ages observed, that severally enable her to do six several things.
Broke. Guard. 7. First, at 7. years of age the Lord her father may distraine
his tenants for aid to marry her: for at those years she may consent to
matrimony, Bract. lib. 2. cap. 36. nu. 3. Secondly, at the age of nine years
she is dowable: for then, or within half a year after, is she able promereri
dotem, and virum sustinere. Fleta li. 5. cap. 22. Litleton lib. prim. cap. 5.
which Bracton loco citato does notwithstanding limit at 12. years. Thirdly, at
twelve years she is able finally to ratify and confirm her former consent
given to matrimony. Fourthly, at 14. years she is enabled to receive her land
into her own hands, and shall be out of ward, if she be of this age at the
death of her ancestor. Fifthly, at sixteen years she shall be out of ward,
though at the death of her auncestor she was within the age of fourteen years.
The reason is, because then she may take a husband able to perform Knights
service. Sixthly, at 21. years she is able to alienate her lands and tenements,
Instit. iure com. cap. 24. Touching this matter, take further these notes
perspicuously gathered. At the age of 14. years a striplin is enabled to choose
his own guardian, and to claim his land holden in socage, Dyer fol. 162.
which Bracton limiteth at fifteen years, li. 2. cap. 37. number. 2. with whom
Glanvile also agrees, lib. 7. cap. 9. And at the age of fourteen years, a
man may consent to marriage, as a woman at 12. Bracton. vbi supra. At the age of
fifteen years a man ought to be sworn to keep the kings peace, anno 34. Edw.
1. Stat. 3. The age of 21. years compels a man to be knight, that has
twenty pounds land per annum in fee, or for term of life, anno 1. Edw. 2.
stat. 1. and also enableth him to contract and to deal by himself, in all
lawful causes appertaining unto his estate. Which until that time, he cannot
with the security of those that deal with him. This the Lombords settle at 18.
years, as appears by Hotomans disputations in libros feudorum, l. 2. c. 53.
ver. decimo. octauo anno. which power the Romans permitted not vsque ad plenam
maturitatem, and that they limited at 25. years. lib. 1. in fine P. de mayor.
25. an. l. fin. Co. de Legit. tut. in principio, titulo de curat. in Institut.
The age of twelve years binds to appearance before the Sheriff and Coroner
for inquiry after roberies, an. 52. H. 3. cap. 24. The age of 14. years,
enableth to enter an order of religion without consent of parents, etc. anno 4.
H. 4. cap. 17.

Age prier (aetatem precari) or (aetatis precatio) is a petition made in count
by one in his minority, having an actio^ brought against him, for lands coming
to him by descent, that the action may rest until he come to his full age:
which the Court in most cases ought to yield unto. This is otherwise in the
civil law, which inforceth children in their minority to answer by their
tutors or curatours, P. de minor. 25. an.

Agenhine. See Haghenhine.

Agist (agistare) seems to come of the French (gift. 1. iacet) having (gasir)
in the Infinitive mood, whence comes the nowne (gisme) a lying in childbed:
or rather of (gister. i. stabulari) a word proper to a Dear, cum sub mensem
Maium e locis abditis in quibus delituit emigrans, in loco delecto stabulari
incipit, vnde commoda and propinqua sit pabulatio. Budaeus in posteriori libro
philologiae. Where also he says, that (giste) est idem quod lustrum vel
cubile. Or it may be probably deduced from the Saxon word (Gast. 1. hospes.) It
signifies in our common law, to take in and feed the ^^tell of strangers in
the kings forest, and to gather the money due for the same to the kings use,
Charta da Foresta, an. 9. H. 3. cap. 9. The Officers that do this, are called
(agistors) in English, Guest-takers, eodem. cap. 8. Cromptons iurisdic. fol.
146. These are made by the kings leters patents under the great seal of
England: of whom the King has four in number within every forest, where he
has any pawnage, called agistors, or Gist-takers. And their office consists
in these four points: (in agist ando, recipiendo, imbreviando, certificando)
Manwood part prima. Of Forest laws, p. 336. and 337. whom you may read more
at large. Their function is termed Agistment, as agistment upon the sea banks,
anno 6. H. 6. cap. 5.

Agreement (agreamentum. i. aggregatio mentium) is the assent or concord of
more to one thing: and this by the author of the new terms of law, is
either executed or executory: which you may read more at large in him
exempified by cases.

Aid (auxilium) is all one in signification with the French (aid) and
differs in nothing, but the only pronunacitio^, if we take it as it is used
in our vulgar language. But in the common law, it is applied to diverse
particular significations, as sometime to a subsidy. anno. 14. Ed. 3. stat. 2.
ca. 1. sometime to a prestation due from tenants to their Lords, as toward the
releife due to the Lord Paramount, Glanvile li. 9. cap. 8. or for the making of
his son knight, or the marying of his daugnter, idem, eodem. This the King,
or other Lord by the ancient law of England, might lay upon their tenants,
for the knighting of his eldest son at the age of 15. years, or the marriage
of his daughter at the age of seven years, Regist. orig. fol. 87. a. and that
at what rate them selves listed. But the Statute, Westmin. 1. anno 3. Edw. 1.
ordained a restraint for to large a demand, made by common persons being Lords,
in this case, and tied them to a certain rate. And the Statute made anno 25.
Ed. 3. stat. 5. cap. 11. provides, that the rate set down by the former
Statute, should hold in the King, as well as in other Lords. Of this I find
mention in the Statute, an. 27. H. 8. ca. 10. This imposition seems to have
descended to us from Normandy: for in the grand custumarie, cap. 35. you have
a Tractate entitled (des aides chevelz. 1. de auxilys capitalibus) whereof the
first is (a fair l'ayne filz de son seigneur chevalier. i. ad filium
primogenitum militem faciendum) the second, (son ainee fille marier. i. ad
filiam primogenitam maritandam.) And the third, (a rechapter le corpse de son
seigneur de prison quand il est prius per la guerre an Duc. i. ad corpus
dominisui de prisona redimendum cum captus fuerit pro bello Ducis Normandiae.
Also I find in Cassanaeus de co^suet. Burg. Quod dominus accipit a subditis pro
dotanda filia, pa. 122. which seems to be all one with this our imposition:
and also in Vincentius de Franchis descis. 131. where he calls it adiutorium
pro maritanda filia. Whence it appears, that this custom is within the
kingdom of Naples also. Touching this likewise, you may read these words in
Maenochius, lib. 2. de arbitrat. Iud. quast. centuria. 2. cap. 181. Habent
saepissime feudorum possessores and Domini multa in carum ditionibus
privilegia, multasque cum locorum incolis connentiones: inter quas, illa vna
solet nominari, vt possit Dominus collectam illis indicere, pro solutione
dotium suarum filiarum, cura matrimonio collocantur. Hoc aliquando Romae
observarum a Caligulafuisse, in illius vita scribit Suetonius, cap. 42. Hodie
hic vsus in subalpina regione est frequens, vt scribit Iacobinus de Sancto
Georgio, in tractu de homagiis. col. 8. Etiam pro filia quae religionem
ingreditur: and non modo pro vna filia, sed pluribus filiabus, non tamen pro
secundis nuptijs exigitur. In which place, the said author makes mention of
diverse other Civilians and feudists, that record this custom to be in other
places. Of this aid, our Fleta writes thus: sicutetiam quaedam consuerudines
quaeservitia non dicuntur, nec concomitantia seruitioru^, ficut rationobilia
auxilia ad filium primogenitum militem faciendum, vel ad filiam primogenita^
maritandam: quae quidem auxilia sunt de gratia and non de iure, pro necessitate
and indigentia dominicapitalis. Et non sunt praedialia sed personalia, secundum
quod perpendi poterit in breui ad hoc prouiso, etc.

This word (aid) is also particularly used in matter of pleading, for a
petition made in court for the calling in of help from another, that has an
interest in the cause in question, and is likely both to give strength to the
party that prays in aid of him, and also to avoid a prejudice growing
toward his own right, except it be prevented. For example: when a tenent for
term of life, by courtesy, tenent in tail after possibility of issue
extinct, for term of years, at will, by elegit, or tenent by statute
merchant being impleaded touching his estate, may petere auxilium, that is,
pray in aid of him in the reuersion (that is) desire or entreat the court,
that he may be called in by writ, to allege what he thinks good for the
maintenance both of his right, and his own. Terms of the law. Fitzh.
mentions both (prier en aid) and (prier aid de patron, etc.) auxilium
petere a patrono, not. br. fol. 50. d. and the new book of entries, verbo,
Aid de parcener, auxilium de parcionario, fol. 411. columna 4. This the later
practitioners in the civil law, call authoris laudationem vel nominationem.
Emericus in pract. titulo. 48. This aid prier, is also used sometime in the
kings behoof, that there be no proceeding against him, until the kings
Council be called, and heard to say what they think good, for the avoiding of
the kings prejudice or loss, touching the cause in hand. For example: if the
kings tenent holding in chief, be demanded a rent of a common person, he may
pray in aid of the king. Also a city or borough that has a fee ferme of the
king, any thing being demanded against them which belongs the reunto, may
pray in aid of the King, etc. Terms of the law. of this thing you may read
the statute (de big amiss. a. 4. Ed. 1. ca. 1. 2. and 3. and anno. 14. Ed. 3.
stat. 1. ca. 14. The civil law in suites begun between two, allows a
third to come in (pro interesse) and he that comes in for his interrest,
comes either assistendo or opponendo, etc. The former is like to this (aid
prier) the other to that which our common lawyers call Receyte. Look Receyte.

Aile (avo) comes of the French (aieul. i. avus) and signifies a writ that
lies, where the gra^dfather or great grandfather called of our common lawyers
(besayle) but in true French (bisaieul) was seized in his demaines as of fee,
of any land or tenement in fee simple, the day that he died, and a stranger
abateth or enters the same day, and dispossesseth the heir. Fitzh. not. br.
fo. 221.

Alderman (aldermannus) is borrowed from the saxon (Ealderman) signifying as
much as Senator in latin. Lamb. in his explica of Saxon words. verbo senator.
See Roger Hoveden part poster. suorum. annal. fo 346. b.

Aler sans. iour, is verbatim, to go without day: the meaning whereof is, to
be finally dismissed the court: because there is no day of farther appeara^ce
assigned, Kitchen. fo. 140.

Ale-tastor, is an officer appointed in every court leete, and sworn to look
to the assise, and the goodness of bread and ale or beer, within the precincts
of that Lordship. Kitchen. fo. 46. where you may see the form of his oath.

Alias v. Capias alias.

Alien (alienare) comes of the French (aliener) and signifies as much as to
transfer the property of any thing unto another man. To alien in mortmaine,
is to make over lands or tenements to a religious company, or other body
politic. Stawnf. praero. fo. 48. look Mortmayn. To alien in fee, isto sell the
fee simple of any land or tenement, or of any incorporeall right, West. 2. ca.
25. anno. 13. Ed. 1.

Alien alias alion (alienigena) comes of the latin (alienus) and signifies
one borne in a strange country. It is ordinarily taken for the contrary to
(Denizen) or a natural subject, that is, one borne in a strange country, and
never here infranchised. Broke. Denizen. 4. etc. And in this case, a man born
out of the land, so it be within the limits of the Kings obedience, beyond the
sease, or of English parents, out of the Kings obedience (so the parents at the
time of the birth, be of the Kings allegiance) is no alien in account, but a
subject to the King. Statute. 2. a. 25. Ed. 3. ca. vnico. commonly called the
Statute, De natis vltra mare. Also if one borne out of the kings allegiance,
come and dwell in England, his children (if he beget any here) be not aliens,
but denizens. Terms of the law. See Denizen.

Allaye (Allaia) is used for the temper and mixture of silver and gold, anno 9.
H. 5. Stat. 2. cap. 4. and Stat. 1. eiusdem anni, cap. 11. The reason of which
allay is, with a baser metal to augment the weight of the silver or gold so
much, as may counteruaile the Princes charge in the coining. Antonius Faber de
nummariorum debitorum solutionibus, cap. 1.

Allocatione facienda, is a writ directed to the Lord Treasurer, and Barons of
the Exchequer, upon complaint of some accountant, commanding them to allow the
accountant such sums, as he has by virtue of his office lawfully and
reasonably expended, Register. orig. fol. 206. b.

Alluminor, seems to be made of the French (allumer, i. accendere, incendere,
inflammare) it is used for one that by his trade colors or painteth upon
paper or parchment. And the reason is, because he gives grace, light, and
ornament by his colors, to the leters or other figures colored. You shall
find the word, an. 1. R. 3. ca. 9.

Almaine riuets, be a certain light kind of armor for the body of a man, with
sleeves of maile, or plates of iron, for the defense of his arms. The former
of which words, seems to show the country where it was first invented: the
other, whether it may come from the French verb (revestir, (...). superinduere)
to put on upon another garment, I leave to farther consideration.

Almner (elecmosinarius) is an officer of the kings house, whose function is,
fragmenta diligenter colligere, and ea distribuere singulis diebus egenis:
agrotos and leprosos, incarceratos, pauperesque viduas, and alios egenos
vagosque in patria commorantes, charitative visitare: item equos relictos,
robas, pecuniam, and alia ad eleemosynae largita, recipere and fideliter
distribuere. Debet etiam regem super eleemosynae largitione crebris
summonitionibus stimulare, and praecipue diebus Sanctorum, and rogare ne robas
suas quae magni sunt pretii, histrionibus, blanditoribus, adulatoribus,
accusatoribus vel menestrallis, sed and eleemosinae suae incrementum iubeat
largiri, Fleta. lib. 2. cap. 2.

Almoine (eleemosina.) See Frank almoyne.

Almond (amygdalum) is well known to every man's sight: it is the kirnell of a
nut or stone, which the tree in Latin called (amygdalus) does bear within a
husk in manner of a wall nut, of whose nature, and diversities, you may read
Gerards Herball, lib. 3. cap. 87. This is noted among merchandise that are to
be garbled, anno 1. Iaco. ca. 19.

Alnegeor, alias, aulnegeor (vlniger vel vlnator) comes from the French
(aulne) an elle, or elwand, and signifies an officer of the Kings, who by
himself or his deputy, in places convenient, looks to the assise of woollen
cloth made through the land, and to seals for that purpose ordained unto them,
an. 25. Ed. 3. Stat. 4. cap. 1. anno 3. R. 2. cap. 2. who is accomptable to the
king for every cloth so sealed in a fee or custom thereunto belonging, anno 17.
R. 2. cap. 2. Read of this more, anno 27. Ed. 3 cap. 4. anno 17. R. 2. cap. 2.
and 5. anno 1. H. 4. cap. 13. anno 7. eiusdem. cap. 10. anno 11 eiusd. cap. 6.
anno 13. eiusd. cap. 4. anno 11. H. 6. cap. 9. anno 31. eiusdem. cap. 5. anno
4. Ed. 4. ca. 1. anno 8. eiusdem, cap. 1. and an. 1. R. 3. cap. 8.

Ambidexter is that iurour or embraceour, that takes of both parties for the
giving of his verdict. He forfeiteth ten times so much as he takes, anno 38.
Ed. 3. cap. 12. Cromptons justice of peace, fol. 156. b.

Amendment (emendatio) comes of the French (amendment) and signifies in our
common law, a correction of an error committed in a process, and espied
before judgment. Terms of the law. Broke, titulo Amendment per totum. But if
the fault be found after judgment given: then is the party that will redress
it, driven to his writ of error. Terms of the law, Broke titulo Error.

Amerciament (amerciamentum) signifies the pecuniarie punishment of an
offender against the King or other Lord in his court, that is found to be (in
misericordia) i. to have offended, and to stand at the mercy of the King or
Lord. There seems to be a difference between amerciaments and fines, Kitchen
fol. 214. And I have heard common Lawyers say, that fines, as they are taken
for punishments, be punishments certain, which grow expressly from some
statute, and that amerciaments be such, as be arbitrably imposed by affeerors.
This is in some sort confirmed by Kitchen fol. 78. in these words:
(l'amerciame^t est affire per pares.) M. Manwood in his first part of Forest
laws. page 166. seems to make another difference, as if he would infer an
amerciame^t to be a more easy, or more merciful penalty, and a fine more
sharp and grievous. Take his words: If the pledges for such a trespass
(says he) do appear by common summons, but not the defendant himself: then
the pledges shall be imprisoned, for that default of the defendant: but
otherwise it is, if the defendant himself do appear, and be ready in Court
before the Lord, Justice in air, to receive his judgment, and to pay his fine.
But if such pledges do make default, in that ease the pledges shall be amerced,
but not fined, etc. The author of the new terms of law, says, that
amerciament is most properly a penalty assessed, by the peers or equals of the
party amercied for an offense done, for the which he puts himself upon the
mercy of the Lord. Who also makes mention of an amerciament royal, and
defines it to be a pecuniarie punishment laid upon a Sheriff, Coroner, or
such like Officer of the kings, amercied by Justices for his offense. See
Misericordia.

Amoveas manum. Look ouster le r^aiue.

An, tour, and waste (annus, dies, and vastum.) Look year, day, and waste.

Ancaling of tile, anno. 17. Ed. 4. ca 4.

Annats, (Annates) seems to be all one with first fruits. anno. 25. H. 8.
ca. 20. look, First fruits. The reason is, because the rate of first fruits
paid of spiritual livings, is after one years profit. Of which Folydore
Virgil, de inue^tione rerum, lib. 8. cap. 2. says thus: Nullum inuentum
m^iores Romano Pontifici cumulavit opes, quam annatum (quas vocant) vsus, qui
omnino multo antiquior est, quam rece^tiores quidam scriptores suspicantur. Et
annates more suo appellant primos fructus vnius anni sacerdatii vacantis, aut
danidiam eorum partem. Sane hoc vectigal iam pride, cum Romanus Pontifex non
habuerit tot possessiones quot nunc habet, and eum oportuerit pro dignitate,
pro officio, multos magnosque facere sumptus, paulatim impositum fuit
sacerdotiis vacantibus quae ille conferret: de qua quidem re vt gravi, saepe
reclamatum fuisse testatur Henricus Hostiensis, qui cum Alexandro 4. Pontifice
vixit, sic vt Franciscus Zabarellus tradat post hac in concilio Viennensi, quod
Clemens quintus indixit (qui factus est Pontifex anno salutis humanae, 135.)
agitatum fuisse, vt, eo deposito, annatum onere vigesima pars vectigalium
sacerdotalium penderetur quotannis Romano Pontifici, and id quidem frustra:
Quare Pontifex annatas in sua nassa retinuit, vt ne indidem exire possent: lege
caetera.

Anniented, comes of the French (aneantir. i. se abiicere, atque prosternere)
It signifies with ourlawyers, as much as frustrated or brought to nothing,
Litlet^n lib. 3. cap. warrantie.

Annua pensione, is a writ, whereby the king having due unto him an annual
pension from any Abbot or Prior for any of his Chaplains, whom he shall think
good to name unto him, being as yet unprovided of sufficient living, does
demand the same of the said Abbot or Prior for one, whose name is comprised in
the same writ, until, etc. and also wills him, for his Chaplains better
assurance, to give him his leters patents for the same. Register orig. fol.
265. and 307. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 231. where you may see the names of all the Abbeyes and Priories bound unto this, in respect of their foundation or
creation: as also the form of the leters patents usually granted upon this
writ.

Annuitie (annuus reditus) signifies a yearly rent to be paid for term of
life or years, or in fee, and is also used, for the writ that lies against a
man for the recovery of such a rent, either out of his land, or out of his
cofers, or to be received of his person, at a day certain every year, not
satisfying it according to the grant. Register. orig. fol. 158. Fitz. not. br.
fol. 152. The author of the new terms of law defines (annuitie) to be a
certain sum of money granted to another in fee simple, fee tail, for
term of life, or of years, to receive of the graunter, or his heirs, so
that no Freehold be charged therewith, whereof a man shall never have assise
or other action, but a writ of annuitie. Saintgerman in his book entitled
(The Doctor and Student) dialogo primo, cap. 3. shows diverse differences
between a rent and an annuitie, whereof the first is, that every rent, be it
rent service, rent charge, or rent seck, is going out of land: but an annuity
goes not out of any land, but charge only the person: that is to say, the
graunter, or his heirs that have assets by descent, or the house, if it be
granted by a house of religion, to perceive of their coffers. The second
difference is, that for the recovery of an annuity, no action lies, but only
the writ of annuitie against the graunter, his heirs, or successors: but of a
rent, the same actions lie as do of land, as the case requires. The third
difference is, that an annuitie is never taken for assets, because it is no
Freehold in law, neither shall be put in execution upon a statute Merchant,
statute Staple, or elegit, as a rent may. Dyer fol. 345. number. 2. speaks also
to this effect:

Annise seed (semen Anisi) is a medicinal seed not unknown, so called of the
herb anisum, whereof it is the fruit. Of this he that lists may read
Gerad^ herball li. 2. ca. 397. It is noted among the garbleable drugs and
spices. anno. 1. Iaco. ca. 19.

Anoisance, alias Noisance, alias Nuisance (nocumentum) comes of the French
(nuisance. i incommodum, noxa) and has a double signification, being used as
well for any hurt done either to a public place, as (high way, bridge, or
common river) or to a private, by laying any thing, that may breed infection,
by incroaching, or such like means: as also, for the writ that is brought upon
this transgression: whereof see more in Nuisance. The word (anoysance) I find,
anno 22. H. 8. ca. 5.

Apostata capiendo, is a writ that lies against one, that having entered and
professed some order of religon, breaks out again, and wandereth the
country, contrarily to the rules of his order. For the Abbot or Prior of the
house, certifying this into the chawncerie, under their common seal, and
praying this writ directed to the Shyreeue for the apprehensio^ of such offend
our, and for the delivery of him again to his Abbot or Prior, or their lawful
attorney, were wont to obtain the same. The form whereof, with other
circumstances, you shall find in the Register. orig. fo. 71. and 267. and
Fitzh. not. br. fo. 233. C.

Apparelment, comes of the French (pareisement. i. similiter, perinde,
itidem) and signifies a resemblance: as apparelment of war. anno 2. R. 2.
stat. 1. ca. 6.

Appeal (appellum) comes of the French (appeller. i. accire, accersere,
nominare, evocare, clamore aliquem flagitare) It signifies in our common law,
as much as (accusatio) with the civilians. For as in the civil law,
cognizance of criminal causes, is taken either upon inquisition, denunciation,
or accusation: so in ours, upon indictment or appeal, indictment comprehending
both inquisition, and denunciation. And accusation or apeale, is a lawful
declaration of another man's crime (which by Bracton must be felony at the
least in the common law) before a competent Judge, by one that sets his
name to the declaration, and undertakes to prove it, upon the penalty that
may ensue of the contrary. To declare the whole course of an appeal, wear to
much for this treatise. Wherefore for that, I must refer you to Bracton. li.
3. tract. 2. ca. 18. cum sequent. Britton. ca. 22. 23. 24. 25. and to S. Thomas
Smith. li. 3. de repub. Anglo. ca. 3. and lastly to Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 2. ca.
6. 7. etc. vsque 17. An appeal is commenced two ways: either by writ, or by
bill. Stawnf. vbi supra fo. 46. And it may be gathered by him. fo. 148. that an
appeal by writ is, when a writ is purchased out of the chauncerie by one to
another to this end, that he appeal a third of some felony committed by him,
finding pledges that he shall do it, and deliver this writ to the Shyreeue to
be recorded. Appeal by bill is, when a man of himself gives up his
accusation in writing to the Vicount or Coroner, offering to undergo the
burden of appealing another therein named. This point of our law, among
others, is drawn from the Normans, as appears plainly by the grand
custumarie. ca. 68. where there is set down a solemn discourse of both the
effects of this appeal. viz. the order of the co^bate, and of the trial by
enquest: of which by the common law of England, it is in the joyce of the
defendant, whether to take. See the new book of entrise. verbo Appel. and the
book of Assizes. fo. 78. Appel.

Appeal of mahem (appellum mahemij) is an accusing of one that has maimed
another. But that being no felony, the appeal thereof is but in a sort, an
action of trespass: because there is noe thing recovered but damages. Bracton
calls this (appellum de plagis and mahemio) and writes of it a whole
chapter. li. 3. tract. 2. ca. 24. See S. Ed. Cook. 4. vol. fo. 43. a.

Appeal of wrong imprisonment (appellum de pace and imprisonamento) is used by
Bracton, for an action of wrong imprisonment, whereof he writes a whole
itactat. li. 3. tractat. 2. ca. 25.

Appeal (appellatio) is used in our common law diverse times, as it is taken in
the civil law: which is a removing of a cause from an inferior judge to a
superior as appeal to Rome. an. 24. H. 8. ca. 12. and an. 1. Elix. ca. 1. But
it is more commonly used, for the private accusation, of a murderer by a party,
who had interest in the party murdered or of any felon by one of his accomplices
in the fact. See Approver.

Appendant (appendens) is any thing belonging to another, as accessorium
principali, with the Civilians, or adiunctum subiecto, with the logicians. An
hospital may be appendant to a Manner. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 142. Common of
fishing appendant to a free hold. Westminster. 2. ca. 25. anno. 13. Ed. 1.

Appertinances (pertinentiae) comes of the French (appartenir. i. pertinere)
It signifies in our common law, things both corporal, belonging to another
thing, as to the more principal: as hamlets to a chief Manner, common of
pasture, turbarie, piscarie, and such like; and incorporeal, as liberties and
services of tenants. Brit. ca. 39. where I note by the way, that he accounts
common of pasture, turbarie, and piscary, to be things corporal look Common.

Apporcu^^ent (Apportion(...)tu^) is a dividing of a rent into parts, according
as the land, whence the whole rent issues, is divided among two or more. See
the new terms of law.

Apprentice (Apprenticius) comes of the French (aprenti. i. tyro and rudis
discipulus) or of the verb (apprendre. i. addiscere, discere) and signifies
with us, one that is bound by covenant in word or writing, to serve another man
of trade for certain years, upon condition, that the artificer or man of
trade, shall in the mean time endeavor to instruct him in his art or
mystery. S. Thomas Smith, in his book de rep. Ang. li. 3. ca. 8. says, that
they are a kind of bond men, differing only, in that they be servants by
covenant and for a time. Of these you may read diverse statutes made by the
wisdom of our realm which I think superfluous here to mention.

Appropriation (appropriatio) proceeds from the French (approprior. i.
apeare, acc(...)re) and properly signifies, in the law of England, a severing
of a benefice ecclesiastical (which originally and in nature is, iuris diuini
and in p(...) nullius) to the proper and perpetual use of some Religious house
or Deane, etc. and Chapter, Bishop rick or College. And the reason of the name
I take to be this: because that whereas persons ordinarily be not accounted
(domini) but (vsufructuarij) having no right of fee simple. Littleton. titulo
Discontinuance: these, by reason of their perpetuity, are accounted owners of
the fee simple, and therefore are called proprietarij. And before the time of
Richard the second, it was lawful (as it seemeeth) simply, at the least by
man's law, to appropriate the whole fruits of a benefice to an abbey or
priory, they finding one to serve the cure. But that King made so evil a thing
more tolerable by a law, whereby he ordained, that in every license of
appropriation made in chauncerie, it should expressly be contained, that the
diocesan of the place should provide a convenient sum of money yearly to be
paid out of the fruits, toward the sustenance of the poor in that parish,
and that the Vicar should be well and sufficiently endowed. anno. 15. Rich. 2.
ca. 6. Touching the first institution, and other things worth the learning
about appropriations, read Plowden in Grendons case. fo. 496. b. and seqq. as
also the new terms of law, verbo Appropriation. To an appropriation, after
the license obtained of the King in chauncerle, the consent of the Diocesan,
Patron, and incumbent are necessary, if the Church be full: but if the Church
be void, the Diocesan and the Patron upon the Kings license may conclude it.
Plowden vbi supra. To dissolve an appropriation, it is enough to present a
Clerk to the Bishop. For, that once done, the benefice returns to the former
nature. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 35. (...).

Approvour (approbator) comes of the French (approuver. i. approbare,
comprobare, calculum albo adijcere) It signifies in our common law, one that
confessing felony of him self, appealeth or accuses another, one or more, to
be guilty of the same; and he is called so, because he must prove that which
he has alleged in his appeal. Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 142. And that proof, is
by battle or by the country, at his election that appealed. The form of this
accusation, you may in part gather by M. Cromptons Justice of peace. fo. 250.
and 251. that it is done before the coroner, either assigned unto the selon by
the court, to take and record what he says, or else called by the felon
himself, and required for the good of the Prince and common wealth, to record
that which he says, etc. The oath of the approuer, when he begins the
combat, see also in Crompton in the very last page of his book, as also the
proclamation by the Herald. Of the antiquity of this law, you may read
something in Horns myrror of Justices, l. 1. in fine cap. del office del
coroner. Of this also see Bracton more at large, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 21. and
34. and Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 52. cum seq.

Approuers of the king (Appruatores regis) be such as have the setting of the
kings demeasne^ in small Manors to the kings best advantage, anno 51. H. 3.
stat. 5. See Approve.

Approve (appruare) comes of the French (approuer, i. approbare, comprobare,
calculum albo adiicere) it signifies in the common law to augment, or (as it
were) to examine to the uttermost. For example: to approve land, is to make the
best benefit thereof by increasing the rent, etc. So is the Substantive
(approuement) used in Cromptons iurisd. fol. 153. for the profits them selves.
So is it likewise in the statute of Merton cap. 4. anno 2. H. 3 land newly
approved, Old. not. br. fol. 79. So the Sheriffs called themselves the kings
approuers, anno 1. Ed. 3. cap. 8. which is as much in mine opinion as the
gatherers or exactors of the kings profits. And anno 9. H. 6. cap. 10.
Bailiffes of Lords in their franchises be called their approuers. But anno 2.
Ed. 3. cap. 12. Approuers be certain men especially sent into several
counties of the Realm, to increase the Fermes of hundreds and wapentakes,
which formerly were set at a certain rate to the Sheriffs, who likewise
dimised them to others, the county Court excepted.

Approuement (appruamentum) see Approve. See the Register judicial. fol. 8.
br. and 9. a. See the new terms of law, verbo (Approuement.)

Arbitratour (arbiter) may be taken to proceed from either the Latin
(arbitrator,) or the French (arbitre) it signifies an extraordinary judge in
one or more causes, between party and party, chosen by their mutual consents,
West. part 2. Symb. titulo Compromise. Sect. 21. who likewise divides
arbitrament, into general, that is, including all actions, quarrels,
executions, and demands, and special, which is of one or more matters, facts, or
things specified, eodem sect. 2. 3. 4. T(...)vilians make a difference between
(arbitrum and arbitratorem) l. 76. P. pro socio. For though they both ground
their power upon the compromise of the parties: yet their liberty is diverse.
For arbiter is tied to proceed and judge according to law with equity
mingled: arbitrator is permitted wholly to his own discretion, without
solemnity of process, or course of judgment, to hear or determine the
controversy committed unto him, so it be iuxta arbitrium boniviri.

Arches court (Curia de arcubus) is the chief and auncientest Co^sistorie,
that belongs to the Archbishop of Canterbury, for the debating of spiritual
causes: and is so called of the Church in London dedicated to the blessed
Virgin, commonly called Bow church, where it is kept. And the Church is called
Bow church of the fashion of the Steeple or clocher thereof, whose top is
raised of stone pillars builded arch-wise, like so many bent bows.

The Judge of this Court, is termed the Deane of the Arches, or the official
of the Arches court. Deane of the Arches, because with this officialtie, is
commonly joined a peculiar jurisdiction of thirteen parishes in London termed
a Deantie, being exempted from the authority of the Bishop of London, and
belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury: of which the parish of Bow is one
and the chief, because the Court is there kept. Some others say, that he was
first called Deane of the arches, because the official to the Archbishop,
being many times employed abroad, in ambassages for the king and realm, the
Deane of the Arches was his substitute in his court, and by that means the
names became confounded. The jurisdiction of this Judge is ordinary, and
extends it self through the whole Province of Canterbury. So that upon any
appeal made, he forthwith, and without any farther examination of the cause,
sends out his citation to the party appealed, and his inhibition to the
Judge, from whom the appeal is made. Of this he that will, may read more in
the book entitled. De antiquitate Eccelesiae Brita^nicaehistoria.

Arma moluta, seem to be sharp weapons that do cut, and not blunt that do
only break or bruise. Bracton. li. 3. tract. 2. ca. 23. and Stawnf. pl. cor.
fo. 78. and 79. whereof Bracton has these words: arma moluta plagam faciunt,
sicut gladius, bisacuta, and huiusmodi: ligna vero and lapides brusuras,
(...)bes, and ictus, qui iudicari non possunt ad plagam ad hoc, vt inde veniri
possit ad duellum.

Armor (arma) in the understanding of our common law, is extended to any
thing, that a man in his anger or fury takes into his hand, to cast at or
strike another. Cromptons Justice of peace. fo. 65. a. So, armorum appellatio,
non vtique scuta and gladios and galeas significat, sed and fustes and lapides.
l. 42. P. de verbo. significatione.

Array (arraia, alias arraiamentum) comes of the French (array. i. ordo.)
which is an old word out of use: or it may be well deduced from (raye. i.
linea) It signifies in our common law, the ranking or setting forth of a
jury or enquest of men impaneled upon a cause. a. 18. H. 6 c. 14. Thence is
the verb to array a panel. owld. not. br. fo. 157. that is, to set forth one by
another, the men empaneled. The array shall be quashed. owld. not. br. fo. 157.
By statute, every array in assise, ought to be made four days before. Broke.
titulo Panel. nu. 10. to challenge the array. Kitchen. fo. 92.

Arreyers, seems to be used in the statut. anno. 12. Rich. 2. ca. 6. for such
officers, as had care of the soldiers armor, to see them duly appointed in
there kinds.

Arraine (arraniare) comes of the French (arranger. i. astituere, ordinare,)
that is, to set a thing in order, or in his place, and the same signification
it has in our common law. For example, he is said to arraine a writ of novel
disseisin in a county, that fitteth it for trial, before the Justices of that
circuit. owld not. br. fo. 109. Litleton. fo. 78. uses the same word in the
same sense. viz. the lease arraineth an assise of nouel disseisin. Also a
prisoner is said to be arrained, where he is indighted and brought forth to his
trial. Arrained within the verge upon murder. Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 150. The
course of this arrainment, you may read in S. Thomas Smith. de repub. Anglo.
li. 2. ca. 23.

Arrearages (arreragia) comes of the French (arrierages. 1. reliqua) It
signifies the remain of an account, or a sum of money remaining in the hands
of an accou^tant. It is used sometime more generally, for any money unpaid at
the due time: as arrearages of rent. That this word is borrowed from France, it
appears by Tiraquel de vtroque retractu. tomo. 3. pa. 32. nu. 10.

Arrest (arestum) comes of the French (arrester. i. retinere, retare,
subsistere) or rather, it is a French word in it self, signifying a settling,
stop, or stay, and is metaphorically used for a decree or determination of a
cause debated or disputed to and fro, as (arrest du Senate. i. placitum curiae)
In our common law, it is taken most of all for a stay or stop: as a man
apprehended for debt, etc. is said to be arrested. To plead in arrest of
judgment, is to show cause why judgment should be stayed, though the verdict of
the 12. be passed. To plead in arrest of taking the enquest upon the former
issue, is to show cause why an enquest should not be taken, etc. Broke. tit.
Repleder. Take this of learned M. Lambard in his eirenarch. li. 2. ca. 2. pa.
94. Budae. (says he) in his greek commentaries is of opinion, that the French
word (arrest) (which with them signifies a decree or judgment of court, took
beginning of the Greek ((...). i. placitum) and as we might say, the pleasure
and will of a court. And albeit it were not out of the way to think that it is
called an arrest, because it stays or arresteth the party: yet I believe
rather, that we received the same from the Normane laws, because we use it in
the same sense with the^. For commonly with us, au arrest is taken for the
execution of the commandment of some court, or of some officer in justice.
But howsoever the name began: an arrest is a certain restraint of a man's
person, depriving him of his own will and liberty, and binding it to become
obedient to the will of the law. And it may be called the beginning of
imprisonment. Precepts and writs of the higher courts of law, do use to
express it by two sundry words: as (capias) and (attachies) which signify to
take or catch hold of a man. But this our precept notes it by the words (duci
facias) that is, cause him to be conveyed, etc. For that the officer has
(after a sort) taken him before, in that he comes unto him, and requires him
to go to some Justice of the peace. Thus far M. Lamberd. And by like this
word is spread farther then France. For Gaile a German writer shows by his
Tractate (de arrestis imperii) that it is used also in the imperial
territories, and in the same signification, c. 1. n. 1.

Arrestandis bonis ne dissipentur, is a writ which lies for him, whose catell
or goods are taken by another, that, during the controversy, does, or is like
to make them away, and will be hardly able to make satisfaction for the^
afterward, Reg. orig. fol. 126. b.

Arrestando ipsum qui pecuniam recepit ad proficiscendum in obsequium Regis,
etc. is a writ that lies for the apprehension of him, that has taken pressed
money toward the kings wars, and lies hidden when he should go. Register.
orig. 24. b.

Arresto facto super bonis mercatorum alienigenorum, etc. is a writ that lies
for a denizen against the goods of strangers of any other country, found
within the kingdom, in recompense of goods taken from him in the said
country, after he has hene denied restitution there. Register. orig. fo. 129.
a. This among the au^cie^t Civilians was called (clarigatio) now barbarously
(represali(...)

Arretted (arrectatus) is he that is conuented before a Judge, and charged with
a crime. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. 45. quasi ad rectum vocatus. It is used
sometime, for (imputed or laid unto) as, no folly may be arretted to him being
under age. Litleton cap. Remitter. The Latin substantive (Rettum) is used in
the Register orig. Chawcer uses the verb (arretteth) id est, lays blame, as
M. Speight interprets it. I may probably conjecture, that this word is the
Latin (rectum.) For Bracton has this phrase (ad rectum habere malefactorem)
i. to have the malefactor forth coming: so as he may be charged, and put to
his trial. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10. and in another place (rectatus de morte
hominis) i. charged with the death of a man, eod. cap. 1. number. 3.

Articles of the Clergy (articuli Cleri) be certain statutes made touching
persons and causes ecclesiastical, anno 9. Ed. 2. Like unto which there were
other made, anno 14. Ed. 3. stat. 3.

Assay of measures and waights (assaia mensurarum and ponderum) Register. orig.
fol. 279. is the examination used by the Clerk of the market.

Assayer of the king, is an officer of the mint, for the due trial of silver,
indifferently appointed betwixt the master of the Mint, and the merchants that
bring silver thither for exchange. anno 2. H. 6. cap. 12.

Assault, in sultus, comes of the French verb (assailir. i. adormi, appetere,
invadere) which French also proceeds from the Latin (assilire. i. vim
afferre, oppugnare.) It signifies in our common law, a violent kind of
injury, offered to a man's person, of a higher nature then battery. For it may
be committed by offering of a blow, or by fearful speech. M. Lamberd in his
eirenar. lib. 2. cap. 3. whom read. The feudists call this (assultum) and
define it thus: Assultus, est impetus in personam aut locum, five hoc pedibus
fiat vel equo, aut machinis, aut quacunque alia re assiliatur. Zasius de feud.
part 10. nu. 38. And (assilire) est, vim adferre, adoriri, oppugnare, li.
feud. 1. tit. 5.. 1.

Assach, seems to be a Welsh word, and to signify so much, as a kind of
excuse, or strange kind of purgation by the oaths of three hundred men. anno
1. H. 5. cap. 6.

Assart (assartum) in M. Manwoods judgment, part. 2. ca. 9. ru. 5. of his
forest laws, comes of the French (assortir) signifying (as he says) to make
plain, or to furnish; but rather indeed, to set in order and handsomely to
dispose. Assartum est, quod redactum est ad culturam. Fleta. li. 4. ca. 21..
Item respondere. It signifies, as the said M. Manwood says. nu. 1. vbi supra,
an offense committed in the forest, by plucking up those woods by the roots,
that are thickets or coverts of the forest, and by making them plain, as
eatable land, where he also faith, that an assart of the Forest, is the
greatest offense or trespass of all other, that can be done in the forest, to
vert or venifon, containing in it as much as waste or more. For whereas the
waste of the Forest, is but the felling and cutting down of the couerts, which
may grow again in time: an assart, is a plucking them up, etc. which he
confirms out of the red book in the Exchequer, in these words: Assarta
vero, occasiones nominantur, quando sc: forestae nemora vel dumeta, pascuis and
latibulis ferarum oportuna, succiduntur: quibus succisis and radiciti^ avulsis,
terra subvertitur and excolitur. And again out of the Register original. fo.
257. a. b. in the writ (ad quod damnum) sent out in case, where a man sueth for
a license, to assart his grounds in the Forest, and to make it several for
tillage. So that it is no offense, if it be done with license. To this, may
Bracton also be added. li. 4. ca. 38. nu. 11. where he says, that these words
(boscus es^icitur assartum) signify as much, as (redactus in culturam) of this
you may read more in Cromptons Jurisdictions. fo. 203. and in charta de
foresta, anno. 9. H. 3. ca. 4. where the english word is not (assart) but
assert, and in Manwood, part. 1. of his Forest laws. pa. 171. The word is
used. anno. 4. Ed. 1. stat. 1. in the same signification. That which we call
(assartum) is else where termed Disboscatio. Decis. Genu. 74.

Assembly unlawful, (illicita assemblata) comes of the French (assembler. i.
aggregare) whence also is the substantive (assemblee. i. coitio, congregatio)
It is in our common law (as M. Lamberd defines it, eiren. li. 1. ca. 19.) the
company of 3. persons (or more) gathered together to do an unlawful act,
although they do it not. See unlawful assembly.

Assets (quod tantundem valet) Bract. li. 5. tract. 3. ca. 8. nu. 2. is nothing
but the French (assez. 1. satis) For though this word masque under the vizard
of a substantive, it is in truth but an adverb. It signifies in our common
law, goods enough to discharge that bruden, which is cast upon the executour
or heir, in the satisfying of the testators or ancestors debts or legacies.
See Brook, titulo Assets per descent: by whom you shall learn, that
whosoever pleads assets, says nothing, but that he against whom he
pleads; has enough descended or come to his hands, to discharge that which
is in demand. The author of the new terms of law, makes. 2. sorts of
assets, viz. assets par descent, and assets enter mains. the former, being to
be alleged against an heir, the other, against an executor or administrator.

Assign (assignare) both it self, and the French (assigner) come of the
latin. It has two significations: one general: as to appoint a depute, or to
set over a right unto another. In which signification, Britton. fo. 122. says
this word was first brought into use, for the favor of Bastards; because they
cannot run under the name of heirs to their fathers, and therefore were, and
are comprised under the name of (assignees) The other signification of this
word is especial, as to appointe at, or set forth. viz. to assign error. old.
br. not. fo. 19. is to show in what part of the process error is committed. To
assign false judgment. eodem. fo. 17. that is, to declare how and where the
judgment is unjust. To assign a false verdict. eodem. fo. 112. and to assign
an oath to be false. anno. 9. R. 2. ca. 3. To assign the cessor, old. not. br.
fo. 134. 1. to show how the plaintiff had cessed, or given over. To assign
wast, is to show, wherein especially the wast is committed. Reg. orig f. 72.

Assign, in the general signification is used. anno 20. Ed 1. and anno 11. H.
6. cap. 2. in these words: Justices assigned to take assizes. And the
Substantive (assignement) has the same signification. Wests symb. part 1.
lib. 2. sect. 496. and seq. In which manner is also used the adjective
(assignee, assignatus) viz. for him that is appointed or deputed by another to
do any act, or perform any business, or enjoy any commodity. And an assignee
may be either in deed, or in law. Assignee in deed, is he that is appointed by
a person, an assignee in law is he, whom the law so makes without any
appointment of the person. v. Dyer fol. 6. number. 5. Perkins in Grauntes says,
that an assignee is he, that occupies a thing in his own right, and depute,
he that does it in the right of another.

Assise (assisa) comes of the French (assise) which in the grand custumarie
of Normandy, cap. 24. is defined to this effect. Assise is an assembly of
Knights and other substantial men, with the Bailiffe or Justice in a certain
place, and at a certain time appointed. And again, cap. 55. Assise is a
court, in the which whatsoever is done, ought to have perpetual strength. This
Normane word (assise) comes of the French (asseoir. ^. collocare) to settle
or bestow in some place certain: as (s^asseoir) is to sit down by another.
And metaphorically it is used of things incorporeall: as (asseoir son judgment
sur quelque lieu) is, interponere iudicium suum. Of this verb comes the
participle (assis) as (estre assis) i. sedere. And this Participle in the grand
custumarie of Normandy, cap. 68. is used, as we would say: appointed, limited,
or determined, viz. (au iour qui est assis a fair la battaille, se doibuent
les champions offrir a la justice) that is: at the day which is appointed for
the combat, the champions ought to offer themselves to the Justice. So that by
all these places compared together, it is evident whence the original of this
word (assise) flows. How diversely it is used in our common law, it follows
that we declare. First Litleton in the chapter, Rents. says, that it is
aequivocum: where he sets down three several significations of it: one, as
it is taken for a writ: another, as it is used for a Jury: the third, as for
an ordinance. And him, he that lists, may read more at large. My collections
have served me thus: first (assise) is taken for a writ directed to the
Shyreeue, for the recovery of possession of things immovable, whereof your
self, or your auncestor have been disseised. And this is as well of things
corporal as incorporeall rights, being of four sorts: as here they follow in
their order.

Assise of novel disseisin (assisa nova disseisina) lies where a tenent in
Fee-simple, Fee-taile, or for term of life, is lately disseised of his lands
or tenements, or else of a rent service, rent seck, or rent charge, of common
of pasture, of an office, of toll, tronage, passage, pownage, or for a nuisance
levied, and diverse other such like. For confirmation whereof, you may read
Glanvile lib. 10. cap. 2. Bracton lib. 4. tract. 1. per totum. Britton. cap.
70. and seqq. Register orig. fol. 197. Fitz. not. br. fol. 177. 178. 179. new
book of entries. fol. 74. col. 3. West. 2. cap. 25. anno 13. Ed. 1. And to
this may aptly be added the Bill of fresh force (friscae fortiae) which is
directed to the officers or magistrates of Cities or Towns corporate, being a
kind of assise for recovery of possession in such places within 40. days
after the force, as the ordinary assise is in the county. Fitzh. not. br. fo.
7. c. This the Civilians call, iudicium possessorium recuperandi.

Assise of mort d' auncester (assisa mortis antecessoris) lies, where my
father, mother, brother, sister, uncle, aunte, etc. died seized of lands,
tenements, rents, etc. that he had in see simple, and after his death a
stranger abateth: an it is good, as well against the abatour, as any other in
possession. How likewise this is extended, see Bracton. li. 4. tract. 3. per
totum. Britton. ca. 70. cum multis sequent. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 114. Register.
orig. fo. 223. This the Civilians call, Iudicium possessorium adipiscendi.

Assise of darrein presentment (assisa vltima praesentationis) lies, where I,
or mine auncestor have presented a Clerk to a Church, and after (the Church
being void by the death of the said Clerk or otherwise) a stranger
presents his Clerk to the same Church, in disturbance of me. And how
otherwise this writ is used; See Bracton. li. 4. tract. 2. Register. orig. fo.
30. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 195.

Assise de vtrum (assisa vtrum) lies either for a parson against a lay man, or
a lay man against a parson, for land or tenement doubtful, whether it be lay
see, or free alms. And of this, see Bracton. li. 4. tract. 5. cap. 1. and
seqq. Brit. ca. 95. The reason why these writs be called assizes, may be
diverse. First, because they settle the possession, and so an outward right in
him that obteineth by them. Secondly, they were originally spedde and executed
at a certain time and place formerly appointed. For by the Norman law, the
time and place must be known 40. days before the Justices sat of them: and
by our law, there must be likewise 15. days of preparation, except they be
tried in those standing courts of the king in Westminster: as appears by
Fitzh. not. br. fo. 177. D. E. Lastly, they may be called assizes, because they
are tried most commonly by especial courts, set and appointed for the purpose:
as may be well proved not only out of the custumarie of Normandy, but our
books also: which show, that in ancient times, Justices were appointed by
especial commission, to dispatch controversies of possession, one or more, in
this or that only county, as accasion fell out, or disseisins were offered,
and that as well in term time, as out of term: whereas of later days, we
see that all these commissions of asseses, of air, of oyer and terminer, of
gaol delivery, and of nisi prius, are dispatched all at one time, by two
several circuits in the year; out of term, and by such as have the greatest
sway of Justice, being al of them, either the Kings ordinary Justices of his
benches, Sergeants at the law, or such like.

Assise, in the second signification (according to Litleton) is used for a
Jury. For (to use his own example) it is set down in the beginning of the
record of an assise, of novel disseisin. Assissa venit recognitura; which is as
much to say, as Iuratores veniunt recognituri. The reason why the Jury is
called an assise, he gives to be this: because by the writ of assise, the
Shyreeue is commanded, quod faciat duodecim liberos and legales homines de
viceneto etc. videre tenementum illud, and nomina eorum imbreviari, and quod
summoneat eos per bonas summonitiones, quod sint coram Iustitiarijs, etc.
parati inde facere recognitionem, etc. This is (as if he should have spoken
shorter) metonymia effecti. For they are called the assizes, because they are
summoned by virtue of the writ so termed. And yet the Jury summoned upon a
writ of right, is likewise called the assise, as himself there confesses:
which writ of right is not an assise. But this may be said to be (...), or
abusiuely so termed. Assise, in this signification, is divided in magnam and
paruam. Glanvile lib. 2. ca. 6. 7. etc. and Britton. c. 12. where it appears,
wherein the great assise differs from the petit assise: whom I wish to be
read, by those that would be further instructed in this point. For this place,
thus much in short. The former 4. kinds of assizes used in actions only
possessory, be called petit assizes, in respect of the graund assise. For the
law of feese is grounded upon two rights: one of possession, the other of
property: and as the grand assise serves for the right of property, so the
petit assise serves for the right of possession. Horns myrror of Justices,
lib. 2. cap. de novel. disseisin.

Assise in the third signification according to Litleton, is an ordinance or
statute: as the statute of bread and ale made, anno 51. H. 3 is termed the
assise of bread and ale (assisa panis and ceruiciae, Regist. orig. fol. 279. b.
The assise of Clarendon, (assisa de Clarendon) whereby those that be accused of
any heinous crime, and not able to purge themselves by fire and water, but must
abjure the realm, had liberty of 40. days to stay, and try what succor
they could get of their friends, toward their sustenance in exile. Stawnf. pl.
cor. fol. 118. out of Bracton li. 3. tract. 2. cap. 16. number. 2. Of this also
Roger Hoveden makes mention, and more particularly then any that I have read,
part poster. suorum annalium, fol. 313. b. in Henrico secundo. Assise of the
Forest, (assisa de Foresta) which is a statute or constitution touching orders
to be observed in the kings forest. Manwood part. 1. of his Forest laws, page
35. Crompton in the Court of the Justices of the Forest per totum, fol. 146.
and seq. And the assise of the king, anno. 18. Ed. 3. stat. 1. called the
statute for view of Francke pledge. And these be called assizes, because they
set down and appoint a certain measure, rate, or order in the things which
they concern. Of assise in this signification does Glanvil also speak, lib.
9. cap. 10. in fine. Generaliter verum est quod de quolibet placito quod in
comitath deducitur and terminatur, misericordia quae inde prouenit, vicecomiti
debetur: quae quanta sit, per nullam assisam generalem determinatum est. And
thus much touching Litletons division. But if we mark well the writers of the
law, we shall find this word (assise) more diversely used, then this author
has noted. For it is used sometime for the measure or quantity it self, (and
that per Metonymiam effecti) because it is the very scantline described or
commanded by the ordinance: as for example we say, when wheat, etc. is of
this price, then the bread, etc. shall be of this assise. This word is further
taken, for the whole process in court upon the writ of assise, or for some
part thereof, as the issue or verdict of the Jury. For example, assizes of new
disseisin, etc. shall not be taken, but in their shires, and after this manner,
etc. mag. char. cap. 12. And so it seems to (...)nifie, Westminster. 2. cap. 25.
anno 13. Ed. 1. in these words: let the disseisiours allege no false
exceptions, whereby the taking of the assizes may be deferred, etc. And anno
34. Ed. 1. stat. 2. if it be found by assise: the assise in arrained: to aver
by the assise: the assise by their default shall pass against them: and also
an. 1. H. 6. cap. 2. assizes awarded by default of the tenants, etc: Lastly, by
Merton, cap. 4. anno 20. H. 3. certified by the assise, quite by the assise,
etc. And in this signification, Glanvile calls it, magnam assisam domim
regis: quae ex duodecim ad minus legalium hominum sacramentis consistit. lib.
2. cap. 7. Bracton uses it in like sort: as assisa cadit in transgressionem.
lib. 4. cap. 30. and assisa cadit in perambulationem. codem. cap. 31. number. 2.
Fleta defines an assise in this signification, thus: Assisa in iure
possessorio, est quaedam recognitio duodecim hominum iuratorum, per quam
Iusticiary certiorantur de articulis in breui contentis. An assise also thus
signifying, is said sometime to pass, (per modum assisae) and sometime in
modum (...)ata. in manner of an assise, when only the disseisin in question, is
put to the trial of the twelve in manner of a jury, when as any exception is
objected to disable the interest of the disseisee, and is put to be tried by
the twelve, before the assise can pass. As for example: Quaestio status, causa
successionis, causa donationis, pactum sieve conditio vel co^nentio, voluntas
and dissimulatio, transactio, vel quietaclamatio vel remissio, confirmatio sieve
consensus, propria vsurpatio rei propriae, difficultas iudicij, iustum
iudicium, finis, chirographum, intrusio in rem alienam, vel disseisina, si in
continenti reijciatur, negligentia quae per transitum temporis excludit
actunem. Fleta. lib. 4. cap. 10.. 1. whom read also to this point, cap. 11..
Siautem a Domino: and at large, cap. 16. eiusdem libri. and lib. 5. cap. 6..
Item. vertitur assisa and seq. And note that assise in this signification, is
taken four ways, Old not. br. fol. 105. The first, is assise at large, which
is taken as well upon other points, as upon the disseisin. For example, where an
infant brings an assise, and the deed of his auncestor is pleaded, whereby he
claims his right or foundeth his title: then the assise shall be taken at
large: that is, the Jury shall enquire, not only whether the plaintiff were
disseised or not by the tenent, but also of these other points: viz. whether
his auncestor were of full age, of good memory, and out of prison, when he
made the deed pleaded. Another example out of Kitchen, fol. 66. The tenent
pleads a foreign release, in bar to an assise, whereupon the cause was
adiourned. At the day the tenent makes default. Therefore the assise was taken
at large: that is, not only whether the plaintiff were disseised, but also
whether there be any such foreign release. A third example you may read in
Litleton. cap. Estates upon condition. The second manner of assise in point of
assise (assisa in modum assisae) which is, when the tenent, as it were, setting
foot to foot with the demandant, without further circumstance, pleads
directly contrary to the writ, no wrong, no disseisin. The third manner is,
assise out of the point of assise (assisa extra assisam, vel in modum iuratae.)
viz. when the tenent alleges some by exception, that must be tried by a
Jury, before the principal cause can proceed: as if he plead a foreine
release, or foreine matter tryable in another county. For in this case, the
Justices refer the record to the Court of common plees, for the trial of the
foreine plee, before the disseisin can come to be discussed. Of this sort read
diverse other examples in Bracton, lib. 4. part. 1. cap. 34. For there be of
them (as he says) and Britton also, cap. 52. both dilatorie and peremptory.
The fourth and last manner is: assise of right of damages, and that is, when
the tenent confessing a putting out, and referring it to a demurter in law,
whether it were rightly done or not, is adjudged to have done wrong. For then
shall the demandant have a writ to recover damages, which is called assise to
recover damages, as also the whole process.

Assise, is further taken for the court, place, or time, where and when the
writs and processes of assise be handled or taken. And in this signification
assise is general: as when the Justices pass their several circuits, every
couple with their commission, to take all assizes twice in the year. For he
that speaks of any thing done, at that time, and in that place, will commonly
say, that it was done at the general assise. It may likewise be special, in
this signification: as if an especial commission should be granted to certain
(as in ancient times they often were, Bracton. lib. 3. cap. 11. in fine) for
the taking of an assise upon one disseisin or two: any thing done in the court
before them, a man would say, it was done at such an especial assise. And in
this very signification does Glanvil use it, lib. 9. cap. 12. in these words:
Si contra dominum suum and non infra assisam, tunc distringitur ipse occupator,
etc. and lib. 13. cap. 32. in these words: cum quis itaque infra assisam domini
regis. i. infra tempus a domino rege de consilio procarum ad hoc constitutum,
quod quandoque maius, quandoque minus censetur, alium unjust and sine iudicio
disseisiver(...), etc. Of this word assise, you may read in M. Skene, de
verbo. signif. verbo. Assise, and by him understand, that in Scotland also it
is diuersely used, viz. in 5. several significations. And touching the fifth
signification, he has these words: An assise is called a certain number of
men lawfully summoned, received, sworn and admitted to judge and discern in
sundry civil causes, syke as perambulations, cognitions, molestations,
pourpresture, division of lands, serving of brieues, and in all and sundry
criminal causes decided and tried by an assise: whereof there are two kinds:
one ordinarily in use, which may be called a little assise of the number of 13.
or 15 persons: the other, called a great assise, which consists of 25.
persons, etc. The rest is very worth the reading.

Assisa continuanda, is a writ directed to the Justices assigned to take an
assise, for the continuance of the cause, in case where certain records
alleged, cannot in time be procured by the party that would use it. Reg. orig.
f. 217.

Assisa proroganda, is a writ directed to the Justices of assise, for the stay
of proceeding, by reason of the Kings buisnes, wherein the party is employed.
Register. orig. fo. 208. and fo. 221.

Association (associatio) is a patent sent by the King, either of his own
motion, or at the suite of the plaintiff, to Justices appointed to take assizes
of novel disseisin, or of oyer and terminer, etc. to take others unto them as
fellows and colleagues in that business. The dirivation is plain: the examples,
and sundry uses hereof you may find, in Fitz^. not. br. fo. 185. E. and fo
111. B. but more particularly in the Reg. orig. f. 201. 202. 205. 206. 207.
223. 224.

Assoile (absolvere) comes of the French (absouldre) and signifies to
deliver or set free from an excommunication. Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 72. in words
to this effect: Otherwise the defenda^t should remain in prison, until the
plaintiff were assoyled, that is, delivered from his excommunication.

Assumpsit, is a voluntary promise made by word, whereby a man assumeth or
takes upon him to perform or pay any thing unto another. This word contains
any verbal promise made upon consideration, which the Civilians express by
diverse words, according to the nature of the promise, calling it sometime
pactum, sometime sponsione^, sometime promissionem, pollicitationem or
constitutum, the word seems to be drawn from the latin (assumptio) quae
significat professionem. l. P. ad municipalem.

Attache (attachiare) comes of the French (attacher. i. figere, nectere,
illigare, defigere, alligare.) In our common law it signifies, to take or
apprehend by commandment or writ. And M. Lamberd in his eirenarch. li. 1.
cap. 16. makes this difference between an arrest and an attachement, that an
arrest proceeds out of lower courts by precept, and an attachment out of
higher courts by precept or writ: and that a precept to arrest has these
formal words (duci facius etc) and a writ of attachment these words:
(praecipimus tibi quod attachies talem, and habeas eum coram nobis etc. whereby
it appears, that he which arresteth, carries the party arrested to another
higher person to be disposed of forth with, he that attacheth, keeps the
party attached, and presents him in court at the day assigned in attachement.
yet I observe out of Master Kitchen, that an attachement issues out of a court
baron, which is a low court. cap: Attachment in court baron, fo. 79. Another
difference there is, that an arrest lies only upon the body of a man, and an
attachement some time upon his good, as shall be showed in the sequel. It may be
likewise asked how an attachement and a (capias) do differ: and how an
attachement and a (cape) and an attachement and a distress. First that an
attachement differs from a (capias) it appears by Kitchen in these words:
fo. 79. Note that in a court Baron a man shall be attached by his goods; and a
(capias) shall not go out thence. whereby I gather, that an attachement is more
general, taking hold of a man's goods, and a (capias) of his body only. Then
an attachement differs from a (cape) in this, because a (cape) be it (cape
magnum) or (cape parvum) takes hold of immoveables, as lands or tenements, and
are properly belonging to action real: as you may gather out of their forms,
in Fitzh. not. br. whereas attacheme^t has rather place in actions personal,
as Bracton plainly sets down. li. 4. tracta. 4. ca. 5. nu. 3. Where
nevertheless it appears, that a (cape) may be likewise used in an action
personal. An attachement (as it is formerly said) takes hold of moveable
goods or the body. For it appears, by Kitchen. fo. 263. that a man may be
attached by a hundred sheep. Read Skene, de verbo. signific. verbo
attachiamentum.

Now it follows to show how attachement differs from a distress. For so it
does, as may be showed out of Kitchen, fo. 78. where he says, that process in
court baron, is summons, attachment, and distress, out of the owld. not. br.
fo. 27. where it is said, that a process in a (quare impedit) is summons,
attachement, and one distress, and, again fo. 28. wheare (speaking of the
writ) ne admittas) he says thus: and the process is one prohibition, and
upon the prohibition an attachment and distress, and fo. 32. in a writ of
(Indicauit) you have these words: and after the attachment returned, the
distress shall go out of the rols of the Justices. Bracton on the other side,
li. 5. tract. 3. ca. 4. nu. 2. shows, that both (attachiamentum, and magnum
cape, districtiones sunt). of which opinion Fleta also is, li. 5. ca. 24.. si
autem ad. But there also he says, that (attachiamentum est districtio
personalis, and cape magnum districtio realis. So that by his opinion,
districtio is (genus) to attachement. Britton in his 26. chapter, has words to
this effect: but in attachement of felony, there comes no distress,
otherwise then by the body. And if the Shyreeue return in the cases aforesaid,
that the trespassours have nothing in his bayliwick, by the which they may be
distreined, it must be awarded that he take their bodies, etc. In which place,
an attachement is plainly used, for an apprehension of an offender by his
goods. So that to conclude, I find no difference between an attachment, and a
distress, but these two^ that an attachement reaches not to lands, as a
distress does, and that a distress touches not the body (if it be properly
taken) as an attachement does. yet are they diverse times confounded, as may
appear by the places formerly alleged, and by Glanvile. li. 10. ca. 3. and
Fleta. li. 2. ca. 66. and seqq. How be it, in the most common use, an
attachment is an apprehe^sion of a man by his body, to bring him to answer the
action of the plaintiff: a distress is the taking of another man's goods, for
some real cause, as rent, service, or such like, whereby to drive him to
replevie, and so to be plaintiff in an action of trespass, against him that
distreined him. And so much for the difference, and cohere^cie of these words.
See also Distres.

I find in West. part. 2. symbolaio. titulo. proceedings in chauncerie. sect.
22. 23. that attacheme^t out of the chau^cery is twofold, one simple, and
originally decreed for the apprehension of of the party: the other, after
return made by the Shyreeue quod defendens non est inventus in baliva sua, with
proclamations made through the whole courtie, in such places, as he shall
think meet, that the party appear by a day assigned, and that he attached
never the less, if he may be found. This second kind has an affinity with
the canonists (vijs and modis) at the which if the party appear not, he is
excommunicate: or with the Civilians (vijs and modis vna cum intimatione) For
in the chau^cerie, if he com not upon this, he is forth with pressed with a
writ of rebellion.

There is an attachment of privilege, which is a power to apprehend a man in a
privileged place, or else, by virtue of a man's privilege, to call another to
this or that court, whereunto he himself belongs, and in respect whereof,
he is privileged. New book of entrise. verbo privilege. fo. 431. col. 2.
There is also a foreine attachement, which is an attachement of a foriners
goods found within a liberty or city, to satisfy some creditour of his
within the city. There is also an attachement of the forest, which is a court
there held. For (as M. Manwood says) in his first part of forest laws, p.
90. 92. 99. there be three courts of the forest, whereof the lowest is called
the (Attachement) the mean, the (swaynemote) the highest, the (Justice seat
in air.) This court of attachement seems so to be called, because the
verderours of the forest have therein no other authority, but to receive the
attachements of offenders against vert and venison, taken by the rest of the
officers, and to enrol them, that they may be presented and punished at the
next Justice seat. Manwood. part. 1. pa. 93. And this attaching is by three
means, by goods and catels, by body, pledges, and mainprise, or by the body
only. The court is kept every. 40. days throughout the year. And he that
has occasion to learn more of this, I refer, him to M. Manwood, loco quo
supra, and to M. Crompton in his court of the forest. Attachement is
commanded in writs, the diversity whereof you may see, in the Register
original under the word Attachiamentum in indice.

At large, see assise at large in the word assise, and owld not. br. fo. 105.
Verdict at large. Littleton. fo. 98. To vouch at large. owld. not. br. fo. 108.
To make title at large. Kitchen. fo. 68. See Bar.

Attaint (attincta) comes of the French, as you shall see in the word
(attainted) But as it is a substantive, it is used for a writ that lies after
judgment, against a Jury that has given a false verdict in any court of
record (be the action real or personal) if the debt or damages surmount the
sum of 40. shillings: what the form of the writ is, and how in use it is
extended, see Fitzena. br. fol. 105. and the new book of entries, fol. 84.
colum. 1. The reason why it is so called, seems to be, because the party
that obtains it, endeavors thereby to touch, deprehend, or stain the Jury
with perjury, by whose verdict he is grieved. What the punishment of this
perjury is, or of him that brings the writ against the Jury, if he fail in
his proof, see Glanvile lib. 2. cap. 19. Fitz. not. br. fol. 109. K. Io. and
110. A. B. C. D. etc. the terms of the law, verb. Attaint. Fortescue cap. 26.
Smith de rep. Anglo. lib. 3. cap. 2. and anno 11. H. 7. cap. 21. and an. 23. H.
8. cap. 3. and others. In what diversity of cases this writ is brought, see
the Register orig. in Indice.

Attainted (attinctus) comes of the French (teindre. i. tingere: the
participle whereof is (teinct: i. tinctus,) or else of (attaindre. i. assequi,
attingere.) It is used in our common law, particularly for such as are found
guilty of some crime or offense, and especially of felony or treason. How be
it a man is said to be attainted of of disseisin. Westminster. 1. cap. 24. and 36.
anno 3. Ed. 1. And so it is taken in French likewise (as estre attaint and
vayncu en aucun cas) is to be cast in any case. Which makes me to think that
it rather comes from (attaindre) as we would say in english catched,
overtaken, or plainly deprehended. And Britton ca. 75. uses the participle
(attaint) in the sense that we say (attained unto) A man is attainted by two
means: by appearance or by process. Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 44. Attaynder by by
appearance, is by confession, by battelll, or by verdict. idem. fo. 122.
Confession whereof attaynt grows, is double: one at the bar before the
judges, when the prisoner upon his endictment read, being asked guilty or not
guilty, answeareth guilty, never putting himself upon the verdict of the
Jury: the other is before the coroner in sanctuary, where he upon his
confession was in former times constreyned to abjure the Realm. which kind
also of the effect, is called attaynder by abiuration. Idem. fo. 182. Attaynder
by battle is, when the party appealed by another, and choosing to try the the
truth by combat rather then by Jury, is vanquished. Idem. fo. 44. Attaynder by
verdict is when the prisoner at the bar answering to the endictment not
guilty: has an enquest (...) life and death passing upon him and is by their
verdict or doom^ pronounced guilty. Idem fo. 108. and 192. Attainder by
process (otherwise called attainder by default, or attainder by outlagarie) is
where a party flies, and is not found until he have been five times called
publicly in the county, and at the last outlawed upon his default. Idem.
fol. 44. I find by the same author. fol. 108. that he makes a difference
between attainder and conviction, in these words: And note the diversity
between attainder and conviction, etc. And with this agrees the Statute, anno
34. and 35. H. 8. cap. 14. in ipso principio, and anno 1. Ed. 6. cap. 12. in
these words: that then every such offender being duly thereof convicted or
attainted, by the laws of this realm, etc. And again, in these words: Every
woman that is, or shall fortune to be wife of the person so attainted,
convicted, or outlawed, etc. To this you may likewise add the flat. anno 2.
and 3. Edw. 6. cap. 33. And I find by Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 66. that a man by
our ancient laws, was said to be convicted presently upon the verdict
(guilty) but not to be attainted, until it appeared that he was no clerk: or
being a clerk, and demanded of his ordinary, could not purge himself. So
that a man was not attainted upon conviction, except he were no Clerk: and, in
one word, it appears, that attainder is larger then conviction; conviction
being only by the Jury.

And attainder is not before judgment, Perkins Graunti. number. 27. 29. Yet it
appears by Stawnf. fol. 9. that conviction is called attainder sometime. For
there he says, that the verdict of the Jury does either acquit or attaint a
man: and so it is, Westminster. pr. cap. 14. anno 3. Ed. 1. This ancient law
touching the conviction and purgation of Clerks, is altered, by anno 23. Eliz.
cap. 2. as you may farther read in Clergy.

Attainder (Attinctus) though it be most used in matters of felony and
treason: yet is it likewise applied to inferior transgressions, as to
disseisin, Westminster. 1. cap. 36. anno 3. Ed. 1. and Britton cap. 26. See Attaint,
and Attainted.

Attendant (attendens) comes of the French (attendre. i. demorari, opperiri,
expectare, praestolari,) it signifies in our common law, one that owes a
duty or service to another, or after a sort depends of another. For example,
there is Lord, mesn, and tenent: the tenent holds of the mesn by a penny; the
mesn holds over by two pence. The mean releaseth to the tenent all the right
he has in the land, and the tenent dies. His wife shall be endowed of the
land, and she shall be attendent to the heir of the third part of the penny,
and not of the third part of the two pence. For she shall be endowed of the
best possession of her husband. Another has, Kitchen, fol. 209. in these
words: where the wife is endowed by the guardian, she shall be attendant to the
guardian, and to the heir at his full age: with whom agrees Perkins also, in
Dower. 424.

Attorney (atturnatus) comes of the French (tourner. i. vertere) as, tourner
son esprit a fair quelque chose, i. animum ad rem aliquam inclinare.) Thence
comes the participle (turn. i. versus, conversus,) and the Substantive
(tour. i. vices, vicissitudo) as, chacun a son tour, i. quilibet sua vice.) It
signifies in our common law, one appointed by another man to do any thing in
his stead, as much as (procurator) or (fyndicus) in the civil law, West.
part 1. Symbolayogr. lib. 2. sect. 559. defines it thus: Atturneys be such
persons, as by the consent, commandment, or request, do take heed, fee to, and
take upon them the charge of other men's business in their absence, by whom they
are commanded or requested. And where it seems that in ancient time, those
of authority in Courts, had it in their arbitriment, whether they would suffer
men to appear, or sue by any other then themselves, as is evident, by Fitz.
not. br. fol. 25. in the writ. Dedimus potest atem de atturnato facundo, where
it is showed, that men were driven to procure the kings writs or letters
parents to appoint Atturneys for them: it is sithence provided by Statutes,
that it should be lawful so to do without any such circuit, as by the Statute.
anno 20. H. 3. cap. 10. anno 6. Ed. 1. cap. 8. anno 27. eiusdem. stat. 2. an.
12. Ed. 2. 1. anno 15. eiusdem cap. vnico. anno 7. Ric. 2. cap. 14. anno 7. H.
4. cap. 13. anno 3. H. 5. cap. 2. anno 15. H. 6. cap. 7. and anno 17. H. 7.
cap. 2. is to be proved. And you may see great diversity of writs, in the
table of the Regi. origin. wherein the king by his writ commands the Judges
to admit of Atturneys. Whereby there grew at the last so many unskillful
Atturneys, and so many mischiefs by them, that provision for restraining them
was requisite. Wherefore anno 4. H. 4. cap. 18. it was ordained, that the
Justices should examine them, and displace the unskillful. And again, anno 33.
H. 6. cap. 7. that there should be but a certain number of them in
Northfo(...) and Southfolke. In what cases a man at this day may have an
Attorney, and in what not, see F^^. vbisupra. Attorney is either general or
special: Attorney general is he, that by general authority is appointed to
all our affairs or suites: as the Attorney general of the king. pl. cor. fol.
152. which is as much as (Procurater Caesaris) was in the Roman Empire.
Attorney general of the Duke, Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 105. Attorney special or
particular is he, that is employed in one or more causes particularly
specified. Atturneys general be made after two sorts: either by the kings
leters patents before him or the Lord Chancelour, or by our appointment before
Justices in air in open court, Glanvile li. 11. cap. pri. Britton. cap. 126.
whom of this thing you may read more at large. There be also in respect of
the diverse courts, Atturneys at large, and Atturneys special, belonging to this
or that court only. The name is borrowed of the Normanes, as appears by the
custumarie, cap. 65. And I find the word (attornati) or as some read (tornati)
in the same signification in the title (de statu regularium) ca. vnico.. Perro
i. n sexto.) where the gloss says, that Atturnati dicuntur Procuratores apud
acta constituti. Our old Latin word for this seems to be (responsalis)
Bract. lib. 4. cap. 31. and lib. 5. part 2. cap. 8. and so it is in Scotland
at this day, but especially for the Attorney of the defendant, as (prolocutor)
is for the persewer. M. Skene de verb. significatione. Responsalis, as Sig^nius
witnesses, in his first book de regno Italy, was in ancient time, the title
of the Popes ambassador, page 11.

Attorney of the court of wards and Liueries (Atturnatus regis in curia
Wardorum and Liberaturaru^) is the third officer in that Court, who must be a
person learned in the laws of the land, being named and assigned by the king.
At his admission into the office, he takes an oath before the Master of the
said court, well and truly to serve the king, as his Attorney in all courts,
for and concerning any matter or cause, that touches the possessions and
hereditaments limited to the survey and government of this court, and to
procure the kings profit thereof: truly to council the king, and the Master
of the Court, in all things concerning the same, to the best of his cunning,
wit, and power: and with all speed and diligence from time to time at the
calling of the Master, to endeavor himself for the hearing and determination
indifferently of such matters and causes, as depend before the Master: not to
take any gift or reward in any matter or cause depending in the court, or else
where, wherein the king shall be party, whereby the king shall be hurt,
hindered, or disinherited: to do to his power, wit, and cunning, all and every
thing that appertains to his office.

Attorney of the Court of the Duchy of Lancaster, (Atturnatus curia Ducatus
Lancastriae) is the second officer in that Court, and seems, for his skill in
law; to be there placed as (assessor) to the Chanceler of that court, being for
the most part, some honorable man, and chosen rather for some especial trust
reposed in him to deal between the king and his tenants, then for any great
learning, as was usual with the Emperors of Rome, in the choice of their
Magistrates.

Attournment (attornamentum) comes of the French (tourner. i. vertero) and in
our common law, is an yielding of the tenent to a new Lord, or acknowledgement
of him to be his Lord. For otherwise he that buyeth or obtains any lands or
tenements of another, which are in the occupation of a third, cannot get
possession: yet see the statute, an. 27. H. 8. cap. 16. The words used in
atturnment are set down in Litleton. I agree me to the grant made to you,
etc. But the more common atturnment is to say: Sir, I attourn to you by force
of the same grant: or, I become your tenent, etc. or else deliver unto the
grauntee a penny, halfepeny, or farding, by way of attournment, Litleton lib. 3.
cap. Attournment. 10. whom you may read more at large, and find that his
definition proceeds from more law then Logicke^ because he sets down
diverse other cases in the same chapter, whereto attournment appertains as
properly as unto this. But you may perceive there, that attournment is the
transposing of those duties that the tenent ought to his former Lord, unto
another, as to his Lord: and also, that attournment is either by word or by
act, etc. Also attournment is voluntary, or else compulsorie, by the writ
termed Per quaeseruitia, Owld. not. br. fol. 155. or sometime by distress.
Fitzh. not. br. fol. 147. Lastly, attournment may be made to the Lord himself
or to his Steward in Court, Kitchen. fol. 70. And there is attournment in
deed, and attournment in law. Coke vol. 6. fo. 113. a. Attournment in law,
is an act, which though it be no express attournment, yet in intendment of law
is all one.

(Atturnato faciendo vel vecipiendo) is a writ which a man oweing suite to a
county, hundred, weapon take, or other court, and desiring to make an
attorney, to appear for him at the same court, whom he doubts whether the
Shyreeue or bailiffe will admit or not for his Attorney there, purchases, to
command him to receive such a man for his attorney, and admit his appearance
by him. The form and other circumstances whereof, see in Fitzh. not. br. fo
156.

Audiendo and terminando, is a writ, but more properly termed a commission,
directed to certain persons, when as any great assembly, insurrectio^, or
heinous demeanure or trespass is committed in any place, for the appeasing,
and punishment thereof. which you may read at large, in Fitzh. not. br. fo.
110. See also oyer and terminer.

Andience court (Curia audientiae Cantuariensis) is a court belonging to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, of equal authority with the Arches court, though
inferior both in dignity and antiquity. The original of this court was,
because the Archeb. of Canterbury heard many causes extra iudicially at home in
his own palace, in which, before he would finally determine any thing, he did
usually commit them to be discussed by certain learned men in the civil and
canon laws, whom thereupon be termed his auditors. And so in time it grew to
one especial man, who at this day is called (Causarum negotiorumque audientiae
Cantuariensis auditor seu officialis. And with this office has heretofore
commonly been joined the Chancelership of the Archbishop, who medleth not in
any point of co^tentious jurisdiction, that is, desciding of causes between
party and party (except such as are ventilated pro forma only, as the
confirmation of bishops elections, or such like) but only of office, and
especially such as are voluntariae iurisdictionis, as the granting of the
custody of the spiritualties, during the vacation of Bishoprics, Institutions
to benefices, dispensing with banes of matrimony, and such like. But this is
now distinguished in person from the Audience. Of this Audience court, you may
read more in the book, entitled De antiquitate ecclasiae Brittannicae
historia.

Audita querela, is a writ, that lies against him, who having taken the bond
called (statute Merchant) of another, and craving or having obtained execution
of the same at the Mayor and Bayliffes hands, before whom it was entered, at
the complaint of the party who entered the same, upon suggestion of some just
cause why execution should not be granted; as a release, or other exception.
This writ is granted by the Chaunceler of England, upon veiwe of the exception
suggested, to the Justices of the common bank, or of the Kings benche, willing
them to grant summons to the Shyrecue of the county, where the creditour is,
for his appearance at a certain day before them. See more in owld. not. br. fo.
66. and Fitzh. not. br. fo. 102.

Auditour (auditor) comes of the French (auditeur) and in our law,
signifies an officer of the king, or some other great personage, which yearly
by examining the accounts of all under officers accountable, makes up a
general book, that shows the difference between their receipts or burden,
and their allowances, commonly called (allocations): as namely, the auditors
of the exchequer, take the accounts of those receivers, which receive the
revenewes of the augmentation: as also of the Shyrceues, escheatours,
collectours, and customers, and set them down and perfect them. Him that will
read more of this, I refer to the Statut. anno. 33. H. 8. c. 33.

Auditors of the Prests, are also officers in the exchequer, that do take and
make up the great accounts of Ireland, Berwick, the mint, and of any money
imprested to any man.

Auditour of the receipts, is an officer of the exchequer, that fileth the
Tellers bills, and makes an entry of them, and gives to the Lord Treasurer a
certificate of the money received the week before. He makes also (Debenturs)
to every Teller, before they pay any money, and takes their accounts. He
keeps the black book of the receipts, and the Treasurers key of the
treasury; and sees every Tellers moneys locked up in the new treasury.

Adventure. is a mischance, causing the death of a man without felony: as when
he is suddenly drowned, or burnt, by any soden disease falling into the water or
fire. Britton. ca. 7. where you may see, what it differs from Misadventure.
See Misadventure.

Average (averagium) by M. Skenes opinion (verbo arage) de verborum
significatione, comes of the word (averia.) i. a beast, and so consequently
signifies service which the tenent owes to to the Lord, by horse or carriage
of horse. I have heard others probably derive it from the French (euvrage) or
(euvre. i. opus.) It seems with us to have two diverse significations; for the
first, Rastall. titulo Exposition of words. makes mention of the Kings
averages, which I take to be the kings cariages by horse or cart. Then. anno.
32. H. 8. ca. 14. and anno. 1. Iacobi, ca. 32. it is used for a certain
contribution that merchants and others do every man proportionably make toward
their losses; who have their goods cast into the sea for the safeguard of the
ship, or of the goods and lives of them in the ship in time of a tempest.
And this contribution seems to be so called, because it is proportioned,
after the rate of every man's average or goods carried.

Averijs captis in withernam, is a writ for the taking of catell to his use,
that has his catell taken unlawfully by another, and driven out of the county
where they weretaken, that they cannot be repleuied. Register. original. fo.
82. a. b. See Withernam.

Averment (verificatio) comes from the French (averer. i. testari) as averer
quelque mescha^cete. i. extrahere scelus aliquod in lucem ex occultis tenebris.
It signifies (according to the author of the terms of law) an offer of the
defendant to make good, or to justify and exception pleaded in abatement or
bar of the plaintifs actio^. But me thinks it should rather signify the
act, the^ the offer of justifying the exception, by diverse places where I find
it used. For example. an 34. Ed. 1 stat. 2. And the demaundant will offer to
aver by the assise or Jury. where to offer to aver and to aver must
needs differ: and again in the same staint. and the demaundaunt will offer to
aver by the country, etc. thirdly in the english not. br. fo. 57. These
errors shall be tried by averment, etc.

Averpennie (quasi Averago penny,) is money contributed toward the Kings
averages. Rastall exposition of words. See Average.

Augmentation (augmentatio) was the name of a court, erected the 27 year of H.
8. as appears by the 27. chapter of that years parliament. And the end
thereof was, that the king might be justly dealt with touching the profits of
such religious howses and their lands, as wear given unto him by an act of
parliament the same year not printed. For the dissolving of which court, there
was authority given to Queen Mary, by the parliament held the first year of
her reign. ses. 2. ca. 10. which she afterward put in execution by her leters
patents. The name of the court grew from this, that the revenewes of the
crown were augmented so much by the suppression of the said houses, as the
king reserved unto the crown, and neither gave nor sold away to others.

Aulne of Renish wine. a. 1. Ed. 6. ca. 13. alias, Awme of Renish wine. 1.
laco. ca. 33. is a vessel that contains 40. gallons.

Aulnegeowr. See Alneger.

Avo, is the name of a writ for the which see (Ayle).

Awncell weight, as I have been informed, is a kind of weight with scoles
hanging, or hooks fastened at each end of a staff, which a man lifts up
upon his forefinger, or hand and so discerns the equality or difference
between the weight and the thing weied. In which, because there may, and was
wont to be great deceit, it was forbidden. anno. 25. Ed. 3. stat. 5. ca. 9.
and anno. 34. eiusdem. ca. 5. and the even balance only commanded, yet a man
of good credit, once certified me, that it is still used in leaden hall at
London among butchers etc. In the deriuation of this word, I dare not be over
confident. But it may probably be thought to be called (awnsell weight, quasi
hand sale weight) because it was and is performed by the hand, as the otheris
by the beam. And if I should draw it from the greek, (...). i. cubitus. the
part of the arm from the elbowe to the fingers ends, I might challenge a good
warrant of this from the Romans; who thence derived their (ancile). i. the
luckie shield, that was said to be sent from heaven in a tempest to Numa
Pompilius, together with a voice, that the city of Rome stould be the
mightiest of all others, so long as that shield remained in it.

Ancient, d(...), (antiquum dominicum) is called (more at large anncient
demeasn of the king or of the crown. Fazb. not. brifo. 14. d. It comes of 2.
French words (auncien. 1. veter, vetus, veteranus, antiquus) and of (demaine,
alias domaire. i. publicum vectigal) It signifies in our common law, a
certain tenure, whereby all the manners belonging to the crown, in the days
of Saint Edward the Saxon king, or of William the conqueror, did hold. The
number and names of which manners, as all other, belonging to common persons, he
caused to be written into a book, after a survey made of them, now remaining
in the exchequer, and called Domes day look. And those, which by that book
do appear, to have belonged to the crown at that time, and at (...)
contained under the title (Terrae regis) be called ancient demeasn. Kitchen.
fo. 98. and M. Gwin. in the preface to his readings. Of these tenants there
were two sorts, one that held their land frankely, by charter, and another that
held by copy of court roll, or by verge, at the will of the Lord, according to
the custom of the manner. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 14. d. of which opinion also
Brittonis, ca. 66. nu. 8. The benefit of this tenure, consists in these
points; first, the tenants of a manner holding freely by charter in this sort,
cannot be impleaded, out of the same manner: and if they be, they may abate the
writ, by pleading their tenure before or after answer made. Secondly, they be
free of toll for all things concerning their sustena^ce and husba^dry. Thirdly,
they may not be e^paneled upon any e^quest. Terms of the law. but more at large
by Fitzh. not. br. fo. 14. d. whom read, as also fo. 128. a. etc. And as it
appears by him. eodem. fo. 4. B. C. these tenants held by the service of
plowing the kings land, by plashing his hedges, or by such like, toward the
maintenance of the kings household; in which regard they had such liberties
given them, wherein, to avoid disturbance, they may have writs to such as take
the duties of toll in any market or feire; as likewise for immunitye of
portage, passage, and such like. Fitzh. not. br. f. 228. A. B. C. D. by which
author it also appears, that no lands be to be accounted ancient demeasn,
but such as are holden in socage. fo. 13. D. et. 14. B. C. See Monstraverunt,
and Firtzh. fo. 14. and Dessendo quietum de telonio. fo. 226. Fleta makes
three tenures holding of the crown: ancient demeasn, by escheate, and by
purchase. li. 1. ca. 20. See Demaine.

Ancient Demesne arere (antiquum dominicum aretro) is that ancient demesne,
which the king grants over to hold of a manner. Kitchen. fo. 67. b.

Avowe (advocatus) see Advowe. Britton says that Avowe is he, to whom the
right of advowzen of any Church appertains, so that he may present thereunto
in his own name, and is called avowe for a difference from those, that
sometime present in another man's name: as a gardia^ that presents in the name
of his ward, and for a difference also from them, which have the lands
whereunto an advowzen appertains, but only for term of their lives, or of
years, or by intrusion or desseisin. ca. 92.

Avowrie. See Advowrie.

Avoir de pois, is in true French (avoir du poix. i. habere pondus, aut iusti
esse ponderis) It signifies in our common law, two things: first, a kind of
weight diverse from that, which is called Troy weight containing but 12. ounces
to the pound, where as this contains sixteen. And in this respect it may be
probably coniectured, that it is so called, because it is of more weight then
the other. Then also it signifies such merchandise, as are waied by this
weight, and not by Troy weight. as in the statute of York anno 9. Ed. 3. in
prooem. anno. 27. Ed. 3. Statuto 2 ca. 10. at anno. 2 Rich. 2. cap. 1. See
Weights.

Auxilium ad filium militem faciendum, and filiam maritandam, is a writ
directed to the Shyreeue of every county, where the king or other lord has
any tenants, to leuye of them reasonable aid toward the knighting of his son,
and the marriage of his daughter. See Aid, and Fitz. not. br. fol. 82.

B
BAcheler (Bachalaureus) comes of the French (Bachalier. i. tyro) and
thereupon I think, those that be called Bachelors of the Companies in London,
be such of each company, as be springing toward the estate of those that be
employed in Counsel, but as yet are inferiors. For every company of the twelve,
consists of a Master, two Wardens, the Liuerie, which are assistants in
matter of Council, or at the least, such as the Assistants be chosen out of,
and the Bachelors, which are yet but in expectance of dignity among them, and
have their function only in attendance upon the Master and Wardens. I have
read in an old monument, this word Bacheler, attributed to the Lord Admiral of
England, if he be under a Baron, in French words to this effect: and it is to
weet, that when the Admiral rides to assemble a snippe of war, or other,
for the business and affairs of the Realm, if he be a Bacheler, he shall
take for his day wages, 4. (...). sterling: if he be an Earl or Baron, he
shall take wages after the rate of his estate and degree. This word is used,
anno 13. R. 2. stat. 2. cap. i. and signifies as much as Bacheler Knight does,
anno 3. Ed. 4. cap. 5. that is, a simple Knight, not a Knight baneret. See
Banaret. Touching the farther etymology of this word, Bachalarii, test Renano,
a bacillo nominati sunt, quia primi studii authoritatem, quae per exhibitionem
baculi concedebatur, iam consecuti fuissent. Vt fuerit velut quoddam
mancipationis signum in huiusmodi aliquod studium baculi traditio. Alciat
writes the word (baccalaurei, eosque dicit visos a bacca laurea nomen
sumpsisse. in l. cui praecipua 57. P. de verbo. significa.

Backberond. is a Saxon word. and almost English at this day, signifying as
much as bearing upon the back, or about a man. Bracton uses it for a sign or
circumstance of manifest theft, which the Civilians call, furtum manifestum.
For dividing (furtum, in manifestum, and non manifestum) he defines (furtum
manifestum) in this sort: Furtum vero manifestu^ est, vbi latro deprehensus est
seisitus de aliquo latrocinio: sc. hand habend and backberend, and insecutus
fuerit per aliquem cuius res illa fuerit. li. 3 tract. 2. cap. 32. Master
Manwood in the second part of his forest laws, notes it for one of the 4.
circumstances or cases, wherein a Forester may arrest the body of an offender
against vert or venison in the Forest. For by the assise of the Forest of
Lancaster (says he) taken with the manner is, when one is found in the kings
Forest in any of these four degrees: sc. stable stand, dog draw, back
bear, and bloody hand. In which place you may find all these interpreted.

Badger, comes of the French (bagage, i. sarcina, impedimentu^,) It
signifies with us, one that buyeth corn or victuals in one place, and carries
it into another. See Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 69. and 70.

Baye or pen is a pond head made up of a great heith, to keep in a great
quantity or store of water, so that the wheels of the furnace or hammer
belonging to an Iron mill, may stand under them, and be driven by the water
coming out of them by a passage or flud-gate (called the penstocke) and
falling upon the said wheels. This word is mentioned in the statute, anno 27.
El. cap. 19.

Bail (Ballium, plevina, manucaptio) comes of the French (bailler, i.
attribuere, tradere, tribuere.) It is used in our common law, properly for the
freeing or setting at liberty of one arrested or imprisoned upon action either
civil or criminal, under surety taken for his appearance at a day and place
certainly assigned. Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 8. number. 8. and 9. The
reason why it is called Bail, is, because by this means the party restrained,
is delivered into the hands of those that bind themselves for his
forth-comming. There is both common and special bail. Common bail, is in
actions of small prejudice, or flight proof: being called common, because any
sureties in that case are taken: whereas upon causes of greater weight or
apparent specialtie, special bail or surety must be taken: as subsidy men
at the least, and they according to the value. Master Manwood in his first part
of Forest laws, page 167 makes a great difference between bail and
mainprise, in these words: and note that there is a great diversity between
bail and mainprise. For he that is mainprised, is always said to be at large,
and to go at his own liberty out of ward, after that he is let to mainprise,
until the day of his appearance, by reason of the said common summons or
otherwise. But otherwise it is, where a man is let to bail, by four or two
men, by the Lord chief Justice in air of the Forest, until. a certain day.
For there he is always accounted by the law, to be in their ward and custody
for the time. And they may, if they will, keep him in ward or in prison at that
time, or otherwise at their will. So that he which is so bailed, shall not be
said, by the law, to be at large, or at his own liberty. See Lamberds
eirenarcha. lib. 3. cap. 2. page 330. Bail, is also a certain limit within
the forest, accordingly as the Forest is divided into the charges of several
Foresters. Crompton in the oath of the bow-bearer, fol. 201. See Maynprise.

Baylife (ballivus) comes of the French (bailif. i. diaecetes, nomarcha,
praefectus Prouinciae) and as the name, so the office it self, in ancient
time, was very aunswerable to that of France and Normandy: for as in France
there be sixteen Parlaments, (Lupanus de Magistratibus Francorum, lib. 2. cap.
Parlamentum) which be high courts, whence lies no appeal: and within the
preeincts of those several parts of that kingdom, that belong to each
Parliament, there be several provinces, unto which, within themselves, justice
is ministered by certain officers called bayliffes: so in England we see many
several counties or shires, within the which justice has been ministered to
the inhabitants of each county, by the officer whom we now call Shyreeue or
Vicount (one name descending from the Saxons, the other from the Normans.) And
though I cannot expressly prove, that this Shyreeue was ever called a
bailiffe: yet is it probable, that that was one of his names likewise, because
the county is called many times (balliva) that is a Bayliwicke: as namely, in
the return of a writ with (non est inuentus,) he writes thus: (A. S. infra
scriptus, non est inventus in balliva mea, post receptionem huius brevis)
Kitchen returna brevium. fol. 258. and again in Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2.
cap. 33. number. 3. and anno 5. Eliz. cap. 23. and anno 14. Ed. 3. stat. 1. cap.
6. And I think the word (bailife) used cap. 28. of Magna charta, compriseth as
well Shyreeues, as bailiffes of hundreds: as also anno 14. Ed. 3. stat. 1. cap.
9. But as the realm is divided into Counties: so every County is again
divided into hundreds, within the which it is manifest, that in ancient times,
the kings subjects had justice ministered unto them, by the several officers of
every hundred, which were called bailiffes, as those officers were and are in
France and Normandy, being chief officers of justice within every Province.
Lupanus de Magistratibus Francorum, lib. 2. cap. Balivi. and the grand
custumary of Normandy, cap. 1. And that this is true among many others, I
bring Bracton for my witness, li. 3. tract. 2. cap. 34. n. 5. where it appears
that bailiffes of hundreds might hold plee of appeal and approuers. But
fithence that time, these hundred courts (certain franchises excepted) are by
the statute anno 14. Ed. 3. stat. 1. cap. 9. swalowed into the County courts,
as you may read in county and hundred. And the Bailiffes name and office is
grown into such contempt, at the least, these bailiffes of hundreds, that they
are now but bare messengers and mandataries within their liberties to serve
writs, and such like base offices: their office consisting in 3. points only,
which see in Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 49. a. Yet is the name still in
good esteem some other way. For the chief Magistrates in diverse towns
corporate be called Bailiffes, as in Ipsewitch, Yarmouth, Colchester, and such
like. And again, there be certain, to whom the kings castles be committed,
which are called Bailifs, as the Bailiffe of Dover castle.

These ordinary bayliffes are of two sorts: baylifs errant, and baylifs of
franchises. Baylifes errant (ballivi it inerantes) be those which the Shyreeue
makes, and appoints to go hither and thither in the county to serve writs,
to summon the county, sessions, assizes, and such like. Baylifs of franchises
(ballivi franchesiarum aut libertatum) be those, that are appointed by every
lord within his liberty, to do such offices within his precincts, as the
baylife errant does at large in the county. Of these read S. Thomas Smith, de
repub. Anglo. li. 2. ca. 16. There be also baylifes of the forest. Manwood
part 1. pa. 113. There be likewise baylifes of husbandry, belonging to
private men of great substance, who seem to be so called, because they dispose
of the under servants every man to his labor and task, check them for
misdoing their buisenes, gather the profits of their lord and master, and
deliver an account for the same at the years end, or otherwise as it shallbe
called for. The word baylife or balivus, is by Rebuffus derived from (Baal. i.
dominus, quia ballivi dominantur suis subditis, quasi eorum magistri and
domini. Rebuf. in constitut. regias. de senten. executionis. art. 7. glos. 1.
The office or duty of a bayliffe of a manner or household (which in ancient
time seems to have been all one) Fleta well describes, li. 2. ca. 72. and
73. This word is also used in the canon law, ca. dilect^. de sentent. excom.
in sexto. and ca. pri. de poenis in clement. where the glossographer says, it
is a French word, signifiing as much as (praepositus) and (balia) or
(balivatus) is used among our later interpreters of the civil and canon law,
for provincia, as balliua here in England, is used for a county or shire.

Balkers See Conders.

Ballivo amove^do, is a writ to remove a baylife out of his office, for want
of sufficient living with in his bayliwick. Reg. orig. f. 178.

Bane, seems to signify the destruction or overthrow of any thing. Bracton.
li. 2. tracta. 2. ca. 1. nu. 1. as he which is the cause of of another man's
drowning, is said there to be la bane. i. malefactor. In that Bracton, in the
place aforesaid, prefixeth a French article to this word, it should seem by
his opinion, that the word is French, but I find it not in any French writer
that ever I read.

Baneret (banerettus) in M. Skenes opinion, seems to be compounded of (baner)
and (rent) whom read more at large of this, verbo. Baneret. de verbo. signi.
but our M. Camden, rather draws the word from the German (bannerheires.
Brittan. pae. 109. in meo libro. S. Thomas Smith de repub. Auglo. li. 1. ca.
18. says, that baueret is a Knight made in the field, with the ceremony of
cutting of the point of his standard, and making it, as it were, a baner. And
they being before bachelors, are now of greater degree, allowed to display
their arms in a baner in the Kings army, as barons do. M. Camden vbi supra,
has these words of this matter, Baneretti, cum vasallorum nomen iam desierat,
a baronibus secundi erant: quibus inditum nomen a vexillo. Concessum illis erat
militaris virtutis ergo, quadrato vexillo (perinde ac barons) vti. vnde and
equites vexillarii a nonnullis vocantur, etc. Of creating a knight baneret, you
may read farther, in M. Segar. Norrey his book. li. 2. ca. 10. That they be
next to barons in dignity, it appears by the statut. an. 14. R. 2. c. 11.
and by anno. 5. R. 2. stat. 2. ca. 4. it may be probably coniectured, that they
were aunciently called by summons to the court of parliament. and anno. 13. R.
2. stat. 2. ca. 1. we find, that a baneret for praying a pardon for a
murderer, contrary to that statut, is subject to all one punishment with a
baron. Johan: Gregorius Tholosanus. li. 6. ca. 10. sui syntagmatis. nu. 9. has
these words: In Gallia sunt duae species affines nobilium and feudorum, quas
dicunt de benneretz and barons. Benneretus iure suae dignitatis, antequam talis
dici mereatur, nobilis esse debet genere, in quarto gradu, possidens in ditione
december scutarios bachalarios armoru^: id est, december vasallos habens sufficiens
patrimonium, quo possit secum ducere quatuor aut quinque nobiles comites
continuos, cum equitibus duodecim aut sexdecim. Fit autem Benneretus, cum
princeps huiusmodi personae concedit vexilli ius, and ex vexillo peditum in
acie, vel extra, die solenni, sacris peractis, admit acumina. Vocant la queve
de pennon, fitque labarum, id est, equitum vexillum, vocant cornette eumque
equitem facit, si iam non est. Quod si ditior his fiat benneretus, and habet
vnam benneretam, aut sex equites bachalarios, qui possideant singuli in censum
sexcentas libras ex eius ditione seu feudo, tunc possunt ex licentia principis,
baronis nomen sibi adsciscere.

Bans (bannus vel bannum) signifies a public notice given of any thing. The
word is ordinary among the feudists, and grown from them to other uses: as to
that which we here in England call a proclamation, whereby any thing is
publicly commanded or forbidden. Vincentius de Franchis. descis. 521. and
360. Hotoman verbo bannus, in verbis fendalibus says that there is both
(ba^nus) and (bannum) and that they signify two diverse things. His words are
these: Bannus sieve bannum duo significat: Edictu^, qua die vasalli equis
armisque instructi, ad comitatum adesse debent: and sanctione^, hoc est,
mulctam edicto non parentis. which he confirms by diverse authorities. This
word (bans) we use here in England, especially in the publishing of
matrimonial contracts in the church, before marriage, to the end that if any
man can say against the inte^tion of the parties, either in respect of kindred
or otherwise, they may take their exception in time. And in the canon law,
Banna, sunt proclamationes sponsi and sponsae in ecclesijs fieri solitae. ca.
27. extra de sponsal. and ca. vlt. qui matrimonium. accus. pos. and ca. vlt de
clan. despons. Yet our word (banning) seems to come thence, being nothing but
an exclamation of another. Only Bracton, once makes mention of bannus regis,
for a proclamation, or silence made by the crier, before the congresse of the
champions in a combat. li. 3 tracta. 2. ca. 21.

Bank (bancus) comes of the French (banque. i. mensa) In our common law, it
is most usually taken for a seat or bench of judgment, as bank leroy the
kings bench. bank de common plees: the bench of common plees, or the common
bench. Kitchen. fo. 102. called also in latin bancus regius, and bancus
communium placitorum. Crompt. iuris. fo. 67. and 91. Camden in his Britannia.
pa. 112. and 113. in meo. calls them also bancum regium and bancum communem.
See frank bank.

Bankrupt, (alias bankrowte.) comes of the french (banque route) and (fair
banqueroute) with the French, is as much as (foro cedere, sol^^ vetere) with
the Romans. The composition of the French word I take to be this (banque. i.
monsa) and (route. i. vestigium) metaphorically taken from the sign left in
the earth, of a table once fastened unto it, and now taken away. So that the
original seemeh to have sprung from those Romain (mensary) which (as appears
by many wrighters) had their (tabernas and mensas) in certain public places,
whereof, when they were disposed to fly, and deceive men that had put them in
trust with their moneys, they left but the signs or carcases behind them. I
know that others of good learning (and M. Skene for one) bring this (a banco
rupto) but the French word works in me this other opinion, for after their
sense, the French should rather be banque rompu. Bankrupt with us signifies
him or his act, that having gotton other men's goods into his hands, hides him
self in places unknown, or in his own private house, not minding to pay or
restore to his creditours their duties. anno. 34. H. 8. ca. 4. where the french
phrase (fair banque route) is translated to the word, to make bankrupt. A
bankrupt, anno. 1. Iacobi. ca. 15. is thus described: All and every such person
and persons, using, or that shall use the trade of merchandise, by way of barg
aining, exchange, bartrey, cheuisance, or otherwise in gross, or by seeking
his, her, or their trade of living by buying and selling, and being a subject
borne of this Realm, or any the kings dominions, or denizen, who at any time
sithence the first day of this present parliament, or at any time hereafter,
shall depart the Realm, or begin to keep his or her house or houses, or
otherwise to absent him or her self, or take sanctuary, or suffer him or her
self willingly to be arrested for any debt or other thing, not grown or due
for money delivered, wares sold, or any other just or lawful cause, or good
consideration or purposes, or has or will suffer him or her self to be
outlawed, or yield him or her self to prison, or willingly or fraudulently has
or shall procure him or her self to be arrested, or his or her goods, money,
or chatels to be attached or sequestered, or depart from his or her dwelling
house, or make, or cause to be made any fraudulent grant or conueyance of his,
her, or their lands, tenements, goods or chatels, to the intent or whereby his,
her, or their creditours being subjects borne, as aforesaid, shall or may be
defeated or delayed forth recovery of their just and true dept: or being
arrested for debt, shall after his other arrest, lie in prison fix months or
more, upon that arrest, or any other arrest or detention in prison for debt,
and lie in prison six months upon such arrest or detention, shall be
accounted and adjudged a bankrupt to all intents and purposes.

Banishment (exilium, abiuratio) comes of the French (bannissement) and has
a signification known to every man. But there be two kinds of banishments in
England: one voluntary and upon oath, whereof you may read (Abiuration:) the
other upon co^pulsion for some offense of crime: as if a layman succor him
that, having taken sanctuary for an offense, obstinately refuses to abjure
the realm, he shall loose his life and member: if a Clerk do so, he shall be
banished, Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 117. This punishment is also of our modern
Civilians called (bannime^tum) which was aunciently termed (deportatio) if it
were perpetual, or (relegatio in insulam,) if for a time. Vincentius de
Franchis. Petrus de Belluga in suo speculo. fol. 125. number. 4.

Barbaries (Oxyeantha) is a thornie shrub known to most men to bear a bery or
fruit of a sharp taste. These beries (as also the leaves of the said tree) be
medicinable, as Gerara in his herball shows, lib. 3. cap. 21. You find them
mentioned among drugs to be garbled, anno 1. Jacob. cap. 19.

Bard, alias, Beard. See Clack.

Bargain and sale, as it seems by West. part. 1. symb. lib. 2. sect. 436. is
properly a contract made of manners, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and other
things, transferring the property thereof from the bargainer to the barganee.
But the author of the new terms of law adds, that it ought to be for money:
saying farther, that this is a good contract for land, etc. and that fee-simple
passes thereby, though it be not said in the deed (To have and to hold the
land to him and to his heirs,) and though there be no liuerie and seisin made
by the seller, so it be by deed indented, sealed, and enrolled, either in the
County where the land lies, or within one of the kings courts of Records at
Westminster, within six months after the date of the deed indented, anno 27.
H. 8. cap. 16.

Barkarie (Barkaria) is a heath house. New book of Entries, titulo. Assise
corp. polit. 2. Some call it a Tanne house.

Baron (Baro) is a French word, and has diverse significations here in England.
First, it is taken for a degree of Nobility next unto a Vicount. Bracton. lib.
1. cap. 8. number. 4. where he says, they be called Barons, quasi robur belli.
And in this signification it is borrowed from other nations, with whom Baroniae
be as much as Prouinciae. Petrus Belluga in speculo princip. fol. 119. So
Barons be such, as have the government of Provinces, as their fee holden of
the king: some having greater, some lesser authority within their territories,
as appears by Vincentius de Franchis in diverse of his desceisions, and
others. Yet it may probably be thought, that of old times here in England all
they were called Barons that had such Seigniories, as we now call court-barons,
as they be at this day called Seigneurs in France, that have any such manor or
lordship. Yea, I have heard by men very learned in our Antiquities, that near
after the conquest, all such came to the Parliament, and sat as Nobles in the
upper house. But when by experience it appeared, that the Parliament was too
much pestered with such multitudes: it grew to a custom, that none should come
but such, as the king, for their extraordinary wisdom or quality, thought
good to call by writ; which writ ran (hac vice tantum.) After that again men
seeing this estate of Nobility to be but casual, and to depend merely upon
the Princes pleasure, they sought a more certain hold, and obtained of the
King, leters patents of this dignity to them and their heirs male. And these
were called Barons by leters patents or by creation: whose posterity, be now by
inheritance and true descent of Nobility, those Barons that be called Lords of
the Parliament: of which kind the king may create more at his pleasure. It is
thought nevertheless, that there are yet Barons by writ, as well as Barons by
leters patents, and that they may be discerned by their titles: because the
Barons by writ are those, that to the title of Lord have their own surnames
annexed, as Compton, North, Norice, etc. whereas the Barons by leters patents,
are named by their Baronies. These Barons which were first by writ, may now
justly also be called Barons by prescription, for that they have continued
Barons in themselves and their ancestors time, beyond the memory of man. The
original of Barons by writ Master Camden in his Britannia page 109. in meo.
refers to Henry the third Barons by leters patents or creation, (as I have
heard among our Antiquaries) were first created about the days of Henry the
sixth* the manner of whose creation read in Master Stowes Annals, page 1121.
Of all these you may also read Master Ferui glory of Generositie, pa. 125 and
126. And see M. Skene de ver. signif. verb. Baro. with Sir Thomas Smith, lib.
1. de rep. Anglor. cap. 17. who says, that none in England is created Baron,
except he can dispend a thousand pound by year, or a thousand marks at the
least. To these former, Master Seager (by office) Norrey, lib. 4. cap. 13. of
Honor civil and military, adds athird kind of Baron, calling them barons
by tenure, and those be the Bishops of the land: all which by virtue of
baronries annexed to their bishoprics, have always had place in the upper
house of Parliament, and are termed by the name of Lords spiritual.

Baron in the next signification is an Officer: as barons of the Exchequer be
to the king: of which the principal is called Lord chief Baron (capitalis
Baro) and the three other (for so many there be) are his assistants in causes
of justice, between the king and his subjects, touching causes appertaining to
the Exchequer.

The Lord chief Baron at this day, is the chief Judge of the court, and in
matter of law, information, and plea, answers the bar, and gives order
for judgment thereuppon. He alone in the term time does sit upon Nisi prius,
that come out of the Kings Remembrancers office, or out of the office of the
clerk of of the please, which cannot be dispatched in the mornings for want of
time. He takes recognisances for the Kings debts, for appearances, and
observing of orders. He takes the presentation of all the officers in court
under himself, and of the Mayor of London, and sees the Kings Remembrancer to
give them their oaths. He takes the declaration of certain receivers
accounts of the lands of the late augmentation, made before him by the Auditors
of the shires. He gives the two parcel makers places by virtue of his office.

The second Baron in the absence of the Lord chief baron, answers the bar
in matters aforesaid: he also takes recognisances for the kings debts,
apparences, and observing of orders. He gives yearly the oath to the late
Mayor and escheatour of London for the true account of the profits of his
office. He takes a declaration of certain receyuers accounts. He also
examineth the letters and sums of such Shyreeues foraine accounts, as also
the accounts of Escheatours and Collectours of Subsidies and Fifteens, as are
brought unto him by the auditors of the Court.

The third Baron, in the abse^ce of the other two, answers the bar in
matters aforesaid, he also takes recognisances, as aforesaid. He gives
yearly the oath of the late Mayor and gawger of London for his true acco^pting.
He also takes a declaration of certain receivers accounts: and examineth the
leters and su^mes of such of the former accountants, as are brought unto him.

The fourth barons is always a coursetour of the court, and has been chosen
of some one of the clerks in the remembrancers offices, or of the clerk of the
pipes office. He at the days of prefixion, takes oath of al high shyreeus and
their vndershyreeues, and of all escheatours, baylifs, and other accounta^ts,
for their true accounting. He takes the oath of al collectours, controllers,
surueyours and serchers of the custom houses, that they have made true
entrances in their books. He apposeth all shyreeues vyon their su^mons of the
pipe in open court. He informs the rest of the Barons, of the course of the
court in any matter that concerns the kings prerogative. He likewise, as the
other Barons, takes the declaration of certain receivers accounts: and
examineth the leters and sums of such of the former accountants, as are
brought unto him.

These barons of the exchequer, areauncient officers for I find them named,
westminster. 2. ca. 11. anno. 13. Ed. 1. and they be called barons, because barons of
the realm were wont to be employed in that office. Fleta. li. 2. ca. 24. S.
Thomas Smith says of them, that their office is to look to the accounts of
the Prince: and to that end they have auditors under them: as also to descide
all causes, appertaining to the Kings profits, coming into the exchequer by
any means. This is in part also proved, by the statut anno. 20. Ed. 3. ca. 2.
and. anno. 27. eiusdem. stat. 2. ca. 18. and anno. 5. R. 2. stat. 1. ca. 9. and
12. and anno. 14. eiusd ca. 1^. And hereupon they be of late, men learned in
the common law of the realm: whereas in ancient times, they were others: viz.
maiores and discretiores in regno, sieve de clero essent, sieve de curea. Ockam
in his lucubrations de fisci regij ratione. Horn in his mirror of Justices
says, that barons were wont to be two, and they Knights. ca. De la place del
Eschequer.

Then be there in this signification, Barons of the Cinque ports. anno. 31.
Ed. 3. stat. 2. ca. 2. et anno. 33. H 8. ca. 10. which are two of every of the
seven towns, Hastings, Winchelsey, Ry, Rumney, Hithe, Dover, and Sandwiche,
that have places in the lower house of Parliament. Cromptons iurisd. fo. 28.
Baron in the the third signification, is used for the husband in relation to
his wife: which is so ordinary in all our law writers, that wright in french,
as it were superfluous to confirm it by any one.

Baronet. I read this word, anno. 13. R. 2. stat. 2. ca. 1. but I hold it
falsely printed for Baneret, or else to signify all one with it.

Baronye (baronia, baronagium) is the fee of a baron. In which account are not
only the fees of temporal Barons, but of Bishops also: who have two respects:
one, as they are spiritual men, without possessions, as was the tribe of Levy
among the Israelites, being sustained by the only first fruits and tenthes of
the other tribes. Iosue. ca. 13. versue. 14. The other respect they have,
grows from the bounty of our english Kings, whereby they have baronies at
the least, and are thereby Barons or Lords of the Parliament. This baronie (as
Bracton says, li. 2. ca. 34. is a right indivisible: and therefore if an
inheritance be to be divided among coparceners: though some capital messuages
may be divided: yet, si capitale messuagium sit caput Comitatus, vel caput
Baroniae, he says they may not be parcelled, The reason is, ne sic caput per
plures particul as diuidatur, and plura iura comitatuum and baroniarum
deveniant ad nihilum: per quod deficiat Regnum, quod ex Comitatibus and Baronys
dicitur esse constitutum.

Bar (barra) comes of the French (bar) or barriere (. i. repagalum, obex,
vectis) It is used in our common law, for a peremptory exception against a
demand or plaint: and is by the author of the Terms of law, defined to be a
plee brought by the defendant in an action, that destroieth the action of the
plaintiff for ever. It is divided into a bar to common intent, and a bar
special. Abarte to a common intendment, is an ordinary or general bar,
that ordinarily disableth the declaration or plee of the plaintiff: a bar
special is that, which is more then ordinary, and falls out in the case in
hand or question, upon some special circumstance of the fact. Plowden. casu
Colthirst. fo. 26. a. b. For example, an executor being sued for his testators
debt, pleads that he had no goods left in his hands, at the day when the writ
was purchased or taken out against him. This is a good bar to common
intendment, or (prima sacie) But yet the case may so fall out, that more goods
might come to his hands sithence that time: which if the plaintiff can show by
way of replication, then excep the have a more especial plee or bar to
allege, he is to be condemned in the action. See also Plowden in the case
aofre named. fo. 28. a. b. and Brook. titulo. Bar. nu. 101. and Kitchen. fo.
215. Bar also in the same signification, is divided into bar material, and
bar at large. Kitchen. fo. 68. A bar material (as it seems) may
otherwise be called a bar special: as when one in the stop of the
plaintiffes action, pleads some particular matter, as a descent from him that
was the undoubted owner, a feofment made by the auncester of the plaintiff, or
such like. A bar at large is, when the tenent or defendant by way of
exception, does not traverse the plaintifes title by pleading not guilty, nor
confess and avoid it, but only makes to himself a title in his bar. As if
in an Assise of novel disseisin, the tenent plead a feosment of a stranger
unto him, and gives but a color only to the plaintiff. Of this there is an
apt example to be found. 5. H. 7. fo. 29.

Bar, is also in regard of the effect, divided into bar perpetual and
bar pro tempore. Perpetual is that, which overthrows the actio^ for ever.
Bar pro tempore is that, which is good for the present, and may fail
hereafter: look an example or two in Broke titulo. Bar. nu. 23. where he
says, that to plead (plene administrauit) is good, until it may appear, that
more goods come to the executors hands afterward, which also holds for an
heir, that in an action of his auncesters debt pleads (rien per disce^t.)
This word is also used for a material bar: as the place where Se^geants or
Cou^celers stand to plead causes in court, or prisoners to answer to their
endictments. Of which our common lawyers, that be lyce^ced to plead, in other
contries called licentiati) are termed barristers. anno. 24. H. 8. ca. 24.

Barrator (barectator) comes from the French (barat. i. astutia) and is near
the French it self in signification. For (barateur) in that tongue betokneth a
deceiver: and a barator in our common law, is a common wrangler, that sets
men at ods, and is himself never quiet, but at brawle with one or other. To
this effect you may read M. Lamberds eirenarcha. pa 342. who says likewise,
that barettor (for so he writes is) may seem to come from the latin
(baratro) or (balatro) that is, a (...) knave or unthrift, and (by a metaphor)
a spot in a common wealth See. the statute of champerty. an. 33. Ed. 1. stat.
2. ca. vnico and West. 1. ca. 32. anno. 3. Ed. i. M. Skene de verb. signif.
verbo barratr^, says that barratours be Symonists called of the Italian word
(barrataria) signifying corruption or briberie in a Judge giving a false
sentence for money: whom you may read more at large: as also Hortensius
Cavalcanus, in his tractat de brachio reg 10. part. 5. nu. 66. whose words
are: Barataria verodicitur, quando Iudex aliquid petit indebitum, vt iustitiam
faciat. Who also. nu. 195. partis 5. says thus: barraterii appella^tur, qui
praetorium nimis frequenta^t. And in another place of the same work. Baratria
dicitur, quia fit quoddam barratrum. i. commutatio pecuniae cum iustitia, etc.
See also Aegidius Bossius in practica criminali. titulo de officialibus
corrupt. etc. nu. 2. and 6. Baratariam committunt, Iudices, qui iusticia^ auro
vendunt. Paris Puteola. de syndicatu. verbo Barataria. pa. 217.

Bar fee, is a see of 20. (...). that every prisoner acquitted of felony
pays to the jailer. Crompt. Justice of peace. fo. 158. b.

Barrel, is a measure of wine, oil, etc. containing the 8. part of a tonne,
the 4. of a pipe, and the second of a hogsehead, that is, 31. gallons and a
half. anno. 1. R. 3. ca. 13. But this vessel seems not to contain any
certain quantity, but differs according to the liquor, for a barrel of
beer contains 36. gallons, the Kilderkin, 18. and the firkin, 9. a barrel
of ale 23. gallons the kilderkin 16. and the firkin. 8. gallons. anno. 23. H.
8. ca. 4.

Barriers, comes of the French (bars) and signifies with us that which the
French men call (ieu de bars. i. palastra^.) a martial sport or exercise of
me^, armed and fighting together with short swords, within certain limits or
lists, whereby they are severed from the beholders.

Barter, may seem to come of the French (barater. i. circumv^nire.) It
signifies in our statutes, exchange of wares with wares. an. 1. R. 3. ca. 9.
and so bartry the substantive. anno. 13. Eliza. ca. 7. The reason may be,
because they that choppe and change in this manner, do what they can for the
most part, one to ouer-reach the other. See barratour.

Base estate, is in true French (basestat) It signifies in our common law,
that estate which base tenants have in their lands. Base tenants be they (as M.
Lamberd says in his explica. of Saxo^word^. verbo Paganus) which do to their
lords villeinous service. The author of the terms of law in his Tractat of old
terms, says that to hold in see base, is to hold at the will of the lord.
Kitchen. fo. 41. seems to make base tenure and franck to be contraries: where
it appears, that he puts copy holders in the number of base tenants. And
out of these, I think, that it may be probably coniectured, that every base
tenent holds at the will of the lord, but yet, that there is a difference
between a base estate, and and villenage, which Fitzh. in his not. br. fo. 12.
B. C. seems to confound. For the above named author of the terms of law
says in the place before cited, that to hold in pure villenage, is to do all
that the lord will command him. So that if a copy holder have but base
estate, he not holding by the performance of every commandment of his lord,
cannot be said to hold in villenage. Whether it may be said, that copy
holders, be by custom and continua^nce of time, grown out of that extreme
servitude, wherein they were first created, I leave to others of better
judgment: but Fith. loco citato says, tenure by copy is a term but lately
invented.

Base court, is any court that is not of record, as the court baron. Of this
read Kitchen. f. 95. 96. etc.

Base fee, See base estate.

Baselard (baslerdus) in the statut. anno. 12. R. 2. ca. 6. signifies a
weapon, which M. Speight in his exposition upon Chancer, cal-leth pugimem vol
(...).

Bastard (bastardus) See Bastardy, and See Skeene de verbo siguif. verbo
Bastardus.

Bastardy (bastardia) comes of the French (bastard. i. ^othu^) Cassanans de
consuetis. Burg. pa. 1116. says (bastard) and (silius naturalis) be all one.
Bastardy in our common law, signifies a defect of birth, objected to one
begotten out of wedlock. Bract. li. 5. ca. 19. per totum. How bastardie is to
be proved, or to be inquired into, if it be pleaded, see Rastalls book of
Entrise. tit. Bastardie. fo. 104. Kitchen. fo. 64. makes mention of bastardie
special, and bastardie general. The difference of which is, that bastardie
general is a certificate from the Bishop of the dioces to the Kings Justices,
after just enquiry made, that the party inquired of, is a bastard or not a
bastard upon some question of inheritance. Bastardy special, is a suite
commenced in the Kings court, against him that calls another bastard: so
termed (as it seems) because bastardy is the principal and especial case in
trial, and no inheritance contended for. And by this it appears, that in
both these significations, bastardy is rather taken for an examination or
trial, whether a man's birth be defective or illegitimat*

itself. See Broke titulo. Bastardy. (...). 29. and Docter Ridlies book. pa.
203. 204.

Baston, is in french a staff, club, or coulestaffe. It signifies in the
statuts of our realm, one of the warden of the fleets his servants or
officers, that attends the Kings court with a red staff, for the taking of
such to ward, as be committed by the court. So it is used. anno. 1. R. 2. ca.
12. anno 5. Eliz. ca. 23.

Batable ground, seems to be the ground in question heretofore, whether it
belo^ged to England or Scotland, lying between both the kingdoms. anno. 23.
H. 8. ca. 16. as if we should say debatable ground. For by that name. M. Skene.
de verbo. sign. verbo Plegius. calls ground, that is in controversy between
two.

Battle (duellum) comes of the French (bataille. i. bellum, praelium) and
signifies in our common law, a trial by combat. The manner whereof becauseit
is long, and full of ceremonies, I do for the better and more full
understanding of it, refer you to Glanvile, lib. 2. cap. 3. 4. 5. to Bracton,
lib. 3. tract. 2 cap. 21. fol. 140 to Britton, cap. 22. and to S. Thomas Swith
de repub. Anglorum, li. 2. cap. 7. and lib. 3. cap. 3. See Bombat.

Battery comes of the French batre. i. verberare, cudere, percutere) and
signifies in our common law, a violent striking of any man, which the
Civilians call iniuriam personalem, quia personae infertur per verbera,
cruciatu^, etc. Wesemb. parat. P. de Iniur. and fam. libel.

Baubels (baubella) is an old word, signifying Jewels. To. Hoveden part
poster. suorum annal. fo. 449. b.

Bearding, alias, Barding of wool See Clack.

Bearers, signify all one with Maintainers, anno 20. Edvar. 3. cap. 5.

Beconage (Beconagium) signifies money paid for the maintenance of Becons.

Bewpleder (pulchre placitando) is made of. 2. french words (beau. 1. decorus,
formosus, pulcher) and (pleder. 1. disputare, and causam agere) It signifies
in our common law, a writ upon the statute of Marlbridge or Marlborow, made the
52. year of H. 3. ca. 11. whereby it is provided, that neither in the circuit
of Justices, nor in Counties, Hundreds, or Courts-baron, any fines shall be
taken of any man for fair pleading, that is, for not pleading fairly or aptly
to the purpose. Upon which Statute, this writ was ordained against those, that
violate the law herein. See Fitz. not. br. fol. 270. A. B. C. whose definition
is to this effect: The writ upon the Statute of Marlebridge for not fair
pleading, lies where the Shyreeue or other Bailiffe in his court, will take
fine of the party plaintiff or defendant, for that he pleads not fairly,
etc.

Bedell (Bedellus) comes of the French (bedeau. i. apparitor) and it
signifies with us, nothing else but a messenger or seruitour belonging to a
Court, as a Court Baron or Leet, Kitchen fol. 46. where you may see his oath:
or to the Court of the Forest, Manwood part pri. of his Forest laws. page
221. in these words: A Bedell is an officer or servant of the Forest, that does
make all manner of garnishments of the Courts of the Forest, and also all manner
of Proclamations, as well within the Courts of the Forest as without: and also
does execute all the processes of the Forest. He is like to a Bailiffe errant
of a Shyreeue in a county, etc.

Benefice (Beneficium) is generally taken for all ecclesiastical livings, be
they dignities or other, as anno 13. R. 2. sat. 2. ca. 2 where benefices are
divided into elective, and benefices of gift. So is it used in the Canon law
also. Duarenus de beneficiis. lib. 2. cap. 3.

Beneficio primo ecclesiastico habendo, is a writ directed from the King to the
Chanceler, to bestow the benefice that first shall fall in the kings gift,
above or under such a value, upon this or that man, Regist. orig. fol. 307. b.

Benevolence (Benevolentia) is used both in the Chronicles and Statutes of this
realm, for a voluntary gratuitie given by the subjects to the King. Look
Stowes annals page 701. That it has been something aunciently accustomed, it
appears by him and by the Statute anno 1. Ric. 3. cap. 2. where it is called
a new imposition: and in that respect reprehended by that tyrant in his
predecessors: whether justly or not I cannot say, nor mind to dispute. But
Stowe, page 791. says, that the invention grew from Edward the fourths days.
You may find it also, anno 11. H. 7. ca. 10. to have been yielded to that
worthy Prince, in regard of his great expenses in wars and otherwise. This is
also mentioned and excepted out of the pardon, anno 1. Ed. 6. cap. 15. It is in
other nations called (subsidium charitativum) given sometime to Lords of the
fee, by their tenants, sometime to bishops by their Clergy. Matthaeus de
Afflictis, de scis. 136. Cassan. de conseut. Burg. page 134. 136. Baldus
consitio. 120. vol. 6. page 230. Of this Maenochius makes mention, lib. 2.
centur. (...). ca. 178. and 179. showing, when it is lawful for a Prelate
charitativum subsidium a sibi subditis exigere, and quanta debeat esse eius
summa, setting down eight just causes of this exaction.

Besaile (proavus) is horowed of the French (bisayeul. i. le pere de man pere
grand) the father of my grandfather. In the common law it signifies a writ,
that lies, where the great grandfather was seized in his demesne as of fee, of
any lands or tenements in fee-simple, the day that be dyed, and after his death
a stranger abateth, or enters the same day upon him, and keeps out his
heir, etc. The form and farther use of this writ, read in Fitz. not. br. fol.
221. D. E. F. etc.

Beasts of chase (Ferae campestres) be five of the Forest, chase, or park:
that is, the Bucke, the Do, the Fox, the Martron, and the Roe, Manwood part
prim. of his Forest laws, page 342. and part 2. cap. 4. number. 2.

Beasts of the forest (ferae sylvestres) are the Heart, the Hind, the Hare, the
Boar, and the Wolf, Manwood part 2. of his Forest laws, cap. 4. number. 1.

Beasts and Fowls of Waren, are the Hare, Conie, Fesant, and the Pertridge,
Manwood part 2. cap. 4. number. 3.

Bestaile, comes of the French (bestial. i. pecus) it seems with us to
signify all kind of catell taken for the kings provision, anno 4. Ed. 3. cap.
3. And bestiall is generally used for all kind of catell, anno 1. Iacobi cap.
33.

Bidding of the bedes, was a charge or warning, that the parish Priest gave to
his parishioners, at certain especial times, to say so many Pater nosters,
etc. upon their beads, anno 27. H. 8. cap. 26.

Bigamie (bigamia) signifies a double marriage. It is used in the common law,
for an impediment that hinders a man to be a Clerk, by reason that he has
been twice married. For upon those words of S. Paul to Timothy the first. cap.
3. verse. 2. (Opertet ergo Episcopum irreprehensibilem esse, and vnius vxoris
virum:) the Canonists have founded their doctrine, that he that has been twice
married, may not be a Clerk. And also him that has married a widow, they by
interpretation, take to have been twice married. And both these they do not
only exclude from holy orders, but also deny them all privileges that belong
unto Clerks. But the author of the new terms of law well says, that this
law is abolished by anno 1. Ed. 6. cap. 12. And to that may be added the
statute, anno 18. Elizab. cap. 7. which allows to all men that can read as
Clerks, though not within orders, the benefit of Clergy in case of felony
not especially excepted by some other statute.

Bilanciis deferendis, is a writ directed to a corporation, for the carrying of
weights, to such or such a haven, there to weigh the wools that such a man is
licenced to tra^sport, Reg. orig f. 270. a.

Bilawes, are orders made in court leets or court Barons by common assent, for
the good of those that make them, farther then the public law does bind.
Coke vol. 6. fo. 63. a. Kitchen fo. 45. and 79. These in Scotland are called
(burlawe) or (birlawe) Skene de verbo: sign. verbo Burlawe: where he says
thus: Laws of burlawe, are made and determined, by consent of neighbors
elected and chosen by common consent, in the courts called birlawe courts. In
the which cognition is taken of compleints betwixt neighbor and neighbor:
which men so chosen, are judges and arbitratours to the effect aforesaid, and
are called birlawe men, For (bawr) or (bawrsman) in Dutch is (rusticus) and so
(birlaw) or (burlaw) leges rusticorum. Hitherto M. Skene.

Bilinguis, though it signify in generality a double tounged man; yet in our
common law, it is used for that Jury, that passes between an english man and
an alien. Whereof part must be Englishmen, and part strangers. anno. 28. Ed.
3. ca. 13.

Bille (billa) is diversely used among our common lawyers. First (as West. says
pa. 1. symb. li. 2. sect. 146. it is al one with an obligation, saving that
when it is in e^glish, it is commonly called a bill, and when it is in latin,
an obligation. But I hear other good lawyers say, that a bill, though it be
obligatorie, yet is without condition or forfeiture for non payment: and that
the obligation has both. Bille secondly, is a declaration in writing, that
expresses either the grief and the wrong that the complaynant has suffered,
by the party complained of, or else some fault, that the party complained of,
has committed against some law or statute of the common wealth. This bille is
sometime offered up to Justices errants in the general assizes: sometime, and
most of all, to the Lord Chanceler of England, especially for unconscionable
wrongs done, sometime to others having jurisdiction, accordingly as the law,
wheruppon they are grounded, does direct. It contains the fact complained
of, the damages thereby suffered, and petition of process against the
defendant for redress. West. part. 2. Simbol. titulo supplications. sect. 52.
whom you may read at large touching this matter.

Billa vera, is (as it were) a word of art in our common law. For the grand
enquest empaneled and sworn before the Justices in ear etc. indorsing a bill,
whereby any crime punishable in that court, is presented unto them, with these
two words; do signify thereby, that the presentor has furnished his
presentment or denunciation with probable evidence, and worthy of farther
consideration. And thereuppon, the party presented by the same bill, is said to
stand indicted of the crime, and so tied to make answer unto it, either by
confessing, or traversing the indictment. And if the crime touch the life of
the party indicted, it is yet referred to another enquest, called the enquest
of life and death: who if they find him guilty, then he stands convicted of
the crime, and is by the Judge to be condemned to death. See Ignoramus, see
Indictment.

Billets of gold, comes of the french (billot. 1. massa auri. anno. 27. Ed 3.
stat. 2. ca. 14.

Bynny peper. anno. 1. Iaco. ca. 19.

Black maile, is half english, half french. For in french (maille)
signifies a small piece of money, which we call a halfepeny. It signifies, in
the counties of Comberla^d, Northumberland, Westmerland, and the bishopric of
Durisme, a certain rate of money, corn, catell, or other consideration, paid
unto some inhabiting upon or near the borders, being men of name and power,
allied with certain, known to be great robbers and spoile-takers within the
said counties, to the end thereby to be by them freed, protected, and kept in
safty, from the danger of such as do usually rob and steal in those
parts. an. 43. Eliza. ca. 13.

Black rod, is the huiffier belonging to the order of the Garter, so called
of his black rod that he carries in his hand. He is of the kings chamber,
and also huissier of the parliament.

Blanks, comes of the french (blanc. 1. candidus, albus) It signifies a kind
of coin that was coined in the parts of France 5. by K. H. that were subject
to England: the value whereof was eight pence. Stowes annals. pa. 586. These
were forbidden to be current within this realm. a. 2. H. 6. ca. 9. The reason
why they were called blankes may be, because at the time these were coined in
France, there was also a piece of gold coined, which was called a (Salus) of
the value of 22. shillings from which this silver was in name distinguished by
the color.

Bloody hand. See Backberend.

Blomary, is one of the forges belonging to an iron mill (which also seems
otherwise to be termed a Finary.) The use whereof if you will understand, you
must know, that first there is a furnace, wherein the mine-stones are melted
and cast into a raw iron, fashioned into long wedges three square. that be
called sows. Then be there two forges like unto smithes forges, but much
bigger, the one whereof is called the blomary or (as it seems) the finary,
into the which being maintained with a charcole fire blown with bellows, made
to go by water, are cast the said sowes of raw iron, and melted again, and
by a workman called the finary man, are wound and wrought round, and
afterward beaten by a hammer into little wedges about a yard long, which are
called bloomes. Then is there another forge called the Hammer, into which these
bloomes are cast, and by a workman (called the hammer man) again chafed and
made soft in a charcole fire, blown likewise with bellows caused to go by
the water: and after carried by the said hammer man, and put under the great
hammer driven also by the water. And so the said bloomes are drawn,
fashio^ed, and made into such bars of iron of diverse sorts and forms, as we
see commonly sold. Of these you may read in the statut. anno. 27. Elizab. ca.
19. See Baye.

Bloodwit (blodwita) is compou^ded of 2. Saxon words (blout. i. sanguis) and
(wit) for the which we have the word (wite) still in the West parts of England
signifying a charging of one with a fault, or an vpbraiding. And Speight in his
expositions upon Chawser says, that (to wit) is as much as to blame. (To twit)
in some other places of this land signifies as much as (to hitte in the teeth)
or to vpbraide. This bloodwit is a wot^ used in charters of liberties
aunciently granted, and signifies an amercement for shedding of blood. So
that whosoever had it given him in his charter, had the penalty due for
shedding of blood granted unto him. Rastall in his exposition of words. Skene
de verbo. signif. writes it (bludveit) and says that (veit) in english is
iniuria vel misericordia: and that (bludveit) is an amercement or (vnlawe) as
the Scottishmen call it, for wrong or injury, as bloodshed is. For he that is
infest with (bludveit) has free liberty to take all amercements of courts for
effusion of blood. Fleta says, quod significat quietantiam misericordiae pro
effusione sanguinis. li. 1. ca. 47.

Bockland, See Charterland. See Copy bold and Free hold.

Bonis arrestandis, is a writ, for the which See Arrestandis bonis.

Bonis non amovendis, is a writ to the Shyreeues of London, etc. to charge
them, that one condemned by judgment in an action, and prosecuting a writ of
error, be not suffered to remove his goods, until the error be tried.
Register. orig. fo. 131. b.

Borow (burgus vel burgum) may either come from the French (burg. i. pagus) or
from the Saxon (borhoe. i. vadium, pignus.) It signifies here in England a
corporate town that is not a City. anno. 2. Ed. 3. ca. 3, namely all such as
send Burgesses to the Parliament: the number whereof you may see in M. Cromptons
Iurisd. fo. 24. It may probably be thought, that it was aunciently taken for
those companies consisting of ten families, which were combyned to be one
another pledge or borhoe: See Bracton. li. 3. tractat. 2. ca. 10. See
Headborowe, and Borowhead, and M. Lambard in the duties of constables. pa. 8.
Lynwood upon the provincial (vt singula de censibus), speak to this effect:
Aliqui interpreta^tur burgum esse castrum, vel locum vbi sunt crebra castra.
vel dicitur burgus, vbi sunt per limits habitacula plura constituta.) But then
setting down his own opinion, he defines it thus: Burgus dici potest villa
quacunque unque alia a ciuitate, in qua est vniuersit as approbata. And that he
proves out of the 11. book of Justinians Godex. titulo de fund. rei
priuatae. 65. et. l. 6. eius tituli. where burgus is termed corpus. some derive
it from the greek ((...). i. turris) see M. Skene de verbo. signif. verbo.
Borghe. The late author M. Verslegan in his restitution of decayed
intelligences, says, that (burg) or (burnh) whereof we say yet (Borough) or
(Bourrow) metaphorically signifies a town, having a wall, or some kind of
closure about it: also a Castle. All places that in old time had among our
auncesters the name of borrough, were places one way or other fensed or
fortified.

Bordlands, signify the demeasns, that lords keep in their hands, to the
maintenance of their board or table. Bract. li. 4. tractat. 3. ca. 9. nu. 5.

Borowhead alias Headborowe, (capitalis plegius) by M. Lamberds opinion in his
treatise of Co^stables, is made up of these two words. (borhoe. i. pledge and
(bead) and signifies a head orchiefe pledge. And in explication of this, and
other Saxon words of this nature, he makes an excellent rehearsal of some
ancient customs of England, during the reign of the Saxons, which you may
read. This borowhead (in short) was the head or chief man of the Decurie or
Borhoe, that there he speaks of, chosen by the rest to speak, and to do in
the name of the rest, those things that concerned them. See Borowholders.

Borowhowlders, alias Bursholders, be quasi borboe ealders, signifing the same
officers that be called borowheads. (Lamb. in the duties of Constchles.)
Bracton calls them (Borghie Aldere) li. 3. tractat. 2. ca. 10.

Borow english, is a custumarie descent of lands or tenements, whereby in all
places where this custom holds, lands and tenemenrs descend to the youngest
son: or, if the owner have no issue, to his youngest brother: as in Edmunton.
Kitchen. fo. 102. And the reason of this custom, as (Litleton says) is, for
that the youngest is presumed in law, to be least able to shift for himself.

Borow goods divisable, I find these words in the statute of Acton. Burnel.
anno 11. Ed. 1. statute vnico. and dare not confidently set down the true
meaning of them. But as before the statute of 32. and 34. H. 8. no lands wear
diuisable at the common law, but in ancient baronies: so perhaps, at the
making of the foresaid statute of Acton burnel, it was doubtful, whether
goods were deuisable but in ancient borowes For it seems by the writ. de
rationabili part bonorum, that aunciently the goods of a man were partible
between his wife and children.

Bote, signifies compensation. Lamb, explication of Saxon words. Thence
comes (manbote, alias monbote) that is compensation or amends for a man
slain, which is bound to another. For farther understanding whereof, it is to
be seen in K. Inas laws, set out by M. Lamberd. ca. 96. what rate was
ordained for the expiation of this offense: See Hedgebote, Plowbote, Howsebote.
and read M. Skenede verbo. signif. verbo. Bote.

Botiler of the king (pincerna regis) anno 43. Ed. 3. ca. 3. is an officer that
provides the Kings wines: who (as Fleta li. 2. ca. 21. says) may by virtue of
his office out of every ship laden with sale wines, vnum doleum eligere in
prora navis ad opus regis, and aliud in puppi, and pre qualibet pecia reddere
tantum 20. solid. mercatori. Si autem plura inde habere volucrit, been licebit:
dum tamen precium fide dignorum iudicio pro rege appenatur.

Bowbearer, is an under officer of the forest (as M. Crompton in his iurisdict.
fo. 201, sets down, sworn to the true performance of his office in these
words: I will true man be to the master forister of this forest, and to his
lieuerenent: and in the absence of them, I shall truly oversee, and true
inquisition make, as well of swornemen as unsworn in every bayliwick, both in
the north bail. and south bail of this forest, and of all manner of trespasses
done, either to vert or venison, I shall truly endeavor my self to attach, or
cause them to be attached, in the next court Attachement, there to be
presented, without any concealment had to my knowledge: so help me God, etc.

Bracton (otherwise called Henry of Bracton) was a famous lawyer of this land,
renowned for his knowledge both in the common and civil laws, as appears by
his book every where extant. He lived in the days of Henry the third. Stawn.
praero fo. 5. b. and as some say, Lord chief Justice of England.

Bread of treat, and bread of coket. anno. 51. H. 3. statuto. 1. of bread and
ale.

Bred, signifies broad. This word Bracton uses, li. 3. tracta. 2. ca. 15.
nu. 7. proverbially thus to lange and to bred the meaning whereof you may there
find, word for word it is, as we now speak two long and two broad: or two in
length, and two in breadth.

Breuibus, and ra(...) liberandis, is a writ or mandat to a Shyreeue to deliver
unto the new Shyreeue chosen in his room, the county with the appertenances,
together with the rols, briefes, remembrances, and all other things belonging
to that office. Register. original. fo. 295. a.

Bribours, comes of the french (bribeur. i. mendicus) It seems to signify
with us, one that pilfreth other men's goods. anno 28. Ed. 2. stat. 1. ca. vnico.

Brief (breve) comes from the French (brefou brief. i. brevis) and in our
common law, signifies a writ, whereby a man is summoned to answer to any
action: or (more largely) any precept of the king in writing; issuing out of
any court, whereby he commands any thing to be done, for the furtherance of
iustile or good order. The word is used in the civil law, some time in the
singular number, and masculine gender, as l. vlt. Coa. de conueniendis fisci
debitoribus. li. 10. tit. 2. you have these words: Inter chartulas confiscati
brevis, quidam adseueratur inve^tus, qui nomina co^tineba^ debitoru^. Where it
is used for a short note. Again, I find a title restored by Gothofred; in the
first book of the Code. de quadrimenstruis brevibus. Quadrumenstrus autem
breves erant, qui de singulis indictionum pensionibus, quarte quoque mense
fo^utis, confic^e^ antur. Also Lampridius in Alexandro has it singularly thus:
notarium, qui falsum causae brevem in consilio imperatorioretulisset, etc. And
in the Authe^tiques. Novel. 105. ca. 2. you have this word (breviatores. i.
brevium proscriptores). Breves autem, brevia, brevicula, sunt chartae sive
libelli breves, as Galbofred. there notes. Where he notes likewise out of
Zonaras in Garthagin: Co^cilio, that this is a greek word, thus: (...). See
Skene de verbo. signif. verbo Breue. Of these breifes see also Bracton. li. 5.
tract. 5. ca. 17. nu. 2. Breve quidem cum sit formatum ad similitudinem regula
iuris, quia breviter and paucis verbis intentionem proferentis exponit and
explanat, sicut regula iuris rem quae est breviter charrat. Non tamen ita breve
esse debet, quin rationem and vim intentionis contineat. etc.

Brigandine (lorica) is the french (brigandine) that is a coat of maile. This
is used. anno 4. and 5. Ph. and Mar. ca. 2.

Brigbote, significat quietantiam reparationis pontium. Fleta, li. 1. ca. 47.
It is compounded of (brig) a bridge and (bote) which is a yielding of amends or
supplying a defect. See (Bote) and Bruckbote.

Britton, was a famous Lawyer, that lived in the days of K. Edward the first,
at whose commandment, and by whose authority he writ a learned book of the
law of this realm. The tenure whereof runs in the Kings name, as if it had
been penned by himself, answerably to the Institutions, which Justinian
assumeth to himself, though composed by others. Stawnf. prare fo. 6. and 21.
S. Edward Cook says, that this Britton writ his book in the fifte year of
the said King reign. li. 4. fo. 126. a. and lib. 6. fo. 67. a. M. Guin. in the
preface to his reading, mencioneth, that this John Britton was bishop of
Hereford.

Broke, commonly called S. Robert Broke, was a great lawyer and lord chief
Justice of the common plees in Queen Mar. (...) time. Cromptons Justices of
peace. fo. 2^ b. he made an abbridgement of the whole law, a book of high
accoumpt.

Broker (brocarnis) seems to come from the French (broieur tritor) that is a
gryneder or breaker into small peaces. Because he that is of that trade, to
deall in matters of money and merchandise between English men and Strangers,
does draw the b^rgaine to particulars, and the parties to conclusion, not
forgetting to grind out something to his own profit. Those men be called
broggers. anno. 10. R. 2. ca. i. It may not improbably be said, that this word
comes from

carder. i. cavillari.) because these kind of men, by their deceitful
(...)ches and abusing their true made, many times inuegle others: In Scotland
they be called (broccary) and in their own idiome, blockers or brockers, that
is, mediators or intercessors in any tra^saction, paction, or contract: as in
buying or selling, or in contractting marriage. Skene de verbo. signi. verbo
broccarij.

He that will know what these brokers were wont and ought to be let him read
the statut. anno. 1. Iacobi. ca. 21. These in the civil law are called
(proxenetae) as also of some (licitatores and mediatores titulo de
proxeneticis. in Digestis. This kind of dealer is also of the Romans called
(pararius) Senece. li. 2. de benef. ca. 22. Caelius Rhideginus, libro. 6. ca.
32. and li 3. cap. 35.

Broderers (comes of the French (brodeur) and that comes of (bordure. i.
fimbria, limbus) the edge or hemme of a garmet. And that because it is
distinguished from the rest, most commonly, by some conceipted or costly work;
he that works it, is called (brodeur) in French, and broderor or embroderer
with us.

Broad halpeny, comes of the three Saxon words (bret, or bred,) (...) aboard:
and (halve) that is, for this or that cause (cuius rei gratie) as the Latinists
speak, and (penning) it signifies a toll or custom for setting up of tables
or boords in a Fair or Market. From the which they that are freed by the Kings
Charter, had this word mentioned in there leters patents. In so much, as at
this day the freedom it self (for shortness of speech) is called by the name
of brodehalpenie.

Broggers. See Brokers.

Bruckbote (Pontagium) is compounded of two German words (bruck. i. pons,) and
(bote. i. compensatio.) It signifies with us, a tribute, contribution, or aid
toward the mending or reedifiing of bridges; whereof many are freed by the
kings charter. And thereupon the word is used for the very liberty or
exemptio^ from this tribute. See Pontage and Brigbote.

Bull (bulla) seems to come from the Greek, ((...)). i. consilium) as
Polidorus Virgilius says, de inventio. rerum. lib. 8. cap. 2. It signifies
the leters, by the Canonists called Apostolic, strengthened with a leaden
seal, and containing in them the decrees or commandments of the Pope or
bishop of Rome. The word is used many times in our Statutes: as anno 28. H. 8.
cap. 16. and anno 1. and 2. Ph. and Ma. ca. 8.

Bullion, comes of the French (billon) that is, the place where gold is tried.
It signifies with us, gold or silver in the mass or billet, anno 9. Ed. 3.
stat. 2. cap. 2. and sometime the Kings exchange or place, whether such gold in
the lump is brought to be tried or exchanged, anno 27. Ed. 3. stat. 2. cap.
14. and anno 4. H. 4. cap. 10. See Skene de verbo. signif. verbo Bullion.

Burghote, comes of (burg. i. castellum) and (bote. i. compensatio) and
signifies a tribute or contribution toward the building or repairing of
castles, or walls of defense, or toward the building of a borow or city. From
this diverse had exemption by the ancient charters of the Saxon kings.
Whereupon it is taken ordinarily for the exemption or liberty it self.
Rastals expos. of words. Fleta has these words of it: Significat quiet antiam
reparationis murorum civitatis vel burgi li. 1. cap. 47.

Burgh English. See Borow English.

Burgage (burgagium) is a tenure proper to cities and towns, whereby men of
cities or borowes, hold their lands or tenements of the King, or other Lord for
a certain yearly rent. Old Tenures: It is a kind of socage. Swinborn. part
3.. 3. nu. 6.

Burglarie (burglaria) is compounded of two French words, (bourg. i. pagus,
villa) and (larecin, i. furtum,) or of (bourg and laron) Coke lib. 4. fol. 39.
b. It is, according to the acceptance of our common law, thus defined:
Burglarie is a felonious entering into another man's dwelling house, wherein some
person is, or into a Church in the night time, to the end to commit some
felony therein: as to kill some man, or to steal somewhat thence, or to do
some other felonious act there, albeit he execute not the same. If the intent,
or fact of this offender, be to steal, this is like robbery, if to murder, it
differs not much from murder, and so of other felonies. West. part 2.
symbol. titulo. Indictments. Sect. 56. Burglarie in the natural signification
of the word, is nothing, but the robbing of a house: but as it is (vox artis)
our common Lawyers restrain it to robbing a house by night, or breaking in
with an intent to rob, or to do some other felony. The like offense
committed by day, they call house-robbing, by a peculiar name. How many ways
burglarie may be committed, see Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 28. b. and
fol. 29. 30.

Butlerage of wines, signifies that imposition of sale wine brought into the
land; which the Kings butler, by virtue of his office, may take of every
ship, anno 1. H. 8. cap. 5. For the which see more in Botyler.

C
CAblish (cablicin) among the writers of the Forest laws, signifies brush
wood, Manwood part page 84. Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 165.

Calamus, is a cane, reed, or quill, the diverse kinds whereof, you have set
down in Gerards Herball. lib. 1. cap. 24. This is comprised among merchandise
and drugs to be garbled, in the statute anno 1. Iacobi, cap. 19.

Calendrin of Worsseds. anno 5. H. 8. cap. 4. and anno 35. eiusdem. cap. 5.

Cantred, is as much in Wales, as an hundred in England. For Cantre in the
British tongue signifies centum. This word is used anno 28. H. 8. cap. 3.

Cape, is a writ judicial touching plee of land or tenements, so termed (as
most writs be) of that word in it self, which carries the especiallest
intention or end thereof. And this writ is divided in (Cape magnum, and Cape
parvum:) both which (as is before said in Attachment) take hold of things
immovable, and seem to differ between themselves in these points. First,
because (cape magnum) or the (grand Cape) lies before appearance, and (Cape
parvum) afterward. Secondly, the (Cape magnum) summoneth the tenent to answer
to the default, and over to the demaundant: (Cape parvum) summoneth the tenent
to answer to the default only: and therefore is called (Cape parvum) or in
French English (petit Cape.) Old. not. br. fol. 161. 162. Yet Ingham says,
that it is called (petit Cape) not because it is of small force, but that it
consists of few words. (Cape magnum) in the old not. br. is thus defined.
This writ is a judicial, and lies where a man has brought a (Praecipe quod
reddat) of a thing that touches plee of land, and the tenent make default at
the day to him given in the writ original: then this writ, shall go for the
king, to take the land into the kings hands: and if he come not at the day
given him by the (grand Cape) he has lost his land, etc. A president and form
of this writ you may see in the Register judicial, fol. 1. b. It seems after
a fort to contain in it the effect (unssionis in possessionem ex primo and
secundo decrete) among the Civilians. For as the first decree seiseth the
thing, and the second gives it from him, that the second time defaulteth in
his appearance: so this (Cape) both seiseth the land, and also assigns to the
party a farther day of appearance, at which if he come not in, the land is
forfeited. Yet is there difference between these two courses of the civil and
common law: first, for that (missio in possessionem) touches both moveable
and immovable goods, whereas the (cape) is extended only to immovable:
secondly, that the party being satisfied of his demand, the remanet is
restored to him that defaulted: but by the (cape) all is seized without
restitution: thirdly, (missio in possess:) is to the use of the party agent,
the (cape) is to the use of the king. Of this writ, and the explication of the
true force and effect thereof, read Bracton lib. 5. tract. 3. cap. 1. number. 4.
5. and 6. See Cape ad valentiam.

Cape parvum, in the Old. na. br. fol. 162. is thus defined: This writ lies,
in case where the tenent is summoned in plee of land, and comes at the
summons, and his appearance is of record, and after he makes default at the
day that is given to him: then shall go this writ for the king, etc. Of this
likewise you have the form in the Register judicial, fol. 2. a. Why it is
called cape parvum, see in cape magnum. Of both these writs, read Fleta lib.
6. cap. 44. (...). Magnum and seqq.

Cape ad Valentiam, is a species of cape magnum, so called of the end whereunto
it tends. In the Old not. br: fol. 161. 162. it is thus defined or described:
This writ lies, where any impleaded of certain lands, and I vouch to warrant
another, against whom the summons ad warrantizandum, has been awarded, and the
Shyreeue comes not at the day given: then if the demandant recover against
me, I shall have this writ against the vouchee, and shall recover so much in
value of the land of the vowchee, if he have so much: and if he have not so
much, then I shall have execution of such lands and tenements, as descend unto
him in fee-simple: or if he purchase afterward, I shall have against him a
resummons: and if he can nothing say, I shall recover the value. And note ye,
that this writ lies before appearance. Thus far goes the book. Of these,
and the diverse uses of them, see the Table of the Register judicial, verbo.
Cape.

Capias, is a writ of two sorts, one before judgment called (Capias ad
respondendum) in an action personal, if the Shyreeue upon the first writ of
distress return (nihil habet in baliua nostra:) and the other is a writ of
execution after judgment, being also of diverse kinds (viz. Capias ad
satisfaciendum, Capias pro fine, Capias vtlagatum, Capias vtlaga(...) and
inquiras de bonis and catallis).

Capias ad satisfaciendum, is a writ of execution after judgment, lying where
a man recouereth in an action personal, as debt, or damages, or detinew in
the kings court: and he against whom the debt is recovered, and has no lands
nor teneme^ts, nor sufficient goods, whereof the debt may be levied. For in this
case, he that recouereth, shall have this writ to the shreue, commanding him
that he take the body of him, against whom the debt is recovered: and he
shall be put in prison, until satisfaction be made unto him that recovered.

Capias pro fine, is where one being by judgment fined unto the king, upon
some offense committed against a statut, does not discharge it according to the
judgment. For by this is his body taken, and committed to prison, until he
content the king for his fine. Coke. li. 3. fo. 12. a.

Capias vtlagatum, is a word of execution, or after judgment, which lies
against him that is outlawed upon any suite: by the which the shyreue upon the
receite thereof, apprehends the party outlawed, for not appearring upon the
(exegend) and keeps him in safe custody until the day of return assigned
in the writ: and then presents him unto the court, there farther to be ordered
for his contempt.

Capias vtlagatum, and inquiras de bonis and catallis, is a writ al one with
the former, but that it gives a farther power to the shyreeue, over and beside
the apprehension of the body, to inquire of his goods and cattels. The form of
all these writs see in the old not. br. fo. 154. and see the Terms of law,
verbo Process. Lastly you may find great variety of this kind, in the table of
the Register judicial. verbo Capias.

Capias in Withernamium de averijs, is a writ lying for catell in Withernam.
Register orig. fo. 82. and. 83. see Withernam.

Capias in Withernamium de homine, is a writ that lies for a servant in
Withernam. Regist. or. fo. 79. and. 80. see Withernam:

Capias conductos ad proficiscendum, is a writ that lies for the taking up of
such, as having received pressed money to serve the king, slink away, and come not
in at their time assigned. Register. orig. fo. 191.

Captain, alias captain (capitaneus) comes of the French (captain) and
signifies with us, him that leads, or has charge of a company of
soldiers: and is either general, as he that has the governance of the whole
host: or special, as he that leads one only band. The word (capitanei) in
others nations signifies more generally those, that are in latin called
(principes) or (proceres) because, as Hottoman says in verbis feudalibus:
tanqua^ caput reliquo corpori, sic hij reliquis civibus praesunt. He divides
them into two sorts: and to use his words. alii sunt capitanei regni: quo verbo
Duces, Comites, Marchiones intelligu^tur. li. 1. feudo. tit. 1.. 1. and ti. 7.
Alii improprie, qui vrbiu^ praefecti sunt, quibus plebs ab aliquo superiorum
gubernanda committitur: qui and vallasores regit, and maiores appellantur. l.
1. feud. tit. 1.. 1. and tit. 7. and tit. 17. So we have captains of castles
here in England, and other places, as of the Isles of Gearsey and Gearnsey, of
the Isle of Weight, etc.

Capite, is a tenure, which holds immediately of the king, as of his crown,
be it by knights service or socage: Broke. tit. Tenures. 46. 94. Dyer. fo. 123.
nu. 38. and fo. 363. nu. 18. and not as of any Honor, castle, or manner: and
therefore it is otherwise called a tenure, that holds merely of the king,
because as the crown is a corporation, and seigneury in gross (as the common
lawyers term it) so the King that possesses the crow, is in account of law,
perpetually King, and never in his minority, nor never dies: no more then
(populus.) does, whose authority he bears. See Fitzh. not. br. fo. 5. F.
Note by the way, that a man may hold of the king, and not (in Capite) that is,
not immediately of the crown in gross, but by means of some Honor, castle,
or manner belonging to the Crown, whereof I hold my land. Whereof Kitchen says
well, that a man may hold of the King by Knight service, and yet not in capite,
because he holds happily of some honor by Knights service, which is in the
kings hands (as by descent from his auncesters) and not immediately of the
king, as of his crown. fo. 129. with whom agrees Fitzh. not. br. f. 5. K.
whose words are to this effect: So that it plainly appears, that lands which
be held of the king, as of an honor, castle, or manner, are not held in capite
of the King: because that a writ of right, in that case, shallbe directed to
the bayliffe of the honor, castle, or manner, etc. but when the land be held
of the King, as of his crown, then they be not held of honor, castle, or
manner, but merely of the King, as King, and of the Kings crown, as of a
seigneury of it selse in gross, and the chief above all other seigneuries,
etc. And this tenure in capite is otherwise called tenure holding of the person
of the King. Dyer. fo. 44. n. 37. Author of the new terms. verb. Tenure in
capite. Broke. titulo. Tenures. nu. 65. 99. And yet M. Kitchen. fo. 208. says,
that a man may hold of the person of the King, and not in capite. His example
is this: if the King purchase a manner that I. S. houldeth, the tenent shall
hold as he held before, and shall not render livery or primier seisin, nor
hold in capite: And if the king grant that manner to W. N. in fee; excepting
the services of I. S. then I. S. holds of the king, as of the person of the
king, and yet houldeth not in caepite, but as he held before. So that by this
book, tenuere houlding of the person of the king, and tenure in capite, are
two diverse tenures. To take away this difficulty, I think M. Kitchen is in
that place to be taken, as if he said, not in capite by Knights service, but
by socage, following the usual speech: because most commonly where we talk of
tenure in capite, we mean tenure by Knights service.

Carno, Cromptons iurisd. fol. 191. is an imunity

Carke, seems to be a quantititie of wolle, whereof thirty make a Sarpler.
anno. 27. H. 6. ca. 2. See Sarpler.

Carrack, alias Carrick, seems to be a ship of burden, so called of this
Italian (carrico) or (carco) a burden or charge, or of the spanish (cargo) you
have this word. anno 2. R. 2. ca. 4. and anno 1. Iaco. ca. 33.

Carroway seeds, alias Carruway seeds (semen cari vel carei) is a seed
springing of the herb so called, of whose operation you may read in Gerards
herball. li. 2. ca. 396. It is reckoned among the merchandise, that ought to be
garbled. anno. i. Iaco. ca. 19.

Carue of land (carucata terrae) comes of the French (charue. i. aratrum) and
with us is a certain quantity of land, by the which the subjects have some
time been taxed: whereupon the tribute so levied, is called (Carvage
Caruagium.) Bracton. li. 2. ca. 16. nu. 8. It is all one with that; which the
same author. lib. 2. ca. 17. calls (carucatam terrae) For Litleton ca Tenure
in socage. says, that (haec soca socae, idem est quod caruca) sc, one sok or
one plow land. Yet one place I find in Stowes annals, that makes me doubt.
page 271. where he has these words: The same time king Henry took carvage,
that is to say, two merks of silver of every knights fee, toward the marriage of
his sister Izabell to the Emperor: where caryage cannot be taken for a plow
land, except there were some other farther division, whereby to raise of every
plowe land so much: and so consequently of every Knights fee: that is, of every
680. acres, two merkes of silver. Rastall in his Exposition of words says,
that caruage is to be quite, if the lord the King shall tax all the land by
carues: that is, a privilege, whereby a man is exempted from carvage. Skene de
verb. signif. ver. Carucata terrae, deriueth it from the French (charon. i. a
plough, and says, that it contains as great a portion of land, as may be
tilled and labored in a year and day with one plough: which also is called
(hilda) or (hida terrae) a word used in the old Britain laws. M. Lamberd
among his precedents, in the end of his Eirenarcha, translateth (carucatu^
terrae) a plough land.

Caruage (caruagium,) see Carue.

Cassia Fistula, is a tree that bears certain black, round, and long cods,
wherein is contained a pulpe, soft and pleasantly sweet, serving for many uses
in Physic. This tree with her virtues you may find described in Gerards
Herball, lib. 3. cap. 77. The fruit is mentioned in the statute, anno 1.
Jacob. cap. 19. among drugges and spices, that be to be garbled.

Cassia lignea, is a sweet wood not unlike to Cynamom, and sometime used in
steed of Cynamom. Whereof you may read in Gerards Herball, lib 1. ca. 141.
This is called Cassia lignum, in the Statute anno 1. Jacob. cap. 19 and is
comprised among merchandise that are to be garbled.

Castellain (castellanus) is a keeper or a Captain, sometime called a
Constable of a castle, Bracton lib. 5. tractat. 2. cap. 16. and lib. 2. cap.
32. number. 2. i^n like manner is it used, anno 3. Ed. 1. cap. 7. In the books (de
feudis) you shall find (guastaldus) to be almost of the same signification, but
something more large: because it is also extended to those that have the
custody of the Kings mansion houses, called of the Lumbards (curtes) in
England (Courts,) though they be not places of defense or strength. M. Manwood,
part. 1. of his Forest laws, page 113. says, that there is an officer of the
Forest called Castellanus.

Castelward (castelgardum, vel wardum castri) is an imposition laid upon such
of the kings subjects, as dwell within a certain compass of any castle,
toward the maintenance of such, as do watch and ward the castle. Magna
charta, cap. 20. and anno 32. H. 8. cap. 48. It is used sometime, for the very
circuit it self, which is inhabited by such as are subject to this service, as
in Stowes annals, page 632.

Casu consimili, is a writ of entry, granted where the tenent by courtesy,
or tenent for term of life, or for the life of another, does alien in fee, or
in tail, or for term of another life. And it has the name of this, for
that the Clerks of the Chauncerie did, by their common consent, frame it to
the likeness of the writ, called (In casu prouiso) according to their
authority given them by the Statute, Westminster. 2. cap. 24. which, as often as
there chances any new case in Chancerie, something like to a former case, and
yet not especially fitted by any writ, licenceth them to lay their heads
together, and to frame a new form aunswerable to the new case, and as like
some former case as they may. And this writ is granted to him in the
reuersion, against the party to whom the said tenent so alienateth to his
prejudice, and in the life time of the said tenent. The form and effect
whereof read more at large in Fitz. not. br. fol. 206.

Casu proviso, is a writ of entry, given by the Statute of Glocecester, cap. 7.
in case where a tenent in dower alieneth in fee or for term of life, or in
tail, and lies for him in reuersion against the alienee. Whereof read
F(...). cat. br. more at large, fol. 205.

Catals (catalla) alias chatels, comes of the Normans. For in the 87. chapter
of the grand Custumarie you shall find, that al moveable goods with them, are
called chatels: the contrary whereof is (fief) ibid. which we do call fee. But
as it is used in our common law, it comprehends all goods moveable and
immovable, but such as are in the nature of free hold, or parcel thereof, as
may be gathered out of Sawnf. praero. ca. 16. and anno. Eliza. 1. ca. 2. How be
it Kitchen in the chapter catalla. fo. 32. says, that ready money is not
accounted any goods or catels, nor hawks, nor hounds. The reason why hawks
and hounds be not, he gives, because they be (ferae naturae) why money is not,
though he set not down the cause: yet it may be gathered to be, for that money
of it self, is not of worth, but as by consent of men, for their easier
traficke, or permutation of things necessary for common life, it is reckoned a
thing rather consisting in imagination, then in deed. Catals be either
personal or real. Personal may be so called in two respects: one, because
they belong immediately to the person of a man, as a bow, horse, etc. the
other, for that being any way withheld injuriously from us, we have no means
to recover them, but by personal action. Chatels real be such, as either
appertain not immediately to the person, but to some other thing, by way of
dependencie: as a box with charters of land, the body of a ward, apples upon a
tree, or a tree it self growing on the ground. Cromptons Justice of peace, fo.
33. B, or else such as are necessary issuing out of some immovable thing to a
person: as a lease or rent for term of years. Also to hold at will, is a
chatell real. New terms. verbo Chatell. The ciuilians comprehend these
things, as also lands of what kin de or hold so ever, under bona; bona aute^
diuiduntur in mobilia and immobilia: mobilia vero in ea quae se movent vel ab
aliis moventur. v. legem. 49. and. l. 208 (...). de. verb. significa. and
interpretes ibidem. Bract. also ca. 3. li. 3. nu. 3. and 4. seems to be of
the same judgment.

Catallis captis nomine districtionis, is a writ which lies within a borowe,
or within a house, for rent going out of the same, and warranteth a man to take
the doors, windows, or gates, by way of distress, for the rent. Old not. br.
fo. 66.

Catallis reddendis, is a writ, which lies where goods being delivered to any
man to keep until a certain day, and be not upon demand delivered at the
day. And it may be otherwise called a writ of detinew. See more of it in the
Register orig. fo. 139. and in the old not. br. fo. 63. This is answerable to
actio depositi, in the civil law.

Catchepolle, though it now be used as a word of contempt, yet in ancient
times, it seems to have been used without reproach, for such as we now call
sergeants of the mace, or any other that use to arrest men upon any cause.
anno. 25. Ed. 3. stat. 4. ca. 2.

Cathedral. See church.

Casu matrimonii praelocuti, is a writ which lies in case where a woman gives
lands to a man in fee simple, to the intent he shall mary her, and refuses so
to do in reasonable time, being required thereunto by the woman. The form,
and farther use hereof, learn in the Register orig. fol. 233. and in Fitzh.
not. br. fo. 205.

Causam nobis significes, is a writ which lies to a Mayer of a town or city,
etc. that formerly by the kings writ being commanded to give seisin unto the
kings grantee of any land or tenements, does delay so to do, willing him to
show cause, why he so delayeth the performance of his charge. Coke. li. 4. casu
communalty des Sadlers. fo. 55 b.

Cautione admittenda, is a writ that lies against the Bishop, houlding an
excommunicate person in prison for his contempt, notwithstanding that he
offers sufficient caution or assurance to obey the commandments and orders of
holy church from thence forth: The form and farther effect whereof, take out of
the Regist. orig. pa. 66. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 63.

Century (centuria) See Hundred.

Cepi corpus, is a return made by the Shyreue, that upon an (exige^d) he has
taken the body of the party. Fitzh not. br. fo. 26.

Certiorari, is a writ issuing out the chauncerie, to an inferior court, to
call up the records of a cause therein depending, that conscionable justice
therein may be ministered, upon complaint made by bill, that the party which
seeks the said writ, has received hard dealing in the said court. Terms of
the law. See the diverse forms and uses of this, in Fitzh. not. br. fo. 242.
as also the Register, both original and judicial in the tables. verbo.
Certiorari. Crompto^ in his Justice of peace. fo 117. says, that this writ is
either returnable in the Kings bench, and then has these words (nobis
mittatis): or in the chauncerie, and then has (in cancellaria nostra) or in
the common bench, and then has (Iusticiariis nostris de banco.) The word
(certiorare) is used diverse times in the digest of the civil law: but our
later Kritiques think it so barbarouse, that they suspect it rather to be
foisted in by Tribonian, the^ to be originally used by those men, of whose
works the said digest is compiled. Prataeus in suo lexico.

Certificat (certificatoriu^) is used for a wirting made in any court, to give
notice to another court of any thing done therein. As for example, a
certificate of the cause of attainte, is a transcript made briefly and in few
words, by the clerk of the Crown, clerk of the peace, or clerk of assise,
to the court of the Kings benche, conteying the tenure and effect of every
endictment, outlawrie, or conviction, and clerk attained, made or pronounced
in any other court. an. 34. H. 8. c. 14. Of this see more in Certificat
d'evesque. Broke. f. 119.

Certification of assise of novel dissessin, etc. (Certificatio assisae novae
disseisinae. etc.) is a writ granted for there examining or reuew of a matter
passed by assise before any Justices, and is called (certificatione novae
disseisine) Old. not. br. fo. 181. Of this see also the Register. Original. fo.
200. and the new book of entrise, verbo. Certificat of assise. This word has
use, where a man appearing by his bayliffe to an assise brought by another,
has lost the day: and having something more to plead for himself, as a deed
of release, etc. which the bayliffe did not, or might not plead for him,
desires a farther examination of the cause either before the same Justices, or
others: and obteineth leters patents unto them to that effect. (The form of
these leters patents, you may see in Fitzh. not. br. fo. 181.) and that done,
brings a writ to the Shyreeue, to call both the party for whom the assise
passed, and the Jury that was empaneled upon the same, before the said
Justices at a certain day and place. And it is called a certificate, because
in it there is mention made to the Shyreeue, that upon the parties complainte
of the defective examination, or doubts yet remaining upon the assise passed,
the King has directed his leters pate^ts to the Justices, for the beter
certifiing of themselves, whether all points of the said assise were duly
examined, yea or not. See farther old. not. br. and Fitzh. vbi supra. Of this
also you may read Bracton. li. 4. ca. 19. nu. 4. in fine. and 5. 6. where he
discusseth the reason of this point very learnedly and lastly Horn in his
Myrrour of Justices. li. 3. ea. finali.. en eyde des memoyres, etc.

Certificando de recognitions Stapulae, is a writ directed to the Mayor of
the staple, etc. commanding him to certify the chaunceler of a statute of the
staple, taken before him between such and such, in case where the party
himself detaineth it, and refuses to bring it in. Regist. orig. fo. 152. b.
In like manner may be said of (certificando de statuto mercatorio) eodem. fo.
148. and (de certificando in cancellarium de inquisitione, de idemptitate
nominis) fo. 195. and (certificando quando recognitio,) etc. and (certificando
quid actum est de breui super statutum mercatorium.) fo. 151 and certificando
si loquela Warantiae. fo. 13.

Cessor, is he that ceseth or neglects so long to perform a duty belonging
unto him, as that by his cesse or cessing he incurreth the danger of law, and
has, or may have the writ (cessavit) brought against him. Old. not. br. fo.
136. And note, that where it is said in diverse places (the tenent cesseth)
without any more words, such phrase is so to be understood, as if it were said:
the tenent ceseth to do that which he ought, or is bound to do by his land
ortenement.

Cessavit, is a writ that, lies in diverse cases, as appears by Fitzh. not.
br. fo. 208. upon this general ground, that he against whom it is brought,
has for 2. years foreslowne to perform such service, or to pay such rent, as
he is tied unto by his tenure, and has not upon his land or his tenement,
sufficient goods or catells to be distreined. Consult more at large with Fitz.
upon this vbi supra. with Fleta. li. 5. ca. 34.. visa sunt. and with the Terms
of law. See Cessauit de cantaria. Register orig. fo. 238. Cessavit de feodi
firma. eodem fo. 237. Cessavit per biennium. eodem. folio etiam eodem. See the
new book of entrise. verbo Cessavit.

Cestui qui vie, is in true French (cestui a vie de qui). i. he for whose life
any land or renement is granted. Perkins graunts. 97.

Cestui qui use (ille cuius vsui vel ad cuius vsum) is broken french, and thus
may be bettered: (Cestui al use de qui) It is an ordinary speech among our
common lawyers, signifying him, to whose use any other man is infeoffed in any
lands or tenements. See the new book of entrise. verbo. uses. and in
Replevin. fo. 508. colum. 3. and verbo Trespass. fo. 606. and fo. 123. a. b.
colum. 3. n^. 7.

Chafe wax, is an officer in chauncery, that fitteth the wax for the fealing
of the writs, and such other instruments as are there made to be sent out. This
officer is borrowed from the French. For there (calefactores cerae sunt, qui
regiis literis in Cancellaria ceram imprimunt. Corasius.

Chase (chacea) comes of the French (chasser. 1. sectari belluas, apros,
cervos) It signifies two things in the common law. First, as much as (actus)
in the civil law, that is a dryving of catell to or from any place: as to
chase a distress to a fortlet, Old not. br. fo. 45. Secondly, it is used for a
receite for dear and wild beasts, of a middle nature between a forest, and a
park: being commonly less then a forest, and not endued with so many
liberties, as the courts of attachment, Swain mote, and Justice seat: and
yet of a larger compass, and stored with greater diversity both of keepers and
wild beasts or game, then a park. And Crompton in his book of Jurisdictions.
fo. 148. says, that a forest cannot be in the hands of a subject, but it
forthwith loses the name, and becomes a chase. and yet. fo. 197. he says,
that a subject may be lord and owner of a forest. which though it seem a
contrariety, yet be both his sayings, in some sort, true. For the king may give
or alienate a forest to a subject: yet so, as when it is once in the subject,
it leeseth the true property of a Forest: because that the courts, called the
Justice seat, the Swain mote, and Attachment, forthwith do vanish: none
being able to make a Lord chief Justice in Air of the Forest, but the king:
as M. Manwood well shows part 2. of his Forest laws, cap. 3. and 4. And yet
it may be granted in so large a manner, that there may be Attachement and
Swainemote, and a court equivalent to a Justice seat, as appears by him in
the same chapter, number. 3. So that a chase differs from a Forest in this,
because it may be in the hands of a subject, which a Forest in his proper and
true nature cannot: and from a Park, in that that it is not enclosed, and has
not only a larger compass, and more store of game, but of Keepers also and
overseers. See Forest.

Challenge (calumnia) comes of the French (chalanger, i. sibiasserere) and is
used in the common law for an exception taken either against persons or
things: persons, as in assise to the Jurors, or any one or more of them: or in
a case of felony by the prisoner at the bar. Smith de rep. Anglor. lib. 2.
cap. 12. Britton. ca. 52. Bracton lib. 2. tract. 2. cap. 22. Against things, as
a declaration, old not. br. fol. 76. Challenge made to the Jurors, is either
made to the array, or to the polles. Challenge to the array is, when the whole
number is excepted against, as partially empaneled: challenge to or by the
polle, when some one, or more are excepted against, as not indifferent. Terms
of the law. Challenge to the Jurors, is also divided into Challenge principal,
and Challenge per cause. i. upon cause or reason. Challenge principal
(otherwise by Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 157. and 158. called (peremptory) is that,
which the law allows without cause alleged or farther examination. Lamberd.
Eirenar. lib. 4. cap. 14. as a prisoner at the bar, arraigned upon felony,
may peremptorily challenge to the number of 20. one after another, of the Jury
empaneled upon him, alleging no cause, but his own dislike: and they shall be
still put off, and new taken in their places. But in case of high treason no
Challenge peremptory is allowed, an. 33. H. 8. cap. 23. Fortescue says, that a
prisoner in this case may challenge, 35. men c. 27. but that law was abridged by
anno 25. H. 8. cap. 3. I cannot here omit to note some difference, that (in
mine opinion) I observe between Challenge principal, and Challenge peremptory,
finding peremptory to be used only in matters criminal, and barely without
cause alleged more then the prisoners own fantasy, Stawnf. pl. cor. fol.
124. but principal in civil actions for the most part, and with naming of
some such cause of exception, as being found true, the law allows without
farther scanning. For example: if either party say, that one of the Jurors is
the son, brother, cousin, or tenent to the other, or espoused his daughter,
this is exception good and strong enough (if it be true) without farther
examination of the parties credit. And how far this challenge upon kindred
reaches, you have a notable example, in Plowden, casu Vernon. against Manners.
fol. 425. Also in the plee of the death of a man, and in every action real, as
also every action personal, where the debt or damages amount to 40. merks, it
is a good challenge to any man, that he cannot dispend 40. shillings by the
year of Freehold, anno 11. H. 7. cap. 21. and Terms of the law, verbo
Challenge. The ground of this challenge you may see farther in Fleta lib. 4. cap.
8. Challenge upon reason or cause is, when the party does allege some such
exception against one or more of the Jurors, as is not forthwith sufficient
upon acknowledgement of the truth thereof, but rather arbitrable and
considerable by the rest of the Jurors: as, for example: if the son of the
Iuror have married or espoused the daughter of the adverse party. Terms of
law, vbi supra. This challenge per cause, seems to be termed by Kitchen,
challenge for favor, fol. 92. or rather Challenge for favor is said there to be
one species of challenge per cause: where you may read what chalenges be
commonly accounted principal, and what not. See the new book of Entries,
verbo, Challenge. and the old not. br. fol. 158. and 159. That this word
(challenge) is long sithence latined by the word (calumnia) appears by
Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 18. and li. 4. tract. 3. cap. 6. and lib. 5.
cap. 6. But I doubt, Priscian will never forgive him that first struck this
blow at him. Of challenge you may farther read Fleta. lib. 1. cap. 32.. Ad quem
diem, and seqq.

Chamberdekins, are Irish beggars, anno 1. H. 5. cap. 8.

Chamberer, is used for a chamber maid, anno 33. H. 8. cap. 21.

Chamberlain (camerarius vel camberlingus) comes of the French (chambellan.
i. cubicularius, vel praefectus cubiculi.) It is diversely used in our
Chronicles, Laws, and Statutes: as Lord great Chamberlain of England, Lord
Chamberlain of the kings house, the kings Chamberlain, anno 13. Ed. 1. cap.
41. anno 17. R. 2. cap. 6. to whose office it especially appertains to look
to the kings chambers and wardrobe, and to govern the under ministers
belonging unto the same. Fleta lib. 2. cap. 6. and 7. Chamberlain of any of
the kings courts, anno 7. Ed. 6. cap. 1. Chamberlain of the Exchequer, anno
51. H. 3. stat. 5. and anno. 10. Ed. 3. cap. 11. and anno 14. eiusdem. cap. 14.
and anno 26. H. 8. cap. 2. Chamberlain of north Wales, Stow. page 641.
Chamberlain of Chester. Cromptons iurisd. fol. 7. This Officer is commonly the
receiver of all rents and revenues belonging to that person or city, whereunto
he is chamberlain. v. Fletam li. 2. cap. 70.. Si autem. The Latin word
seems to express the function of this officer. For (camerarius dicitur a
camera. i. testudine sive fornice.) quia custodit pecunias quae in cameris
praecipue reservantur. Onyphrius de interpret. vooum ecclesiasticarum. It
seems to be borrowed from the Feudists, who define the word (camera) thus:
Camera est locus in quem the saurus recolligitur, vel conclave in quo pecunia
reservatur. Zasius de feudis. part. 4. number. 7. and Peregrinus, de iure fisci.
lib. 6. tit. 3. says, that camerarius vel camberlingus, (que^ quaestorem
antiqui appellarunt,) in rebus fisci primum locum tenet, quia thesauraruis and
custos est publicae pecuniae. Sane officium hoc primipilatus fuisse nonnulli
senserunt. There be two officers of this name in the kings Exchequer, who were
wont to keep a controlment of the pels of receipt and exitus, and kept
certain keys of the treasure cofers, which is not now in use. They keep the
keys of the Treasury, where the leagues of the Kings predecessors, and diverse
ancient books do remain. There is mention of this officer, in the Statute
anno 34. and 35. H. 8. cap. 16. There be also vnder-chamberlaines of the
Exchequer, which see in Vnder-chamberlaine.

Champartie, (cambipartita) alias champertie, seems to come from the french
(champart. 1. vectigal) and signifies, in our common law, a maintenance of
any man in his suit depending, upon condition to have part of the thing (be it
lands or goods) when it is recovered. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 171. and champertours
be they, that move plees or suites, or cause to be moved, either by their own
procurement, or by other; and persyew at their proper costs, for to have part
of the land in variance, or part of the gains. anno. 33. Ed. 1. stat. 2. in
fine. Whereunto add the third statut made the same year. This seems to have
been an ancient fault in our realm. For notwithstanding these former
statutes, and a form of writ framed unto them, yet anno. 4. Ed. 3. ca. 11. it
was again inacted, that whereas the former statute provided redress for this
in the kings bench only (which in those days followed the court) from thence
forth it should be lawful for Justices of the common plees likewise, and
Justices of assizes in their circuits, to inquire, hear, and determine this
and such like cases, as well at the suite of the king, as of the party. How
far this writ extends, and the diverse forms thereof, applied to several
cases, see Fitzh. not. br. fo. 171. and the Register orig. fo. 183. and the new
book of entrise. verbo. Champertie. Every champertie employeth maintenance.
Cromptons iurisd fo. 39. See also his Justice of peace. fo. 155. b. etc. These
with the Romans were called redemptores litium, qui sc. quotidianas lites
mercantur, aut quipartem litis paciscuntur. l. si remunerandi.. Maurus. P.
Mandati. l. si contra. and. l. per diuersas. Co. eodem. 13.

Champion, (campio) is thus defined by Hotoman, in verbis feudalibus. Campio
est certator pro alio datus in duello: a campo dictus, qui circus erat
decertantibus definitus. In our common law, it is taken no less for him that
tries the combat in his own case, then for him that fights in the place or
quarrel of another. Bracton li. 3. tracta. 2. ca. 21. nu. 4. who also seems
to use this word for such, as hold by sergeanty, or some service, of another,
as: ca^piones faciunt homagium domino suo. li. 2. ca. 35. Of this read more in
Battle and Combat. 30.

Chanceler, (cancellarius) comes of the french (chaneelier) Vincentius
Lupanus de magistratibus Francorum says, that (cancellarius) is no latin
word: how be it he cites diverse latin writers that do use it. With him
agrees that excellent man Petrus Pithaeus, libro. 2. aduersariorum. ca. 12.
and whereas Lupanus would derive it from the verb (cancello) Pithaeus
confesses, he has good color for his opinion, though he think it not sound;
and therefore rather deduceth it (a cancellis). (Cancellare) is (literas vel
scriptum linea per medium ducta damnare) and seems of it self likewise to be
derived (a cancellis) which signify all one with ((...)) in greek, which we
in our tongue call a letis: that is, a thing made of wood or iron bars laid
cross ways one over another, so that a man may see through them in and out.
And it is to be thought, that judgment seats in old time, were compassed in
with those bars, being found most necessary to defend the judges and other
officers from the press of the multitude, and and yet never the more to hinder
any man's view, that had a desire or cause to observe what was done.
Cancellarius at the first by the opinion of Lupanus, signified the registers or
actuaries in court, (grapharios sc: qui conscribendis and excipiendis iudicum
actis dant operam) Pithaeus says, they were such as we now call (Secretarios)
But this name in our days is greatly advanced, and not only in other
kingdoms, but in ours also, is given to him, that is the chief man for matter
of justice (in private causes especially) next unto the prince. For whereas all
other Justices in our common wealth, are tied to the law, and may not swerue
from it in judgment: the Chanceler has in this the kings absolute power, to
moderate and temper the written law, and subiecteth himself only to the law
of nature and conscience, ordering all things iuxta aequum and bonum. And
therefore Stawnford in his Prerogative. ca. 20. fo. 65. says, that the
Chanceler has two powers: one absolute, the other ordinary: meaning that
though by his ordinary power in some cases, he must observe the form of
proceeding, as other ordinary Judges: yet that in his absolute power he is not
limited by the written law, but by conscience and equity, according to the
circumstances of the matter in question. But how long he has had this power,
some would doubt. For Polidorus Virgilius, lib. 9. historiae Anglica. has
these words of William the Conqueror: Instituit item Scribarum Collegium, qui
diplomata scriberent, and eius Collegii magistrum vocabat Cancellarium, qui
paulatim supremus factus est Magistratus, qualis hodie habetur. And see Fleta,
lib. 2. cap. 13. This high Officer, seems to be derived from France unto us,
as many other Officers and vsages be. For of this thus writes Boerius in his
Tractate De authoritat. Magni Concilii. number. 8. Consistorio Franciae post.
Principem Dominus Franciae Cancellarius, cui velut excelsum iudicii tribunal
hoc in regno (sub Principe tamen nostro) moderanti, sigillumque authenticum,
quo sine publicis and pate^tibus regiis literis nulla fides adhibetur, liberam
administrationem habenti, omnes and singuli regii Iusticiarii, quocunque nomine
nuncupentur, ac quavis authoritate fungantur, e^ inferiores sunt. Et merito:
Succedit enim in quaestoris locum, etc.

He that bears this magistracy, is called the Chanceler of England. anno 7.
R. 2. cap. 14. and by the Statute anno 5. Eliz. cap. 18. the Lord Chanceler and
Keeper have all one power. Note farther that diverse inferior Officers, are
called Chancelers, as Chanceler of the Exchequer. an. 25. H. 8. cap. 16. whose
office has been thought by many, to have been created for the qualifying of
extremities in the Exchequer. He sits in the court, and in the Exchequer
chamber, and with the rest of the court orders things to the kings best
benefit: he is always in commission with the Lord Treasurer for the letting of
the lands that came to the crown by the dissolution of Abbeyes: and has by
privy seal from the king, power with others to compound for forfeitures of
bonds, and forfeitures upon penal statutes. He has also much to do in the
revenue come by the dissolution and first fruits, as appears by the acts of
uniting them to the Crown. Chanceler of the Duchy of La^caster, anno 3. Ed 6.
cap. 1. and an. 5. eiusdem. cap. 26. whose office is principal in that court
to judge and determine all controversies between the king and his tenants of
the Duchy land, and otherwise to direct all the kings affairs belonging to
that court. Chanceler of the Order. 1. of the Garter, Stowes annals page 706.
Chanceler of the University, anno 9. H. 5. cap. 8. and anno 2. H. 6. cap. 8.
Chaunceler of the court of Augmentations, anno 27. H. 8. cap. 27. and anno 32.
eiusdem. cap. 20. and anno 33. eiusd. cap. 39. Chaunceler of the first fruits,
anno 32. H. 8. cap. 45. Chaunceler of courts, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 28.
Chaunceler of the Diocese, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 15.

Chancerie (cancellaria) is the court of equity and conscience, moderating the
rigor of other courts, that are more straightly tied to the leter of the
law, whereof the Lord Chancellor of England is the chief Judge. Cromptons
iurisd. fol. 41. or else the Lord Keeper of the great Seal, sithence the
statute 5. Eliz. cap. 18. It takes the name from the Chaunceler, as M. Camden
notes in his Britannia, page 114. in meo. The Officers belonging to this
court, are (as is abouesaid) the Lord Chaunceler or Keeper of the broad Seal,
twelve Masters of the Chancerie, whereof the Master of the rolls is one and
the chief, the six Clerks, the Examiners, a Sergeant at arms, the Marshall,
and crier of the court, the clerks of the courts, otherwise called Courseters,
the clerks of the petie bag, the clerk of the crown, the clerk of the
hanaper, the protonotary or register, the controller of the hanaper, the clerk
of appeals, the sealer, the ch(...)axe, the clerk of the facult(...) the
clerk of the patents, clerk of the star chamber, clerk of presentations,
clerk of dismissions, clerk of licenses to alienate, clerks of the enrolments,
clerk of the protections, clerk of the court of wards, clerk of the sub penaes,
which see described in their places.

Chapel, (capella) comes of the French (chapelle. i. aedicula) and is of 2.
sorts, either adioining to a Church, as a parcel of the same, which men of
worth do build, vt ibidem familiaria sepulchra sibi constituant, to the use of
the Romans. l. 5. P. de religio. or else separate from the mother church, where
the parish is wide, and is commonly called a chapel of case: because it is
builded for the case of one or more parishioners that dwell over far from the
Church, and is served by some inferior curate provided at the charge of the
rector, or of them that have benifite by it, as the composition or custom is.
Whence the word is derived the Canonists differ in opinion. Rebuffus de pacif.
posses. nu. 104. saying, that some take it (a capiendo laicot) others (a capra)
because it represents those cotages, which men were wont to cover over with
goats skins. Petrus Gregorius in suo syntagma. te. li. 15. ca. 29. has these
words of this thing: Capellanus a capellania and capella, cui praeficitur,
nominatur: item ab officio seu beneficio and capellania. Capella aliquibus
dicta, quasi capiens (...) seu populos, vel capiens laudem: vel secundum
praepositum, a cappa Diui Martint, aut a capriuis pellibus, quibus olim altaria
tegebantur secundum Archidiaconum. Arbitrarer and a simplici tecto, quo
oratorium campestre operitur, lateribus vndiquaque patentibus and patulis.
Tectum enim Gallis simpliciter dicitur (chapelle) a capite. Vnde and formata
aliqua nomina (chapean, cape, etc) Aut capella locus qui minoris spatii sit
quam ecclesia, quod tot homines non capiat, vt ecclesia. Ita altar capella
est. ca. quaesitum, and ca. penult. i. quaest. 3. Johan. Andraeas. in ca. i. de
succes. ab intesta. and praebenda cum onere quotidie celebrandi sacram
liturgiam. ca. significatum. 11. de praebend and oratorium. ca. authoritate: de
privilegiis. in 6. quod in co loco orationes non aliae res profanae peragi
debeant. ca. pen. and fina. 42. distinct. The same author in his book de
beneficiis. ca. 11. nu. 10. has these words: Dicti porro primitus capellani, a
cappa Sancti Martini, quam Reges Francorum ob adiutorium in praelus solebant
secum habere: quam ferentes and custodientes cum caeteris sanctorum reliquiis
clerici, capellani caeperunt vocari. vr omnia refert Valafridus Strabo. Abbas
Augensis. ca. fina. de incrementis rerum ecclesiastica.

There is of these chapels one kind called a free chapel, which seems to be
such as has maintenance perpetual toward the vphoulding thereof, and wages of
the curate, by some land charitablely bestowed on it, without the charge of the
rector or parish. anno. 37. H. 8. cap. 4. anno. 1. Ed. 6. ca. 14.

Chapellaine, (capellanus) is he that performs divine service in a chapel.
and therefore in our common law, it is used most ordinarily for him, that is
depending upon the king, or other man of worth, for the instruction of him and
his family, the executing of prayers and preaching in his private house, where
commonly they have a chapel for that purpose. as anno. 21. H. 8. ca. 13.
where it is set down what persons may privilege one or more chaplains, to
discontinew from their benefices, for their particular service.

Chapiters, (capitula) comes of the French (chapitre. 1. caput libri) It
signifies in our common law, a summary or content of such matters, as are to
be inquired of or presented before Justices in Air, Justices of assise, or of
peace in their sessions. So is it used., anno. 3. Ed. 1. ca. 27. in these
words: and that no clerk of any Justice, Escheatour, or Commissioner in Air,
shall take any thing for delivering chapiters, but only clerks of Justices in
their circuits: and again anno. 13. eiusdem. ca. 10. in these words: and when
the time comes, the shyreeue shall certify the chapiters before the Justices
in Eire, how many writs he has and what etc. Britton likewise uses the same
word in this signification. ca. 3. Chapiters or (capitula) be now called
articles most ordinarily, and are delivered as well by the mouth of the Justice
in his charge, as by the clerks in wrighting to the enquest; whereas in
ancient times (as appears by Bracton and Britton) they were after an
exhortation given by the Justices for the good observation of the laws and
kings peace, first red distinctly and openly in the whole court, and then
delivered in writing to the grand enquest. And the same order does M. Lamberd
wish to be kept in these days also. Eirenar. li. 4. ca. 4. pa. 393. Horn in
his mirror of Justices calls them articles, and expresses what they were
wont to contain. li. 3. ca. des. articles in Eire. An example of these
chapters or articles, you have in the book of assizes, fo. 138. nu. 44. as
also in Roger Houeden, part poster. suorum annal. in Richardo primo. fo. 423.

Chapter. (capitulum) signifies in our common law (as in the canon law,
whence it is borrowed) congregationem clericorum in ecclesiae cathedrali,
conuentuali, regulari, vel collegiata: and in another signification, locum in
quo fiunt communes tractatus collegiatorum. It has other significations,
though not greatly worth the repeating in this place, which you may read in
Linwods prouineials. glos. in ca. quia in contine^tiae. de constitutionibus.
verb. Capitulis. Why this collegiat company should be called (capitulum) of
the canonists, a man may make a question: and for answer, it may be said, that
it is metaphorically so termed the word originally signifiing a little head. For
this company or corporation is a kind of head, not only to rule and govern
the dioces in the vacatio^ of the Bishopric, but also in many things to advise
the Bishop, when the Sea is full. See Panormitan. in ca. capitulum. extra de
rescriptis.

Charta perdonationis se defendendo, is the form of a pardon for slaying
another in a man's own defense. Register. original. fo. 287.

Chartae perdonationis vtlagariae, is the form of a pardon for a man thatis
outlawed. Reg. orig. fo. 288. 38^.

Charter (charta) comes of the French (chartres. i. instrumenta) It is taken
in our law, for written evidence of things done between man and man, whereof
Bracton lib. 2. (...) ca. 16. number. 1. says thus: Fiunt aliquando donationes in
scriptis, sicut in chartis, ad perpetuam rei memoriam, propter brevem hominum
vitam, etc. and a little after: nu. 12. Et sciendum, quod chartaru^ alia regia,
alia privatorum; and regiarum alia privata, alia communis, and alia
vniuersalis. Item priuatorum, alia de puro feoffamento and simplici, alia de
feoffamento conditionali sive conventionali: and secundum omnia genera
feoffamentorum fieri potest. Item privatorum alia de recognitione puravel
conditionali. Item alia de quiete-clamantia: Item alia de confirmatione, etc.
and so thorough the chapter. Britton likewise in his 39. chapter, divides
charters into the charters of the King, and charters of private persons.
Charters of the King are those, whereby the King passes any grant to any
person or more, or to any body politic: as a charter of exemption that a man
shall not be empaneled upon any Jury. Kitchen. fo. 114. and fo. 177. charter
of pardon, whereby a man is forgiven a felony, or other offense committed
against the Kings crown and dignity. Broke. tit. charter of pardon. Charter
of the forest, wherein the laws of the forest are comprised. anno. 9. H. 3.
Cromptons Iurisd. fo. (...) 47. Pupilla oculi. part. 5. ca. 22. Manwood.
part. 1. of his forest laws. fo. i. where he sets down the charters of of
Canutus. and fo. 17. where he has set down that which was made. anno 9. H. 3.
with the charter of the forest which we use, M. Skene says, that the laws of
the forest in Scotland do agree. de verbo. signif. verbo. Venison. Charter of
land. Broke. codem titulo. That which we call a charter, the Lombards in libris
feudalibus, call praeceptu^ (praeceptionem) Hotama. verbo praeceptu^. in verbis
feudalibus. Of these charters you have also a long discourse in Fleta. li. 3.
ca. 14. who expounds every substantial part of a deed of gift particularly
in order.

Charter land, (terra per chartam) is such sa a man holds by charter, that
is, by evidence in writing; otherwise called freehold. anno 19. H. 7. ca. 13.
and Kitchen. fo. 86. and these in the Saxons time, were wont to be called
(bockland) Idem. fo. 89. and Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words. verbo
Terra ex scripto which was held, as he there says, with more commodious and
easier conditions, then (folkland) was: that is land held without writing. And
the reason he gives, because that was haereditataria, libera, atque immunis:
whereas fundus sine scripto censum pensitabat annuum, atque officiorum quadam
servitute est obligatus. Priore^viriplerunque nobiles atque ingenui,
posteriorem rustici fere and pagani possidebant. Illam nos vulgo freehold and
per chartam, hanc ad voluntatem domini appellamus. Thus far M. Lamberd.

Charter party (charta partita) is nothing but that which we call a pair of
indentures, containing the covenants and agreements made between merchants, or
sea faring men touching their marine affairs. anno 32. H. 8. cap. 14.

Chartis reddendis, is a writ, which lies against him that has charters of
feofment delivered him to be kept, and refuses to deliver them. old. not. br.
fo. 66. Register orig. fo. 159.

Chase. See Chase.

Chatell. See Catell.

Chawnce medley (Infortunium) comes of 2. french words (chance. i. lapsus)
and (mesler. i. miscere) It signifies in our common law, the casual
slaughter of a man, not altogether without the fault of the slayer. Stawnf. pl.
cor. li. 1. ca. 8. calls it homicide by misaduenture, West. calls it
homicide mixed. part. 2. symbol. titulo Indictments. sect. 50. and there
defines it thus: Homicide mixed is, when the killers ignorance or negligence is
joined with the chance: as if a man loppe trees by an high way side, by which
many usually travel, and cast down a bow, not giving warning to take heed
thereof, by which bow one passing by is slain: In which case he offends,
because he gave noe warning, that the party might have taken heed to himself.
See Skene de verbo: signifi. verbo Melletum.

Chaungeour, is an officer belonging to the Kings mint, whose function seems
especially to consist, in exchanging coin for gold or silver in the mass,
brought in by merchants or others. anno 2. H. 6. ca. 12.

Chawntery, (cantaria) is a Church or chapel endewed with lands or other
yearly revenewe, for the mantenance of one or more priests, daily to sing mass
for the souls of the donours, and such others, as they do appointe. anno 37.
H. 8. ca. 4. anno 1. Fd. 6. ca. 14.

Check roll, seems to be a roll or book, that contains the names of
such, as are attendants and in pay to great personages, as their household
servants. It is otherwise called the chequer roll. anno 24. H. 8. ca. 13. anno
3. H. 7. ca. 13. and seemeeth to have one etymology with eschequer. Which see.

Chevage, (cheuagium) comes of the French (chef. i. caput) It signifies with
us, a sum of money paid by villeins to their Lords, in acknowledgment of
their slavery. Whereof Bracton li. 1. ca. 10. says thus: chevagium dicitur
recognitio in signum subiectionis and dominij de capite suo. It seems also to
be used, for a sum of a money, yearly given by a man to another of might and
power, for his avowement, maintenance, and protection, as to their head or
leader. M. Lamberds li. 2. ca. 5. etrenarch. writes it (chivage) or rather
(chiefage)

Chevisance, comes of the French (chevir. i. venir a chef de de quelque
chose) to come to the head or end of a business, to perfect a matter. This word
is used for bargayning. anno 37. H. 8. ca. 9. and anno. 13. Eliza. ca. 5. and
8. an. 10. R. 2. cap. 1. and anno 3. H. 7. cap. 5.

Chief. See Capite.

Chief pledge (plegius, vel vas capitalis) an. 20. H. 6. ca. 8. For the
understanding of this word, See Borowhead.

Childwit, comes of the Saxon word (child), and (wit) which some say, in that
tongue, is a terminatio^ of certain words without signification, as (dom) in
(christendom) or (hood) in (childehood) with us. But for the signification of
(wit) see Bloodwit) Childwit signifies a power to to take a fine of your
bondwoman begotten with child without your consent. Rastall. exposit. of words.

Chimin, (chiminus) comes from the French (chemin. i. aditus, via) and
signifies in our common law, a way. It is divided into two sorts: the Kings
high way, and a private way. Kitchen. fo. 35. The Kings high way (chiminus
regius) is that, by which the Kings subjects, and all others under his
protection, have free liberty to pass, though the property of the soil of
each side, where the way lies, may perhaps belong to some private man. A way
private is that, by which one man or more have liberty to pass, either by
prescription or by charter, through another man's ground. And this is divided
into chymin in gross, and chymin appendant. Kitchen. fo. 177. Chymin in gross
is that way, which a man holds principally and solely in it self: chimin
apendant is that, which a man has adjoined to some other thing as appertinent
thereu^to. For example, if a man hire a close or pasture, and covenant for
ingresse and egresse to and from the said close, through some other ground, by
the which otherwise he cannot pass. Or chimin in gross may be that, which the
Civilians call personal: as when one covenanteth for a way through another
man's ground, for himself and his heirs: chimin appendant, on the otherside,
may be that which they call real: as when a man purchases a way through
another mansground, for such as do or shall dwell in this or that house for
ever, or be owners of such a manner.

Chiminage, (chiminagium) signifies a toll for wayfarage thorough the forest.
Cromptons. Iurisd. fo. 189. and Manwood. farte. 1. of his forest laws. pa. 86.
See Chimin. The Feudists call it, pedagium. See Chimin.

Chirographer of fynes (chirographus finium and concordiarum) comes of the
greek ((...)) which signifies a wrighting of a man's own hand, whereby he
acknowledges a dept to another. It signifies in our common law, him in the
common bench office, that ingrosseth fines in that court acknowledged, into a
perpetual record, after they be acknowledged, and fully passed by those
officers, by whom they are formerly examined; and that writes and delivers
the indentures of them unto the party anno. 2. H. 3. ca. 8. and. West Symbol:
part. 2. titulo. fines. sect. 114. and 129. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 147. A. This
officer also makes two indentures, one for the buier, another for the seller;
and makes one other indented piece, containing also the effect of the fine,
which he delivers over to the custos breuium, that is called the foot of the
fine. The Chirographer also, or his debuty, does proclaim all the fines in the
court every term, according to the Statute; and then repayring to the office
of the custos breuium, there indorseth the proclamations upon the backside of
the foot thereof: and alwaie keeps the writ of covenant, as also the note of
the fine.

Chivage. See Chevage.

Chivalrie, (servitium militare) comes of the French (chevalier. i. eques)
and signifies in our common law, a tenure of land by knights service. For the
better understanding whereof, it is to be known, that there is noe land, but
is holden mediatly or immediately of the Crown, by some service or other: and
therefore are all our free-houlds that are to us and our heirs, called (feuda)
feese, as proceeding from the benefit of the King, for some small yearly rent,
and the performance of such services, as originally were laid upon the land at
the donation thereof. For as the king gave to the great Nobles his immediate
tenants, large possessions for ever, to hold of him for this or that rent and
service: so they again in time parcelled out to such as they liked, their
lands so received of the kings bounty, for rents and services, as they thought
good. And these services are all by Litleton divided into two sorts chivalry,
and socage. The one is martial and military, the other clownish and rusticall.
Chivalrie therefore is a tenure or service, whereby the tenent is bound to
perform some noble or military office unto his Lord, and is of two sorts:
either regal, that is, such as may hold only of the king: or such as may also
hold of a common person, as well as of the king. That which may hold only of
the King, is properly called servitium, or sergeantia: and is again divided
into grand or petit, i. great or small. Great, commonly called grand
sergeantie, is that where one holds lands of the King by service, which he
ought to do in his own person unto him as to bear the kings baner or his
spear, or to lead his host, or to be his Marshall, or to blow a horn, when
he sees his enemies invade the land, or to find a man at arms to fight within
the four Sease, or else to do it himself, or to bear the kings sword before
him at his coronation, or at that day to be his sewer, caruer, butler, or
chamberlain. Litleton tit. Sergeantie. Petit Sergeantie, is where a man
holds land of the king, to yield him yearly some small thing toward his
wars, as a sword, dagger, bow, knife, spear, pair of gloves of maile, a
pair of spurs, or such like. Litleton. titulo petit Sergeanty. Chivalry, that
may hold of a common person as well as of the king, is called (scutagium)
escuage, that is service of the shield. And this is either uncertain or
certain. Escuage uncertain is likewise twofold: first, where the tenent by
his tenure, is bound to follow his lord going in person to the kings wars
against his enemies, either him self, or to send a sufficient man in his
place, there to be maintained at his cost so many days, as were agreed upon
between the lord and his first tenent at the granting of the sea. And the
days of such service seem to have been rated by the quantity of the land so
houlden: as if it extend to a whole knights fee, then the tenent was bound
thus to follow his lord forty days. And a knights fee, was so much land, as
in those days was accoumpted a sufficient living for a knight: and that was
680 acres, as some opinion is, or 800 as others think: or 15 pounds per annum.
Camdens Brittan. pa. 110. in meo. S. Thomas Smyth says, that census equestris
is 40. pounds reuenew in free lands. If the law extend but to half a knights
fee, then the tenent is bound to follow his lord, as above is said, but twenty
days. If to a fourth part, then ten days. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 83. C. and 84.
C. E. The other kind of this escuage uncertain is called castelward: where
the tenent by his land is bound, either by him self, or by some other, to
defend a castle, as often as it shall come to his course. Escuage certain, is
where the tenent is set at a certain sum of money, to be paid in lieu of
such uncertain service, as that a man shall yearly pay for a Knights Fee, 20.
shillings, Stow annal. page 238. for half a Knights Fee, ten shillings, or
some like rate. And this service, because it is drawn to a certain rent,
grows to be of a mixed nature: not merely socage, for that it smells not of
the plough, and yet so cage in effect: being now neither personal service, nor
uncertain, Litleton, titulo Secage. This tenure called chiualry, has other
conditions annexed unto it; as homage, fealty, wardship, relief, and marriage.
Bracton. li. 2. ca. 35. which what they signify, look in their places.
Chilualry is either general or especial. Dier. fo. 161. nu. 47. General
seems to be, where only it is said in the feofment, that the tenent houldeth
per seruitium militare, without any specification of sergeanty, escuage, etc.
Special, that which is declared particularly what kind of knights service he
houldeth by.

Chorall, (choralis) seems to be any that by virtue of any of the orders of
Clergy, was in ancient time admitted, to sit and serve God in the Quier,
which in Latin is termed Chorus.

Chose, (res) is the French word as general as (thing) is with us. It is in
the common law, used with diverse epithites worthy the interpretation: as,
chose local, is such a thing as is annexed to a place. For example: a mill is
chose local, Kitchen fol. 18. Chose transitory, in the same place seems to
be that thing which is moveable, and may be taken away, or carried from place
to place. Chose in action, is a thing incorporeall, and only a right: as an
annuitie, an obligation of debt, a covenant, or vowcher by warrantie. Broke
titulo. Chose in action. And it seems, that chose in action, may be also
called chose in suspense, because it has no real existence or being, neither
can be properly said to be in our possession. Broke ibid.

Churchwardens (Ecclesiarum gardiani) be Officers yearly chosen, by the
consent of the Minister and parishioners, according to the custom of every
several place, to look to the church, churchyard, and such things, as belong
to both, and to observe the behauiours of their parishioners for such faults as
appertain to the jurisdiction or censure of the court ecclesiastical. These
be a kind of corporation, enabled by law, to sue for any thing belonging to
their church, or poor of their parish. See Lamberd in his pamphlet of the duty
of Churchwardens.

Churchesset, is a word that I find in Fleta. lib. 1. cap. 47 in fine. whereof
he thus writes: Certam mensuram bladi tritici significat, quam quilibet olim
sanctae Ecclesiae die Sancti Martini te^pore tam Britonum quam Anglorum
contribuerunt. Plures tamen magnates, post Romanorum adventum, illam
contributionem secundum veterem legem Moysi nomine primitiarum dabant: prout in
brevi regis Knuti, ad summum Pontificem transmisso, continetur, in quo illam
contributionem, (chirchsed) appellant, quasi semen Ecclesiae.

Cinamom (cinamomum) is a tree, whereof the bark is known to be a pleasant,
comfortable, and medicinal spice, which you have described in Gerards Herball.
lib. 3 cap. 142. This is reckoned among garbleable spices, an. 1. Iac. cap. 19.

Cinque ports (quinque portus) be those special havens, that lie toward
France, and therefore have been thought by our kings, from time to time, to be
such as ought most vigilantly to be observed against invasion. In which
respect, the places where they be, have an especial governor or keeper, called
by his office Lord Warden of the Cinque ports: and diverse privileges granted
unto them, as a particular jurisdiction, their Warden having the authority of
an Admiral among them, and sending out writs in his own name. Crompton in his
Jurisdictions, fol. 28. names the Cinque ports, Dover, Sandwich, Rye,
Hastings, Winchelsea, Rumney, Hithe: whereof some, because the number exceeds
five, must either be added to the first institution, by some later grant, or
be accounted as appendents to some of the rest. See Gardein of the Cinque
ports: and the Statute anno 32. H. 8. cap. 48.

Circuit of action, (circuitus actionis) is a longer course of proceeding, to
recover the thing sued for, then is needful. See the new Terms of law.

Circumstantibus, is a word of art, signifying the supply or making up of the
number of Jurors, (if any empaneled appear not, or appearing, be challenged by
either party) by adding unto them so many other of those that are present or
standing by, as will serve the turn, v. ann. 35. H. 8. cap. 6. and anno 5.
Elizab. cap. 25.

City (civitas) comes of the French (cite) and signifies with us, as it
does in other regions, such a town corporate, as has a Bishop and a
cathedral church. For Lucas de Penna lege vnica, tituli, De Metropol. Beryto.
ti. 21. lib. 10. Cod. has these words: Idem locus, vrbs, civitas, and oppidum
appeliatur. (Pro quo est etiam infra. De spectaculis. l. Nemo.) Civitas enim
dicitur, quatenus cum iustitia and magistratuum ordine gubernatur, oppidum,
quaetenus est ibi copia incolarum: and vrbs, quatenus muris debito more
cingitur. Proprie autem dicitur civitas, quae habet Episcopu^. Supra de
Episcop. and Cleri. l. Nulli. Alias dicitur generaliter omnis habitatio
plurimorum, quae muro cingitur. P. de verb. signif. lib. 2. and de penu lega.
l. Nam quod.. St ita. Sed stricte loquendo, si Episcopo caret, dicitur vrbs. P.
de verb. signif. l. Pupillus.. Oppidum, etc. Yet M. Crompton in his
Jurisdictions, where he reckons up the cities, leaves out Elye, though it
have a bishop and a cathedral Church, and puts in Westminster, though now
it have no bishop. And anno 35. Eliza. ca. 6. Westminster is called a city,
anno 27. eiusd. cap. 5. Of the Statutes not printed, it is alternatiuely
termed a city or borow. It appears by the Statute, 35. H. 8 cap. 10. that
then there was a bishop of Westminster. Civitas, according to Aristotle, lib.
3. politicorum. ca. pri. is defined to be a certain or uniform government of
the inhabitants. and Caesar ciuitatem vocat populum eodem iure vtentem. Camd.
Brittan. pa. 310. But this is the general definition of a common wealth, and
not of a city, at the least, as we now a days particularly take it. For over
and beside that which is above said, Cassanaeus in consuetudi. Burg. pa. 15.
says, that France has within the teritories of it, 104. cities, and gives
reason of this his saying, because there be there so many seats of Archbishops
and bishops.

Clack, as to clack, force, and bard, alias, beard good wools. anno. 8. H. 6.
ca. 22. whereof the first, viz. to clack wool, is to cut of the sheep mark,
which makes it to weigh less, and so yield the less custom to the king, to
force wool, is to clip of the upper and more heary part of it, to bard or
beard it, is to cut the head and neck from the rest of the fleece.

Clamea admittenda in itinere per Atturnatum, is a writ whereby the king
commands the Justices in air to admit of ones claim by Attorney, that is
employed in the kings service, and cannot come in his own person. Regist.
orig. fol. 19. b.

Claim (clameum) is a challenge of interest in any thing that is in the
possession of another, or at the least out of his own: as, claim by charter,
claim by descent, old not. br. fol. 11. Si dominus infra annum clameum
qualitercunque apposuerit: Bracton. lib. 1. cap. 10. See the definition and
diverse sorts of claim in Plowden. Casu Stowel. fol. 359. a.

Clarentius. See Herald.

Clorgie (clerus, clericatus) is diversely taken: sometime for the whole number
of those, that are de Clero domini) of the Lords lot or share, as the tribe of
Leuy. was in Iudaea: some time for a plee to an indictment, or an appeal, and
is by Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 2. ca. 41. thus defined. Clergy is an ancient
liberty of the church, which has been confirmed by diverse parlaments, and is,
when a priest, or one within orders, is arraigned of felony, before a seculer
judge, he may pray his clergy. which is as much, as if he prayed to be
delivered to his ordinary, to purge him self of the offense objected. And
this might be done in case of murder. Coke. li. 4. fo. 46. a. This liberty is
mentioned in articulis cleri. anno. 9. Ed. 2. ca. 16. and what persons might
have their clergy, and what not, see Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 2. ca. 42. and 43.
Howbeit there be many statuts made sithence he writ that book, whereby the
benefit of clergy is abridged. as anno. 8. El. ca. 4. anno. 14. eiusdem. ca.
5. anno. 18. eiusd. cap. 4. 6. 7. and anno 23. eiusd. cap. 2. a. 29. eiusd. c.
2. anno 31. eiusd. ca. 12. a. 39. eiusd. ca. 9. and ca. 15. Of this see
Cromptons Justice of peace, fo. 102. 103. 104. 105. and Lamberds Eirenarcha.
li. 4. ca. 14. pa. 543. And note by the way, that the ancient course of the
law in this point of clergy, is much altered. For by the statute anno. 18.
Eliza. ca. 7. clerks be no more delivered to their ordinaries to be purged, but
now every man, though not within orders, is put to read at the bar, being
found guilty, and convicted of such felony as this benefit is still granted
for: and so burnt in the hand and set free for the first time, if the
ordinaries commissioner or depute standing by do say: (legit vt clericus) or
otherwise suffers death for his transgression.

Clerico addmittendo, is a writ directed to the bishop, for the admitting of a
clerk to a benefice upon a (Ne admittas) tried and found for the party that
procures the writ. Regist. orig. fo. 31. 6.

Clerico captoper statutu^ mercatorum, etc. is a writ for the delivery of a
clerk out of prison, that is imprisoned upon the breach of a statut merchant.
Register orig. fo. 147.

Clerico conuicto commisso gaolae in defectu ordinarii deliberando, etc. is a
writ for the delivery of a clerk to his ordinary, that formerly was convicted
of felony, by reason his ordinary did not challenge him according to the
privilege of clerks. Register. orig. fo. 69. a.

Clerico infra sacros ordines constituto non elegendo in officium, is a writ
directed to the bay lifs, etc. that have thrust a bayliwick or bedelship upon
one in holy orders, charging them to release him again. Register orig. fo.
187. b.

Clerk (clericus) has two significations: one, as it is the title of him, that
belongs to the holy ministry of the church, that is (in these days) either
minister, or deacon, of what other degree or dignity soever: though according
to former times, not only sacerdotes and diaconi, but also, subdiaconi,
cantores, acolyti, exorcistae, and ostiarii were within this accoumpt, as they
be at this day, where the canon law has full power. And in this
signification, a clerk is either relegious (otherwise called regular) or
secular. anno. 4. H. 4. ca. 12. The other signification of this word, notes
those, that by their function or course of life, practice their pen in any
court or other wise; as namely, the clerk of the rolls of parliament, clerks
of the Chancery, and such like, whose peculiar offices I purpose to set down
in order, according to that knowledge that I could procure of them.

Clerk of the parliament rolls, (clericus rotulorum Parlamenti) is he that
records all things done in the high court of Parliament, and engrosseth them
fairly into parhement rolls, for their better keeping to all posterity. Of
these there be two, one of the higher, another of the lower or common house,
Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 4. and 8. Smith de rep. Anglor. page 38. See also Vowels
book touching the order of the Parliament.

Clerk of the crown in the cha^cerie (clericus Coronae in Cancellaria) is an
officer there, that by himself or his deputy, is continually to attend the
Lord Chanceler, or Lord Keeper, for special matters of estate by commission,
or the like, either immediately from his majesty, or by order of his privy
council, as well ordinary as extraordinary. viz. commissions of
lieuetenancies, of Justices errant, and of assizes, of oyer and terrainer, of
gaol delivery, of the peace, and such like, with their writs of association,
and dedimus potestatem, for taking of oaths. Also all general pardons upon
graunts of them at the kings coronation, or at a parliament, where he sits in
the higher house at the Parliament time; the writs of parliament, with the names
of knights and burgesses, which be to be returned into his office. He has also
the making of all special pardons, and writs of execution, upon bonds of
statute of the Staple forfeited: which was annexed to his office in the reign
of Queen Mary, in consideration of his continual and chargeable attendance:
both these before being common for every coursitour, and clerk of court to make.

Clerk of the Crown (clericus Coronae) is a clerk or officer in the Kings
bench, whose function is to frame, read, and record all indictments against
traitors, felons, and other offenders there arraigned upon any public crime.
He is otherwise termed Clerk of the Crown office. And anno. 2. H. 4. ca. 10.
he is called clerk of the crown of the kings bench.

Clerk of the extreates (clericus extractorum) is a clerk belonging to the
exchequer, who termely receives the extreats out of the Lord treasurers
remembrancer his office, and writes them out to be levied for the king. He
also makes ceduls of such sums extreated, as are to be discharged.

Clerk of assise (clericus assisae) is he, that writes all things iudicially
done by the Justices of assise in their circuits. Cromptons Iurisd. fo. 227.

Clerk of the pele (clericus pellis) is a clerk belonging to the exchequer,
whose office is, to enter every tellers bille into a parchement roll called
(pellis receptorum) and also to make another roll of paiments, which is called
(pellis exituum) where in he sets down, by what warrent the money was paid.

Clerk of the warrants (clericus warrantorum) is an officer belonging to the
court of common plees, which enters all warrants of attorney for plantiffe and
defendant, and enrolleth all deeds of indentures of bargain and sale, which
are acknowledged in the court, or before any judges out of the court. And he
does extreate into the exchequer, all issues, fines, and amercements, which
grow due to the king any way in that court, and has a standing fee of ten
pound of the king, for making the same extreats. See Fitzh. not. br. fo. 76. in
prin.

Clerk of the petit bag (clericus parvae bagiae) is an officer of the
chawncerie, of which sort there be three, and the master of the Roles their
chief. Their office is to record the return of all inquisitions out of every
shire, all liveries granted in the court of wards, all ouster les mains, to
make all patents of customers, gawgers, controllers, and aulnegers, all conge
d' eslires for Bishops, all liberateis upon extents of statute staples, the
recovery of Recognisances forfeited, and all Elegits upon them, the summons of
the nobility, clergy, and burgeses to the Parliament; commissions directed to
knights and other of every shire for seassing of the subsidies. Writs for the
nominations of collectours for the fiftenthes, and all traverses upon any
office, bille or otherwise, and to recieue the money due to the king for the
same. This officer is mentioned. anno 33. H. 8. ca. 22.

Clerk of the Kings great wardrobe (clericus magnae garderobae regis) is an
officer of the Kings house, that keeps an account or Inventarie in writing,
of all things belonging to the kings wardrobe. This officer is mentioned. anno
1. Ed. 4. ca. 1.

Clerk of the market (clericus merketi) is an officer of the kings house. anno
1. Ed. 4. cap. 1. and anno 13. R. 2. ca. 4. whose duty is to take charge of
the kings measures, and to keep the standards of them, (that is) the examples
of all the measures that ought to be through the land: as of elns, yards,
lagens, as quarts, pottels, gallons, etc. of weights, bushels, and such like,
and to see, that all measures in every place, be answerable unto the said
standard, Fleta. li. 2. ca. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. of which office, as also of our
diversity of weights and measures, you may there find a treatise worth the
reading. Britton also in his 30. chapter says in the Kings person, to this
effect: we will that none have measures in the realm but we our selves: but
that every man take his measures and weights from our standards: and so goes
on with a tractat of this matter, that well shows the ancient law and
practice in this point. Touching this officers duty, you have also a good
statut. anno 13. R. 2. cap. 4.

Clerk of the Kings silver (clericus argenti Regis) is an officer belonging to
the court of common plees, unto whom every fine is brought, after it has
been with the custos brevium, and by whom the effect of the writ of covenant
is entered into a paper book; and according to that note, all the fines of that
term are also recorded in the rolls of the court. And his entry is in this
form: He puts the Shire over the margen, and then says. A. B. dat domino
regi dimidiam merkam (or more, according to the value) pro licentia
concordandi. C. cum C. D. pro talibus terris, in tali villa, and habet
chirographum per pacem admissum etc.

Clerk of the peace (clericus pacis,) is an officer belonging to the sessions
of the peace: His duty is, in the sessions to read the endictments, to
enrolle the acts, and draw the process: to record the proclamations of rates
for servants wages, to enrolle the discharge of apprentices, to keep the
counterpaine of the indenture of armor, to keep the register book of
licenses, given to badgers and laders of corn, and of those that are licensed
to shoot in guns, and to certify into the kings bench transcripts of
indictments, outlawries, attainders, and convictions had before the Justices of
the peace, within the time limited by statute. Lamberds eirenarcha. li. 4. ca.
3. fo. 379.

Clerk of the signet (clericus signetti) is an officer attendant continually on
his majesty's principal secretary, who always has the custody of the privy
signet, as well for sealing his majesty's private leters, as also such graunts
as pass his majesty's hands by bill assigned. Of these there be four that
attend in their course, and have their diet at the Secretaries table. More
largely you may read of their office, in the statute made anno 27. H. 8. ca.
11.

Clerk of the privy seal (clericus priuati sigilli) is an officer (whereof
there be four in number) that attends the Lord keeper of the privy seal,
or if there be none such, upon the principal Secretary, writing and making out
all things that be sent by warrant from the signet to the privy seal, and are
to be passed to the great seal: as also to make out (as they are termed)
privy seals, upon any especial occasion of his majesty's affairs; as for
loan of money, or such like. Of this officer, and his function, you may read
the statute anno. 27. H. 8. ca. 11. He that is in these days called the Lord
keeper of the privy seal, seems in ancient time to have been called
clerk of the privy seal, and to have been reckoned in the number of the
great officers of the realm. Read the statute. anno. 12. R. 2. ca. 11.

Clerk of the Iuries or iurata writs (clericus iuratorum) is an officer
belonging to the court of the common plees, which makes out the writs called
(habeas corpora) and (distringas) for appearance of the Jury, either in court
or at the assizes, after that the Jury or panell is returned upon the (venire
facias). He enters also into the rols the awarding of these writs, and makes
all the continuance from the going out of the (habeas corpora) until the
verdict be given.

Clerk of the pipe (clericus pipae) is an officer in the kings exchequer, who
having all accounts and debts due to the king delivered and drawn down out of
the Remembrancers offices, charge them down into the great roll: who also
writes su^mons to the Shyreeue, to levy the said debts upon the goods and
catels of the deptors: and if they have no goods, then does he draw them down
to the L. treasurers remembrancer, to write extreats against their lands. The
awncient revenew of the Crown, remains in charge before him, and he sees the
same answered by the fermers and shyreeues to the King. He makes a charge to
al Shyreeues of their summons of the pipe and greenwax, and sees it answered
upon their accounts. He has the drawing and engrossing of all leases of the
Kings land.

Clerk of the hamper or hanaper (clericus hanaperij) is an officer in
chawncerie, anno 2. Fd. 4. ca. 1. otherwise called warden of the hamper, in the
same statute, whose function is, to receive all the money due to the kings
majesty, for the seals of charters, pate^ts, commissions, and writs, as also
feese due to the officers for enrolling and examining the same, with such like.
He is tied to attendance on the lord Chanceler, or lord keeper, daily in the
term time, and at all times of sealing: having with him leather bags, wherein
are put all charters, etc. after they be sealed by the Lord Chanceler, and
those bags being sealed up with the lord Chancelers private seal, are to be
delivered to the controller of the hanaper, who upon receipt of them, does as
you shall read in his office. This hanaper represents a shadow of that
which the Romans termed (fiscum) that contained the Emperors treasure.

Clerk of the plees (clericus placitorum) is an officer in the exchequer, in
whose office all the officers of the court (upon especial privilege belonging
unto them) ought to siew or be siewed upon any action.

Clerk of the treasury (clericus thesaurariae) is an officer belonging to the
common plees, who has the charge of keeping the records of the court, and
makes out all the records of Nisi prins, has the fees due for all searches,
and has the certifiing of all records into the the kings bench, when a writ of
error is brought; and makes out all writs of (Supersideas de non molestando)
which are granted for the defendants, while the writ of error hangs. Also
he makes all exemplications of records being in the treasury. He is taken to
be the servant of the chief Justice, and remoueable at his pleasure: whereas
al other officers are for term of life. There is also a Secondarie, or under
clerk of the treasury for assistance, which has some allowances. There is
likewise an under keeper, who always keeps one key of the treasury door, and
the chief clerk of the Secundarie another: so the one cannot come in without
the other.

Clerk of essoines, (clericus essoniorum) is an officer belonging to the court
of common plees, who only keeps the essoines roll, and has for entering
every essoine, six pence, and for every exception to bar the essoine, in
case where the party has omitted his time, six pence. He has also the
providing of parchment, and cutting it out into rols, and marking the numbers
upon them, and the delivery out of all the rols to every officer, and the
receiving of them again, when they be written, and the binding and making up
of the whole bundels of every term: and this he does as servant to the chief
Justice. For the chief Justice is at charge for all the parcheme^t of all the
rols.

Clerk of the outlawries, (clericus vtlagariarum) is an officer belonging to
the court of common plees, being only the servant or deputy to the kings
attorney general, for making out the writs of (capias vtlagatum) after
outlawrie. And the kings atturneis name is to every one of those writs. And
whereas seven pence is paid for the seal of every other writ betwixt party
and party, there is but a penny paid for the seal of this writ, because it
goes our at the Kings suite.

Clerk of the sewers, (clericus sucraerum) is an officer apperteining to the
commissioners of sewers, writing all things that they do by virtue of their
commission, for the which See Sewers: and see the statute anno 13. Elizabe. ca.
9.

Clerk controller of the kings house, (whereof there be two) is an officer in
court, that has place and seat in the compting house and authority to allow
or disallow the charges and demands of pursuivants or messengers of the green
cloth, purveiours, or other like. He has also the ouer-sight and controlling
of all defaults, defects and miscariages of any the inferior officers, and to
sit in the counting house with the superior officers, viz. the L. Steward,
treasurer, controller and coferer. either for correcting or bettering things
out of order; and also for bringing in country provision requisite for the
Kings household: and the censure for failing of cariages and carts warned and
charged for that purpose. This officer you have mentioned. anno. 33. H. 8. ca.
12.

Clerk of the Nihils (clericus nihilorum) is an officer in the Exchequer, that
makes a roll of all such sums, as are nihiled by the shyreeues upon their
estreats of green wax, and dilivereth the same into the Lord treasurers
remembrancer his office, to have execution done upon it for the king.

Clerk of the check, is an officer in court, so called, because he has the
check and controlment of the yeomen of the guard, and all other ordinary yeomen
and huissiers belonging either to his majesty, the Queen, or Prince, either
giving leave, or allowing their absences or defects in attendance, or
deminishing their wages for the same. He also nightly by himself or depute,
takes the view of those that are to watch in the court, and has the setting
of the watch. This officer is mentioned. anno. 33. H. 8. ca. 12.

Clerk marshiall of the kings house, seems to be an officer that attends
the marshiall in his court, and records all his proceedings, anno 33. H. 8.
cap. 12.

Clothe of raye. anno 27. Ed. 3. sta. 1. cap. 4.

Closhe, is an unlawful game forbidden by the statute, anno 17. Ed. 4. cap. 3.
which is casting of a bowl at nine pinnes of wood, or nine shanke bones of an
ox or horse.

Clove is the 32. part of a weigh of cheese i. 8. pound, anno 9. H. 6. cap. 8.

Cloves (caryophylli) are a spice known by sight to every man. They be flowers
of a tree called (caryophyllus) gathered and hardened by the Sun. Of their
nature you may read in Gerards Herball. lib. 3. cap. 144. This is comprised
among such spices, as be to be garbled, anno 1. Jacob. cap. 19.

Cocket (cokettum) is a seal appertaining to the kings custom house, Regist.
orig. fol. 192. a. and also ascrow of parchement sealed and delivered by the
officers of the custom house to merchants, as a warrant that their merchandise
be customed, anno 11. H. 6. cap. 16. which parchment is otherwise called
literae de coketto, or literae testimoniales de coketto. Regist. vbi supra.
fol. 179. a. So is the word used. anno 5. and 6. Ed. 6. cap. 14. and anno 14.
Ed. 3. stat. 1. cap. 21. This word is also used for a distinction of bread in
the statutes of bread and ale, made anno 51. H. 3. where you have mention of
bread coket, wastell bread, bread of trete, and bread of common wheat.

Coferer of the Kings household, is a principal officer of his Majesty's court,
next under the Controller, that in the counting house and elsewhere at other
times, has a special charge and oversight of other officers of the household,
for their good demeanure and carriage in their offices, to all which one and
other, being either Sergeants, Yeome^, grooms, pages, or children of the
kitchen, or any other in any room of his Majesty's servants of household, and
pays their wages. This officer is mentioned. anno 39. Elixab. cap. 7.

Cogs anno 23. H. 8. cap. 18.

Conisour of a fine, is he, that passes or acknowledges a fine in lands or
teneme^ts to another: Cognise^ is he to whom the fine is acknowledged, West.
part 2. symbol. titulo Fines. sect. 2.

Cognizance, comes from the French (cognizance. i. intelligentia,
intellectus, notio, cognitio,) with us it is used diversely: some time
signifying a badge of a seruingmans sleeue, whereby he is discerned to belong
to this or that Noble or Gentleman: sometime an acknowledgement of a fine, or
confession of a thing done: as cognoscens latro, Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2.
cap. 3. 20. 32. cognoscere se ad villanum. Idem lib. 4. tractat. 3. cap. 16. As
also to make cognizance of taking a distress: sometime as an audience or
hearing of a matter iudicially, as to take cognizance: sometime a power or
jurisdiction, as cognizance of plee, is an ability to call a cause or plee
out of another court: which no man can do but the king, except he can show
charter for it. Manwood part 1. Of his Forest laws, page 68. See the new
terms of the law, and the new book of Entries, verbo, Conusance.

Cognatione. See Cosenage.

Cognisour, see Conisour.

Cognitionibus mittendis, is a writ to a Justice, or other, that has power to
take a fine, who having taken knowledgement of a fine, deferreth to certify it
into the court of common plees, commanding him to certify it. Regist. orig.
68. b.

Coin (cuneus, vel cuna) seems to come from the French (coin. i. angulus)
which probably verifieth the opinion of such, as do hold the auncientest sort
of coin to be cornered and not round. Of this Lawyers substantive (cuna)
comes the Lawyers verb (cunare) i. to coin. Cromptons Justice of peace fol.
220.

Coliander seed, or rather Coriander seed (Semen coriandri) is the seed of
an herb so called, medicinable and wholesome for diverse good purposes, which
see in Gerards Herball. lib. 2. cap. 3. 79. It is numbered among the drugges
that be to be garbled, anno 1. Jacob. cap. 19.

Collateral (collateralis) comes of the Latin (laterale) i. that which
hangs by the side. Lateralia viatoria. P. de lega. and fideium, tertio l.
102. seem to signify a budget or capcase to hang by a saddle pomel.
Collateral, is used in the common law, for that which comes in, or is
adhering of the side: as, collateral assurance, is that which is made over and
beside the deed it self. For example, if a man covenant with another, and
enter bond for the performance of his covenant, the bond is termed collateral
assurance: because it is external, and without the nature and essence of the
covenant. And Crompton in his Iurisd. fol. 185. says, that to be subject to
the feeding of the kings Dear, is collateral to the soil within the Forest.
In like manner may we say, that the liberty to pitche boothes or standings for
a Fair in another man's ground, is collateral to the ground. The private woods
of a common person within a Forest, may not be cut without the kings license.
For it is a prerogative collateral to the soil. Manwood part 1. of his
Forest laws, page 66. Collateral warrantie. See Warrantie.

Collation of a benefice (collatio beneficii) signifies properly the bestowing
of a benefice by the Bishop, that has it in his own gift or patronage: and
differs from Institution in this, for that Institution into a benefice, is
performed by the Bishop at the motion or presentation of another, who is patron
of the same, or has the patrons right for the time. Extra de Institutionibus.
and De concessione praebendarum. etc. And yet is collation used for
presentation. anno. 25. Ed. 3. stat. 6.

Collatione facta vni post mortem alterius, etc. is a writ directed to the
Justices of the common plees, commanding them to direct their writ to a Bishop,
for the admitting of a clerk in the place of another presented by the king,
that during the suit between the king and the Bishops clerk, is departed. For
judgment once passed for the kings clerk, and he dying before he be admitted,
the king may bestow his presentation upon another, Register orig. fo. 31. b.

Collatione heremitagii, is a writ whereby the king conferreth the keeping of
an ermitage upon a clerk. Register orig. fo. 303 308.

Color, (color) signifies in the common law, a probable plee, but in truth
false, and has this end, to draw the trial of the cause from the Jury to the
Judges. Of this see two apt examples in the author of the new terms. Verbo
Color. who also refers you to the Doctor and student. fo. 158. etc. See
Broke tit. Color in assise, trespass etc. fo. 140.

Collusion, (collusio) is in our common law, a deceitful agreement or compact
between two or more, for the one party to bring an action against the other to
some evil purpose; as to defraude a third of his right, etc. See the new
terms. and Broke titulo. Collusion. See also one case of collusion in the
Register orig. fo. 179. a.

Combat, (duellum) is a french word signifiing as much as (certamen,
decertatio, dimicatio, discrimen, praelium, pugna) but in our common law, it is
taken for a formal trial of a doubtful cause or quarrel, by the sword or
bastons of two champions. Of this you may read at large both in diverse
ciuilians, as Paris de Puteo, de remilitari and duello. Alciat de duello,
Hotomam disputatio. feudalium. ca. 42. and others: as also in our common
lawyers of England, namely Glanuile. li. 14. ca. 1. Bracton. li. 3. tracta. 2.
ca. 3. Britton ca. 22. Horns mirror of Justices li. 3. ca. des exceptions in
fine proxime ante c. Iuramentu^ duelli. Dier. fo. 301. nu. 41. and 42. That
this also was aunciently the law of the Lombards, before they invaded Italy
(which was about the year of our Lord 571 appears by Sigonius, in his
history De regno Italiae. lib. 2. de Ari^aldo rege. who there reports, that
the said king, having put away his wife Gundeberga, upon a surmise of adultery
with Tato Duke of Etruria, at the private suggestion of Adalulphus, a great man
among the Lombards, and being charged by Clotharius the king of France his
Ambassadors, of whose blood she was, that he had done her wrong: he answered,
that he had done her no wrong. Whereupon Ansoaldus one of the ambassadors
replied, that they would easily believe him, if he would suffer the truth to be
tried by combat, between some one of the Queens friends, and her accuser,
according to the custom of the Lombards. And the king yielding unto this,
Adalulphus was vanquished by one Pitto, otherwise called Charles, set forth
for the Queens cha^pion, and she restored to her former place and honor.

Cominseede, alias, Cumin seed, (Semen cumini) is a seed brought forth by an
herb so called, which you may see described in Gerards Herball, lib. 2. cap.
416. This is placed among the garbleable drugges, anno 1. Jacob. cap. 19.

Comitatu commisso, is a writ or a commission, whereby the Shyreeue is
authorized to take upon him the swaye of the county. Regist. orig. fol. 295.
a. and b. and Co(...) Reports, li. 3. fol. 72. a.

Comitatu and castro commisso, is a writ whereby the charge of a county,
together with the keeping of a castle, is committed to the Shyreeue, Reg orig.
fol. 295. a.

Commaundrie (praeceptoria) was by some men's opinion, a manner or chief
mefuage, with which lands or tenements were occupied, belonging to the Priorie
of S. John's in Jerusalem in England: and he which had the government of any
such manner or house, was called the commander, who had nothing to dispose of
it, but to the use of the Priorie, taking only his sustenance thence,
according to his degree, and was usually a brother of the same Priorie. Author
of the new terms of law. verbo, Commaundrie. By some other books it
appears, that the chief Prior of S. John's, was a co^maunder of a Nunnerie,
and co^stituted the Priores of the said Nunnerie, who was under his obedience,
and remoueable at his will, notwithstanding that she had covent, and common
seal, and had her possessions several, and was wont to lease the land for
term of years. Fulbecks Paralels, fol. 2. a. Of these comma^dries also Petrus
Gregorius lib. de beneficiis cap. 11. number. 11. has these words: Praeceptoriae
dictae commendae sacrorum militum, (...)eluti ordinis hospitalii Sancti Ioannis
Hierosolymitani, beneficia quidem secundum quid Ecclesiastica dic untur a
Barbatia ad Clement. causam col. 51. de Electione. Tamen non proprie dicuntur
ex genere communium beneficiorum, eo quod personae conferentes, and quibus
conferuntur, non sunt laicae vel ecclesiasticae, sed tertu ordinis. De hiis
beneficiis ^fit mentio. cap. exhibita de priuilegiis. in extravag. com. in cap.
Dudum, de decimis. These in many places of our realm are termed by the name of
temples, because they sometime belonged to the Templers. Of these you read
ann. 26 H. 8. cap. 2. and anno 32. eiusd. ca 24. And of these the said
Gregorius Tolosanus. li. 15. sui syntagmatis. cap. 34. has these words:
Monuimus superiori capite, crescente numero peregrinorum, iuxta Te^plum
Hierosolymitanum Xenodo. chium aedificatum, tit. Diui Iohannis, quo
exciperentur peregrini, quos coenobia capere non possent. Huius ergo ministerio
quoque viri pij nobiles se devoverunt, qui and peregrinos tutarentur, and a
latronum seu Agarenorum incursu defenderent. Horum professio est votum solenne
paupertatis, and abdicationis propriorum, castitatis, and obedientiae. Proinde
propter primum votum nihil proprii habent, vel habere debent, sed accipiunt
annonam, quam diu vivunt, vel praeceptorias (quas vocant Commanderies)
administrant, quam diueas possident, and optione mutant; vel ex magistri
licentia permutant reddituri morientes quae apud eos reperie^tur, societati Of
these Corasius in his paraphrase Ad sacerd. mat. part prim. cap. 3. says
thus: Praeceptoriae Rhodienses, cum non nisi fratribus Hierosolymitanis, atque
it a personis ecclesiasticis conferantur; beneficiis ecclesiasticis annumerari
merito debent.

Commandment (praeceptum) is used diuersely in the common law: some time for
the commandment of the king, when upon his mere motion, and from his own
mouth, he casts any man into prison. Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 72. or of the
Justices. And this commandment of the Justices, is either absolute or
ordinary: absolute, as when upon their own authority in their wisdom and
discretion, they commit a man to prison, for a punishment: Ordinary is, when
they commit one rather for safe custody then punishment. And a man committed
upon an ordinary commandment, is repleuisable. pl. cor. fo. 73. Commandment
is again used for the offense of him, that wills another man to transgress
the law, or to do any such thing, as is contrary to the law, as murder,
theft, or such like. Bract. li. 3. tra. 2. ca. 19 And this the ciuilians call
(mandatum) Angelus de maleficiis.

Commen (communia) comes from the french (commun. i. quod ad omnes pertinet)
and signifies in our common law, that soil or water, whereof the use is
common to this or that town, or lordship; as common of pasture (communia
pesturae.) Bract. ls. 4. ca. 19. and 40. commen of fishing. communia piscariae.
Idem. li. 2. ca. 34. commen of turbary. i. of digging turues (communia
turbariae) Idem. li. 4. ca. 41. common of estouers (communia estoueriorum.)
Kitchen. fo. 94. Comen, is divided into commen in gross, commen appendant,
commen dppertinent, and commen per cause de vicinage. i. by reason of
neighborhood. Common in gross, is a liberty to have common alone (that is)
without any land or tenement, in another man's land, to him self for life, or
to him and his heirs. And this is commonly passed by deed of grant or
specialty. Old not. br. fo. 31. and 37. Commen appendant and common
appertinent, be in a manner confounded: as appears by Fitzh. not. br. fo. 180.
and be defined to be a liberty of common, appertaining to, or depending of such
or such a freehould. Only Kitchen. fo. 94. seems to make this difference,
that he which has commen appertine^t, has it without limitation of this or
that kind of beasts: but that is controlled by Dyer. fo. 70. b. nu. 19. He
that has commen appendant, has it but for beasts commenable, as horses,
oxen, kine, and sheep, being acompted fittest for the plowman: and not of
goats, geese and hogs. whereunto the author of the new teaams of law adds
another difference: which is, that common appertinent may be severed from the
land, whereunto it is appertinent, but not common appendant. The original of
common appendant S. Ed Coke li. 4. fo. 37. thus expresses: Common appendant,
by the ancient law, had beginning in this manner, when a lord infeoffed
another in erable lands, to hold of him in socage (idest, per seruicium socae)
as all tenure in the beginning (according to Litleton) was: the feoffee, to
mamtaine the service of his plough, had common in the wastes of his Iord, for
his necessary beasts to gain and compass his land: and that for two causes: one
for that, as then it was taken, it was (tacit) employed in the feofment, by
reason the feoffee could not gain or compass his land without catell, and
catell could not be sustained without pasture. anb so by consequent the feoffec
had (as a thing necessary and incident) common in the wastes and land of the
lord. And this appears by ancient books tempore. Ed. i. tit. common 24. and
17. E. 2. tit. common. 23. and 20. Ed. 3. tit. Admesurement. 8, and 18. Ed. 3.
and by the rehersall of the statute of Merton. ca. 4. The second reason was for
maintenance, and advancement of tillage, which is much regarded and favored in
the law, Thus far S. Edward.

Commen per cause de vicinage, is a liberty, that the tenants of one lord in
one town, have to common with the tenants of another lord in another town
which kind of common they that challenge, may not put their catell into the
common of the other town. For then they be distremable. But turning them into
their own fields, if they strey into the neighbors commen, they must be
suffered. See the terms of law. Common of pasture the Civilians call ius
compascendi, cum sc: plures ex municipipibus qui diversa praedia possiaebant,
saltum communem, vt ius compascendi haberent, mercarentur. l. penul. P. si
servit, vendicetur. It is also called ius compascuum. ibidem.

Commendam (commenda) is a benefice, that being void, is commended to the
charge and care of some sufficient clerk, to be supplied, until it may be
conveniently provided of a pastor. And that this was the true original of this
practice, you may read at large in Duarenus de sacris ecclesiae ministeriis and
beneficiis li. 5. ca. 7. And whereas the gloss, in verbo commendare. in ca.
Nemo deinceps: de electione. in sexto. defines commendam esse ecclesiae
custodiam al icui commissam: Johannes Andraeas thereupon says thus: huic
definitioni necessario haec aditcienda putem: in tempus gratia evidentis
necessitatis and vtilitatis. Idque docuit textus in dicto capite. Nemo.
Corrasius in his paraphrase de sacerdotiorum materia part prima. ca. 6. nu. 3.
and seqq. thus describes the matter: In commendam conceditur beneficium, cum
Romanus Pontifex, Legatus, aut Episcopus (Neque enim inferioribus, qui ex
privelegio aut alio iure spirituals conferunt, concessum est, ca. cum omnes
basilicae. 16. quaest. 7.) ecclesiae vacantis custodiam alicui committit,
administratorem generalem eius templi eum constituens, ca. nemo. de electio. in
sexto. Commendare enim aliud est nihil, quam deponere. l. publius. P. depositi.
l. co^me^dare. P. de verb: signif.) Hoc aute^, ad tempus sex mensium, and pro
evidenti necessitate aut vtilitate ecclesiae lex permittit, (d. ca. Nemo.)
Quaere commendatarius qui ecclesiae vacantis and fructuum, ad tempus duntaxat
custodia^ habet, nec tenere beneficiu^, iusve habere in beneficio, aut
canonicum titulum censebuur: vti nec depositarius in re deposita. whereof also
Petrus Gregorius de beneficiis, ca. 10. nu. 13. thus writes. In hac quarta
divisione, potest adds tertium genus beneficii, quod citra praescriptionem
qualitatis a persona alterius qualitatis quam beneficium exigat natura,
possidetur, sed sine praeiudicio naturae beneficii, and per dispensationem, eo
commendato olim ad tempus certum certae personae, hodie, vt plerunque, quam diu
commendatarius vixerit. Vocant hoc beneficium commendatum commendam: vt si
regulare beneficium a Summo Pontisice conferatur, nomine comme^dae, saeculari.
Nam ideo non mutatur beneficii natura, nec fit ideo saeculare, etc. And a
little after, Interim annotabimus duplici de causa fieri commendam ecclesiae,
nempe vel in vtilitatem ecclesiae, vel commendatarii. In primo commenda titulum
non dat beneficii commendatario, and dicitur potius custodia quae revocari
potest: quod repugnat naturae beneficii, quod est perpetuum. In secundo autem
casu beneficium censetur in vtilitatem commendatarii comme^da facta, quam
possidere potest quam diu vixerit, etc. whom you may also read. ca. 2. li. 13.

Commissarie (co^missarius) is a title of ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
appertaining to such a one as exercises spiritual jurisdiction (at the least,
so far as his commission permits him) in places of the dioces so far
distant from the chief city, as the chanceler cannot call the subjects to the
Bishops principal consistory, without their to great molestation. This
commissarie is of the canonists termed commissarius or officialis foraneus.
Lyndwoods provin. ca. 1. de accusatio. ver. bo. Mandatum archiepiscopi. in
glos. and is ordained to this especial end, that he supply the bishops
jurisdiction and office in the out places of the dioces, or else in such
parishes as be peculiars to the bishop, and exempted from the jurisdiction of
the Archdeacon. For where either by prescription or composition, there be
archedeacons that have jurisdiction within their archdeaconries, as in most
places they have, there this commissarie is but superfluous, and most commonly,
does rather vex and disturb the country for his lucre, then of conscience
seek to redress the lives of offenders. And therefore the Bishop taking
prestation money of his archdeacons yearly pro exteriori jurisdiction, as it
is ordinarily called, does by superonerating their circuit with a commissarie,
not only wrong archdeacons, but the poorer sort of subjects much more, as
common practice daily teaches to their great woe.

Commission, (commissio) is for the most part, in the understanding of the
common law, as much as (delegatio) with the Civilians. (See Broke. titulo
commission.) and is taken for the warrant or letters patents, that all men
exercising jurisdiction either ordinary or extraordinary, have for their
power to hear or determine any cause or action. Of these see diverse in the
table of the Register original. verbo. Commissio. yet this word sometime is is
extended farther, then to matters of judgment: as the commission of purveiours
or takers. anno. 11. H. 4. ca. 28. But with this epitheton (high) it is most
notoriously used for the honorable commission court, instituted and founded
upon the statute 1. Eliza. ca. 1. for the ordering and reformation of all
offenses, in any thing appertaining to the jurisdiction ecclesiastical: but
especially such as are of higher nature, or, at the least, require greater
punishment, then ordinary jurisdiction can afford. For the world being grown
to that loosenes, as not to esteem the censure of excommunication, necessity
calls for those censures of fynes to the prince and imprisonment, which do
affect men more nearly.

Commission of rebellion (Commissio rebellionis) is otherwise called a writ
of rebellion, (breue rebellionis) and it has use, when a man after
proclamation made by the Shyreeue upon an order of the channcerie, or court of
Star chamber, under penalty of his allegance, to present himself to the
court by a certain day, appears not. And this commission is directed by way
of command to certain persons, to this end, that they, or three, two, or one
of them, do apprehend, or cause to be apprehend, the party as a rebel and
contemner of the kings laws, wheresoever they find him within the kingdom,
and bring him, or cause him to be brought to the court, upon a day therein
assigned. The true copy of this commission or writ, you have in Cromptons
diverse Jurisdictions. Court de Star chamber: as also in West. tractat.
touching proceedings in Chancerie, Sectio 24.

Commissioner (commissionarius) is he that has commission, as leters patents,
or other lawful warrant, to execute any public office: as commissioners of
the office of fines and licenses. West. part. 2. symbol: titulo Fines. sect.
106. commissioners in air. an. 3. Ed. 1. ca. 26. with infinite such like.

Committee, is he to whom the consideration or ordering of any matter is
referred, either by some court, or consent of parties, to whom it belongs.
As in Parliament, a bille being read, is either consented unto and passed, or
denied, or nether of both, but referred to the consideration of some certain
men, appointed by the house farther to examine it: who thereupon are called
committees. Committee of the King West. par. 2. symbo. titulo Chancerie. sect.
144. This word seems to be something strangely used in Kitchen. fo. 160.
where the widow of the kings tenent being dead, is called the co^mittee of the
king. that is, one committed by the ancient law of the land, to the kings care
and protection.

Common bench (bancus communis) is used some time for the court of common
plees. anno. 2. Ed. 3. ca. 11. So called, as M. Camden says in his Britannia.
pa. 113. quia communia placita inter subditos ex iure nostro, quod communae
vocant, in hoc disceptantur, that is, the plees or controversies tried between
common persons.

Common fine (finis communis) of this Fleta has these words: Quibus expeditis
(speaking of the business finished by Justices in air) consueverunt
Iusticiarii imponere villatis, iuratoribus, hundredis, and toti comitatui
concelame^tum, and omnes separatim amerciare: quod videtur voluntarium, cum de
periurio and concelamento non fuerint convicti, sed potius dispensandum esset
cumeis quod animas in statera posuerint pro pacis conservatione. li. 1. cap.
48.. Quibus. And a little following.. Et provisum, he has these words: Et
provisum est, quod communes misericordiae vel fines comitatuum amerciatorumin
finibus itinerum Iusticiariorum ante recessum ipsorum Iustitiariorum per
sacramenta militum, and aliorum proborum hominum de commitatu eodem, affidentur
super eos qui contribuere debent: vnde particulae Iusticiariis liberentur, vt
cum aliis extractis suis ad Scaccarium liberare valiant. These last words of
his have relation to the statute, Westminst. pr. cap. 18. which read. See Fine.

Common plees (communia placita) is the kings Court now held in Westminster
hall, but in ancient time moveable, as appears by the statute called Magna
charta. cap. 11. as also anno 2. Ed. 3. cap. 11. and Pupilla oculi, part 5.
cap. 22. But M. Gwin in the Preface to his readings says, that until the time
that Henry the third granted the great charter, there were but two courts in
all, called the Kings courts: whereof one was the Exchequer, and the other, the
kings bench, which was then called (curia Domini regis) and (aula regia)
because it followed the court or king: and that upon the grant of that charter,
the court of common plees was erected and settled in one place certain: viz. at
Westminster. And because this court was settled at Westminster, wheresoever the
king lay: thereupon M. Gwin, vbi supra, says, that after that, all the writs
ran, Quod sit coram Iusticiariis meis apud Westmonasterium: whereas before
the party was commanded by the^, to appear coram me vel Iusticiariis meis,
simply without addition of place, as he well observes out of Glanvile and
Bracton, the one writing in Henry the seconds time, before this court was
erected, the other in the later end of Henry the thirds time, who erected this
court. All civil causes both real and personal are, or were in former times,
tried in this court, according to the strict law of the realm: and by
Fortescue, cap. 50. it seems to have been the only court for real causes.
The chief Judge thereof is called the Lord chief Justice of the common plees,
accompanied with 3. or 4. assistants or associates, which are created by leters
patents from the king, and (as it were) enstalled or placed upon the bench, by
the Lord Chaunceler and lord chief Justice of the court, as appears by
Fortescue, cap. 51. who expresses all the circumstances of this admission. The
rest of the officers belonging to this court, are these: the custos breuium,
three Protonotaries, otherwise called Prenotaries, Chirographer, Filazers 14.
Exigenters, 4. Clerk of the warrants, Clerk of the Iuries or iurata writs,
Clerk of the Treasury, Clerk of the kings silver, Clerk of the essoins,
Clerk of the outlawries. Whose distinct functions look in their places. See
Common bench.

Common day in plee of land, an. 13. R. 2. stat. 1. cap. 17. signifies an
ordinary day in the court as Octavis Michaelis, quindena pascae. etc. as you
may see in the statute made anno 51. H. 3. concerning general days in the
bench.

Common house of parliament, is used for the nether house: because the commo^s
of the realm, that is, the knights of the shires and burgeses, possess that
house. Crompton iurisd. 9.

Commotes, seems to be compounded of the prepositio^ (con) and (mot. i.
dictio, verbum) and signifies in Wales a part of a shire, as a hundred. anno.
28. H. 8. ca. 3. It is written commoithes. anno. 4. H. 4. ca. 17. and is used
for a gathering made upon the people (as it seems) of this or that hundred,
by welsh minstrels.

Common law (comunis lex) has three diverse significatio^s. which see in the
author of new terms of law. verbo. Common law.

Communi custodia, is a writ that lies for that lord, whose tenent houlding by
knights service, dies, and leaves his eldest son under age, against a
stranger that enters the land, and obtains the ward of the body. It may
seem to take the name from the common custom or right in this case: which is,
that the lord have the wardship of his tenent, until his full age, or because
it is common for the recovery both of land and tenent, as appears by the
form thereof. Old not. br. fo. 89. See also the Register orig. fo. 161. a.

Communi placito non tenendo in scaccario, is a writ directed to the treasurer
and barons of the exchequer, forbidding them to hold plee between two common
persons in that court, neither of them belonging toward the said court.
Register orig. fo. 187. b.

Companion of the garter, is one of the knights of that most noble and
honorable order. anno. 24. H. 8. ca. 13. See Garter.

Compromis, (compromissum) is a mutual promise of two or more parties at
difference, to refer the ending of their controversies, to the arbitriment
and equity of one or more arbitratours. West. defines is thus, part. 2.
Symbol. titulo Compromise. sect. pri. A compromise or submission (arbitrium,
compromissum, submissio) is the faculty or power of pronouncing sentence
between persons at controversy, given to arbitratours by the parties mutual
private consent, without public authority.

Computo, is a writ so called of the effect: because it compels a baylife,
chamberlain, or receiver to yield his accoumpt, Old not. br. fo. 58. It is
founded upon the statut of Westminster. 2. ca. 2. anno. 13. Ed. i. which for your
beter understanding you may read. And it lies also for executours of
executours. anno. 15. Ed. 3. statut. de prouis. victual. ca. 5. Thirdly,
against the garden in socage for waste made in the minority of the heir.
Marlb. ca. 17. And see farther in what other cases it lies. Register orig. fo.
135. old not. br. vbi supra. and Fitzh. not. br. fo. 116.

Concealers, be such as find out concealed lands, that is, such lands as
privily are kept from the king by common persons, having nothing to show for
them. anno. 39. Eliza. ca. 22. They be so called a concelando, as mons a
mouendo. per antiphrasin.

Concord, (concordia) is in the common law, by a peculiar signification,
defined to be the very agreement between parties, that intend the leuying of a
fine of lands one to the other, how and in what manner the land shall pass. For
in the form thereof many things are to be considered. West. part. 2. Symbol.
titulo. Fines and concords, sect. 30. whom read at large. Concord is also an
agreement made upon any trespass committed between two or more: and is divided
into a concord executory, and a concord executed. See Plowden. casu Reniger,
and Fogassa fo. 5. and 6. where it appears by some opinion, that the one
binds not as being imperfect: the other absolute and tyeth the parties: and
yet by some other opinion in the same case, it is affirmed that agreements
executory be perfect, and do noe less bind, then agreements executed. fo. 8.
b.

Concubinage, (concubinatus) is an exception against her, that sieweth for her
dower, whereby it is alleged, that she was not a wife lawefully married to
the party, in whose lands she seeks to be endowed, but his concubine.
Britton. ca. 107. Bract. li. 4. tract 6. ca. 8.

Condition, (conditio) is a rate, manner, or law, annexed to men's acts, staying
or suspending the same, and making them uncertain, whether they shall take
effect or no, West. part 1. symb. li. 2. Sect. 156. In a lease there may be
two sorts of conditions: condition collateral, or condition annexed to the
rent. Sir Edward Coke. lib. 3. Pennants case. fol. 64. Collateral condition is
that, which is annexed to any collateral act: as that the leassee shall not go
to Rome, ibi fol. 65. Condition is also divided, into condition in deed or
fact, and condition in law: which otherwise may be termed, condition
expressed, and condition employed. Perkins. Conditions. 722. These and other
like divisions of conditions you may read in the author of the new Terms of
law. verbo. Condition. and in Litleton. li. 3. cap. 5.

Conders, may seem to proceed from the French, (conduire. i. deducere,
gubernare) they be such as stand upon high places near the sea coast, at the
time of herring fishing, to make signs with bowghes, etc. in their hand unto
the fishers, which way the shole of herrings passes. For that may beter
appear to such as stand upon some high cliffe on the shore, by a kind of blew
color, that the said fish causes in the water, then to those that be in the
ships. These be otherwise called huers, by likelihood of the French (huyer.
i. exclamare) and balkers: as appears by the statute, anno 1. Jacob. cap. 23.

Cone and key. Bracton. lib. 2. ca. 37. number. 3. look Cover and Key.

Confirmation (confirmatio) is a strengthening of an estate formerly had, and
yet voydable, though not presently void. For example, a Bishop grants his
Chancelershippe by patent for the term of the patentee his life: this is no
void grant, but voydable by the bishops death, except it be strengthened by
the confirmation of the Deane and chapter. See more of this, in West. part
prim. symb. lib. 2. sect. 500. and Fitz. not. br. fol. 169. B. 226. H. 271. D.
163. G. and Litleton lib. 3. cap. 9.

Confiscate (confiscatus) may be said to come either from the Latin
(confiscare) or the French (confisquer. i. in publicum addicere.) All these
words are drawn from (fiscus) which originally signifies a hamper, pannyer,
basket, or freyle: but metonymically the Emperors treasure: because it was
anciently kept in such hampers, etc. And though our king keep not his treasure
in such things: yet as the Romans said, that such goods as were forfeited to
the Emperors treasury for any offense, were bona confiscata: so do we those
that are forfeited to our kings Exchequer. See more of these goods confiscate.
in Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 24.

Conge d'eslire (venia eligendi) is very French, and signifies in our common
law, the kings permission royal, to a Deane and chapter in time of vacation,
to choose a bishop: or to an Abbey or Priorie of his own foundation, to choose
their Abbot or Prior. Fitz. not. br. fol. 169. B. 170. B. C. etc. Touching this
matter, M. Gwin in the preface to his readings says, that the king of England,
as sovereign patron of all Archbishoprickes, Bishoprics, and other
Ecclesiastical benefices, had of ancient time, free appointment of all
ecclesiastical dignities, when soever they chanced to be void: inuesting
them first (per baculum and annulum) and afterward by his leters patents: and
that in process of time he made the election over to others, under certain
forms and conditions: as namely, that they should at every vacation before
they choose, demand of the king (conge d'eslire) that is, license to proceed
to election, and then after the election, to crave his royal assent, etc. And
further he affirms by good proof out of common law books, that King John
was the first that granted this, and that it was afterward confirmed by Westminster.
pri. ca. i. which statute was made anno. 3. Ed. pri. and again by the statut
(Articuli cleri) ca. 2. which was ordained. anno. 25. Ed. 3. statuto tertio.

Congeable, comes of the french (conge i. venia) It signifies in our common
law, as much as lawful or lawfully done; as the entry of the disseisee is
congeable. Litleton. fo. 91. in meo.

Conisance, See Cognizance.

Conizour, alias cognizour (recognitor) comes of the French (cognoistre. i.
cognoscere, cernere) and is used in the passing of fynes for him, that does
acknowledge the fine; and the conizee is he, to whom it is acknowledged.
West. part. 1. symbol. li. 2. sect. 49. and part 2. titulo. Fines sectio.
114. See Recognizour.

Coniuration (coniuratio) is the very French word drawn from the latin, which
as it is compounded of (con and iuro) so it signifies a compact or plot, made
by men combining themselves together by oath or promise, to do some public
harm. But in our common law, it is especially used for such as have personal
conference with the devil or evil spirit, to knowany secret, or to effect any
purpose. anno 5. Eliza. ca. 16. And the difference that I have observed (how
truly let those judge that be beter skilled in these matters) between
coniuration and witch craft, is because the one seems, by prayers and
invocation of Gods powerful names, to compel the devil, to to say or do
what he commands him: the other deals rather by a friendly and voluntary
conference or agreement between him or her and the devil or familiar, to have
her or his desires and turns served in lien of blood, or other gift offered
unto him, especially of his or her soul. And both these differ from
inchawntments or forceries, because they are personal conferences with the
devil, as is said: but these are but medicines and cerimoniall forms of words
(called commonly charms) without apparition.

Consanguineo, is a writ, for the which See Avo: and See the Register orig. De
auo. proavo, and consanguineo. fo. 226. a.

Conseruatour of the truce and safe conduicts (conservator induciarum and
saluorum regis conductuum) was an officer appointed in every port of the Sea,
under the Kings leters patents, and had 40. pound for his yearly stipend, at
the least. His charge was to enquire of all offenses done against the Kings
truce and safe conduicts, upon the maine sea out of the countries, and out of
the franchises of the Cinque ports of the king, as the admirals of custom were
wont and such other things as are declared. anno 2. H. 5. ca. 6. Touching this
matter you may read another statut. anno 4. H. 5. cap. 7.

Conseruatour of the peace (conseruator vel custos pacis) is he that has an
especial charge by virtue of his office, to see the kings peace kept. which
peace learned M. Lamberd defines, in effect, to be a withholding or abstinence
from that iniutious force and violence, which boisterous and unruly persons are
in their natures prone to use toward others, were they not restrained by laws
and fear of punishment. Of these conservators he farther says thus: that
before the time of K. Edward the third, who first erected Justices of peace,
there were sundry persons, that by the common law had interest in keeping of
the peace. Of those some had that charge as incident to their offices, which
they did bear, and so included within the same, that they were never the less
called by the name of their office only: some others had it simply as of it
self, and were thereof named custodes pacis, wardens or conservators of the
peace. The former and later sort he again subdivideth. Which read in his
eirenarcha. li. 1. ca. 3.

Consideration, (consideratio) is that with us, which the Grecians called
(...): that is, the material cause of a contract, without the which no
contract binds. This consideration is either expressed, as if a man bargain
to give 20. shillings for a horse: or else employed, as when the law it self
inforceth a consideration; as if a man come into a common Inn, and there
staying sometime, takes both meat and lodging, or either for himself and his
horse: the law presumes, that he intends to pay for both, though nothing be
farther couenanted between him and his host: and therefore if he discharge not
the house, the host may stay his horse. Fulb: parel: tracta. Contracts. fo. 6.
a. b.

Consistory (consistorium) is a word borrowed of the Italians, or rather
Lombards, signifing as much as (praetorium) or tribunal. vocab. vtriusque iur.
It is used for the place of justice in the court christian.

Convocation house (domus convocationis) is the house, wherein the whole
clergy is assembled, for consultation upon matters ecclesiastical in time of
parliament. And as the house of Parliament, so this consists of two distinct
houses, one called the higher convocation house, where the Archebishops and
Bishops sit severally by themselves: the other the lower convocation house,
where all the rest of the clergy are bestowed. See Prolocutor.

Conusance. See Cognizance.

Conuzour, See Cognizour.

Consolidation (consolidatio) is used for the combining, and uniting of two
benefices in one. Brook titulo. Union. This word is taken from the civil
law, where it signifies properly an uniting of the possession, occupation, or
profit with the property. For example, if a man have by legacy vsumfructum
fundi, and after ward buy the property or fee simple (as we call it) of the
heir, hoc casu consolidatio fieri dicitur.. 3. De vsufructu. in Institut. See
Union, and Unity of possession.

Conspiracy (conspiratio) though both in Latin and French, it be used for an
agreement of men, to do any thing either good or bad: yet in our lawyers
books, it is always taken in the evil part. It is defined. anno. 34. Ed. pri.
statut. 2. to be an agreement of such, as do confedre or bind themselves by
oath, covenant, or other alliance, that every of them shall bear and aid the
other falsely and maliciously to indight, or falsely to move ormaintaine plees,
and also such as cause children within age, to appeal me^ of felony, whereby
they are imprisoned, and sore grieved: and such as retain men in the contries
with liueries or feese, to maintain their malicious enterprises. And this
extends as well to the takers, as to the givers. And Stewards and baylifes of
great lords, which by their seignorie, office, or power, undertake to bear or
maintain quarrels, plees, or debates that concern other parties, then such as
touch the estate of their lords, or themselves. anno 4. Ed. 3. cap. 11. anno.
3. H. 7. ca. 13. and of this see more. an. 1. H. 5. c. 3. and and an. 18. H. 6.
c. 12. as also in the new book of e^tries. ver. Co^spiracy.

Conspiracy, in the places before mentioned, is taken more generally, and is
confounded with maintenance and champertie. But in a more special
signification, it is taken for a confederacy of two at the least, falsely to
endict one, or to procure one to be indicted of felony. And the punishment of
conspiracie^, upon an endictment of felony, at the kings suyte, is that the
party attainted, leese his frank law, to the intent that he be not empaneled
upon iuries or assizes, or such like employments, for the testifiing of truth.
And if he have to do in the kings court, that he make his attorney: and that
his lands, goods and chatels be seysed into the kings hands, his lands
estreaped (if he find no better favor) his trees raced, and his body
committed to prison. 27. lib. assis. 59. Cromptons Justice of peace. fo. 156.
b. This is called vilanous judgment or punishment. See Vilanous judgment. But
if the party greiued siew upon the writ of conspiracy, then see. Fitzh. not.
br. f. 114. D. 115. I. Conspiracy may be also in cases of less weight. Idem.
fo. 116. A. etc. See Frank law.

Conspiratione, is a writ that lies against conspiratours. Fitz. not. br. fo.
114. d. Cromptons iurisd. fo. 209. See also the Regist. fo. 134.

Constable (constabularius vel conestabulis) is a Saxon word, compounded of
(cuning or cyng) and (staple) which do signify the stay and hold of the king.
Lamb. duties of constables. nu. 4. But I have heard it made heretofore of these
two words, (comes stabuli) which seems to me the more probable, because we
have this officer from France, as most others, and not from the Saxons. And
Tilius in his commentaries (de rebus gallicis) li. 2. ca. de conistabili, has
the same etymology, giving the reason thereof, (quia praeest stabulo. i.
equiliregis) which office is ancient here in England, and mentioned by
Bracton, seeming to answer him, that was called (tribunus celervm) under the
first kings of Rome, and (Magister equitum) afterward. The Germans that
inhabit the side of the river Rhene, note him by this title (die constofler)
and in counterfeit latin (constofelerus) and in owlder time (constafolarius)
that the Romans were wont to term (assessorem iudicij) And (as Spiegelius in
his lexicon notes, derive the word (a stafolo comitis. i. gradu Iudicis
fiscalis. For staffel in their language (as he says) signifies a grees or
step of a pair of stairs. And thereupon (staffelstein) being a word used in
their very awncient writings, signifies as much as praetorium. But a man many
times may show in this kind more curiosity then discretion: as perhaps some
will judge me here to have done. And therefore enough of this. This word is
diversely used in our common law: first forth cunstable of England, who is also
called marshiall. Stawn. pl. cor. fo. 65. of whose great dignity and
authority a man may find many arguments and signs both in the statutes and
chronicles of this realm. His sway consists in the care of the common peace
of the land, in deeds of arms, and matters of wars. Lamb. vbi supra with
whom agrees the statut. anno. 13. R. 2. ca. 2. statu. 1. Smith de Repub.
Anglo. li. 2. c. 25. Of this officer or magistrate M. Gwyn in the preface to
his readings says to this effect: The court of the constable and marshiall
determines co^tracts touching deeds of arms out of the realm, and handles
things concerning wars within the realm, as combats, blaso^s of armorie, etc.
But it may not deal with battle in appeals, nor generally with any other
thing that may be tried by the law of the land. And read Fortescue ca. 32.
This office was belonging heretofore to the lords of certain manners, iure
feudi: and why it is discontinued, see Dyer. fo. 258. nu. 39. Out of this high
magistracy (says M. Lamberd) were drawn these lower constables, which we
call constables of hundreds and franchises, and first ordained by the statute
of Winchester, anno. 13. Ed. 1. which appoints for the conservation of the
peace, and view of armor, two constables in every hundred and franchise,
which in latin are called constabularii capitales. And these be now a days
called high constables: because continuance of time, and increase both of
people and offenfes, has again under these made others in every town called
petit constables, in latin (subconstabularios) which are of like nature but of
inferior authority to the other, as you may read at large in that learned
man's treatise before named. Of these also read S. Thomas Smith li. 2. ca. 22.
Beside these there be officers of particular places, called by this name; as
constable of the tower. Ssawnf. pl. cor. fol. 152. and anno. 1. H. 4. ca. 13.
Stowes annals pa. 812. iurisdict. fo. 132. constable of the exchequer. anno.
51. H. 3. statute. 5. Constable of Dover castle. Camdeni Britan. pa. 239.
Fitzh. not. br. fo. 240. otherwise called castellane. Westminster. i. ca. 7. anno. 3.
Ed. i. But these be castellani properly. as M. Lamberd. notes, though
conioined in name with the others. See the statute. anno. 32. H. 8. ca. 38. M.
Manwood part. prima. ca. 13. of his forest laws, makes mention of a
constable of the forest.

Consuetudinibus and seruities, is a writ of right close, which lies against
the tenent, that deforceth his lord of the rent or service dew unto him. Of
this see more at large the Old not. br. fo. 77. Fitzh. eodem. fo. 151. and the
Register orig: fo. 159.

Consultation, (consultatio) is a writ whereby a cause, being formerly removed
by prohibition from the ecclesiastical court, or court christian, to the kings
court, is returned thither again. For the Judges of the kings court, if upon
comparing the libell with the suggestion of the party, they do find the
suggestion false, or not proved, and therefore the cause to be wrongfully
called from the court christian; then upon this consultation or deliberation,
they decree it to be returned again, whereupon the writ in this case obtained,
is called a consultation. Of this you may read the Register orig. fo. 44. 45.
etc. vsque fol. 58. Old not. br. fo. 32. and Fitzh. eodem. fo. 50.

Contenement, (contenementum) seems to be the free hold land, which lies to
a man's tenement or dwelling house, that is in his own occupation. For in magna
charta. ca. 14. you have these words: A free man shall not be amerced for a
small fault, but after the quantity of the fault: and for a great fault, after
the manner thereof, saving to him his contenement or free hold. And a merchant
likewise shall be amerced saving to him his merchandies: and any other villain
then owers, shall be amerced saving his wainage, if he take him to our mercy. And
Bracton. li. 3. tracta. 2. ca. 1 nu. 3. has these words: and sciendum, quod
miles and liber homo non amerciabitur, nisi secundum modum delicti. seoundum
quod delictum fuit magnum vel parvum, and saluo contenemento suo: mercator vero
non nisi salua merchandiza sua, and villanus nisi saluo Waniagio suo. which
mercy seems to have been learned from the civil law: whereby (executio non
potest fieri in boues, aratra, aliaue instrumenta rusticorum. l. executores and
Authen. Agricultores. Co: quae res pign. obliga nec in stipendia, arma, and
equos militum. l. stipendia. Co. de executio. rei indica. and ibi doctores. nec
in libros scholarium. glos. in. l. Nepos Proculo. verbo. dignitate. P. de
verbo: significa. Quae tamen rusticorum, militum, and scholarium priuilegia
circa executionem vera esse, and eatenus obtinere intelligenda sunt, quatenus
alia bona habent. Johan. Eimericus in processu indiciario: cap. de Executione
senten. 79. number. 11.

Continuance, seems to be used in the common law, as prorogatio is in the
civil law. For example: Continuance until the next assise. Eitz. not. br.
fol. 154. F. and 244. D. in both which places it is said, that if a record in
the treasury be alleged by the one party, and denied by the other: a
(certiorari) shall be siewed to the Treasurer, and the chamberlain of the
Exchequer: who, if they certify not in the Chauncerie, that such a record is
there, or that it is likely to be in the Tower: the king shall send to the
Justices repeating the (certificate) and will them to continue the assise. In
this signification it is likewise used by Kitchen. fol. 202. and 199. and also
anno 11. H. 6. cap. 4.

Continual claim (continuum clameum) is a claim made from time to time.
Within every year and day, to land or other thing, which in some respect we
cannot attain without danger. For example, if I be disseised of land, into
which, though I have right unto it, I dare not enter for fear of beating: it
behooves me to hold on my right of entry to the best opportunity of me and
mine heir, by approaching as near it as I can, once every year, as long as I
live: and so I save the right of entry to mine heir. Terms of law. Again, if
I have a slave or villein broken from me, and remaining any where within the
ancient demesne of the king, being in the hands of the king, I cannot
maintain the writ de nativo habendo, as long as he continues there: but if I
claim him within the year and the day, and so continue my claim, until I
can find him within that compass: I may lawfully lay hold of him as mine own.
Fitz. not. br. fol. 79. See more in Litleton, verbo Continual claim. And the
new book of Entries. Ibid. and Fleta. lib. 6. cap. 53.

Contract (contractus) is a covenant or agreement with a lawful consideration
or cause. West. part prim. symbol. lib. 1. Sect. 10. and lib. 19. P. de verbo:
Significa. with other places, it is thus defined: Contractus est negotium inter
duos pluresve data opera gestum, vt vel vterque invicem, vel alteruter
obligetur. Who so will thoroughly examine the difference between this and
(pactu^) and such other words something like in signification: let him search
the civilians, and he shall find work both pleasant and profitable, and well
fitting the common law also.

Contra formam collationis, is a writ that lies against an abbot or his
successor, for him (or his heir) that has given land to an Abbey, to certain
good uses, and finds that the Abbot or his successor has made a feofment
thereof, with the assent of the tenants, to the disherison of the house or
church. This is founded upon the statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 41. And of this see
the Regist. orig. fol. 238. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 210. And note that the
author of the Terms of law says, that this is not brought against the tenent
or alience.

Contra formam feoffamenti, is a writ, that lies for the heir of a tenent
infeoffed of certain lands or tenements, by charter of feofment by a Lord, to
make certain services and suites to his court, and is afterward distreined for
more, then is contained in the said charter. Regist. orig. fol. 176. old not.
br. fol. 162. and the Terms of the law.

Contributione faciendae, is a writ that lies in case where more are bound to
one thing, and one is put to the whole burden. Fitz. not. br. fo. 162. brings
these examples. If tene^ts in common or joint, hold a mill (pro indiviso) and
equally take the profits thereof, the mill falling to decay, and one or more of
the^, refusing to contribute toward the reparation thereof, the rest shall have
this writ to compel the^. And if there be 3. coparceners of land, that owe
suite to the lords court, and the eldest perform the whole: then may she have
this writ to compel the other two to a co^tributio^ of the charge or to one of
them, if one only refuse. The old. not. br. frames this writ to a case, where
one only suite is required for land, and that land being sold to diverse, suite
is required of them all, or some of them by distress, as entirely, as if all
were still in one. fol. 103. See the Regist. orig. fol 176.

Controller (contrarotulator) comes of the French (contrerouleur. i.
antigraphus, grace (...)) which in Rome was used for him, cui id muneris
iunctum erat, vt observaret pecuniam, quam in vsum Principis vel civitatis
colligerunt exactores. Budaeus in annota. prio. in pand. titulo De officio
quaestoris. In England we have diverse officers of this name: as controller of
the kings house, pl. cor. fol. 52. and anno 6. H. 4. cap. 3. controller of the
navy. anno 35. Elizabeth. cap. 4. controller of the custom. Cromptons Iurisd.
fol. 105. controller of Calis. anno 21 Rich. 2. cap. 18. controller of the
Mint. anno 2. H. 6. cap. 12. controller of the hamper, (Contrarotulator
Hamperii) which is an officer in the Chauncerie attending on the Lord
Chaunceler or Keeper daily in the term time, and days appointed for sealing.
His office is to take all things sealed from the clerk of the hanaper,
enclosed in bags of lether, as is mentioned in the said clerks office, and
opening the bags to note the just number, and especial effects of all things
so received, and to enter the same into a special book, with all the duties
appertaining to his Majesty, and other officers for the same, and so charge
the clerk of the hanaper with the same. Controller of the Pipe,
(contrarotulator Pipae) who is an officer of the Exchequer that writes out
summons twice every year to the Shyreeues, to levy the Fermes and debts of
the Pipe, and also keeps a contrarolment of the Pipe. Controller of the pell,
is also an officer of the Exchequer, of which sort there be two, viz. the two
chamberlaines clerks, that do or should keep a controlment of the pell of
receipts and goings out. And in one word, this officer was originally one, that
took notes of any other officers accounts or receipts, to the intent to
discover him, if he dealt amiss, and was ordained for the Princes beter
security, howsoever the name sithence may be in some things otherwise applied.
To the proof whereof you may take these few words out of Fleta. lib. 1. cap.
18. in prin. Qui cum fuerint ad hoc vocati and electi, (speaking of the
coroners) attachiari praecipiant appella: qui and capitula coronae in comitatu
praesente^t: contra quos vicecomes loci habeat contrarotulum, tam de appellis
and inquisitionibus, quam aliis officium illud tangentibus, etc. Which
(contrarollum) is nothing else, but a parallel of the same quality and contents
with the (...), or original. This also appears by anno 12. Ed. 3. ca. 3. And
this signification it seems to have also in France. For there the king has
his receyuers of taylles in every province, and controllers, qui ad maiorem
fidem susceptoribus accedunt, describuntque in tabulis quae colliguntur.
Gregorii syntagn. lib. 3. cap. 6. number. 6.

Conuentione, is a writ, that lies for the breach of any covenant in writing.
Register orig. fo. 185. Old not. br. fo. 101. Fitzh. calls a writ of
covenant. not. br. fo. 145. who deuideth covenants into personal and real,
making a sufficient discourse of them both: as also how this writ lies for
both.

Convict, (conuictus) is he that is found guilty of an offense by the verdict
of the jury. Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 186. yet Master Crompton out of Judge Dyers
commentaries 275. says, that conviction is, either when a man is outlawed, or
appears and confesses, or else is found guilty by the inquest. Crompt. Just.
of peace. fo. 9. a. Conviction and attainder are often confounded. li. 4. fo.
46. a. b. See Attaint.

Coparceners, (participes) be otherwise called parceners: and in common law,
are such as have equal portion in the inheritance of their auncestour. and, as
Litleton in the beginning of his third book says, parceners be either by law
or by custom. Parceners by law, are the issue femall, which (noe heir male
being) come in equality to the lands of their ancestors. Bract. li. 2. ca.
30. Parceners by custom, are those that by custom of the country, challenge
equal part in such lands: as in Kent by the custom called (Gauel Kind) This
is called adaequatio among the Feudists. Hot. in verbis feuda. verbo.
Adaequatio. And among the ciuilians it is termed familiae erciscundae
iudicium. quod inter cohaeredes ideo redditur, vt and haereditas diuidatur, and
quod alterum alteri dare facere oportebit, praestetur. Hotoman. Of these two
you may see Litleton at large in the first and second chapters of his third
book, and Britton cap. 27. entitled De heritage diuisable. The crown of
England is not subject to coparcinory. anno. 25. H. 8. ca. 22.

Copy, (copia) comes from the french copia. i. le double de quelqut
escripture, latin descriptio, graece (...), and signifies in our common
language, the example of an original writing: as the copy of a charter, the
copy of a court roll.

Copia libelli deliberanda, is a writ that lies in case where a man cannot get
the copy of a libell at the hands of the Judge ecclesiastical. Register orig.
f. 51.

Copiehould, (tenura per copiam rotuli curiae) is a tenure, for the which the
tenent has nothing to show, but the copy of the rols made by the steward of
his lords court. For the steward, as he inrolleth, and makes remembrances of
all other things done in the lords court: so he does also of such tenants, as
be admitted in the court, to any parcel of land or tenement belonging to the
manner: and the transcript of this, is called the court roll: the copy whereof
the tenent takes from him, and keeps as his only evidence. Coke. li. 4. fo.
25. b. This tenure is called a base tenure, because it houldeth at the will of
the lord. Kitchen. fo. 80. chap: copihoulds. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 12. B. C. who
there says, that it was wont to be called tenure in villenage, and that this
copihould is but a new name. Yet is it not simply at the will of the lord, but
according to the custom of the manner. So that if a copiehoulder break not the
custom of the manner, and thereby forfeit his tenure, he seems not so much to
stand at the lords courtesy for his right, that he may be displaced hand over
head at his pleasure. These customs of manner be infinite, varying in one point
or other, almost in every several manner. First, some copiehould is fineable,
and some certain: that which is fineable, the lord rateth at what fine or
incom he pleases, when the tenent is admmitted unto it: that which is
certain, is a kind of inheritance, and called in many places custumary:
because the tenent dying, and the hold being void the next of the blood paying
the custumarie fine, as two shillngs for an acre or such like, may not be
denied his admission. Secondly, some copihoulders have by custom, the wood
growing upon their own land, which by law they could not have. Kitchen
vbisupra. Thirdly, copi-holders, some be such as hold by the verge in ancient
demesne: and although they hold by copy, yet are they in account a kind of
Freeholders. For if such a one commit felony, the king has (annum, diem, and
vastum) as in case of Freehold. Some other hold by common tenure, called mere
copy hold: and they committing felony, their land escheateth to the Lord of
the manner forthwith. Kitchen fol. 81. chap. Tenants per verge in ancient
demesne. What ancient demesne is, see in the right place. See Tenent by copy of
court roll. This is the land that in the Saxons time, was called Folk land.
Lamberd, explicat. of Saxon words. verbo, Terra ex scripto. West. part prim.
symbol. lib. 2. Sect. 646. defines a copi-holder thus: Tenent by copy of
court roll, is he which is admitted tenent of any lands or tenements within a
manner, that time out of the memory of man, by use and custom of the said
manner, have been dimisable, and dimised to such, as will take the same in fee,
in fee-taile, for life, years, or at will, according to the custom of the
said manner, by copy of courtrolle of the same manner. where you may read more
of these things.

Coraage (coraagium) is a kind of imposition extraordinary, and growing upon
some unusual occasion, and it seems to be of certain measures of corn. For
corus tritici, is a certain measure of corn. Bracton libro 2. ca. 16. nu. 6.
who in the same chapter. nu. 8. has of this matter these words: Sunt etiam
quaedam communes praestationes, quae seruitia non dicuntur, nec de consuetudine
veniunt, nisi cum necessitas interuenerit, vel cum rex venerit: sicut sunt
hidagia, coraagia, and caruagia, and alia plura de necessitate and ex consensu
communitotius regni introducta, and quae ad dominum feudi non pertinent, and de
quibus nullus tenetur tenente^ suu^ acquietare, nisi se adhoc specialiter
obligauerit in charta sua. etc.

Cordiner, comes of the French (cordouannier. i. suitor calcearius) a
shoemaker, and is so used in diverse statutes. as anno. 3. H. 8. ca. 10, and
anno. 5. eiusdem. ca. 7. and others.

Cornage (cornagium) comes of the French (cor. i. cornu) and in our common
law, signifies a kind of grand sergeantie, the service of which tenure, is to
blow a horn, when any invasion of the northern enemy is perceived. And by
this many men hold their land northward, about the wall, commonly called the
Picts wall. Camd. Britan. p. 609. hence comes the word (cornuare) to blow a
horn. pupil. oculi, part. 5. ca. 22. in charta de Foresta. This service
seems to have proceeded from the Romans. For I find (cornicularios)
mentioned in the civil law. viz. li. 1. Cod. de officio diuerso. Iud. 48.
lege. 3. and. lib. 12. titulo de apparitoribus praefectorum praetorio. 53.
lege. 1. and 3. where Lucas de Penna defines them (eos qui cornu faciunt
excubias militares. And Brissonius. libro. 3. de verbo significat. says thus
of them: (hi militum quoddam genus fuere, qui corniculo merebant, vnde nomen
habent. Where it appears by him out of Suetonius, Pliny, and Livie, that the
horn was an honor and reward given for service in war.

Corner tile. See Gutter tile.

Corodye (corodium) comes of the Latin verb (corrodo) and signifies in our
common law, a sum of money or allowance of meat and drink due to the king
from an abbey, or other house of religion, whereof he is the founder, toward
the reasonable sustena^ce of such a one of his servants, being put to his
pension, as he thinks good to bestow it on. And the difference between a
corodie and a pension seems to be, that a corodie is allowed toward the
maintenance of any the kings servants, that lives in the abbey: a pension is
given to one of the kings chaplains, for his better maintenance in the kings
service, until he may be provided of a benefice. Of both these read Fitzh.
not. br. fo. 230. 231. 233. who there sets down all the corodies and
pensions certain, that any abbey, when they stood, was bound to perform unto
the king. There is mention also of a corodie in Stawnf. praerogatiue. fo. 44.
And this seems to be awncient law. For in Westminster. 2. ca. 25. it is ordained,
that an assise shall lie for a corodie. It is also apparent by the statute.
anno. 34. and 35. H. 8. ca. 16. that corodies belonged some time to Bishops
from monasteries: and by the new terms of law, that a corodie may be due to a
common person by grant from one to another, or of common right, to him that is
founder of a religious house, not holden in frank almoyn. For that tenure was a
discharge of all corodies in it self. By which book it appears also, that a
corodie is either certain or uncertain, and that it may be for life, years,
in tail, or in fee.

Corodio habendo, is a writ whereby to exact a corodie of any abbey or
religious house. See Corodie. See the Register original. fo. 264.

Coronatore eligendo, is a writ which after the death or discharge of any
coroner, is directed to the shyreeue out of the Cha^cery, to call together the
free holders of the county, for the choice of a new coroner, to certify into
the chanceries both the election, and the name of the party elected, and to
give him his oath. See Westminster. 1. ca. 10. and Fitzh. not. br. fo. 163. and the
Register orig. fo. 177.

Coroner (coronator) is an ancient officer of this land, so called, because he
deals wholly for the king and crown. There be four of them commonly in
every county, and they are chosen by the freeholders of the same upon writ,
and not made by leters patents. Crompt. Iurisd. fo. 126. This officer, though
now he be some inferior gentleman, that has some smattering in the law: yet
if we look to the statute of Westminster. 1. ca. 10. we shall find, that he was
wont, and ought to be, a sufficient man: that is, the most wise and discreet
knight, that best will andmay attend upon such an office. Yea there is a writ
in the Register, Nisi sit miles. so. 177. b. whereby it appears, that it was
fufficient cause to remove a coroner chosen, if he were not a knight, and had
not a hundred shillings rent of freehold. And the Lord chief Justice of the
kings bench, is the sovereign coroner of the whole realm in person. i.
wheresoever he remains. libro assisarum. fo. 49. 5. coron. Coke. li. 4. casu.
de Wardens, etc. of the Sadlers. fo. 57. b. His office especially concerns
the plees of the crown: but if you will read at large, what aunciently
belonged unto him: read Bracton. li. 3. tra. 2. c. 5. de officio coronatorum
circa homicidium. and ca. 6. de officio coronatoris in the sauris inventis. and
ca. 6. de officio coronatorum in raptu virginium. and ca. 8. de officio
coronatorum de pace and plagis. and Britton in his first chapter, where he
handles it at large. Fleta also in his first book cap. 18. and Andrew Horns
mirror of Justices. li. 1. ca. del office del coroners. but more aptly for the
present times, Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 1. ca. 51. Note there be certain coroners
special within diverse liberties, as well as these ordinary officers in every
county: as the coroner of the verge, which is a certain compass about the
kings court. whom Crompt. in his iurisd. fo. 102. calls the coroner of the
kings house: of whose authority see S. Ed. Cokes reports. lib. 4. fo. 46. a.
b. And I know certain charters belonging to colleges and other corporations,
whereby they are lice^sed to appoint their coroner within their own precincts.
Farther of this office see also Fitzh. not. br. fo. 76. A. B. S. Thomas Smith.
li. 2. ca. ca. 21. de repub. Anglo. and Lamb. eirenarcha. li. 4. ca. 3. pa.
380. And the office of the coroner in Scotland. what it is, read M. John. Skene
de verbo. signifi. verbo. Iter.

Corporation (corporatio) is that which the civil law calls vniversitatem,
or collegium. a body politic authorized by the kings charter, to have a
common seal, a head officer, one or more, and members able by their common
consent, to grant or to receive in law any thing within the compass of their
charter: even as one man may do by law all things, that by law he is not
forbidden: and binds the successors, as a single man binds his executour
or heir. See Brokes his abridgment. titulo Corporation, and the new Terms
of law. eodem.

Corpus cum causa, is a writ issuying out of the Chauncerie, to remove both the
body and the record touching the cause of any man lying in execution, upon a
judgment for debt into the Kings bench, etc. there to lie until he have
satisfied the judgment. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 25^. E.

Corrector of the staple, is an officer or clerk belonging to the staple, that
writes and records the bergains of Merchants there made, anno 27. Ed. 3.
stat. 2. cap. 22. and 23. The Romans called them Mensarios.

Corruption of blood, is an infection growing to the estate of a man attainted
of felony or treason, and to his issue. For as he leeseth all to the Prince,
or other lord of the fee, accordingly as his case is, so his issue cannot be
heirs to him, or to any other auncester, of whom they might have claimed by
him. And farther if he were noble, or a gentleman before, he and his children
are made unnoble and ungentle in respect of the father. New Terms of the
law.

Corse present, are words borrowed from the French, signifying a mortuarie. anno
21. H. 8. ca. 6. The true French is (corpse praesente) i. the body presented or
tendered. The reason why the mortuarie is thus also termed, seems to be, for
that where a mortuarie was wont to be due, the body of the best beast was
according to the law or custom offered or presented to the priest.

Corselet, is a French word signifying a little body, in Latin (corpusculum.)
It is used with us, for an armor to cover the whole body, or trunk of a man.
anno 4. and 5. Ph. and Mar. cap. 2. where with the pikemen, commonly set in the
front and flanks of the battle, are armed, for the beter resistance of the
enemies assaults, and the surer guard of the gunners placed behind or within
them, being more slightly armed, for their speedier issuing in and out to
discharge their pieces. See Barrets discourse of War. lib. 3. dialog. 2.

Cofenage, (cognatione) is a writ, that lies where the tresaile (that is,
tritavus, the father of the besaile, or of the great grandfather) is seysed in
his demesne as of see, at the day of his death, of certain lands or tenements,
and dies: and then a stranger enters and abateth. For then shall his heir
have this writ of cosenage: the form whereof see in Fitz. not. br. fol. 221.
Of this also read Britton at large. cap. 89.

Cosening, is an offense unnamed, whereby any thing is done guilefully in or
out of contracts, which cannot be fitly termed by any special name. West.
part. 2. simbolaeogr. titulo. Indictments. sect. 68. It is called stellionaius
in the civil law of (stellio) the beast, which is lacertae genus
virsutissimum, as Cuiacius in his paratitles calls it, and, quo nullum animal
homini invidet fraudulentius. Pliny li. 3. ca. 10.

Cotage (cotagium) is a house without land belonging unto it. anno. 4. Ed. pri.
statut. primo. And the inhabitant of such a house is called a cotager. But by a
later statute, no man may build a cotage, but he must lay 4. acres of ground
unto it. 31. Eli. ca. 7.

Cote, is a kind of resuse wolle clung or clotted together, that it cannot be
pulled asunder. anno. 13. R. 2. stat. 1. ca. 9. It signifies also as much as
cotage in many places, as also it did among the Saxons. Verslegan in his
Restitut. of decayed intelligence in antiquities.

Covenable (rationabilis) is a French word, signifying fit or convenient, or
suitable. covenably endowed anno. 4. H. 8. ca. 12. It is aunciently written
(convenable) as in the stat. an. 27. Ed. 3. stat. 2. ca. 17.

Covenant, conue^tio, is the consent of two or more in one self thing, to do
or give somewhat. West. part. 2. symbol. li. 1. sect. 4. It seems to be as
much as (pactum. conventum) with the ciuilians. which you read often times in
Tullie. Pactum conuentum, quod and vulgo vestitum vocant, opponitur nudo pacto,
velut ab omni iuris solennitate destituto. Huius exempla ponere difficile esse
Jason existimavit. Conventum aiunt, quod vestitur, aut re, aut verbis, aut
literis, aut contractus cohaerentia, aut rei interuentu. Oldendorpius. And
covenant in this signification, is either a covenant in law, or a covenant in
fact. Coke. lib. 4. Nokes case. fo. 80. or covenant express and covenant in
law. idem. li. 6. fo. 17. ae. Covenant in law is that, which the law intends
to be made, though in words it be not expressed: as if the lessour do dimise
and grant, etc. to the leassee for a certain term, the law intends a
covenant of the lessours part, that the lessee shall, during his whole term,
quietly enjoy his lease against all lawful encumbrance. Covenant in fact is
that, which is expressly agreed between the parties. There is also a covenant
merely personal, and a covenant real. Fitz. not. br. fo. 145. And he seems
to say, that a covenant real is, whereby a man tieth himself to pass a thing
real, as land or tenements, as a covenant to levy a fine of land, etc. a
covenant merely personal of the other side, is where a man couenanteth with
another by deed, to build him a house, or any other thing, or to serve him, or
to infeoffe him etc. Covenant is also the name of a writ, for the which see
Conuentione. Instruments of covenants you may see good store in West part. i.
Symbolaeog. li. 2. sectio. 100. See also the new book of entries. verbo.
Covenant.

Covent, (conuentus) signifies the society or fraternity of an abbie or
priorie, as (societas) signifies the number of fellows in a college.
Bracton. li. 2. ca. 35. It comes of the french (convent. i. coenobium).

Couerture, is a french word signifying any thing that covers, as apparel, a
couerlet, etc. and deduced from the verb (couvrer. i. tegere) It is
particularly applied in our common law, to the estate and condition of a
married woman, who by the laws of our realm, is in (potestate viri) and
therefore disabled to contract with any, to the prejudice of her self or her
husband, without his consent and priuity; or at the least, without his
allowance and confirmation. Broke. hoc tit. per totum. And Bracton says, that
omnia quae sunt vxoris, sunt ipsius viri, nec habet vxor potestatem sui, sed
vir. li. 2. ca. 15. and that (vir est caput mulieris) li. 4. ca. 24. and
again, that in any law matter, sine viro respondere non potest. li. 5. tract.
2. ca. 3. and tract. 5. ca. 25. eiusdem libri. he has words to this effect:
vir and vxor sunt quasi vnica persona: quia caro vna and sanguis vnus. Res
licet sit propria vxoris, vir tamen eius custos, cum sit caput mulieris. and
li. 1. ca. 10. nu. 2. Vxores sunt sub virga viri. And if the husband alienate
the wifes land, during the marriage, she cannot gainesay it during his life.
See Cui ante diuortium. and Cui in vita.

Covine, (covina) is a deceitful assent or agreement between two or more, to
the prejudice or hurt of another. New terms of law. It comes of the french
verb (conuenancer. i. depacisci.) or rather (conuenir. i. conuenire.)

Cowcher, signifies a factour that continues in some place or country for
trafique. anno. 37. Ed. 3. ca. 16. It is used also for the general book, into
which any corporation enters their particular acts for a perpetual
remembrance of them.

Count, comes of the french (coumpte. i. subductus, co^putatio, ratio) or of
(co^te. i. narratio.) It signifies as much as the original declaration in a
process, though more used in real actions then personal, as declaration is
rather applied to personal then real. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 16. A. 60. D. N.
71. A. 191. E. 217. A. (Libellus) with the ciuilians comprehends both. And
yet count and declaration be confounded sometimes; as count in debt. Kitchen:
fo. 281. count or declaration in appeal. pl. cor. fo. 78. Count in trefpasse.
Britton. cap. 26 count in an action of trespass upon the case for a slander.
Kit. fol. 252. This word seems to come from France and Normandy. For in the
grand Custumarie, c. 64. I find (conteurs) to be those, which a man sets to
speak for him in court, as advocates: and cap. 63. (pledeurs) to be another
sort of spokes men, in the nature of Atturneys, for one, that is him self
present, but suffers another to tell his tale. Where also in the 65. chapter,
Attorney is said to be he, that deals for him that is absent. See this text
and Gloss upon those 3. chapters. Countours (by Horn in his Myrror of
Justices. li. 2. ca. Des loyers) are Sergeants skillful in the law of the
Realm, which serve the common people, to pronounce and defend their actions in
judgment for their fee, when occasion requires: whose duty, if it be as it is
there described, and were observed, men might have much more comfort of the
law then they have.

Countenance, seems to be used for credit or estimation, old na. br. fol.
111. in these words: Also the attaint shall be granted to poor men that will
swear, that they have nothing whereof they may make fine, saving their
countenance, or to other by a reasonable fine. So is it used, anno 1. Ed. 3.
stat. 2. cap. 4. in these words: Shyreeues shall charge the kings depters with
as much as they may levy with their oaths, without abating the depters
countenance.

Cownter (computatorium) feemeth to come of the Latin (computare) or the French
(counter.) For we use it for the name of a prison, wherinto he that once
slippeth, is like to account ere he get out.

Counter plee, is compounded of two French words (contre. i. contra, adversus)
and (pleder. i. causam agere.) It signifies properly in our common law, a
replication to (aid prier.) For when the tenent by courtesy, or in dower,
prays in aid of the king, or him in the reuersion, for his beter defense: or
else if a stranger to the action begun, defire to be received to say what he
can for the safeguard of his estate: that which the demandant alleges against
this request, why it shuold not be admitted, is called a counter plee. See
Broke(...)t. And in this signification it is used. anno. 25. Ed. 3. st at. 3.
cap. 7. See also the new terms of the law, and the statute anno 3. Ed. 1. cap.
39.

County, (comitatus) signifies as much as (shire,) the one descending from the
French, the other from the Saxons, both containing a circuit or portion of the
realm, into the which the whole land is divided, for the beter government
thereof, and the more easy administration of justice. So that there is no part
of the kingdom, that lies not within some county, and every county is
governed by a yearly officer, whom we call a Shyreeue, which among other duties
belonging to his office, puts in execution all the commandments and
judgments of the kings courts, that are to be executed within that compass.
Fortescue cap. 24. Of these counties there be four of especial mark, which
therefore are termed county Palatines, as the county Palatine of Lancaster,
of Chester, of Durham, and of Ely, ann. 5. Eliz. 1. c. 23. I read also of the
county Palatine of Hexam. an. 33 H. 8. ca. 10. Vnde quaere. And this county
Palatine is a Jurisdiction of so high a nature, that whereas all plees touching
the life or mayhem of man, called plees of the crown, be ordinarily held and
sped in the kings name, and cannot pass in the name of any other; the chief
gouerners of these, by especial charter from the king, did heretofore send out
all writs in their own name, and did all things touching justice, as
absolutely as the Prince himself in other counties, only acknowledging him
their superior and Sovereign. But by the statute. anno 27. H. 8. c. 25. this
power is much a bridged, unto the which I refer the reader, as also to Crom.
Iuris. fo. 137. for the whole course of this court. Besides these counties of
both sorts, there be likewise counties corporate, as appears by the statute.
anno 3. Ed. 4. 5. and these be certain cities, or ancient boroughs of the
land, upon which the Princes of our nation have thought good to bestow such
extraordinary liberties. Of these the famous city of London is one, and the
principal, York another, an. 32. H. 8. cap. 13. the city of Chester a third,
an. 42. Eliz. cap. 15. Canterbury a fourth. Lamb. Eiren. l. 1. cap. 9. And to
these may be added many more: but I have only observed out of the statutes and
other writers, the county of the town of Kingston upon Hull, anno 32. H. 8.
cap. 13. the county of the town of Havorford. West. anno 35. H. 8. cap. 26.
and the county of Litchfield. Cromptons Justice of peace. fo. 59. a. County is
in another signification used for the County court, which the Shyreeue keeps
every month within his charge either by himself or his deputy, anno 2. Ed. 6
ca. 25. Cromptons Iuris. fo. 221. Bract. li. 3. c. 7. and li. 3. tract. 2. cap.
12. Of these counties or shires one with another, there are reckoned in England
37. beside twelve in Walet.

(...). The word (comitatus) is also used for a jurisdiction or territory
among the Feudists.

County court (curia comitatus) by M. Lamberd is otherwise called (conuentus)
in his explication of Saxon words, and divided into two sorts: one retaining
the general name, as the county court held every month by the Shyreeue, or
his deputy the vnder-shyreeue, whereof you may read in Cromptons iurisd. fol.
231. the other called the Turn, held twice every year, which see more at
large in his place: and Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 231. This county court had in
ancient times the cognition of these and other great matters, as may appear by
Glanvile. lib. 1. cap. 2 3. 4. by Bracton and Britton in diverse places, and by
Fleta. li. 2. cap. 62. But that was abridged by the statute of Magna charta.
cap. 17. and much more by 1. Ed. 4. cap. vnico. It had also, and has the
determination of certain trespasses, and debts under forty shillings. Britton.
cap 27. and 28. what manner of proceeding was of old used in this court, see
Fleta vbi supra.

Coursitour. See Cursetour.

Court (curia) comes of the French (court) which signifies the kings palace
or mansion, as (curtis) does among the Lombards. All these spring of the Latin
(curia) which signifies one of thirty parts, into which Romulus divided the
whole number of the Romans: sometime also the Senate house, as appears by
Tully in his Offices (nihil est quod dignum nobis, aut in foro aut in curia
agere possumus: which in his oration (pro Milone) he calls, Templum
sanctitatis, amplitudinis, mentis, consilii publici, caput vrbis, etc. Court,
with us, signifies diversely: as the house where presently the king remains
with his ordinary retinue, and also the place where justice is iudicially
ministered: of which you find 32. several sorts in M. Cromptons book of
Jurisdictions well described. And of them most be courts of record: some be
not, and therefore are accounted base courts in comparison of the rest. Beside
these also there are courts Christian. Smith de repub. Anglor. lib. 3. cap. 9.
which are so called, because they handle matters especially appertaining to
Christianity, and such as without good knowledge in divinity cannot be well
judged of, being held heretofore by Archb. and Bishops, as from the Pope of
Rome: because he challenged the superiority in all causes spiritual: but
sithence his eiection, they hold them by the kings authority (virtue
magistratus sui) as the Admiral of England does his court. Whereupon it
proceeds, that they send out their precepts in their own names, and not in
the kings, as the Justices of the kings courts do. And therefore as the
appeal from these courts did lie to Rome: now by the statute an. 25. H. 8.
cap. 19. it lies to the king in his Chauncerie.

Court baron (curia baronis) is a court that every lord of a manner (which in
ancient times were called barons) has within his own precincts. Barons in
other nations have great territories and jurisdiction from their Sovereigns:
as may be proved out of Cassanaeus de gloria mundi. part 5. consideratio. 56.
by Vincentius de Franchis descis. 211. and many others. But here in England
what they be, and have been heretofore, see in Baron. Of this court Baron you
may read your fill in Kitchen, that writes a large book of it, and of a
court leete. S. Edward Coke in his fourth book of Reports, amongst his
copyhold cases. fol. 26. b. says, that this court is two after a sort: and
therefore if a man having a manner in a town, and do grant the inheritance or
the copyholders thereunto belonging, unto another: this grantee may keep a
court for the custumarie tenants, and accept surrenders to the use of others,
and make both admittances and graunts: the other court is of Freeholders, which
is properly called the court baron, wherein the suyters, that is, the
Freeholders be Judges: whereas of the other the Lord or his steward is Judge.

Court christian (curia christiana) See Court.

Court of Pypowders. See Pypowders.

Court of Requests (curia requestarum) is a court of equity, of the same
nature with the Chancerie, principally instituted for the help of such
petitioners, as in conscionable cases deal by supplication with his Majesty.
This court, as M. Gwin says, in the preface to his readings, had beginning
from commission first granted by Henry the 8. to the masters of Requests:
whereas before that time (by his opinion) they had no warrant of ordinary
jurisdiction, but traveled between the king and the petitioner by direction
from the kings mouth. But Sir Julius Caesar in a Tractate of his, painefully
and very iudiciously gathered from the records of the same court, plainly
shows that this court was 9. Henrici septimi, though then following the king,
and not settled in any certain place, neither swayed particularly by the
Masters of requests, (as now it is) but more at large by others of the kings
most Honorable Council, whom he pleased to employ in this service. For page
148. of the said Tractate, you have the form of the oath then ministered to
those that were Judges in this court: and a page prim. vsque ad page 46. causes
of diverse natures, which in the said kings days were there handled and
adjudged. This court, as that right Honorable and learned Knight in a brief of
his upon the same court plainly proves, was and is parcel of the kings most
Honorable Council, and so always called and esteemed. The Judges thereof were
always of the kings most Honorable Council, appointed by the king to keep
his Council board. The keeping of this court was never tied to any place
certain, but only where the Council sat, the suyters were to attend. But
now of late for the ease of suitors, it has been kept in the White hall at
Westminster, and only in the Term time. It is a court of Record, wherein
recognizances are also taken by the kings Council. The form of proceeding in
this court, was altogether according to the process of summarie causes in the
civil law. The persons plaintiffes and defendants, were always either
privileged, as officers of the court, or their servants, or as the kings
servants, or as necessary attendants of them: or else where the plaintiffes
poverty, or mean estate was not matchable with the wealth or greatness of
the defendant: or where the cause merely contained matter of equity, and had
no proper remedy at the common law: or where it was specially recommended from
the king to the examination of his Council: or concerned Universities,
Colleges, Hospitals, and the like. The causes wherewith they deal, and whereof
they judge, are of all sorts: as maritime, vltra marine, ecclesiastical,
temporal; but properly temporal causes, and only of the other sort, as they
are mixed with temporal. The manner of proceeding in the said court, is first, by
privy seal, leters missiue, or Iniunction, or messenger, or bond. Secondly,
by attachement. Thirdly, by proclamation of rebellion. Fourthly, by commission
of rebellion: fifthly, by Sergeant at arms. The effect of the defendants
appearance is, that he attend de die in diem on the council, till he have made
his answer to the plaintiffes bill, and be licenced to depart upon caution de
iudicio sisti and indicato solvendo, and constitution of his Attorney and
council by name. The authority of this court is such, as upon cause to
grant injunctions for barring the defendant from syewing the plaintiff at the
common law: and to stay the suyte at the common law before commencement, and
not to arrest the body of the plaintiff, till further order be taken by the
Kings council: and the execution of a decree in this court may be done, either
by imprisonment of the person disobeying, being party, or claiming under the
party: or by levy of the sum adjudged upon his lands.

Courtesy of England (lex Angliae) comes of the french (Courtesy. i.
benignitas, humanitas) but with us has a proper signification, being used for
a tenure. For if a man marie an inheretrice, that is, a woman seized of land in
fee simple, or fee tail general, or seized as heir of the tail special,
and gets a child of her that comes alive into the world, though both it
and his wife die forthwith, yet, if she were in possession, shall he keep the
land during his life, and is called tenent per legem Angliae, or by the
courtesy of England. Glanvil. li. 7. ca. 18. Bracton. li. 5. tracta. 5. ca.
30. nu. 7. 8. 9. Britton. ca. 51. fo. 132. Fleta. li. 6. ca. 56.. lex quaedam.
Fitzh. not. br. fo. 149. D. Litleton. li. 1. ca. 4. It is called the law of
England. Westminster. 2. ca. 3. This is in Scotland called (curialitas Scotiae. Skene
de verbo. sign. verbo Curialitas: who there says that this is used in these
two realms only, and makes a large discourse of the custom.

Coutheutlaughe, is he that wittingly receives a man outlawed, and cheriseth
or hides him. In which case he was in ancient times subject to the same
punishment, that the outlawe himself was. Bracton. li. 3. tracta. 2. ca. 13.
nu. 2. It is compounded of (couthe. i. known, acquainted, familiar, and
(vtlaughe) an outlaw, as we now call him.

Courtilage, alias curtilage (curtilagium, alias curtilegium) signifies a
garden, a yard, or a feeld, or piece of void ground lying ne ere and belonging
to a mesuage, West. part. 2. Symbolaeo. titulo fines. sect. 26. And so is it
used anno. 4. Ed. i. ca. vnico. anno. 35. H. 8. ca. 4. and anno. 39. Eliza. ca.
2. and Coke vol. 6. fo. 64. a. Of this also Lindwood thus writes. Curtilegium
vulgar nomen est, non omnium patriarum, sed certarum. Est enim curtis mansio
vel manerium ad habitandum cum terris, possessionibus, and aliis emolumentis ad
tale manerium pertimentibus, prove satis colligitur in libro feudorum, titulo.
de controuersia investiturae. si quis de manso. Coll. 10. Vnde curtilegium
dicitur locus adiunctus tali curti, vbi leguntur herbae vel olera: sic dictus a
(curtis) and (lego legis) pro collig ere. Thus far Linwood. titulo de
decimis. ca. Sancta.. omnibus, verbo Curtelegiorum. So that in effect, it is a
yard or a garden adjoining to a house.

Creansour, (creditor) comes of the french (croyance. i. persuasio) and
signifies him, that trusts another with any debt, be it in money or wares.
Old not. br. fo. 67.

Cranage, (cranagium) is a liberty to vsea crane for the drawing up of wares
from the vessels, at any creek of the sea or wharfe, unto the land, and to make
profit of it. It signifies also the money paid and taken for the same. New
book of Entries. (...). 3. col. 3.

Creek, (creca, crecca, vel crecum) seems to be a part of a haven, where any
thing is landed or disburdened out of the sea. So that when you are out of the
main sea within the haven, look how many landing places you have, so many
creeks may be said to belong to that haven. See Cromptons jurisdictions. fo.
110. a. This word is mentioned in the statute, as anno 5. El. ca. 5. and diverse
others.

Creast Tile. See Roof tile.

Croft, (croftum) is a little close or pitle joining to a house, that sometimes
is used for a hemp ground, sometime for corn, and sometime for pasture, as the
owner lists. It seems to come of the old english word (Creaft) signifiing
handy craft: because such grounds are for the most part extraordinarily
dressed and trimmed by the both labor and skill of the owner.

Croises, (cruce signati) be used by Britton. ca. 122. for such as are
pilgrims: the reason may be, for that they wear the sign of the cross upon
their garments. Of these and their privileges read Bracton. li. 5. part 2.
ca. 2. and part 5. ca. 29. and the grand custumary of Normandy ca. 45. Under
this word are also signified the knights of the order of Saint John of
Jerusalem, created for the defense of pilgrims. Grego. Syntag. li. 15. ca. 13.
and 14.

Cucking stool, (tumbrella) is an engine invented for the punishment of scolds
and unquiet women, called in ancient time a tumbrell. Lamb. eirenarcha. li. 3.
ca. 12. po. 62. in meo. Bracton writes this word (tymborella.) Kitchen, where
he says, that every one having view of Erankpledge, ought to have a pillorie
and a tumbrell, seems by a tumbrell to mean the same thing. cap. Charge in
court leete. fol. 13. a.

Cuth, other vncuth (privatus vel extraneus.) These be old English words, not
yet worn out of knowledge, for the which see Roger Hoveden. part poster.
suorum annalium. fol. 345. a.

Cudutlaghe. See Conthutlaughe.

Cui ante divortium, is a writ, that a woman divorced from her husband, has to
recover lands or tenements from him, to whom her husband did alienate them
during the marriage: because during the marriage, she could not gainesay it.
Regist. ori. fol. 233. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 204.

Cuinage, is a word used for the making up of tin, into such fashion, as it
is commonly framed into for the carriage thereof into other places, anno 11. H.
7. cap. 4.

Cui in vita, is a writ of entry, that a widow has against him, to whom her
husband aliened her lands or tenements in his life time: which must contain in
it, that during his life time, she could not withstand it. Regist. orig. fol.
232. Fitz. not. br. fol. 193. See the new book of Entries. ver ho. Cut in
vita.

Cuntey cuntey is a kind of trial, as appears by Bracton in these words:
Negotium in hoc casu terminabitur per cuntye cuntey, sicut inter cohaeredes.
Bracton. lib. 4. tra. 3. cap. 18. And again, in the same place: In brevi de
recto negotium terminabitur per cuntey cuntey. And thirdly, lib. 4. tract. 4.
cap. 2. Terminabitur negotium per breve de recto: vbi nec duellum, nec magna
assisa, sed per cuntey cuntey omnino: which in mine opinion is as much, as the
ordinary Jury.

Curfew, comes of two French words, (couvrir. i. tegere,) and (feu. i.
ignis.) We use it for an evening peale, by the which the Conqueror willed
every man to take warning for the raking up of his fire, and the putting out of
his light. So that in many places at this day, where a bell customably is rung
toward bed time, it is said to ring curfew. Stowes annals.

Curia avisare vult, is a deliberation, that the court purposes to take, upon
any point or points of a cause, before judgment be resolved on. For this, see
the new book of Entries. verbo. Curia avisare vult.

Curia claudenda, is a writ, that lies against him, who should fence and close
up his ground, if he refuse or defer to do it. Register. orig. fo. 155.
Fitzh. not. br. fo. 127. See also the new book of Entrise. verbo. Curia
claudenda.

Cursiter (clericus de cursu, vel cursista curiae cancellariae) is an officer
or clerk belonging to the chancerie, that makes out original writs. anno. 14
and 15. H. 8. ca. 8. They be called clerks of course in the oathe of the clerks
of the chancerie appointed anno 18. Ed. 3. stat. 5. ca. vnico. There be of
these 2^. in number, which have allotted unto every of them certain shires,
into the which they make out such original writs, as are by the subject
required, and are a corporation among themselves.

Curteyn (curtana) was the name of king Edward the saint his sword, which is
the first sword, that is carried before the kings of this land at their
cotonation. Mathaeus Parisiensan Henrico tertio. And I have heard say, that the
point thereof is broken: which may argue an emblem of mercy.

Curtilage. See Courtelage.

Custode admittendo, and Custode amouendo, are writs for the admitting or
removing of gardians. Register. original. in indice.

Custom (consuctudo) is all one in signification with our common lawyers and
Civilians, being by them both accounted a part of the law. Consuetudo
quandoque pro lege seruatur (faith Bracton) in partibus vbi fuerit more
vtentium approbata. Longaevi enim temporis vsus and consuetudinis non est vilis
authoritas. li. 1. ca. 3. It may be thus not unaptly defined: Custom is a law.
or right not written, which being established by long use and the consent of
our awncesters, has been and is daily practiced: our awncesters, that is
(maiores,) and those of our kindred that are vltra tritavum. li. 4.. parentem.
P. de in ius vocando. l. vlt.. parents. P. de gradibus and affini. and
nominibus eorum. So that allowing the father to be so much owlder then his
son, as (pubertas) or the years of generation do require, the grandfather so
much elder then him, and so forth vsque ad tritavum: we cannot say that this
or that is a custom, except we can justify, that it has continued so one
hundred years. For tritavus must be so much elder then the party that pleads
it: yet because that is hard to proone: it is enough for the proof of a custom
by witnesses in the common law (as I have credibly heard) if two or more can
depose, that they heard their fathers say, that it was a custom all their
time, and that their fathers heard their fathers also say, that it was likewise
a custom in their time. If it be to be prooved by record, the continuance of a
hundred years will serve. Custom is either general or particular: general I
call that, which is current thorough England: whereof you shall read diverse in
the Doctor and Student. li. pri. ca. 7. very worthy to be known. Particular is
that, which belongs to this or that county, as Gavelkind to Kent, or to this
or that Lordship, city, or town. Custom differs from prescription, for that
custom is common to more, and prescription (in some men's opnion) is particular
to this or that man. Again, prescription may be for a far shorter time then
a custom, viz. for five year, or for one year, or less. Example of five
years prescription you have in the levying of a fine. For if a fine duly
levied of lands and tenements be not impugned within five years, it excludes
all claim for ever. And if a man omit his continual claim for a year and a
day: then the tenent in possession prescribes an immunity against the entry
of the demandant and his heir. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 79. Terms of the law,
verbo. Continual claim. Out of our statutes you may have greater diversity,
which see collected in mine Institutes. titulo de Vsucapio: and longi tempo.
praescript. So that Brissonius in his 14. de verbo fignif. seems to say
truly, that prescription is an exception founded upon so long time run and
past, as the law limiteth for the pursuit of any action. An example may be
taken from those statutes. anno. 1. H. 8. ca. 4. which inacteth, that in all
actions populer, information shall be made within three years after the
offense committed, or else be of no force. Of like nature is the statute. anno
7. H. 8. ca. 3. which in some cases makes one years prescription sufficient
against informations. Custom is also used for the tribute or toll, that
merchans pay to the king for carrying in and out merchandise. anno 14. Ed. 3.
stat. 1. ca. 21. in which signification it is latined (custuma) Register. orig.
fo. 138. a. 129. a. and lastly for such services, as tenants of a manner owe
unto their lord. New book of entries, verbo Custom.

Customary tenants, (tenentes per consuetudmem) are such tenants, as hold by
the custom of the manner, as their especial evidence, See Copihoulds.

Custos breuium, is the principal clerk belonging to the court of common
plees: whose office is to receive and keep all the writs, and put them upon
files, every return by it self, and at the end of every term to receive of
the protonotaries all the records of (Nisiprius) called the (postea) For they
are first brought in by the clerk of assise of every circuit to the
protonotarie that entered the issue in that matter, for the entering of the
judgment. And then do the protonotaries get of the court peremptory day, for
every party to speak what he has to allege in arrest of judgment: which day
being past, he enters the verdict and judgment thereupon into the rols of the
court: and that done, he does in the end of the term deliver over to the
custos breuium, all the records of (Nisi prius) which came to his hand that
term: which received he binds into a bundle and bestows them. The custos
breuium also makes entry of the writs of covenant, and the concord upon every
fine: and makes forth exemplifications and copies of all writs and records in
his office, and of all fines levied. The fines after they be engrossed, the
parts thereof are divided between the custos breuium and the chirogropher:
whereof the chirogropher keeps always with him the writ of covenant and the
note, the custos breuium keeps the concord and the foot of the fine, upon
the which foot the chirographer does cause the proclamations to be indorsed,
when they be all proclaimed. This office is in the princes gift.

Custos placitorum coronae. Bracton. li. 2. ca. 5. This seems to be all one
with him, whom we now call (custos rotulorum) of this officer I find mention
in the writ (odio and atia) Register. original. fo. 133. b.

Custos rotulorum, is he, that has the custody of the rols or records of the
sessions of peace: and (as some think) of the commission of the peace it
self. Lamb. Eirenarch. li. 4. ca. pa. 3. 373. He is always a Justice of Peace
and Quorum, in the county where he has his office. Idem. eodem. and by his
office he is rather termed an officer or minister then a judge: because the
commission of the peace layethe, by express words this especial charge upon
him: quod ad dies and locapraedicta, breuia, praecepta, processus, and
indictamenta praedicta coramte and dictis sociis tuis venire facias. Idem.
eodem. where read a competent tract of other things belonging to this office.

Custos of the spiritualties (custos spiritualitatis vel spiritualium) is he
that exercises the spiritual or ecclesiastical jurisdiction of any dioces,
during the vacancie of the Sea: the appointment of whom by the canon law
apperteineth to the deane and chapter. ca. ad abolendam, Extra. Ne sede vacant
aliquid innovetur. but with us in England to the Archbishop of the province by
prescription. How be it diverse deanes and chapters (if M. Gwin say truly in the
preface to his readings) do challenge this by awncient charters from the kings
of this land.

Cutter of the talyes, is an officer in the exchequer, that provideth wood for
the talyes, and cutteth the sum paid upon them, and then casts the same
into the Court to be written upon.

DA
Damage, comes of the french (dam) or (damage) signifiing generally any hurt
or hinderance, that a man takes in his estate: But in the common law, it
particularly signifies a part of that the Jurors be to inquire of, passing
for the plaintiff or demandant in a civil action, be it personal or real.
For after verdict given of the principal cause, they are likewise asked their
consciences touching costs (which be the charges of suite, called of the
Civilians (expensae litis) and damages, which contain the hindrance that the
plaintiff or demandant has suffered by means of the wrong done to him by the
defendant or tenent.

Dane guilt, Danegold, or Danegelt (Danegeldum) is compounded of (Dane and
gelt. i. pecunia) and was a tribute laid upon our ancesters of 12. pence for
every hide of land through the realm by the Danes, that once got the masterie
of us, in regard (as they pretended) of clearing the sease of pirates, which
greatly annoyed our land in those days. Cambd. Brittan. 83. with whom agree
the laws of Edward set out by M. Lamberd. ca. 11. Stowe in his annals, pa.
118. says, that this tribute came to 40000. pownds by the year, and that it
was released by Edw. the confessor. The author of the new Terms of law says,
that this tribute began in the time of king Etheldred, who being sore
distressed by the continual invasion of the Dane, to procure his peace, was
compelled to charge his people with importable payments. For first he gave them
at five several paiments 113000. pounds, and afterward granted them 48000.
pounds yearly. See Roger Houeden part. poster. suorum annalium in Henrico
secundo. fo. 344. a.

Dareyn continuance, See Continuance. Darein is a corrupt word of the French
(dernier. i. vltimu^.)

Darrein presentment (vltima praesentatio.) See Assise or darreyn presentment.

Dates (dactyli) is the plumme or fruit of the tree in latin called palma, in
english the Date tree well known to most men by sight. And he that will farther
understand the nature or diversities of this fruit, may repair to Gerards
herball. li. 3. ca. 131. They be numbered among spices and drugs to be
garbleled. 1. Iaco. 19.

Day (dies) is sometime used in the law, for the day of appearance in court,
either originally, or upon assignation; and sometime for the returns of writs.
For example, days in bank, be days set down by statute or order of the
court, when writs shall be returned, or when the party shall appear upon the
writ served. And of this you may read the statutes, anno 51. H. 3. ca. 1. and
2. Marlb. ca. 12. anno. 52. H. 3. and the statute de anno bissextili. anno 21.
H. 3. and lastly anno 32. H. 8. ca. 21. To be dismissed with out day, is to be
finally discharged the court. Kitchen. fo. 193. He had a day by the roll.
Kitchen. fo. 197. that is, he had a day of appearance assigned him. Day, year,
and waste. Sea Dies, and year.

Deadly feude (feuda) is a profession of an unquenchable hatred, until we be
revenged, even by the death of our enemy. It is deduced from the German word
(Feed) which, as Hotoman says, in verbis feudalibus, modo bellum, modo
capitales inimicitias significat. This word is used. anno. 43. Eliz. cap. 13.

Dead pledge (mortuum vadium) See Mort gage.

Deane, (decanus) is an ecclesiastical magistrate, so called of the greek
((...)) because he has power over ten Canons at the least. How be it in
England we use to call him a deane, that is next under the bishop, and chief
of the chapter ordinarily in a cathedral church: and the rest of the society
or corporation we call Capitulum, the chapter. But this word how diversely it is
used, read Lindwood. titulo de iudiciis ca. pri. verbo Decanirurales. where
deane rurals are said to be certain persons that have certain jurisdiction
ecclesiastical over other ministers and parishes near adjoining, assigned
unto them by the Bishop and archdeacon, being placed and displaced by them. As
there be two foundations of cathedral churches in England, the old, and the
new (the new bethose which Henry the 8. upon suppression of abbeyes transformed
from abbot or prior and coue^t to deane and chapter) so be there two means of
creating these deanes. For these of the old foundation, are brought to their
dignity much like Bishops: the king first se^ding out his conge d' eslire to
the chapter, the chapter then choosing, the king yielding his royal asse^t, and
the Bishop confirming him, and giving his mandate to installe him. Those of the
new foundation are by a shorter course installed by virtue of the kings leters
patents, without either election or confirmation. This word is also applied to
diverse, that are the chief of certain peculiar Churches, or chapels, as the
deane of the kings chapel, the deane of the Arches, the deane of Saint George
his chapel in Windsour, the deane of Bockin in Essex.

Debet and solet: These words are diverse times used in the writers of the
common law, and may trouble the mind of a young student, except he have some
advertisement of them. For example, it is said in the old. not. br. fo. 98.
This writ (de secta molendini) being in the (debet) and (solet) is a writ of
right, etc. and again. fo. 69. A writ of Quod permittat) may be pleaded in the
county before the shyreeue, and it may be in the (debet) and in the (solet) or
the (debet) with out the (solet) according as the Demanda^t claymeth. wherefore
note, that those writs that be in this sort brought, have these words in them,
as formal words not to be omitted. And according to the diversity of the case,
both (debet) and (solet) are used, or (debet) alone: that is, if a man siew to
recover any right by a writ, whereof his awncester was disseised by the tenent
or his awncester, then he uses only the word (debet) in his writ: because
(solet) is not fit by reason his awncester was disseised, and the custom
discontinued: but if he siew for any thing, that is now first of all denied
him, then he uses both these words (debet and so'et) because his awneesters
before him, and he him self usually imoyed the thing siewed for: as suite to a
mill, or common of pasture until this present refusal of the tenent. The
like may be said of (debet) and (detinet) as appears by the Register. orig.
in the writ de debito. fo. s 40. a.

Debito, is a writ which lies, where a man owes to another a certain sum
of mony-vpo^ an obligation or other bargain, for any thing sold unto him. Fitz.
not br. fo. 119. This writ is made sometime in the Detinet, and not in the
Debet. which properly falls out, where a man owes an annuitie: or a certain
quantity of wheat, barley, or such like, which he refuses to pay. old. not.
br. fo. 75. See Debet and Solet.

Denelage (denelagia) is the law that the Danes made here in England, out of
which and Merchenlage, and West Sexonlage, the Conqueror compounded certain
ordinances for his subjects. Camdeni Britan. pa. 94. and pa. 183.

December tales. See Tales.

Decies tantum, is a writ that lies a against a Iurour, which has taken money
for the giving of his verdict, called so of the effect, because it is to,
recover ten times so much as he took. It lies also against embracers that
procure such an enquest. anno 38. Ed. 3. ca. 13. Reg. orig. fo. 188. Fitzh.
not. br. fo. 171. New book of Entrise. verbo Decies tantum.

Deceyte (deceptio fraus, dolus) is a subtle wily shift or deuiso, having noe
other name. Hereunto may be drawn all manner of craft, subtlety, guile,
fraud, wilynes, slightnes, cunning, couin, collusion, practice, and offense,
used to deceive another man by any means, which has none other proper or
particular name, but offense. West part. 2. symbol. titulo. Indictments. sect.
68. See Cosening.

Decenniers. See Deciners.

Deceptione, is a writ that lies properly against him, that deceitfully does
any thing in the name of another, for one that receives harm or damage
thereby. Fuzh. not. br. fo. 95. This writ is either original or judicial, as
appears by the old. not. br. fo. 50. where you may read the use of both. For
some satisfaction, take these words of that book: This writ of deceit, when it
is original, then it lies in case, where deceit is made to a man by another,
by which deceit he may be disherited, or otherwise evil entreated: as it
appears by the Register, etc. And when it is judicial, then it lies out of
the rols of record: as in case where (scire facias) is sent to the Shyreeue,
that he warm a man to be before the Justices at a certain day, and the
Shyreeue return the writ served; whereas the said man was not warned, by which
(...) party that sieweth tho (scire (...)as) recouereth, then the party which
ought to have been warned, shall have the said writ against the Shyreeue. The
author of the terms of law. verbo Deceit, says that the original writ of
deceit lies, where any deceit is done to a man by another, so that he has
not sufficiently performed his bargain or promise, In the writ judicial he
concurreth with the former book. See the Reg. orig. fo. 112. and the Reg.
judicial in the table. verbo. Deceptione.

Decimis solvendis pro possessionibus alienigenarum, is a writ or leters
patents, yet extant in the Register, which lay against those, that had fermed
the Priors aliens lands of the king, for the Rector of the Parish, to recover
his tithe of them. Regi. orig. fol. 179.

Deciners, alias, desiners, alias, doziners, (decennarii) comes of the
French, (dizeine. i. decas) ten in number, or else of (disenier. i.
decearchus.) It signifies, in the ancient monuments of our law, such as were
wont to have the oversight and check of ten friburgs, for the maintenance of
the kings peace. And the limits or compass of their jurisdiction was called
(decenna) Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 15. of whom you may also read, Fleta
lib. 1. cap. 27 and a touch in the Regist. orig. fol. 68. b. These seemed to
have la(...) authority in the Saxons time, (...) king knowledge of causes
within their circuit, and redressing wrongs by way of judgment, as you may
read in the laws of king Edward, set out by M. Lambard. number. 32. In later
times I find mention of these, as in Britton cap. 12. who says in the kings
person (as he writes his whole book) in this manner: We will, that all those
which be 14. years old, shall make oath, that they shall be sufficient and
loyal unto us, and that they will be neither felons, nor assenting to felons:
and we will, that all be (en dozeine and plevis per dozeniers) that is,
profess themselves to be of this or that dozein, and make or offer surety of
their behavior by these or those doziniers: except religious persons, clerks,
knights, and their eldest sons, and women. Yet the same author in his 29.
chapter, some thing toward the end, does say, that all of 12. years old and
upward, are punishable for not coming to the Turn of the Shyreeue, except
Earls, Prelates, Barons, religious persons, and women. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol.
37. out of Fitzh. has these words: The like law is, where the dozeniers make
presentment, that a felon is taken for felony, and delivered to the Shyreeue,
etc. And Kitchen, out of the Register, and Britton, says thus. Religious
persons, clerks, knights, or women shall not be deceniers. fol. 33. So that
hereby I gather, that of later times, this word signifies nothing but such an
one, as by his oath of loyalty to his Prince, (for surety none ordinarily
finds at these days) is settled in the combination or society of a dozein.
And a dozein seems now to extend so far, as every leete extends: because
in leetes only this oathe is ministered by the steward, and taken by such as
are twelve years old and upwards, dwelling within the compass of the leete
where they are sworn. Fitz. not. br. fol. 161. A. The particulars of this oath
you may read in Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 1. number. 1. in these words:
Quibus propositis (that is, the commission of the Justices being read, and the
cause of their coming being showed) debent Iusticiarii se transfer in
aliquem locum secretum, and vocatis ad se quatuor vel sex, vel pluribus de
maioribus de comitatu, qui dicuntur Busones Comitatus, and ad quorum nutum
dependent vota aliorum, et sic inter se tractatum habeant Iusticiarii ad
muicem, and ostendant qualiter a Domino Rege and eius concilio. prouisum sit,
quod omnes tam milites, quam alii qui sunt quindecim annorum and amplius,
iurare debent, quod vtlagatos, murditores, robbatores, and burglatores non
receptabunt, neceis consentient, nec eorum receptatoribus, and si quos tales
nouerint, illos attachiari facient, and hoc Vicecomiti and baliuis suis
monstrabunt: and si hutesium vel clameum de talibus audiverint, statim audsto
clamore, sequantur cum familia and hominibus de terra sua. Here Bracton sets
down 15. years, for the age of those that are sworn to the kings peace, but
lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 11. number. 5. he names 12. years. See Inlaughe. A man
may note out of the premises, diversities between the ancient and these our
times, in this point of law and government, as well for the age of those that
are to be sworn, as also that Decennier is not now used for the chief man of a
Dozen, but for him him that is sworn to the kings peace: and lastly, that now
there are no other Dozens but leetes, and that no man ordinarily gives other
security for the keeping of the kings peace, but his own oathe: and that
therefore none answers for another transgression, but every man for
himself. And for the general ground this may suffice. See Frankepledge.

Declaration (declaratio) is properly the showing forth, or laying out of an
action personal in any suite, howbeit it is used sometime and indifferently
for both personal and real actions. For example, anno 36. Ed. 3. c. 15. in
these words: By the ancient terms and forms of declarations, no man shall be
prejudiced: so that the matter of the action be fully showed in the
demonstration and in the writ: See the new Terms of law. See Cownte.

Dedimus potestatem, is a writ, whereby commission is given to a private man
for the speeding of some act appertaining to a Judge. The Civilians call it
(Delegationem) And it is granted most commonly upon suggestio^, that the
party, which is to do something before a Judge, or in court, is so feeble,
that he cannot travel. It is used in diverse cases: as to make a personal
answer to a bill of complaint in the Chaunceric, to make an Attorney for the
following of a suite in the County, Hundred, Wapentake, etc. Oldnat. br. fol.
20. To levy a fine. West. part. 2. symbol. titulo. Fines. sect. 112. and
diverse other effects, as you may see by Fitzh. not. br. in diverse places noted
in the Index of the book: In what diversity of cases this writ or commission
is used, see the table of the Regist. orig. verbo Dedimus potestatem.

Deeds, (Facta) signify in our common law wrighungs that contain the effect
of a contract made between man and man, which the ciuilians call (literarum
obligationem). And of deeds there be two sorts, deeds indented and deeds poll.
Which division, as M. West. says part. i. Simbol: lib. 1. sect. 46. grows
from the form or fashion of them; the one being cut to the fashion of teeth in
the top or side the other being plain. And the definition of a deed
indented he expresses thus Sect. 47. A deed iudented, is a deed consisting of
two parts or more, in which it is expressed, that the parties to the same
deed, have to every part thereof interchangeabely, or severally set there
several seals. See the rest, where at the last he shows: the cause of the
name: viz: for that consisting of more parts, each part is indented or cut
one of them into the other, that by the cut it may appear, they belong to one
business or contract. A deed poll or polled he describes thus: Sect. 46. Q. A
polled deed, is a deed testifying, that only the one of the parties to the
bargain, has put his seal; thereunto after the manner there by him described:
which read for your beter understanding. See the new Terms of law, verbo
Fait, where he shows, that each deed consists of 3. points: writing,
sealing, and delivery.

Dear Hayse. anno 19. H. 7. cap. 11. seems to be an Engine. of cords, to
catch Dear.

De essendo quieium de relovio, is a writ that lies for them which are by
privilege freed from the payment of toll, which read at large in Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 226.

Defalt (defalta) comes from the French (Defaut) and is an offense in
omitting that, which we ought to do. West. part. 2. symbol. titulo.
Indictment. sect. 2. Of this has Bracton a whole tractats, lib. 5. tractat. 3.
By whom it appears that a default is most notoriously taken for non
appearance in court, at a day assigned. Of this you may read also in Fleta.
lib. 6. cap. 14.

Defeisance (defeisantia) comes of the French (Desfaire) or Deffaire) i.
infectum reddere quod factumest, and signifies in our common law, nothing but
a condition annexed to an act, as to an obligation, a recognizance or statute,
which performed by the obligee or recognizee, the act is disabled and made
void, as if it never had been done, whereof you may see West at large, part.
1. symb. li. 2. sect. 156.

Defendant (defendens) is he that is siewed in an action personal: as tenent,
is he which is siewed in an action real. Terms of the law.

Defendemus, is an ordinary word in a feofment or donation, and has this
force, that it binds the donour and his heirs, to defend the Donee, if any
man go about to lay any servitude upon the thing given, other then is
contained in the donation. Bract. lib. 2. cap. 16. number. 10. See also
Warrantizabimus and Acquietabimus.

Defender of the faith (defensor fides) is a peculiar title given to the King
of England by the Pope, as (Catholicus) to the king of Spain, and
Christianissimus to the French king. It was first given by Leo decimus to king
Henry the 8. for writing against Martin Luther, in the behalf of the Church of
Rome, then accounted Domicilium fidei Caholicae. Stowes annals. page 863.

Deforsour, (Deforciator) comes of the french (For ceur. i. expugnator). It
is used, in our common law, for one that overcomes and casts out by force,
and differs from disseisour first in this, because a man may disseise another
without force, which act is called simple disseisin. Britton. ca. 53. next,
because a man may deforce another, that never was in possession: as for
example: if more have right to lands, as common heirs and one entering keeps
out the rest, the law says, that he deforceth them, though he do not disseise
them. Old not: br: fol: 118. and Litleton in his chapter (Discontinuance) fol.
117. faith, that he which is infeoffed by the tenent in tail, and put in
possession, by keeping out the heir of him in reuersion being dead, does
deforce him, though he did not disseise him; because he entered, when the tenent
in tail was living, and the heir had noe present right. And a deforsour
differreth from an Intrudour, because a man is made an Intrudour by a wrongful
entry only into land or tenement void of a possessour. Bracton li: 4: ca: pri.
and a deforsour is also by houlding out the right heir, as is abouesaide.

Deliverance, See Repligiare.

Demand, (Demanda vel Demandum) comes of the french (Demand. i. postulatio,
postulatus) and signifies a calling upon a man for anything due. It has
likewise a proper signification with the common lawyers opposite to plaint. For
the pursiute of all civil actions are either demands or plaints: and the
persyewer is called demaundant or plaintiff: Viz: Demandaundant in actions
real, and plaintiff in personal. And where the party persiewing is called
demaunda^t, there the party persiewed is called tenent: where plaintiff, there
defendant. See terms of law, verbo Demaundant.

Demi haque, See Haque, and Haquebut.

Demaine, (Dominicum) is a french word, otherwise written (Domaine) and
signifies (Patrimonium domini) as Hotoman says in verbis feudalibus. verbo
Dominicum. where by diverse authorities he proves those lands to be dominicum,
which a man holds originally of himself, and those to be feodum, which he
holds by the benefit of a superior Lord. And I find in the civil law (Rem
dominicam) for that which is proper to the Emperor. Cod. Ne rei dominicae vel
templorum vindicatio temporis praescriptione submoueatur, being the 38. title
of the 7. book. And (res dominici iuris. i. reipub. in the same place. And by
the word (Domanium) or (Demanium) are properly signified the kings lands in
France, appertaining to him in property, Quia Domanium definitur illud, quod
nominatim consecratum est, vnitum, and incorporatum Regiae coronae, vt scripsit
Chopinus de domanio Franciae tit. 2. per legem. Siquando 3. Cod. de bon. vacan.
lib. 10. and Mathaeus de Afflict is in constit. Siciliae li. 1. tit. De
locatione Demanii. 82. which may be called Bona incorporata and in corpus sisci
redacta. Skene de verborum signif. verb. Terrae Dominicales. In like manner do
we use it in England: howbeit, we here have no land (the Crown land only
excepted) which holds not of a superior. For all depends either mediatly or
immediately of the Crown, that is, of some honor or other belonging to the
Crown, and not granted in fee to any inferior person. Wherefore no common
person has any demaynes, simply understood. For when a man in pleading would
signify his land to be his own, he says, that he is or was seized thereof in
his demaine as of fee. Litleton li. 1. cap. 1. Whereby he signifies, that
though his land be to him and his heirs for ever, yet it is not true demaine,
but depending upon a superior Lord, and holding by service, or rent in liewe of
service, or by both service and rent: Yet I find these words used in the kings
right, anno 37. H. 8. cap. 16. and 39. Eliz. cap. 22. But the application of
this speech to the king and crown land, is crept in by error and ignorance of
the word (Fee,) or at least by understanding it otherwise then of the Feudists
it is taken. But Britton. cap. 78. shows, that this word (Demeyne) is
diversely taken: sometime more largely, as of lands or tenements held for life,
etc. and sometime more strictly as for such only as are generally held in fee.
This word sometime is used for a distinction between those lands, that the Lord
of a manner has in his own hands, or in the hands of his leasec, dimised upon
a rent for term of years or life, and such other la^d appertaining to the
said manner, which belongs to free or copy-houlders. Howbeit, the copyhold
belonging to any manner, is also in the opinion of many good lawyers accounted
Demeines. Bracton in his fourth book tract. 3. ca. 9. nu. 5. has these words:
Item dominicum accipitur multipliciter. Est aute^ dominicum quod quis habet
admensam suam and proprie, sicut sunt Bordlands anglie. Item dicitur dominicum
villenagium, quod traditur villanis, quod quis tempestiue and intempestiue
resumere possit pro voluntate sua, and reuocare. Of this Fleta likewise thus
writes: Dominicum est multiplex. Est autem Dominicum proprie terra admensam
assignata, and villenagium quod traditur villanis ad excolendum, and terra
precario dimissa, quae tempestiue and pro voluntate domini poterit reuocari:
and sicut est de terra commissa, tenenda quam diu commissori placuerit. poterit
and dici Dominicum, de quo quis habet liberum tenementum, and alius
vsumfructum: and etiam vbiquis habet liberum tenementum, and alius curam, sicut
de custode dicipoter it and curatore; and vnde vnus dicitur a iure, alius
quoque ab homine. Dominicum etiam dicitur ad differentiam eius quod tenetur in
seruitio. Dominicum est omne illud tenementum, de quo antecessor obiit seisitus
vt de feudo, nec refert cum vsufructu vel sine, and de quo si eiect us esset,
si viueret, recuperare posset per assissam nomine disseisina, licet alius
haberet vsum fructum: sicut dici poterit de illis qui tenent in villenagio, qui
vtuntur, fruuntur non nomine proprio sed nomine Domini sui. Fleta: l. 5. c: 5..
Dominicu^ aute^. And the reason why copyhold is accounted Demeanes, is because
they that be tenants unto it, are judged, in law, to have nor other right, but
at the will of the lord. So that it is reputed still after a sort to be in the
Lords hands. And yet in common speech, that is called ordinarily Demeanes,
which is neither free nor copy. It is farther to be noted, that Demaine is
sometime used in a more special signification, and is opposite to Franck fee.
For example, those lands, which were in the possession of King Edward the
confessor, are called ancient Demaine, and all others be called Franck fee.
Kitchen. fol: 98. and the tenants which hold any of those lands, be called
tenants in ancient demaine, the others tenants in franck fee. Kitchen vbi
supra. And also tenants at the common law. West. part 2. Simbol: titulo
Fines. Sect 25. The reason is, because tenants in ancient Demaine, cannot be
syewed out of the Lords court: Terms of the Law. verbo Ancient Demaine. And
the tenants in ancient demaine, though they hold all by the verge, and have
none other evidence but copy of court roll, yet they are said to have free
hold. Kitchen. fol. 81. See Awncient demaine.

Demayne cart of an Abbot, seems to be that cart, which the Abbot uses upon
his owe Demaine: Anno. 6. H. 3. cap. 21.

Demurrer (Demorare) comes of the French (Demeurer. i. manner in aliquo loco
vel morari) It signifies in our common law, a kind of pawse upon a point of
difficulty in any action, and is used substantiuely. For in every action, the
controversy consists either in the fact, or in the law, if in the fact,
that is tried by the Jury, if in law, then is the case plain to the Judge,
or so hard and rare, as it breeds just doubt. I call that plain to the
Judge, wherein he is assured of the law, though perhaps the party and his
council yield not unto it. And in such, the Judge with his Assessors
proceeds to Judgment without farther work: but when it is doubtful to him
and his Associates, then is there stay made, and a time taken, either for the
court to think farther upon it, and to agree if they can: or else for all the
Iu^stices to meet together in the Chequer chamber, and upon hearing of that
which the sergeants shall say of both parts, to advise and set down what is
law. And whatsoever they conclude, stands firm without farther remedy.
Smith. de Repub. Angliae. lib. 2. cap. 13. West. calls it a Demurrer in
chauncery likewise, when there is question made whether a parties answer to a
bille of complaint, etc. be defective or not: and thereof reference made to any
of the bench for the examination thereof, and report to be made to the court.
part. 2. symb. tit. Chauncery. sect. 29.

Denariata terrae. See Farding deal of land.

Denizen, comes of the French (Donaison. i. Donatio) and signifies in our
common law, an Alein that is infra^chised here in England by the Princes
charter, an dinabled, almost in all respects, to do as the kings native
subjects do: namely to purchase, and to possess lands, to be capable of any
office or dignity. Yet it is said to be short of naturalis^^ion, because a
stranger naturalised, may inherit lands by descent, which a man made only, a
denizen cannot. And again, in the charter whereby a man is made denizen, there
is commonly contained some one claufe or other, that abridgeth him of that full
benefit, which natural subjects do enjoy. And when a man is thus
infranchised, he is said to be under the kings protection, or, esse ad fidem
Regis Angliae, before which time he can enjoy nothing in England. Bracton. lib.
5. tractat. 5. cap. 25. nu. 3. Nay, he and his goods might be seized to the
kings use. Horn in his mirror of Justices. li. 1. ca. de la Venue de franc
plege.

Deodand (Deodandum) is a thing given or forseited (as it were) to God for the
pacification of his wrath in a case of misaduenture, whereby any Christian
soul comes to a violent end, without the fault of any reasonable creature.
For example, if a horse should strike his keeper and so kille him; if a man in
dryuing a cart, and seeking to redress any thing about it, should so fall, as
the cart wheel running over him, should press him to death: if one should be
felling of a tree, and giving warning to one coming by, when the tree were
near falling, to look to themselves, and any of them should be slain
nevertheless by the fall of the tree. In the first of these cases the horse,
in the second the cart wheel, carte and horses, and in the third the tree is
to be given to God: that is, to be sold and distributed to the poor, for an
expiation of this dreadful event, though effected by unreasonable, yea sensles
and dead creatures. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 1. ca. 2. whereof also read Bracton.
lib. 3. tractat. 2. cap. 5. and Britton. cap. 7. and West part. 2. symbolaeog.
titulo Indictments. sect. 49. And though this be given to God: yet is it
forfeited to the king by law, as susteining Gods person, and an executioner in
this case, to see the price of these distributed to the poor, for the
appeasing of God stirred up even against the earth and place, by the shedding
of innocent blood thereupon. Fleta, says that this is sold, and the price
distributed to the poor for the soul of the king, his auncesters, and of all
faithful people departed this life. lib. 1. cap. 25. verbo. De submersis. And
it seems that this law has an imitation of that in Exodus. cap. 21. Si cornu
petierit bos virum vel mulierem, ita vt moriatur, lapidabitur bos, neque
comedetur caro eius, at Dominus eius erit innocens.

De Deonerando pro rata portionis, is a writ that lies where one is distrained
for a rent, that ought to be paid by others proportionally with him. For
example, a man holds ten; Oxegangs of land by fealty, and ten shillings rent
of the king, and alienateth one Oxegang thereof to one, another, to another in
fee. Afterward the Shyreeue or other Officer, comes and distraineth only one
of them for the Rent: he that is distrained may have this writ for his help.
Fitzh. not. br. fo. 234.

Departer, is a word properly used of him, that first pleading one thing in
bar of an action, and being replied thereunto, does in his reioynder show
another matter contrary to his first plea. Plowden in Reniger and Fogassa, fo.
7. and 8. And of this see diverse examples in Brook. titulo Departer de son
plee etc.

Departers of gold and silver. See Finours.

De quibus sur disseisin, is a writ of entry. See Fitzh. not. br. fol. 191. C.

Dereyne (Disrationare, vel Dirationare) may seem to come of the French
(Disarroyer. i. confundere, turbare) to confound or turn out of order, or
(desranger. 1. to set out of order, or lastly of the Norman word (desrene) for
with the Normans (desrene) is nothing else but a proof of the denial of a
man's own fact. For Rubigineus in his grand custumarie cap. 122. and 123.
makes mention of (lex probabilis) and (lex deraisnia) legem probabilem or
(probationem) he defines to be a proof of a man's own fact, which he says
he has done, and his adversary denies. His example is this: A. sieweth R.
for a hog: saying, thou should deliver me a hog for 2. shillings six
pence: which money F. paid thee: wherefore I demand my hog. R. answers. It
is true that thou say, and I delivered thee thy hog, which I am ready to
prove. Deraisnia^ he defines, to be a proof of a thing that one denies to
be done by himself, which his adversary says was done, defeating or
confounding his adversaries assertion (as you would say) and showing it to be
without and against reason or likelihood, which is avouched. In our common law
it is used diversely, first generally, for to prove: as Dirationabit ius suum
haeres propinquior. Glanuile li. 2. cap. 6. and Habeo probos homines, qui hoc
viderunt and audierunt, and parati sunt hoc dirationare. Idem lib. 4. cap. 6.
and (Dirationauit terram illam in curia mea) Idem lib. 2. cap. 20. 1. he
proved that land to be his own, etc. and (peroinentiam eam dirationauit in
vita sua, vel alio modo just perquisivit) Idem, lib. 6. cap. 12. and Bracton
uses it after the same sort, in these words: Habeo sufficientem
disratiocinationem and probationem. lib. 4. tracta: 6 cap. 16. and so he uses
(disrationare) lib. 4. cap. 22. and so in Westminster. 2. anno. 13. Ed. pri: ca. 32.
an to dereine the warrantie old. not. br. f. 146. and to dereine the warra^ty
paramou^t. an. 31. H. 8. c. primo. And dereigner le Warranty in Plowd. casu
Basset in fine. 2. partis fo. 6. 7. and 8. a. has the same signification. So
it is used, Westminster. 2. cap. 5. anno. 13. Ed. 1. in these words: And when the
person of any Church is disturbed to demand tithes in the next parish, by a
writ of (Indicauit) the patron of the Parson so disturbed to demand tithes,
shall have a writ, to demand the Advowsen of the tithes being in Demand: and
when it is deraigned, then shall the plee pass in the court christian, as
far forth as it is deraigned in the kings court. Bracton also, li. 3. tracta.
2. cap. 3. nu. 1. speaking of him that appealeth another for any treason
orfelonie, has these words. Proponat accusans appellum suum in hunc modum, sc:
debet dicere se interfuisse, and vidisse certo loco, certo die, certa hora, and
scivisse ipsum accusatum praelocutum fuisse mortem regis, vel seditionem suam,
vel exercitus sui, vel consensisse, vel auxilium and consilium impendisse, vel
ad hoc authoritatem praestitisse: and hoc ego iuxta considerationem curiae
disrationare paratus sum. He uses it likewise as the Normans use (Deraisniam)
for him, that offers to justify his denial: as lib. 3. tracta. 2. cap. 28.
nu. 1. in these words. Rex consilio episcorum and bonorum misit propter
comitem, vt statuto die veniret ad curiam, ad disrationandum vel defendendum
se, si posset. Lastly, in some places I find the substantive (deremement) used
in the very literal signification of the french (Disrayer) or (desranger) that
is, as a man would say, turning out of course, displacing or setting out of
order: as dereinement or departure out of religion. anno 31. H. 8. cap. 6. and
dereinment or discharge of their profession. anno 33. H. 8. cap. 29. which is
spoken of those religious men, that forsook their orders and professions: as
also anno 5. and 6. Ed. 6. cap. 13. So does Kitchen use the verb fo. 152. in
these words: the leassee enters into religion, and afterward is dereigned. And
Britton uses these words (Semounse desrenable) for a summons that may be
challenged as defective or not lawfully made, cap. 21. Of this you may read
something more in Skene de verb. signif. verbo Disrationare, where in one
signification he confounds it with our waging and making of law.

De son tort demesne, seem to be certain words of form in an action of
trespass, used by way of reply to the plee of the Desendant. For example: A.
sieweth B. in action of trespass. B. answers for himself, that he did that
which A calls a trespass, by the commandment of C. his master. A says
again, that B. did it de son tort demesne, sans ceo que. C. luy commaunda modo
and forma, that is: B. did it of his own wrong, without that that C.
commanded him in such form, etc.

Detin et. See Debito and Debet.

Detynew (detinendo) is a writ that lies against him, who having goods or
chatels delivered him to keep, refuses to deliver them again. See of this
Fitzh. not. br. fol. 138. To this is answerable in some sort (actio depositi)
in the civil law. And he takes his action of ditinew, that intends to
recover the thing delivered, and not the damages sustained by the detinew.
Kitchen fol. 176. See the new book of Entries. verbo, Detinew.

Devastaverunt bona testatoris, is a writ lying against executors, for paying
Legacies and debts without specialties, to the prejudice of the creditours that
have specialties, before the debt upon the said specialties be due. For in this
case, the executors are as liable to action, as if they had wasted the goods of
the testatourriotously or without cause. New terms of law.

Divest (devestire) is contrary to Invest. For as Investire signifies
possessionem tradere. So (devestire) is (possessionem auferr^) feud. libro
primo cap. 7.

Devise, alias, divise comes of the French (diviser, i. disper^iri,
discernere, separare, distinguere) as (diviser par ci and par la, distribuere.)
This word is properly attributed in our common law to him, that bequeathes his
goods by his last will or testament in writing: and the reason is, because
those that now appertain only to the Devisour, by this act are distributed
into many parts. Wherefore I think it better written divise the^ devise,
howbeit, it were not absurd, to derive this word from the French (deviser) i.
sermocinari, fabulari, consilium confer. For in this sense it agrees in some
sort with the nature of the act of the testator, and with the Etymology of a
testament set down by Justinian, who says, that testamentum is (quaesi mentis
testatio. titulo. de Testa. ordinan. in Institut. and testatio mentis cannot be
so well, as by talk and conference with our wise and skillful friends.

Devoires of Cales, anno 2. R. 2. Stat. 1. cap. 3. and anno 5. eiusdem, stat.
2. cap. 2. were the customs due to the king for merchandise brought to or
carried out from Caleis, when our Staple was there. The word is French,
signifying as much as (officium) duty.

Devorce, alias, divorce (divortium) is with our common Lawyers, accounted that
separation between two de facto married together, which is a vinculo
matrimonii, non solum a mensa and thoro. And therefore the woman so divorced,
receives al again that she brought with her. This is not, but only upon a
nullitie of the marriage through some essential impediment, as consanguinitie
or affinity within the degrees forbidden, precontract, impotencie, or such
like. See the new Terms of law.

Diem clausit extremum, is a writ that lies for the heir of him that holds
land of the Crown, either by Knights service or in soccage, and dies, be he
under or at full age, directed to the escheatour of the county for inquiry to
be made by him, of what estate the party deceased was seized, and who is next
heir unto him, and of what value the land is. The form thereof and other
circumstances, you may learn in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 251.

Dyer, was a learned Lawyer, and Lord chief Justice of the Common plees, in
the days of Queen Elizabeth: who writ a book of great account, called his
Commentaries or Reports.

Dies datus, is a respight given to the tenent or defendant before the court.
Brook titulo. Continuance.

Dicker of lether, is a quantity consisting of ten hides. The name may seem
to come from the Greek (decas) which is also a Latin word signifying ten in
number.

Dignity ecclesiastical (dignitas ecclesiastica) is mentioned in the statute
anno 26. H. 8. cap. 3. and is by the Canonists defined to be (administratio cum
jurisdiction and potestate aliqua coniuncta. Glos. in cap. 1. de consuet. iu
sexto.) whereof you may read diverse examples in Duarenus de sacris eccles.
minist. and benefic. lib. 2. cap. 6.

Dioces (dioecesis) is a Greek word compounded of ((...)) and ((...),) and
signifies with us, the circuit of every Bishops jurisdiction. For this realm
has two sorts of divisions, one into Shyres or Counties, in respect of
temporal policy, another into Diocesses in respect of jurisdiction
ecclesiastical.

Dieta rationabilis, is in Bracton used for a reasonable days journey. lib. 3.
part. 2. chap. 16. It has in the civil law diverse other significations, not
needful here to be set down. v. vocab: vtirusque iuris.

Dimy haque. See Haque.

Disalt, signifies as much as to disable. Litleton in his chapter of
Discontinance.

Disceite, See deceit and deceptione. See the new book of Entry, verbo
Disceit.

Descent, (Discensus) in the french (Descente) signifies in the common law, an
order or means whereby lands or tenements are derived unto any man from his
ancestors: as to make his descent from his Ancestors. Old not. br. fol.
101. is to show how, and by what degrees, the land in question came to him from
his ancestors: as first from his great grandfather to his grandfather, from
his grandfather to his father, and so to him. Or in such other like sort: This
descent is either lineall or collateral. Lineall descent is conveyed downward
in a right line from the Grandfather, to the father, and from the father to the
son, and from the son to the Nephew, etc. Collateral descent is springing
out of the side of the whole blood: as Grandfathers brother, fathers brother,
etc. See the new Terms of law.

Disclamer, (Disclamium) is a plee containing an express denial or refusal:
as if the tenent siew a replevin upon a distress taken by the lord, and the
lord avow the taking of the distress, saying that he houldeth of him as of his
Lord, and that he distreined for rent not paid, or service not performed: then
the tenent denying himself to hold of such Lord, is said to disclaim: and
the Lord proving the tenent to hold of him, the tenant leeseth his land.
Terms of law. Of this see Skene de verb: signif: verbo Disclamation. Also if
a man deny himself to be of the blood or kindred of another in his plee, he is
said to disclaim his blood: Eitzh: not: br: fol, 197. G. See Brook, titulo
Disclaimer If a man arraigned of felony do disclaim goods, being cleared he
leeseth them. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 186. See the new book of Entries. verbo,
Disclamer.

Discontinuance, (Discontinuatio) comes of the french (Discontinuer). i.
cessare, intermittere) and signifies in the common law, nothing else but an
interruption or breaking of: as discontinuance of possession, or discontinuance
of process. And the large discourse that Litleton has about this
(Discontinuance) is rather to show cases wherein it is, or wherein it is not,
then to define the thing. The effect of discontinuance of possession is this,
that a man may not enter upon his own land or tenement alienated, whatsoever
his right be unto it, of his own self, or by his own authority, but must
bring his writ, and seek to recover possession by law. Examples you may have
store in his Terms of law, verbo Discontinuance. And in Litleton eodem capite,
with whom agrees another in these words: But discontinuance of possession is
indeed an impediment to a man for entering into his own land or tenements,
caused by the fact of one, that alienated them contrary to right, and gave
Livery and seisin of them, whereby the true owner is left only to his action.
See the new terms of law, and the Institutes of the Common Law. ca: 43. and
see S. Ed. Cokes reports. l. 3. the case of Fines. fo. 85. b. The effect of
discontinuance of plee is, that the instance is fallen, and may not be taken up
again, but by a new writ to begin the suite a fresh. For to be discontinued,
and to be put without day, is all one; and nothing else, but finally to be
dismissed the court of that instance. West. part 2. Simbol: titulo. Fines.
sect: 115. So Crompton in his diverse Jurisdictions, fol: 131. uses it in these
words: If a Justice seat be discontinued by the not coming of the Justices,
the king may renew the same by his writ, etc. In this signification Fitzh: in
his not. br. uses the word diverse times: as discontinuance of a corody, f.
193. A. To discontinew the right of his wife, fol. 191. L. and. 193. L.
Discontinuance of an assise, fol. 182. D. 187. B.

Disgrading, (Degradatio) is the punishment of a Clerk, that being delivered to
his Ordinary, cannot purge himself of the offience, whereof he was convicted
by the Jury: and is nothing but the deprivation of him from those orders of
Clerkship that he had, as Preistehood, Deaconship. etc. Stawnf. pl: cor: fol.
130. and 138. There is likewise disgrading of a knight. Stowes Annals. page
865. And it is not to be omitted, that by the Canon law, there be two sorts of
disgrading: one summary by word only, and another solemn by deuesting the
party degraded of those ornaments and rites, which be the ensigns of his order
or degree.

Dismes (Decimae) is made of the french (Decimes) and signifies tithe or the
tenth part of all the fruits, either of the earth, or beasts, or our labor,
dew unto God, and so consequently to him that is of the Lords lot, and has his
share: viz. our pastor. It signifies also the tenthes of all spiritual
livings, yearly given to the Prince (called a perpetual Disme. anno. 2. and 3.
Ed. 6. ca. 35) which in ancient times, were paid to the Pope, until Pope
Vrbane gave them to Richard the second, to aid him against Charles the french
king, and those other that vpheld Clement the seventh against him. Polidor
Virgil. Angl. hist: lib. 20. Lastly it signifies a tribute levied of the
Temporalty. Holinshed. in Henry. 2. fol. 111.

Disparidgment, Disparagatio, is by our common lawyers, used especially for
matching an heir in marriage under his or her degree. or against decency. See
my Institutes. titulo de nuptiis.. 6.

Disseisin (Disseisina) comes of the french (Disseisir) and signifies in the
common law, an unlawful dispossessing of a man of his land, teneme^t or other
immovable or incorporeall right, Iustitut. of the the com. law. ca. 15. And
how far this extends, See Bracton, libro quarto, cap. tertio. And therefore
the Assizes be called writs of disseisin, that lie against disseisours in any
case. whereof some be termed little writs of disseisin. being vicontiel, that
is, siewable before the Shyreeue in the county court, old. not. br. fol. 109.
because they are determined by the Shyreeue without assise. Register Original.
fo. 198. b. as for Nuissances of no great prejudice. Disseisin is of two sorts;
either simple disseisin, committed by day without force and arms. Bracton. li.
4. ca. 4. Britton. ca. 42. and 43. and 44. where you shall find in what
especially it is lawful, in what not Britton. ca. 53. And Disseisin by force,
for the which see Defersour. See fresh Disseisin. See Redisseisin, and
Postdisseisin. See Skene de verbo. significat. verbo Dissaisina. Disseisin how
many ways it is committed. See Fleta. li. 4. ca. 1.. Fit autem, etc. and when
it is lawful. ca. 2.

Distress (Districtio, Districtus) comes of the French (Distress,
augustiae) It signifies most commonly in the common law, a compulsion in
certain real actions, whereby to bring a man to appearance in court, or to
pay debt or duty denied. The effect whereof most commonly is, to drive the
party distreined to replevie the distress, and so to take his action of
trespass against the distreiner, or else to compound neighbourly with him for
the debt or duty, for the which he distreineth. In what cases a distress is
lawful, see the new terms of law. The Civilians call it (pignorum
captionem) Brissonius de verbo. significa. lib. 14. This compulsion is by
Britton. ca. 71. divided into a distress personal and distress real:
distress personal, is made by surprising a man's moveable goods, and deteining
them for the security of his appearance to the suite, and to make him
plantiffe. A distress real, is made upon immovable goods, as the Grand Cape
and Petit Cape. And thus it is interpreted by Hotoman de verb. feudal: verbo
Districtus. This differs from an attachement in this point (among others)
that a distress cannot be taken by any common person, without the compass of
his own fee. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 904 except it be presently after the catell
or other thing is driven or borne out of the ground by him that perceives it
to be in danger to be distreined. New terms of the law. verbo distress.

Districtus, is sometime used for the circuit or territory within the which a
man may be thus compelled to apperance. Ca. ne Romani. de electione in Clem:
and Cassan. de consuetud: Burgand. pa. 90. Britton. ca. 120. and so likewise is
Districtio in the Register original. fol. 6. b. And so it seems to be used
in pupilla oculi. part. 5. c. 22. Charta de foresta. See also Mynsing. in the
chapter. licet causam. 9. extra de probationibus. nu. 5. and Zasius in his 16.
council. nu. 47. Distress, in the former signification, is divided first into
finite and infinite. Finite is that which is limited by law, how often it
shall be made to bring the party to trial of the action, as once, twice. Old
not. br. fo. 43. Distress infinite is without limitation until the party
come: as against a Jury that refuses to appear super certificatione Assisae,
the process is a (venire facias) (habeas corpora) and distress infifinite.
Old. not. br. fol. 113. Then it is divided into a graund distress. anno. 52.
H. 3. ca. 7. which Fitzherbert calls in latin magnam districtionem. not. br.
fol. 126. A. and an ordinary distress. A graund distress is that, which is
made of all the goods and catels, that the party has within the County.
Britton. ca. 26. fol. 52. but see whether it be sometime not all one with a
distress infinite. Idem. fol. 80. with whom also the Statute of Marlbridge
seems to agree. anno 52. H. 3. ca. 7. and ca. 9. and ca. 12. See old. not.
breu. fol. 71. b. See grand distress, what thngs be distreinable, and for
what causes. See the new Terms of law. verbo Distress. Of this also see
more in Attachment.

Distringas, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, or any other ofofficer,
commanding him to distreine one for a debt to the king, etc. or for his
appearance at a day. See great diversity of this writ in the table of the
Register judicial, verbo Distringas.

Divise. See Devise.

Dividends in the Exchequer, seems to be one part of an Indenture. anno 10.
Ed. 1. ca. 11. and anno 28. eiusdem. Stat. 3. ca. 2.

Dyvorce. See. Devorce.

Docket, is a brife in writing. anno. 2. and 3. Ph. and Mar. ca. 6. West
writes it (Dogget) by whom it seems to be some small piece of paper or
parchement, containing the effect of a larger writing. Symbol. part. 2. titulo
Fines. sect. 106.

Doctor and Student, is a book containing certain dialogues, between a D. of
Divinity, and a Student at the common Law, wherein are contained questions and
cases, as well of the equity and conscience used in the common Law, as also a
comparison of the Civil, Canon, and common law together, very worthy the
reading. The author is said by D. Cousin in his Apology, to be a gentleman,
called Saint German, The book was written in the days of H. 8.

To do law (facere legem) is as much as to make law. 23. H. 6. ca. 14. See.
Make.

Dog draw, is a manifest deprehension of an offender against venison in the
forest. There be four of these noted by M. Manhood. part. 2. of his forest
laws. ca. 18. nu. 9. viz. Stablest and Dog draw, Back bear, and Bloody
hand. Dog draw, is when one is found drawing after a dear, by the sent of a
hound, that he leads in his hand.

Dogger, a kind of ship. an. 31. Ed. 3. Stat. 3. ca. pr^.

Doggerfish, ibid. c. 2. seems to be fish brought in those ships to
Blackcney haven, etc. Dogger men. anno 2. H. 8. ca. 4.

Dogget, See Docket.

Domo reparanda, is a writ that lies for one against his neighbor, by the
fall of whose house he fears hurt toward his own house. Register original.
fol. 153. for this point. The ciuilians have the action de damno infecto.

Dole fish, seems to be that fish, which the fisher men, yearly employed in
the north sease, do of custom receive for their allowance, See the statute.
a. 35. H. 8. ca. 7.

Donatyue, is a benefice merely given and collated by the Patron to a man,
without either presentation to the Ordinary, or Institution by the Ordinary,
or Induction by his commandment. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 35. E. See the statute,
anno 8. R. 2. cap. 4. Of this Petr. Gregor. de beneficiis cap. 11. nu. 10.
hatl. these words: Si tamen Capellaniae fundatae per Laicos non fuerint a
Dioecesano approbatae, and vt (loquuntur) spiritualizatae, non censentur
beneficia, nec ab Episcopo conferri possunt, sed sunt sub pia dispositione
fundatoris. Ioh. Faber ad. Nullius. De rerum divis: Ideo fundatores and
haeredes eorum, possunt tales Capellanias donare sine Episcopo, cui voluerint,
tanquam profona beneficia. Guido Papaeus descis. 187. See also Gregorius. lib.
15. ca. 29. sui syntagmatis. nu. 11. I find in the preface of M. Gwins
readings, that as the king might of ancient times found a free Chapel, and
exempt it from the jurisdiction of the Diocesan: so he might also by his
leters patents license a common person, to found such a chapel, and to
ordeine, that it shall be donatiue and not presentable, and that the Chaplain
shall be depriueable by the founder and his heirs, and not by the Bishop. And
this is likest to be the original of these Donatiues in England. Fitzh.
says, that there be certain Chauntries, which a man may give by his leters
patents. not. br. fol. 33. C. See him also, fol. 42. B. All Bishoprics were
donatiue by the king, Coke. li. 3. fo. 75. b.

Doomes day, (Rotulus Wintoniae) (domus Dei. Coke in Praefatione ad librum
suum) is a book that was made in king Ed. the Confessors days, as the author
of the old. not. br. says, f. 15. containing in it not only all the lands
through England, but also all the names of those, in whose hands they were at
that time when the book was made. M. Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words
(verbo, Ius Dacoru, etc.) proves out of Gervasius Tilburiensis, that this
book was made in William the Conquerors time: with whom agrees M. Camden in
his Britan. page 94. proving it out of Ingulphus, that flourished the same
time. And for the beter commendation of the book, it is not amiss to set
down the words of Ingulphus, touching the contents thereof. Totam terram
descripsit. Nec erat hyda in tota Anglia, quin valorem eius and possessorem
scivit, nec lacus nec locus aliquis, quin in Regis rotulo extitit descriptus,
ac eius reditus and proventus, ipsa possessio, and eius possessor regiae
notitiae manifest atus, iuxta taxatorum fidom qui electi de qualibet patria
territorium proprium describebant. Iste rotulus vocatus est Rotulus Wintoniae,
and ab Anglis pro sua generalitate, quod omnia tenementa totius terrae
continuit (Domesday) cognominatur. So it is called in the Statute anno pri.
Ric. 2. cap. 6. And in Ockhams lucubrations de fisci Regii ratione, which
seems to be taken out of the Book called (Liber rubeus) in the Exchequer. It
is termed (liber Iudicatorius) and the reason why quia in eo totius Regni
descriptio diligens continetur: and tam de tempore Regis Edwardi, quam de
tempore Regis Willielmi, sub quo factus est, singulorum fundorum valentia
exprimitur.

Dorture (Dormitorium) anno. 25. H. 8. ca. 11. is the common room, place or
chamber, where all the friars of one covent slept, and lay all night.

Dote assignanda, is a writ that lies for a widow, where it is found by
office, that the kings tenent was seized of tenements in fee, or fee tail, at
the day of his death, etc. and that he holds of the king in chief, etc. For
in this case the widow comes into the Chauncerie, and there makes oath,
that she will not mary without the kings leave. Anno 15. Ed. 3. ca. 4. and
hereupon she shall have this writ to the Escheatour, for which see the
Register original fol. 297. and Fitzh. not. br. f. 263. And this sort of
widows is called the kings widow. See Widow.

Dote vnde nihil habet, is a writ of dower, that lies for the widow against
the tenent, which has bought land of her husband in his life time, whereof he
was feised solely in fee simple, or fee tail, in such sort as the issue of
them both might have inhereted it. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 147. Register fol. 170.

Dotis admensuratione, See Adme^surement. See the Register. fol. 171.

Dotkins, a kind of coin. pl: cor: fol: 37. It seems to come of the Dutch
word Duythen, that is, the eight part of a Stufer, or French Shilling, which in
lat ne is called Solidus Gallicus.

Doubles. anno 14. H. 6. cap. 6. signify as much as leters patents, being as
it seems a French word made of the Latin (diploma.)

Double plee, (duplex placitum) is that, wherein the defendant alleges for
himself two several matters, in bar of the action, whereof either is
sufficient to effect his desire in debarring the plaintiff. And this is not to
be admitted in the common law: wherefore it is well to be observed, when a
plee is double, and when it is not. For if a man allege several matters, the
one nothing depending of the other, the plee is accounted double. If they be
mutually depending one of the other, then is it accounted but single. Kitchen
fo. 223. See Broke hoc titulo. But why this doublenes (for so Kitchen calls
it, fol. 234.) should be debarred, I see no reason (under correction all
things being spoken.) For a man may have two good defenses: and happily in the
issue he shall contrarily to his hope fail in proving the one, and yet be able
to carry the cause by the other. And therefore not only the Civilians, but
Bracton also says: Pluribus exceptionibus uti nemo prohibetur. lib. 5. tract.
5. cap. 5. number. 4. whom also read, libro, 4. cap. 17. And Sir Thomas Smiths
reason of this scantly satisfies me, alleging this to be the course of our
proceeding, because the trial is by twelve rude men, whose heads are not to
be troubled with over many things at once. lib. 2. de Repub. Anglor. cap. 13.

Double quarrel (duplex querela) is a complaint made by any Clerk or other
unto the Archbishop of the Province, against an inferior ordinary for
delaying of justice in some cause ecclefiasticall: as to give sentence or to
institute a clerk presented, or such like. The effect whereof, is that the
said Archbishop taking knowledge of such delay, directs his leters under his
authentical seal, to all and singular clerks of his Province, thereby
commanding and authorizing them and every of them, to admonish the said
Ordinary, within a certain number of days, namely, 9. days, to do the
justice required, or otherwise to cite him to appear before him or his
official, at a day in the said leters prefixed, and there to allege the cause
of his delay. And lastly, to intimate to the said Ordinary, that if he neither
perform the thing enjoined, nor appear at the day assigned, he himself will,
without farther delay, proceed to perform the justice required. And this seems
to be termed a double quarrel,

because it is most commonly made against both the Judge, and him at whose
petition justice is delayed.

Dower (dos) comes of the French (douaire) and signifies in our common law,
two things: first, that which the wife brings to her husband in marriage,
otherwise called maritagiu^, marriage good: next, and more commonly, that which
she has of her husband, after the marriage determined, if she out-liue him.
Glanvile. lib. 7. cap. 1. Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 38. Britton. cap. 101. in
princ. And in Scotland, (dos) signifies just as much. Skene de verb. signif.
verbo. Dos. The former is in French called (dot) the other douayre, and by them
latined doarium. I likewise once thought it not unreasonable, to call the
former a Dowry, and the other a Dower: but I find them confounded. For
example: Smith de rep. Anglo. p. 105. calls the later a dowry, and dower is
sometime used for the former: as in Britton vbi supra. yet were it not
inconvenient to distinguish them being so diverse. The Civilians call the former
(dotem) and the later (donationem propter nuptias.) Of the former the common
law books speak very little. This only is to be noted, that whereas by the
civil law, instruments are made before marriage, which contain the quantity
of the wives dowry, or substance brought to her husband, that he having the
use of it, during marriage, may, after certain deductions, restore it again to
his wives heirs or friends, after the marriage dissolved: the common law of
England, whatsoever chatels moveable or immovable, or ready money she
brings, does make them forthwith her husbands own, to be disposed of, as he
will, leaving her at his courtesy, to bestow any thing or nothing of her at
his death. The reason whereof is said to be, the holding of the wife in
obedience to her husband. Only if she be an inheretrice, her husband holds
the land but during her life, except he have issue by her: but then he holds
it by the courtesy of England during his own life. See Courtesy. And again,
if he have any land in fee, whereof he was possessed during the marriage, she is
to have a third thereof during her life, though she bring nothing to him, except
she do by fine release her right, during the marriage. So that here is no great
matter to be spoken of, but touching dower in the later signification. You must
know therefore, that upon speech of marriage between two, the parents of both
sides are commonly more careful in providing each for his child, then the
parties themselves: and that by their means there be diverse bargains made,
sometime for the conueiance of lands, etc. to them and their issue: and this is
said to be given in frank marriage: sometime to her during her life, and that
before, or at the marriage: if before marriage, then it is called a Ioynture. For
a Ioynture is a covenant, whereby the husband, or some for him is tied (ratione
iuncturae) in consideration of the marriage, that the wife surviuing him, shall
have during her life, this or that tenement or lands, or thus much rent yearly
paylible out of such land, etc. with clause of distress: and this may be more
or less, as they do accord. Britton, cap. 101. whom read also ca. 102. 103.
104. for conventio vincit legem. Bracton. lib. 5. tract. 4. cap. 9. The
diversity of these Ioyntures, you may see in West. part prima symbol. lib. 2.
sect. 128. 129. 130. 131. 132. 133. But if none of these former bargains pass
before marriage, then must the wife stick to her Dower: and that is sometime
given at the Church door or the Chapel door, if the marriage be by license,
but not the chamber door; and may be what the husband will: so it exceed not
a third part of his lands. G lanvile libro. 6. cap. pri. Or the half, as some
say. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 150. N. P. And this Dower is either certainly set
down and named, or not named but only in generality, as the law requires:
if it be not named, then is it by law, the third part, and called (dos
ligitima) Bracton. lib. 4. tracta. 6. cap. 6. nu. 6. and 10. Magna. Charta. c.
7. or the half by the custom of some countries, as in Gavelkinde. Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 150. O. And though it be named, it seems that it cannot be above
half the lands of the husband. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 150. P. And the woman that
will challenge this dower, must make 3. things good, viz. that she was married
to her husband, that he was in his life time seized of the land, whereof she
demands dower, and that he is dead. Cokesreportes li. 2. Binghams case. fo.
93. a. Of these things see Glanvile. li. 6. cap. 1. 2. and 3. Bracton lib. 2.
ca. 38. 39. and lib. 4. tracta. 6. cap. 1. and 6. and Britton cap. 101. 102.
103. 104. and Fitzherb. nature. brev. fol. 147. 148. 149. and 150. And this
custumary, dower, seems to be observed in other nations, as well as in ours.
Hotoman verbo Dotalitium in verbis feudal: Cassan. de consuetud. Burg. page
580. 676. 677. and de conventionali. p. 720. And to these join the graund
Custumarie of Normandy, cap. 102. where you shall perceive, that in a manner
all our law in this point is taken from the Normans: See Endowment. Of dower
read Fleta likewise, who writes largely thereof, and has many things worth
the learning. li. 5. ca. 22 and seqq.

Dozenne. See Decennier.

Drags. ano. 6. H. 6. ca. 5. seem to be wood or timber so joined together, as
swimming or floting upon the water, they may bear a burden or load of other
wares down the river.

Draw latches. anno. 5. Ed. 3. ca. 14. and anno. 7. Rich. 2. ca. 5. Master
Lamberd, in his Eirenarch lib: 2. ca. 6. calls them miching thieves, as
Wasters and Roberdsemen mighty thieves, saying that the words be grown out of
use.

Dreit Dreit, signifies a double right, that is ius possessionis, and ius
Domini. Bracton. lib: 4. cap. 27. and lib. 4. tracta. 4. cap: 4. and lib. 5.
tracta. 3. cap. 5.

Dry exchange. an. 3. H. 7. ca. 5. (Cambium siccum) seems to be a clenly
term invented for the disguising of foul usury, in the which some thing is
pretended to pass of both sides, whereas in truth, nothing passes but on the
one side: in which respect it may well be called dry. Of this Ludouicus Lopes
tractat: de contract: and negotiatio. lib: 2. ca. pri.. Deinde postquam:
writes thus: Cambium est reale vel siccum. Cambium reale dicitur, quod
consistentiam very Cambit realem habet, and Cambium per trans, and Cambium
minutum. Cambium aute^ siccum est Cambium non habens existentiam Cambii, sed
apparentiam ad instar arboris exsiccatae, quae humore vitali iam carens
apparentiam arboris habet, non existentiam. Summa Sylv: Verbo Vsura. quaest: 6.
Est ergo Cambium siccum iuxta hanc acceptionem (in qua etiam accipitur in
Extrau. Pii quinti) idem quod Cambium fictu^. Non aute^ habet propriam naturam
Cambii, sed mutui and vsurae. At vero secundum Laurentium de Nauarra in
Co^mento de vsuris and Cambiis citatam, Cambium siccum in alia acceptione minus
communi sumptum est Cambium, in quo Campsor prius dat quam accipiat. Dicitur
autem isto modo siccum, quia sine praeuia acceptione dat Campsor. Quod tamen,
vt fic acceptum (autore Siluestro) licite celebratur aliquando. Quia tunc verum
and reale Cambium est differens genere ab eo Cambio, in quo Campsor prius
recipit. Quia in isto Campsor semper primo dat and deinde accipit.

Drift of the Forest, seems to be nothing but an exact view or examination,
what catell are in the forest: that it may be known, whether it be ouercharged
or not, and whose the beasts be. This drift, when, how often in the year, by
whom, and in what manner it is to be made, see Manwood part. 2. of his forest
laws. cap: 15.

Droit d' Advowzen. See Recto de aduocatione Ecclesiae.

Droit close. See. Recto clausum.

Droit de dower. See Recto dotis.

Droit sur Disclaimer. See Recto sur disclaimer.

Droit patent. See Rectopatens.

Duces tecum, is a writ commanding one to appear at a day in the chauncery,
and to bring with him some piece of evidence, or other thing, that the court
would view. See the new book of Entries, verb. Duces tecum.

Duke (Dux) commethe of the french (Duc) It signifies in ancient times among
the Romans Ductorem exercitus) such as led their armies, who if by their
prowes they obtained any famous victory, they were by their soldiers sa'uted
(Imperatores) as Hotoman verbo Dux, de verbis feud il: proves out of Lyvy,
Tully, and others. Sithence that they were called (Duces) to whom the king or
people committed the custody or regiment of any province. Idem. eod. And this
seems to proceed from the Lombards or Germans, Sigon de regno Ital. l. 4. In
some nations at this day, the Sovereigns of the country, are called by this
name, as Duke of Russia, Duke of Swethen. Here in England, Duke is the next in
seculer dignity to the Prince of Wales. And as (M. Camden says) heretofore in
the Saxons times, they were called Dukes, without any addition, being but mere
officers, and leaders of armies. After the Conqueror came in, there were none
of this title until Edward the thirds days, who, made Edward his son Duke of
Cornwayle. After that there were more made, and in such sort, that their titles
descended by inheritance to their posterity. They were created with solemnity
(per cincturam gladii, cappaeque and circuli aurei in capite impositionem, vide
Camd. Britan. pa. 166. Zasium de feudis part. 4. nu. 7. and Cassan. de
consuetud. Burg page 6. and 10. and Ferns glory of generosity. page 139.

Duchy court, is a court, wherein all matters appertaining to the Duchy of
Lancaster, are descided the decree of the Chauncelour of that Court. And the
original of it was in Henry the fourthes days, who obtaining the crown, by
deposing Richard the second, and having the Duchy of Lancaster by descent in
the right of his mother, he was seized thereof as king, and not as Duke. So
that all the liberties, fraunchises, and Jurisdictions of the said Duchy
passed from the king by his graund seal, and not by liverie, or attournment:
as the possessions of Everwicke, and of the Earldome of March, and such others
did, which had descended to the king, by other Auncesters then kings. But at
the last, Henry the 4. by authority of Parliament passed a charter, whereby the
possessions, liberties, etc. of the said Duchy were severed from the Crown:
Yet Henry the 7. reduced it to his former nature, as it was in Henry the fifts
days. Crompton Iurisdict. fol. 136. The officers belonging to this Court are
the Chancellor, the Attorney, Receiver general, Clerk of the court, the
Messenger. Beside these, there be certain Assistantes of this Court: as one
Attorney in the Exchequer: one Attorney of the Duchy in the Chauncery, four
learned men in the law, retained of council with the King in the said court.
Of this Court M. Gwin. in the preface to his readings thus speaks: The court
of the Duchy (or County Palatine of Lancaster) grew out of the grant of king
Edward the third, who first gave the Duchy to his son John of Gawnte, and
endowed it with such royal right, as the County Palatine of Chester had: and
for as much, as it was afterward extinct in the person of king Henry the
fourth, by reason of the union of it with the Crown: the same king suspecting
himself to be more rightfully Duke of Lancaster, then king of England,
determined to save his right in the Duchy, whatsoever should befall of the
Kingdom: and therefore he separated the Duchy from the Crown, and settled it
so in the natural persons of himself and his heirs, as if he had bin no king
or Politic body at all: In which plight it continued, during the reign of
K. Henry the 5. and Henry the 6. that were descended of him. But when King Edw.
the 4. had (by recovery of the Crown) recontinued the right of the house of
York, he feared not to appropriate that Duchy to the Crown again: and yet
so, that he suffered the Court and Officers to remain as he found them. And
in this manner, it came together with the Crown, to King Henry the 7. who
liking well of that policy of King H. the 4. (by whose right also he obtained
the Kingdom) made like separation of the Duchy, as he had done, and so left
it to his posterity which do yet enjoy it.

Dumfuit infra aetatem, is a writ which lies for him, that before he came to
his full age, made a feofment of his land in fee, or for term of life, or in
tail, to recover them again from him, to whom he conveied them. Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 192.

Dum non fuit compos mentis, is a writ that lies for him, that being not of
sound memory, did alien any lands or tenements in fee simple, fee tail, for
term of life, or of years, against the alienee. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 202.

Duplicat, is used by Crompton, for a second leters patent granted by the Lord
Chauncelour, in a case, wherein he had formerly done the same: and was
therefore thought void. Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 215.

Dures (Duritia) comes of the French (dur. i. durus, vel durete. i. duritas)
and is in our common law, a plee used in way of exception, by him that being
cast in prison at a man's suite, or otherwise by beating or threats hardly used,
seals any bond unto him during his restraint. For the law holds this not
good, but rather supposes it to be constrained. Brook in his Abridgement
joins Dures and Manasse together. i. duritiam and minas, hardness and
threatening. See the new book of Entries, verbo Dures. and the new Terms of
law.

E A
EAlderman (Aldermannus) among the Saxons, was as much as Earl among the
Danes. Camden. Britan. page 107. If ye go to the true etimologie of the word,
me thinks, it shoud sound more generally, so much as (...) with the
Graecians, or Senator with the Romans: who were rather Councellers at large,
then bestowed upon any particular office, as Comites were. See County. And
that signification we retain at this day almost in all our Cities, and
Borowes, calling those Aldermen, that are Associates to the Chief Officer in
the common council of the Town. anno 24. H. 8. ca. 13. or sometime the chief
officer himself, as in Stawnford.

Earl (Comes) in M. Camdens opinion. page 107. is a word made by the Danes of
(Ealderman) a word of the Saxons. M. Lamberd seems notwithstanding to
acknowledge, that Earl is originally a Saxon word. Explica. of Sax. words.
verbo Paganus: and interprets it (Satrapam) which word the Romans borowing
of the Persians, applied to those that were praefecti provinciarum. M.
Verslegan in his restitution of decayed intelligence, deriueth it from two
Netherland words (ear. i. honor) and (ethel i. nobilis) wherein I leave the
reader to his own judgment. This title in ancient time, was given to those,
that were associates to the king in his councels and Marshall actions (as Comes
was to those that followed the Magistrates in Room, and executed their offices
for them as their deputies, and died always with the man. Zasius has of this
word thus much. Comitu^ originem in Doctoribus non invenimus: sed noveris came
dignitatem vetustissimam esse. Nam Cor. Tacitus in libello de Germania scribit
apud priscos vsu fuisse receptum, vt cuilibet principi seu Duci exercitus
duodecim comites assignarentur: ideo dictos, quia comitarentur eos, and a Ducum
latere non decederent. Comitu^ itaque origine^ Germanis moribus ortum esse,
dictus receptissimus author testis est. Quapropter quod in duodecimo libro
Codicis aliqui tituli de Comitibus largitionum etc. inscribuntur, usurpationem
Imperatoris ex Germanorum ritibus sumptam credo. But the Conqueror (as M.
Camd. says) gave this dignity in fee to his nobles, annexing it to this or
that county or province, and allotted them, for their maintenance, a certain
proportion of money rising from the Princes profits, for the pleadings and
forfeitures of the province. For example, he brings an aunent Record in these
words. Henricus 2. Rex Anglie his verbis Comitem creauit: Sciatis nos fecisse
Hugonet Bigot Comite^ de Nortfolk. sc: de tertio denario de Norwic. and
Northfolke, sicut aliquis comes Angliae liberius comitatum suum tenet. Which
words (says the same author) an old book of Battle Abbie thus expounds:
Consuetudinaliter per totam Angliammos antiquitus inoleverat, Comites
provinciarum tertium denarium sibi obtinere, inde Comites dicti. And another
book without name more fully. Comitatus a Comite dicitur, aut vice versa.
Comes autem est, quia tertiam portionem eorum, quae de placitis proveniunt, in
quolibet Comitatu percipit. Sed non omnes Comites ista percipiunt: sed hii
quibus Rex haereditario aut personaliter concessit. You may read M. Fern in
Lacyse nobility, something to this effect. pa. 12. But he says, that one Duke
or Earl had diverse Shires under his government, as a viceroy, and had
lieuetenants under him in every particular Shire, called a Shyreeue. That one
Earl was dignified by the appellation or more rhen one Shyreeue, it appears
by diverse of our ancient Statutes, as namely by the sentence of
excommunication pronounced by the Bishops against the infringers of the great
Charter and charter of the forest. anno. 38. H. 3. Roger Bigot is named Earl
both of Northfolke and Southfolke, and anno 1. Ed. 3. Thomas Earl of Lancaster
and Leycester. Humsrey Bohum. Earl of Hereford and Essex. Dyer. fo. 285. nu.
39. At these days, as long since, the kings of England make Earls by their
charters, of this or that County, giving them no authority over the County,
nor any part of the profit rising of it, but only some annual stipend out of
the Exchequer, rather for honors sake, then any great commodity. And these
be in other nations accounted Earls improperly. Quia illi dicuntur vere
Comites, quibus datur Comitatus in feudum: illi Comites abusive, qui non habent
administrationem. Vincentius de Franchis. descis. 115. nu. 7. The manner of
creating Earls is by girding them with a sword. Camden. page 107. but see the
solemnity thereof described more at large in Stowes annals. pa. 1121 The
occasion why these Earls in later time have had no swaye over the County,
whereof they bear their name, is not obscurely signified in Sir Thomas Smith.
lib. 2. cap. 14. Where he says, that the Shyreeue is called Vicecomes, as
(Vicarius Comitis) following all matters of justice, as the Earl should do: and
that because the Earl is most commonly attendant upon the king, in his wars
or otherwise. So that it seems that Earls by reason of their high
employments, being not able to follow also the business of the county, were
delivered of all that burden, and only enjoyed the honor, as now they do.
And the Shyreeue, though he be still called Vice-comes, yet all he does, is
immediately under the king, and not under the Earl. See County, and see
Hetoman. de verb. feudal. verbo Comes: and Cassan, de consuetud. Burg. p 12.

Easement, (esamentum) is a service that one neighbor has of another by
charter or prescription, without profit, as a way through his ground, a sink,
or such like. Kitchen. fol. 105. which in the civil law is called Seruitus
pradii.

Eele fares, alias, Eele Vare. an. 25. H. 8. cap. 7. be the fry or brood of
Eeles.

Egyptians (Egyptiani) are in our statutes and laws of England, a counterfeit
kind of roagues, that being English or Welsh people, accompany themselves
together, disguising themselves in strange roabes, blacking their faces and
bodies, and framing to themselves an unknown language, wander up and down,
and under pretense of telling of Fortunes, curing diseases, and such like,
abuse the ignorant common people, by stealing all that is not too hot or too
heavy for their cariaage. anno 1. and 2. Phi. and M. cap. 4. anno 5. Eliz.
cap. 20. These are very like to those, whom the Italians call Cingari: of whom
Franciscus Leo in suo the sauro fori ecclesiastici part prim. cap. 13. thus
writes: Cingari, qui corrupt vocabulo, quandoque etiam Saraceni nominantur,
and permissione principu^ ac aliorum dominorum, per Italian vagantur, nec
vnquam viderunt parts infidelium, minusque legem Mahome it noverunt: sed sunt
fere omnes Itali, and male habituati, ex rebus furtivis vivunt, ac fraudulentis
earum permut ationibus and ludis, in quibus vt plurimum frauds committunt, and
sunt baptizati.

Eiectione custodiae, Eiectment de guard, is a writ which lies properly against
him, that casts out the Guardian from any land, during the minority of the
heir. Register origin. fol. 162. Fitz. not. br. fol. 139. Terms of the law.
verbo. Guard. There be two other writs not unlike this: the one is termed Droit
de guard, or right of guard, the other Rauishment de Guard. Which see in their
places.

Eiectione firmae, is a writ, which lies for the Leassee for term of years,
that is cast out before the expiration of his term, either by the leassour,
or a stranger. Register fol. 227. Fitz. not. br. fo. 220. See Quare eiecit
infra terminum. See the new book of Entries. verbo Eiectione firmae.

Einecia, is borrowed of the French (Aisne. i. primogenitus) and signifies in
our common law, Eldership. Statute of Ireland. anno 14. Hen. 3. Of this see M.
Skene deverb. signif. verbo. Eneya.

Air, alias, Eyer, (Iter. Bracton lib. 3. cap. 11. in Rubrica) comes of the
old French word (Err. i. iter) as (a grand err. i. magnis itineribus.) It
signifies in Britton cap. 2. the court of Justices itinerants: and Justices in
Air, are those only, which Bracton in many places calls (Iusticiarios
itinerantes) of the Air, read Britton vbi supra, who expresses the whole
course of it. And Bracton. lib. 3. tractat. 2. cap. 1. and 2. The Air also of
the Forest is nothing, but the Justice seat otherwise called: which is or
should by ancient custom, be held every three year by the Justices of the
forest, iourneying up and down to that purpose. Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 156.
Manmood part prima of his Forest laws. page 121. See Justice in Air. Read
Skene de verborum significa. verbo. Iter: whereby, as by many other places you
may see great affinity between these 2. Kingdoms in the administration of
Justice and government.

Election de Clerk (Electione clerici) is a writ, that lies for the choice of
a clerk, assigned to take and make bonds called statute Merchant: and is
granted out of the Chauncerie upon suggestion made, that the Clerk formely
assigned, is gone to dwell in another place, or has hinderance to let him from
following that business, or has not land sufficient to answer his
transgression, if he should deal amiss, etc. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 164.

Elegit, is a writ Judicial, and lies for him, that has recovered debt or
damages in the kings court, against one not able in his goods to satisfy: and
directed to the Shyreeue, commanding him that he make delivery of half the
parties lands or tenements, and all his goods, oxen and beasts for the plough
excepted. Old not. br. fol. 152. Register original fol. 299. and 301. and the
Table of the Register Judicial, which expresses diverse uses of this writ. The
author of the new terms of law says, that this writ should be siewed within
the year, whom read at large for the use of the same.

Elk a kind of ewe to make bows of. anno 33. H 8. cap. 9.

Empanel (Impanellare, Ponere in assisis and Iuratis) comes of the french
(Pan. 1. pellis) or of (Pannequ) which signifies some time as much as a pane
with us, as a pane of glass, or of a window. It signifies the wrighting or
entering the names of a Jury into a parchment schedule or Roll or paper, by the
Shyreeue, which he has sommoned to appear for the perfourmance of such
public feruice, as Iuries are employed in. See Panell.

Emparlance, comes of the french (Parler) and signifies in our common law,
a desire or petition in court of a day to pause, what is best to do. The
ciuilians call it (petitionem induciaru^) Kitchen fol. 200. interprets it in
these words: If he imparle or pray continuance. For praying continuance is
spoken interpretatiue in that place, as I take it. The same author makes
mention of Emparlance general. fol. 201. and Emparlance special fol. 200.
Emperlance general seems to be that which is made only in one word, and in
general terms. Emparlance special, where the party requires a day to
deliberate, adding also these words: saluis omnibus aduantagiis tam ad
iurisdictionem Curia quam ad breue and narrationem, or such like: Britton uses
it for the conference of a Jury upon the cause committed unto them. ca. 53. See
Imparlance.

Emprouement, See Improuement.

Encheson. A. 50. Ed. 3. ca. 3. is a french word, signifiing as much as
occasion, cause, or reason wherefore any thing is done, See Skene de verbo.
significa: verbo Encheson.

Encrochement or Accrocheme^t, comes of the french (Accrocher. 1.
apprehendere, inuncare, harpagare) and that comes of (Crochure. 1. aduncitas)
or (crochu. 1. aduncus) Encrochement, in our common law, signifies an
unlawful gathering in upon another man. For Example, if two men's grounds lying
together, the one presses too far upon the other: or if a tenent owe two
shillings rent service to the Lord, and the Lord takes three: So Hugh and Hugh
Spencer encroched unto them royal power and authority, annoprim. Ed. 3. in
prooem.

Enditement (Indictamentum) comes of the French (Enditer. i. defer nomen
alicuius, indicare) or from the Greek (...), because M. Lamberd will have it
so. Eirenar. lib. 4. cap. 5. page 468. It signifies in our common law, as
much as (Accusatio) in the civil law, though it have not in all points the
like effect. West part 2. symb. titulo, Inditements) defines it thus: An
Indictment is a Bill or declaration made in form of law, (for the benefit of
the common wealth) of an accusation for some offense, either criminal or
penal, exhibited unto Jurors, and by their verdict found and presented to be
true, before an Officer having power to punish the same offense. It is an
accusation, because the Jury that inquireth of the offense, does not receive it
until the party that offers the Bill, appear so far in it, as to
subscribe his name, and offer his oath for the truth thereof. It differs from
an Accusation in this, that the preferrer of the Bill is no way tied to the
proof thereof upon any penalty, if it be not proved, except there appear
conspiracy. Wherefore, though moved by M. Wests authority, I call it an
Accusation: yet I take it to be rather (Denuntiatio) because it is of office
done by the great enquest, rather then of a free intent to accuse. Of this you
may read. S. Tho. Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. 2. cap. 19. and Stawnf. pl.
cor. lib. 2. cap. 23. 24. 25. 26. etc. Vsque 34. and M. Lamberds Eirenarcha.
li. 4. ca. 5. whence you may receive good satisfaction in this matter.

Endowment (Dotatio) comes of the french (Douare) and signifies the
bestowing or assuring of a Dower. See Dower. But it is sometime used
metaphorically, for the setting forth or seuering of a sufficient portion, for
a vickar toward his perpetual maintenance, when the benefice is appropriated.
See Appropriation. And the statute A. 15. R. 2. cap. 6.

Endowment de la plus Belle part. is where a man dying seized of some lands,
houlding in knights service, and other some in socage, the widow is sped of her
dower, rather in the lands houlding in socage, then knights service. Of this
read Litleton more at large. li. 1. ca. 5.

Enfranchisement, comes of the french (Franchise. 1. libertas) and is in a
manner a french word of it self: It signifies in our common law, the
incorporating of a man into any society, or body politic. For example, he
that by charter is made Denizen of England, is said to be enfranchised; and so
is he that is made a citizen of London, or other city, or Burges of any town
corporate, because he is made partaker of those liberties that appertain to
the corporation, whereinto he is enfranchised. So a villain is enfranchised,
when he is made free by his Lord, and made capable of the benefits belonging
to freemen.

Englecerie (engleceria) is an old abstract word, signifying nothing else but
to be an English man. For example, if a man be privily slain or murdered, he
was in old time accounted (Francigena) which word comprehends every alien,
until Englecerie was proved: that is, until it were made manifest, that he was
an Englishman. A man may marvel, what meaning there might be in this: but
Bracton clears the doubt, who in his third book tract. 2. cap. 15. number. 3.
tells us, that when Canutus the Danish king, having settled his estate here in
peace, did at the request of our Barons, disburden the land of his army,
wherein he accounted his greatest safety: and conditioned with them, that his
countrymen which remained here, should continue in peace: and the more to
secure that, that for every Francigena (under which word (as is above said) he
comprehended all outlandish men and women, and especially Danes) that was
secretly murdered, there should be leauied to his Treasury 66. merkes out of
the village, where the murder was committed, or out of the hundred, if the
village were not able to pay it: and further, that every man murdered should be
accounted Francigena, except Englecery were proved: which how it was to be
proved, look the 7. number in the same chapter. And see also Horns myrror of
Justices. lib. 1. cap. del office del coroner, and Fleta lib. 1. cap. 30. This
Englecerie for the abuses and troubles that afterward were perceived to grow
by it, was clean taken away, by a statute made anno 14. Ed. 3. capite quarto.

Enheritance: See Inheritance.

Enquest (Inquisitio) is all one in writing with the french word, and all one
in signification both with the French and Latin. Howbeit, it is especially
taken for that Inquisition, that neither the Romans, nor French men ever had
use of, that I can learn. And that is the Enquest of Jurors, or by Jury,
which is the most usual trial of all causes both civil and criminal in our
realm. For in causes civil after proof is made of either side, so much as
each party thinks good for himself, if the doubt be in the fact, it is
referred to the discretion of twelve indifferent men, empaneled by the Shyreeue
for the purpose: and as they bring in their verdict, so judgment passes. For
the Judge says, the Jury finds the fact thus: then is the law thus: and so
we judge. For the enquest in causes criminal, see Jury. and see Sir Thomas
Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. 2. cap. 19. An enquest is either of office, or at
the mise of the party. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 12.

Entendment, comes of the French (entendement. i. intellectus, ingenium.) It
signifies in our common law so much, as the true meaning or signification of
a word or sentence. See of this Kitchen, fol. 224.

Entayle (feudum talliatum) comes of the French (entaille. i. inscisus) and
in our common law, is a substantive abstract, signifying Fee-tayle, or
Fee-intayled. Litleton in the second chapter of his book, draws Fee-tayle
from the verb Talliare, (which whence it comes, or whether it will I know
not) whereas in truth it must come from the French (taille. i. sectura,) or
(tailler. i. scindere, secare) And the reason is manifest, because fee-tayle in
the law, is nothing but fee abridged, scanted or curtelled, (as you would say,)
or limited and tied to certain conditions. Taille in France is metaphorically
taken for a tribute or subsidy. v. Lupanum de Magistratibus Francoru^. lib. 3.
cap. Talea. See Fee. See Tail.

Enterpleder (Interplacitare) is compounded of two french words: (enter. i.
inter) and (pleder. i. disputare) and it signifies in our common law, as much
as cognitio praeiudicialis in the civil law: that is, the discussing of a
point incidently falling out, before the principal cause can take end. For
example, two several persons being found heirs to land by two several
offices in one county, the king is brought in doubt to whether livery ought to
be made: and therefore before livery be made to either, they must enterpleade,
that is, formerly try between themselves, who is the right heir. Stawnf.
praeroga: chap. 19. See more examples in Brook. titulo Enterpleder.

Entiere tenancie, is contrary to several Tenency, signifiing a sole
possession in one man: whereas the other signifies joint or common in more. See
Brook several tenancy. See the new book of Entries, verbo Entier tenancy.

Entry (Ingressus) comes of the french (Entree. i. introitus ingressus,
aditus) and properly signifies in our common law, the taking possession of
lands or tenements. See Plowden. Afsise of fresh force in London. fo. 93. b. It
is also used for a writ of possession, for the which See Ingressu. And read
West also, part. 2. Symbol. titulo Recoueries. sect: 2. and. 3. Who there
shows for what things it lies, and for what it lies not. Of this Britton in
his 114. chapter writes to this effect. The writs of entry savor much of the
right of property. As for example: some be to recover customs and services:
in the which are contained these twoe words (solet and debet) as the writs Quo
iure, Rationabilibus diuisis, rationabili estoverio, with such like. And in
this plee of entry there be three degrees: The first is, where a man demands
lands or tenements of his own seisin, after the term is expired. The second
is, where one demands lands or tenements let by another after the term
expired. The third, where one demands lands or tenements of that tenent,
that had entry by one, to whom some auncestor of the plaintiff did let it for a
term now expired. According to which degrees the writs for more fit remedy are
varied. And there is yet a fourth form, which is without the degrees, and in
case of a more remote seisin, whereunto the other three degrees do not extend.
The writ in the second degree is called a writ of entry in le per: and a writ
in the third degree is called a writ of entry in le per and cui: and the
fourth form without these degrees, is called a writ of entry in le post, that
is to say, after the disseisin which such a one made to such a one. And if any
writ of entry be conceived out of the right case, so that one form be brought
for another, it is abatable. The form of the first degree is such. Praecipe
Willielmo quod reddat Petro manerium de B. cum pertinentiis quod ille dimisit
pro termino, qui est elapsus. The second is such: Praecipe Petro quod reddat
Willielmo manerium etc. in quod ille non habuit ingressum nisi per patrem
a(...) matrem, avunculum, vel amitam, vel cognatum, avum vel proavum dicti
Petri, qui dictum manerium danifit pro termino qui est elapsus. The third form
is such: Praecipe Iohanni quod reddat Petro manerium de S. in quod ille non
habuit ingressum nisi per T. cui talis pater vel matter, vel alius antecessor
aut cognatus idem dimisit, cuius haeres est ipse Petrus, pro termino, qui est
elapsus. And the form without the degrees is such: In quod non habuit
ingressum, nisi post lessam, quam talis pater aut matter (sic vt supra) cuius
haeres ille est, inde fecit pro termino, qui est elapsus. And in those four
degrees be comprehended all manner writs of entry, which be without certainty
and number. Thus far Britton: by whom you may perceive, that those words
(solet and debet) and also those other words (in le per) (in le per and cut)
and (in le post) which we meet with many times in books shortly and obscurely
mentioned, do signify nothing else, but diverse forms of this writ, applied to
the case, whereupon it is brought; and each form taking his name from the said
words contained in the writ. And of this read Fitz. in his not. br. fol. 193.
and 194. This writ of entry differs from an assise, because it lies for the
most part, against him, who entered lawfully, but houldeth against law: whereas
an assise lies against him that unlawfully disseised: yet sometime a writ of
entry lies upon an intrusion. Regist. orig. fol. 233. b. See the new book of
Entries, verbo. Enter Brevis. fol. 254. colum. 3. I read of a writ of entry in
the nature of an assise. Of this writ in all his degrees, read Fleta lib. 5.
cap. 34. and seqq. 5.

Entrusion (Intrusio) in our common law, signifies a violent or unlawful
entrance into lands or tenements, being utterly void of a possessour, by him
that has no right nor spark of right unto them. Bracton lib. 4. cap. 2. For
example, if a man step in upon any lands, the owner whereof lately died, and
the right heir, neither by himself nor others, as yet has taken possession
of them. What the difference is between Abator and Intrudor, I do not well
perceive, except an Abatour be he that steppeth into land void by the death of
a tenent in fee, and an Entrudour that does the like into lands, etc. void by
the death of the tenent for terms of life or years. See Fitz. not. br. fol.
203. F. The author of the new Terms of law would have abatement latined,
(Interpositionem, aut Introitionem per interpositionem) and to be restrained to
him that enters before the heir after the decease of a tenent for life,
though the new book of Entries fol. 63. C. and 205. D. and 519. C. by his
confession does Latin (Abatement) by this word (Intrusionem.) See Abatement.
See Disseisin. See Britton, cap. 65. Entrusion is also taken for the writ
brought against an Intrudour, which see in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 203.

Entrusion de guard, is a writ, that lies where the Infant within age entered
into his lands, and houldeth his Lord out: for in this case, the Lord shall not
have the writ (De communi custodia) But this. Old not. br. fol. 90.

Envre, signifies to take place or effect, to be avaylable, Example: A Release
shall envure by way of extinguishment. Litleton. cap: Release: And a release
made to a tenent for term of life, shall inure to him in the Reuersion.

Erius, alius Iris, is the flower de. luce. whose diverse kinds you have
expressed in Gerards herball. lib. 1. ca. 34. The root of this is mentioned
among merchandise or drugs to be garbled. anno. 1. laco. ca. 19.

Ermins, seems to come of the french (Ermine. i. mus araneus) it signifies a
furre of great price.

Erminstreate. See Watlingstreate.

Errant (Itinerans) comes of the french (Errer). i. errare) or the old word
(Err. i. iter) It is attributed to Justices of circuit. pl. cor: f: 15. and
Baylifes at large. See Justices in Air. and Baylife. See also Air.

Error (Error) comes of the french (Erreur) and signifies more specially in
our common law, an error in pleading or in the process. Brook, titulo Error.
And thereuppon the writ, which is brought for remedy of this oversight, is
called a writ of error, in Latin, De errore corrigendo: thus defined by Fitz.
in his not. br. fol. 20. A writ of error is that properly, which lies to
redress false judgment given in any court of record, as in the common bench,
London, or other city, having power (by the kings charter or prescription) to
hold plee of debt. See the new book of Entries. verbo. Error. or trespass
above the sum of twenty shillings. This is borrowed from the French practice,
which they call (proposition d'erreur.) Whereof you may read in Gregorius De
appellation. page 36. In what diversity of cases this writ lies, see the
Register original in the Table, verb. Errore corrigendo, and Register
judicial. fol. 34. There is likewise a writ of error to reuerse a fine. West
part 2 sect. symbol. titulo. Fines 151.

Errore corrigendo. See Error.

Escambio, is a license granted to one, for the making over of a Bill of
Exchange to a man over Sea. Register. original. fol. 194. a.

Escape (Escapium) comes of the French (Eschapper.. i. aufugere effugere):
and signifies in the law, a violent or privy evasion out of some lawful
restraint. For example, if the Shyreeue upon a Capias directed unto him, take
one, and endeavor to carry him to the Gaol, and he in the way, either by
violence or by slight, break from him: this is called an Escape. pl. cor. fol.
70. Many examples might be brought out of him and others, but the thing is
plain: Stawnford lib. 1. ca. 26. pl. cor. names two kinds of Escapes,
voluntary and negligent: Voluntary is, when one aresteth another for felony
or some other crime, and afterward lets him go whither he lists. In
which escape the party that permits it, is by law guilty of the fault
committed by him that escapes, be it felony, treason, or trespass: Negligent
escape is, when one is arrested, and afterward escapes against his will that
arrested him, and is not pursued by fresh suite, and taken again, before the
party pursuing has lost the fight of him: Idem, cap. 27. but there read more
of this matter, for there be doubts worth the consideration. And of the course
of punishment by the civil law in this point, read in practica criminali
Claudii de Battandier. reg. 143. read also Cromptons Justice. fol. 35. b. and
fol. 36. and 37. and read the new Terms of law. There is an escape of beasts
likewise: and therefore he that by charter, is quietus de escapio in the
forest, is delivered of that punishment, which by order of the forest, lies
upon those whose beasts be found within the land forbidden: Cromptons
Iurisdict. fo. 196.

Eschequer (Scaccarium) comes of the French (Eschequier. i. abacus, tabula
lusoria) and signifies the place or court of all receipts belonging to the
crown, and is so termed, as I take it, by reason that in ancient times, the
accomptants in that office used such tables as Arithmeticians use for their
calculations, for that is one fignification of (Abacus) amonst others. Polidor.
Virgil. lib. 9. histo. Anglo. says that the true word in latin is Statarium,
and by abuse called Scaccarium. In mine opinion, it may well seem to be taken
from the German word (schatz) signifiing as much as (the saurus) or (fiscus)
And from this fountain (no doubt) springs the Italian word (Zeccha)
signifiing a mynt: and Zeccherii alias Zecchieri) the officers thereunto
belonging, Descis. Geruen 134. M. Came. in his Britan. p. 113. says that this
court or office took the name a tabula ad quam assidebant, proouing it out of
Geruasius Tilburiensis, whose words you may read in him. This court is taken
from the Normans, as appears by the grand Custumarie. cap. 56. where you may
find the Eschequier thus described. The Eschiquier is called an assembly of
high Iusticiers, to whom it appertains to amend that which the Baliffes and
other meaner Iusticiers have evil done, and unadvisedly judged: and to do
right to all men without delaie, as from the princes mouth: Skene de verbo.
significatione: verbo (Scaccarium) has, out of Paulus Aemilius these words:
Scaccarium dicitur quasi Statarium, quod homines ibi in iure sistantur, vel
quod sit stataria and perennis Curia, cum ceterae curiae essent indictivae, nec
loco nec tempore statae: where he says also of himself, that in Scotland the
Eschequer was stable, but the other session was deambulatorie, before James the
5. qui instituit Statariam curiam, cum antea esset indictiva: he adds farther:
Others think that Scaccarium is so called a similitudine ludi Scaccorum, that
is the play of the chests: because many persons meet in the Chequer, pleading
their causes one against the other, as if they were fighting in an arraied
battle: Others think that it comes from an old Saxon word (Scata) as
writes S. Thomas Smith, which signifies treasure, taxation, or imposts,
whereof account is made in the Chequer: This court consists, as it were, of
2. parts: whereof one is conversant especially in the judicial hearing and
deciding of all causes appertaining to the princes cofers, aunciently called
Scaccarium computorum, as Ockam testifies in his lucubration: the other is
called the receipt of the Eschequer, which is properly employed in the
receiving and payment of money. Crompton in his Jurisdictions, fo. 105.
defines it to be a court of record, wherein al causes touching the revenues
of the crown are handled. The officers belonging to both these, you may find
named in M. Camdens Britannia, ca. Tribunalia Angliae, to whom I refer you.
The kings exchequer which now is settled in Westminster, was in diverse countries
of Wales, anno 27. H. 8. ca. 5. but especially ca. 26.

Escheate (Eschaeta) comes of the French (escheoir, i. cadere, accidere,
excidere, and signifies in our common law, any lands or other profits, that
fall to a Lord within his manner by way of forfeiture, or the death of his
tene^t, dying without heir general or especial, or leaving his heir within
age or unmarried, Magna chart. ca. 31. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 143. T. etc.
Escheate is also used some time for the place or circuit within the which the
king or other Lord has escheates of his tenants. Bracton li. 3. tract. 2. cap.
2. and pupilla oculi part 5. ca. 22. Escheate thirdly, is used for a writ,
which lies, where the tenent having estate of see simple in any lands or
tenements holden of a superior lord, dies seized without heir general or
especial. For in this case the Lord brings this writ against him that
possesses these lands after the death of his tenent, and shall thereby recover
the same in liew of his services. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 144. These that we call
Escheats, are in the kingdom of Naples called Excadentiae or bona
excadentialia: as: Baro locat excadentias eo modo quo locatae fueru^t ab
antiquo: it a quod in nullo debit a servitia minuantur, and non remittit
gallinam debitam: Iacobutius de Franchis in praeludiis ad feudorum vsum, tit.
1. nu. 29. and nu. 23. v. Maranta singularia, verbo Excadentia. And in the same
signification, as we say the fee is escheated, the Feudists use (feudum
aperitur. li. 1. feud. titulo. 18.. 2. ti. 15. and ti. 26.. 4.

Escheatour (Escaetor) comes of (Escheate) and signifies an officer that
observes the Escheates of the king in the county, whereof he is Escheatour,
and certifieth them into the Eschequer: This officer is appointed by the L.
treasurer, and by leters patents from him, and continues in his office but one
year, neither can any be Escheatour above once in 3. years. anno. 1. H. 8.
cap. 8. and anno 3. eiusd. ca. 2. See more of this officer and his authority
in Cromptons Justice of peace. See an. 29. Ed. 1. The form of the Escheatours
oath, see in the Register original. fol. 201. b. Fitzh. calls him an officer
of record. not. br. fol. 100. C. because that which he certifieth by virtue of
his office, has the credit of a record. Officium escaetriae, is the
escheatourship. Register. orig. fo. 259. b.

Escuage (Scutagiu^) comes of the French (Escu. i. clypeus) a bucler or
sneild. In our common law, it signifies a kind of knights service, called
service of the shield, whereby the tenent holding is bound to follow his Lord
into the Scottish or Welsh wars, at his own charge: for the which see
Chyvalrie. But note that Escuage is either uncertain or certain. Escuage
uncertain, is properly Escuage, and knights service, being subject to homage
fealty, ward and marriage, so called, because it is uncertain how often a man
shall be called to follow his lord into those wars, and again what his charge
will be in each journey. Escuage certain, is that which yearly pays a
certain rent in lieu of all services, being no further bound then to pay his
rent, called a knights fee, or half a knights fee, or the fourth part of a
knights fee, according to his land and this leeseth the nature of knights
service, though it hold the name of Escuage, being in in effect, Soccage.
Fitzh. not. br. fol. 84. C.

Esnecy (Aesnecia) is a prerogative given to the eldest coparcener, to choose
first after the inheritance is divided. Fleta. li. 5. ca. 10.. in diuisionem.

Esplees (Expletia) seem to be the full profits that the ground or land
yeldeth, as the hay of the meadows, the feed of the pasture, the corn of the
earable, the rents, services, and such like issues: Ingham. It seems to
proceed from the latin (expleo) The profits comprised under this word, the
Romans call properly accessiones. Nam accessionum nomine intelligu^tur ea
generaliter omnia, quae ex re, de qua agitur, orta sunt, veluti fructus,
partus, and omnis causa rei, and quaecunque ex re procedunt. l. 2. P. De in
diem adiectio. li. 50. P. Ad Trebel. l. 61.. hiis etiam. P. de furt. See the
new Terms of law.

Esquier (Armiger) is in leters little altered from the french (Escuier. i.
scutiger) It signifies with us a gentleman, or one that bears arms, as a
testimony of his nobility or gentry. S. Thomas Smith is of opinion, that at
the first, these were bearers of arms to Lords and Knights, and by that had
their name and dignity. Indeed the french word is sometime translated (Agaso)
that is, a boy to attend or keep a horse, and in old English writers, it is
used for a lackey or one that carries the shield or spear of a knight. Mast.
Camden in his Britannia page: 111. has these words of them: having spoken of
Knights: Hiis proximi fuere Armigers, qui and scutiseri, hominesque ad arma
dicti, qui vel a clypeis gentilitiis, qua in nobilitatis insignia gestant: vel
quia principibus and matoribus illis nobilibus ab armis erant, nomen traxerunt.
Olim enim ex hiis duo vnicuique militi seruiebant, galeam clypeumque gestabant.
etc. Hotoman in the sixth chapter of his disputatio^s upon the feods says,
that these which the French men call Escuiers) were a military kind of
vassal haueing ius scuti, which is as much to say (he there interprets him
self) as that they bare a shield, and in it the ensigns of their family, in
token of their gentility or dignity.

Essendi quietum de telonio, is a writ that lies for Citizens or burgesses of
any city or town, that have a charter or prescription to exempt them from
toll, through the whole realm, if it chance they be any where exacted the
same. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 226. Register fol. 258.

Essoine (Essonium) comes of the French (Essonie or exonnie. i. causarius
miles) he that has his presence forborne or excused upon any just cause, as
sickness or other encumbrance. It signifies in our common law, an
alledgement of an excuse for him that is summoned, or sought for to appear and
answer to an action real, or to perform suite to a court baron, upon just
cause of absence. It is as much as (excusatio) with the Ciuilians. The causes
that serve to Essoine any man summoned, be diverse and infinite: yet drawn to
five heads, whereof the first is (vltra mare) the second (de terra sancta) the
third (de malo vemendi) which is also called the common Essoine the fourth is
(de malo lecti) the fifth (de seruitio Regis) For further knowledge of these, I
refer you to Glanvile in his whole first book, and Bracton li. 5. tractat.
2. per totum. and Brittan ca. 122. 123. 124. 125. and to Horns mirror of
Justices, li. 1. ca. des Essoinis, who makes mention of some more Essoines
touching the service of the king celestial, then the rest do, and of some
other points not unworthy to be known. Of these essoines you may read farther
in Fleta l. 6. c. 8. and seqq. and that these came to us from the Normans, is
well showed by the Grand Custumarie, where you may find in a manner all said,
that our lawyers have of this matter, cap. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. 45.

Essoines and profers, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 21. See Profer.

Essonio de malo lecti, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, for the sending of
4. lawful knights to view one that has essoined himself de malo lecti.
Register. orig. fol. 8. b.

Establishment of dower, seems to be the assurance of dower, made to the wife
by the husband or his friends, before or at marriage. And assignement is the
setting it out by the heir afterward, according to the Establishment. Britton.
cap. 102. and 103.

Estandard or Standard, comes of the French (Estandart) or Estendart. i.
signum, vexillum. It signifies an Ensign in war, as well with us as with
them. But it is also used for the principal or standing measure of the King,
to the scantling whereof, all the measures through the land, are or ought to be
framed by the Clerk of the market, Aulneger, or other officer according to
their functions, For it was established by the statute of Magna charta. anno 6.
H. 3. ca. 9. that there should be but one scantlin of weights or measures
thorough the whole realm, which is sit hence confirmed by Anno 14. Ed. 3. ca.
12. and many other statutes, as also that all should be fitted to the Standard
sealed with the kings seal. It is not called a Standard without great reason:
because it stands constant and immovable, and has all other measures
coming toward it for their conformity, even as soldiers in field have their
Standard or colors for their direction in their march or skirmish. Of these
Standards and measures, read Britton. cap. 30.

Estate, comes of the French (Estat. i. conditio) and signifies especially
in our common law, that title or interest, which a man has in lands or
tenements, as estate simple, otherwise called fee simple, and estate
conditional or upon condition, which is (as Litleton says, li. 3. ca. 5.)
either upon condition indeed, or upon condition in law. Estate upon condition
in deed is, where a man by deed indented infeoffeth another in fee, reserving
to him and to his heirs yearly a certain rent paiable at one feast or at
diverse, upon condition that if the rent be behind, etc. that it shall be
lawful to the feoffour and to his heirs, to enter in the lands or tenements,
etc. Estate upon condition in law, is such as has a consideration in the law
annexed to it, though it be not specified in writing. For example, if a man
grant to another by his deed, the office of a Parkership for term of his
life, this estate is upon condition in the law, or employed by law. viz. if
the Parker so long shall well and truly keep the park, etc. I read also of an
estate particular, which is an estate for life or for years. Parkins
Surrenders. 581.

Estopel, seems to come from the French (estouper. i. oppilare, obturare,
stipare, obstipare) and signifies in our common law, an impediment or bar
of an action growing from his own fact, that has or otherwise might have had
his action: for example: A tenent makes a feofment by collusion to one: the
Lord accepts the services of the feoffee: by this he debarreth himself of
the wardship of his tenants heir. Fitz. not. br. fo. 142. K. Diverse other
examples might be showed out of him and Brook h. titule Sir Edward Cook. lib.
2. casu Goddard fol. 4. b. defines an estopel to be a bar or hindrance unto
one to plead the truth, and restrains it not to the impediment given to a
man by his own act only, but by another also. li. 3. The case of Fines. fol.
88. a.

Estovers (Estoverium) comes of the French (estouver. 1. fovere) and
signifies in our common law, nourishment or maintenance: for example:
Bracton. lib. 3. tractat. 2. cap. 18. number. 2. uses it for that sustenance,
which a man taken for felony, is to have out of his lands or goods for
himself and his family, during his imprisonment: and the statute anno 6. Ed.
prim. cap. 3. uses it for an allowance in meat or cloth. It is also used for
certain allowances of wood, to be taken out of another man's woods. So is it
used West. 2. cap. 25. anno 13. Edw. 1. M. West part 2. symbol. titulo Fines.
sect. 26. says, that the name of Estovers contains housebote, hay-bote, and
plow-bote: as if he have in his grant these general words: De rationabili
estoverio in boscis, etc. he may thereby clay me these three.

Estrepement, or Estripament, (estrepementum) comes of the French word
(estropier. i. mutilare, obtruncare) the which word the French men have also
borrowed of the Italians, or rather Spaniards, with whom (Estropear) signifies
to set upon the rack. It signifies in our common law, spoil made by the
tenent for term of life, upon any lands or woods, to the prejudice of him in
the reversion, as namely in the statute anno 6. Ed. 1. ca. 13. And it may seem
by the deriuation, that Estrepament is properly the vnm easurable soaking or
drawing of the heart of the land by ploughing or sowing it continually, without
manuring, or other such usage as is requisite in good husbandry. And yet
(Estropier signifying mutilare) it may no less conveniently be applied to
those, that cut down trees or loppe them farther then the law will bear. This
signifies also a writ, which lies in two sorts, the one is, when a man
having an action depending (as a fordom, or dum fuit infra aetatem, or writ of
right, or any such other) wherein the demandant is not to recover damages,
sieweth to inhibite the tenent for making waste, during the suite. The other
sort is for the demaundant, that is adjudged to recover seisin of the land in
question, and before execution siewed by the writ Habere facias seisinam, for
fear of waste to be made before he can get possession, sieweth out this writ:
See more of this, in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 60. and 61. See the Register orig.
fol. 76. and the Regist. judicial. fol. 33.

Estreate (extractum vel extracta) comes of the French (Traict) which among
other things signifies a figure or resemblance: and is used in our common
law, for the copy or true note of an original writing. For example, of
amerciaments or penalties set down in the rolls of a court, to be leauied by
the Bay liffe or other officer, of every man for his offense. See Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 75. H. I. K. and 76. A. And so is it used Westminster. 2. cap. 8. anno 13.
Edw. 1.

Estrey (extrahura) in our common law signifies any beast not wild, found
within any Lordship, and not owned by any man. For in this case, if it being
cried, according to law, in the market towns adjoining, shall not be claimed
by the owner within a year and a day, it is the Lords of the soil. See
Britton cap. 17. See Estrayes in the Forest, anno 27. H. 8. cap. 7. New book
of Entries. verbo. Trespass concernant estrey.

Evidence, (Evidentia) is used in our law generally for any proof, be it
testimony of men or instrument. Sir Thomas Smith uses it in both sorts. lib.
2. cap. 17. in these words: Evidence, in this signification, is authentical
writings of contracts after the manner of England, that is to say, written,
sealed, and delivered. And lib. 2. cap. 23. speaking of the prisoner that
stands at the bar, to plead for his life, and of those that charge him
with felony, he says thus: then he tells what he can say: after him
likewise all those, who were at the apprehension of the prisoner, or who can
give any Indices or tokens, which we call in our language (Evidence) against
the malefactor.

Examiner in the Chauncerie or Star Chamber, (examinator) is an Officer in
either Court, that examineth the parties to any suite upon their oaths, or
witnesses producted of either side: whereof there be in the Chauncerie two.

Exception (exceptio) is a stop or stay to an action, being used in the
civil and common law both alike, and in both divided into dilatorie and
peremptory. Of these see Bract. lib. 5. tract. 5. per totum, and Britton cap.
91. 92.

Exchange, (excambium, vel cambium) has a peculiar signification in our
common law, and is used for that compensation, which the warrantor must make
to the warrantee, valewe for value, if the land warranted be recovered from the
warrantee. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 16. and li. 1. cap. 19. It signifies also
generally as much as (Permutatio) with the Civilians, as the Kings Exchange,
anno 1. H. 6. cap. 1. and 4. and anno 9. Ed. 3. stat. 2. cap. 7. which is
nothing else, but the place appointed by the king for the exchange of bullion,
be it gold or silver, or plate, etc. with the Kings coin. These places have
been diverse heretofore as appears by the said statutes. But now is there
only one, viz. the tower of London conjoined with the mint. Which in time past
might not be, as appears by anno 1. Henrici 6. ca. 4.

Exchequer, see Eschequer.

Excheatour, see Escheatour.

Excommunication, (excommunicatio) is thus defined by Panormitan:
Excommunicatio est nihil aliud, quam censura a Canone, vel Iudice ecclesiastico
prolata and insticta, privans legitima communione sacramentorum, and quandoque
hominum. And it is divided in maiorem and minorem, Minor est, per quam quis a
Sacramentorum participatione conscientia vel sententia arcetur. Mayor est, quae
non solum a Sacramentorum, verum etiam fidelium communione excludit, and ab
omniactu legitimo separat and di vidit. Venatorius de sentent. excom.

Excommunicato capiendo, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, for the
apprehension of him that stands obstinately excommunicated for forty days:
for such a one not seeking absolution, has or may have his contempt certified
or signified into the Chauncerie, whence issues this writ, for the laying of
him up without bail or mainprise, until he conform himself. See Fitz. not.
br. fol. 62. and anno 5. Eliz cap. 23. and the Regist. orig. fol. 65. 67. and
70.

Exco^municato deliberando, is a writ to the under shyreeue, for the delivery
of an excommunicate person out of prison, upon certificate from the Ordinary of
his conformity to the jurisdiction ecclesiastical. See Fitzh. not. br: fol.
63. A. and the Register fol. 65. and 67.

Excommunicato recipiendo, is a writ whereby persons excommunicate, being for
their obstinacy committed to prison, and unlawfully delivered thence, before
they have given caution to obey the authority of the church, are commanded to
be sought for and laid up again. Register orig. fo. 67. a.

Executione facienda, is a writ commanding execution of a judgment: the
diverse uses whereof, see in the table of the register judicial. verbo
Executione facienda.

Executione facienda in Withernamium, is a writ that lies for the taking of
his catell, that formerly has conveyed out of the county the catell of
another, so that the bayliffe having authority from the shyreeue, to repleuy
the cattle so conueighed away, could not execute his charge. Register
original, fol. 82. b.

Execution (Executio) in the common law, signifies the last performance of an
act, as of a fine, or of a judgment. And the execution of a fine, is the
obtaining of actual possession of the things contained in the same, by virtue
thereof: which is either by entry into the lands, or by writ: whereof see West
at large, part. 2. Symbol. titulo Fines. sect: 136. 137. 138. Executing of
judgments, and statutes, and such like, see in Fitzh. not. br. in Indice. 2.
Verbo Execution. S. Ed. Coke. vol: 6. casu Blumfield. fo. 87. a. makes two
sorts of executions, one final, another with a (quousque) tending to an end.
An execution final is that, which makes money of the defendants goods, or
extends his lands, and delivers them to the plaintiff. For this the party
accepts in satisfaction: and this is the end of the suite, and all that the
kings writ commands to be done. The other sort with a (Quousque) is tending
to an end, and not final, as in the case of (capias ad satisfaciendum etc.)
this is not final: but the body of the party is to be taken, to the intent and
purpose to satisfy the demaundant: and his imprisonment is not absolute, but
until the defendant do satisfy. Idem. ibidem.

Executour (Executor) is he, that is appointed by any man, in his last will and
testament, to have the disposing of all his substance, according to the content
of the said will. This Executor is either particular or universal. Particular,
as if this or that thing only be committed to his charge. Universal, if all.
And this is in the place of him, whom the Ciuilians call haeredem, and the law
accounts one person with the party, whose executor he is, as having all
advantage of action against all men, that he had, so likewise being subject to
every man's action, as far as himself was. This executor had his beginning in
the civil law, by the constitutions of the Emperors, who first permitted
those, that thought good by their wills to bestow any thing upon good and godly
uses, to appoint whom they pleased, to see the same performed, and if they
appointed none, then they ordained, that the bishop of the place should have
authority of course, to effect it. l. 28. C. de Episcopis and clericis. And
from this in mine opinion, time and experience has wrought out the use of
these universal executors, as also brought the administration of their goods
that die without will, unto the Bishop.

Exemplificatione, is a writ granted for the exemplification of an original,
see the Register original. fol. 290.

Ex gravi querela, is a writ that lies for him, unto whom any lands or
tenements in fee within a city, town or borough, being devisable, are devised
by will, and the heir of the deuisour enters into them, and detaineth them
from him. Register original. fol. 244. Old not. br. fol. 87. See Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 198. L.

Exigendarie of the common bank (Exigendarius de banco comuni) is otherwise
called Exigenter. anno 10. H. 6. cap. 4. and is an officer belonging to that
court, for the which see Exigenter.

Exigent (Exigenda) is a writ, that lies where the defendant in an action
personal, cannot be found, nor any thing within the county, whereby to be
attached or distrained, and is directed to the Shyreeue, to proclaim and call
five county days one after another, charging him to appear under the pain of
outlawrie. Terms of the law. This writ lies also in an indictment of felony,
where the party indicted cannot be found: Smith de Rep. Angl. li. 2. ca. 19. It
seems to be called an Exigent: because it exacteth the party, that is,
requires his expearance or forth-comming, to answer the law, for if he come
not at the last days proclamation, he is said to be quinquies exactus, and
then is outlawed. Crompton Iurisd. fol. 188. and this M. Manwood also sets
down for the law of the forest. part. i. of his forest laws page 71. See the
new book of Entries, verbo Exigent.

Exigenter (Exigendarius) anno 18. H. 6. ca. 9. is an officer of the court of
common plees, of whom there be four in number: They make all Exigents and
proclamations in all actions, where process of outlawrie does lie, and writs of
supersedeas, as well as the protonotaries, upon such exigents, as were made in
their offices.

Ex mero motu, are words formally used in any charter of the Prince, whereby he
signifies, that he does that which is contained in the charter of his own
will and motion, without petition or suggestion made by any other. And the
effect of these words are to bar al exceptions, that might be taken unto the
instrument wherein they be contained, by alleging that the Prince in passing
that charter, was abused by any false suggestion: Kitchen fol. 151.

Exoneratione sectae, is a writ that lies for the kings ward, to be
disburdened of all suite, etc. to the County, Hundred, Leet, or court Baron,
during the time of his wardship. Fitz. not. br. fol. 158.

Exparte latis, is a writ that lies for a Bayliffe or Receiver, that having
Auditors assigned to hear his account, cannot obtain of them reasonable
allowance, but is cast into prison by them. Regist. fol. 137. Fitzh. not. br.
fol. 129. The manner in this case is, to take this writ out of the Chauncerie
directed to the Shyreeue, to take four mainperuours to bring his body before
the Barons of the Echequer at a day certain, and to warn the Lord to appear
at that time: New Terms of the law. verb. Account.

Expectant, is used in the common law with this word (fee) and thus used, it
is opposite to Fee-simple. For example, lands are given to a man and his wife
in frank marriage, to have and to hold to them and their heirs. In this case
they have Fee simple. But if it be given to them and the heirs of their body,
etc. they have tail and see expectant. Kitchen fol. 153. Mathaeus de afflictis
uses the Adjective (expectativa) substantiuely in the same signification.
Descis. 292. number. 2. page 412.

Explees. See Espleese.

Expeditate (expeditare) is a word usual in the Forest, signifiing to cut out
the balls of the great dogs feet, for the preservation of the Kings game.
Every one that keeps any great dogs not expeditated, forfeiteth to the king
3. shillings 4. pence. Crompt. iurisd. fol. 152. M. Manwood uses the same
word, part prim. of his Forest laws, page 205. and page 212. he sets down
the manner of expeditating dogs heretofore, viz. Quod tres ortelli
abscindantur sine pellota de pede anteriori. i. that the three claws of the
sorefoot on the right side, shall be cut off by the skin, whereunto he also
adds out of the same ordinance, called the Assise of the Forest, that the
same manner of expeditating of dogs, shall be still used and kept, and none
other. Quaere whence it grows, that M. Crompton and he differ: the one
saying, that the ball of the foot it cut out, the other that the three
foreclawes are pared off by the skin.

Expensis militum levandis, is a writ directed to the shyrecue, for levying the
allowance for Knights of the Parliament. Register original. fol. 191. b.

Expensis militum non levandis ab hominibus de antiquo dominico, nec a natiuis,
is a writ whereby to prohibit the Shyreeue from levying any allowance for the
Knights of the Shire, upon those that hold in ancient demesne, etc. Regist.
orig. fol. 261. b.

Extend (extendere) comes of the French (estendre. i. dilatare, dispandere,
distendere) and signifies in our common law, to value the lands or tenements
of one bound by statute, etc. that has forfeited his bond, to such an
indifferent rate, as by the yearly rent the obligour may in time be paid his
debt. The course and circumstances of this see in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 131.
Brief d'execution sur statut Merchant.

Extendi facias, is a writ ordinarily called a writ of extent, whereby the
value of lands, etc. is commanded to be made and leavied in diverse cases,
which see in the table of the Register original.

Extent (extenta) has two significations, sometime signifiing a writ or
commission to the shyreeue for the valuing of lands or tenements. Register
judicial in the Table of the book: sometime the act of the Shyreeue or other
Commissioner, upon this writ. Brook titulo. Extent. fol. 313.

Extinguishment, in our common law, signifies an effect of consolidation. For
example, if a man have due unto him a yearly rent out of any lands, and
afterward purchase the same lands, now both the property and rent are
consolidated, or united in one possessour, and therefore the rent is said to be
extinguished. In like manner it is, where a man has a lease for years, and
afterward buyeth the property: this is a consolidation of the property and the
fruits, and is an extinguishment of the lease, See the terms of law.

Extirpatione, is a writ Judicial, that lies against him, who after a verdict
found against him for land, etc. does maliciously overthrow any house upon it,
etc. and it is twofold, one ante iudicium, the other post iudicium: Register
judicial fol. 13. 56. 58.

Extortion (Extortio) signifies in our common law, an unlawful or violent
wringing of money or money worth from any man. For example, if any officer by
terrifiing any the kings subjects in his office, take more then his ordinary
duties, he commits, and is inditeable of extortion: To this (by M. Wests
judgment) may be referred the exaction of unlawful usury, winning by
unlawful games, and (in one word) all taking of more then is due, by color or
pretense of right; as excessive toll in milners, excessive prices of ale,
bread, victuals, wares, etc. West part. 2. Simbol. titulo. Indictments sect:
65. M: Manwood says, that extortion is Color officis, and not virtute
officii. part. 1. of his forest laws, page 216. M. Crompton in his Justice of
peace fol. 8. has these words in effect: wrong done by any man is properly a
trespass: but excessive wrong done by any is called extortion: and this is most
properly in officers, as Shyreeues, Majors, Baylifes, Escheatours, and other
officers whatsoever, that by color of their office work great oppression, and
excessive wrong unto the Kings subjects, in taking excessive reward, or fees,
for the execution of their office. Great diversity of cases touching extortion,
you may see in Cromptons Justice of peace. fol. 48. b. and 49. and 50. See the
difference between color officij, and virtute vel ratione officij. Plowd.
casu. Dives. fol. 64. a. This word is used in the same signification in Italy
also. For Cavalcanus de brachio regio, part 5. number. 21. thus describes it.
Extortio dicitur fieri, quando Iudex cogit aliquod sibi dari quod non est
debitum, vel quodest vltra debitum: vel ante tempus petit id, quod post
administratam iustitiam debetur.

Extreats. See Estreats.

Air. See Eire.

F
FAculty, (facultas) as it is restrained from the original and active
signification, to a particular understanding in law, is used for a privilege,
or especial power granted unto a man by favor, indulgence, and dispensation,
to do that which by the common law he cannot do: as to eat flesh upon days
prohibited, to mary without bans first asked, to hold two or more
ecclesiastical livings, the son to succeed the father in a benefice; and
such like. And for the granting of these, there is an especial officer under
the Archbishop of Canterbury, called (Magister ad facultates) the Master of the
faculties.

Fag. anno 4. Ed. 4. cap. 1.

Faint and false action, seem to be Synonima in Litleton. fol. 144. For
(faint) in the French tongue signifies as much as (fained) in English.

Faint pleader (falsa placitatio) comes of the French (feint) a participle of
the verb (feindre. i. simulare, fingere) and (pledoir. i. placitare.) It
signifies with us, a false covenous, or collusory manner of pleading, to the
deceit of a third party. anno 34. and 35. H. 8. cap. 24.

Fair, alias, Feire, (feria) comes of the French (foire) and signifies with
us, as much as (Nundinae) with the Civilians: that is a solemn or greater sort
of market, granted to any town by privilege, for the more speedy and
commodious provision of such things, as the subject needs, or the utterance
of such things, as we abound in, above our own uses and occasions: both our
English and the French word seem to come of (Feriae) because it is always
incident to the privilege of a Fair, that a man may not be arested or
molested in it for any other debt, then first was contracted in the same, or at
least was promised to be paid there. an. 17. Ed. 4. cap. 2. and anno 1. R. 3.
cap. 6.

Fair pleading, see Beau pleader.

Faitours, seems to be a French word antiquated, or something traduced. For
the modern French word is (faiseur. i. factor) It is used in the statute anno
7. R. 2. cap. 5. And in the evil part, signifying a bad doer. Or it may not
improbably be interpreted an idle liver, taken from (faitardise) which
signifies a kind of numme or sleepy disease, proceeding of too much
sluggishnesse, which the Latins call (veternus.) For in the said statute it
seems to be a Synonymon to Vagabound.

Falke land, alias, Folk land. See Copi-hold and Freehold.

False imprisonment, (falsum imprisonamentum) is a trespass committed against
a man, by imprisoning him without lawefull cause: it is also used for the writ
which is brought upon this trespass. Fitz not. br. fol. 86. K. and 88. P. v.
Broke h. t. See the new book of Entries. verbo. False imprisonment.

Falso iudicio, is a writ, that lies for false judgment given in the county,
Hundred, Court Baron, or other courts being no court of record, be the plea
real or personal. Register original fol. 15: Fitzh. not. br. fol. 17. See
the new book of Entries. verbo False judgment.

False prophecies. See Prophecies.

Falso returno bre^^im. is a writ lying against the Syreeue, for false
returning of writs. Register iudic. fo. 43. b.

Falsify, seems to signify as much, as to prove a thing to be false.
Perkins Dower. 383. 384. 385.

Farding, or farthing of gold. seems to be a come used in ancient times,
containing in value the fourth part of a noble. viz. twenty pence silver, and
in weight the sixth part of an ounce of gould, that is, of five shillings in
silver, which is threepence and something more. This word is is found anno 9.
H. 5. stat. 2. ca. 7. thus: Item that the king do to be ordained good and just
weight, of the noble, half noble, and farthing of gould, with the rates
necessary to the same, for every city, etc. by which place it plainly
appears, to have been a coin, as well as the noble and half noble.

Farding deal alias Farundell of land (Quadrantata terrae) signifies the
fourth part of an acre. Crompt. Iurisd fol. 220. Quadrantata terrae. is read in
the register orig. fol. 1. b. where you have also Denariata and ^bolata,
solidata, and librata terrae, which by probability must rise in proportion of
quantity from the farding deal, as an halfepeny, penny, shilling, or pound
rise in value and estimation: then must ^bolata be half an acre, denariata the
acre, solidata twelve acres, and librata twelve score acres, and yet I find
(viginti libratas terrae vel reditus. Regist. original. fol. 94. a and fol.
248. b. Whereby it seems, that librata terrae, is so much as yields twenty
shillings per annum, and centum soliditas terrarum tenement orum and redituum.
fol. 249. a. And in Fitz. not. br. fol. 87. F. I find these words: viginti
libratas terrae vel reditus, which argues it to be so much land as twenty
shillings per annum. See Furlong.

Fate or Fat: is a great wooden vessel, which among brewers in London, is
ordinarily used at this day, to measure malt by, containing a quarter, which
they have for expedition in measuring. This word is read anno 1. H. 5. cap. 10.
and anno 11. H. 6. cap. 8.

Fealty (fidelitas) comes of the French (feaulte. i. fides) and signifies
in our common law, an oath taken at the admittance of every tenent, to be true
to the Lord, of whom he holds his land. And he that holds land by this
only oath of fealty, holds in the freest manner, that any man in England
under the king may hold: because all with us that have fee, hold (per fidem and
fiduciam) that is, by fealty at the least. Smith de Repub. Anglor. li. 3. cap.
8. for, fidelitas est de substantia feudi, as Dwarenus says de feud. cap. 2.
number. 4. and Mathaeus de afflictis decis. 320. number. 4. page 465. says, that
fidelitas est substantiale feudi, non servitium. The particulars of this oath,
as it is used among the feudists, you may read well expressed by Zasius in his
Tractate de feudis. part. 7. number. 15. and 16. which is worth the comparing
with the usual oath taken here in our part of Britannie. This fealty is also
used in other nations, as the Lombards and Burgundians. Cassanaus de consuet.
Burgund. page 419. and 420. And indeed the very first creation of this tenure,
as it grew from the love of the lord toward his followers, so did it bind the
tenent to fidelity, as appears by the whole course of the feods. And the
breach thereof is loss of the fee. Duarenus in Commentariis feudorum cap. 14.
number. 11. and Wesenbecius in tract. de feudis cap. 15. number. 4 and seqq. Antonius
Contius in methodo feudorum cap. Quibus modis feudum amittitur. Hotoman in his
Commentaries (De verbis feudalibus) shows a double fealty: one general, to
be performed by every subject to his prince: the other special, required only
of such, as in respect of their fee are tied by this oath toward their
landlords: both we may read of in the grand Customary of Normandy, being of
course performed to the Duke, by all resient within the Duchy. The effect of
the words turned into latin by the Interpreter, is this: Fidelitatem autem
tenentur omnes residentes in Provincia Duci facere and servare: Vnde tenentur
se ei innocuos in omnibus and fideles exhibere, nec aliquid ipsum incommodi
procurare: nec eius inimicis praebere contra ipsum consilium vel iuvamen: and
qui ex hoc inventi fuerint ex causa manifesta, notabiles and traditores
Principis reputantur. Et omnes eorum possessiones perpetuae Principi
remanebunt, si super hoc convicti fuerint vel damnati: Omnes enim in Normania
tenentur Principi fidelitatem observare. Vnde nullus homag ium vel fidelitatem
alicuius potest recipere, nisi salva Principis fideliiate. Quod etiam est in
eorum receptione specialiter exprimendum. Inter Dominos autem alios and homines
fides taliter debet obseruari, quod neuter in personam alterius personalem
violentiam, seu percussionis iniectionem cum viole^tia, debet irrogari. Si quis
e^^m eoru^ ex hoc fuerit accusatus in curia and conuictus, feudum omne debet
amittere etc. This fealty special, is with us performed either by free men or
by villeines. The form of both see anno 14. Ed. 1. stat. 2. in these words:
when a freeman shall do fealty to his lord, he shall hold his right hand upon
a book, and shall say thus: Hear you my lord R. that I. P. shall be to you both
faithful and true, and shall owe my fealty to you for the land that I hold of
you at the terms assigned: So help me god and all his saints. When a villain
shall do fealty unto his lord, he shall hold his right hand over the book,
and shall say thus: Hear you my lord. A. that I. B. from this day forth unto
you shall be true and faithful, and shall owe you fealty for the land that I
hold of you in villenage, and shall be justified by you in body and goods: So
help me god and all his Saints. See the Register original. fol. 302. a.

Fee (Feodum, alias Feudum) comes of the French) Fief. i. praedium
beneficiarium, vel res clientelaris) and is used in our common law, for all
those lands which we hold by perpetual right: as Hotoman well notes verbo
Feodumide verbis f^udalibus: our ancient lawyers either not observing whence
the word grew, or at the least not sufficiently expressing their knowledge,
what it signified among them, from whom they took it, Feudum whence the word
(Fief) or fee comes, signifies in the German language (beneficium cuius
nomine opera quaedam gratiae testifieandae causa debentur, Hotoman disput. ca.
1. And by this name go all lands and tenements, that are held by any
acknowledgement of any superiority to a higher Lord. They that write of this
subject, do divide all lands and tenements, wherein a man has a perpetual
estate to him and his heirs, etc, into Allodium and Feudum. Allodium is
defined to be every man's own land, etc. which he possesses merely in his
own right, without acknowledgement of any service, or payment of any rent unto
any other, and this is a property in the highest degree, and of some it is
called (allaudium ab a privatiua particula, and laudum vel laudatio, vt sit
praedium cuius nullus author est nisi deus. Est enim laudare, vel Nouio test,
nominare. Quod and Budaeus docuit ad Modestinum. l. Herennius 63. P. de haere.
institu. Prataeus. verbo. Allaudium. Hotoman in verb. feuda. Feudum is that,
which we hold by the benefit of another, and in the name whereof we owe
service, or pay rent, or both, to a superior lord. And all our land here in
England (the Crown land which is in the kings own hands in the right of his
crown, excepted) is in the nature of Feudum or fee, for though many a man has
land by descent from his Ancestors, and many another has dearly boughtland
for his money, yet is the land of such nature, that it cannot come to any,
either by descent or purchase, but with the burden that was laid upon him, who
had novel fee, or first of all received it as a benefit from his Lord, to him
and to all such, to whom it might descend, or any way be conveyed from him. So
that if we will reckon with our host (as the proverb is) there is no man here,
that has directum dominium. i. the very property or demaine in in any land,
but the prince in the right of his crown. Camd. Britan. page 93. for though he
that has fee, has ius perpetuum, and vtile dominium: yet he owes a duty for
it: and therefore is it not simply his own. Which thing I take those words,
that we use for the expressing of our deepest right in any lands or tenements,
to import: for he that can say most for his estate, says thus: I am seized of
this or that land or tenement in my demaine, as of fee. Seisitus inde in
dominico meo vt de feudo, and that is as much, as if he said, it is my demaine
or proper land after a sort: because it is to me and mine heirs forever: yet
not simply mine, because I hold it in the nature of a benefit from another.
yet the statute anno 37. H. 8. ca. 16. uses these words of lands invested in
the crown: but it proceeds from the ignorance of the nature of this word
(fee) for fee cannot be without fealty sworn to a superior, as you may read
partly in the word (Fealty) but more at large in those that write de feudis:
and namely Hotoman, both in his commentaries and disputations. And no man may
grant, that our king or Crown owes fealty to any superior but God only. Yet
it may be said, that land, etc. with us is termed fee in two respects; one, as
it belongs to us and our heirs for ever: and so may the Crown land be
called Fee: the other, as it holds of another, which is and must be far
from our Crown. Britton ca. 32. defines fee to this effect. Fee is a right
consisting in the person of the true heir, or of some other, that by just
title has, purchased it. Fleta says that Feudum est quod quis tenet ex
quacunque causa sibi and haeredibus suis, sieve sit tenementum, sieve reditus,
qui non proveniunt ex camera, and alio modo dicitur feudum, sicut eius
quifeoffat, and quod quis tenet ab alio: sicut dicitur: talis tenet de tali tot
feuda per servitium militare. li. 5. ca. 5.. Feudum autem. And all that write
de feudis, do hold that (Feudatarius) has not an entire property in his fee:
Nay, it is held by right learned men, that these fees were at the first
invention or creation of them, either all or some of them temporary, and not
perpetual and hereditarie. Iacobutius de Franchis in praeludio fend. ca. 2.
nu. 133. The divisions of (fee) in diverse respects are many, and those though
little known to us in England, yet better worthy to known, then we commonly
think. But for our present purpose, it is sufficient to divide Fee into two
sorts: Fee absolute, otherwise called simple: and Fee conditional, otherwise
termed fee tail: Fee simple (Feudum simplex) is that, whereof we are seized in
these general words (to us and our heirs for ever.) Fee tail (Feudum
talliatum) is that, whereof we are seized to us and our heirs with limitation,
that is, the heirs of our body, etc. And fee tail is either general or
special. General is, where land is given to a man and the heirs of his body.
The reason whereof is given by Litleton ca. 2. li. 1. because a man seized of
land by such a gift, if he marie one or more wives, and have no issue by them,
and at the length marie another, by whom he has issue, this issue shall
inherit the land: Fee tail special is that, where a man and his wife be
seized of lands to them, and the heirs of their two bodies. The reason is
likewise given by Litleton in the same place, because in this case, the wife
dying without issue, and he marying another, by whom he has issue, this
issue, cannot inherit the land, being specially given to such heirs, etc. this
Fee tail has the original, from the statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 1. which was
made anno 13. Ed. 1. yet see Bracton. li. 2. ca. 5. nu. 3. hiis verbis. Item
quaedam absoluta and larga, and quaedam stricta and coarctata, sicut certis
haeredibus to whom add Plowden, casu Willion. fo. 235. a. b. and seqq. for
before that statute, all land given to a man and his heirs, either general or
special, was accounted in the nature of fee: and therefore held to be so
firmly in him to whom it was given: that, any limitation notwithstanding, he
might alienate and fell it at his pleasure: much like that which the Civilians
call (Nudum praeceptum) binding rather by way of counsel and advice, then
compulsion or restrainte: And this thing seeming unreasonable to the wisdom
of our realm, because so a man meaning well to this or that posterity of
himself or his friends, might be forthwith deceived of his intention, the said
statute was made for redress of this inconvenience, wereby it is ordained,
that if a man give lands in fee, limiting the heirs to whom it shall descend,
with a reversion to himself or his heirs for default, etc. that the form and
true meaning of his gift, shall be observed. Wherefore in what conscience our
lawyers have invented means, so easily to cut off this form of gift, it is to
be considered. He that has fee then, holds of another by some duty or
other, which is called service, and of this service and the diversity thereof,
See Chivalrie and Service. He that will learn from what fountain these feuds
or fees did first spring let him read Antonius Contius his first chapter de
methodo feudorum, where he shall receive great light for his guide into so
obscure a dungeon. See Liege. This word, (Fee) is sometime used with us, for
the compass or circuit of a Lordship or manner. Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 5. in these
words: In eadem villa and de eodem feodo. Thirdly it is used for a perpetual
right incorporeall: as to have the keeping of prisons in fee. old. not. br.
fol. 41. Foster in fee eod. fol: 6. Rent granted in fee. eod. fo. 8 Shyreeue in
fee. ann 28. Ed pri. stat. 3. ca. 8. Lastly fee signifies a reward or
ordinary duty, that a man has given him for the execution of his office, or
the performance of his industry in his art or science: as the lawyer or the
physician is said to have his fee, when he has the consideration of his pains
taken, the one with his client, the other with his patient.

Fee expectant, is by the feudists termed feudum expectativum, or expectatiua,
substantiuely used, Mathaeus de Afflictis decis. 292. nu. 2. page 417. See
expectant.

Fee fcrm (feudi firma) is a compound of Fee. whereof see (Fee) and (ferm. i.
coloma, villa, praedium rusticum, of (Ferme) comes Fermier du prince. i.
manceps, redemptor publicorum vectigalium, Publicanus,) Feeferm signifies in
our common law, land held of another in fee, that is in perpetuity to
himself and his heirs, for so much yearly rent, as it is reasonably worth,
more or less, so it be the fourth part of the worth, old tenurcs, See
exposition of the statute of Gloucester anno 6. Ed. pri. without homage, fealty
or other services, other then be especially comprised in the feofment, but by
Fitzh. it seems that the third part of the value may be appointed for the
rent, or the finding of a chaplain to sing divine service, etc. not. br. fol.
210. C. And the nature of it is this, that if the rent be behind and unpaid for
the space of two years, then the feoffour or his heirs have action to recover
the lands as their demesnes: Britton ca. 66. nu. 4. but observe out of West.
symbol. part 1. lib. 2. sect. 463. that the feofment may contain services and
suite of court, as well as rent: and the author of the new terms of law, says,
that Feeferm owes fealty, though not expressed in the feofment, for that
fealty belongs to all kind of tenures: This is near the nature of that,
which among the Civilians is called (ager vectigalis, qui in perpetuum licetur.
i. hac lege vt quam diu pro eo vectigal pendatur, tam diuneque ipsis qui
conduxerunt, neque iis qui in locum eorum successerunt, auferri eum liceat. l.
1. P. siager vectigalis, etc.

Feed (Feida alias Faida) signifies in the German tongue Guerram. i.
(capitales inimicitias vel bellum) Hotoman disputat: de feudis ca. 2. B.
Foemina dicitur faidam non facere. gloss: in. vlt. De lege Conradi lib. 2. de
feudis, by reason that women by the law, are not subject to warfare, to battle
or proclamation made for that cause. Skene de verbo: signif. verbo Assidatio.
M. Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words writes it (Feeth) and says
likewise, that it signifies capitales inimicitias, and also that (Feud) used
now in Scotland and the north parts of England, is the same, and that is, a
combination of kindred to revenge the death of any of their blood against the
killer and all his race.

Felony (Felonia) seems to come of the french (Felonnie. a^. impetuositas,
atrocitas, immisericordia) Felonia (says Hotomande verbis feudalibus) non
praescise contumaciam vasalli in dominum, huiusue in vasallum perfidiam
significat, verum quoduis capitale facinus. And again. Felonia Gothis and
Longobardis dicitur quod Germanis hodie Schelmarey, latinis Scelus. S. Ed.
Cook says thus. Ideo dicta est felonia qua fieri debet felleo animo. li. 4.
fo. 124. b. Hostiensis in sua summa titulo, De feudis, and others speak of this
to this effect. Felonia, alias Fallonia est culpa vel iniuria, propter quam
vasallus amittit feudum. Sedhec respicit dominum feudi. Est and alia fallonia
quae non respicit dominum, sc. quando vasallus interficit fratrem vel filium
suum, vel filium fratris, vel aliud crimen commisit quod parricidii
appellatione continetur. and plures aliae falloniae tam respicientes dominum,
quam alios propter quas feudum amittitur ibi not antur. We account any offense
felony that is in degree next unto petit treason, and compriseth diverse
particulars under it, as murder, theft, killing of a man's self, Sodometrie,
rape, wilful burning of houses, and diverse such like, which are to be gathered
especially out of statutes, whereby many offenses are daily made felony, that
before were not. Felony is discerned from lightter offenses by this, that the
punishment thereof is death. How be it this is not perpetual. For petit
larcenie (which is the stealing of any thing under the value of twelve pence)
is felony, as appears by Broke titulo Coron. number. 2. his reason is, because
the indictment against such a one must run with these words, (felonice cepit)
and yet is this not punished by death though it be loss of goods. Any other
exception I know not, but that a man may call that felony, which is under petit
treason, and punished by death. And of this there be two sorts: one lighter,
that for the first time may be relieved by clergy, another, that may not. And
these you must also learn to know by the statutes: for Clergy is allowed,
where it is not expressly taken away. Of these matters read Stawnfords first
book of his pl. cor. from the end of the second Chapter, to the 39. and the
statutes whereby many offenses be made felony, since he writ that learned
book. See also Lamberds Justice of peace, lib. 2. cap. 7. in a Table drawn
for the purpose. As also lib. 4. cap. 4. page 404. and Crompton in his justice
of peace. fol. 32. etc. Felony is also punished by loss of lands not
entayled, and goods or chatels, as well real as personal: and yet the statutes
make difference in some cases touching lands, as appears by the statute, anno
37 H. 8. cap. 6. Felony ordinarily works corruption of blood, though not,
where a statute ordains an offense to be felony, and yet withal says, that
it shall not work corruption of blood. As anno 39. Eliz. cap. 17. How many
ways felony is committed, see Cromptons Justice of peace. page 32. etc.

Feyre. See Fair.

Felo de se, is he that commits felony by murdering himself. See
Cromptons Justice of peace fol. 28. and Lamberds Eirenarcha. lib. 2. cap. 7.
page 243.

Fencemoneth, is a month, wherein it is unlawful to hunt in the Forest,
because in that month the female Dear do faune: and this month begins 15.
days before Midsomer, and ends 15. days after. So that to this month there
be 31. days. See Manwood part prim. of his Forest laws. page 86. but more at
large part secunda. cap. 13 per totum. It is also called the defense month,
that is, the forbidden month, and the word defense is used in like sort. West.
2. cap. 47. anno 13. Ed. 1. in these words: All waters where Salmons be taken,
shall be in defense for taking of Salmons from the Nativity, etc.

Fennycricke, or rather Fenegreeke, (Foenum Graecum) is a medicinal plant or
herb, so called, because it grows like hey, and comes out of Greece. Of
this you may read more in Gerrards herball. lib. 2. cap. 483. The seed thereof
is reckoned among drugs, that are to be garbled. an. 1. Jacob. cap. 19.

Feofment (feoffamentum) by the opinion of Sir Thomas Smith de Repub. Anglor.
lib. 3. cap. 8. and M. West part. prim. symbol. lib. 2. sect. 280. is descended
from the Gottish word (feudum) which you have interpreted in (fee) and
signifies (donationem feudi) But (as M. West also adds) it signifies in our
common law, any gift or grant of any honors, castles, manners, mesuages,
lands, or other corporal and immovable things of like nature, unto another in
see simple, that is to him and his heirs for ever, by the delivery of seisin
and possession of the thing given, whether the gift be made by word or writing.
And when it is in writing, it is called a deed of feofment, and in every
feofment the giver is called the Feaffour feoffator,) and he that receives by
virtue thereof, the Feoffee (feoffatus) and Litleton says, that the proper
difference between a feoffour and a donour is, that the feoffour gives in
fee-simple, the donour in fee-taile. lib. 1. cap. 6.

Feodarie, alias, Feudarie, alias, feudatarie, (feudatarius) is an officer
authorized and made by the master of the Court of wards and liueries, by leters
patents under the seal of that office. His function is to be present with the
Escheater at the finding of any office, and to give evidence for the king as
well concerning the value, as the tenure, and also to survey the land of the
ward, after the office found, and to rate it. He is also to assign the kings
widows their dowers and to receive all the rents of the wards lands, with in
his circuit, and to answer them to the Receiver of the court of wards and
liueries. This officer is mentioned anno 32. H. 8. cap. 46.

Ferdfare, significat quietantiam eundi in exercitum. Fleta libr. pri. cap. 47.

Ferdwit, significat quietantiam murdri in exercitu. Fleta libr. prim. cap. 47.

Ferm (firma) comes of the French (Ferme, i. colonia, villa, praedium,) and
signifies with us, house or land, or both, taken by Indenture of lease, or
lease parol. It may likewise not unaptly be coniectured, that both the French
and English word came from the Latin (firmus) for (locare ad firmum) I find
sometime to signify with others, as much as (to set or let to farm) with us.
The reason whereof may be in respect of the sure hold they have above tenants
at will. v. vocabul. vtriusque iuris. verbo Afflictus. The author of the new
Terms of law, deriueth this word from the Saxon (feormian) which signifies
to feed or yield victual. For in ancient time the reseruations were as well
in victuals as money, which I leave to the judgment of the Reader. How many
ways ferme is taken, see Plowden. casu Wrothesley. fol. 195. a. b.

Feudarie. See Feodarie.

Fieri facias, is a writ judicial, that lies at all times within the year
and day, for him that has recovered in an action of debt or damages, to the
Shyreeue, to command him to levy the debt or the damages of his goods,
against whom the recovery was had. This writ has beginning from Westminster. 2.
cap. 18 anno 13. Ed. 1. See old not. br. fol. 152. See great diversity thereof
in the Table of the Register judicial. verbo. Fieri facias.

Fifteenth (Decimaquinta) is a tribute, or imposition of money laid upon every
city, borough, and other town through the realm, not by the polle, or upon
this or that man, but in general, upon the whole city or town, so called,
because it amounts to one fifteenth part of that, which the city or town
has been valued at of old. This is now a days imposed by parliament: and
every town through the realm, great or less, knows what a fiftenth for
themselves does amount unto, because it is perpetual: whereas the subsidy,
which is raised of every particular man's lands or goods, must needs be
uncertain, because the estate of every several man is so ticklish and
uncertain. And in that regard am I driven to think that this fifteenth is a
rate aunciently laid upon every town, according to the land or circuit
belonging unto it. whereof M. Camden has many mentions in his Britannia. In
stead of the rest take a few page. 168. of Wels in Somerset shire he writes
thus. Quo tempore, vt testatur ceasualis Angliae liber, Episcopus ipsum oppidum
tenuit, quod pro quinquiginta hidis geldauit: And page 171. of Bathe. Geldabat
pro viginti hidis, quando Schira geldabat. thirdly, pa. 181. of old Sarisbury
thus pro quinquaginta hidis geldabat. and these rates were taken out of Domes
day in the Eschequer. so that this seemed in old time, to be a yearly tribute
in certainty, whereas now, though the rate be certain, yet it is not levied
but by Parliament. See Task, see Quinsie me.

Filazer (Filazarius) comes of the french (Filace. i. filum, filacium) it is
an officer in the common plees, whereof there be 14. in number: they make out
all original process, as well real as personal and mixed: and in actions
merely personal, where the defendants be returned or sommoned, there goes
out the distress infinite until appearance. If he be returned Nihil, then
process of Capias infinite, if the plaintiff will, or after the third Capias,
the plaintiff may go to the Exigenter of the Shire, where his original is
grounded, and have an Exigent and proclamation made: And also the Filazer
makes forth all writs of view in causes, where the view is prayed: he is
also allowed to enter the imparlance, or the general issue in common actions,
where appearance is made with him, and also judgment by confession in any of
them before issue be joined, and to make out writs of execution thereupon. But
although they entered the issue: yet the protonotarie must enter the judgment,
if it be after verdict. They also make writs of Supersedeas, in case where the
defendant appears in their offices, after the Capias awarded.

Filctale. See Sothale.

File (filacium) is a thread or wire, whereon writs, or other exhibits in
courts, are fastened for the more safe keeping of them.

Finders. anno 18. Ed. 3. stat. 1. cap. vnico. anno 14. R. 2. cap. 10. seem to
be all one with those, which in these days we call searchers.

Fine (finis) comes of the French (fin. i. finis) and has diverse
applications in our common law: sometime being used for a formal or
ceremonious conueyance of lands or tenements, or (as West says, titulo Fines.
sect. 25.) of any thing inheritable, being in esse tempore finis, to the end to
cut off all controversies. West part 2. symb. sect. 1. defines a fine in this
signification: covenants made before Justices, and entered of Record. And out of
Glanvile thus lib. 8. cap. 1. Finis est amicabilis compositio and finalis
concordia, ex consensu and licentia Domini Regis, vel eius Iusticiariorum. And
lib. 9. cap. 3. Talis concordia finalis dicitur, eo quod finem imponit negotio,
adeo vt neutra pars litigantium ab eo de caetero poterit recedere. And out of
Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 5. cap. 28. number. 7. thus: Finis ideo dicitur finalis
concordia, quia imponit finem litibus, and est exceptio peremptoria. The
author of the new terms of law, defines it to be a final agreement had
between persons concerning any land or rent, or other thing, whereof any suite
or writ is between them hanging in any court. See the new book of Entries,
verbo Fines. This fine is of so high a nature, that Bracton. lib. 3. cap. 7.
number. 3. has these words of it. Item immediate pertinet ad Regem querela finis
factae in curia Domini Regis, and non observatae. Et est ratio, quia nemo
potest finem interpretari nisi ipse Rex, in cuius curia fines fiunt. See also
anno 27. Ed. prim. stat. prim. cap. prim. The Civilians would call this solemn
contract transactionem iudicialem de re immobili, because it has all the
properties of a transaction, if it be considered in his original use. v.
Wesemb. parat. titulo de transact. For it appears by the writers of the
common law above named, that it is nothing but a composition or concord
acknowledged and recorded before a competent Judge, touching some hereditament
or thing immovable, that erst was in controversy between those, that be
parties to the same concord: and that for the better credit of the transaction,
being by imputation made in the presence of the king, because it is levied in
his Court: and therefore does it bind women covert being parties, and others
whom ordinarily the law disableth to transact, only for this reason, that all
presumption of deceit or evil meaning is excluded, where the king is privy to
the act. But discourse of wit and reason, has in time wrought other uses of
this concord, which in the beginning was but one: as namely, to secure the
title that any man has in his possession against all men: to cut off intayles,
and with more certainty to pass the interest or the title of any land or
tenement, though not controuerted, to whom we think good, either for years
or in fee. In so much that the passing of a fine, in most cases, now is it but
mera fictio iuris, alluding to the use for the which it was invented, and
supposing a doubt or controversy, where in truth none is: and so not only to
work a present prescription against the parties to the concord or fine, and
their heirs, but within five years against all others, not expressly excepted
(if it be levied upon good consideration, and without Couin) as women covert,
persons under 21. years, or prisoners, or such as be out of the realm at the
time when it was acknowledged. Touching this matter, see the statutes. anno 1.
Rich. 3. cap. 7 anno 4. H. 7. cap. 24. anno 32. H. 8. cap. 36. and anno 31.
Elizab. ca. 2. This fine has in it five essential parts: the original writ
taken out against the conizour: the kings license giving the parties liberty
to accord, for the which he has a fine called the Kings silver, being
accounted a part of the Crowns reuenew. Thirdly, the concord it self, which
thus begins: Et est concordia talis, etc. Fourthly, the note of the fine,
which is an abstract of the original concord, and begins in this manner: Sc.
Inter R. querentem. and S. and E. vxorem eius, deforciantes, etc. Fifthly, the
foot of the fine, which begins thus: Hac est finalis concordia facta in
Curia domini Regis, apud Westminster. a die Paschae in quindecim dies, anno etc. So
as the foot of the fine includes all, containing the day, year, and place,
and before what Justice the concord was made. Coke vo. 6. casu Teye. fol. 38.
and 39. This fine is either single or double: A single fine, is that by which
nothing is granted or rendered back again by the Cognizeese to the
Cognizours, or any of them. A double fine contains a grant and render back
again, either of some rent, common, or other thing, out of the land, or of the
land it self, to all or some of the Cognizours, for some estate, limiting
thereby many times Remainders to strangers, which be not named in the writ of
covenant. West vbi supra, sect. 21. Again, a fine is of the effect, divided
into a fine executed, and a fine executory. A fine executed is such a fine, as
of his own force gives a present possession (at the least in law) unto the
Cognizee, so that he needs no writ of (Habere facias seisinam) for the
execution of the same, but may enter; of which sort is a fine (sur cognizance
de droit come ceo que il ad de son done) that is upon acknowledgement, that the
thing mentioned in the concord be ius ipsius cognizati, vt illa quae idem habet
de dono Cognitoris. West. sect. 51. K. and the reason of this seems to be,
because this fine, passes by way of release of that thing, which the cognizee
has already (at the least by supposition) by virtue of a former gift of the
cognizour. Cokes reports li. 3. the case of fines fo. 89. b. which is, in very
deed, the surest fine of all. Fines executorie be such, as of their own force
do not execute the possession in the Cognizeese, as fines sur cognizance de
droit tantum. fines sur done, grant, release, confirmation, or render. For if
such fines be not levied, or such render made unto them, that be in possession
at the time of the fines levied, the cognizees must needs siew writs of (Habere
facias seisinam) according to their several cases, for the obtaining of their
possessions, except at the leuying of such executory fines, the parties, unto
whom the estate is by them limited, be in possession of the lands passed
thereby: for in this case such fines do inure by way of extinguishment of
right, not altering the estate or possession of the Cognizee, but perchance
bettring it. West. vbi supra, sect. 20.

Touching the form of these fines, it is to be considered upon what writ or
action the concord is to be made, and that is, most commonly, upon a writ of
covenant: and then first there must pass a pair of indentures between the
Cognizour and Cognizee, whereby the Cognizour couenanteth with the cognizee, to
pass a fine unto him, of such or such things by a day set down. And these
indentures, as they are first in this proceeding, so are they said to lead the
fine; upon this covenant, the writ of covenant is brought by the Cognizee
against the cognizour, who thereupon yields to pass the fine before the
Judge, and so the acknowledgement being recorded, the cognizout and his heirs
are presently concluded, and all strangers not excepted, after five years
once passed. If the writ whereupon the fine is grounded, be not a writ of
covenant, but of warrantia chartae, or a writ of right, or a writ of mesn, or
a writ of custom and services (for of all these fines may also be founded.
(West. vbi supra, sect: 23.) then this form is observed: the writ is served
upon the party that is to acknowledge the fine, and then he appearing does
accordingly: See Dier, fo. 179. nu. 46.

This word (fine) sometime signifies a sum of money, paid for an Income to
lands or tenements let by lease: sometime an amends, pecuniarie punishment, or
recompense upon an offense committed against the king and his laws, or a Lord
of a manner. In which case, a man is said facere finem de transgressione cum
Rege, etc. Regist. Iud. fol. 25. a. and of the diversity of these fines with
other matter worth the learning, see Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 141. b.
143. 144. and Lamberds Eirenarcha libro. 4. ca 16. pa. 555. But in all these
diversities of uses, it has but one signification; and that is a final
conclusion or end of differences between parties. And in this last sense,
wherein it is used for the ending and remission of an offense, Bracton has it
li. 2. ca. 15. nu. 8. speaking of a common fine that the County pays to the
king, for false judgments or other trespasses, which is to be assessed by the
Justices in Air before their departure, by the oath of knights and other good
men, upon such as ought to pay it: with whom agrees the statute anno. 3. Ed.
pri. ca. 18. There is also a common fine in leetes. See Kitchen. fo. 13. a. v.
common fine. See Fleta. l. 1. ca. 48.

Fines pro licentia concordandi, anno 21. H. 8. c. 1. See Fine.

Fine force, seems to come of the french adjective (fin) and the substantive
(force. i. vis) The adjective (fin) signifies sometime as much as crafty,
wily or subtle, sometime as much as, artificial, curious, singular, exact,
or perfect. as (Rien contrefaict fin. i. nihil simulatum aut adimitationem
alterius expressum, potest esse exactum, vel ita absolutum, quin reprehensionem
vel offensionem incurrat, as is set down in that work, truly regal, entitled
(...). pa. 115. so that this (fine force) with us, seems to signify an
absolute necessity or constreint, not avoidable. and in this sense it is used,
old. not. br. fol. 78. and in the statute anno. 35. H. 8. ca. 12. in Perkins
Dower. fo. 321. and Plowden. fo. 94. Coke. vol. 6. fol. 111. a.

Fine adnullando levato de tenemento quod fuit de antiquo dominico, is a writ
to Justices, for the disanulling of a fine levied of lands holding in ancient
demesne, to the prejudice of the Lord: Register original. fol. 15. b.

Fine capiendo pro terris, etc. is a writ lying for one, that upon conviction
by a Jury having his lands and goods taken into the kings hand, and his body
committed to prison, obteineth favor for a sum of money etc. to be remitted
his imprisonment, and his lands and goods to be redeliuerd unto him. Register.
orig. fo. 132. a.

Fine levando de tenementis tentis de Rege in capite, etc. is a writ directed
to the Justices of the common plees, whereby to license them to admit of a fine
for the sale of land holding in capite, Regist. original, fol. 167. a.

Fine non capiendo pro pulchre placitando, is a writ to inhibit officers of
courts, to take fines for fair pleading, Register original. fol. 179. See Beau
pleder.

Fine pro redisseisina capienda, etc. is a writ, that lies for the release of
one laid in prison for a redisseisin, upon a reasonable fine. Register.
original fol. 222.

Finarie. See Blomarie.

Finours of gold and silver, be those that purify and part those metals from
other courser, by fire and water. anno. 4. H. 7. ca. 2. They be also called
parters in the same place, sometime departers.

Fireboote, for the composition look Hayboote. It signifies allowance or
Estovers of woods, to maintain competent fire for the use of the tenent.

First fruits (primitiae) are the profits of every spiritual living for one
year, given in ancient time to the Pope throughout all Cristendome: but by
the statute anno 26. H. 8. cap. 3. translated to the Prince, for the ordring
whereof, there was a court erected, an. 32. H. 8. ca. 45. but this court was
dissolved. anno. pri. Mar. sess. 2. ca. 10. and sithence that time, though
those profits be reduced again to the crown, by the statute anno 1. Eliz. ca.
4. yet was the court never restored, but all matters therein wont to be handled,
were transferred to the Exchequer. See Annats.

Fishgarthe, anno 23. H. 8. ca. 18. Fitche, See furre.

Fitzherberd, was a famous lawyer in the days of King Henry the eight, and was
chief Justice of the common plees, he wrote two worthy books, one an
abridgement of the common laws, another entitled de Natura brevium.

Fled^it, comes of the Saxon word (Fled) that is a fugitive, and wit, which
some make but a termination, signifiing nothing of it self: how be it others
say, it signifies a reprehen sion, censure, or correction: It signifies in
our ancient law, a discharge or freedom from amercements, when one having
been an outlawed fugitive comes to the peace of our Lord the King, of his
own accord. Rastall, Exposition of words: or being licensed: New terms of
law. See Bloodwit, and Childwit: See Fletwit.

Fleet (Fleta) is a famous prison in London, so called (as it seems) of the
river, upon the side whereof it stands, Camden Britannia, page 317. Unto this
none are usually committed, but for contempt to the king and his laws, or upon
absolute commandment of the king, or some of his courts, or lastly upon debt,
when men are unable, or vowilling to satisfy their creditours.

Flemeswit or rather (Fleherswit) comes of the Saxon word (Flean) which is a
contract of (Flegen) that is, to fly away. It signifies with our lawyers, a
liberty or charter, whereby to challenge the catel or amercements of your man a
fugitive: Rastall Exposition of words. See Bloodwit. Fleta writes this word
two other ways, as (Flemenesfree vie or Flemesfreicthe, and interprets it,
habere catalla fugitivorum. li. 1. ca. 47.

Fleta, is a feigned name of a learned lawyer, that writing a book of the
common laws of England and other antiquities in the Fleet, termed it thereof
Fleta: He seems to have lived in Ed. the 2. time and Edw. the 3. idem, li. 1.
ca. 20.. qui ceperint. li. 2. ca. 66.. item quod nullus.

Fletwit, alias Fredwit. Skene de verborum significatione. verb. Melletum.
says, that (Flichtwit) is a liberty to courts, and to take up the amercements
pro melletis. he gives the reason because (Flicht) is called Fliting in french
(Melle) which sometime is conjoined with hand-strookes: And in some books
Placitum de melletis, is called the moote or plee of beating or striking.

Flight See Finer.

Florences, anno 1. R. 3. ca. 8. a kind of cloth so called.

Flotsen alias (Flotzam) is a word proper to the sease, signifiing any goods
that by shipwrecke be lost, and lie floting or swimming upon the top of the
water, which with Ietson and lagon and shares be given to the Lord Admiral, by
his leters patents. Ietson is a thing cast out of the ship being in danger
of wrecke, and beaten to the shore by the waters, or cast on the shore by the
mariners. Coke vol. 6. fo. 106. a. Lagon alias Lagam vel Ligan, is that which
lies in the bottom of the sea, Coke ibi. Shares are goods due to more by
proportion.

Foder (fodrum) signifies in our English tongue, a course kind of meat for
horses and other catell. But among the Feudists, it is used for a prerogative
that the prince has, to be provided of corn and other meat for his horses by
his subjects toward his wars, or other expeditions. Arnoldus Clapmarius. de
arcanis imperii. lib. 1. ca. 11. And read Hotoman de verbis feudalibus.
litera. F.

Folgheres, or rather Folgers, be folowers, if we interpret the word according
to the true signification: Bracton says it signifies, eos qui alii
deserviunt. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10.

Folkmoote, is a Saxon word, compounded of Folk. i. populus and Gemettan. i.
convenire. It signifies (as M. Lamberd says in his explication of Saxon
words, verbo (Conuentus) two kind of Courts, one now called the county court,
the other called the Shyreeues turn: This word is still in use among the
Londoners, and signifies celebrem ex omni ciuitate conuentum: Stowe in his
Survey of London. but M. Manwood in his first part of forest laws. page 111.
has these words. Folkemote is the court holden in London, wherein all the
folk and people of the city did complain on the Mayor and the Aldermen, for
misgouernment within the city.

Forbarre, is for ever to deprive. an. 9. Ric. 2. ca. 2.

Force (Forcia) is a french word, signifiing (vim, nervositatem, fortitudinem,
virtutem) in our common law, it is most usually applied to the evil part, and
signifies unlawful violence. West thus defines it: Force is an offense, by
which violence is used to things or persons. part 2. symbol. titulo.
Inditements. sect. 65. where also he divides it thus: Force is either simple
or compound. Simple is that which is so committed, that it has no other crime
adjoined unto it; as if one by force do only enter into an other man's
possession, without doing any other unlawful act there. Mixed force, is that
violence, which is committed with such a fact, as of it self only, is
criminal; as if any by force enter into another man's possession, and kill a
man, or ravish a woman there, etc. he farther divides it into true force, and
force after a sort, and so proceeds to diverse other branches worth the
reading, as forcible entry, forcible deteining, unlawful assembly, Rowtes,
Riets, Rebellions, etc.

Forcible deteining or withholding of possession, is a violent act of
resistance by strong hand of men weaponed with harnes, or other action of
fear, in the same place or else where, by which the lawful entry of Justices
or others is barred or hindered. West part 2. symbol. titulo Inditements, sect.
65. M. of this see Cromptons Justice of peace, f. 58. b etc. vsque ad 63.

Forcible entry (Ingressus manu fortifactus) is a violent actual entry into
an house or land, etc. or taking a distress of any person, weaponed, whither
he offer violence or fear of hurt to any there, or furiously drive any out of
the possession thereof: West part 2 symbol. titulo Inditements, sect. 65. L.
of this see Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 58. b. 59. etc. vsque 63. It is
also used for a writ grounded upon the statute. anno 8. H. 6. ca. 9. whereof
read Fitz. not. br. at large, fol. 248. See the new book of Entries, verbo
Forcible Entry, see Lamb. definition in certain cases. Eiren. l. 2. c. 4. p.
145.

Foreign (Forinsecus) comes of the french (Forain. i. exterus, externus) it is
used adiectiuely in our common law, and joined with diverse substantives in
senses not unworthy the exposition, as Foreign matter, that is matter triable in
another county, pl. cor. fo. 154. or matter done in another county, Kitchen.
fol. 126. Foreinplea (forinsecum placitum). i. a refusal of the Judge as
incompetent, because the matter in hand was not within his precincts, Kitchen.
fol. 75. and anno 4. H. 8. ca. 2. and anno 22. eiusdem. ca. 2. and 14. Foreign
answer, that is, such an answer, as is not triable in the county where it is
made. anno 15. H. 6. ca. 5. Foreign service (forinsecum servitium) that is such
service, whereby a mean Lord holds over of another, without the compass of
his own fee. Brook. titulo Tenures. f. 251. nu. 12. and 28. and Kitchen, fol.
209. or else that which a tenent performs, either to his own Lord, or to the
Lord paramount out of the fee. For of these services, Bracton speaks thus,
lib. 2. cap. 16. nu. 7. Item sunt quaedam seruitia, quae dicuntur forinseca,
quamvis sunt in charta de feoffamento expressa and nominata: and quae ideo dici
possunt forinseca, quia pertinent ad Dominum Regem, and non ad dominum
capitalem, nisi cum in propria persona profectus fuerit in seruitio: vel nisi
cum pro seruitio suo satisfecerit domino Regi quocunque modo, and fiunt in
certis temporibus, cum casus and necessitas evenerit, and varia habent nomina
and diuersa: Quandoque enim nominantur forinseca, large sumpto vocabulo, quoad
seruitium domins Regis, quandoque scutagium, quandoque seruitium domini Regis,
and ideo forinsecum dici potest, quia fit and capitur foris, sieve extra
seruitium quod fit Domino capitali. v. Broke Tenures 28. 95. Foreign service,
seems to be knights service or Escuage uncertain. Perkins Reseruations 650.
Foreign attachement (Attachiamentum forinsecum) is an attachement of foriners
goods, found within a liberty or city, for the satisfaction of some citizen,
to whom the said foriner owes money.

Foreign Apposer (forinsecarum oppositor) is an officer in the exchequer, to
whom all shyreeues and baylifes do repair, hy him to be opposed of their
green wax, and from thence draws down a charge upon the shyreeue and
baylife to the clerk of the pipe.

Forest (Foresta) is a french word, signifiing a great or vast wood. Lieu
forestier and sauuage: locus syluestris and saltuosus. The writers upon the
common law define it thus: Foresta est locus vbi ferae inhabitant vel
includuntur. glos. in ca. cum dilecti. extra. de donatio. and Felinus in ca.
Rodolphus. versu, quid autem Foresta. extra de rescriptis. speaks to the same
effect. Some other writers do say, it is called foresta, quasi ferarum statio,
vel tuta mansio ferarum. But as it is taken with us, M. Manw. in his second
part of forest laws, cap. 1. nu. 1. thus defines it: A Forest is a certain
territory of woody grounds and fruitful pastures, privileged for wild
beasts, and fowls of forest, chase, and warren, to rest and abide in, in the
safe protection of the King, for his princely delight and pleasure: which
terrioritie of ground so privileged, is meered and bounded with unremovable
marks, meeres, and Boundaries, either known by matter of record, or else
prescription, and also replenished with wild beasts of Venerie, or chase, and
with great coverts of vert, for the succor of the said wild beasts, to have
their abode in: for the preservation and continuance of which said place,
together with the vert and venison, there are certain particular laws,
privileges, and officers, belonging to the same, meet for that purpose, that
are only proper unto a forest, and not to any other place. The same definition
he has part 1. page 139. which though it have many superfluities, yet it well
expresses the nature of the thing, especially the explication adjoined, which
there is set down by the said author in both places in his first part. page
16. where he fetches a forest from such overgrowne antiquity, alleging for
it the second book of Kings, ca. 2. ver. 24. and ca. 19. verse. 23. and the
104. psalm verse. 20. the 131. ver. 6. he takes license to sport himself. for
though our english translation have the word forest, to express the vastnes of
the desert, yet if we look to the original Idiome, we shall find no more
reason to call those places forests, the^ either chases or parks.

The manner of making forests, as the same author well sets down, part. 1.
page 142. is this. The king sends out his commission under the broad seal of
England, directed to certain discreet persons, for the view, perrambulation,
meering and bounding of the place, that he minds to afforest; which returned
into the chauncerie, proclamation is made throughout all the Shire, where the
ground lies, that none shall hunt or chase any manner of wild bests within that
precinct, without the kings special license, after which he appoints
ordinances, laws, and officers, fit for the preservation of the vert and
venison: and so becomes this a forest by matter of record. The properties of a
forest are these in special, first, a forest, as it is truly and strictly
taken, cannot be in the hands of any but the king: the reason is given by M.
Manwood, because none has power to grant commission to a Justice in Eire for
the forest, but the king. part. 1. page 87. The second property, be the
courts, as the Justice seat every three year, the Swainemoote thrice every
year: Idem eodem page 90. and part 2. ca. 1. nu. 4. and 5. and the
attachement, once every forty days. Idem eod. page 92. The third property
may be the officers belonging unto it, for the preservation of the vert and
venison, as first the Justices of the forest, the warden or keeper, the
verders, the foristers, Agistours, Regarders, Bailiffes, Bedels and such like,
which you may see in their places. See Manwood part. 2. ca. 1. nu. 4. and 5.
But the chief property of a forest, both by M. Manwood. part 1. pa. 144. and
M. Crompton page 146. is the Swainmote, which (as they both agree) is no less
incident unto it, then the court of Pyepowders to a fair. Other courts and
offices are not so requisite, in those forests that are in the hands of
subjects, because they be not truly forests: but if this fail, then is there
no thing of a forest remaining, but it is turned into the nature of a chase.
See Chase. I read of thus many forests in England. The forest of Windsour in
Berkshire: Cambd. Britan. page 213. of Pickering. Crompton 190. of Shirwood
idem fol. 202. of Englewood in Cumberland. anno. 4. H. 7. ca. 6. and Crompton
fol. 42. of Lancaster. Idem. fol. 196. of Wolemore. Stowes Annals. page 462. of
Gillingham Idem. page 113. of Knaresborow. anno. 21. H. 8. ca. 17. of Waltham.
Camd. page 328. of Breden. Idem, page 176. of Whiteharte Idem, page 150. of
Wiersdale. Idem page 589. and Lownsedall ibidem. of Deane. Idem. page 266. and
and anno 8. H. 6. ca. 27. and anno 19. H. 7. cap. 8. of Saint Leonards in
Southsex. Manwood part. 1. pa. 144. of Waybridge and Sapler. Idem. eodem. pa.
63. of Whitvey. page 81. of Fekenham, Camd. pa 441. of Rockingham. Idem page
396. Forest de la mer. Idem, page 467. of Huckstowe. Idem pa. 456. of Hay.
Manwood part. 1. page 144. of Cantselly, eadem page of Ashdowne in the county
of Sussex. anno. 37. H. 8. ca. 16. Forests of Whittilwood and Swasie in the
county of Northampton. anno 33. H. 8. ca. 38. of Fronselwood in com. Somerset.
Cook li. 2. Cromw. case. f. 71. b. I hear also of the forest of Exmore, in
Devonshire. There may be more which he that lists, may look for.

Forester (forestarius) is a sworn officer of the Forest, appointed by the
Kings leters patents, to walk the forest both early and late, watching both
the vert and venison, attaching and presenting all trespassers against them,
within their own bayliwicke or walk: whose oath you may see in Crompton. fol.
201. And though these leters patents be ordinarily granted, but quam diu been
se gesserint, yet some have this grant to the^ and their heirs, and thereby
are called Foristers or Fosters in fee. Idem, fol. 157. and 159. Et Manwood
part prima. page 220. whom in Latin Crompton calls Foristarium feudi. fol.
175.

Foreiudger, (forisiudicatio) signifies in the common law, a judgment,
whereby a man is deprived, or put by the thing in question. It seems to be
compounded of (fors. i. praeter) and (iuger. i. iudicare.) Bracton lib. 4.
tract. 3. cap. 5. has these words: Et non permittas quod A. capitalis dominus
feudi illius, habeat custodiam haeredis, etc. quia in Curia nostra
forisiudicatur de custodia, etc. So does Kitchen use it. fol. 209. and old not.
bre. fol. 44. and 81. and the statute. anno 5. Ed. 3. cap. 9. and anno 21. R.
2. cap. 12. Foriudicatus with authors of other nations signifies as much as
(banished) or as (deportatus) in the ancient Roman law, as appears by
Vincentius de Franchis, descis. 102. Mathaeus de Afflictis. lib. 3. feudorum.
Rub. 31. page 625.

Foregoers be pourveyours, going before the king or queen, being in progress,
to provide for them, anno 36. Ed. 3. cap. 5.

Forfeiture, (forisfactura) comes of the French word (forfaict. i. scelus)
but signifies in our language, rather the effect of transgressing a penal
law, then the transgression it self: as forfeiture of Escheates. anno 25. Ed.
3. cap. 2. Statut. de Proditionibus. Goods confiscate, and goods forfeited
differ. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 186. where those seem to be forfeited, that have
a known owner, having committed any thing whereby he has lost his goods; and
those confiscate, that are disavowed by an offendour, as not his own, nor
claymed by any other. I think rather, that forfeiture is more general, and
confiscation particular, to such as forfeit only to the Princes Exchequer.
Read the whole chapter. lib. 3. cap. 24. Full forfeiture (plenaforisfactura)
otherwise called (plena vita) is forfeiture of life and member, and all else
that a man has. Manwood part prim. page 341. The Canon Lawyers use also this
word. For forisfacta sunt pecuniariae poenae delinquentium. Glos. in cap.
Praesbyteri, extra. de poenis.

Forfeiture of marriage, (forisfactura maritagii) is a writ lying against him,
who houlding by knights service, and being under age and unmarried, refuses
her, whom the Lord offers him, without his disparagement, and marieth
another. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 141. H. I. K. L. Register orig. fol. 163. b.

Forfeng, quiet antiam prioris prisae designat: in hoc enim delinquunt
Burgenses Londonenses, cum prisas suas ante prisas regis faciunt. Fleta lib. 1.
cap. 47.

Forgerie. See here next following, Forger of false deeds.

Forger of false deeds, comes of the french (Forger). i. accudere,
fabricare, conflare, to beat one an anvile, to fashion, to bring into shape,
and fignifieth in our common law, either him that fraudulently makes and
publishes false writings, to the prejudice of any man's right, or else the writ
that lies against him, that commits this offense. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 96.
B. C. calls it a writ of deceit. See Terms of law, verbo Forger. and Wests
Simbol. part. 2. Indictments, sectio. 66. See the new book of Entries. verbo
Forger. de faits. This is a branch of that which the ciuilians call crimen
falsi: Nam falsarius est, qui decipiendi causa scripta publica falsificat.
Speculator. de crimine falsi. Falsi crimen proprie dicitur, quod vtilitatis
priuatae causa factum est. Connanus li. 5. ca. 7. nu. 4. Ad esse falsitatis
tria requiruntur: mutatio veritatis, dolus, and quod alteri sit nocivum. Quorum
si alterum desit, falsitas non est punibilis. Hostiensis, and Azo in suis
summis.

Forister. See Forester.

Formdon (Breve formatum donationis) is a writ that lies for him, that has
right to any lands or tenements by virtue of any entayle, growing from the
statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 1. It lies in three sorts, and accordingly is called
forma donationis, or formdon in the descender: formdon in the reverter, or
formdon in the remainder. Formdon in the descender lies for the recovery of
lands, etc. given to one and the heirs of his body, or to a man and his wife,
and the heirs of their two bodies, or to a man and his wife being cousin to the
donour, in frank marriage, and afterward alienated by the Donee. For after his
decease his heir shall have this writ against the tenent or alience. Fitz.
not. br. fol. 211. He makes three sorts of this formdon in the descender: The
first is, in the manner now expressed: the second is, for the heir of a
coparcener, that alienateth and dies. fol. 214 The third is called by him (In
simul tenuit) fol. 216. which lies for a coparcener or heir in Gauelkind,
before partition against him, to whom the other coparcener or heir has
alienated and is dead. Formdon in the reuerter, lies for the donour or his
heirs, where land entayled to certain and their issue, with condition for
want of such issue to reuert to the donour and his heirs, against him to whom
the Donee alienateth, after the issue extinct, to which it was entayled. Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 219. Formdon in the remainder lies, where a man gives lands in
tail, the remainder to another in tail, and afterward the former tenent in
tail dies without issue of his body, and a stranger abateth, then he in the
remainder shall have this writ. Fitz. not. br. fol. 217. See the Register
original. fol. 238. 242. 243. of this see the new book of Entries. verb.
Formdon.

Forsechoke, seems to signify originally as much as forsaken in our modern
language, or (derelictum) with the Romans. It is especially used in one of
our statutes, for land or tenements seized by the Lord, for want of services
due from the tenent: and so quietly held and possessed beyond the year and
day. As if we should say, that the tenent which seeing his land or tenements
taken into the Lords hand, and possessed so long, takes not the course
appointed by law to recouerthem, does in due presumption of law disavow or
forsake whatsoever right he has unto them. See the statute anno 10. Ed. 1.
cap. vnico.

Forstall, is to be quit of amerciaments and catels arrested within your land,
and the amerciaments thereof coming. New terms of law.

Forstalling (forstallatio) is partly french, for (Estaller) is in that tongue,
as much as (merces exponere, expedire, explicare) or to show wares in a market
or fair. It signifies in our common law, the buying or bargaining for any
victuals or wares coming to be sold toward any fair or market, or from
beyond the seas toward any city, port, haven, creek, or road of this realm,
and before the same be there. anno. 51. H. 3. stat. 6. West. part 2. Simbol.
titulo indictments. sect. 64. Forstaller, in Cromptons Jurisdiction, fol. 153.
is used for stopping of a dear broken out of the forest, from returning home
again, or laying between him and the forest, in the way that he is to
return: See Regratours and Engrossers. See Cromptons Justice of peace. fol.
69. a. The author of the new terms of law defines it thus. Forstalling
(Forstallamentum) is the buying of corn, cattle, or other merchandies by the
way, as it comes toward the fair or market to be sold, to the intent to
sell the same again at a more high and dear price. Fleta says thus of it,
significat obtrusionem vtae vel impedimentum transitus and fugae aueriorum, li.
1. cap. 47.

Fortescue, was a learned Lawyer, and Lord Chauncelor in Henry the 6. days:
who writ a book in the commendation of our common laws.

Fortlet (forteletum) comes nete the french (fortelet. i. valenticulus,
forticulus) and signifies in our common law, a place of some strength. old
not. br. fol. 45. This in other countries is written (fortalitium) and
signifies (castrum.) Scraderus select. and practabil. quest.. 12. nu. 7. and 8.

Fother, is a weight of twenty hundred, which is a waine or cartloade. Speight
in his Annot. upon Chawcer.

Fourche (Assorciare) seems to come of the french, (fourcher. i. titubare
liugua) and signifies in our common law, a putting off, prolonging, or delay
of an action. And it appeasieth no unpleasant metaphor: for as by stammering we
draw out our speech, not delivering. that we have to say in ordinary time, so
by sourching we prolong a suite that might be ended in a shorter space. To
sourch by essoine. Westminster. 1. cap. 24. anno 3. Ed. prim. where you have words to
this effect: Coparceners, Iointtenants, and Tenants in common, may not sourch
by essoine to essoine severally, but have only one essoine, as one sole tenent
may have. And anno 6. Ed. 1. ca. 10. you have it used in like sort.

Foutgeld, is a word compounded of these two German words (fous. i. pes, and
(gyldan. i. solvere) and it signifies an amercement for not cutting out the
balls of great dogs feet in the forest. See Expeditate. And to be quit of
footegeld is a privilege to keep dogs within the forest, vnlawed, without
punishment or controlment. Cromptons Iurisdict. fol. 197. Manwood part pri. of
his forest laws, page 86.

Fowls of warren. See Warren.

Founder, is he that melts metal, and makes any thing of it, by casting it
into a mold, etc. anno 17. Rich. 2. cap. 1. derived of the verb (fundere) to
power.

Franchise, (libertas, franchesia) comes of the french (franchise) so
signifiing: it is taken with us for a privilege, or an exemption from
ordinary jurisdiction, and sometime an immunitie from tribute. It is either
personal or real. Cromp. Iurisd. fol. 141. that is belonging to a
personimmediatly, or else by means of this or that place, or court of
immunitie, whereof he is either chief or a member. In what particular things
franchises commonly consist, See Britton cap. 19. Franchise royal anno 15. R.
2. cap. 4. and anno 2. H. 5. cap. 7. in fine, seems to be that, where the
kings writs run not: as Chester and Durham, they are called Seignories
royal. an. 28. H. 6. cap. 4. The author of the new Terms of law says, that
franches royal is, where the King grants to one and his heirs, that they
shall be quit of toll or such like: See franchise in the new book of Entries.
See Bracton lib. 2. cap. 5. See Sac.

Frauk almoine (libera Eleemozyna) in french (frank Ausmone) signifies in our
common law, a tenure or title of lands. Britton cap. 66. nu. 5. says thus of
it: Frank almoyne is lands or tenements bestowed upon God, that is, given to
such people, as bestow themselves in the service of God, for pure and
perpetual alms: whence the feoffours or giuers cannot demand any
terrestrial service, so long as the lands. etc. remain in the hands of the
feoffees. With this agrees the grand custumary of Normandy. cap. 32. Of this
you may read Bracton at large. lib. 2. cap. 5. and 10. See Fitzh. not. br.
fol. 211. See the new book of Entries. verbo. Frank Almoine. But Britton
makes another kind of this land, etc. which is given in alms, but not free
alms: because the tenants in this are tied in certain services to the feoffor,
Pritton vbisupra.

Frank bank (francus bancus) in true french, (franc banc) signifies, word for
word, a free bench or seat: and among our law writers, it seems to be used
for copyhold lands, that the wife being espoused a virgin, has after the
decease of her husband for her dower. Kitchen fol. 102. Bracton lib. 4. tract.
6. cap. 13. nu. 2. has these words: Consuetudo est in partibus illis, quod
vxores maritorum defunctorum habeant francum bancum suum de terris
sockmannorum, and tenent nomine dotis. Fitzher. calls it a custom, whereby
in certain cities the wise shall have her husbands whole lands, etc. for her
dower. Not. br. fol. 150. P. See Plowden casu Newis. fol. 411.

Frank chase, (Libera chasea) is a liberty of free chase, whereby all men
having ground within that compass, are prohibited to cut down wood, or
discover, etc. without the view of the forester, though it be his own demesne.
Cromptons Jurisdictions, fol. 187.

Frank fee (feudum francum, seu liberum) is by Brook tit. Dimesn. number. 32.
thus expressed: That which is in the hand of the King or Lord of any manner,
being ancient demesne of the Crown (viz. the Demesnes) is called frank fee,
and that which is in the hands of the tenants, is ancient demesne only: see
the Register original. fol. 12. a. Whereby it seems, that that is frank see,
which a man holds at the common law to himself and his heirs, and not by
such service as is required in ancient demesne, according to the custom of the
manner. And again, I find in the same book fol. 14. b. a note to this effect,
that the lands which were in the hands of king Edward the Saint, at the making
of the book called Doomesday, is ancient demesne: and that all the rest in the
realm is called frank fee: with the which note Fitzherb. agrees, na. br. fol.
161. E. So that all the land in the realm, by this reason, is either ancient
demesne, or frank fee. The new expounder of the law terms defines frank fee,
to be a tanure in fee simple, of lands pleadable at the common law, and not in
ancient demesne: See Fachineus. lib. 7. cap. 39. who defines feudum francum
esse, pro quo nullum seruitium praestatur Domino: with whom agrees Zasius de
fendis. part 12. saying, that therefore it is feudum improprium, quia ab omni
seruitio liberum.

Frank ferme (Firma libera) is land or tenement, wherein the nature of fee is
changed by feofment, out of knights service, for certain yearly services,
and whence neither homage, wardship, marriage, nor releife may be demanded, nor
any other service not contained in the feofment. Britton. ca. 66. nu. 3. see
Fee ferme.

Frank law (libera lex) See Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 156. b. where you
shall find what it is, by the contrary. For he that for an offense, as
conspiracy, etc. leeseth his frank law, is said to fall into these mischiefs:
first, that he may never be impaneled upon any jury, or assise, or otherwise
used in testifiing any truth. Next, if he have any thing to do in the kings
court, he must not approach thither in person, but must appoint his attorney.
Thirdly, his lands, goods, and chatelsmust be seized into the kings hands: and
his lands must be estreaped, his trees rooted up, and his body committed to
prison. For this, the said author cites the book of Assizes fo. 59.
Conspiracy. F. 11. 24. Ed. 3. fo. 34. See Conspiracy.

Frank marriage (liberu^ maritagiu^) is a tenurein tail special, growing from
these words in the gift comprised: Sciant etc. me M. H de W. dedrsse and
concessisse, and praesenti charta mea confirmasse I. A. filio meo and Margeriae
vxori eius, filiae verae T. N. in liberu^ marit agium vnum messuagium etc. West
part i. Symbol. li. 2. sect. 303. The effect of which words is, that they
shall have the land to them, and the heirs of their bodies, and shall do no
fealty to the donour, until the fourth degree. See new Terms of law. Glanuile
li. 7. ca. 18. and Bracton li. 2. ca. 7. nu. 4. where he divides maritagium,
in liberum and seruitio obligatum. See Marriage. Fleta gives this reason why
the heirs do no service until the fourth descent, ne donatores vel eorum
haeredes, per homagii receptionem, a reuersione repellantur. And why in the
fourth descent and downward, they shall do service to the donour, quia in
quarto gradu vehementer praesumitur, quod terra non est pro defectu haeredum
donatariorum reversura, libro tertio. ca. 11. in princ.

Frankpledge (Franoiplegium) is compounded of (Franc. i. liber) and (pleige. i.
fideiussor) and signifies in our common law, a pledge or surety for free men.
For the ancient custom of England for the preservation of the public peace,
was that every free borne man, at fourteen years of age, after Bracton
(religious persons, clerks, knights, and their eldest sons excepted) should
find suerty for his truth toward the King and his subjects, or else be kept in
prison, whereupon a certain number of neighbors became customably bound one
for another, to see each man of their pledge forthcomming at all times, or to
answer the transgression committed by any broken away. So that whosoever
offended, it was forthwith inquired in what pledge he was, and then they of
that pledge, either brought him forth within 31. days to his answer, or
satisfied for his offense. This was called Frank pledge, causa qua supra. and
the circuit thereof was called Decenna, because it commonly consisted of 10.
houshouldes: And every particular person thus mutually bound for himself and
his neighbors, was called Decennier, because he was of one Decenna or another:
This custom was so kept, that the shyreeues, at every county court, did from
time to time take the oaths of young ones, as they grew to the age of 14.
years, and see, that he were combined in one dozen or another. whereupon this
branch of the shyreeues authority was called visus Franciplegu, view of
frankpledge. See the statute for view of Frankpledge, made anno. 18. Ed. 1: See
Deoennier, Leete view of Frankpledge, and Freoborghe. That this discipline is
borrowed by us of the Roman Emperors or rather Lombards, appears most
manifestly in the second book of Feuds. ca. 53. upon which if you read
Hotoman, with those authors that he there records, you will think your
labor well bestowed. Read more of this. viz. what articles were wont to be
inquired of in this court, in Horns mirror of Justices li. 1. ca. de la
veneudes francs pleges, and what these articles were in ancient times, see in
Fleta. li. 2. ca. 52.

Fredwit See Fletwit.

Free chapel (libera Capella) by some opinion, is a chapel founded within a
parish for the service of God, by the devotion and liberality of some good
man, over and above the mother Church, unto the which it was free for the
parishioners, to com or not to come, and e^dowed with maintenance by the
founder, and thereupon called free: I have heard others say, and more probably,
that those only be free chapels, that are of the Kings foundation, and by him
exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary: but the King may license a
subject to found such a chapel, and by his charter exempt it from the
Ordinaries visitation also. That it is called free in respect it is exempted
from the jurisdiction of the Diocesan, appears by the Register original.
fol. 40. and 41. These chapels were all given to the King: with chaunteries
anno. 1. Ed. 6. ca. 14. Free chapel of Saint Martin le grand. anno. 3. Eduardi
4. capite quarto. and anno. 4. Eduard. quarti ca. 7.

Free hold (liberum teneme^tum) is that land or tenement, which a man holds
in see, see tail, or at the least, for term of life, Bract. li. 2. ca. 9. The
new expounder of the law terms says, that free hold is of 2. sorts.
Freehould in deed, and freehold in law: Freehold in deed, is the real
possession of land or tenements in fee, fee tail, or for life. Freehould in
law, is the right that a man has to such land or tenements before his entry
or seizure. I have heard it likewise extended to those offices, which a man
holds either infee or for term of life. Britton defines it to this effect.
Frank tenement is a possession of the soil, or services issuing out of the
soil, which a free man holds in fee to him and his heirs, or at the least,
for term of his life, though the soil be charged with free services or
others. ca. 32. Free hold is sometime taken in opposition to villenage. Bract.
li, 4. ca. 37. and 38. M. Lamberd (in his explication of Saxon words, verbo
Terra ex scripto) says, that land in the Saxons time was called either
Bockland, that is holden by book or writing: or Folcland, that is holden
without writing: The former, he reports, was held with far better
conditions, and by the beter sort of tenants, as noble men and gentlemen, being
such as we now call free hold: the later was commonly in the possession of
clownes, being that which we now call at the will of the Lord: I find in the
Register judicial. fol. 68. a. and in diverse other places, that he which
holds land upon an execution of a Statute merchant, until he be satisfied
the debt. tenet vt liberum tenementum sibi and assignatis suis. and fol. 73. b.
I read the same of a tenent per elegit; where I think the meaning is not,
that such tenants be free-houlders, but as freehoulders for their time, that is
until they have gathered profits to the value of their debt. Freehoulders in
the ancient laws of Scotland, were called Milites. Skene de verb. signif.
verb. Milites: The D. and Student says, that the possession of land, after the
law of England, is called franck tenement, or free hold. fol. 97. a.

Frenchman (Francigena) was wont to be used for every outlandish man.
Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 15. See Englecerie.

Frendwite, vel Infeng, significat quietantiam prioris prisae ratione convivii,
Fleta li. 1. ca. 47.

Frendles maen, was wont to be the Saxon word for him, whom we call an
outlawe. And the reason thereof I take to be: because he was upon his exclusion
from the kings peace and protection, denied all help of friends; after
certain days. Nam forisfecit amicos. Bract. li. 3. tract. 2. ca. 12. nu. 1.
whose words are these. Talem vocant Angli (vtlaugh) and alio nomine antiquitus
solet nominari, sc: Frendles man: and sic videtur quod forisfecit amicos: and
vnde st quis talem post vtlagariam and expulsionem scienter paverit,
receptaverit, vel scienter co^municaverit aliquo modo, vel receptauerit,
veloccultauerit, eadem paena puniri debet, qua puniretur vtlagatus: ita quod
careat omnibus bonis suis and vita, nisi Rex et parcat de sua gratia. (...)
Fresh disseisin (Frisca disseisina) comes of the french (Fraiz. 1. recens)
and (disseisir. i. posessione eiicere) It seems to signify in our common
law, that disseisin that a man may seek to defeat, of himself, and by his
own power, without the help of the king or his judges, Britton. ca. 5. and
that is such disseisin, as is not above 15. days old. Bract. li. 4. ca. 5.
whom you may read at large of this matter, concluding that it is arbitrarie,
and so does Britton ca. 65. but ca. 43. he seems to say, that in one case it
is a year. See him also ca. 44.

Fresh fine, is that which was levied within a year past, Westminster. 2. cap. 45.
an. 13. Ed. 1. Fresh force (Frisca fortia) is a force done within 40. days, as
it seems by Fitzh. not. br. fol. 7. C. For if a man be disseised of any lands
or tenements, within any city or borough, or deforced from them after the death
of his auncester, to whom he is heir: or after the death of his tenent for
life or in tail: he may within 40. days after his title accrued, have a bille
out of the chauncerie to the Mayor, etc. See the rest.

Fresh suite (recens insecutio) is such a present and earnest following of an
offendour, as never cease from the time of the offense committed or espied,
until he be apprehended. And the effect of this, in the pursuit of a felon,
is, that the party persiewing shall have his goods restored him agine: whereas
otherwise they are the kings. Of this see Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 3. ca. 10. and
12. where you shall find handled at large, what suite is to be accounted
fresh, and what not. And the same author in his first book, cap. 27. says,
that fresh suite may continue for seven years, See Cooks reports. l. 3.
Rigewaies case. Fresh suite, seems to be either within the view or without:
for M. Manwood says, that upon fresh suite within the view, trespassers in the
forest may be attached by the efficers persiewing them, though without the
limits and bounds of the forest. part 2. ca. 19. nu. 4. fol. 121.

Freoborgh: alias Fridburgh: alias Frithborg (Frideburgum) comes of two Saxon
words (Freo. i. liber, ingenuus) and (borgh. i. fideiussor) or of (Frid. i pax)
and (Borgha. i. sponsor) This is otherwise called after the French (Franck
pledge) the one being in use in the Saxons time, the other sithence the
Conquest: wherefore for the understanding of this, read Franck pledge. That it
is all one thing, it appears by M. Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words,
verbo Centuria and again in the laws of King Edward set out by him, fol. 132.
in these words: Praeterea est quaedam summa and maxima securitas, per quam
omnes statu firmissimo sustinentur: viz. vt vnusquisque stabiliat se sub
fideiussionis securitate, quam Angli vocant (Freoborghes) soli tamen
Eberacenses, dicunt eandem (Tienmannatale) quod sonat latin december hominum
numerum. Haec securitas hoc modo fiebat, quod de omnibus villis totius regni
sub decennali fideiussione debebant esse vniuersi: ita quod si vnus ex december
forisfecerit, novem adrectum eum habere^t: quod si aufugeret, daretur lege
terminus ei 31. dierum: vt quaesitus interim and inventus, ad iustitiam Regis
adduceretur, and de suo illico restauraret damnum quod fecerat. Etsi ad hoc
forisfaceret, de corpore sno iustitia fieret. Sed si infra praedictum terminum
inveniri non posset, etc: as in the book: Bracton makes mention of
(Fridburgum. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10. in these words: Archiepiscopi,
Episcopi, Comites, and Barons, and omnes qui habent Soc, and Sak. Tol, and
Team, and huiusmodi libertates, milites suos and proprios servientes, armigeros
sc. dapiferos, and pincernas, camerarios, coquos, pistores, sub suo Fridburgo
habere debent. Item and isti suos Armigeros, and alios sibi servientes. Quod si
cui forisfecerint, ipsi domini sui habeant eos adrectum, et si non habuerint,
solvant pro eis forisfacturam. Et sic obseruandum erit de omnibus alits, qui
sunt de alicuius manupastu. Out of these words, I learn the reason, why great
men were not combined in any ordinary dozeine, and that is, because they were
a sufficient assurance for themselves and for their meniall servants: no less
then the ten were one for another in ordinary dozeins. See Frank pledge: see
Skene de verborum significatione. verbo. Freiborgh. Fleta writes this word
(frithborgh) and uses it for the principal man, or at the least, for a man of
every dozein. Frithborgh (says he) est laudabilis homo testimonii liber vel
servus, per quem omnes iuxta ipsum commorantes firmiori pace sustententur sub
stabilitate fideiussionis eius vel alterius per denarium numerum, vnde quilibet
quasi plegius alterius: it a quod si vnus feloniam fecerit, novem tenentur
ipsum ad standum recto praesentare. lib. 1. ca. 47.. Frithborgh. See Roger
Hoveden, part poster. suorum annal. in Henrico secundo. fol. 345. a. b.

Friar (frater) comes of the French (fiere) there be four orders reckoned of
them. anno 4. H. 4. cap. 17. viz. Minours, Augustines, Preachers, and
Garmelites, the four principal orders, of which the test descend. See in
Zechius de rep. ecc. page 380 Look Linwood. titulo de relig. demibus. cap. 1.
verb. Sancti Augustine.

Friar observant (frater observans) is an order of Franciscans: for the better
understanding of whom, it is to be noted, that of those 4. orders mentioned in
the word (Friar,) the Franciscans, are minores tam Obseruantes quom
Conventuales and Capuchini. Zecchus de Repub. Eccl. tract. de regular. cap. 2.
These Friars observant, you find spoken of anno 25. H. 8. cap. 12. who be
called observants, because they are not combined together in any cloister,
covent, or corporation as the Conuentuals are: but only tie themselves to
observe the rites of their order, and more strictly then the Conuentuals do:
and upon a singularity of zeal, separate themselves from them, living in
certain places, and companies of their own choosing. And of these you may
read Hospinian. de orig. and progr. Monachatus. fol. 878. cap. 38.

Friperer, is taken from the French (fripier) interpolator, one that scowreth
up and cleanses old apparel to sell again. This word is used for a bastardly
kind of broker. anno 1. Iaco. cap. 21.

Frithborgh, see Freeborgh.

Frithsoken, signifies surety of defense, as Saxon says in the description of
England, cap. 12. It seems to come of these two Saxon words, frith, or frid,
or (fred.) i. pax, and (soken. i. quaerere.) Fleta terms it frithsokne, vel
forsokne, yielding this reason, Quod significat libertatem habendi franci
plegii.

Fuer (fuga) comes of the French (fuir, i. fugere) though it be a verb, yet
it is used substantiuely in our common law, and is twofold: fuer in feit, (in
facto) when a man does apparently and corporally fly, and fuer in ley, (in
lege) when being called in the county, he appears not until he be outlawed:
for this is flight in interpretation of law. Staw nf. pl. cor. lib. 3. c. 22.

Fugitives goods, (bona fugitiuorum) be the proper goods of him that flies
upon felony, which after the flight lawfully found, do belong to the king.
Coke vol. 6. fol. 109. b.

Furlong, (ferlingum terrae) is a quantity of ground containing twenty lugs
or poles in length, and every pole 16 foot and a half, eight of which
furlongs make a mile, anno 35. Fd. 1. cap. 6. It is otherwise the eighth part
of an acre. See Acre. In the former signification the Romans call it
(stadium,) in the later (iugerum.) This measure which we call a pole, is also
called a perch, and differs in length, according to the custom of the
country. See Perch.

Furre (furrura) comes of the French (fourrer. i. pelliculare) to line with
skins. Of furre I find diverse strange kinds in the statute. anno 24. H. 8.
cap. 13. as of sables, which is a rich furre of color between black and
brown, being the skin of a beast called a Sable, of quantity between a
Polecat and an ordinary cat, and of fashion like a Polecat, bred in Ruscia,
but most and the best in Tartaria. Lucerns; which is the skin of a beast so
called, being nere the bigness of a wolf, of color between red and brown,
something mayled like a cat, and mingled with black spots, bred in Muscovie
and Ruscia, and is a very rich furre. Genets, that is the skin of a beast so
called, of bigness between a cat and a wesell, mayled like a cat, and of the
nature of a cat, bred in Spain. Whereof there be two kinds, black, and gray,
and the black the more precious furre, having black spots upon it hardly to
be seen. Foines, is of fashion like the Sable bred in France for the most
part: the top of the furre is black, and the ground whitish. Marterne, is a
beast very like the Sable, the skin something courser, it lives in all
countries that be not too cold, as England, Ireland, etc. and the best be in
Ireland. Miniuer, is nothing but the bellies of Squirels, as some men say:
others say, it is a little vermin like unto a Wesell milk white, and comes
from Muscovie. Fitch, is that which we otherwise call the Polecat here in
England. Shankes, be the skin of the shanke or leg of a kind of Kidde which
bears the furre, that we call Budge. Calaber, is a little beast, in bigness
about the quantity of a squirell, of color gray, and bred especially in high
Germany.

G
GAbell (gabella, gablum) comes of the French (gabelle. i. vectigal) and has
the same signification among our old Writers, that (gabelle) has in France,
for M. Camden in his Britannia. page 213. speaking of Wallingford, has these
words: Continebat 276. hagas. i. domos reddentes novem libras de gablo: and
page 282. of Oxford, these: Haec vrbs reddebat pro telonio and gablo, and aliis
consuetudinibus per annum, Regi quidem viginti libras, and sex sextarios
mellis: Comiti vero A'garo december libras. Gabella (as Cassanaeus defines it, de
consuetu. Burgund. page 119. Est vectigal quod solvitur probonis mobilibus, id
est, pro hiis quae vehuntur, distinguishing it from Tributum, quia Tributum est
proprie, quod fisco vel Principi solvitur pro rebus immobilibus.

Gage, (vadium) comes of the French (gager. i. dare pignus, pignore certare)
and is it self a French word nothing changed, but in pronunciation. It
signifies with us also a pawn o^ pledge. Glanvile lib. 10. cap. 6. where he
says thus: Quandoque res mobiles ponuntur in vadium, quandoque res immobiles,
and a little after that, thus: Invadiatur res quandoque ad terminum, quandoque
sine termino. Item quandoque invadiatur res aliqua in mortuo vadio, quandoque
non. And from that chapter to the end of the twelfth in the same book, he
handles this only thing. Though the word (gage) be retained as it is a
substantive, yet as it is a verb, the use has turned the G. into W. so as it
is oftener written (wage:) as to wage deliverance, that is, to give security
that a thing shall be delivered. For if he that distrained, being siewed, have
not delivered the catell that were distrained, then he shall not only avow the
distress, but (gager deliverance) i. put in surety, that he will deliver the
catell distrained. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 74. D. and 67. F. whom see also fol.
67. F. G. yet in some cases, he shall not by tied to make this security: as if
the catell died in pound. Kitchen fol. 145. or if he claim a property in the
catell siewed for. Terms of the law. To wage law what it is, see in his
place. verbo. Lane. See Mortgage.

Gager deliverance. See Gage.

Gayle. See Gaoll.

Gainage, (Wainagium) is near to the French (Gaignage. i. quaestus, lucrum,)
and signifies in our common law, the land held by the baser kind of Sokemen
or villeines. Bract. lib. 1. cap. 9. where he has these words, speaking of
servants: Et in hoc legem habent contra dommos, quod stare possunt in iudicio
contra eos de vita and membris propter saeuitiam dominorum, vel propter
intolerabilem iniuriam. Vt si eos distruant, quod salvum non possit eis esse
Wainagium suum. Hoc autem verum est de illis servis, qui tenent in antiquo
dominico coronae. And again, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 1. Miles and liber homo
non amerciabitur nisi secundum modum delicti, secundum quod delictu^ fuit
magnum vel parvum, and salvo contenemento suo: Mercator vero, non nisi salva
mercandiza sua: and villanus, non nisi salvo Wainagio suo. This in Westminster. 1.
cap. 6. an. 3. Ed. prim. is called Gaynure: and again, cap. 17. and in magna
charta, cap. 14. it is called wainage. I find it in the old. not. br. fol. 117.
called Gainor. viz. in these words: The writ of Aile was praecipe, etc. quod
reddat vnam bovatam terrae, and vnam bovatam marisci: and the writ was abated
for that the oxegang is always of a thing that lies in gainor. I think this
word was used of lands usually plowed, because they that had it in occupation,
had nothing of it but the profit and fruit raised of it by their own pains,
toward their suste nance, nor any other title, but at the Lords will. Gainor
again in the same book, fol. 12. is used for a Sokeman, that has such land in
his occupation. In the 32. chapter of the Grand Custumarie of Normandy:
Gaigneurs be ruricolae qui terras eleemozin at as possident: and Britton uses
gainer, for to plow or till, fol. 65. a. and 42. b. West part 2. symbol.
titulo, Recoueries. sect. 3. has these words: A praecipe quod reddat, lies
not in Bovata marisci. 13. Ed. 3. fol. 3. nor de selione terrae. Ed. 1. for the
uncertainty: because a selion, which is a land, sometime contains an acre,
sometime half an acre, sometime more, and sometime less. It lies not of a
garden, cotage, or croft. 14. Assis. 13. 8. H. 63. 22. Ed. 4. 13. de virgata
terrae. 41. 43. 13. Ed. 3. de fodina, de minera, de mercatu. 13. E. 3. for they
be not in demesne: but in gain, etc. Lastly, in the statute of Distresses in
the Exchequer. anno 51. H. 3. I find these words. No man of religion, nor
other, shall be distreined by his beasts that gain the land.

Galege, (galicae) seems to come of the French, (galloches) which signifies
a certain kind of shoo worn by the Gauls in soul weather of old times. I
find it used for some such implement. anno 4. Ed. 4. cap. 7. and anno 14. and
15. H. 8. cap. 9. where it is written plainly. Galochet.

Galingal (cyperus) is a medicinal herb, the nature and diversity whereof is
expressed in Gerards herball. lib. 1. cap. 22. The root of this is mentioned
for a drugge to be garbled. anno 1. Iaco. cap. 19.

Gallihalpens, were a kind of coin forbidden by the statute. anno 3. H. 5.
cap. 1.

Galloches. See Galege.

Gals, (Gallae) be a kind of hard fruit like a nutte, but rounder, growing of
the tree called in latin (galla.) The diverse kinds and uses whereof Gerard
expresses in his Herball. lib. 3. cap. 34. This is a drugge to be garbled.
anno 1. Iaco. cap. 19.

Gaol, (gaola) comes of the French (Geole. i. caveola) a cage for birds, but
is metaphorically used for a prison. Thence comes (Geolier) whom we call
Gayler or Jailer.

Garb (garba) comes of the French (garb, alias, gerbe. 1. fascis.) It
signifies with us, a bundle or sheafe of corn. Charta de foresta. cap. 7. and
garba sagittarum, is a sheafe of arrows. Skene de verb. signif. verbo, Garba.

Garbling of bow-staues. anno 1. R. 3. cap. 11. is the sorting or culling out
the good from the bad. As garbling of spice, is nothing but to purify it from
the dross and dust that is mixed with it. It may seem to proceed from the
Italian (garbo) that is, finenesse, neatness.

Guard, (Custodia) comes of the French, (guard) being all of one
signification. It signifies in our common law, a custody or care of defense:
but has diverse applications: sometimes to those that attend upon the safety
of the Prince, called Yeomen of the Guard: sometime to such as have the
education of children under age, or of an Idiot: sometime to a writ touching
wardshippe. Which writs are of three sorts: one called a right of guard or
ward, in French, droit de guard, Fitzh. not. br. fol. 139. the second is
eiectment de guard. Idem fol. 139. L. the third, is rauishment de guard. Idem
fol. 140. F. G. See Gardem, see Ward.

Gardein (Custos) comes of the French (gardien,) and yet the German (Warden)
is near unto it. It signifies generally him, that has the charge or custody
of any person or thing: but most notoriously him, that has the education or
protection of such people, as are not of sufficient discretion, to guide
themselves and their own affairs, as children and Idiots: being indeed as
largely extended, as both (Tutor and Curator) among the Civilians. For whereas
Tutor is he, that has the government of a youth, until he come to 14. years
of age, and Curator, he that has the disposition and ordering of his substance
afterward, until he attain to 25. years: or that has the charge of a
frantic person during his lunacie: the common Lawyers use but only Gardien
or Guardian for both these. And for the better understanding of our English law
in this thing, you must know, that as tutor is either testamentarius, or a
Praetore datus ex lege Atilia, or lastly, legitimus: so we have three sorts of
Gardeines in England: one ordained by the father in his last will, another
appointed by the Judge afterward, the third cast upon the Minor by the law and
custom of the land. Touching the first, a man having goods and chatels never
so many, may appoint a gardein to the body or person of his child, by his last
will and testament, until he come to the age of fourteen years, and so the
disposing or ordering of his substance, until what time he thinks meet, and
that is most commonly to the age of 21. years. The same may he do, if he have
lands to never so great a value, so they hold not in capite of the king, nor of
any other Lord, by knights service. And in the former case, if the father
appoint no Gardein to his child, the Ordinary may appoint one to order his
moueables and chatels, until the age of 14. years: at which time he may choose
his guardian, accordingly as by the the civil law he may his Curator. For we
hold all one rule with the Civilians in this case: and that is, Invito curator
non datur. And for his lands, if he hold any by copy of court roll, commonly
the Lord of the fee appoints him a guardian, until he come to the age of 14.
years, and that is one, next of kind to the Minor of that side, that can hope
for least profitby his death. If he hold by charter in socage, then the next of
kind on that side by which the land comes not is the guardian: and hereupon
called guardian in socage. And that which is said here of socage seems to be
true likewise in petit sergeantie. anno vicesimo octauo. Edvardi primi. statuto
primo. And the reason of this, Fortescue gives in his book, entitled, A
commendation of the politic laws of England. cap. 44. viz. because there
might be suspicion, if the next kinsman on that side by which the land
descends, should have the custody and education of the child, that for desire
of his land, he might be entised to work him some mischief. Lastly, if a man
dye seized of lands, holding by knights service, leaving his heir in
minority, that is, under 21. years: the Lord of the fee has, by law, the
custody both of the heir and his land, until he come to age. See the
statute, anno 28. Ed. prim. statut. prim. And the reason of this, Fortescue
likewise gives, for that he to whom by his tenure he owes knights service,
when he can perform it, is likeliest to train him up in martial and
ingenious discipline, until he be of ability. But Polidore Virgil in his
Chronicle, lib. 16. says, that this was Movum vectigalis genus excogitatum, to
help Henry the third, being oppressed much with poverty, by reason he
received the kingdom much wasted by the wars of his aun cestours: and
therefore needing extraordinary help to uphold his estate: yet the 33.
chapter of the Grand Custumary makes mention of this to have been used by the
Normans: and I think this the truer opinion. Here it is to be observed,
whether land in knights service hold in capite, or of another Lord, or some of
the King, and some of another. If of the king, whether of the king alone or
not, all is one. For the king in this case is guardian to the heirs both
person and land by his prerogative. Stawnf praerog. cap. 1. If he hold of a
common Lord, it is either of one alone or more; if of one only, then is he
guardian of both person and lands; if of more, then the Lord of whom he
houldeth by the elder tenure, is guardian of the person, and every one of the
rest has the custody of the land holden of him self. If the prioritie of the
tenure cannot be discerned, then is he guardian of the person, that first
happeth him. Terms of the law. Stawnf. vbi supra. whom you may read more at
large: which Author fol. 19. makes mention of gardeyn in feit, and Gardeyn in
droit: that is, in deed, and in law: I take the first to be him that has
purchased, or otherwise obtained the ward of the Lord of whom the land holds:
the second, him that has the right by his inheritance and seignorie. old. not.
br. fol. 94 Then is there gardein per cause de guard, which is he that has the
wardship of a Minor, because he is guardian of his Lord being likewise in
minority. Stawnf. vbi supra. fol. 15. Of this you may read Skene de verb.
signif. verbo Varda. by whom you may learn great affinity, and yet some
difference between the law of Scotland, and ours in this point.

Guardia, is a word used among the Feudists, for the Latin (custodia,) and
guardianus seu guardio dicitur ille, cui custodia commissa est. lib. Feudo. 1.
titulo. 2. and tit. 11.

Gardeyn of the spiritualties, (Custos spiritualium, vel spiritualitatis) is he
to whom the spiritual jurisdiction of any Diocese is committed, during the
vacancy of the sea. anno 25. H. 8. cap. 21. And I take, that the guardeyn of
the spiritualties, may be either Guardeyn in law, or Iure Magistratus, as the
Archbishop is of any Dioces within his province, or guardian by delegation, as
he whom the Archbishop or Vicar general does for the time depute.

Gardeyn of the peace, (Custos pacis.) See Conservatour of the peace.

Gardeyn of the Cinque ports, (Gardianus quinque portuum) is a Magistrate that
has the jurisdiction of those havens in the east part of England, which are
commonly called the Cinque ports, that is, the five havens: who there has all
that jurisdiction, that the Admiral of England has in places not exempt. The
reason why one Magistrate should be assigned to these few havens, seems to
be, because they in respect of their situation, aunciently required a more
vigilant care, then other havens, being in greater danger of invasion by our
enemies, by reason that the sea is narrower there then in any other place. M.
Camden in his Britannia, page 238. says, that the Romans, after they had
settled themselves and their Empire here in England, appointed a Magistrate or
governor over those East parts, whom they termed Comitem littoris Saxonici
per Britanniam, having another that did bear the same title on the opposite
part of the sea: whose office was to strengthen the sea coasts with munition,
against the outrages and robberies of the Barbarians. And farther signifies his
opinion, that this Warden of the Cinque ports, was first erected amongst us, in
imitation of that Roman policy. See Cinque ports.

Gare, anno 31. Fd. 3. cap. 8. is a course wool full of staring hairs, as
such as grows about the pesill or shankes of the sheep.

Garnishment, comes of the French (Garnir. i. instruere.) It signifies in
our common law, a warning given to one for his appearance, and that for the
beter furnishing of the cause and court. For example, one is siewed for the
detinew of certain evidences or charters, and says, that the evidences were
delivered unto him not only by the plaintiff, but by another also: and
therefore prays, that that other may be warned to plead with the plaintiff,
whether the said conditions be performed yea or no. And in this petition he is
said to pray garnishment. New book of Entries. fol. 211. colum. 3. Terms of
the law. Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 211. which may be interpreted either warning
of that other, or else furnishing of the court with parties sufficient,
thoroughly to determine the cause: because until he appear and join, the
defendant (as Fitzh. says) is, as it were, out of the court. not. br. fol.
106. G. and the court is not provided of all parties to the action. I am the
bolder thus to interpret it, because I find Britton in the same mind. cap. 28.
where he says, that contracts be some naked, and sans garnment, and some
furnished, or to use the literal signification of his word, appareled: but a
naked obligation gives no action, but by common assent. And therefore it is
necessary or needful, that every obligation be appareled. And an obligation
ought to be appareled with these five sorts of garnements, etc. Howbeit, I
read it generally used for a warning in many places, and namely, in Kitchen
fol. 6. Garnisher le court, is to warn the court. And reasonable garnishment
in the same place, is nothing but reasonable warning: and again, fol. 283. and
many other authors also. But this may be well thought a Metonymie of the
effect, because by the warning of parties to the court, the court is furnished
and adorned.

Garrantie. See Warrantie.

Garter (Garterium) comes of the french (Iartiere or Iartier. i. periscelis,
fascia poplitaria) It signifies with us both in diverse statutes, and
otherwise, one especial garter, being the ensign of a great and noble
society of knights, called knights of the garter. And this is (...), as Poeta
among the Graecians was Homer, among the Romans Virgill, because they were of
all others the most excellent. This high order (as appears by M. Camden page
211) and many others, was first instituted by that famous king Edward the
third, upon good success in a skirmish, wherein the kings garter (I know not
upon what occasion) was used for a token. I know that Polidore Virgill casts
in an other suspicion of the original: but his grounds by his own confession
grew from the vulgar opinion: yet as it is, I will mention it as I have read
it. Edward the third king of England after he had obtained many great
victories: King John of France, King James, of Scotland, being both prisoners
in the tower of London at one time, and king Henry of Castile, the bastard
expulsed, and Don Pedro restored by the prince of Wales, did upon no weighty
occasion first erect this order in anno 1350. viz. He dancing with the Queen,
and other ladies of the court, took up a garter that happened to fall from one
of them: whereat some of the lords smiling, the king said unto them, that ear
it were long, he would make that garter to be of high reputation, and shortly
after instituted this order of the blew garter, which every one of the order is
bound daily to wear, being richly decked with gold and precious stones, and
having these words written, or wrought upon it: Honi soit qui mal y pence.
which is thus commonly interpreted: evil come to him that evil thinks: but
I think it might be better thus: Shame take him that thinks evil. See
knights of the garter. M. Fearne in his glory of generosity agrees with M.
Camden, and expressier sets down the victories, whence this order was
occasioned: whatsoever cause of beginning it had, theorder is inferiorto none
in the world, consisting of 26. martial and heroical nobles, whereof the king
of England is the chief, and the rest be either nobles of the realm or princes
of other countries, friends and confederates with this realm; the honor being
such, as Emperors and Kings of other nations, have desired and thankfully
accepted it: He that will read more of this, let him repair to M. Camden, and
Polidore, and M. Fern. fol. 120. vbi supra.

The Ceremonies of the chapter proceeding to election, of the inuestures and
robes: of his installation, of his vow with all such other obseruances, see in
M. Segars new book, entitled Honor military and civil. li. 2. ca. 9. fo.
65. Garter also signifies the principal king at arms, among our English
Heralds created by king Henry the 5. Stow. pa. 584.

Garthman, anno 13. R. 2. stat. 1. ca. 19. and anno. 17. eiusd. cap. 9.

Gavelet, is a special and ancient kind of Cessauit used in Kent, where the
custom of Gavill kind continues: whereby the tenent shall forfeit his lands
and tenements to the Lord of whom he holds, if he withdraw from him his due
rents and services. The new Expounder of law Terms, whom read more at large:
I read this word, anno 10. Ed. 2. cap. vnico. where it appears to be a writ
used in the Hustings at London. And I find by Fleta, that it is used in other
liberties, as the Hustings of Winchester, Lincoln, York, and the Cinque
ports. lib. 2. cap. 55. in principio.

Gavelkind, is, by M. Lamberd in his Exposition of Saxon words, verbo. Terra ex
scripto, compounded of three Saxon words, gyfe, call, cin: omnibus cognatione
proximis data. But M. Verstegan in his restitution of decayed intelligence,
cap. 3. calls it (Gavelkind) quasi, give all kind, that is, give to each
child his part. It signifies in our common law a custom, whereby the lands
of the father is equally divided at his death amongst all his sons, or the la^d
of the brother equally divided among the brethren, if he have no issue of his
own, Kit. fol. 102. This custom is said to be of force in diverse places of
England, but especially in Kent, as the said Author reports, showing also
the cause why Kentish men rather use this custom, then any other province.
viz. because it was a composition made between the Conqueror and them, after
all, England beside was conquered, that they should enjoy their ancient
customs, whereof this was one. For M. Camden in his Britannia, page 239. says
in express words thus: Cantiani ea lege Gulielmo Normano se dediderunt, vt
patrias consuetudines illaesas retinerent, illamque inprimis quam Gavelkind
nominant. Hac terrae quae eo nomine censentur, liberis masculis ex aequis
portionibus dividuntur: vel foeminis, si masculi non fuerint: adding more worth
the noting, viz. Hanc haereditatem, cum quintum decimum annum attigerint,
adeunt, and sine Domini consensu, cuilibet, vel dando, vel vendendo alienare
licet. Hac filii parentibus furti damnatis in id genus fundis succedunt, etc.
This custom in diverse gentlemen's lands, was altered at their own petition, by
Act of Parliament. anno 31. H. 8. cap. 3. But it appears by 18. H. 6. cap.
pri. that in those days there were not above thirty or forty persons in Kent,
that held by any other tenure. See the new Terms, Gavelet, and Gavelkinde.

Gawgeour, (gaugeator) seems to come of the French (Gawehir. i. in gyrum
torquere.) It signifies with us an Officer of the Kings appointed to examine
all tons, hogsheades, pipes, barels, and tercians of wine, oil, honey,
butter, and to give them a mark of allowance, before they be sold in any
place. And because this mark is a circle made with an iron instrument for that
purpose: it seems that from thence he takes his name. Of this office you may
find many statutes: the first whereof is, anno 27. Ed. 3. commonly called the
statute of provision, or Purveyours. cap. 8.

Geld, signifies with the Saxons, pecunia vel tributum. See Gyld.

Genets, alias, Ienets. See Furre.

Gentleman, (generosus) seems to be made of two words, the one French,
(gentil. i. honestus, vel honesto loco natus:) the other Saxon (Mon) as if you
would say, a man well borne. The Italian follows the very word, calling those
(gentil homini) whom we call Gentlemen. The Spaniard keeps the meaning,
calling him Hidalgo, or Hyod'algo, that is, the son of some man, or of a man of
reckoning. The Frenchmen call him also gentil houme: so that gentlemen be
those, whom their blood and race does make noble and known. (...), in Greek,
in Latin, Nobiles. Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. 1. cap. 20. under this name
are all comprised that are above Yeomen: so that Noblemen be truly called
gentlemen. But by the course and custom of England, Nobility is either mayor
or minor: the greater contains all titles and degrees from Knights upward: the
lesser all from Barons downward. Smith vbi supra. cap. 21. The reason of the
name, as I take it, grows from this, that they observe gentilitatem suam,
that is, the race and propagation of their blood, by giving of arms, which the
common sort neither does, nor may do. For by the coat that a gentleman
gives, he is known to be, or not to be descended from those of his name, that
lived many hundred years since. Howbeit, that this is neglected, where
substance fails to maintain the countenance. For many of great birth fall to
poverty, whose posterity living and laboring in want, have small
encouragement to look after the titles of their auncesters, and so in time
slip into the number of the ignoble sort: yet if they by their virtue or
fortune, can again advance themselves to sufficient ability, the Herald out
of his observations can restore them to the coat of their progenitors, and now
and then help them to one, that their ancestors never ware. Gentiles homines,
see in Tiraquel. de Nobilitate. cap. 2. page 53. Tully in his Topickes thus
says of this matter. Gentiles sunt, qui inter se eodem sunt nomine ab ingenuis
oriundi, quorum maiorum nemo servitutem servivit, qui capite non sunt diminuti.
And in the first book of his Tusc. questions, he calls Tullum Hostilium,
one of the kings of Rome, gentilem suum.

General Issue. vid. Issue.

Gestu and fama, is a writ. Lamb. Eirenarcha. lib. 4. ca. 14. page 531.

Gygge milles, were for the fulling of woollin cloth and forbidden, anno 5.
Edward. 6. cap. 22.

Gild: alias Geld (Gildare) comes from the Saxon word (Gildan) i. soluere,
Lamb. in his explica: of Saxon words says verb. Contubernalis. It is used as a
verb, and as a substantive also, and as it is a substantive, it is latined
Gilda and signifies a tribute, or sometime an amercement, or thirdly a
fraternity or company, combined together by orders and laws made among
themselves by the princes license. M. Camden cites many antiquities, by which
it appearreth to signify a tribute or tax, as pa. 135. 139. 159. 168. 178. M.
Crompton in his jurisdictions, fol. 191. shows it to be an amercement, as
footgeld, and fol. 197. he interprets it to be a prestation within the
forest, in these words: To be quit of all manner of Gelds. is to be discharged
of all manner of prestations to be made for gathering of sheues of corn, of
lamb, and of wolle to the use of Foresters. Again M. Camden page 349.
dividing Suffolk into three parts, calls the first Gildable, because tribute
is thence gathered; the second libertatem S. Edmundi: The third libertatem S.
Etheldredae. And the statutes: anno 27. Ed. 3. stat. 2. ca. 13. and anno 11. H.
7. ca. 9. use Gildable in the same sense, and so does the statute anno 27. H.
8. ca. 26. From this M. Lamberd, vbi supra, is likewise persuaded, that the
common word (Gild) or (Gildhall) does proceed, being a fraternity or
communalty of men gathered into one combination, supporting their common charge
by a mutual contribution: And in the register original, fol. 219. b. I read
Gildam mercatoriam, that is the Gilde merchaunt, which I have heard to be a
certain liberty or privilege belonging to Merchants, whereby they are enabled
to hold certain plees of land within their own precincts. This word (Gildes)
or (Guildes) is so used anno 37. Ed. 3. ca. 51. and anno 15. R. 2. cap. 5. And
Gildhalda Teutonicorum, is used for the fraternity of easterling merchaunts in
London, called the stilyard anno 22. H. 8. cap. octauo.

Ginger (Zinziber) is a spice well known, being the root of a plant that
grows in hot countries, as Spain, Barbary, etc. The true form whereof you
have expressed in Gerards herball. li. 1. ca. 38. This is a spice whose root
is to be garbled. anno 1. Iaco. ca. 19.

Ginny peper (piper de Ginnea) is otherwise called Indian peper, of the place
whence it comes. The nature and farther description whereof you have in
Gerards herball. lib. 2. ca. 66. This you have mentioned among drugs and spices
to be garbled, in the statute. i. Iaco. ca. 19.

Gisarms: anno 13. Ed. 1. stat. 3. cap. 6. is a kind of weapon. Flet a writes
it Sisarmes. lib. 1. ca. 24, item quod quilibet.

Glaunce Ore, Plowden casu Mines. fo. 320. b.

Glanuill was a learned lawyer, that was Chief Justice in Henry the seconds
days, and writ a book of the common laws of England, which is the
auncientest of any extant touching that subject. Stawnf. praerog. cap. prim.
fol. 5. He was then called in Latin Ranulphus de Glanvilla. He died in Richard
the first his days at the city of Acres in the coast of Jury, being with him
in his voyage to the holy land. Plowden. casu. Stowel. fol. 368. b.

Go, is used sometime in a special signification in our common law: as to go
to God, is to be dismissed the court. Broke titulo. Fayler de records. number. 1.
Go forward, seems also to be a sign given by a Judge to the Sergeant or
Counceler, pleading the cause of his client, that his cause is not good. For
when he stands upon a point of law, and hears those words of the Judges
mouth, he takes understanding, that he loses the action. Smith de Repub.
Anglo. lib. 2. cap. 13. To go without day, is as much as to be dismissed the
court. Kitchen fol. 193.

Good behavior. See Good abearing

Good abearing, (Bonus gestus) is, by an especial signification, an exact
carriage or behavior of a subject, toward the king and his liege people,
whereunto men upon their evil course of life, or loose demeanure are sometimes
bound. For as M. Lamberd in his Eirenarcha. lib. 2. cap. 2. says: he that is
bound to this, is more strictly bound then to the peace: because, where the
peace is not broken without an affray, or battery, or such like: this surety
(de bono gestu) may be forfeited by the number of a man's company, or by his or
their weapons or harness: Where of see more in that learned Writer in the same
chapter, as also in M. Cromptons Justice of peace. fol. 119. b. 120. 121. 122.
123. 124. 125. 126. 127.

Good country, (Bona patria) is an Assise, or Jury of country men or good
neighbors: Skene de verbo. signif. verbo, Bona patria.

Graffer (grafarius) signifies as much as a notarie or scriuener. It comes
of the French (greffier. i. scriba, actuarius.) This word is used in the
statute anno. 5. H. 8. c. 1.

Grains (grana paradisi, alias Cardamomum) is a spice medicinable and
wholesome, whereof you may see diverse kinds in Gerards herball, l. 3. ca. 148.
These are comprised among mercha^dise that be to be garbled. an^. I. c. 19.

Grand assise. See Assise. and Magna assisa.

Grand Cape. see Cape and Attachment.

Grand Sergeanty: See Chyvalrie. and Seargeantye.

Grand distress: (Magna destrictio) is a distress taken of all the lands, and
goods, that a man has within the county or bayliwicke, whence he is to be
distrained: Fleta. li. 2. ca. 69.. penult: See Distress. This word is used
anno 51. H. 3. ca. 9. This falls out when the defendant has been attached,
and yet appears not upon his attachment; or when he appears and afterward
makes default. For then the Shyreeue is commanded to distreine the Defendant,
by all his goods and chatels, and to answer the king the issues of his lands.

Grange (grangia) is a house or building, not only where corn is laid up, as
barns be, but also where there be stables for horses, stalles for oxen and
other catell, sties for hogs, and other things necessary for husbandry,
Lindwood ca. item omnes de iudiciis verbo, Graungus, in glossa:

Grant (Concessio, grantum) Glanvile. signifies specially in our common law,
a gift in writing of such a thing, as cannot aptly be passed or conveyed by
word only: as rent, reversions, services, advowsens in gross, common in
gross, villein in gross, tithes, etc. or made by such persons, as cannot give
but by deed, as the king and all bodies politic: which differences be often
in speech neglected, and then is it taken generally for euerry gift whatsoever,
made of any thing by any person, and he that grants it, is named the
grauntour, and he to whom it is made, the Grauntee. West. part. i. symbol.
lib. 2. sect. 334. A thing is said to lie in grant, which cannot be assigned
with out deed. Coke l. 3. Lincolnes Coll. case. f. 63. a.

Great men, are sometimes understood of the laity of the higher house of
parliament, as anno. 43. Ed. 3. ca. 2. and anno 8. R. 2. in prooem. and sometime
of the knights etc. of the lower house, as anno 2. R. 2. stat. 2. in princip.

Gree, comes of the French (Gre). i. sententia, beneplaecitum. It signifies
in our common law, contentment or good liking: as to make gree to the parties,
is to satisfy them for an offense done. anno 1. Rich. 2. cap. 15.

Greachbreach, is breaking of the peace. Saxon in the descriptiion of England.
ca. 11. v. Rastal. titulo exposition of words. The new expounder of law terms
writes it (Grichbreach) and gives it the same signification. See Greve.

Green hew, is all one with vert. Manwood part 2. of his forest laws. cap.
6. nu. 5. See Vert.

Green wax, seems to be used for estretes delivered to Shyreeues out of the
exchequer, under the seal of that court, to be levied in the county, anno 42.
Ed. 3. ca. 9. and anno 7. H. 4. cap. 3. See Foreign apposer.

Grieve (praepositus) is a word of power and authority, signifiing as much as
Dominus, or praefectus. Lamberd in his exposi. of Saxon words, verbo
Praefectus. Where he seems to make it all one with (Reve) as I think
undoubtedly it is: The Saxon word is Gerefa whereof we have diverse words
compounded, as Shyreeue. Portgreave, etc. which were wont of the Saxons to be
written Scyrgerefa: Portgerefa See. Shyreeue and Portgreve. See Roger Hoveden
part poster. suorum annal. fo. 346. b. where he says thus: Grieve dicitur,
ideo quod iure debeat grithe. i. pacem ex illis facere, qui patriae inferunt
Vae. i. miseriam vel malum.

Grithbreach, is a breach of peace. For Grith is a word of the old Angles,
signifiing peace. Roger Hovedin part poster suorum annal. fo. 346. b. See
Greachbreach.

Grills anno 22. Ed. 4. ca. 2.

Grocers, be merchants that ingrosse all merchandise vendible anno 37. Ed. 3.
ca. 5.

Groom, anno 33. H. 8. ca. 10. (Valletus) is the name of a servant that
serves in some inferior place. M. Verslegan in his restitution of decayed
intelligence says, that he finds it to have been in times past a name for
youths, who albeit they served, yet were they inferior to men servants, and
were sometimes used to be sent on foot of errands, serving in such manner as
lackies do now.

Growme, anno 43. E. ca. 10. seems to be an engine to stretch woollen cloth
withal after it is wouen.

Guydage (Guyda^gium) is that which is given for safe conduct through a strange
territory. Cassan: de consuet. Bourg. page 119. whose words be these. Est
Guidagiu^ quod datur alicui, vt tuto conducatur per loca alterius.

Guylde, See Gyld.

Guylhalda Teutonicorum. See Gild.

Gule of August (Gula Augusti) anno. 27. Ed. 3. stat. 3. cap. vnico Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 62. I. alias Goule de August. Plowd. casu Mines, fo. 316. b. is the
very day of Saint Peterad vincula, which was wont, and is still within the
limits of the Roman church, celebrated upon the very Kalends of August. Why it
should be called the gule of August, I cannot otherwise conjecture, but that it
comes of the latin (gula) or the French (gueule) the throat. The reason of
my conjecture is in Durands rationali diuinorum li. 7. ca. de festo Sancti
Petri ad vincula, who says that one Quirinus a tribune, having a daughter that
had a disease in her throat, went to Alexander then Pope of Rome the sixth from
Saint Peter, and desired of him to borow or see the cheines that Saint Peter
was cheined with under Nero: which request obtained, his said daughter kissing
the said cheine, was cured of her disease and Quirinus with his family was
baptized. Tunc dictus Alexander papa (says Durand hoc festum in Kalendis.
Augusti celebrandum instituit, and in honorem beali Petri ecclesiam in vrbe
fabricavit, vbi vincula ipsa reposuit, and ad vincula nominavit; and Kalendis
Augusti, dedicauit. In qua festivitate, populus illic ipsa vincula hodie
osculatur. So that this day being before called only the Kalends of August,
was upon this occasion afterward termed indifferently either of the instrument
that wrought this miracle, Saint Peter's day ad vincula, or of that part of the
maiden, whereon the miracle was wrought, the Gule of August.

Gultwit, seems to be compounded of (Gult. i. noxa) and wit, which is said by
some skillful men, to be an ancient termination of the words in the Saxon
tongue, signifiing nothing in it self, but as (dom) or (hood) and such like be
in these english words (Christendom) and (Manhood) or such others: others say,
and it is true, that wit signifies blame or reprehension. Gultwit (as Saxon in
his description of England ca. 11. does interpret it) is an amends for trespass.

Gust (Hospes) is used by Bracton for a stranger or guest, that lodges with
us the second night: lib. 3. tracta. 2. ca. 10. In the laws of Saint Edward
set forth by M. Lamberd, number. 27. it is written Gest: of this see more in
Vncothe.

Gum (gummi) is a certain clammie or tough liquor that in manner of a swetie
excrement, issues out of trees, and is hardened by the sun. Of these there be
diverse sorts brought over seas, that be drugs to be garbled, as appears by
the statute anno 1. Iaco. ca. 19.

Gutter tyle, alias corner tyle, is a tile made three cornerwise, especially to
be laid in gutters, or, at the corners of tyled houses which you shall often
see upon douehouses at the four corners of their rofes. anno 17. Eduardi 4.
ca. 4.

H A
HAbeas corpus, is a writ, the which a man indicted of some trespass before
Justices of peace, or in a court of any franchise, and upon his apprehension
being laid in prison for the same, may have out of the kings bench, thereby to
remove himself thither at his own costs, and to answer the cause there, etc.
Fitzh. not. br. fol. 250. H. And the order is in this case, first to procure a
(Certiorari) out of the Chau^cerie directed to the said Justices for the
remoouing of the Inditeme^t into the kings bench, and upon that to procure this
writ to the Shyreeue, for the causing of his body to be brought at a day,
Register judicial. fol. 81. where you shall find diverse cases, wherein this
writ is used.

Habeas corpora, is a writ that lies for the bringing in of a Jury, or so
many of them, as refuse to come upon the (venire facias) for the trial of a
cause brought to issue. old not br. fol. 157. See great diversity of this
writ, in the table of the Register Judicial. verbo, habeas corpora. and the
new book of Entries. verbo eodem.

Habendum, is a word of form in a deed of conueyance, to the true
understanding whereof you must know, that in every deed of conueyance, there
be 2. principal parts, the premises, and the habendum. The office of the
premises is, to express the name of the grauntour, the grauntee, and the
thing granted or to be granted. The office of the (habendum) is to limite the
estate, so that the general implication of the estate, which by construction
of law passes in the premises, is by the (habendum) controlled and
qualified. As in a lease to two persons, the (habendum) to one for life, the
remainder to the other for life, alters the general implication of the joint
tenancie in the freehould, which should pass by the premises, if the
(Habendum) wear not. Cook. vol. 2. Bucklers case. fo. 55. See Use.

Habere facias seisinam, is a writ Judicial, which lies, where a man has
recovered lands in the kings court, directed to the Shyreeue, and commanding
him to give him seisin of the land recovered. old not. br. fol. 154. Terms of
the law: whereof see great diversity also in the table of the Register
Judicial, verb. Habere facias seisina^. This writ is issuing sometime out of
the Records of a fine executorie, directed to the Shyreeue of the county,
where the land lies, and commanding him to give to the Cognizee or his heirs,
seisin of the land, whereof the fine is levied. which writ lies within the
year after the fine, or Judgment upon a (scire facias) and may be made in
diverse forms. West. part. 2. symb. titulo Fines. sect. 136. There is also a
writ called Habere facias seisinam, vbi Rex habuit annum, diem, and vastum,
which is for the redeliuery of lands to the Lord of the fee, after the king
has taken his due of his lands, that was convicted of felony. Register. orig.
fol. 165.

Habere facias visum, is a writ that lies in diverse cases, where view is to be
taken of the lands or tenements in question. See Fitzh. not. br. in Iudice.
verbo, (View) See Bracton. li. 5. tract. 3. ca. 8. and lib. 5. part. 2. ca.
11. See vi(...) See the Register. Judicial, fol. 1. 26, 28. 45. 49. 52.

Haberiects (Hauberietus pannus) magn. chart. ca. 25. and pupilla oculi. part.
5. ca. 22.

Hables, is the plural of the French (hable) signifiing as much as a port or
haven of the sea, whence ships do set forth into other countries, and whether
they do arrive, when they return from their voyage. This word is used. anno
27. Hen. 6. cap. 3.

Haerede deliberando alii qui habet custodiam terrae, is a writ directed to the
Shyreeue, willing him to command one having the body of him, that is ward to
another, to deliver him to him, whose ward he is by reason of his land.
Register. original. fol. 161. b.

Haerede abducto, is a writ that lies for the lord, who having the wardship of
his tenent under age by right, cannot come by his body, for that he is conveyed
away by another. old. not. br. fol. 93. See Ravishment de Guard, and Haerede
rapto, in Regist. orig. fol. 163.

Haeretico comburendo, is a writ that lies against him, that is an heretic.
viz. that having been once convinced of herisy by his Bishop, and having
abiured it, afterward falls into it again, or into some other, and is
thereupon committed to the secular power. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 269.

Haga, is used as a kind of latin word for a house. I find in an ancient
book sometime belonging to the abbey of Saint Augustines in Canterbury, that
king Stephen sent his writ to the Shyreeue and Justices of Kent, in this manner.
Stephanus Rex Anglorum vicecomiti and Iusticiariis de Kent salutem. praecipio
quod faciatis habere ecclesiae sancti Augustini and monachis hagam suam quam
Gosceoldus eis dedit, it a been and in pace and just and quiet and libere,
sicut eam eis dedit in morte sua coram legalibus testibus, etc.

Hagbut, See Haque and Haquebut.

Hay boot, seems to be compounded (Hay. i. Sepes) and (Bote. i.
compensatio) The former is french, and the second is Saxon. And although it do
fall out sometime, that our words be so compounded: yet is it rare. wherefore
it may be thought peradventure to come as well from (Hag) and (boot) which be
both saxon words. It is used in our common law for a permission to take
thorns and freeth to make or repair hedges.

Half haque, See Haque.

Half merk (dimidia merka) seems to signify a noble. Fitzh: not: br: fol: 5.
where he says that in case a writ of right be brought and the seisin of the
Demaundant, or his auncester alleged, the seisin is not traversable by the
Defendant, but he may tender or proferre the half merke for the inquiry of
this seisin, which is as much to say in plainer terms, that the Defendant
shall not be admitted to deny, that the Demandant or his auncester, was seized
of the land in question, and to prove his denial: but that he shall be
admitted to tender half a merke in money, to have an inquiry made, whether
the Demandant, etc. were so seized or not. And in this signification I read
the same words in the old English natura breuium, fol. 26. b. viz. Know ye,
that in a writ of right of Advouzen brought by the king, the defendant shall
not proferre the half merke, ne judgment final shall be given against the
king, etc. Whereof Fitz. vbi supra. M. gives the reason, because in the kings
case, the defendant shall be permitted to trauerse the seisin by license
obtained of the Kings Sergeant. To this effect see Fitz. not. br. fol. 31. C.
D. E.

Half seal, is used in the Chauncerie for the sealing of Commissions unto
Delegates, appointed upon any appeal in ecclesiastical or marine causes, an.
8. Elizab. cap. 5.

Half tongue. See Medietas linguae.

Halymote, alias, Healgemot, is a Court Baron. Manwood part prim. of his
Forest laws. page 111. and the etymology is the meeting of the tenants of one
hall or manner. M. Gwins preface to his reading, which for the esteem thereof,
is by copies spread into many men's hands.

Hallage, is a see due for cloths brought for sale to Blackwell hal in London.
Coke vol. 6. fol. 62. b.

Hamlet (Hameletum) is a diminutiue of (Ham) which signifies habitationem.
Camden. Brit. page 149. and 354. The French (hameau. i. viculus) is also nere
unto it. Kitchen has Hamel in the same sense. fol. 215. who also uses hampsel
for an old house or cotage decayed. fol. 103. Hamlet (as Stowe uses it in Ed.
3.) seems to be the seat of a Free holder. For there he says, that the said
king bestowed two manners and nine hamlets of land upon the monastery of
Westminster, for the keeping of yearly obits for his wife Queen Eleanor
deceased.

Hameling of dogs, or hambling of dogs, is all one with the expeditating of
dogs. Manwood part prim. of his Forest laws. page 212. and part 2. cap.
16. number. 5. where he says, that this is the ancient term that Foristers used
for that matter, whence this word might be drawn, I dare not resolve: but it is
not improbable, that hameling is quasi, hamhalding, that is, keeping at home,
which is done by paring their feet so, as they cannot take any great delight
in running abroad. See Expeditate.

Hampsell. See Hamlet.

Hamscken, see Homesoken. M. Skene de verb: significa: writes it Haimsuken,
and deriueth it from (Haim) a German word, signifiing a house or dwelling, and
(Suchen) that is to seek, search, or persiew. It is used in Scotland for the
crime of him, that violently, and contrary to the kings peace, assaulteth a man
in his own house: which (as he says) is punishable equally with rauishing of
a woman. significat quietantiam miser^^rdiae intrationis in alienam domum vi
and unjust. Fleta. lib. pri. cap. 47. See Homesoken.

Hand in and Hand out. anno 17. Ed. 4. cap. 2. is the name of an unlawful game.

Hand full, is four inches by the standard. anno 33. H. 8. cap.

Hankwit alias (Hangwit) or (Hengwit) comes of the Saxon words (Hangen. i.
pendere) and (wit) whereof read in Gultwit: Rastall in the title, Exposition
of words faith, it is a liberty granted unto a man, whereby he is quit of a
felon or these hanged without judgment, or escaped out of custody. I read
it interpreted, mulcta pro homine unjust suspenso. Or whether it may be a
liberty, whereby a Lord chalengeth the forfeiture due for him, that fordoeth
himself within his fee or not, let the Reader consider. See Bloodwit.

Hanper, (haneperium) haueper of the Chauncerie. anno 10. R. 2. cap. prim.
seems to signify as fiseus originally does in Latin. See Clerk of the
Hanaper.

Hanse, (as Ortelius in the Index of his Additament to his Theater, verb.
Ansiatici. says,) is an old Gothish word. Where he shows not the
interpretation. It signifies a certain society of Merchants, combined
together for the good usage and safe passage of merchandies from kingdom to
kingdom. This society was, and (in part) yet is, endued with many large
privileges of princes, respectively within their territories. It had four
principal seats, or staples: where the Almaine or Dutch Merchants being the
erectours of this society, had an especial house, one of which was here in
London, called Gildhalda Teutonicorum, or in our common language, the
Steelyard. Of this you may read more in the place of Ortelius above mentioned.

Hap, comes of the french (Happer. i. rapio, cum quadam velocitate capio)
and the french seems to come from the greek (...). It signifies in our
common law the same thing: as to hap the possession of a deed poll.
Litleton. fol. 8.

Haque, is a handgunne of about three quarters of a yard long, anno. 33. H. 8.
ca. 6. and a. 2. et. 3. Ed. 6. ca. 14. There is also the half haque or demi
hake. See Haquebut.

Haquebut, is that piece of artilery or gunne, which we otherwise call an
harquebuse, being both french words. anno. 2. and 3. Ed. 6. ca. 14. and anno 4.
and 5. Ph. and Ma. ca. 2.

Hariot, alias, Heriot (heriotum) is the saxon (heregeat) a little altered,
which is drawn from (here. i. exercitus) and a (heriot) in our Saxons time
signified a tribute given to the lord for his better preparation toward war.
Lamb. in his expl. of Saxon words. verbo. hereotum. The name is still retained,
but the use altered: for whereas, by M. Lamb. opinion vbi supra, it did
signify so much as Releife does now with us: now it is taken for the best
cha^ell that a tenent has at the hour of his death, due unto the lord by
custom, be it horse, ox, kettle, or any such like. M. Kitchen distinguishes
between heriot service and heriot custom. fol. 133. and 134. for
interpretation whereof, you shall find these words in Brook. titulo hariot.
nu. 5. Hariot after the death of the tenent for life, is hariot custom. For
hariot service is after the death of tenent in fee-simple. The new Expounder of
the law terms says, that hariot service (in some man's opinion) is often
expressed in a man's grant or deed, that he holds by such service to pay
hariot at the time of his death, that holds in fee simple. Hariot custom is,
where hariots have bin paid time out of mind by custom. And this may be after
the death of the tenent for life. See Plowden. fol. 95. b. 69. a. b. Braston
says, that heriotum, est quasi Releuium. lib. 2. cap. 36. See Relief. But
Britton. cap. 69. says, that heriot is a reward made by the death of a tenent,
to any Lord, of the best beast found in the possession of the tenent
deceased, or of some other according to the ordinance or assignement of the
party deceased, to the use of his Lord, which reward touches not the Lord at
all, nor the heir, nor his inheritance, neither has any comparison to be
Releife: for it proceeds rather of grace or goodwill then of right, and
rather from villeins then free men. See Dyer, fol. 199. nu. 58. to the same
effect. This in Scotland is called Herrezelda. compounded of herr. i. dominus,
herus. and zeild.. i. gift. Skene de verbo. signif. verbo Herrezelda.

Heart, is a stagge of 5. years old complete. Manwood part 2. of his forest
laws. cap. 4. nu. 5. which he has out of Budaeus de philologia. li. 2. And if
the King or Queen do hunt him, and he escape away alive, then afterward he is
called a Heart royal. And if the beast by the Kings or Queens hunting be
chased out of the forest and so escape: proclamation is commonly made in the
places there about, that in regard of the pastime, that the beast has showed
to the King or Queen, noneshall hurt him, or hinder him from returning to the
forest; and then is he a Heart royal proclaimed. Idem. eodem.

Hauberk, comes of the French (Haubert. i. lorica) whereupon he that holds
land in France by finding a coat or shirt of mayle, and to be ready with it,
when he shall be called, is said to have Hauberticum feudum. whereof Hotoman
writes thus: Hauberticum feudum gallica lingua vulgo dicitur pro (loricatum).
i. datum vasallo ca condition, vt ad edictum loricatus sieve cataphractus
praesto sit. Nam vt lorica latinis proprie and minus vsitate est tegmen de loro
factum, quo maiores in bello vtebantur, quemadmodum Seruius Honoratus scribit
in libro Aeneidu^ 11 frequentissime autem pro aenea armatura in tegravsurpatur.
sic apud Gallos Haubert proprie loricam annulis contextam significat, quam
vulgus Cotte de maille appellat. Haec Hot. in verbis feudal. verbo Hauberticum
feudum. Hauberk with our awncesters seems to signify, as in France, a shirt
or coat of mayle and so it seems to be used, anno 13. Ed. pri. stat. 3. ca.
6. Though in these days the word is otherwise written as (Halbert) and
signifies a weapon well enough known.

Haward alias Hayward, secmeth to be componnded of two french word (Hay. i.
sepes) and Guard.. i. custodia) It signifies with us, one that keeps the
common heard of the town: and the reason may be, because one part of his
office is to look that they neither break nor croppe the hedges of enclosed
grounds. It may likewise come from the german (herd. i. armentu^ and (bewarren.
i. custodire). He is a sworn officer in the Lords court: and the form of his
oath you may see in Kitchen. fol. 46.

Hawkers, be certain deceitful fellows, that go from place to place, buying
and selling, brass, pewter, and other merchandise, that ought to be uttered in
open market. The appellation seemeeth to grow from their uncertain wandering,
like those that with hawks seek their game, where they can find it. You
find the word. anno. 25. H. 8. ca. 6. and anno 33. eiusdem. cap. quarto.

Headborow, is compounded of two words: (Heofod. i. caput) and (Bor-he. i.
pignus) It signifies him, that is chief of the franckpledg: and him that had
the principal government of them within his own pledge. And as he was called
Headborowe, so was he also called Borowhead, Bursholder, Thirdborow, Tithing
man, Chief pledge, or Borowelder, according to the diversity of speech in
diverse places. Of this see M. Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words. verbo
Centuria. and in his treatise of Constables. and Smith de Repub. Anglo. lib. 2.
cap. 22. It now signifies Constable. See Constable.

Healfang, is compounded of two Saxon words (Hals. i. collu^) and (fang. i.
capere, captivare). See Pylorie.

Heir (Haeres) though, for the word, it be borrowed of the latin; yet, it has
not altogether the same signification with us, that it has with the Civilians,
for whereas they call him (haeredem) qui ex testamento succed(...) in vniuersum
ius testatoris: the common lawyers call him heir, that succeeds by right of
blood, in any man's lands or tenenients in fee, for there is nothing passes
with us iure haereditatis, but only fee. Moueables, or chatels immovable, are
given by testament, to whom the testator lists, or else are at the
disposition of the Ordinary, to be distributed as he in conscience thinks
meet, Glossa in Provinciali constitut. Ita quorundam. De testamentis. verbo.
Ab intestato. And whether a man enjoy moveable goods and chatels, by will or
the discretion of the Ordinary, he is not with us called an heir: but only
he that succeeds either by testament, or right of blood in fee. Cassanaeus in
consuetud. Burg. page 909. has a distinction of haeres, which in some sort
well accords with our law: For he says, there is haeres sanguinis, and
haereditatis. And a man may be haeres sanguinis with us, that is, heir
apparent to his father, or other auncester: and yet may upon displeasure, or
mere will be defeated of his inheritance, or at the least, the greatest part
thereof.

Heir loome, seems to be compounded of (heir) and (loome) that is, a
frame, namely to weaue in. The word by time is drawn to a more general
signification, then at the first it did bear, comprehending all implements of
household, as namely, tables, presses, cupbords, bedsteedes, wainscots, and such
like, which by the custom of some countries, having belonged to a house
certain descents, are never inventaried after the decease of the owner, as
chatels, but accrue to the heir with the house it self. This word is twice
metaphorically used in that divine speech, made by that most worthy and
complete noble man the Earl of Northampton, against that hellish, ugly, and
damnable treason of gunpowder, plotted to consume the most virtuous King that
ever reigned in Europe, together with his gracious Queen, and precious
posterity, as also the three honorable estates of this renowned kingdom.

Heck, is the name of an Engine, to take fish in the river of Owse by York.
anno 23. H. 8. cap. 18.

Heinfare, alias, hinefare, (discessiofamuli a domino) the word is compounded
of (hine) a servant, and (fare) an old English word, signifiing a passage.

Henchman, or heinsman, is a German word signifying (domesticum, aut vnum de
familia.) It is used with us, for one that runs on foot attending upon a
man of honor or worship. anno 3. Ed. 4. cap. 5. anno 24. Henric. 8. cap. 13.

Hengwite, significat quiet antia^ misericordiae de latrone suspenso absque
consideratione. Fleta lib. prim. cap. 47. See Hankwit.

Herald, (heraldus) is borrowed by us of the French (herault) and in M.
Verstegans judgment proceeds originally from two Dutch words (here. i.
exercitus) and (healt. i. pugil magnanimus,) as if he should be called (the
Champion of the army) having by especial office to challenge unto battle or
combat. With us it signifies an officer at arms, whose function is to
denounce war, to proclaim peace, or otherwise to be employed by the King in
martial messages or other business. The Romans called them plurally
(Feciales.) M. Stow in his Annals deriueth them from heroes. page 12. which he
has from other that writ of that subject, whose conjecture I leave to the
reader. Their office with us, is described by Polydore. lib. 19. in this sort:
speaking of the knights of the Garter, he says: habent insuper Apparitores
ministros, quos heraldos dicunt: quorum praefectus armorum Rex vocitatur: hy
belli and pacis nuncii. Ducibus, Comitibusque a Rege factis insignia aptant, ac
eorum funera curant. He might have added farther, that they be the Judges and
examiners of gentlemen's arms, that they marshall all the solemnities at the
coronations of princes, manage combats, and such like. There is also one and
the same use of them with us, and with the French nation, whence we have their
name. And what their office is with them, see Lupanus lib. prim. de Magist.
Francorum, ca. Heraldi. There be diverse of them with us: whereof three being
the chief, are called Kings at arms. And of them Garter is the principal,
instituted and created by Henry the fifth. Stowes annals. page 584. whose
office is to attend the knights of the Garter at their solemnities, and to
marshall the solemnities of the funerals of all the greater nobility, as of
Princes, Dukes, Marquises, Earls, Vicounts, and Barons, yet I find in
Plowden, casu Reniger, and Fogassa, that Ed. the fourth granted the office of
the king of Heralds, to one Garter cum feudis and proficuis ab antiquo, etc.
fol. 12. b. The next is Clarentius, ordained by Edward the fourth. for he
attaining the Dukedom of Clarence by the death of George his brother, whom he
beheaded for aspiring to the crown, made the Herald, which properly belonged
to the Duke of Clarence, a King at arms, and called him Clarentius. His proper
office is, to marshall and dispose the funerals of all the lesser nobility, as
knights, and Esquires, through the Realm of the south side of Trent. The third
is Norroy, or Northroy, whose office is the same on the north side of Trent,
that Clarentius has on this side, as may well appear by his name, signifiing
the northern king, or king of the north parts. Beside these, there be six
other properly called Heralds according to their original, as they were
created to attend Dukes, etc. in marshall executions. viz. York, Lancaster,
Somerset, Richemond, Chester, Windlesour. Lastly there be four other called
marshals or pourswivants at arms, reckoned after a sort, in the number of
Heralds, and do commonly succeed in the place of the Heralds as they dye, or
be preferred: and those be Blew Mantle, Rougecrosse, Rougedragon, and
Percull^^. The (feciales) among the Romans were priests, Nam N(...) Pompilius
diuini cultus inst(...)nem in octo parts diuisit, and ita itiam sacerdotum
octo ordines constunit, etc. Septima^ partem sacrae constitutionis collegio
little adiccit, (...) Feciales vocantur. Erant autem ex optimis domibus viri
electi, per omne ipsi vitae tempus sacrati, quorum parts in eo versabantur, vt
fidei publicae inter populos praeessent: neque iustum aliquod bellum fore
censebatur: nisi id per Feciales esset indictum. Qui vt Festus ait, a faciendo,
quod belli pacisque faciendae apud cos ius esset, Feciales dicti sunt. Corasius
miscel. iuris ciui. li. 1. ca. 10. (...). 12.

Herbage (herbagium) is a french word, and signifies in our common law, the
fruit of the earth provided by nature for the bitte or mouth of the catell. But
it is most commonly used for a liberty that a man has to feed his catell in
another man's ground, as in the forest, etc. Cromptons Jurisdiction. fol. 197.

Herbenger comes of the french (Heberger) or (Esberger) (hesberger). i.
hospitio excipere. It signifies with us, an officer of the princes court, that
allotteth the noble men, and those of the household their lodgings. It
signifies also in Kitchen, an Inkeeper. fol. 176.

Hereditaments (hereditamenta) seem to signify all such things immovable, be
they corporeal or incorporeall, as a man may have to himself and his heirs,
by way of inheritance. v. anno 32. H. 8. ca. 2. or not being otherwise
bequeathed, do naturally and of course descend to him which is our next heir
of blood, and fall not within the compass of an executour, or administratour, as
chatels do.

Heriot. See Hariot.

Hide of land (Hida terrae) Saxonice (Hidelandes) is a certain measure or
quantity of land, by some men's opinion, that may be plowed with one plowe in a
year: as the author of the new Terms says, verbo Hidage. by other men, it
is an hundred acres. By Beda (who calls it familia^) it is as much as will
maintain a family. Crompton in his Iurisdict. fol. 220. says, that it
consists of an hundred acres: every acre in length 40. perches, and in
breadth 4. perches, every perch 16. foot and a half. and again, fol. 222. A
hide of land contains an hundred acres, and 8. hides or 800. acres, contain
a knights fee. Of this read more in M. Lamberds Explica: of Saxon words,
verbo Hyda terrae. See Carue.

Hide and gain. old. not. br. fol. 71. Coke. lib. 4. Tirringhams case.
signifies carable land. See Gainage.

Hidage (Hidagium) is an extraordinary tax, to be paid for every hide of
land, Bracton li. 2. c. 6. writes thus of it: Sunt etiam quaedam communes
praestationes, quae seruitia non dicuntur, nec de consuetudine veniunt, nisi
cum necessitas intervenerit, vel cum Rex venerit: sicut sunt Hidagia, Coragia,
and Carvagia: and alia plura de necessitate and ex consensu communi totius
Regni introducta, and quae ad Dominum feudi non pertinent, etc. of this read
the new expounder of law terms, who says that hidage is to be quit, if the
king shall tax all the lands by hides, and yet also grants it to be the
tax it self, saying that it was wont to be an usual kind of taxing as well
for provision of armor, as payments of money.

Hinefare. See Heinfare.

Hidel. i. H. 7. ca. 6. seeemeth to signify a place of protection, as a
Sanctuary.

Hierlome, See Heirlome.

Hine, seems to be used for a Servant at husbandry and the master hine a
servant that ouerseeth the rest. anno. 12. R. 2. ca. quarto.

Hoblers (Hobellarii) are certain men, that by their tenure are tied to
maintain a little light nagge, for the certifiing of any invasion made by
enemies, or such like peril toward the Sea side, as Porchmouth, etc. of these
you shall read. anno 18. Ed. 3. stat. 2. cap. 7. and anno 25. eiusdem. stat.
5. ca. 8.

Hoghenhine, is he that comes guestwise to a house, and lies there the third
night. After which time he is accounted of his family in whose house he lies:
and if he offend the kings peace, his host must be answerable for him. Bracton
lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10. In the laws of King Edward set forth by M. Lamberd,
he is called agenhine. wheare you may read more of this matter.

Hithe (Hitha) is a petit haven to land wares out of vessels or boats. new
book of Entrise. fol. 3. colum. 3.

Hoggeshead, is a measure of wine or oil containing the fourth part of a
tun. that is 63. gallons. anno. i. R. 3. ca. 13.

Hoistings. See Hustings.

Homage (Homagium) is a french word, signifiing (fidem clientularem.) for in
the original grants of land and tenements by way of fee, the lord did not
only tie his tenants or feed men to certain services: but also took a
submission with promis and oathe, to be true and loyal to him, as there lord
and benefactour. This submission was and is called homage: the form whereof you
have in the second statute anni. 17. Ed: 2. in these words: when a free man
shall do homage to his Lord, of whom he holds in chief: he shall hold his
hands together between the hands of his lord, and shall say thus: I become
your man from this day forth for life, for member, and for wordly honor, and
shall owe you my faith for the land I hold of you: saving the faith, that I do
owe unto our Sovereign Lord the king, and to mine other Lords. And in this
manner the Lord of the fee, for which homage is due, takes homage of every
tenent, as he comes to the land or fee. Glanvile. lib. 9. ca. 1. except they
be women, who perform not homage but by their husbands, (yet see Fitzherbert.
that says the contrary in his natura br. fol. 157. F.) Read Glanuile more at
large in the said first chapter, with the second, third and fourth; The reason
of this M. Skene gives de verbo. significatione, verbo Homagium. viz. because
Homage especially concerns service in war. He says also, that consecrated
Bishops, do no homage, but only fidelity: the reason may be all one. And yet
I find in the Register. orig. fol. 296. a. that a woman taking liuerie of lands
holden by knights service, must do homage, but not being jointly infeoffed,
for then she does only fealty. And see Glanuile in the end of the first
chapter of his nineth book touching Bishops consecrated, whom he denies to
perform homage to the king for their Baronie, but only fealty. Fulbeck
reconeileth this, fol. 20. a. in these words. By our law a religious man may
do homage, but may not say to his Lord. Egodevenio homo vester, because he
has professed himself to be only Gods man, but he may say, I do unto you
homage, and to you shall be faithful and loyal. See of this Britton. cap. 68.
Homage, is either new with the fee, or auncestrell: that is, wheare a man and
his auncesters, time out of mind, have held their lands by homage to their
Lord, whereby the Lord is tied to warrant the land unto his tenent. new Terms
of the law. This homage is used in other countries as well as ours, and was
wont to be called Hominium. See Hotom. de verbis feudalibus, verbo. Homo. Skene
divides it into liegium and non liegium. de verb. signifi. verbo Homage. for
the which see Liege, and Hotoman, disputatione de feudis tertia. Homage is
sometime used for the Jury in the Court Baron, Smith de Repub. Anglo. lib. 2.
cap. 27. The reason is, because it consists most commonly of such, as owe
homage unto the Lord of the fee. And these of the Feudists are called pares
curiae, sive ourtis, sieve domus, sic dicuntur enim conuassalli sieve compares,
qui ab eodem patrono feudum receperunt, vel qui in eodom territorio feudum
habent. Hotoman. Of this homage you may read in the 29. c. of the Grand
Custumarie of Normandy, where you shall understand of other sorts of homage
used by them, and strange unto us. whereunto join Hotoman. disputat. de
feudis, in diverse places and namely columna 860. C. hiis verbis. Deinceps de
nota hominii and feudalitiae subiectionis videamus. Omnium quidem video esse
commune, vt dexteras tanquam in foederibus iungerent: plerumque etiam vt
dexteris aversis, osculum praeberent, interdum, vt ambas manus iunctas patrono
contrectandas praeberent: supplicum and dedititiorum nomine, qui velatas manus
porrigebant. and page 861. hiis verbis. Multis Galliae atque etiam Angliae
moribus constitutum est (Quod ex Anglico Litletonio intelleximus) vt hominium
seruili and supplici veneratione, ac plane tanquam a dedititiis praestetur. Nam
vasallus discinctus, nudo capite, ad pedet sedentis patroni proiectus, ambas
manus iunctas porrigit: quas dum Dominus suis manibus amplectitur, haec verba
pronunciat. Here, venio in tuum hominium and fidem, and homo tuus fio ore and
manibus; tibique iuro ac spondeo fidelem me tibi futurum eorum feudorum nomine,
quae tuo beneficio accepi, etc. Whereunto you may add him, colum. 819. G. 822.
F. and 857. B. and D. and F. Of homage in Scotland, read M. Skene, de verb.
signif. verbo Homagium. to whom you may also join a plentiful discourse in
speculo Durandi. commonly called (speculator) among the Civilians, titulo De
Feudis.

Homagio respectuando, is a writ to the Escheatour commanding him to deliver
seisin of lands to the heir, that is at full age, notwithstanding his homage
not done, which ought to be performed before the heir have liuerie of his
lands, except there fall out some reasonable cause to hinder it. Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 269.

Homine eligendo ad custodiendam peciam sigillipro Mereatoribus aediti, is a
writ directed to a corporation, for the choice of a new man to keep the one
part of the seal, appointed for statutes Merchant, when the other is dead,
according to the statute of Acton Burnel. Register. orig. fol. 178. a.

Homine replegiando, is a writ for the bail of a man out of prison: which, in
what cases it lies, and what not, See Fitz. not. br. fol. 66. See also the
Register orig. fol. 77. See the new book of Entries. verb. Homine replegiando.

Homine capto in Withernamium, is a writ to take him, that has taken any
bondsman or woman, and led him or her out of the county, so that he or she
cannot be repleuied according to law. Register orig. fol. 79. a. See Withernam.

Homicide (homicidium) is the slaying of a man: and it is divided into
voluntary, or casual: homicide voluntary is that, which is deliberated, and
committed of a set mind, and purpose to kill: homicide volu^tary, is either
with precedent malice, or without. The former is murder, and is the felonious
killing through malice prepensed of any person living in this realm under the
Kings protection. West. part. 2. simbol: tit. Inditment. sect: 37. etc. vsque
ad 51. where you may see diverse subdiuisions of this matter. See also Glanuile.
lib 14. cap: 3. Bract. l: 3. tra: 2. c. 4. 15. and 17. Brit. c. 5. 6. 7. See
Muder. Man's slaughter and Chance medley.

Homesoken, alias Hamsoken (Hamsoca) is compounded of (Ham. i. habitatio) and
(Soken. i. quaerere). It is by Bracton. lib. 3. tract: 2. c: 23. thus defined.
Homesoken dicitur inuasio domus contra pacem Domini Regis. It appears by
Rastall in the title. Exposition of of words: that in ancient times some men
had an immunitie to do this: for he defines Homesoken to be an immunitie from
amercements for entering into houses violently, and without license. which thing
seems so unreasonable, that me thinks he should be deceived in that his
exposition. I would rather think it should be a liberty, or power granted by
the king to some common person, for the cognizance or punishment of such a
trangression. for so I have seen it interpreted in an old note that I have
given me by a friend, which he had of an expert man toward the Exchequer, but
of what authority I know not. See Hamsoken.

Hondhabend, is compounded of two Saxon words (Hond. i. hand, and habend. i.
having) and signifies a circumstance of manifest theft, when one is
deprehended with the thing stolen in his hand. Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. ca.
31. and 54. who also use the (handberend) for the same, eodem cap. 8.

Honor (honor) is, beside the general signification, used specially for the
more noble sort of seigneuries: whereof other inferior Lordships, or manners
do depend by performance of customs and services, some or other, to those
that are Lords of them. And I have reason to think that none are honors
originally, but such as are belonging to the King. How be it they may afterward
be bestowed in fee upon other nobles. The manner of creating these honors may
in part be gathered out of the statutes anno 31. H. 8. cap. 5. where Hampton
court is made an honor. and anno 33. eiusdem. cap. 37. and 38. whereby Amptill
and Grafton be likewise made honors. and anno 37. eiusdem ca. 18. whereby the
King has power given by his leters patents, to erect four several honors.
Of Westminster, of Kingston upon Hull, Saint Osithes in Essex, and Dodington in
Berkshire. This word is also used in the self same signification in other
nations. See ca. licet causam. extra de probationibus. and Minsinger upon it.
nu. 4. In reading I have observed thus many honors in England: The honor of
Aquila. Camden. Britan. page 231. of Clare. page 351. of Lancaster. page 581.
of Tickhill. page 531. of Wallingford, Notingham, Boloine. Magna charta. cap:
31. of West Greenewish, Camd: page 239. of Bedford. pupil. oculi. part. 5.
cap. 22. of Barhimsted. Brook, titulo Tenure. nu. 16. of Hwittam. Camd page
333. of Plimpton. Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 115. of Creuecure, and Hagenet Febert.
anno 32. H. 8. cap. 48. of East Greenewish. of Windsour in Berk shire, and of
Bealew in Essex. anno 37. H. 8. ca. 18. of Peverell in the county of Lincoln.
Register orig. fol. 1.

Horngeld, is compounded of Horn and Gildan or Gelder. i. Soluere. It
signifies a tax within the forest to be paid for horned beasts. Cromptons
Iurisd. fol. 197. And to be free thereof, is a privilege granted by the king
unto such as he think eth good. Idem, ibidem. and Rastall in his exposition of
words.

Horse de sonfee, is an exception to avoid an action brought for rent, issuing
out of certain land by him that pretends to be the Lord, or for some
customs and services. for if he can justify that the land is without the
compass of his fee, the action falls. v. Brook. hoc titulo.

Hospitallers (Hospitalarii) were certain knights of an order, so called,
because they had the care of hospitals, wherein Pilgrims were received to these
Pope Clement the fifth transferred the Templers, which order, by a council held
at Vienna in France, he suppressed for their many and great offenses, as he
pretended. These Hospitallers be now the knights of Saint John of Malta.
Cassan: gloria mundi. part. 9. considerat. 5. This constitution was also
obeyed in Ed. the 2. time here in England, and confirmed by Parliament. Tho.
Walsing ham. in historia Ed. 2. Stawes annals. ibidem. These are mentioned anno
13. Ed. 1. ca. 43. and anno 9. H. 3. ca. 37.

Hostelers (Hostellarius) comes of the french (Hosteler. i. Hospes) and
signifies with us, those that otherwise we call Inkeepers, an. 9. Ed. 3. stat.
2. c. 11.

Hotchepot (in partem positio) is a word that comes out of the lowecountries,
where (Hutspot) signifies flesh cut into pretty pieces, and sodden with herbs
or roots, not unlike that which the Romans called farraginem. Festus. Litleton
says that literally it signifies a pudding mixed of diverse ingredients: but
metaphorically a commxtion or putting together of lands, for the equal
division of them being so put together. Examples you have diverse in him. fo.
55. and see Briton, fol: 119. There is in the Civil law collatio bonorum
answerable unto it, whereby if a child advanced by the father in his life
time, do after his father decease, challenge a child's part with the rest, he
must cast in all that formerly he had received, and then take out an equal
share with the others. De collatio: bonorum. P. lib: 37. titulo. 6.

Housebote, is compounded of House, and Bote. i. compensatio. It signifies
estovers out of the Lords wo^de to vphould a tenement or house.

Houserobbing, is the robbing of a man in some part of his house, or his booth,
or te^t in any fair or market, and the owner, or his wife, children, or
servants, being within the same. for this is felony by anno. 23. H: 8. cap. i.
and. anno. 3. Ed. 6. cap 9. yea, now it is felony though none be within the
house. anno. 39. Eliz: ca. 15. See Burglarie. see West. part. 2. sym. tit.
Inditeme^ts, sect: 67.

Hudegeld, significat quiet antiam transgressionis illatae in seruum
transgredientem. Fleta lib. i. ca: 47. Quare whether it should not be Hindegeld.

Hue, and Cry (Hutesium and Clamor) come of 2. french words: (Huier) and
(Crier) both signifiing to shoute or cry a loud. M. Manwood, part. 2. of his
forest laws. ca: 19. nu. 11. says, that Hew is latin, meaning belike the
Interiection: but under reformation, I think he is deceived; this signifies a
pursuit of one having committed felony by the high way, for if the party
robbed, or any in the company of one murdered or robbed, come to the Constable
of the next town, and will him to raise Hiew and Cry, or to make pursuit
after the offe^dour, describing the party, and showing as near as he can,
which way he is gone: the Constable ought forthwith to call upon the parish
for aid in seeking the felon: and if he be not found theare, then to give the
next Constable warning, and he the next, until the offender be apprehended, or
at the least, until he be thus persued to the sea side. Of this read Bracton.
lib: 3. tracta: 2. ca. 5. Smith de Repub: Anglo: lib: 2. cap: 20. and the
statute anno. 13. Ed. 1. statute of Winchest. c. 3. and. a. 28. Ed: 3. c: 11.
and anno. 27. El: c: 13. The Normans had such a persuite with a Cry after
offenders as this is, which they called Haro: whereof you may read the Grand
Custumarie, cap. 54. Some call it Harol: the reason whereof they give to be
this, that there was a Duke of Normandy called Roll, a man of great justice and
seruerity against grievous offenders: and that thereupon when they follow any
in this persuite, they cry Ha-Rol, as if they should say, Ah Roll where art
thou that were wont to redress this, or what would thou do against these
wretches, if thou now were living. But in truth I think it comes, from
Harier. (...) flagitare, inquiet are, vrgere. Hue is used alone. anno 4. Ed.
pri. Stat. 2. This the Scots call Huesium and M. Skene de verbo. signif. verb.
Huesium, says, that it comes of the french Oye^. i. Audite. making one
etymology of this and the cry used before a proclamation, The manner of their
hue and cry, as he there describes it, is that if a robbery be done, a horn
is blown, and an out cry made: after which, if the party fly away, and not
yield himself to the Kings Bayliffe, he may be lawfully slain, and hanged up
upon the next gallows. Of this Hue and cry, see Cromptons Justice of peace.
fol. 160. b.

Huissers. See Vshers.

Hundred (Hundredum) is a part of a shire, so called originally, because it
contained ten tithings called in latin Decennas. These were first ordained by
king Alfred the 29. king of the West Saxons. Stowes Annals page 105. of these
thus speaks M. Lamb. in his explica. of Saxon words. verbo, Centuria^
Aluredus rex, vbi cum Guthruno Daca foedus inierat, prudentissimum illud ^lim a
Ietr^^ Moysi datum secutus consilium, Angliamprimus in satrapias, Centurias,
and Decurias, partitus est. Satrapiam, shire a shyran (quod parti^ significat)
nominavit: Centuriam, Hundred: and Decuria^, Toothing sieve Tienmantale. i.
Decemvirale collegium appellavit: atque iisdem nominibus vel hodie vocantur,
etc. And again afterward: Decrevit tum porro Aluredus liberae vt condicionis
quisque in Centuriam ascriberitur aliquam, atque in Decemviralt aliquod
coniiceretur collegium. De minoribus negotiis Decurionet vt tudicarent: ac
si^quae esset re^ difficilior, ad Centuriam deferrent: diffi^illimas denique
and maximi mo^^enti lites, Senator and praepositus in frequenti illo ex omni
satrapia conventu componerent. Modus autem iudicandi quis fuerit, Ethelredus
Rex, legum, quas frequenti apud Vanatingum senatu sancivit, capite 4. hiis fere
verbis exponit. In singulis centuriis comitia sunto, atque liberae condicionis
viri duodeni, aetate superiores, vna cum praeposito, sacra tenentes iur anto,
se adeo virum aliquem innocent em haud damnaturos sortemve absoluturos. This
form of dividing counties into Hundreds for beter government, howsoever it is
attributed to King Alfred here with us: yet he had it from Germany, whence he
and his came hither. For there centa or centena is a jurisdiction over a
hundred towns, and contains the punishment of capital crimes. Andraeas
Kitchen. in his tractate, de sublimi and regio territorii iure. ca. 4. pa. 123.
where he also shows out of Tacitus, de situ and moribus Germa. that this
diuiuision was usual amongst the Germans before his days. By this you
understand the original and old use of Hundreds, which hold still in name, and
remain in some sort of combination, for their several services in diverse
respects, but their jurisdiction is abolished, and grown to the county court,
some few excepted, which have been by privilege annexed to the crown, or
granted unto some great subject, and so remain still in the nature of a
Fraunchise. And this has been ever sithence the stat. anno 14. Ed. 3. stat.
1. ca. 9. whereby these Hundred courts formerly fermed out by the Shyreeue to
other men, were reduced all, or the most part, to to the county court, and so
have and do remain at this present. So that where you read now of any hundred
courts, you must know, that they be several fraunchises, wherein the Shyreeue
has not to deal by his ordinary authority, except they of the Hundred
refuse to do their office. See West. part. 1. symbol. lib. 2. sect. 288. See.
Turn. The new expounder of law terms says, that the latin Hundredum is
sometime used for an immunitie or privilege, whereby a man is quit of money or
customs due to the governors, or Hundreders.

Hundreders (Hundredarii) be men empaneled or fit to be empaneled of a Jury
upon any controversy, dwelling within the Hundred where the land lies, which
is in question, Cromptons Iurisdict. fol. 217. and anno 35. Henrici 8. cap. 6.
It signifies also him that has the Jurisdiction of a hundred, and holds the
hundred court. anno. 13. Ed. pri. ca. 38. anno. 9. Ed. 2. stat. 2. and anno 2.
Ed. 3. ca. 4. and sometime is used for the Bayliffe of an hundred. Hornin his
mirror of Justices, li. 1. ca del office del coroner.

Hundredlaghe, signifies the Hundred court, from the which all the officers
of the Kings forest were freed by the charter of Canutus. ca. 9. Manwood.
part. 1. page 2.

Huors, See Conders.

Huseans, comes of the French (houseaux) i. ocrea, aboote. It is used in the
Statute anno. 4. Ed. 4. ca. 7.

Hustings (Hustingum) may seem to come from the French (Haulser. i. tollere,
attollere, suberigere) for it signifies the principal and highest court in
London. anno 11. H. 7. ca. 21. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 23. See anno. 9. Ed.
pri. ca. vnico. Other Cities and towns also have had a court of the same name,
as Winchester, Lincoln, York, and Sheppey, and others, where the Barons or
Citizens have a record of such things as are determinable before them. Fleta.
libro 2. cap. 55.

Husfastene, is he that holds house and land, Bracton lib. 3. tractat. 2. ca.
10. His words be these, Et in franco plegio esse debet omnis, qui terram tenet
and domum, qui dicuntur Husfastene, and etiam alii qui illis deserviunt, qui
dicuntur Folgheres, etc.

I A
I Arrock: anno 1 Rt. 3. ca. 8. is a kind of cork so called.

Identitate nominis, is a writ that lies for him who is upon a Capias or
Exigent, taken and committed to prison for another man of the same name:
whereof see the form and farther use, in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 267. see the
Register original, fol. 194.

Idiot, and he that afterward becomes of insane memory, differs in diverse
cases, Coke. fol. 154. b. lib. 4. See here following Idiota inquirenda.

Idiota inquirenda vel ex aminanda, is a writ that is directed to the
excheatour or the Shyreeue of any county, where the king has understanding
that there is an Idiot, naturally borne so weak of understanding, that he
connot govern or manage his inheritance, to call before him the partysuspected
of Idiocie, and examine him: And also to inquire by the oaths of twelve men,
whether he be sufficiently witted to dispose of his own lands with discretion
or not, and to certify accordingly into the Chauncery: For the king has the
protection of his subjects, and by his prerogative the government of their
lands and substance, that are naturally defective in their own discretion:
statut. de praerogatiua Regis editum anno 17. Ed. 2. cap. 8. whereof read
Stawnf. praerog. cap. 9. and of this writ, read Fitzh. not. br. fol. 232. see
the register orig. fol. 267.

Ietzon se Flotzon.

Ieofaile, is co^pou^ded of 3. french words, IN ay faille: i. ego lapsus sum:
and signifies in our common law, an ouer-sight in pleading, touching the
which you have a statute anno 32. H. 8. cap. 30. whereby it is enacted, that if
the Jury have once passed upon the issue, though afterward there be found a
Ieofaile in the pleading, yet judgment shall likewise be given according to
the verdict of the Jury. See Brook, tit. Rrepleder: the author of the new
terms of law says, that a Ieofaile is when the parties to any suite, have in
pleading proceeded so far, that they have joined issue, which shall be tried or
is tried by a Jury or inquest: and this pleading or issue is so badly pleaded
or joined, that it will be error if they proceed: then some of the said
parties may by their council show it to the court, as well after verdict given
and before judgment, as before the Jury be charged: the showing of which
defects before the Jury charged, was often when the Jury came into the court to
try the issue, then the council which will show it, shall say: this inquest
you ought not to take, and if it be after verdict, then he may say: to
Judgment you ought not to go: and because of this many delays grew in
suites, diverse statutes are made to redress them: viz. 32. H. 8. c. 30. and
others in Q. Elizabethes days, and yet the fault little amended.

Ignoramus, is a word properly used by the grand Enquest empaneled in the
inquisition of causes criminal and public: and written upon the bill, whereby
any crime is offered to their consideration, when as they mislike their
evidence, as defective or to weak to make good the presentment. The effect of
which word so written is, that all farther inquiry upon that party for that
fault, is thereby stopped, and he delivered without farther answer. It has a
resemblance with that custom of the ancient Romans: where the Judges, when
they absolved a person accused, did wright A. upon a little table provided for
that purpose. i. Absoluimus: if they judged him guilty, they writ C. id est.
Condemnamus: if they found the cause difficult and doubtful, they writ. N. L.
id est. Non liquet. Asconius Pedianus in oration. pro Milone. Alexander ab
Alexandro. Genial. dierum, li. 3. ca. 14.

Ikenildstreate, is one of the four famous ways that the Romans made in
England, taking the beginning ab Icenis, which were they that inhabited Northf.
Southf. and Cambridg shyre, Camd. Britan. fol. 343. See Watlingstreat.

Imparlance (interlocutio vel interloquela) is a petition made In court upon
the count of the Demanndant by the tenent, or declaration of the plaintiff, by
the defendant, whereby he craves respight, or an other day to put in his
answer, See Brook, titulo Continuaence: See Dies datus: Imparlaunce seems
to be general or special: special imparlaunce is with this clause saluis
omnibus aduantagiis tam ad iurisdictionem curiae, quam breue and narrationem.
Kitchen: fol. 200. Then general in reason must be that, which is made at large
without inserting that or the like clause. See Emperlaunce

Impeachment of Waste, (impetitio vasti) comes of the french (empeschement.
i. impedimentum) and signifies with us, a restraint from committing of waste
upon lands or tenements: See Waste.

Implements, comes of the french (emploier, i. insumere in re aliqua) it
signifies with us, things tending to the necessary use of any trade or
furniture of househould.

Impost, is a french word signifiing tribute, coming of the verb (imposer) i:
iniungere, irrogare, it signifies with us, the tax received by the prince for
such merchandise, as are brought into any heaven from other nations: anno. 31.
Elizabeth. cap: 5. and I think it may in some sort be distinguished from
customs, because custom is rather that profit, which the prince makes of wares
shipped out of the land: yet may they be confounded:

Improuement, See Approve.

In casu consimili. is a Writ: See casu consimili.

In casu prouiso: is a Writ: See casu prouiso.

Incident (incidens) signifies a thing necessarily depending upon another as
more principal: for example, a court Baron is so incident to a manner, and a
court of piepowders to a faier, that they cannot be severed by grant: for if a
manner or fair be granted, these coutts cannot be referued. Kitchen. fol: 36.

Incroche (incrociare) Se encrochments. Admirals, and their deputies do
incroche to themselves Jurisdictions, etc: anno. 15. Rich: 2. ca: 3.

Indenture (indentura) is a writing comprising some contract between two, and
being indented in the top aunswerably to another, that likewise contains
the same contract: this the Latins called (...), or (...), which among the
ciuilians, is defined to be scriptura inter creditorem and debitorem indentata,
in cuius sciscura literis capitalibus haec dictio (...), or plurally (...)
scribitur. and it differs from (...), quia hoc manu vnius tantum, puta
debitoris scribitur, and penes debitorem relinquitur pruinc. consttut. de
offic: archidiaco: cap: pri: verbo In scriptis. vid. Gothosr: in notis ad l.
27. 3. P. ad leg. Corn. de falls.

Indicauit, is a writ or prohibition that lies for a patron of a church, whose
Clerk is defendant in court Christian, in an action of tithes commenced by
another clerk, and extending to the fourth part of the church, or of the
tithes belonging unto it. for in this case, the suite belongs to the kings
court, by the statute Westminster: 2: cap: 5. wherefore the patron of the defendant,
being like to be prejudiced in his church and aduowzen, if the plaintiff
obtain in the court Christian, has this means to remove it to the kings
court; the Register original fol. 35. b. see old. not: br. fol. 31. and the
register fol: 35. and Britton. cap: 109. fol. ^60. A.

Indictment (Indictamentum) see indightment.

Indiuisum, is used in the common law, for that which two houlde in common
without particio^. Kitchen. fol. 241. in these words: he houldeth pro indiuiso,
etc:

Indorsment (indorsamentum, signifies in the common law, a condition written
upon the other side of an obligation: West: part: 2. simbol: sect: 157.

Infang, alias infeng, significat quietantiam prioris prisae ratione conuiuij,
Fleta l: i. cap: 47.

Infangthef, or Hinfangthefe, or Infangtheof, is compounded of 3. Saxon words:
the preposition (In) (fang or fong) to take or catch, and (thef) it signifies
a privilege or liberty granted unto Lords of certain manners, to judge any
theeife taken within there fee. Bracton. lib. 3. tracta. 2. cap. 8. In the
laws of King Edward, set out by M. Lambard: nu. 26: you have it thus
described: Infangthefe, Iustitia cognoscentis latronis sua est, de homine suo,
si captus fuerit super terram suam: Illivero qui non habent has consuetudines,
coram insticia regia rectum faciant in Hundredis, vel in Wapentachiis, vel in
Scyris: The definition of this see also in Britton: fol: 90. b. and Roger
Houeden. part poster. suoru^ annalium. fol. 345. b. and M. Skene de verborum
significatione, verbo Infangthefe, who writes of it at large, reciting
diversity of opinions touching this and outfangthefe: Fleta says that
(infangtheef) for so he writes it, dicitur latro captus in terra alicuius
seisitus aliquo latrocinio de suis propriis hominibus. libro 1. cap: 47:
Infangtheefe.

Information, See Enditement: See the new terms of law.

Informer (informator) in french (informateur) is an officer belonging to the
exchequer or kings bench, that denounces or complains of those that offend
against any penal statute. They are otherwise called promotors, but the men
being bashful of nature, do blush at this name: these among the Ciuilians are
called delatores.

Informatus non sum, is a formal answer or of course made by an attorney,
that is commanded by the court to say what he thinks good in the defense of
his client, by the which he is deemed to leave his client undefended, and so
judgment paseth for the adverse party. See the new book of Entries. titulo
Non sum informatus. and Judgment 12.

Ingressu, is a writ of entry, that is, whereby a man seeks entry into lands
or tenements; it lies in many diverse cases wherit has as many diversities of
forms. See Entry: this writ is also called in the particular, praecipe quod
reddat: because those be formal words in all writs of entry. The writs as they
lie in diverse cases, are these described in the old natura breu: Ingressu ad
terminum qui praetertit, fol. 121. original Regist. sol. 227. which lies
where lands or tenements are let to a man for term of years, and the tenent
houldeth over his term: Ingressu dum non fuit compos mentis. fol. 223.
original: regist: fol. 228. which lies where a man sells land or tenement
when he is out of his wits, etc. Ingressu dum fuit infra aetatem, fol. 123.
Register original fol. 228. which lies where one under age sells his lands,
etc. Ingressu super deseisina in le quibus fol. 125. Regist. orig. fol. 229.
which lies where a man is disseised and dies, for his heir against the
disseisour. Ingressu in per fol. 126. original register fol. 229. Ingressu sur
cui in vita, fol. 128. original Register fo. 239. both which see in Enrry:
Ingressu cause matrimonii praelocuti. fol. 130. original register fol. 233:
which see causa matrimonii praelocuti. Ingressu in casu proviso, f. 132.
Register original. fo. 235. which see casu pro viso. Ingressu cui ante
diuortium. fol. 130. original register fol. 233. for which see, cui ante
diuorium. Ingressu in consimili casu, fol. 233. original Register fol. 236.
for which see Confimili casu. Ingressu sine consensu capituli, fol. 128.
original register, fol. 230: for which see Sine assensu capituli. Ingressu ad
communem legem. fol. 132. original register, fol. 234. which lies, where the
tenent for term of life or of another life, tenent by courtesy, or tenent in
Dower makes a feofment in fee, and dies; he in the reuersion shall have the
foresaid writagainst whomsoever that is in the land, after such feofment made.

Engrossing of a fine, is making the indentures by the chirographer, and the
delivery of them to the party unto whom the cognizance is made. Fitzh. not. br.
fol. 147. A.

Ingrosser (ingrossator) comes of the frence Grosseur: i. crassiiudo. or
Grosier. i. Solidarius venditor, it signifies in the common law, one that
buieth corn growing, or dead victual, to sell again, except barley for malt,
oats for oatemeale, or victuals to retaile, badging by license, and buying of
oiles, spices, and victuals, other then fish or salt. anno. 5. Edward: 6.
cap: 14. anno. 5. Elizab: cap: 14. anno. 13. Elizab. cap: 25. these be M.
Wests. words, part. 2. simbol: titulo Inditements: sect. 64. howbeit this
definition rather does belong to unlawful engrossing, then to the word in
general. see Forstaller.

Inheritance (hareditas) is a perpetuity in lands or tenements to a man and his
heirs. For Litleton cap: i. lib: i: has these words: and it is to be
understand, that this word (inheritance) is not only understand, where a man
has inheritance of lands and tenements by descent of heritage, but also every
fee simple or fee tail that a man has by his purchase, may be said
inheritance: for that, that his heirs may inherit him: Several inheritance is
that, which two or more hold severally, as if two men have land given them to
them and the heirs of their two bodies, these have joint estate during their
lives, but their heirs have several inheritance. Kitchen. fol: 155. See the
new terms of law. verbo Enheritance:

Inhibition (Inhibitio) is a writ to inhibit or forbid a Judge from farther
proceeding in the cause depe^ding before him: See Fitzh: not: br: fol: 39. where
he puts prohibition and inhibition together: inhibition is most commonly a
writ issuing out of a higher court Christian to a lower and inferior, upon an
Appeal. anno. 24. H. 8. cap: 12. and prohibition out of the kings court to a
court Christian, or to an inferior temporal court.

Iniunction (iniunctio) is an interlocutory decree out of the Cha^cerie,
sometimes to give possession unto the plaintiff, for want of appearance in the
defendant, sometime to the Kings ordinary court, and sometime to the court
Christian, to stay proceeding in a cause upon suggestion made, that the regour
of the law, if it take place, is against equity and conscience in that Case.
see West: part. 2. simb: titulo Proceeding in Chauncery sect: 25.

Inlawgh (Inlagatus) vel homo sub lege) signifies him that is in some frank
pledge, of whom take Bractons words, l. 3. tracta: 2. cap. H. nu. 5. Minor
vero, and qui infra aetatem duodecim annoru^ fuerit, vtlagari non potest nec
extra legem poni: quia ante talem aetatem non est sub lege aliqua, nec in
decenna, non magis quam foemina. quae vtlagari non potest quia ipsa non est sub
lege. i. Inlowghe anglice: sc: in franco plegio sieve decenna sicut masculus
duodecim annorum and vlteriu^s, etc. Inlaughe, significat hominem subiectum leg
i, Fleta li. i. cap. 47.

Inlagary (Inlagatio) is a restitution of one outlawed, to the kings
protection, and to the benifite or estate of a subject. Bracton: lib. 3 tracta:
2 cap. 14. nu. 6. 7. 8. Britton cap: 13.

Inmates, are those that be admitted to dwell for their money jointly with
another man, though in several rooms of his mantio^ house, passing in and out
by one door, and not being able to maintain themselves, which are inquiralle
in a leete. Kitchen. fol: 45 where you may read him at large who be properly
Inmates in intendment of law, and who not.

Imprision, anno 18 Ed: 3 statu: 4: cap. vnico. seems to signify so much as
an attempt, coming of the french empris) which is all one with (enterpris) an
enterprise.

Inquirendo, is an authority given to a person or persons, to inquire into
some thing for the kings advantage, which in what cases it lies, see the
Register original, fol. 72. 85. 124. 265. 266. 179. 267.

Inquisition (Inquisitio) is a manner of proceeding in matters criminal, by the
office of the Judge, which Hostiensis defines thus: Inquisitio nihil aliud est
quam alicuius criminis manifesti ex bono and aquo Iudicis compeientis canonice
facta investigatio, ca. qualiter. de accusatio. In the Decretales: this course
we take here in England by the great Enquest before Justices in Air: See Air.
and the places in Bracton and Britton there noted; Inquisition is also with us,
used for the King in temporal causes and profits, in which kind it is
confounded with Office: Stawnf praerog. fo. 51. See Office.

Inrolement (Irrotulatio) is the registring, recording or entering of any lawful
act in the rowles of the chauncerie, as recognisance acknowledged, or a statute
or a fine levied. See West. part 2. symbol. titulo Fines. sect. 133.

Insimul tenuit, is one species of the writ called a Formdon. See Formdon.

Intakers, be a kind of thieves in Ridesdall. anno. 9. H. 5. ca. 8. so called,
as it seems, because they dwelling within that liberty, did receive in such
booties of catell or other things as the out parters brought in unto them. See
Out parters.

Interdiction (Interdictio) is used in the common law, in the same
signification that it has in the canon law, where it is thus defined:
interdictio est censura ecclesiastica prohibens administrationem diuinorum: c.
quod in te: de paenitent: and remiss. in the Decretals: and thus is it used.
anno. 24. H. 8. cap. 12.

Interpleder, See Enterpleder.

Intrusion (Intrusio) by Bracton lib. 4. cap. 2. is thus defined. Intrusio est,
vbi quis (cui nullum ius competit in re nec scintilla Iuris, possessionem
vacuam ingreditur, quae nec corpore nec animo possidetur, sicut haereditatem
iacentem antequam adita fuerit ab harede, vel saltem a domino capitals ratione,
custodiae, vel ratione eschaeta si forte heredes non existant, vel si post
mortem alicuius per finem factum, vel per modum donationis, vbi successio sibi
locum vendicare non possit, vel si post mortem alicuius qui tenuit ad vitam,
debeat tenementum reverti ad proprietariu^, ponat quis se in seisina^ antequa^
teneme^tu^ illud veniat ad illu^ ad quem pertinere deberet ex praedictis
causis, with whom agrees Fleta, lib. 4. cap. 30.. 1. and 2. See Britton cap.
65. to the same effect. See the new book of Entries. verbo Entrusion. See
Entrusion. See disseisin: the author of new Terms of law would have intrusion
especially after the tenent for life is deceased. verbo, Abatement. and
abatement in all other cases: But I find not any latin word for abatement but
intrusio, so that I rather think these 2. english words to be synonyma: and
Fleta cap. supra citato, seems direct against this his opinion.

Intrusione, is a writ that lies against the intruder: Register: fol. 233.

Inuentarie (inuentarium) is a description or repertory orderly made of all
dead men's goods and catels prized by four credible men or more, which every
executor or administrator ought to exhibit to the Ordinary, at such times as
he shall appoint the same. West. part prim: Simb: lib: 2. sect: 696. where
likewise you may see the form: This Inuentary proceeds from the civil law;
for whereas by the ancient law of the Romans, the heir was tied to answer
all the testators debts, by which means heritages were prejudicial to many
men and not profitable: Justinian to encorage men the better to take upon them
this charitable office, ordained, that if the heir would first make and
exhibit a true Inuentary of all the testatours substance coming to his hand,
he should be no further charged, then to the value of the Inuentarie: l. vlt.
Cod. de Iure de liberando.

Inuest (Inuestire) comes of the french word (Inuester) and signifies to
give possession. He are Hotoman de verbis fendalibus, verbo Inuestitura:
Inuestitura barbarum nomen, barbaricam quoque rationem habet. Nam vt ait
Feudista, lib. 2. titulo. 2. Inuestitura proprie dicitur quando hasta vel
aliquod corporeum traditur a domino; with us we use likewise to admit the
tenants by delivering them a verge or rodd into their hands, and ministering
them an oath, which is called Inuesting: others define it thus: Inuestitura,
est alicuius in suumius introductio.

Inure, signifies to take effect: as the pardon inureth: Stawnf: praerog: fol.
40. See Enure.

Ioynder, is the coupling of two in a suite or action against another: Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 118. H. 20^. H. 221. and H. in many other places, as appears in
the Index. verbo Ioynder.

Joint tenants (simul tenentes) liber intrationum, titulo Formdon in vieu. 3.
be those that come to and hold lands or tenements by one title pro indiuiso,
or without partition. Litleton lib. 3. cap. 3. and terms of law: See Tenants
in common.

Joining of issue (Iunctio exitus) See Issue.

Iointure (Iunctura) is a covenant, whereby the husband or some other friend in
his behalf assures unto his wife, in respect of marriage, lands or tenements
for term of her life, or otherwise, See West: part: 2. Symbol. lib. 2. titulo
Covenants. sect. 128. and the new exposition of the law terms: it seems to be
called a Ioynture, either because it is granted ratione iuncturae in
matrimonio, or because the land in frank marriage, is given jointly to the
husband and the wife, and after to the heirs of their bodies, whereby the
husband and wife be made joint tenants during the couerture. Coke li. 3. Butler
and Bakers case. f. 27. b. See franckmariage. Ioynture, is also used as the
abstract of joint tenants. Coke lib. 3. the Marquis of Winchesters case. fol.
3. a. b. Iunctura, is also by Bracton and Fleta used for joining of one
bargain to another. Fleta lib. 2. ca. 60. touching the self same thing: and
therefore ioynture in the first signification, may be so called, in respect
that it is a bargain of liuelyhood for the wife: adjoined to the contract of
marriage.

Iourn Choppers, anno 8. Hen. 6. cap. 5. be regraters of yarn. Whether that we
now call (yarne) were in those days called (iourn) I cannot say: but
(choppers) in these days are well known to be chaungers. as choppers of
churches, etc.

Iourneyman, comes of the French (Iournee) that is a day or days work.
which argues that they were called Iourneymen, that wrought with others by the
day, though now by statute it be extended to those likewise, that covenant to
work in their occupation with another by the year. anno quinto Elizabeth.
cap. quarto.

Issue (Exitus) comes of the French (Issir: i. emanare) or the substantive
(Issue: i. exitus, euentus) It hat diverse applications in the common law:
sometime being used for the children begotten between a man and his wife:
sometime for profits growing from an amercement or fine, or expenses of suite:
sometime for profits of lands or tenements: West: 2. anno. 13. Edw. prim. cap.
39. sometime for that point of matter depending in suite, whereupon the parties
join and put their cause to the trial of the Jury: and in all these it has
but one signification, which is an effect of a cause proceeding. as the
children be the effect of the marriage between the parents: the profits growing
to the king or Lord from the punishment of any man's offense, is the effect of
his transgression: the point referred to the trial of twelve men is the effect
of pleading or process. Issue, in this last signification, is either general
or special: General issue seems to be that, whereby it is referred to the
Jury to bring in their verdict, whether the defendant have done any such thing,
as the plaintiff lays to his charge. For example: if it be an offense against
any statute, and the defendant plead: not culpable: this being put to the
Jury, is called the general issue: and if a man complain of a private wrong
which the defendant denies, and plead, no wrong nor disseisin, and this be
referred to the 12. it is likewise the general issue. Kitchen. fol. 225. See
the Doctor and Student, fol. 158. b. the special issue then must be that,
where special matter being alleged by the defendant for his defense; both the
parties join thereupon, and so grow rath er to a demurrer, if it be quaestio
Iuris, or to trial by the Jury, if it be quaestio facti; see the new book of
Entries: verbo, Issue.

Iuncture see Iointure.

Iure patronatus, See the new book of Entries, verbo Iure patronatus in quar^
impedit. fol. 465. col. 3.

Jury (Iurata) comes of the french (Iurer: i iurare.) it signifies in our
common law, a company of men as 24. or 12. Sworn to deliver a truth upon
such evidence, as shall be delivered them touching the matter in question. Of
which trial who may and who may not be empaneled, see Fitzh. not. br. fol.
165. D. And for beter understanding of this point, it is to be known, that
there be. 3. manner of trials in England: one by Parliament, another by battle,
and the third by Assise or Jury: Smith de repub. Anglorum. lib: 2. cap: 5. 6.
7. touching the 2. former read him, and see Battle, and Combat, and
Parliament: the trial by Assise (be the action civil or criminal, public or
private, personal or real) is referred for the fact to a Jury, and as they
find it, so passes the Judgment. and the great favor that by this the King
shows to his subjects more then the princes of other nations, you may read
in Glanuil. lib: 2: cap: 7. where he called it Regale beneficium clementis
principis de consilio procerum populis indultum, quo vitae hominu^, and status
integritati tam salubriter consulitur; vt in iure, quod quis in libero soli
tenemento possidet, retinendo, duells casum declinare possint homines ambiguum,
etc: see the rest. This Jury is not used only in circuits of Justices errant,
but also in other courts and matters of office, as if the Escheatour make
inquisition in any thing touching his office, he does it by a Jury or inquest:
if the Coroner inquire how a subject found dead, came to his end: he uses an
inquest. the Justices of peace in there quarter Sessions, the Shyreeue in his
county and Turn, the baylife of a Hundred, the Steward of a court Leete or
court Baron, if they inquire of any offense, or descide any cause between
party and party, they do it by the same manner. So that where it is said that
all things be triable by Parliament, Battle, or assise; Assise in this place is
taken for a Jury or Enquest, empaneled upon any cause in a court, where this
kind of trial is used: and though it be commonly deemed, that this custom of
ending and desciding causes proceed from the Saxons and Brittons, and was of
favor permitted unto us by the Conqueror: yet I find by the grand Customarie
of Normandy. cap: 24. that this course was used likewise in that country. For
Assise is, in that Chapter, defined to be an assembley of wise men, with the
Bailife in a place certain at a time assigned 40. days before. whereby Justice
may be done in causes heard in the court: of this custom also and those
Knights of Normandy Johannes Faber makes mention, in the Rubrique of the
title de militari testamento, in Institut. this Jury, though it appertain to
most courts of the common law, yet is it most notorious in the half year
courts of the Justices errants, commonly called the great assizes, and in the
quarter Sessions, and in them it is most ordinarily called a Jury. And that in
civil causes: whereas in other courts, it is oftener termed an enquest, and in
the court Baron the Homage. In the general Assise there are usually many
Iuries, because there be store of causes both civil and criminal commonly to
be tried, whereof one is called the Grand Jury, and the rest petit Iuries:
whereof it seems there should be one for every Hundred, Lamb. Eirenar. l. 4.
cap. 3. pa. 384. The Grand Jury consists ordinarily of 24. grave and
substantial gentlemen, or some of them yeomen chosen indifferently out of the
whole shyre by the Shyreeue, to consider of all bills of Indictment preferred to
the court: which they do either approve, by writing upon them these words,
billa vera: or disallowe, by writing, Ignoramus: such as they do approve, if
they touch life and death, are farther referred to another Jury to be considered
of, because the case is of such importance: but others of lighter moment, are
upon their allowance, without more work fined by the bench, except the party
travers the Indictment, or challenge it for insufficiency, or remove the cause
to a higher court by certiorarie, in which 2. former cases it is referred to
another Jury, and in the latter transmitted to the higher. Lamb. Eire. l. 4.
c. 7. and presently upon the allowance of this bill by the Grand Enquest, a man
is said to be indighted. Such as they dissalowe, are delivered to the benche,
by whom they are forthwith cancilled or torn. The petit Jury consists of.
12. men at the least, and are Empanelled, as well upon criminal as upon civil
causes. those that pass upon offenses of life and death, do bring in their
verdict either guilty or not guilty, whereupon the prisoner, if he be found
guilty, is said to be convicted, and so afterward receaueth his judgment and
condemnation: or otherwise is acquitted and set Free: of this read Fortes:
cap: 27. those that pass upon civil causes reail, are all, or so many as can
conveniently be had, of the same hundred, where the land or tenement in
question does lie, and 4. at the least: And they upon due examination bring in
their verdict either for the demaundant, or Tenent. of this see Fortesc. cap.
25. 26. according unto which, judgment passes afterward in the court where
the cause first began: and the reason hereof is, because these Justices of
Assise, are in this case, for the ease of the cuntry, only to take the verdict
of the Jury, by the virtue of the writ called (nisi prius) and so return it
to the court where the cause is depending. See (Nisi prius.) Join with this
the chapter formerly cited out of the custumary of Normandy, and that of King
Etheldreds laws mentioned by Master Lamberd, verbo Centuria. in his
explication of Saxon words; and by these two words you shall perceive, that as
well among these Normans, as the Saxons, the men of this Iuty were associats
and Assistants to the Judges of the court, in a kind of equality; where as now
a days they attend them in great humility, and are, as it were, at their
command for the service of the court: the words set down by M. Lamberd are
these: In singulis centuriis comitia sunto, atque liberae condicionis viri
duodeniaetate superiores, vna cum praeposito sacra tenentes, iuranto, se adeo
virum aliquem innocentem haud condemnaturos, sontemve absoluturos: to this
join also the 69. chapter of the said custumarie. See Enquest. See 12. men.
See Lamberds Eurenarch. lib. 4. cap. 3. p. 384.

Iuris vtrum, is a writ, that lies for the incumbent, whose predecessor has
alienated his lands or tenements. the diverse uses of which writ, see in Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 48.

Jurisdiction (Iurisdictio) is a dignity which a man has by a power to do
Justice in causes of complaint made before him. And there be two kinds of
Jurisdictions, the one that a man has by reason of his fee, and by virtue
thereof does right in all plaints concerning his see: The other is a
Jurisdiction given by the prince to a baylife: this division I have in the
Custumary of Normandy, cap. 2. which is not unapt for the practice of our
commonwealth, for by him whom they call a baylife, we may understand all that
have commission from the prince to give judgment in any cause: The ciuilians
divide iurisdictionem generally understand in imperium and iurisdictionem: and
imperium in merum and mixtum. Of which you may read many especial tractats
written of them, as a matter of great difficulty and importance.

Iustes, comes of the French (Ioustes. i. decursus) and signifies with us,
contentions between Martial men by spears on horsbacke, anno 24. H. 8. cap.
13.

Justice (Iusticiarius) is a French word, and signifies him, that is deputed
by the king, to do right by way of judgment. the reason why he is called
Justice and not Iudex, is because in ancient time the latin word for him was
(Iusticia) and not (Iusticiarius) as appears by Glan. lib. 2. cap. 6. Roger
Houeden part poster. suorum annalium, fo. 413. a. and diverse other places,
which appellation we have from the Normans, as appears by the grand
custumary. cap. 3. and I do the rather note it, because men of this function
should hereby consider, that they are or ought to be, not (Iusti) in their
judgments, but in abstract (ips^ iusticia) how be it I hold it well, if they
perform their office in concreto. Another reason why they are called
Iusticiary with us and not Iudices, is, because they have their authority by
deputation, as Delegates to the king, and not iure magistratus; and therefore
cannot depute others in their steed, the Justice of the Forest only excepted,
who has that liberty, especially given him by the statute anno. 32. H. 8. cap.
35. for the Chanceller, Marshall, Admiral, and such like are not called
Iusticiarii but Iudices: of these Justices you have diverse sorts in England, as
you may perceive hear following. The manner of creating these Justices, with
other appertenences reed in Fortescu. cap. 51.

Justice of the Kings bench (Iusticiarius de Banco regis) is a Lord by his
office, and the chief of the rest. wherefore he is also called Capitalis
Iusticiarius Angliae, his office especially is to hear and determine all plees
of the crown: that is, such as concern offenses committed against the crown,
dignity, and peace of the King; as treasons, felonies, may hems and such like,
which you may fee in Bracton, lib. 3. tractat. 2. per totum* and in Stawnf.
treatise entitled the plees of the crown, from the first chapter to the 51.
of the first Book. But either it was from the beginning, or by time it is come
to pass, that he with his assistans, hears all personal actions, and real
also, if they be incident to any personal action depending before them: See
Cromptons Iuridict. fol. 67. etc. of this court Bracton lib. 3. cap. 7. nu. 2.
says thus: placita vero ciuilia in rem and personam in Curia Domini Regis
terminanda, coram diuersis iusticiarus terminantur: Habet enim plures curias in
quibus diversae actiones terminantur; and illarum curiarum habet vnam propriam,
sicut aulam regiam, and iusticiarios capitales qui proprias causas Regis
terminant, and aliorum omnium per querelam vel per priuilegium sieve libertatam;
vt si sit aliquis qui implacitari non debeat, nisi coram Domino rege. This
Justice (as it seems) has no patent under the broad seal. For so Crompton
says vbi supra. He is made only by writ, which is a short one to this effect.
Regina Iohanni Popham militi salute^. Sciatis quod consistuimus vos
Iusticiarium nostrum capitalem, ad placita coram nobis terminandum, durante
beneplacito nostro, Test, etc. And Bracton in the place now recited, speaking
of the common plees, says, that sine warranto inrisdictionem non habet, which
(I think) is to be understood of a commission under the great Seal. This
court was first called the kings bench, because the King sat as Judge in it in
his proper Person, and it was moveable with the court. See anno 9. H. 3. cap.
11. more of the Jurisdiction of this court see in Crompton vbi supra. See Kings
bench. The oath of the Justices see in the statute. anno 18. Ed. 3. stat. 4.
See Oathe.

Justice of common plees (Iusticiarius communium placitorum) is also a Lord by
his office, and is called (Dominus Iusticiarius communium placitorum) and he
with his assistants originally did hear and determine all causes at the common
law, that is, all civil causes between common persons, as well personal as
real, for which cause it was called the court of common plees, in opposition
to the plees of the Crown or the Kings plees, which are special and
appertaining to him only. Of this, and the Iuridisdiction hereof, see
Cromptons Jurisdiction. fo. 91. This Court was always settled in a place, as
appears by the statute anno 9. H. 3. cap. 11. The oath of this Justice and
his associats, see anno 18. Ed. 3. stat. 4. See Oath.

Justice of the Forest (Iusticiarius Forestae) is also a Lord by his office,
and has the hearing and determining of all offenses, within the Kings forest,
committed against Venison or Vert, of these there be two, whereof the one has
Jurisdiction oueral the forests, on this side Trent: the other of all beyond.
the chiefest point of their Jurisdiction, consists upon the articles of the
Kings Charter, called Charta de Foresta, made anno 9. H. 3. which was by the
Barons hardly drawn from him, to the mitigation of over cruel ordinances made
by his predecessors. Read M. Camdens Britan. Page 214. See Protoforestarius.
The Court where this Justice sits and determines, is called the Justice
seat of the Forest, held every three years once, whereof you may read your
fill in M. Manwoodes first part of Forest laws. page 121. and 154. and page
76. He is sometimes called Justice in Air of the forest. See the reason in
Justice in Air. This is the only Justice that may appoint a deputy per
statutum anno 32. H. 8. cap. 35.

Justices of Assise (Iusticiarii ad capiendas Assisas) are such as were wont by
special commission to be sent (as occasion was offered) into this or that
county to take Assizes; the ground of which polity, was the ease of the
subjects: For whereas these actions pass always by Jury, so many men might not
without great hinderance be brought to London, and therefore Justices for this
purpose were by commission particularly authorized, and sent down to them. And
it may seem that the Justices of the common plees had no power to deal in
this kind of business, until the statute made anno 8. Rich. 2. cap. 2. for by
that they are enhabled to take Assizes, and to deliver Gaols. And the Justices
of the kings Bench have by that statute such power affirmed unto them, as they
had one hundred years before that: Time has taught by experience, that the
beter sort of Lawyers being fittest both to judge and plead, may hardly be
spared in term time to ride into the country about such business: and therefore
of later years it is come to pass, that these commissions (ad ^apiedas
Assisas) are driven to these two times in the year out of term, when the
Justices and other may beat leisure for these controversies also: whereupon it
is also fallen out, that the matters wont to be heard by more general
Commissions of Justices in Air, are heard all at one time with these Assizes:
which was not so of old, as appears by Bracton, lib. 3. c. 7. nu. 2. Habet
etiam Iusticiarios itinera^tes de comitatu in Comitatum, quandoque ad omnia
placita, quandoque ad quaedam specialia, sicut Assisas etc. and ad Gaolas
deliberandas, quandoque ad vnicam vel duas, and non plures. And by this means
the Justices of both benches, being justly to be accounted the fittest of all
others, and others their assistants, as also the Sergeants at law may be
employed in these affairs, who as grauest in years, so are they ripest in
judgment, and therefore likest to be void of prociality, for being called to
this dignity, they give over practice anno 8. R. 2. cap. 3. but this always to
be remembered, that neither Justice of either bench, nor any other, may be
Justice of Assise in his own country, anno 8. Rich. 2. cap. 2. and anno 33. H.
8. cap. 24. lastly, note that in these days, though the self same men
dispatch business of so diverse natures, and all at one time, which were wont to
be performed by diverse, and at several times, yet they do it by several
commissions. Cromptons Jurisdictions. fo. 210. For those who be in one word
called Justices of circuit, and twice every year pass, by two and two,
through all England, have one commission to take Assizes; another to deliver
Goales, another of oyer and terminer. That Justices of Assise, and Justices in
Air did aunciently differ, it appears an. 27. Ed. 3. cap. 5. and that
Justices of Assise, and Justices of goal delivery were diverse, it is evident
by anno 4. Fd. 3. cap. 3. The oath taken by Justices of assise, is all one with
the oath taken by the Justices of the kings bench. Old abridgement of
statutes. titulo Sacramentum Iusticiariorum. See Oath.

Justices of oyer and terminer, Iusticiarii ad audiendum and terminandum) were
Justices deputed upon some especial or extraordinary occasion, to hear and
determine some or more causes. Fitzherberd in his natura beruium says, that
the commission d' oyer and terminer, is directed to certain persons upon any
great assembly, insurrection, heinous demeanure, or trespass committed. And
because the occasion of granting this commission should be maturely wayed, it
is provided by the statute anno 2. Ed. 3. cap. 2. that no such commission ought
to be granted, but that they shall be dispatcheo before the Justices of the one
bench or other, or Justices erra^ts, except for horrible trespasses, and that
by the especial favor of the King. The form of this commission, see in Fitzh.
natura breu. fol. 110.

Justices in Air (Iusticiarii itinerantes) are so termed of the French (Err.
i. iter) which is an old word, as (a grand err. i. magnis iteneribus)
prouerbially spoken. the use of these in ancient time, was to send them with
commission into diverse counties, to heat such causes especially, as were
termed the plees of the crown, and therefore I must imagine they were so sent
abroad for the ease of the subjects, who must else have been hurried to the
kings bench, if the cause were too high for the county court. They differed
from the Justices of oyer and terminer, because they (as is above said) were
sent upon some one, or few special cases and to one place: whereas the
Justices in Air, were sent through the provinces and counties of the land,
with more Indefinite and general commission, as appears by Bracton, lib. 3.
cap. 11. 12. 13. and Britton cap. 2. And again they seem to differ in this,
because the Justices of oyer and terminer (as it is before said) were sent
uncertainly, upon any vproare or other occasion in the country: but these in
Air (as M. Gwin sets down in the preface to his reading, were sent but
every seven year once; with whom Horn in his myrrour of Justices, seems to
agree. lib. 2. cap. queux poient estre actours, etc. and lib. 2. c. des peches
criminels etc. al suyte de Roy, etc. and lib. 3. c. de Justices in Air. where
he also declares what belonged to their office. These were instituted by Henry
the 2. as M. Camden in his Britannia witnesses page 104. And Roger Hoveden,
part posteri. annalium. fo. 313. b. has of them these words: Iusticiarij
itinerantes constituti per Henricum secundum. i. qui diuisit regnum suumin sex
parts, per quarum singulas tres Iusticiarios itinerantes constituit, quorum
nomina haec sunt, etc.

Justices of Gaol delivery (Iusticiarii ad Gaolas deliberandas) are such as are
sent with commission, to hear and determine all causes apperteining to such,
as for any offense are cast into the Gaol, part of whose authority is, to
punish such, as let to mainprise those prisoners, that by law be not bayleable
by the statute de finibus, cap. 3. Fitzh. not. br. f. 251. I. These by
likelyhoode in ancient time, were sent to countries upon this several
occasion. But afterward Justices of Assise were likewise authorized to this,
anno. 4. Ed. 3. cap. 3. Their oath is all one with other of the kings Justices
of either bench. Old Abridgement of statutes. titulo Sacramentum
Iusticiariorum. See Oath.

Justices of laborers, were Justices appointed in those times, to redress the
frowardness of laboring men, that would either be idle, or have unreasonable
wages. See anno 21. Eduardi 3. cap. primo. anno. 25. eiusd. cap. 8. and anno
31. eiusdem cap. 6.

Justices of Nisi prius, are all one now a days with Justices of Assizes: for
it is a common Adiournment of a cause, in the common plees to put it off to
such a day, Nisi prius Iusticiarii venerint ad eas parts, ad capiendas
Assisas: and upon this clause of Adiournment, they are called Justices of Nisi
prius, as well as Justices of Assizes; by reason of the writ or action that
they have to deal in: their commission you may see in Cromptons Iurisdsctious
fol. 204. yet M. Crompton makes this difference between them, because
Justices of Assise have power to give judgment in a cause, but Justices of
Nisi prius. only to take the verdict. But in the nature of both there functions
this seems to be the greatest difference, because Justices of Nisi prius have
to deal in causes personal as well as real, whereas Justices of Assise, in
strict acception, deal only with the possessory writs called Assizes.

Justices of trial basto^, alias of trayl baston, were a kind of Justices
appointed by King Edward the first upon occasion of great disorder grown in
the Realm, during his absence in the Scottishe and French wars, they are
called in the old not. bre. f. 52. Justices of trial Baston, but by Holynshed
and Stow in Edw. pri. of Traile baston, of trailing or drawing the staff as
Holinshed says. Their office was to make inquisition through the Realm by the
verdict of substantial Iuries upon all officers, as Mayors Shyreeues,
Bailifes, escheatours and others, touching extortion, briberies and other such
greeuances, as intrusions into other men's lands, and Barratours that used to
take money for beating of men, and also of them whom they did beat; by means
of which inquisitions many were punished by death, many by ransom, and so the
rest flying the Realm, the land was quieted, and the king gained great riches
toward the supporting of his wars. Inquire farther of the name. Baston is thougt
by some to be the beam of a pair of Scoales or waights. and this is in this
place metaphorically applied to the just peising of recompense for offenses
committed. My poor opinion is, that the etymology of this title or addition
grows from the French (treilles) i. cancelli, bars or letises of what thing
soever, a grate with cross bars, or of the singular (treille) i. pargula, an
house arbor, a rail or form, such as vines run upon, and (Baston) a staff
or pole, noting thereby that the Justices employed in this commission, had
authority to proceed without any solemn judgment seat in any place either
compassed in with railes, or made booth or tent-wise, set up with staves or
poales without more work, wheresoever they could apprehend the malefactors
they sought for. See, lib. Assisarum. fol. 141. 57.

Justices of peace (Iusticiarii ad pacem) are they that are appointed by the
kings commission, with others, to attend the peace in the County where they
dwell: of whom some upon special respect are made of the Quorum, because some
business of importance may not be dealt in without the presence or asse^t of
them, or one of them. Of these it is but folly to write more, because they have
so many things perteining to their office, as cannot in few words be
comprehended. And again Justice Fitzherberd some time sithence, as also M.
Lamberd and M. Crompton of late have written books of it to their great
commendatio^, and fruitful benefit of the whole Realm. See also Sir Thomas
Smith de repub: Angl: lib: 2. cap. 19. They were called Gardians of the peace,
until the 36. year of King Edward the third, cap. 12. where they be called
Justices. Lamb. Eirenarcha. lib. 4. cap. 19 page 578. There oathe see also in
Lambard. lib. i. ca. 10.

Justices of peace, etc. within liberties, Iusticiarii ad pacem infra
libertates, be such in cities and other corporate towns, as those others be of
any county: and their authority or power is all one within their several
precincts anno. 27. H. 8. ca. 25.

Iusticies, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, for the dispatch of justice in
some especial cause, wherewith of his own authority he cannot deal in his
County Court. lib. 12. cap. 18. whereupon the writ de excommunicato
deliberando, is called a Iusticies in the old not. bre. fol. 35. Also the writ
de homine replegiando. eodem: fol. 41. Thirdly the writ de secunda
superoneratione pasturae. eodem: fol. 73. Kitchen fol. 74. says, that by this
writ called Iusticies, the Shyreeue may hold plee of a great sum, whereas of
his ordinary authority he cannot hold plees but of sums under 40. shillings.
Crompt on fo. 231. agrees with him. It is called a Iusticies, because it is a
commission to the Shyreeue ad Iusticiandum aliquem, to ^doe aman right, and
requires noe return of any certificat of what he has done. Bracton. lib. 4.
tracta. 6. cap. 13. nu. 2. makes mention of a Iusticies to the Shyreeue of
London, in a case of Dower. See the new book of Entries, Iusticies.

Justification (Iustificatio) is an upholding or showing a good reason in
court, why he did such a thing as he is called to answer: as to justify in a
cause of Repleuin. Broke. titulo Repleuin.

K E
KEeper of the great Seal (Custos Magni Sigills) is a L. by his office and
called Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, etc. and is of the Kings
privy Council, under whose hands pass al charters, Commissions, and graunts
of the King strengthened by the great or broad Seal. Without the which Seal,
all such Instruments, by Law are of no force. for the King is in
interpretation and intendment of Law, a Corporation, and therefore passes
nothing firmly, but under the said Seal. This Lord Keeper by the statute anno
5. Elizabethae Cap. 18. has the same and the like place, authority,
preeminence, Jurisdiction, execution of Laws, and all other Customs,
Commodities; and Advantages, as has the Lord Chaunceler of England for the
time being.

Keeper of the privy Seal (Custos priuati Sigilli) is a Lord by his office,
under whose hands pass all Charters signed by the Prince, before they come to
the broad or great Seal of England. He is also of the Kings privy Council. He
seems to be called Clerk of the privy Seal. anno 12. R 2. Cap. 11. But of
late days, I have known none to bear this office, by reason the Prince
thinks good, rather to keep this Seal in his own hands, and by private
trust to commit it to his principal Secretary, or some such one of his
Council, as he thinks fit for that function.

Keeper of the Touch. anno 2. H. 6. cap. 14. seems to be that officer in the
kings mint, which at this day is termed the master of the assay. See Mint.

Keeper of the Forest (Custos Forestae) is also called chief Warden of the
Forest. Manwood part. pri. of his Forest Laws, page 156. etc. and has the
principal government of all things belonging thereunto: as also the check of
all officers belonging to the Forest. And the Lord Chief Justice in Air of
the Forest, when it pleases him to keep his Justice Seat, does 40. days
before, send out his general Summons to him, for the warning of all
under-officers, to appear before him at a day assigned in the Summons. This
See in Manwood Vbi Supra.

King (Rex) is thought by M. Camden in his Britan. page 105. to be contracted
of the Saxon word Cyninge, signifing him that has the highest power and
absolute rule over our whole Land. and thereupon the King is in intendment of
Law cleared of those defects, that common persons be subject unto. For he is
always supposed to be of full age, though he be in years never so young.
Cromptons Jurisdictions fol. 134. Kitchen. fol. i. He is taken as not subject
to death, but is a Corporation in himself that lives ever. Crompton ibidem.
Thirdly, he is above the Law by his absolute power. Bracton lib. pri cap. 8.
Kitchen fol. 1. and though for the beter and equal course in making Laws he
do admit the 3. estates, that is, Lords Spiritual, Lords temporal, and the
Commons unto Council: yet this, in diverse learned men's opinions, is not of
constreinte, but of his own benignity, or by reason of his promise made upon
oath, at the time of his coronation. For otherwise were he a subject after a
sort and subordinate, which may not be thought without breach of duty and
loyalty. For then must we deny him to be above the law, and to have no power
of dispensing with any positive law, or of granting especial privileges and
charters unto any, which is his only and clear right, as Sir Thomas Smith
well expresses lib. 2. cap. 3. de Repub. Anglican. and Bracton. lib. 2. cap.
16. number. 3. and Britton, cap. 39. For he pardons life and limme to
offenders against his crown and dignity, except such as he binds himself
by oath not to forgive. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 35. And Habet omnia iura
in manu sua. Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 24. number. prim. And though at his coronation
he take an oath not to alter the laws of the land: Yet this oath
notwithstanding, he may alter or suspend any particular law that seems
hurtful to the public estate. Blackwood in Apologia Regum, c. 11. See Oath of
the king. Thus much in short, because I have heard some to be of opinion, that
the laws be above the king. But the kings oath of old you may see in Bracton,
lib. 3. cap. 9. nu. 2. for the which look in Oath of the King. The kings oath
in English, you may see in the old abridgement of Statutes, titulo, Sacram.
Regis. Fourthly, the kings only testimony of any thing done in his presence,
is of as high nature and credit as any Record. Whence it comes, that in all
writs or precepts sent out for the dispatch of Justice, he uses none other
witness but himself, always using these words under it, Test me ipso.
Lastly, he has in the right of his crown many prerogatives above any common
person, be he never so potent or honorable: whereof you may read your fill in
Stawnf. tractate upon the Statute thereof made, anno 17. Ed. 2. though that
contain not all by a great number. What the kings power is, read in Bracton.
lib. 2. cap. 24. nu. prim. and 2.

King of Heradls (Rex Heraldoru^ is an officer at Arms, that has the
preeminence of this Society. See Herald. This officer of the Romans was called
Pater Patratus.

Kings Bench (Bancus Regius) is the Court or Judgment seat where the King of
England was wont to sit in his own person: and therefore was it moveable
with the court or kings Household. And called Curia domini Regis, or Aula
Regia, as M. Gwine reports in the preface to his readings; and that, in that
and the Exchequer, which were the only courts of the king, until Henry the
thirds days, were handled all matters of Justice, as well Civil as Criminal.
whereas the court of common plees might not be so by the statute: anno 9. H. 3.
cap. 11. or rather, by M. Gwins opinion, was presently upon the grant of the
great charter severally erected. This court of the Kings bench was wont in
ancient times to be especially exercised in all Criminal matters and plees of
the crown, leaving the handling of private contracts to the cownty court.
Glanuil. lib. 1. cap. 2. 3. 4. and li. 10. cap. 18. Smith de Repub: Anglicana,
lib. 2. cap. 11. and has president of it, the Lord Chief Justice of England,
with three or four Justices assistaunts, four or five as Fortescu says, cap.
51. and officers thereunto belonging, the clearke of the crown, a Praenatory
or Protonotari, and other six inferior ministers or Atturnies. Camd: Britan:
page 112. See Latitat: How long this court was moveable, I find not in any
wrighter: But in Brittons time, who wrote In K. Ed: the 1. his days, it
appears it followed the court, as M. Gwin in his said preface well
obseruethout of him. See Justice of the Kings Bench.

Kings silver, is properly that money, which is due to the king in the court of
common plees in respect of a license there granted to any man for passing a
fine. Coke vol. 6. fo. 39. a. and 43. b.

Kintall of woad, iron etc. is a certain weight of merchandise to the value of
a hundred, or something under or over, according to the diverse uses of sundry
nations. This word is mentioned by Plowden in the case of Reniger and Fagossa.

Knave, is used for a man servant. a. 14. Ed. 3. stat. 1. ca. 3. And by M.
Verstigans judgment, in his Restitutio^ of decayed intelligence. ca. 10. it is
borrowed of the dutch (cnapa) cnaue or knave, which signify all one thing: and
that is some kind of officer or servant: as (scild-cnapa) was he, that bore
the weapon or shield of his superior, whom the latins call (armigerum) and the
French men (escuyer.)

Knight (Miles) is almost one with the Saxon (Cnight. i. Administer) and by M.
Camdens judgment, page 110. derived from the same. with us it signifies a
gentleman, or one that bears Arms, that for his virtue and especially
Martial prowes, is by the King, or one having the Kings authority, singled (as
it were) from the ordinary sort of gentlemen, and raised to a higher account or
step of dignity. This among all other nations, has his name from the Horse:
Because they were wont in ancient time, to serve in wars one horsbacke. The
Romans called them Equites, the Italians at these days term them Cauallieri.
The French men Cheualliers. The German, Reiters. The Spaniard Caualleros, or
Varoncs a Cauallo. It appears by the statute anno 1. Ed. 2. cap. 1. that in
ancient times, gentlemen having a full knights fee, and houlding their land by
knights service, of the king, or other great person, might be urged by
distress, to procure himself to be made knight, when he came to man's estate
for the answerable service of his Lord in the Kings wars. To which point you
may also read M. Camden in his Britannia. page 111 But these customs be not
now much urged: this dignity in these days being rather of favor bestowed by
the Prince upon the worthier sort of gentlemen, then urged by constraint. The
manner of making knights (for the dignity is not hereditarie) M. Camden in his
Britan. page 111. shortly expresses in these words: Nostris vero temporibus,
qui Equestrem dignitatem suscipit, flexis genibus educto gladio leuiter in
humero percutitur. Princeps his verbis Gallice affatur: Sus vel sois Cheualier
au nom de Dieu. id est, Surge, aut, Sis Eques in nomine Dei. The solemnity of
making Knights among the Saxons, M. Stow mentions in his Annals. page 159.
See the privileges belonging to a knight in Fernes Glory of Generositie. page
116. Of these knights there be two sorts: one spiritual, another temporal.
Cassanaeus in gloria mundi. part 9. Considerat. 2. of both those sorts, and of
many subdiuisions, read him in that whole part. The temporal or second sort
of knights M. Fern in his Glory of generositie. page 103. makes threefold
here with us. Knights of the sword, Knights of the Bath, and Knights of the
sovereign Order, that is, of the Garter: of all which you may read what he
says. I must remember that mine intent is but to explain the terms especially
of our common law. Wherefore such as I find mentioned in Statutes, I will
define as I can. M: Skene de verb. significat. verbo Milites, says, that in
the ancient laws of Scotland, Freeholders were called Milites. Which may seem
to have been a custom with us also by diverse places in Bracton, who says,
that knights must be in Iuries, which turn Freeholders do serve.

Knights of the Garter, (Equites Garterii) are an order of knights, created by
Edward the third, after he had obtained many notable victories, (king John of
Frannce, and king James of Scotland being both his prisoners together, and
Henry of Castile the bastard expulsed out of his Realm, and Don Petro being
restored unto it by the Prince of Wales, and Duke of Aquitane, called the
black Prince) who for furnishing of this honorable Order, made a choice out of
his own realm, and all Christendom, of the best and most excellent renowned
Knights in virtues and honor, bestowing this dignity upon them, and giving
them a blew Garter, decked with gold, pearl, and precious stones, and a buckle
of gold to wear daily on the left leg only, a kirtle, gown, cloak,
chaperon, a collar, and other stately and magnificall apparel both of stuff
and fashion, exquisite and heroical, to wear at high feasts, as to so high
and princely an order was meet. Of which Order, he and his successors, kings
of England, were ordained to be the Sovereigns, and the rest fellows and
brethren to the number of 26. Smith de Republ. Angl. libro primo. cap. 20. I
have seen an ancient monument, whereby I am taught that this Honorable
company is a College or a Corporation, having a common Seal belonging unto
it, and consisting of a Sovereign Guardian which is the King of England, that
always gouernes this order by himself or his Deputy, of 25. Companions
called Knights of the Garter, of 14. secular Chanons that be Priests, or must
be within one year after their admission: 13. Vicars also Priests, and 26.
poor Knights, that have no other sustenance or means of living but the
allowance of this house, which is given them in respect of their daily prayer
to the Honor of God, and (according to the course of those times) of Saint
George. There be also certain officers belonging to this order, as namely the
Prelate of the Garter, which office is inherent to the Bish: of Winchester for
the time being, the Chaunceler of the Garter, the Register, who is always
Deane of Windesour. The principal King at Arms called Garter, whose chief
function is to manage and marshall their Solemnities at their yearly feasts
and Installations. Lastly, the Usher of the Garter, which (as I have heard)
belongs to an Usher of the Princes chamber, called Black rod. There are also
certain ordinances or Constitutions belonging unto this Society, with certain
forfeitures, and sometime penances for the Breakers of them; which
constitutions concern either the solemnities of making these Knights, or their
duties after their Creation, or the Privileges belonging to so high an order,
but are too large for the nature of this poor Vocabularie. The site of this
College, is the Castle of Windesoure, with the Chapel of Saint George, erected
by Edward the third, and the Chapter house in the said Castle. Howbeit the
yearly Solemnity or prosession may be, and is, by the Sovereigns direction,
performed at the Court, wheresoever it lies, upon Saint Georges day. M. Camden
says, that this order received great ornament from Edward the 4 See Fearns
glory of Generosity. page 120. See Garter. Hospinian in his book de origin
and progressu Monachatus, makes mention of this honorable order, terming it
by ignorance of our tongue ordinem Carteriorum equitum, and Charteriorum
equitum. which you may read. cap. 307. as also Bernardus Girardus in his
history, libr. 15. ca. 185.

Knights of the Bath (milites balnei, vel de balneo) are an order of Knights
made within the Lists of the Bath, girded with a sword, in the ceremony of his
Creation. Ferns glory of generosity. page 105. These are spoken of, anno. 8.
Ed. 4. cap. 2. But I had an old monument lent me by a friend, whereby it
appears, that these Knights were so called of a Bath, into the which (after
they had bine shaven and trimmed by a Barber) they entered, and thence, the
night before they were Knighted, being well bathed, were taken again by two
Esquiers commanded to attend them, dried with fine linen clothes, and so
apparelled and led through many solemn Ceremonies. viz. Confessing their
sins, watching and praying all night in a church or chapel, with many
other,) to the order of Knighthood the next day. So that by the same reason
these seemed to be termed Knights of the Bathe, by which Knights made out of
the field in these days are called knights of the Carpet, because in receiving
their order they commonly kneel upon a Carpet.

Knights of the order of Saint John of Jerusalem (milites Sancti Iohannis
Heirosolumitani) were otherwise called the Knights of the Rhodes, being an
order of Knighthood, that had beginning about the year of the Lord. 1120.
Honorius then Pope of Rome. Cassanaeus de gloria mundi, part. 9.
Considerarione 4. and M. Fern. in his glory of Generosity: page 127. they had
their primarie foundation and chief abode first in Jerusalem, and the^ in
Rhodes, wheremany of the^ lived under their Principal called the M. of Rhodes.
until they were expelled thence by the Turk, anno 1523. sithence which time
their chief seat is at Malta, where they have done great exploits against the
Infidels, but especially in the year 1595. These, though they had their
beginning and especialest abode first at Jerusalem and next in Rhodes, yet they
increased both in number and Revenues, living after the order of Friars
vnderthe Rule of Saint Augustine, and were dispersed into France, Spain,
Alvern, Campany, England, and Ireland. Of these mention is made in the stat:
anno. 25. H. 8. ca. 2. and anno 26. eiusdem, cap. secundo. and it appears
that they in England had one general prior, that had the government of the
whole order within England and Scotland. Reg. orig. fol. 20. b. But toward the
end of Henry the eights days, they in England and Ireland being found over
much to adhere to the B. of Rome against the King, were suppressed, and their
Lands and goods referred by Parliament to the Kings disposition. anno. 32. H. 8.
cap. 24. The Occasion and the propagation of this order more especially
described, you may read in the Treatise entitled the Book of Honor and
Arms, lib. 5. cap. 18. written by M. Rich. Ihones.

Knights of the Rhodes, anno. 32. H. 8: ca. 24. See Knights of the order of
Saint John.

Knights of the Temple otherwise called Templers) Templaplarii was an order of
Knighthood created by Gelasius the Pope, about the year of our Lord. 1117. and
so called, because they dwelt in a part of the buildings belonging to the
Temple. These in the beginning dwelling not far from the Sepulcher of the Lord
entertained Cristian strangers and Pilgrims charitably, and in their armor
led them through the Holy Land, to view such things, as there were to be
seen, without fear of Infidels adjoining. This Order continuing and
increasing by the space of 200. years, was far spread in Christendom, and
namely here in England. But at the last, the chief of them at Jerusalem,
being (as some men say) found to fall away to the Sazarens from Christianity,
and to abound in many vices, the whole Order was suppressed by Clemens quintus,
which was about King Ed. the 1. days, and their substance given partly to the
Knights of the Rhodes, and partly to other Religious. Cassan: de gloria mnndi,
part 9. Consid. 5. and See anno prim: Ed. 1. cap. 42. Others wright that in
truth their destruction grew from leaning to the Emperor against the Pope of
Rome, what soever was pretended. Ioach. Stephanus De jurisdiction. lib. 4.
cap. 10. nu. 18. See Templers.

Knights of the Shire (Milites Comitatus) otherwise be called Knights of the
Parliament, and be two Knights, or other gentlemen of worth, that are chosen in
pleno Comitatu, by the free holders of every County that can dispend 40.
shillings per annum, and be Resient in the shire, anno 10. H, 6. cap. 2. and
anno 1. H. 5. cap. 1. upon the Kings writ, to be sent to the Parliament, and
there by their counsel to assist the common proceedings of the whole Realm.
These when every man that had a Knights fee, were custumarily constreined to be
a Knight, were of necessity to be milites gladio cincti, for so runs the
tenor of the writ at this day. Cromptons Iurisdict. fol. pri. But now there
being but few Knights in comparison of former times, and many men of great
living in every county, Custom bears that Esquiers may be chosen to this
office. anno 23. H. 6. ca. 6. so that they be resient within the county, anno
H. 6. cap. 7. and anno 1. H. 5. cap. prim. For the observations in choice of
these knights, see the statutes anno 7. H. 4. cap. 15. and anno 11. eiusdem,
cap. 1. and anno 6. H. 6. cap. 4. and anno 23. H. 6. cap. 15. and the new book
of Entries. verbo Parliament. nu. 1. Their expenses during the Parliament are
borne by the County, anno 35. H. 8. cap. 11.

Knight Marshiall (Marescallus hospitii Regii) is an officer in the kings
house, having jurisdiction, and cognizance of any transgression within the
kings house and verge, as also of contracts made within the same house,
whereunto one of the house is a party. Register orig. fo. 185. a. b. and fo.
191. b. whereof you may there read more at large.

Knights fee, (Feudum militare) is so much inheritance, as is sufficient
yearly to maintain a knight with convenient reuenew which in Henry the. 3.
days was fifteen pounds. Camdeni Britan. page ^11. or 680. acres of land, or
800. acres. eodem: But S. Thomas Smith in his Repub. Angl. lib. pri. cap. 18.
rateth it at forty pound. And I find in the statute for knights anno pri.
Ed. 2. cap pri. that such as had 20. pound in fee or for term of life per
annum, might be compelled to be knights. M. Stowe in his annals, page 285.
says, that there were found in England at the time of the Conqueror 60211.
Knights fees: others say 60215. whereof the religious houses before their
suppression were possessed of 28015. Knights fee, is sometime used for the
rent, that a knight pays for his fee to his Lord, of whom he houldeth. And
this is an uncertain sum, some houlding by forty shillings the shield, some
by twenty shillings as appears by Bracton. lib. 5. tract: pri. cap. 2.

Knighten Gylde, was a Gylde in London consisting of 19. knights, which king
Edgar founded, giving unto them a portion of void ground lying without the
walls of the city, now called Portesoken ward. Stow. in his Annals, page 151.

L
LAborariis, is a writ that lies against such, as having not whereof to live,
do refuse to serve, or for him that refuses to serve in summer, where he
served in winter: orig. Register, fol. 189. b.

Laches, comes of the French (lascher. i. laxare, or lusche. i. frigidus,
ignavus, flaccidus) it signifies in our common law, negligence: as no laches
shall be adjudged in the heir within age, Litleton fol. 136. and old not. br.
fol. 110. where a man ought to make a thing, and makes it not, I of his laches
cannot have an Assise, but I must take mine action upon the case.

Lagon, See Flotzon.

Laised listes, anno i. R. 3. cap. 8.

Land tenent, anno 14. Ed. (...). stat. 1. cap. 3. and anno 23. eiusdem. cap.
1. and. 26. eiusdem, stat. 5. cap. 2. See Terre-tenent, and anno 12. R. 2. cap.
4. and anno 4. H. 4. cap. 8. it is joined with this word (Possessor) as
Synonymon. v. anno 1. H. 6. cap. 5. See Terretenent.

Lanis de crescentia Walliae traducendis abque custuma, etc. is a writ that
lies to the customer of a port, for the permitting one to pass over wolles
without custom, because he has paid custom in Wales before, Register, fol.
279.

Lapse (Lapsus) is a slip or departure of a right of prese^ting to avoid
benefice, from the original patron neglecting to present within six months,
unto the Ordinary. For we say that benefice is in lapse or lapsed, whereunto he
that ought to present, has omitted or slipped his opportunity, anno 13. Eliz.
cap. 12. This lapse grows as well the Patron being ignorant of the auoydance,
as privy, except only upon the resignation of the former Incumbent, or the
deprivation upon any cause comprehended in the statute, anno 13. Eliz. cap. 12.
Panor: in cap. quia diuersitatem. nu. 7. de concess: praebend. Rebuffus de
devolut: in praxi beneficiorum: Lancelotus de collation: lib. 1. Institut.
canon:. Tempus autem. In which cases the Bishop ought to give notice to the
Patron.

Larceny (Laricinium) comes of the French (Larcen. i. furtum, detractio
alicui) It is defined by West. part. 2. Symbol titulo Inditements, to be theft
of personal goods or chatels, in the owners absence: and in respect of the
things stolen, it is either great or small. Great Larceny is, wherein the
things stolen, though severally, exceed the value of 12. pence, and petit
Larceny is when the goods stolen exceed not the value of 12. pence, hitherto
M. West. But he differs from Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. c. 32. n. 1. Of this
see more in Stawnf. pl. cor. l. 1. cap. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19.

Laghslite, is compounded of (lah. i. lex) and (slite. i. ruptum) and
signifies mulctam ruptae vel violatae legis. Lamb: explicat. of Saxon words,
verbo Mulcta.

Last, is a Saxon word, signifiing a burden in general, as also particularly a
certain weight: for as we say a last of hering, so they say Ein last corns,
last wines, etc. thence comes lastage, which see in Lestage. A last of hering
contains 10. thousand, an. 31. Ed. 3. stat. 2. cap. 2. a last of pitch and
tar, or of ashes, contains 14. barrels. anno. 32. H. 8. cap. 14. a last of
hides, anno 1. Iac. cap. 33. contains 12. dozen of hides or skins.

Latitat, is the name of a writ whereby all men in personal actions are called
originally to the Kings bench. Fitz. not. br. fo. 78. M. And it has the name
from this, because in respect of their beter expedition, a man is supposed to
lurk, and therefore being served with this writ, he must put in security for
his appearance at the day, for latitare, est se malitiose occultare animo
fraudandi creditores suos agere volentes. l. Fulcinius. Quid sit latitare.
(...). Quibus ex causis in possessionem eatur: But to understand the true
original of this writ, it is to be known, that in ancient time, whilst the
kings bench was moveable, and followed the court of the King, the custom was,
when any man was to be siewed, to send forth a writ to the Shyreeue of the
county where the Court lay, for the calling him in: and if the Shyreeue
returned, non est inventus in baliva nostra, etc. then was there a second writ
procured forth, that had these words, (testatum est eum latitare, etc.) and
thereby the Shyreeue willed to attach him in any other place where he might be
found. Now when the tribunal of the Kings bench came to be settled at
Westminster, the former course of writ was kept for a long time, first sending
to the Shyreeue of Midlesex to summon the party, and if he could not be found
there, then next to apprehend him wheresoever. But this seeming too troublesome
for the subject, it was at last devised, to put both these writs into one, and
so originally to attache the party complained of upon a supposall or fiction,
that he was not within the county of Middlesex, but lurking else where, and
that therefore he was to be apprehended in any place else, where he was
presumed to lie hidden, by a writ directed to the Shyreeue of the county where
he is suspected to be: and by this writ a man being brought in, is committed to
the Marshall of that court, in whose custody when he is, then by reason he is
in the same county where the Kings bench is, he may be siewed upon an action
in that court, whereas the original cause of apprehending him must be a
pretense of some deceit or contempt committed, which most properly of old
belonged to the cognizance of that court. I have been informed, that the
bringing of these actions of trespass so ordinarily to the kings bench, was an
invention of Councelers, that because only Sergeants may come to the common
plees bar, found a means to set themselves on work in that court. The form
of this writ is such: Iacobus Dei gratia Angliae, Francis, Scotiae, and
Hiberniae Rex, fidei defensor, etc. Vicecomiti Cantabrigiae salutem. Cum
Vicecomitinostro Midlesexiae nuper praeceperimus, quod caperet Thomam T. and
Wilielmum W. si inuenti fuissent in balliua sua, and eos saluo custodiret, ita
quod haberet corpora eorum coram nobis apud Westminster die veneris proximo
post octavas Sanctae Trinitatis, ad respondendum Roberto R. de placito
trangressionis; cumque vicecomes noster Midlesexiae, ad diem illum nobis
returnauerit, quod praedicti Thomas T. and Wilielmus W. non sunt inuenti in
balliua sua, super quo ex part: praedicti Roberti in curia nostra coram nobis
sufficienter testatum est, quod praedicti Thomas and Wilielmus latitant and
discurrunt in comitatu tuo. Idcirco tibipraecipimus quod capias eos, si
inve^tifuerint in balliua tua, and eos salvo custodias, it a quod habeas
corpora eorum coram nobis apud Westminster, die. Martis proximo post tres
septimanas, eodem Trinitatis, ad respondendum praefato Roberto deplacito
praedicto, and habeas ibi tunc hoc breve. Test Iohanne P^pham apud
Westminster. Roper.

Launcegay, anno. 7. Rich. secundi: cap. 13.

Law (lex) comes of the Saxon (lah) the general signification is plain, only
this I thought to note, that the law of this land has been variable. For
first Dunwallo Mulmutius otherwise Molincius a Britain, that being Duke of
Cornwall reduced the whole land formerly severed by civil wars, into the state
of a Monarchy, made certain wholesome laws, which long after were called
Mulmutius laws, and by Gyldas translated out of the Bryttish tongue into
latin. Stow in his Annals, page 16. Of these there remain yet certain heads,
recorded by our historiographers, as follows. 1. vt Deorum templa, and
civitates hominum consequantur tantam dignitatem, ne quis illo confugiens
extrahipossit, antequam ab eo quem laeserat, veniam impetraverit. 2. vt
huiusmods privilegium immunitatis habeant etiam ipsae viae, quae ducunt ad
templa and ad vrbes. 3. Imo and iumenta quoque illa, quae res rusticae
subueniunt. 4. Denique colonorum aratra ipsa tali praerogativa libertatis
perfruantur. 5. Hoc amplius, vt ne quaterra vacaret cultura, neve populus
inopia reifrumentariae premeretur, aut ea minueretur, si pecora sola occuparent
agros qui ab hominibus coli dobent. 6. Constituit quot aratra quaelibet dioece
sis haberet ac poenam statuit iis, per quos ille numerus aratrorum foret
diminutus: 7. Item vetuit, bovem arator^m pro debito pecuniae, assignari
debitoribus, si alia bonae debitoris essent. Ita fore, ne compendii causa
homines pecuarii agros incultos redderent: sic etiam fore, ne quid carum rerum,
quas natura praebet, hominibus vsquam deesse posset. Rich. Vitus historiarum
Britanniae. li. 3. nu. 1. And of these laws we find no obscure remanets in
our laws now in use: See Magna charta. ca. 1: etc^. 14. See Sanctuary. See
Peace. Then was there a law called Merchenlage, whereby the Mercians were
governed, being a kingdom in the heart of the land, containing those
countries, that be now called Northampton shire, Leycester shire, Rutland
shire, Lincoln shire, Nottingham shire, and Derby shire. Camd. Britan. page
94. whose power was great in the Heptarchy of the Saxons, until at the last
they were conquered by the west Saxons, and made subject to them. Polydor. in
Angl. Hist. lib. 5. But whereas the name of these laws sauoureth of the Saxons
time, it is reported by others that Martia a very learned Queen and wife to
Quintelinus a Britton king, was the author of them, long before the Saxons set
foot in England. Rich. Vitus. histo. Britan. li. 3. nu. 14. who also says
that Alphred the Saxon King translated both these, and also those of Mulmutius
into the English or Saxon tongue. Thirdly, there was the law of the west
Saxons, called west Saxenlage, and the law of the Danes when they set foot
into the Realm* called Denelage. And of these laws, Edward made one law, as
some write, whereby he ruled his kingdom. But M. Camd. vbi supra, speaking
nothing of Mulmutius laws, says out of Geruasius Tilburiensis, that of the
other three William the Conqueror chose the best, and to them adding of the
Norman laws, such as he thought good, he ordained laws for our kingdom,
which we have at this present, or the most of them.

Law has an especial signification also, wherein it is taken for that which
is lawful with us, and not else where. As tenent by the courtesy of England.
anno 13. Ed. 1. cap. 3. and again, to wage law, vadiare legem, and to make
law, facere legem. Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 37. is to challenge a
special benefit, that the law of this Realm affords in certain cases:
whereof the first, sc. vadiar^ legem, is to put in security, that he will make
law at a day assigned, Glanuile lib. 1. cap. 9. and to make law is to take an
oath, that he owes not the debt challenged at his hand, and also to bring with
him so many men as the court shall assign, to avowe upon their oath, that in
there consciences he has sworn truly. And this law is used in actions of
debt, without specialty, as also where a man coming to the court, after such
time, as his tenements for default be seized into the Kings hands, will deny
himself to have been summoned, Glanuile lib. 1. cap. 9. and 12. and See
Bracton vbi supra. nu. 1. v. Kitchen. fol. 164. See the new exposition of law
Terms verbo (Ley) this is borrowed from Normandy, as appears by the grand
Custumarie, cap. 8y. But Sir Edward Cook says, it springs originally from
the judicial law of god, li. 4. of his reports, Slades case, fol. 95. b.
alleging the 22. cap. of Exodus, versu. 7. Whether so or not, the like custom
is among the Feudists: by whom they that come to purge the defendant, are
called (Sacramentales.) libro feud. 1. tit. 4.. 3. and titulo 10. and titulo.
26.

Law of arms (ius militare) is a law that gives precepts and rules how
rightly to proclaim war, to make and observe leagues and truce, to set upon
the enemy, to retire, to punish offenders in the camp, to appoint soldiers
their pay, to give every one dignity to his desert, to divide spoils in
proportion, and such like, for farther knowledge whereof, read those that write
de iure bells.

Law day, signifies a leete Cromptons Iurisdict. fol. 160. and the county
court, anno 1. Ed. 4. cap. 2.

Lawles man, is he qui est extra legem, Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 11. nu.
1. See Outlawe.

Law of Marque, See Retrisalles. This word is used anno 27. Ed. 3. stat. 2.
ca. 17. and grows from the German word March. i. limes, a bound or limite.
And the reason of this appellation is, because they that are driven to this
law of reprisall, do take the goods of that people of whom they have received
wrong, and cannot get ordinary justice, when they can catch them within their
own territories or precincts.

Law Merchant, is a privilege or special law differing from the common law
of England, and proper to merchants and summary in proceeding, anno 27. Ed. 3.
stat. 8. 9. 19. and 20. anno 13. Ed. 1. stat. tertio.

Lawing of dogs (expeditatio canum) See Expeditate. Mastifs must be lawed every
three year. Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 163.

Lease (lessa) comes of the French (laysser. i linquere, relinquere,
omittere, permittere:) It signifies in our common law, a dimise or letting of
lands or tenements or right of common, or of a rent or any hereditament unto
another, for term of years or of life, for a rent reserved. And a lease is
either written, called a lease by Indenture, or made by word of mouth, called a
lease paroll. See the new Terms of the law. The party that lets this
lease, is called the leassour, and the party to whom it is let, the leassee.
And a lease has in it six points: viz. words importing a dimise, a leassee
named, a commencement from a day certain, a term of years, a determination, a
reservation of a rent. Coke vol. 6. Knights case. fol. 55. a.

Leete (leta) is otherwise called a law day, Smith de Republ. Anglor. lib. 2.
cap. 18. the word seems to have grown from the Saxon (Lethe) which as
appeateth by the laws of king Edward set out by M. Lamberd. number. 34. was a
court or jurisdiction above the Wapentake or Hundred, comprehending three or
four of them, otherwise called Thryhing, and contained the third patt of a
Province or Shire. These jurisdictions one and other be now abolished, and
swallowed up in the County court, except they be held by prescription.
Kitchen. fol. 6. or charter in the nature of a franchise, as I have said in
(Hundred.) The liberty of Hundreds is rare, but many Lords, together with
their courts Baron, have likewise Leetes adjoined, and thereby do enquire of
such transgressions, as are subject to the inquiry and correction of this
Court: whereof you may read your fill in Kitchen, from the beginning of his
book to the fifth chapter, and Briton. cap. 28. But this court, in whose manner
soever it be kept, is accounted the kings court, because the authority thereof
is originally belonging to the Crown, and thence derived to inferior persons,
Kitchen fol. 6. Justice Dyer says, that this Leete was first derived from the
Shyreeues Turn. fol. 64. And it enquireth of all offenses under high treason,
committed against the Crown and dignity of the king; though it cannot punish
many, but must certify them to the Justices or Assise, per Statut. anno 1. Ed.
3. cap. vlt. Kitchen fol. 8. but what things be only inquirable, and what
punishable, see Kitchu in the charge of a court Leet* fol. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.
13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. See also the Statute anno 18. Ed. 2. The
Jurisdiction of Bayliffes in the Duchy of Normandy, within the compass of
their Provinces, seems to be the same, or very near the ^ame, with the power
of our Leete. cap. 4. of the grand Custumarie.

Legacy (legatum) is a particular thing given by last will and testament. For
if a man dispose or transfer his whole right or estate upon another, that is
called Haereditas by the Ciuilians, and he to whom it is so transferred, is
termed haeres. Howbeit our common Lawyers call him Heir, to whom all a man's
lands and hereditaments do descend by right of blood. See Heir. See
Hereditaments.

Leproso amouendo, is a writ that lies for a Parish, to remove a Leper or
Lazar, that thrusts himself into the company of his neighbors, either in
church or other public meeting, and communeth with them to their annoyance or
disturbance. Regi. orig. fol. 267. Fitz. not. br. fol. 234.

Lestage, alias lastage, (lastagium) proceeds from the Saxon word (last. i.
onus) and is a custom challenged in Faires and markets for carrying of things.
Rastals Exposition of words: or a custom challenged in cheapings or Faires.
Saxon in the description of England, cap. 11. Lastage. anno 21. R. 2. cap. 18.
seems to be the Balance of a ship. Fleta terms it Lesting, saying, quod
significat acquietantia^ Lestagii. lib. 1. cap. 47.. Lesting.

Leters of exchange, (literae Cambitoriae, vel litera Cambii) Regist. orig.
fol. 194. a.

Leters patents (literae patentes) be writings sealed with the broad Seal of
England, whereby a man is authorized to do or enjoy any thing that otherwise of
himself he could not. anno 19. H. 7. cap. 7. And they be so termed of their
form, because they be open with the Seal hanging, ready to be showed for the
confirmation of the authority given by them. If any will say, that leters
patents may be granted by common persons, I will not greatly contend. For I
find that to be true in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 35. E. Howbeit they be called
rather patents in our common speech, then Leters patents. Leters patents to
make Denizens. anno 32. H. 6. cap. 16. yet for difference sake, the kings
leters patents be called leters patents royal. anno 2. H. 6. cap. 10. There is
likewise a writ patent. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 1. and seqq.

Leuari facias, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, for the leuying of a Sum
of money upon lands and tenements, of him that has forfeited a recognizance,
etc. Regist. origin. fol. 298. b. and 300. b.

Leuari facias damna de disseisitoribus, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue,
for the leauying of damages, wherein the disseisour has formerly been
condemned to the disseisee. Regist. fol. 214. b.

Leuari facias residuum debiti, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, for the
leuying of a Remanent of a debt upon lands and tenements, or chatels of the
debtor, that has in part satisfied before, Regist. orig. fol. 299.

Leuari facias quando vicecomes returnavit quod non habuit emptores, is a writ
commanding the Shyreeue to sell the goods of the debtor, which he has
already taken, and returned that he could not sell them, and as much more of
the debtours goods, as will satisfy the whole debt. Regist. orig. fol. 300. a.

Leter of Attorney, (litera Atturnatus) is a writing, authorizing an Attorney,
that is, a man appointed to do a lawful act in our steedes, West part prim.
symbol. lib. 2. sect. 559. It is called in the civil law (mandatum, or
procuratorium) There seems to be some difference between a leter of
Attorney, and a warrant of Attorney. For whereas a leter of Attorney is
sufficient, if it be sealed and delivered before sufficient witness: a warrant
of Attorney must be acknowledged and certified before such persons, as fines
be acknowledged in the country, or at the least before some Justice or
Sergeant, West. part 2. symbol. titulo Recoveries. sect. 1. F. See the
statute, anno 7. R. 2. cap. 14.

Leters of Marque. See Marque and law of Marque. See Reprisals. see a. 14.
Hen. 6. cap. 7.

Leters patents of summons for debt: anno 9. H. 3. cap. 18.

Leuy (Leuare) comes of the French (Lever. i. alleuare, attoller^) It is used
in our common law, for to set up any thing, as to leuy a mill. Kitchen, fol.
180. or to cast up, as to leuy a ditch. Old. not. br. fol. 110. or to gather
and exact, as to leuy money. See Leu^ri facias.

Libell (Libellus) literally signifies a little book, but by use it is the
original declaration of any action in the civil law, anno 2. H. 5. cap. 3.
and anno 2. Ed. 6. cap. 13. it signifies also a criminous report of any man
cast abroad, or otherwise unlawfully published in writing, but then for
difference sake it is called an in famous libel, famosus libellus.

Libello habendo. See Copia libelli de liberanda.

Libera Chasea habenda, is a writ Judicial, granted to a man for a free chase
belonging to his manner, after he has by a Jury proved it to belong unto him.
Register Judicial, fol. 36. and 37.

Liberate, is a warrant issuing out of the Chau^cery to the Treasurer,
Chamberlaines, and Barons of the Exchequer, or clerk of the Hamper, etc. for
the payments of any annual pension or other sums granted under the broad
seal. v. Brook. titulo Tail d'Exchequer. nu. 4. orig. Reg. fol. 193. a. b.
or sometime to the shyreeue. etc. n. br. f. 132. for the delivery of any lands
or goods taken upon forfeits of a Recognisaunce. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 131. and
132. v. Coke. li. 4. Fulwods case, so. 64. 66. and 67. It is also to a Jailer
from the Justices for the delivery of a prisoner, that has put in bail for
his appearaunce. Lamb. Eirenarch. lib. 3. cap. 2.

Liberate probanda, is a writ that lies for such, as be chalendged for
slaves, and offer to prove themselves free, to the Shyreeue, that he take
security of them for the proving of their freedom before the Justices of
Assise, and provide, that in the mean time they be quiet from their vexations,
that challenge them for slaves. Fitz. not. br. fol. 77. See Natiuo habendo.

Libertatibus allocandis, is a writ that lies for a citizen or Burges of any
city, that contrarily to the liberties of the city or town whereof he is, is
impleaded before the kings Justices, or Justices errants, or Justice of the
Forest, etc. that refuses or deferreth to allow his privilege Orig. Regist.
fol. 262. Fitz. not. br. fol. 229.

Libertatibus exigendis in itinere, is a writ, whereby the king wills the
Justices in air, to admit of an Attorney for the defense of another man's
liberty, etc. before them. Regist. origin. fol. 19. b.

Libertas (libertas) is a privilege held by grant or prescription, whereby
men enjoy some benefit or favor beyond the ordinary subject. Liberties royal
what they be, see in Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 5. Broke hoc titulo. See Franchise.

Librata terrae, contains four oxegangs, and every oxegange 13. acres. Skene
de verb. signif. verbo Bovata terrae. See Farding deal of land.

License to go to election, (Licentia eligendi, Regist. fol. 294.) See Conge
d'eslire.

License to arise, (licentia surgendi) is a liberty given by the Court to a
tenent, that is essoyned de malo lecti in a real action. For the law is, that
in this case he may not arise out of his bed, or at least go out of his
chamber, until he have been viewed by Knights thereunto appointed, and so upon
view of his sickness, have a day assigned him to appear, or else lie, until
he be licenced by the court to arise. And the reason of this is, as I take it,
because it may appear, whether he caused himself to be essoyned deceitfully
yea or not: And therefore if the demaundant can prove, that he be seen out of
his chamber, walking up and down his grounds, or else going abroad unto any
other place, before he be viewed or have license of the court, he shall be
adjudged to be deceitfully essoyned, and to have made default. Of this see
Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 2. cap. 7. 10. and 12. and Fleta, li. 6. cap. 10. Horn
in his second book of his mirror, ca. des Essoines, says that the adverse
party may grant licentiam surgendi to his adversary thus essoyned: And if he
will not, the king upon just cause, may.

Licentia surgendi, is the writ whereby the tenent essoyned de malo lecti,
obteineth liberty to rise. See License to arise. See the Register, fol. 8.

Licentia transfretandi, is a writ or warrant directed to the keepers of the
Port at Dover, etc. willing them to let some pass quietly over sea, that has
formerly obtained the kings license thereunto, Reg. Orig. fol. 193. b.

Lieftenent (locum tenens) is a French word, signifiing as much as (Legatus) it
is compounded of (Lieu. i. Locus) and (tenir. i. tenere) It signifies with us
him, that occupies the kings place, or represents his person, as the
Liefetenent of the Kings of Ireland. anno 4. H. 5. cap. 6. so is it used anno
2. and 3. Ed. 6. cap. 2. whence that officer seems to take his beginning. But
I read also in M. Manwoods first part of forest laws. page 113. that the lord
chief Justice in Air of the Forest: and the chief warden also, have their
Liefetenents in the forest. So that though a Leiftenent be most ordinary and
most properly used for the Depute of the king: yet is it sometime exte^ded to
there deputes that be but Liefetenents to the King.

Liefetenent of the Ordinance, anno 39. El. ca. 7.

Liege, (ligius) is a word borrowed from the Feudists, and has two several
significations in our common law: sometime being used for Liege Lord. anno 34.
and 35. H. 8. cap. 1. and anno 35. eiusdem, cap. 3. and sometimes for Liege man.
anno 10. R. 2. cap. vnico. and anno 11. eiusdem. cap. prim. Liege Lord is he,
that acknowledges no superior. Duarenus in Comment. de Consuetud. Feudorum,
cap. 4. number. 3. Liege man is he, that owes legeancie to his liege Lord. M.
Skene de verb. sign. verbo Ligeantia, says, that it is derived from the
Italian word, (liga) i. a band, league, or obligation, in whom read more of
this matter.

Ligeancie, is such a duty or fealty, as no man may owe or bear to more then
one Lord. Idem, eodem. number. 4. I find also this definition of ligeancie in the
grand Custumarie of Normandy, cap. 13. Ligeantia est, ex qua Domino tenentur
vasalli sui contra omnes homines qui mori possunt and viuere, proprii corporis
praebere consilii and auxilii iuvamentum, and ei se in omnibus innocuos
exhibere, nec ei adversantium partem in aliquo confouere. Dominus etiam eosdem
tenetur regere, protegere and defensare: eosque secundum iura and
consuetudines, and leges patriae pertractare: this is otherwise called
l^gietas, Cassan: de Consuetud: Burgund: page 420. and 421. This word is used
in the statutes of our realm: as the kings liege people. anno 14. H. 8. c. 2.
Of the oath of leageancy, Iacobutius de Franchis in praeludio feudorum, cap. 2.
nu. 138. has these words: Praestatur hoc Ligeum Homagium in manibus Regis vel
imperatoris, genibus flexis, positis manibus iunctis in manibus Domini,
dicendo: Ego iuro homagiu^ tibi Dom. vt a modo sim homo ligeus vester, contra
omnem hominem, qui potest viuere: verba sunt pulchra Andr. de Isern: in cap. 1.
in verbo omnem. Colum: prima. de noua forma fidelita: and hoc ligeum Homagium
videmus praestari domino Regi tantum: quia cum per id efficiatur homo solius
illius, cui iuratur, vt dixit Hostiensis in cap. ex diligenti. de Simon: alii
non potest praestari. i. quia illius solius esse similiter non potest:
Non(...). esse potest duorum in solidum. l. si vt certo.. si duobus vehiculum.
(...): commodati. secundum And: in dicto cap: 1.. omnem. and Bald: hic in 7.
diuis and Aluar. in 13. diuisione.) Non ligeum vero dicitur, quando quis ^^rat
fidelitatem Domino, excepta aliqua persona, viz. domino superiori, vel
antiquiore: Hactenus Iacobutius. where you may read more touching this point:
as also in Hotomans disputations de feudis, page 816. fol. 820. etc.

Ligeance (Ligeantia) See Liege It sometime signifies the dominions or
territoritie of the Liege Lord: as anno 25. Ed. 3. stat. 2. Children borne out
of the Ligeance of the King.

Lierwit est mulcta adulteriorum. Fleta li. 1. ca. 47. It is used for a
liberty whereby a Lord chalengeth the penalty of one that lies unlawfully
with his bond woman. See Lotherwit.

Limitation of Assise (Limitatio assisae) is a certain time set down by
statute, within the which a man must allege himself or his auncester to have
bin seized of lands, siewed for by a writ of Assise. See the statute of Merton,
cap. 8. anno 20. H. 3. and West. 1. cap. 38. and an. 32. H. 8. c. 2. and an. 1.
M. 1. p. c. 5. See also Theloals digest of writs lib. 10. cap. 2. So it is used
in the old. not. br. fol. 77. in these words: the writ de consuetudinibus and
seruitiis lies, where I or mine Auncesters after the limitation of Assise,
were not seized of the Customs, etc. But before the Limitation of Assise we
were seized, etc.

Lindwood, was a Doctor of both Civil and Canon laws, and Deane of the
Arches, he was Ambassador for Henry the fiueth into Portingall, anno 1422. as
appears by the preface to his commentary upon the Provincialls.

Litleton, was a lawyer of great account, living in the days of Edward the
fourth, as appears by Stawnf. praerogat: cap. 21. fol. 72. he wrote a book of
great account, called Litletons tenoures, which Hotoman in his commentary de
verbis feudalibus. verb. Foedum, thus commends. Stephanus Pasquerius
excellenti vir ingenio, and inter Parisienses causidicos dicendi facultate
praestans, libellum mihi Anglicanum Litletonum dedit, quo Feudorum Anglicorum
lura exponuntur, ita incondite, absurd, and inconcinne scriptum, vt facile
appareat verum esse, quod Polidorus Virgilius in Anglica historia scribit,
stultitiam in eo libro cum malitia and calumniandi studio certare.

Literae ad faciendum attornatum pro secta facienda: see in the Regist:
original, fol. 172. Literae de annua pensione, eodem, 266. and 307. Litera
patens ad faciendum generale^ atturnatum quia infirmus, eodem, fol. 21. Litera
per quam dominus remittit curiam suam Regi, eodem. fol. 4. Literae de requestu,
eodem, fol. 129. Literae canonici ad exercendam iurisdictionem loco suo, fo.
305. Literae patentes ad conferendum beneficta, domino in remotis agente. fol.
305. Literae ad innote sce^dum recuperationem Regis de ecclesia omnibus quorum
interest, fol. 305. Literae patentes regis quod Abbas ad totam vitam suam
possit facere Atturnatos generales, f. 21. Literae procuratoriae; fol. 205.
306. Literae Regia deprecatoriae pro annua pensione, fol. 307. All these you
may see in their places, and understand the meaning of them, as occasion shall
require.

Liverie (Liberatura) is drawn from the French (^^vree i. insigne, gestamen,
Centuriale discrimen, nota centurialis, turmalis) or else from (livrer. i.
tradere) and accordingly has 3. significations. In one it is used for a suite
of cloth or other stuff, that a gentleman gives in coats, cloakes, hats or
gowns, with cognisaunce or without, to his servants or followers, anno 1.
Rich. 2. cap. 7. and anno 20. eiusdem, cap. 1. and (...). and anno 7. H. 4. ca.
14. and anno 8. Ed. 4. ca. 2. and anno 7. eiusdem, ca. 14. and anno 13.
eiusdem, ca. 3. and a. 8. H. 6. ca. 4. and anno 8. Ed. 4. ca. 3. and anno 3. H.
7. ca. 1. and 12. and anno 11. eiusdem, ca. 3. and anno 19. eiusdem, cap. 14.
In the other signification, it betokens a delivery of possession unto those
tenants, which hold of the king in capite, or in knights service: for the king
by his prerogative has primier seysini (or the first possession) of all lands
and tenements so houlden of him. anno 52. H. 3. cap. 16. and an. 17. Ed. 2.
cap. 3. that is, when any such tenent dies, the king forthwith enters, and
holds it until the heir do his homage, and so pray his land to be delivered
unto him. Which act in the king is called Liuerie: and liuerie in this
signification is either general or special. Stawn. praerog. fol. 12. and cap.
3. Liuerie general seems to be that, which is made in general words, and
therefore may easily be missued. Liuerie special is that, which contains in
it a pardon of ouersights committed by the tenent in siewing out his liuerie,
by which pardon the missuing is dispensed with. Stawnf. page 67 cap. Trauers.
20. See the Institutes and grounds of the common law. cap. 30. of general and
special liueries. Liuerie in the third signification is the writ which lies
for the heir to obtain the possession or seisin of his lands at the kings
hands: which see in Fitz. not. br. fol. 155.

Liuerie of seisin (deliberatio seisinae) is a delivery of possession of land
or tenement, or other things corporeal, (for of things incorporeall no liuerie
of seisin may be) unto one that has right or a probability of right unto
them. For as Bracton says: Traditio debet esse vestita and non nuda, sc. quod
traditione praecedat vera causa vel putatiua, qua transeat Dominicum. lib. 2.
cap. 18. number. 3. West part prim. symbol. li. 2. sect. 196. calls this a
ceremony in the common law, used in the conueyance of lands or tenements,
etc. where you may see the usual form hereof particularly set down,
whereunto join the new exposition of law terms.

Lieutenent. See Lieftenent.

Lieutenent of the tower, seems to have been an officer under the Constable.
anno Henr. 4. cap. 15.

Locus partitus, signifies a division made between 2. towns or counties, to
make trial in whether the land or place in question lies. Fleta lib. 4. cap.
15. number. 1.

Local (localis) signifies in our common law, as much as tied or annexed to
a place certain: Example: the thing is local and annexed to the Freehold.
Kitchen fol. 180. and again in the same place: An action of trespass for
battery, etc. is transitory and not local: that is, not needful that the
place of the battery should be set down as material in the declaration: or
if it be set down, that the defendant should trauerse the place set down, by
saying, he did not commit the battery in the place mentioned in the
declaration, and so avoid the action. And again, fol. 230. the place is not
local: that is, not material to be set down in certainty. And the guard of
the person and of the lands differs in this, because the person being
transitory, the lord may have his rauishment de guard, before he be seized of
him, but not of the land, because it is local. Perkins Graunts 30.

Lobbe, is a great kind of north sea fish. anno 31. Ed. 3. stat. 3. cap. 2.

Lodemanage, is the hire of a Pilot for conducting of a ship from one place to
another.

Loichfish, as Lob. Ling. Cod. anno 31. Ed. 3. stat. 3. cap. 2.

Lode works, is one of the works belonging to the Stannaries in Cornwall: for
the which read M. Camdens Britan: in his title of Cornwall. pa. 119. See Streme
work.

Lollards (Lollards) were in account and reputation of those times, Heretics
that abounded here in England, in the days of Edward the third, and Henry the
fifth. anno 2. H. 5. cap. 7. whereof Weekleife was the chief, as Stowe says
in his Annalls: page 425. who by his report, went barefooted and baslely
clothed, to wit in base russet garments down to the heels: they preached, and
especially against Monks and other religious men. Of these read more in him
and others that writ of those times. The name Lindwood deriueth a lolio: quia
sicut lolium inficit segetes: sic Lollardi multociens inficiunt fideles
simplices inter quos conuersantur. in ca. finali: de Haereticis verbo
Lollardiae: But Tritemius in his chronicle, deduceth the name from one Gualter
Lolhard a German as the first author of that sect, living about the year of
our redemption. 1315.

Lord (Dominus) by M. Camdens opinion, is a contract (of Lafford) which is the
Danish word for Dominus. It is a word of honor with us, and is used diversely.
Sometime being attributed to a man, that is noble by birth or creation, which
sort are otherwise called Lords of the Parliament. Sometime to those that be so
called by the courtesy of England, as all the sons, of a Duke, or the eldest
son of an Earl. Sometime to men honorable by office, as lord chief Justice,
etc. and sometime to a mean man that has fee, and so consequently the homage
of tenants within his manner. For by his tenants he is called Lord, and by none
other, and in some places, for distinction sake, he is called Landlord. It is
used nevertheless by the Writers of the common law, most usually in this
signification. And so is it divided into lord above, and lord mesn: lord mesn,
is he that is owner of a manner, and by virtue thereof has tenants holding of
him in fee, and by copy of court roll, and yet holds himself over of a
superior Lord: who is called lord above, or lord Paramount, old not. br. fol.
79. Although I think none simply to be accounted lord Paramount, but the
Prince: because all hold either mediately or immediately of him, and he of none.
In this signification I likewise read Very lord, and Very tenent. eod. fol.
42. and Broke titulo Heriot. number. 1. where (I think) very lord, is he which is
immediate Lord to his tenent: and him to be very tenent to that Lord, of whom
he immediately holds. So that if there be lord above, lord mesn, and tenent,
the lord above is not very lord to the tenent, nor the tenent very tenent to
the lord above.

Lord in gross. Fitz. not. br. fol. 3. is he that is lord having noe manner, as
the king in respect of his crown. idem, f. 5. F. See him also, fol. 8. A. B.
where I find a case wherein a private man is lord in gross. viz. a man makes
a gift in tail of all the land he has, to hold of him and dies: his heir
has but a Seignorie in gross.

Lorimers. anno 1. R. 3. cap. 12. is one of the companies in London, tha makeht
bits for bridles of horses and such like. The name seems to be taken from the
latin (lorum) and is else where written Lorinors.

Lotherwit, alias Leyerwit, is a liberty or privilege to take amends of him
that defiles your bondwoman without license, Rastall: exposition of words. It
is an amends for lying with abondwoman. Saxon in his description of England.
cap. 11. Some think it should be rather written (Legerwit) For (Ledger) is the
Saxon word for a bed, or (Logherwit) of the old word (Logher) being of the
same signification. See Bloodwit and Lyerwit.

Lusernes, See Furre.

Lushoborow, is a base coin used in the days of King Ed. the 3. coined beyond
Seas to the likeness of English money, and brought in to deceive the King and
his subjects. To avoid the which it was made treason for any man wittingly to
bring in any such. an. 25. Ed. 3. stat. 4. cap. secundo.

M
MAcegriefs. alias Macegrefs. be such as willingly buie and sell stolen slesh,
Britton, cap. 29. fo. 71. b. Cromptons Justice of peace. fo. 193. a.

Magna assisa eligenda, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, to summon four
lawful knights before the Justices of Assise, there upon their oaths to choose
12. knights of the vicenage, etc. to pass upon the great assise between A.
plaintiff and B. defendant, etc. Register original, fol. 8. a.

Magna Charta, called in English the great charter, is a charter containing a
number of laws ordained the ninth year of Henry the third, and confirmed by
Edward the first. The reason why it was termed Magna charta, was either for
that it contained the sum of all the written laws in England, or else that
there was another Charter called the Charter of the Forest, established with
it, which in quantity was the lesser of the two. I read in Holinshed, that
King John to appease his Barons, yielded to laws or articles of government much
like to this great Charter, but we now have noe auncienter written law, then
this, which was thought to be so beneficall to the sublect, and a law of so
great equity in comparison of those, which were formerly in use, that K. Henry
the third was thought but hardly to yield unto it, and that to have the
fifteenth penny of all the moveable goods both of the spirituality and
temporaltie throughout his realm. Holinshed in Henry the third. And though
this Charter consist not of above 37. chapters or laws: yet is it of such
extent, as all the law we have, is thought in some sort to depend of it.
Polydorus and Holinshed, vbi supra.

Mahim (Mahemium) comes of the old French (Mehaigne) as M. Skene says, de
verbo. signif. verbo Machanium, and signifies a corporal hurt, whereby a man
loses the use of any member, that is or might be any defense unto him in
batel. The Canonists call it membrimatilationem, as the eye, the hand, the
foot, the scalpe of the head, his foretooth, or, as some say, of any finger of
his hand, Glanuile lib. 14. ca. 7. See Bracton at large, lib. 3. tracta. 2.
cap. 24. nu. 3. and Britton cap. 25. and Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. pri. ca. 41. and
the new exposition of law Terms, and the Mirror of Justices, cap. d'homicid.
The grand Custumarie of Normandy, cap. 6. calls it Mahaignium, and defines
it to be enormem laesionem. All agree that it is the loss of a member, or the
use thereof. And membrum, as Cassan: de consuetu: Burgund. page 168. defines
it out of Baldus, est pars corporis habens destinatam operationem in corpore.
where you may read more of this point. But if you will see it largely
discussed, look Vgolinus de irregularitatibus, ca. 4.. 3. 4. 5. also read M.
Skene vbi supra.

Mainour, alias Manor, alias Meinoure, seems to come of the French (Manier.
i. manu tractare, attrectare) or else of (Ameuer. i. abducere). It signifies in
our common law, the thing that a thief takes away or steals: as to be
taken with the mainor. pl. cor. fol. 179. is to be taken with the thing stolen
about him: and again, fol. 194. It was presented that a thief was delivered
to the Vicount together with the Mainor: and thirdly, fol. 186. If a man be
indicted that he feloniously stole the goods of another, where, in truth, they
be his own goods, and the goods be brought into the court as the manor, and
it be demanded of him, what he says to the goods, and he disclaim them:
though he be quitted of the felony, he shall loose the goods, and again. fol.
149. if the defendant were taken with the manor, and the manor be carried to
the court, they in ancient times would arraine him upon the manor, without
any appeal or indictment. I find this word used in the old. not. br. fol. 110.
in this sort: where a man makes a thing by mainour, or leuying, or estopping,
in such case he shall have Assise. where it signifies handie labor, and is
but an abbreviation of Mainovrey.

Mainovre, see Minouerye.

Mainprise (Manucaptio) is compounded of two French words (Main. i. manus) and
(prins. i. captus) which is a participle of the verb) prendre i. capere,
excipere, captare) It signifies in our common law, the taking or receiving a
man into friendly custody, that otherwise, is or might be committed to the
mercy of the prison, upon security given for his forth coming at a day
assigned: as to let one to mainprise. old not. br. fol. 42. is to commit him to
them, that undertake his appearance at the time appointed. And they that do thus
undertake for any, are called Mainpernouns, because they do receive him into
their hands. pl. cor. fol. 178. Of this sort is the word (Mainpernable) which
signifies him that has committed such an offense, as by law he may be thus
bayled. For in many cases a man is not mainpernable: whereof see Broke, titulo
Mainprise, per totum. and Fitz. not. br. fol. 249. and seqq. M. Manwood in the
first part of his Forest laws. page 167. makes a great difference between
Bail and Mainprise. For he that is mainprised (quoth he) is always said to be
at large, and to go at his own liberty out of ward, after the day is set to
mainprise, until the day of his appearance, by reason of the said common
summons or otherwise. But otherwise it is, where a man is let to bail to four
or two men, by the lord Justice in air of the Forest, until a certain day.
For there he is always accounted by the law to be in their ward and custody
for the time. And they may, if they will, keep him in ward, or in prison all
that time, or otherwise at their will. So that he that is so bayled, shall not
be said by the law to be at large, or at his own liberty. Thus far M.
Manwood. The myrror of Justices makes a difference also between pledges and
mainpernours, saying, that pledges are more general, and that mainpernours are
body for body. lib. 2. cap. de trespass venial. and lib. 3. cap. des pledges
and mainpernours. When mainprises may be granted, and when not, see Cromptons
Justice of peace. fol. 136. etc. vsque 141. and Lamberd. Eiren. lib. 3. cap. 2.
page 336. 337. 338. 339. 340. See also Britton fol. 73. a. cap. Des pledges and
mainpernours: the author of the Myrror of Justices says, that pledges be
those, that bail or redeem any thing but the body of a man, and that
mainpernours be those, that free the body of a man. And that pledges therefore
belong properly to real and mixed actions, and mainpernours to personal.

Maintenance (manutentio vel manutenentia) is a French word, and signifies an
upholding of a cause or person, metaphorically drawn from the succouring of a
young child, that learneth to go, by ones hand. In our common law, it is used
in the evil part, for him, that secondeth a cause depending in suite between
others, either by lending of money, or making friends for either party, toward
his help. anno 32. Henr. 8. cap. 9. And when a man's act in this kind is by
law accounted Maintenance, and when not, see Broke, titulo Maintenance: and
Kitchen, fol. 202. and seqq. and Fitz. not. br. fol. 172. and Cromptons
Iurisdict. fol. 38. The writ that lies against a man for this offense, is
likewise called Maintenance. Terms of the law. verb. Maintenance. Special
maintenance Kitchen, fol. 204. seems to be maintenance most properly so
termed. Of this see Cromptons Justice of peace. fol. 155. b. and the new book
of Entries. verbo, Maintenance. Maintenance, vid. Nouos terminos Iuris.

Make (facere) signifies in the common law, to perform or execute: as to
make his law, is to perform that law which he has formerly bound himself
unto, that is, to clear himself of an action commenced against him by his
oath, and the oaths of his neighbors. Old not. br. fol. 161. Kitchen fol.
192. which law seems to be borrowed of the Feudists, who call these men that
come to swear for another in this case, Sacramentales. Of whom thus says
Hotoman in verbis foundal. Sacramentales a sacramento i. iuramento diccbantur
^i, qui quamuis res, de qua ambigebatur, testes non fuissent, tamen ex eius,
cuius res agebatur, animi sententia, in eadem quae ille verba iurabant: illius
vide licet probitate and innocentia confisi. Nam tum demum adhibebantur, cum
testes nulli extarent. See the rest. The formal words used by him that makes
his law, are commonly these. Hear O ye Justices, that I do not owe this
sum of money demanded, neither all nor any part thereof, in manner and form
declared, so help me God, and the contents of this book. To make services or
custom, is nothing else but to perform them. Old. not. br. fol. 14. To make
oath, is to take an oath.

Maletent, in the Statute called the Confirmation of the liberties of etc. anno
29. Ed. prim. cap. 7. is interpreteted to be a toll of 40. shillings for every
sack of wool. Stow in his Annals calls it a Maletot. page 461 See also the
Statute (de tallagio non concedendo) an. 34. eius. stat. 5.

Malin. See Marle.

Manbote signifies a pecuniary compensation for killing of a man. Lambard in
his exposition of Saxon words. verbo Aestimatio. Of which read Roger Houeden
also, in part poster. suorum annal. fol. 344. a. b.

Mandamus, is a writ, that lies after the year and day, whereas in the mean
time the writ called (diem clausit extremum) has not been sent out to the
Excheatour, for the same purpose, for the which it should formerly have been
sent forth. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 253. B. See Diem clausit extremum. Mandamus is
also a charge to the shyreeue, to take into the kings hands, all the lands and
tenements of the kings widow, that against her oath formerly given, marieth
without the kings consent. Register. fol. 295. b. See Widow.

Mandatum, is a commaundment judicial of the king or his Justices, to have any
thing done for the dispatch of justice, whereof you shall see diversity in the
table of the Register judicial. verbo Mandatum.

Manner (Manerium) seems to come of the French (manoir. i. domicilium,
habitatio) M. Skene. de verbo. significatione. verbo Manerium, says it is
called Manerium, quasi Manurium, because it is labored with handy work by the
Lord himself. It signifies in our common law, a rule or government, which a
man has over such as hold land within his fee. Touching the original of
these manners, it seems that in the beginning, there was a certain compass
or circunt of ground, granted by the king unto some man of worth (as a Baron
or such like) for him and his heirs to dwell upon, and to exercise some
jurisdiction more or less within that compass, as he thought good to grant,
performing him such services, and paying such yearly rent for the same, as he
by his grant required: and that afterward this great man parcelled his land to
other meaner men, inioyning them again such services and rents, as he thought
good, and by that means, as he became tenent to the king, so the inferiors
became tenants unto him. See Perkins Reseruations 670. and Andrew Horns book
entitled the mirror of Justices li. 1. ca. du. Roy Alfred. See the definition
of a Manner. Fulb. fol. 18. And this course of benefiting or rewarding their
nobles for good service, have our kings borrowed from the Emperors of Rome, or
the Lombard kings, after they had settled themselves in Italy, as may well
appear by Antonius Contius in methodo feudorum, c. i. de origin, and libris
Feudorum. And I find that according to this our custom, all lands houlden in
fee throughout France, are divided into Fiefz and arrierfiefz: whereof the
former are such as are immediately granted by the king, the second such as the
kings feudataries do again grant to others. Gregorii Syntagm. lib. 6. an. 5.
nu. 3. But the inconstancy of man's estate, and the mutability of time, has
brought to pass, that those great men, or their posterity, have alienated
these Mansions and lands so given them by their Prince, and others that had
none, have by there wealth purchased many of them: and again that many for
capital offenses have forfeited them to the king, and that thereby they still
remain in the crown, or are bestowed again upon others: so that at these
days many be in the hands of mean men, such as by their skill in law or
physic, by merchaundize, grazing, or such other good husbandry, have gathered
wealth, and enabled themselves to purchase them of those, that by descent
received the^ from their ancestors in greater abundance, then wit to keep
them. But who so ever possesses these manners, the liberty belonging unto them
is real and prediall; and therefore remains still, though the owners be
changed. In these days a manner rather signifies the Jurisdiction and royalty
incorporeal, then the land or site. For a man may have a manner in gross (as
the law terms it) that is, the right and interest of a court Baron, with the
perquisites thereunto belonging: and another or others have every foot of the
land thereunto belonging. Kitchen. fol. 4. Brook hoc titulo per totum.
Bracton, lab: 4. ca. 31. nu. 2. divides manerium, in capitale and non
capitale. See Bracton lib. 5. tracta. 5. ca. 28. nu. pri. See Fee: The new
expositor of law terms says, that Manor is a thing compounded of diverse
things, as of a house, land earable, pasture, meadow, wood, rent, advouzen,
court Baron, and such like. And this ought to be by long continuance of time,
to the contrary whereof man's memory cannot discern, etc.

Mansion (Mansio) as Eracton defines it, lib. 5. cap. 28. nu. pri. is a
dwelling, consisting of one or more houses without any neighbor. And yet he
grants forthwith, that Mansio Mansioni possit esse vicinata. I find it most
commonly used for the lords chief dwelling house within his fee, whether it
have neighbors adjoining or not, otherwise called the capital mesuage.
Bracton. li. 2. c. 26. or the chief manner place. Mansio amongst the ancient
Romans, was a place appointed for the lodging of the Prince or soldiers in
their journey, furnished with convenient entertainment by the neighbors
adjoining. And in this sense we read primam mansionem, for the first nights
lodging, and so in order. It is probable that this word (Mansion) does in some
construction signify so much land, as Beda calls familiam in his
ecclesiastical history. For Master Lambert in his explica. of Saxon words,
ver. Hida terrae, says, that that which he calls familiam, others sithence
call Manentem vel Mansam. (Mansus and Mansum) I read of in the Feudists, which
as Hotoman says, in verbis feudalibus, est neque domus, neque area, neque
hortus, sed ager certi modi ac mensurae. And again, in Commentarus feudorum,
lib. p. tit. 4. verse. de Manso. Agri deserti and inculti certa mensura dabantur
cultoribus quasi in emphyteusin, vt culti and meliorati, feudi iure a vasallis
possiderentur. In contractu autem vasalls nonnunquam incrementum. i.
meliorationem omnem sibi recipiebant, sieve per culturam, sieve per
inaedificationem ea melioratio fieret, etc. And Cassanaeus de consuet. Burg.
page 1195. defines it thus: Mansus est, quantum qu is cum vno pari boum
laborare possit. proving it out of Bartolus, in li. si ita. (...). de auro and
argen. legato: in fine legis. Read M. Skene de verbo. sign. verbo Mansus. I
read the latin word (Mansia) in the same signification, as namely in the
charter granted by King Kanulphus to Ruchin the abbot of Abingdon, which Sir
Edward Cook sets down in his book de iure Regis ecclesiastico.

Manslaughter (Homicidium) is the unlawful killing of a man, without prepensed
malice: as when two, that formerly meant no harm one to the other, meet
together, and upon some sudden occasion falling out, the one kills the
other. West par. 2. symb. titulo Inditements. sect. 44. It differs from
murder, because it is not done with foregoing malice: and from chauncemedly,
because it has a present intent to kill. And this is felony, but admits
clergy for the first time. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 1. cap. 9. and Britton ca. 9.
It is confounded with murder in the statute, anno 28. Ed. 3. ca. 11.

Mantyle (Mantile) comes of the French (Manteau) and signifies with us a
long roabe, anno 24. Hen. 8. cap. 13.

Manucaptio, is a writ that lies for a man, who taken for supition of felony,
and offering sufficient Bail for his appearance, cannot be admitted thereunto
by the Shyreeue, or other having power to let to mainprise. Fitzh. not. br.
fol. 249. See Mainprise. How diversely it is used, see the Register original,
in the table.

Manuel (Manualis) is a thing whereof present profit may be made. Stawnf.
praerogat. fol. 54. And a thing not manuell is that, whereof no present profit
may be made, but hereafter, when it falls, ibid.

Manumission (Manumissio) is a freeing of a villein or slave out of his
bondage. The form of this in the time of the Conqueror, M. Lamb. in his
(...). fol. 126. sets down in these words: Si quis velit seruum suum
liberum facere, tradat eum vice-comiti, per manum dexteram, in pleno comitatu,
and quietum illum clamare debet a iugo seruitutis suae per manumissionem: and
ostendat ei liberas portas, and vias, and tradat illi libera arma, scilicet
lanceam and gladium: and deinde liber homo efficitur. Some also were wont to be
manumitted by charter of manumission. vide Brook, titulo Villenage. fol. 305.
The new expositour of law Terms makes two kinds of manumission: one
expressed, an another implied. Manumissio^ expressed is, when the Lord makes a
deed to his villein to infranchise him by this word (Manumittere) The manner
of manumitting in old time was thus: The Lord in presence of his neighbors
took the bondsman by the head, saying: I will that this man be free, and
therewith shoued him forward out of his hands. Manumission implied, is, when
the Lord makes an obligation for payment of money to him at a certain day, or
sieweth him, where he might enter without suite, or grants him an annuitie,
or leaseth land unto him by deed, for years, or for life, and such like.

Manutenentia, is the writ used in case of maintenance, Register original,
fol. 182. and 189. See Maintenance.

Marches (Marchia) be the bounds and limits between us and Wales, or between
us and Scotland. anno. 24. Henry 8. cap. 9. Camd. page 453. and 606. and the
marches of Scotland are divided into west and middle marches anno 4. H. 5. ca.
7. and anno 22. Ed. 4. cap. 8. It seems to be borrowed from the German
(March. i. limes) Camd. Britan. page 27. or it may be from the French (Marque.
i. signum) being the notorious distinction of two diverse countries or
territories. It is used in the statute anno 24. Hen. 8. ca. 12. generally for
the precincts of the Kings dominions.

Marchers, be the noble men dwelling on the Marches of Wales or Scotland: who
in times past (as M. Camden says, page 453.) had their private laws, much
like as if they had been Kings, which now be worn out. Of these Marchers you
may read, anno 2. H. 4. cap. 18. and anno 26. Hen. 8. cap. 6. and anno 1. Ed.
6. cap. 10. where they are called Lord Marchers. See anno 27. Hen. 8. cap. 26.
how these were extinguished.

Mareshall (Mariscallus) is a French word, signifying as much as Tribunus
Celerum, or Tribunus militum with the ancient Romans, or (...) with the
Grecians, or (...). Tiraquel. de Nobilitate, ca. 8. p. 42. nu. 17. The french
word may seem also (among many other that they have, to proceed from the
German Marschalk. i. equitum magister. which Hotoman in verbis feudalibus,
verbo Marschalkus, deriueth from the old word (March) signifiing a house, with
whom agrees Lupanus, de Magistratibus Eranciae, lib. pri. ca. Marcshallus.
Others make it of these two Saxon words. (Mar. i. equus and scalch. i.
praefectus) or as M. Verstegan says, from (Mare) the general appellation of
all horses, as horse) is now in English, and (Scalc) which, in the ancient
language of the Netherlanders, he affirms to signify a kind of servant, as
Scalco, does at this day among the Italians, being originally a Dutch word.
with us there be diverse officers of this name: but one most noble of all the
rest, who is called Lord or Earl Marshall of England, of whom mention is made
in diverse statutes, as anno. 1. H. 4. ca. 7. and 14. and anno. 13. Rich. 2. ca.
2. His office consists especially in matters of war and arms, as well with
us as in other countries. whereof you may read in Lupanus vbi supra. and
Tilius. li. 2. ca. de Conestabili, Mariscallo. etc. But he that will know the
office of our Lord Marshall, had need beside the few statutes which concern
him, to read his commission, and also to have acces to the Heradls, who out of
their antiquities are able to discover much, that by prescription belongs
unto this office. The next to this is the Marshal of the Kings house, whose
especial authority is, according to Britton and M. Gwin in the preface to his
reading, in the Kings place to hear and determine all plees of the Crown, and
to punish faults committed within the verge, and to hear and determine suites
between those of the kings household, and others within the verge. Cromptons
Iurisdict. fol. 102. of him you may read Fitzh. not. br. fol. 241. B. and
anno. 18. Ed. 3. statut. 2. ca. 7. and anno 27. Ed. 3. stat. 2. c. 6. and an.
2. H. 4. c. 23. and a. 15. H. 6. c. 1. Fleta says, that the office of the
Marshall of the kings house belongs to the Earl of Northf. in fee, and that
he may appoint (with the Kings consent) a Knight under him to execute the
office. which office he also describes to be especially to execute the
judgments and decrees of the Steward, and to have the keeping of the
prisoners. li. 2. cap. 4. and read farther of his office in the 5. chapter of
the said book, which is to dispose of the Lodging in the Kings household under
the Chamberlain, and to clear the Verge of strumpets, etc. anno 5. Hen. 3.
statut. 5. Then be there other inferior officers of this name: as Marshall of
the Justices in Air, anno 3. Ed. 1. ca. 19. Marshall of the Kings bench, anno
5. Ed. 3. ca. 8. and this is he which has the custody of the prison, called
the Kings bench in Southwarke. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 251. I. And these inferior
Marshalls be either ad placitum, or in fee, Kitchen. fol. 143. I find also in
Fleta li. 2. ca. 15. mention of a Marshall of the Kings hall, whose office is,
when the tables be prepared and clothes laid, to call out both those of the
household and strangers, according to their worth, and decently to place them,
to reject unworthy persons, to know the number of the hall, and to testify it
at the next account, to see dogs kept out, to save the alms from filching, to
see filence kept, and every man competently served with meat and drink, and
when the court remoueth, to appointe every one of the household his lodging.
There is also a Marshall of the esche quer, anno. 51. H. 3. sta. 5. to whom
the court commits the custody of the kings debtors during the term time,
to the end they may be farther imprisoned, if they clear not their debts. He
also assigns Shyreeues, escheators, customers, and collectors, their
auditors before whom they shall account. He has all inquisitions taken
before escheators virtute officii, delivered unto him, to be delivered by him
to the treasurers Remembrancer.

Mareshalsee (Marescaltia) is the Court of the Marshall or (word for word) the
seat of the Marshall, of whom see Cromptons Iurisdict. fol. 102. It is also
used for the prison in Southwarke, the reason whereof may be, because the
Marshall of the kings house was wont perhaps to sit there in judgment. See the
statute anno 9. R. 2. cap. 5. and anno 2. Hen. 4. ca. 23.

Martial law, is the law that depends upon the voice of the king, or the
kings leiuetenent in wars. For how be it, the king for the indifferent and
equal temper of laws to all his subjects, do not in time of peace make any
laws but by the consent of the three estates in Parliament: yet in wars by
reason of great dangers rising of small occasions, he uses absolute power: in
so much as his word goes for law. And this is called Martial law. Smith de
repub: Angli: li. 2. c. 3. See Law of arms.

Marriage (Maritagium) signifies not only the coupling together of man and
wife, but also the interest of bestowing a ward or a widow in marriage. Magna
charta, ca: 6. anno 9. He. 3. and Bracton lib. 2. ca. 3. and also it signifies
land given in marriage, Bracton li. 2. ca. 34. and 39. And in this signification
the same author says, that Maritagium est aut liberum aut seruitio obligatum.
li. 2. ca. 7. nu. 3. and 4. Liberum maritagium dicitur, vbi donator vult, quod
terra sic data, quieta sit and libera ab omni seculari seruitio, quod ad
Dominum feudi possit pertinere; et ita quod ille, cui sic data fuerit, nullum
omnino inde faciat seruitium vsque ad tertium haeredem, and vsque ad quartum
gradum: ita quod tertius here is sit inclusivus. See the rest. See also Skene de
verbo. significatione, verbo Maritagium, who is worth the reading.

Maritagio amisso per defaltam, is a writ for the tenent in frank marriage, to
recover lands, etc. whereof he is deforced by another. Regist. fol. 171.

Maritagio forisfacto, is a writ. See Forisfactura Maritagii.

Mark, (merca) comes of the Saxon (Mearc) which signifies a piece of money
worth thirty silver pence. Lamb. explicat. of Saxon words. verbo, Mancusa: what
it now signifies in our coin every man knows. But in ancient times I find
a merke of gold, which was the quantity of eight ounces. Stowes annals. page
32. and again, page 691. 12. merkes of gold Troy weight, the which was 200.
pounds of English money, after which rate every merke valued 16. pounds, 13.
shillings, 4. pence. M. Skene de verbor. signific. verbo, Merke. says, that in
tractatu de ponderibus and mensuris, a Mercke signifies an ounce weight, or
half a pound, whereof the dram is the eighth part, like as the ounce is the
eighth part of a marcke: citing Cassanaeus de consuet. Burgund. Rub. prim.. 7.
verbo. Solz Turnoys. hiis verbis. Solidus (inquit) in iure capitur pro auro,
quorum 72. faciunt libram auri, and duodecim vncia faciunt libram, and octo
vnciae merca^.

Market (mercatus) comes of the French (march. i. emporium, forum
nundinarium) it signifies with us, the same thing, and also the liberty or
privilege whereby a town is enabled to keep a market. Old not. br. fol. 149.
So does Bracton use it, lib. 2. cap. 24. number. 6. and lib. 4. cap. 46. where he
shows, that one market ought to be distant from another sex lencas and
dimidiam, and tertiam partem dimidiae. The reason thereof both he and Fleta
gives in these words: Quia omnes rationabiles dietae constant ex 20.
milliaribus. Diuidatur ergo dieta in tres parts: prima aute^ matutina detur
euntibus versus mercatum: secunda detur ad emendum and vendendum: quae quidem
sufficere debet omnibus, nisi sint forte mercatores statarii qui merces
deposuerint and exposuerint venales, quibus necessaria erit prolixior mora in
mercatu: and tertia pars relinquitur redeuntibus de mercatu ad propria. Et
quaequidem omnia necesse erit facere de die, non de nocte, propter infidias and
incursum latronum, vt omnia sint in tuto, etc. lib. 4. cap. 28.. Item refert.

Marle, is a kind of stone or ^halke, which men in diverse countries of this
Realm, cast upon their land to make it the more fertile. It is some where
called Malin. anno 17. Edvard. 4. cap. 4.

Marque, seems to be a French word signifying notam, vel signum, or else to
come from the German (march. i. limes) it signifies in the ancient statutes
of our land, as much as reprisals, as anno 4. H. 5. cap. 7. Marquis and
Reprisals are used as synonyma. And leters of Marque are found in the same
signification in the same chapter. The reason may be, because ^^e griefs
whereupon these le^^rs are sought and granted, are commonly given about the
^ounds and limits of every country: or at least the remedy for the same is
likest there to be had by some sudden inrode, and happing of such recompense
of the injury received, as may most conveniently be lighted upon. See
Reprisals. See Marches.

Marquis (Marchio) by the opinion of Hotom. verbo Marchio, in verbis
feudalibus, comes of the German March. i. limes, signifiing originally as
much as (Custos limitis) or (Comes and praefectus limitis) of these Zasius thus
writes: de Marchione nihil compertu^ est, nisi quod Gothicum vocabulum
putamus. And afterward thus: Huiusmodi Marchionum (sieve vt nos appellamus)
Margraphiorum origo in limitaneos, praepositos, sieve duces referenda:
Margraphis dicti quod limitibus, quos vulgo marken appellamus, graphii, id est
praepositi fuerunt, etc. For in those teritories, that have naturally noe
bounds of great strength or defense, there is need of wise and stout men
toward their borders, for the keeping out of neighbor enemies. But here in
England though we have a Lord warden of the marches northward, and a warden of
the cinque ports toward the south east, and were wont to have Lo. Marchers
between us and Wales, that served this turn, yet those which we call
Marquises, are lords of more dignity, without any such charge: and are in
honor and account next unto Dukes. At this day I know but one in England, and
that is the Marquis of Winchester, being of that noble family of the Powlets.
See Cassanaeus de consuetud. Burg. page 15.

Marrow, was a lawyer of great account, that lived in Henry the seventh his
days, whose learned readings are extant, but not in print. Lamb. Eiren. li.
pri. cap. 1.

Marterns, see Furre.

Master of the Rols (Magister rotulorum) is an Assista^t unto the Lord
Chauncelour of England in the high court of Chauncery, and in his absence
hears causes there, and gives orders. Crompt. Iurisd. fol. 41. His title in
his patent (as I have heard) is Clericus paruae bagae, custos rotulorum and
domus conuersorum. This domus conuersorum, is the place where the rols are
kept, so called because the Jews in ancient times, as they were any of them
brought to christianity, were bestowed in that house separatly from the rest of
their nation. But his office seems originally to have sprung, from the safe
keeping of the Roules or records of inditements passed in the kings courts, and
many other things. He is called clerk of the rols, anno 12. R. 2. ca. 2. and
in Fortescue his book, cap. 24. and no where master of the rols, until anno
11. Hen. 7. cap. 20. and yet anno 11. einsdem, cap. 25. he is also called
clerk. In which respect, Sir Thomas Smith, li. 2. ca. 10. de Repnb. Angl. well
says that he might not unfitly be called (Custos Archiuorum). He seems to
have the bestowing of the offices of the six clerks. anno 14. and 15. Hen. 8.
cap. 8.

Master of the mint, anno 2. Hen. 6. cap. 14. he is now called the Warden of
the mint, whose office, see in Mint.

Master of the court of Wards and Liueries, is the chief and principal
officer of the court of wards and liueries, named and assigned by the king, to
whose custody the seal of the court is committed. He at the entering upon his
office, takes an oath before the Lord Chauncelour of England, well and truly
to serve the King in his office, to minister equal justice to rich and poor,
to the best of his cunning, wit, and power, diligently to procure all things,
which may honestly and justly be to the kings advantage and profit, and to the
augmentation of the rights and prerogative of the crown, truly to use the
kings seal appointed to his office, to end eauour to the uttermost of his
power, to see th(...) king justly answered of all suc(...) profits, rents,
revenues, a(...)issues as shall yearly rise, grow, or be due to the king in
his office from time to time, to deliver with speed such as have to do before
him, not to take or receive of any person any gift or reward in any case or
matter depending before him, or wherein the king shall be party, whereby any
prejudice, loss, hinderance, or disherison shall be or grow to the king, a.
33. H. 8. c. 33. Master of the horse, is he that has the rule and charge of
the kings stable, being an office of high account, and always bestowed upon
some Noble man both valiant and wise. This Officer under the Emperors of Rome,
was called (comes sacri stabuli.) The Master of the horse is mentioned. anno
39. Eliz. cap. 7. and anno prim. Ed. 6. cap. 5.

Master of the posts, is an Officer of the Kings court, that has the
appointing, placing, and displacing of all such through England, as provide
post horse for the speedy passing of the kings messages and other business,
in the through-fayre towns where they dwell: as also to see that they keep a
certain number of convenient horses of their own, and when occasion is, that
they provide others, wherewith to furnish such, as have warrant from him to
take post horses, either from or to the seas, or other borders, or places
within the Realm. He likewise has the care to pay them their wages, and make
their allowance accordingly, as he shall think meet. This officer is
mentioned, anno 2. Ed. 6. cap. 3.

Master of the armorie, is he that has the care and oversight of his Majesty's
armor for his person or horses, or any other provision or store thereof in any
standing Armories: with command, and placing or displacing of all inferior
Officers thereunto appertaining. Mention is made of him. anno 39. Eliz. cap. 7.

Master of the Jewel house, is an Officer in the Kings household, of great
credit, being allowed bouge of court, that is, diet for himself and the
inferior Officers. viz. Clerks of the Jewel house, and a special lodging or
chamber in court, having charge of all plate of gold, of silver double or
parcel guilt, used or occupied for the Kings or Queens board, or to any
Officer of account attendant in court, and of all plate remaining in the Tower
of London, of cheynes and loose Jewels not fixed to any garment. Mention is
made of this Officer anno 39. Eliz. cap. 7.

Master of the Kings household,, (magister hospitii) is in his just title
called grand Master of the Kings household, and bears the same office that he
did, that was wont to be called Lord Steward of the kings most honorable
household. anno 32. H. 8. ca. 39. Whereby it appears, that the name of this
Officer was then changed, and Charles Duke of Suffolk, President of the Kings
Council, then enjoying that office, was so to be called ever after, so long as
he should poffesse that office.

Master of the Ordinance. anno 39. El. cap. 7. is a great Officer, to whose
care all the Kings Ordinance and Artillery is committed, being some great man
of the Realm, and expert in marshall affairs.

Master of the Chauncery (Magister Cancellariae) is an assistant in Chauncerie
to the Lord Chaunceler or Lord Keeper of the broad seal in matters of
judgment. Of these there be some ordinary, and some extraordinary: of
ordinary there be twelve in number, whereof some fit in court every day
thorough each Term, and have committed unto them (at the Lord Chauncelers
discretion) the interlocutorie report, and sometimes the final determination
of causes there depending.

Master of the Kings musters, is a martial officer in all royal armies most
necessary, as well for the maintaining of the forces complete, well armed and
treined, as also for prevention of such frauds, as otherwise may exceedingly
waste the Princes treasure, and extremely weaken the forces. He has the
oversight of all the captains and bands, and ought to have at the beginning
delivered unto him by the Lord General, perfect lists and rolls of all the
forces both horse and foot, Officers, etc. with the rates of their allowances
signed by the Lord General, for his direction and discharge, in signifying
warrants for their full pay. This Officer is mentioned in the statue, anno 2.
Ed. 6. cap. 2. and Muster master general, anno 35. Eliz. cap. 4. who so
desires to read more of him let him have recourse to Master Digs his
Stratioticos.

Master of the Wardrobe (magster garderobae) is a great and principal officer
in Court, having his habitation and dwelling house belonging to that office,
called the Wardrobe near Puddle-wharfe in London. He has the charge and
custody of all former Kings and Queens ancient robes, remaining in the Tower
of London, and all hangings of Arras, Tapestrie, or the like, for his Majesty's
houses, with the bedding remaining in standing wardrobes, as Hampton court,
Richmond, etc. He has also the charging and delivering out of all either
Velvet or Scarlet allowed for liueries, to any of his Majesty's servants of the
privy chamber, or others. Mention is made of this officer. anno. 39. Eliz. ca.
7.

Matter in deed, and matter of record, are said to differ. old. not. br. fol.
19. where matter in deed, seems to be nothing else, but a truth to be
proved, though not by any Record: and matter of Record, is that which may be
proved by some Record. For example, if a man be siewed to an exigent, during
the time he was in the kings wars, this is matter in deed, and not matter of
record. And therefore (says the book) he that will allege this for himself,
must come, before the Scire facias for execution be awarded against him. For
after that, nothing will serve but matter of Record; that is, some error in the
process appearing upon the Record. Kitchen fol. 216. makes also a difference
between matter of Record, and a specialitie, and nude matter; where he faith,
that nude matter is not of so high nature, as either a matter of Record or a
speciality, otherwise there called matter in deed; which makes me to think,
that nude matter is a naked allegation of a thing done, to be proved only by
witnesses, and not either by Record, or other speciality in writing under seal.

Mauger, is shuffied up of two French words (Mal) and (Gre) id est, animo
iniquo) it fignifieth with us as much as in despite, or in despite of ones
teeth. as the wife mauger the husband, Litleton fol. 124. that is, whether the
husbund will or not.

Mean (Medius) signifies the middle between two extremes, and that eitherin
time or dignity. Example of the first: His action was mean betwixt the
disseisin made to him and his recovery: that is in the interim. Of the second
there is Lord Mean and Tenent. See Mesn.

Mease (Mesuagium) seems to come of the French (Maison) or rather (Meix)
which word I find in Cassanaeus de consuetu. Burgund. page 1195. and
interpreted by him Mansus: what Mansus is, see Mansio^. It signifies a house.
Kitchen fol. 239. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 2. C. See Mesuage.

Medlefe. Cromptons Justice of peace, fol. 193. is that which Bracton calls
(medletum) It. 3. tract. 2. ca. 35. It seems to signify quarrels, scuffling,
or brawling, and to be derived from the French (mesler). i. miscere, turbare

Mere (Merus) though an Adjective, yet is it used for a substantine,
signifiing mere tight. Owld not. br. fol. 2. in these words. And know ye,
that this writ has but two issues: that is to say, joining the mise upon the
mere: And that is, to put himself in the great assise of our Souerainge Lord
the King, or to join battle. See Mise.

Mesurement. See Admesurement.

Medietas linguae, signifies an enquest empaneled upon any cause, wereof the
one half consists of Denizens, the other of strangers. It is called in
English the half tongue, and is used in plees, wherein the one party is a
stranger, the other a denizen. See the statute, anno 28. Ed. 3. ca. 13. and.
anno, 27. eiusdem, statu: 2. ca. 8. commonly called the statute of the Staple.
and anno. 8. H. 6. ca. 29. and. anno. 2. He. 5. ca. 3. and. anno. 11. He. 7.
ca. 21. and. anno. 1. and. 2. Phi. and. Mar. ca. 8. And before the first of
these statutes was made, this was wont to be obtained of the King by grant
made to any company of strangers, as Lombards, Almaines, etc. Stawnf. pl. cor.
lib. 3. ca. 7.

Medio acquietando, is a writ judicial, to distraine a lord for the acquiting
of a mean Lord from a rent, which he formerly acknowledges in court not to
belong unto him. Register judicial, fol. 29. b.

Melius inquirendo, is a writ that lies for a second inquiry, as what lands
and tenements a man dyed seized of, where partial dealing is suspected upon
the writ, Diem clausit extremum. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 255.

Merchenlage, was one of the three sorts of laws, out of which the Conqueror
framed laws unto us, mingled with those of Normandy. Camd. Britan. page 94.
who also, page 103. shows that in the year of our lord 1016. this land was
divided into three parts, whereof the west Saxons had one, governing it by the
laws called West Saxon laws, and that contained these nine shyres, Kent,
Southsex, South. rey, Barkeshire, Hamshire, Wilshire. Somerset, Dorset and
Devonshire. the second by the Danes, which was governed by the laws called
Denelage, and that contained these fifteen shires, York, Darby, Notingham,
Leycester, Lincoln, Northampton, Bedford, Buckingham, Hertford, Essex,
Midlesex, Northf. Southf. Cambridge, Huntington. The third was possessed and
governed by the Mercians, whose law was called Merchenlage. which were these
eight, Gloucester, Worcester, Hereford, Warwick, Oxenford, Chester, Salop, and
Stafford. See Law.

Mercy (Misericordia) signifies the arbitrament or discretion of the King or
Lord, in punishing any offense, not directly censured by the law. As to be in
the grievous mercy of the king. anno 11. H. 6. cap. 6. is to be in hazard of a
great penalty. See Misericordia.

Measondue, (domus Dei) comes of the French (maison de dien) by which names
diverse Hospitals are named. You find the word, anno 2. and 3. Philip. and Mar.
cap. 23. in fine.

Mese, See Mease.

Mesn (medius) seems to come from the French (mainsne. i. minor natu) it
signifies in our common law, him that is lord of a manner, and thereby has
tenants holding of him, yet holding himself of a superior Lord. And therefore
it seems not absurdly to be drawn from the French (mainsne) because the
Lordship is created after the higher, whereof he holds. Mesn also signifies
a writ, which lies where there is Lord, mesn, and tenent, the tenent holding
of the mesn by the same services, whereby the mesn holds of the Lord, and the
tenent of the mesn is distrained by the superior lord, for that his service or
rent, which is due to the mesn. Fitz. not. br. fol. 135. See Mesnaltie.

Mesnaltie (medietas) comes of Mesn, and signifies nothing but the right of
the mesn: as, the mesnaltie is extinct. old net. br. fol. 44. if the mesnalty
descend of the tenent. Kitchen fol. 147. For farther understanding whereof, take
these words out of the Custumarie of Norm. Medietate tenentur feuda, quando
aliqua persona intervenit inter Dominum and tenentes. Et hoc modo tenent omnes
post nati, mediante ante nato.

Messenger of the Exchequer, is an Officer there, of which sort there be four
in that court, that be Pursuyvants attending the lord Treasurer, to carry his
leters and precepts. See Pursuyvant.

Mesuage (mesuagium) is a dwelling house. West part. 2. symbol. titulo. Fines.
sect. 26. But by the name of a mesuage may pass also a Curtilage, a garden, an
orchard, a dove house, a shop, a mill, as parcel of an house, as he himself
confirms out of Bracton. lib. 5. cap. 28. sect. prim. and Plowden fol. 199.
170. 171. and of himself he avouches the like of a cotage, a tossed, a chamber,
a celler, etc. yet may they be demanded by their single names. Mesuagium in
Scotland, signifies the principal dwelling place or house within a Barony,
which in our land is called a maner-house. Skene de verb. significat. verbo,
Mesuagium, where he cites Vaientine Leigh, that in his book of Survey he
affirms Mesuagium to be the tenement or land earable, and the dwelling house
or place, or court hall thereof, to be called the site, in Latin called Situs.

Mile (milliare) is a quantity of a thousand paces, otherwise described to
contain eight furlongs, and every furlong to contain forty lugs or poles, and
every lugger or pole to contain 16. foot and a half. anno 35. El. cap. 6.

Mildernix. anno 1. Jacob. cap. 24.

Mindbruch, is hurting of honor and worship. Saxon in his description of Engl.
cap. 71.

Miniuer. See Furre.

Minouery. anno 7. R. 2. cap. 4. seems to be compounded of two French words
(main. i. manus and (ouvrer. i. operari) and to signify some trespass or
offense committed by a man's handie work in the Forest, as an engyn to catch
Dear. Britton uses the verb (Meinoverer) for to occupy and manure land.
cap. 40. and cap. 62. main-ovre, for handyworke. It is not unlike, that our
English (manure) is abbreuiated of the French.

Mint, comes of the Germane word, (meunk. i. pecunia, moneta) and it
signifies with us, the place where the kings coin is formed, be it gold or
silver, which is at this present, and long has been, the Tower of London,
though it appear by diverse stories, and other anticuities, that in ancient
times the mint has been also at C^leis, an. 21. R. 2 cap. 16. and anno 9 Hen.
5. stat. 5. cap. 5. The Officers belonging to the mint, have not been always
alike. At this present they seem to be these: The Warden, who is the chief of
the rest, and is by his office to receive the silver of the Goldsmiths, and to
pay them for it, and to ouersee all the rest belonging to this function. His
fee is an hundred pounds per annum. The master-worker, who receives the silver
from the Warden, causes it to be melted, and delivers it to the moniers, and
takes it from them again, when it is made. His allowance is not any set fee,
but according to the pound weight. The third, is the Controller, who is to see
that the money be made to the just assise, to ouersee the officers, and control
them, if the money be not as it ought to be: his fee is 100. merkes per annum.
Then is the Master of the Assaye, who weighs the silver, and sees whether it
be according to standard: his yearly fee is also an hundred merkes. Then is the
Auditour to take the accounts, and make them up Auditor-like. Then is the
Surueyor of the melting, who is to see the silver cast out, and not to be
altered after it is delivered to the melter: which is after the Assay-master
has made trial of it. Then is the Clerk of the Irons, who sees that the
Irons be clean, and fit to work with. Then the Grauer, who graueth the
stampes for the moneys. Then the Smyters of Irons, who after they be graven,
smites them upon the money. Then the Melters, that melt the Bullion, before it
come to the coining. The^ the Blanchers, who do aneale, boil, and cleanse the
money. The Porter, who keeps the gate of the mint. The Provost of the mint,
who is to provide for all the monyers, and to ouersee them. Lastly, the
monyers, who are some to sheere the money, some to forge it, some to beat it
abroad, some to rou^nd it, some to stamp or coin it. Their wages is not by
the day or year, but uncertain, according to the weight of the money coined
by them. Other officers that have benein former time, are said now to be out
of use.

Misauenture, or misaduenture, comes near the French (mesaduenture. i.
infortunium.) In our common law, it has an especial signification for the
killing of a man, partly by negligence, and partly by chance. As if one
thinking no harm, dissolutely throws a stone, where with he kills another:
or shoots an arrow, etc. For in this case he commits not felony, but only
loses his goods, and has pardon of course for his life. Stawn. pl. cor. li.
1. ca. 8. Britton ca. 7. distinguishes between Adventure and misauenture.
Adventure he makes to be mere chance, as if a man being upon or near the
water, be taken with some sudden sickness, and so fall in, and is drowned, or
into the fire, and be burned to death. Misauenture he makes, where a man
comes to his death by some outward violence, as the fall of a tree, or of a
gate, the running of a cartwheele, the stroke of a horse, or such like. So that
misauenture in Stawnfords opinione, is construed somewhat more largely, then
Britton understands it. West part. 2. Symbol. titulo Indictment, sect. 48.
makes homicide casual, to be merely casual or mixed. Homicide by mere
chance, he defines sect. 49. to be, when a man is slain by mere fortune,
against the mind of the killer; as if one hewing, the axe flies of the haste,
and kills a man. And this is all one with Brutons misauenture. Homicide by
chance mixed he defines sect. 50. to be, when the killers ignorance or
negligence is joined with the chance: as if a man loppe trees by an high way
side, by which many usually travel, and cast down a bowgh not giving warning,
etc. by which bowgh a man passing by is slain.

Miscontinuance, Kitchen fol. 231. See Discontinuance.

Mise (misa) is a French word signifing as much as (expensum) in latin, and
the latin word (Misa) is so used in Kitchen fol. 144. and in West. part. 2.
Simbol. titulo, Proceedings in chauncery, sect. 21. F. It is used anno 2. and
3. Ed. 6. ca. 36. for a sum of money paid by the Kings tenants in certain
counties in Wales according to their several customs. In the statute 33. H.
8. ca. 13. it is used plurally, for certain custumary gratuities sent to to
the Lord Marchers of Wales, by their tenants, at their first coming to their
lands. And anno 4. and 5. Phil. and Mar. ca. 11. mise is used in an action of
right or property, for the point whereupon the parties proceed to trial,
either by Assise or battle: as issue is in an action personal; if the Mise
be upon battle. Litleton fol. 102. and in the old not. br. fol. (...). you
have these words. Know yea that this writ has but two issues: that is to say,
joining the mise upon the mere, and that is, to put himself into the great
Assise of our sovereign Lord the King, or to join battle, See anno 37. Ed.
3. ca. 16. To join the mise upon the mere, is as much to say, as to join the
mise upon the clear right, and that in more plain terms is nothing else, but
to join upon this point, whether has the more right, the tenent or
demaundant. Litleton. li. 3. ca. 8. foll. 101. b. This word in some other place
is used for a participle, signifiing as much as (cast or put upon) in english,
which appears by S. Ed. Cokes report in Saffins case. vol. 6. fo. 124. a.

Misericordia, is used in the common law, for an arbitrary punishment. Bracton
li. 4. tracta. 5. ca. 6. in these words. Item siquis in misericordiam inciderit
pro disseisina, non remanebit misericordia exigenda, si ille qui ^miserit,
quaesiuerit conuictionem. Kitchen. fol. 78. out of Glanuile says thus, Est
autem misericordia, quia quis per iuramentum legalium hominum amerciatus est,
ne aliquid de suo honorabili contenemento amitta^, which saying you have in a
manner word forword in Glanvile, lib. 9. cap. 11. Fitzherbert says, that it is
called misericordia, because it ought to be very moderate, and rather less
then the offense, according to the tenure of the great charter. cap. 14. This
says Fitz. in his not. br. in the writ De moderata misericordia, fol. 75. A.
I. Misericordia is to be quit of Misericors, that is, to be discharged of all
manner of amercements, that a man may fall into within the Forest. Crompton.
Iurisd. fol. 196. See Amerciament. See Mercy, and Moderata misericordia.

Miske^ning. i. changing of speech in court. Saxon in the description of Engl.
cap. 11.

Misnomer, is compounded of the French (mes) which in composition always
signifies as much as (amiss) and (nomer. i. nominare.) It signifies in our
common law, the using of one name for another, or mis-tearming. Broke, titulo
Misnomer.

Misprision (Misprisio) comes of the French (Mespris. i. fastidiu^,
contemptus,) it signifies in our common law, neglect, or negligence, or
oversight: As for example, Misprision of treason, or of felony, is a neglect or
light account showed of treason or felony committed, by not revealing it, when
we know it to be committed; Stawnf: pl. cor. li. 1. ca. 19. which read at
large: or by letting any person committed for treason or felony, or suspision
of either, to go before he be indicted. Also Misprision of Clerks, anno. 8. He.
6. ca. 15. is a neglect of Clerks in wrighting, or keeping records. Thirdly,
anno. 14. Ed. 3. ca. 6. statu. pri. by misprision of Clerks no process shall be
admitted. Misprision of treason, is the concealment, or not disclosing of
known treason, for the which the offenders are to suffer imprisonment during
the Kings pleasure, loose their goods, and the profits of their lands, during
their lives. Crompton in his Justice of peace. cap. Misprision of felony, fol.
40. West. part 2. symbol. titulo Inditements, sect. 63. in sieve. Misprision of
felony, seems only finable by the Justices, before whom the party is
attainted. Crompton. Justice of peace, vbisupra. The Justices of the common
place have power to assesse fines and amerciaments upon persons offending for
misprisions, contempts, or negligences, for not doing, or misdoing any thing,
in or concerning fines. West part 2. symbol. titulo Fines. sect. 133. Justices
of Assise shall amend the defaults of Clerks misprising of a syllable or leter
in writing. Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 208. But it is to be noted, that other
faults may be accounted misprisions of treasons or felony, because certain
later statutes do inflict that punishment upon them, that of old has been
inflicted upon misprisions. whereof you have an example. anno 14. El. ca. 3. of
such as coin foreine coins not current in this Realm, and of their
procurers, aiders, and abetters. And see the new exposition of law Terms.
Misprision signifies also a mistaking, anno 14. Ed. 3. stat. pri. ca. 6.

Misses, See Mise.

Misuser, is an abuse of liberty or benefit: As, he shall make fine for his
misuser. old. not. br. fol. 149.

Mystery (mysterium) comes of the latin (Mysterium) or rather from the
French (Mestier. i. ars, artificium) an art or occupation.

Mittendo manuscriptum pedis finis, is a writ Judicial, directed to the
Treasurer and Chamberlaines of the Exchequer, to search and transmit the foot
of a fine, acknowledged before Justices in Air, into the common plees, etc.
Register. fol. 14. a. b.

Mittimus, signifies a precept sent by the King out of his Bench, to those
that have the custody of fines levied, that they send them by a day assigned
to his Bench, West part 2. symbol. titulo Eynes sect. 138. F. and 154. B. and
also to the Exchequer for certificate that Judgment is given for the liuerie of
lands to such or such a one, out of the Kings hands: whereupon he is dismissed
also out of the exchequer, a. 5. R. 2. c. 15. of diverse other uses and
applicatio^s of this (Mittimus) see the Register original in the table of the
book.

Moderata misericordia, is a writ that lies for him that is amersed in court
Baron or other, being not of Record, for any transgression or offense beyond
the quality of a fault. It is directed to the Lord of the court, or his
Bayliffe, commanding them to take a moderate amerciament of the party: and is
founded upon Magna charta, ca. 14. Quod nullus liber homo amercietur nisi
secundum qualitatem delicti, etc. The rest touching this writ, see in Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 75. See Misericordia.

Modo and forma, are words of art in a process, and namely in the answer of
the defendant, whereby he denies himself to have done the thing laid to his
charge, modo and forma declarata. Kitch. fol. 232. It signifies as much, as
that clause in the civil law, Negat allegata, prout allegantur, esse vera.

Moitye, comes of the French (Moitie) id est, coaequa vel mediapars) and
signifies the half of any thing, Litleton. fol. 125.

Monks clothes, anno 20. Hen. 6. cap. 10.

Moniers (Monetari^) Register. original. fol. 262. b. and anno 1. Ed. 6. ca.
15. be ministers of the Mint, which make and coin the Kings money. It appears
by some antiquity which I have seen that in ancient times our kings of England
had mints in most of the countries of this Realm. And in the tractate of the
Exchequer, written by Ockham, I find, that whereas the Shyreeues ordinarily
were tied to pay into the Exchequer the kings sterling, for such debts as they
were to answer, they of Northumberland, and Cumberland, were at liberty to pay
in any sort of money, so it were silver. And the reason is there given, because
those two shires, monetarios de antiqua institutione non habent.

Monstrance de droyt, is as much to say, as showing of his right. It signifies
in our co^mmon law, a sulte in Chancerie to be restored to lands or tenements,
that indeed be mine in right, though they were by some office found to be in
possession of another lately dead. See Stawnf. praerog. ca. 21. at large, and
Brook, titulo Petition. of this also read Sir Edward Cooks reports, lib. 4.
fol. 54. b. etc. the Wardens of the Sadlers case.

Monstrauerunt, is a writ that lies for tenants that hold freely by charter in
ancient Demean, being distreined for the payment of any toll or imposition,
contrary to their liberty, which they do or should enjoy, which see in Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 14.

Morian, is all one in signification with the french (Morion. i. cassis) a head
piece: which word the french man boroweth from the Italian (morione) anno. 4.
and 5. Phi. and. Ma. ca. 2.

Morlinge, alias Mortling. seems to be that wolle which is taken from the
skin of a dead sheep, whether dying of the rotte, or being killed. anno. 27.
H. 6. ca. 2, This is written Morki^. anno. 3. Iaco. ca. 8.

Mort d'auncester, See Assise.

Mortgage (Mortuum vadium, vel Morgagium) is compounded of 2. French words
(Mort, id est, mors) and (Gage, id est, pignus, merces) It signifies in our
common law, a pawn of land or tenement, or anything moveable, laid or bound
for money borrowed, peremptorily to be the creditours for ever, if the money be
not paid at the day agreed upon. And the creditour holding land or tenement
upon this bargain, is in the mean time called Tene^t in mortgage. Of this we
read in the grand Custumarie of Normandy, cap. 113. in these words. Notandum
insuper est, quod vadiorum, quoddam viuum, quoddam mortuum nuncupatur. Mortuum
autem dicitur vadium, quod se de nihilo redimit and acquietat, vt terra tradita
in vadium pro centum solidis, quam cum obligator retrahere voluerit, acceptam
pecuniam restituet in solidum. Vivum autem dicitur vadium, quod ex suis
prouentibus acquir atur. Vt terra tradita in vadium pro centum solidis vsque ad
tres annos, quae, elapso tertio anno, reddenda est obligatori, vel tradita in
vadium, quousque pecunia recepta de eiusdem proventibus fuerit persoluta.
Glanvile likewise lib. 10. cap. 6. defines it thus: mortuum vadium dicitur
illud, cuius fructus vel reditus interim percepti in nullo se acquietant. So
you see by both these books, that it is called a dead gage, because whatsoever
profit it yields, yet it redeemeth not it self by yelding such profit,
except the whole sum borrowed be likewise paid at the day. See M. Skene. de
verborum signif. eodem. He that lays this pawn or gage, is called the
Mortgager, and he that takes it, the Mortgagee. West. par. 2. symb. titulo
Fines: sect. 145. This if it contain excessive usury, is prohibited. anno 37.
H. 8. c. 9.

Mortmaine (Manus mortua) is compounded of two french words (Mort. i. mors) and
Main. i. manus) It signifies in the common law, an alienation of lands or
tenements to any corporation, guilde, or fraternity, and their successors, as
Bishops, parsons, vicars, etc. which may not be done without license of the
king, and the Lord of the manner. The reason of the name proceeds from this,
as I conceive it, because the services and other profits due for such lands, as
escheates, etc. comme into a dead hand, or into such a hand as holds them,
and is not of power to deliver them, or any thing for them back again. Magna
charta, cap. 36. and anno 7. Ed. prim. commonly called (the statute of
Mortmaine) and anno 18. Ed. 3. statut. 3. cap. 3. and anno 15. Richard. 2. cap.
5. Polydor. Virgill in the 17. book of his Chronicles, makes mention of this
law, and gives this reason of the name. Et legem hanc manum mortuam vocarunt,
quod res semel datae collegiis sacerdotum, non vtique rursus venderentur, velut
mortuae, hoc est, vsui aliorum mortalium in perpetuum ademptae essent. Lex
diligenter servatur, sic vt nihil possessionum ordini sacerdotali a quoquam
detur, nisi Regio permissu. But the former statutes be some thing abridged by
anno 39. Elizabeth cap. 5. by which the gift of lands, etc. to Hospitals is
permitted without obteining of Mortmaine. Hotoman in his commentaries de verbis
feudal. verbo Manus mortua, has these words. Manus mortua locutio est, quae
vsurpatur de ijs, quorum possessio, vt ita dicam, immortalis est: quia nunquam
haeredem habere desinunt. Qua de causa res nunquam ad priorem dominum
revertitur. Nam manus pro possessione dicitur, mortua pro immortali. Sic
municipium dicitur non mori, l. An vsusfructus 56. D. de vsufr. legate. quoniam
hominibus aliis succrescentibus, idem populi corpus videtur. l. proponebatur.
76. D. de Iudiciis: Haec Hotemanus. and read the rest. Amortizatio, est in
manum mortuam translatio Principis iussu. Petrus Belluga in speculo principum:
fol. 76. Ius amortizationis est licentia capiendi ad manum mortuam. Idem,
eodem. where you may read a learned tractate both of the begicning and nature
of this doctrine. To the same effect you may read Cassa. de consuetu. Burg.
page 348. 387. 1183. 1185. 1201. 1225. 1285. 1218. 1274. M. Skene de verborum
signif. says that Dimittere terras ad manum mortuam, est idem atque dimittere
ad multitudinem sive vniuersitatem, quae nunquam moritur: idque per (...), seu
a contrario sensu, because communalties never die.

Mortuary (Mortuarium) is a gift lest by a man at his death, to his parish
church, for the recompense of his personal tithes and offerings not duly paid
in his life time. And if a man have three or more catell of any kind, the best
being kept for the lord of the fee, as a Heriot, the second was wont to be
given to the person in right of the church, cap. statutum. De consuetu. in
provincial. Touching this you have two statutes. one anno 13. Ed. pri. commonly
called, Circumspecte agatis: whereby it appears, that Mortuaries are suable
in the court Christian; the other anno 21. H. 8: cap. 6. whereby is set down
an order and rate in money for mortuaries.

Mulier, as it is used in the common law, seems to be a word corrupted and
used for (Melior) or rather the French (Melieur). It signifies the lawful
issue preferred before an elder brother borne out of matrimony: anno H. 6. cap.
11. Smith de repub. Anglo. lib. 3. cap. 6. But by Glanuile lib. 7: ca. pri. the
lawful issue seems rather (Mulier) then (Melior) because it is begotten (e
Muliere) and not (ex Concubma). for he calls such issue filios mulierato^,
opposing them to bastards. And Britton cap. 70. has friar mulier. i. the
brother begotten of the wise, opposite to friar bastard. This seems to be used
in Scotland also, for M. Skene de verborum signifi. verbo (Mulieratus filius)
says that Mulieratus filius, is a lawful son begotten of a lawful wife. Quia
mulieris appellatione vxor continetur. l. Mulieris 13. and ibid. glossa de
verborum significatine.

Mulmutius laws, See Law.

Multure (molitura, vel multura) comes near the French, (moulture) and
signifies in our common law, the toll that the miller takes, for grinding
of corn.

Murage, (muragium) is a toll or tribute to be levied for the building or
repayring of public edifices or walls. Fitz. not. br. fol. 227. D. Murage
seems also to be a liberty granted by the King to a town, for the
gathering of money toward walling of the same. anno 3. Ed. 1. cap. 30.

Murder (murdrum) is borrowed of the French, (meurtrier. i. carnifex, homicida)
or (meurtre. i. internecio, homicidium,) The new Expositour of the law terms
draws it from the Saxon word, (mordren) signifying the same thing. It
signifies in our common law, a wilful and felonious killing of any other
upon prepensed malice. anno 52. H. 3. cap. 25. West. part. 2. symbol. titulo,
Inditements. sect. 47. Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 15 number. prim. defines
it to be Homicidium, quod, nullo praesente, nullo sciente, nullo audiente,
nullo vidente, clam perpetratur. And of the same mind is Britton. cap. 6. as
also Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 30. yet Fleta says also, that it was not murder,
except it were proved the party slain were English, and no stranger. But as
Stawnf. says, pl. cor. lib. 1. cap. 2. the law in this point is altered, by
the statute, anno 14. Ed. 3. cap. 4. and murder is now otherwise to be defined.
When a man upon prepensed malice kills another, whether secrotly or openly,
it makes no matter: or be he an English man, or a forainer living under the
Kings protection. And prepensed malice is here either express or employed:
express, when it may be evidently proved, that there was formerly some evil
will employed: when one kills another suddenly, having nothing to defend
himself: as going over a style, or such like. Crompton. Justice of peace, in
the chapter of Murder. fol. 19. b. See M. Skene de verbor. signif. verbo,
Murdrum. This by the Latin Interpretour of the graund Custumarie of Normandy,
is called multrum. cap. 68. See Were.

Muster, comes of the French (moustre. i. specimen, spectamen, exemplum,) as,
feire moustre generale de toute son armee, is as much as, lustrare exercitum.
The signification is plain. Mustred of record. anno 18. H. 6. cap. 19. seems
to be dare nomen, or to be enrolled in the number of the kings soldiers.
Master of the kings musters. anno. 2. Ed. 6. cap. 2. See Master.

Muster master general. anno. 35. Eliz. ca. 4. See Master of the kings musters.

N
NAam (Namium) seems to come from the Dutch word (nemmen. i. capio) It
signifies in our common law, the taking or apprehending of another man's
moveable goods: and is either lawful or unlawful. Lawful naam, is nothing
else but a reasonable distress, proportionable to the value of the thing
distreined for. And this naam was aunciently called either vif or mort, quick
or dead, accordingly as it was made of dead or quick chatels. Lawful naam is
so, either by the common law, or by a man's particular fact: by the common law,
as when one takes another man's beasts damage seisant in his grounds: by a
man's particular fact, as by reason of some contract made, that for default of
payment of an annuity agreed upon, it shall be lawful to distreine in such or
such lands, etc. Horns mirror of Justices. lib. 2. ca. de vec de naam. where
you may read of other circumstances required in lawful naam: viz: of what
thing, or of what things first, in what manner, on what days, and at what
hours it ought to be made; with other points worth the reading, for the
understanding of our law antiquities. See Withernam.

Nasse. anno. 4. H. 7. ca. 21. seems to be the proper name of Orford Haven.
Whether it be so termed of the boats or water vessels that lie there or not,
let the reader judge. But (nasselle) is in French a kind of small boat.

Natiuo habendo, is a writ that lies to the Shyreeue for a Lord, whose vilein
claimed as his inheritance, is run from him, for the apprehending and
restoring of him to his Lord again. Register orig. fol. 87. Fitzh. not. br.
fol. 77. See Liberate probanda.

Naturalization. See Denizen.

Ne admittas, is a writ that lies for the plaintiff in a Quare impedit, or him
that has an action of Darrein presentment depending in the common Bench, and
fears that the Bishop will admit the clerk of the defendant, during the
suite between them. And this writ must be sued within six months after the
avoydance. Because after the six months the Bishop may present by lapse.
Register orig. fol. 31. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 37. where see the rest.

Negative pregnant (Negatiua praegnans) is a negative implying also an
affirmative. As is a man being impleaded, to haued one a thing upon such a day,
or in such a place, denies that he did it modo and forma declarata: which
implies never the less, that in some sort he did it. Or if a man be said to
have alienated land, etc. in fee, he denying that he has alienated in fee,
seems to confess that he has alienated in some other sort. Dyer. fol. 17.
nu. 95. See Brook hoc titulo and Kitchen, fol. 232. And see the new exposition
of law terms. And read also in some Ciuilians, of Affirmatiua praegnans, and
that is, quae habet in se inclusiuam negatiuam. Et hoc importare videntur
dictiones (Solum and tantum, quae implicant negatiuam) Pacianus. De
probationibus. lib. 1. ca. 31. nu. 16. fol. 93.

Neif (natiua) comes of the French (Naif. i. naturalis, vel nativus) it
signifies in our common law, a bond woman, anno. 1 Ed. 6. ca. 3. the reason
is, because women become bond rather natiuitate, than by any other means.

Ne in just vexes, is a writ that lies for a Tenent, which is distrained by
his Lord, for other services than he ought to make, and is a prohibition to the
Lord in it self, commanding him not to distreine. The especial use of it is,
where the tenent has formerly prejudiced himself by performing more services,
or paying more rent without constraint, than he needed. For in this case, by
reason of the Lords seisin, he cannot avoid him in avowry: and therefore he is
driven to this writ as his next remedy, Register orig. fol. 4. Fitzh. not. br.
fol 10.

Ne vicecomes color mandat^ Regis quenquam amoueat a possessione ecclesiae
minus just. Register orig. fol. 61.

Nient comprise, is an exception taken to a petition as unjust, because, the
thing desired, is not contained or comprehended in that act or deed, whereupon
the petition is grounded. For example, one desires of the court, to be put in
possession of a house formerly among other lands etc. adjudged unto him. The
adverse party pleads, that his petition is not to be granted, because though
he had a judgment for certain lands and houses: yet the house into the
possession whereof he desires to be put, is not contained among those for the
which he had judgment. See the new book of Entries. titulo, Nient comprise.
This seems to be especially to hinder execution.

Nifle, anno 3. Ed. 4. cap. 5.

Nihil. anno. 5. R. 2. stat. pri. cap. 3. is a word set upon a debt illeuiable,
by the foreine Apposer in the Exchequer.

Nohil dicit, is a failing to put in answer to the plee of the plaintiff by
the day assigned, which if a man do commit, judgment passes against him, as
saying nothing why it should not.

Nisi prius, is a writ judicial, which lies in case, where the Enquest is
paneled, and returned before the Justices of the Bank, the one party or the
other making petition, to have this writ for the case of the contrie. It is
directed to the Shyreeue, commanding that he cause the men impaneled to come
before the Justices in the same county, for the determination of the cause
there, except it be so difficult, that it need great deliberation. In which
case it is sent again to the Bank, v. anno 14. Ed. 3. cap. 15. The form of
the writ, see in old. not. br. fol. 159. and in the Regist. indic. fol. 7. and
28. and 75. See the new book of Entries, verbo, Nisi prius. And it is called
(Nisi prius) of these words comprised in the same, whereby the Shyreeue is
willed to bring to Westminst. the men impaneled at a certain day, or before
the Justices of the next Assizes: nisi die Lunae apud talem locum prius
venerint, etc. whereby it appears, that Justices of Assizes, and Justices of
(nisi prius) are differing. And Justices of (nisi prius) must be one of them,
before whom the cause is depending in the Bench, with some other good man of
the County associated unto him. Fitz. not. br. fol. 240. E. which he takes
from the Statute of York. ann. 12. Ed. 2. See Westminster. 2. cap. 30. anno 13. Ed.
prim. and anno 27. eiusdem. cap. 4. and anno 2. Ed. 3. cap. 17. and anno 4.
eiusdem, cap. 11. and anno 14. eiusdem cap. 16. and anno 7. Rich. 2. cap. 7.
and anno 18. Eliz. cap. 12.

Nobility (nobilitas) in England compriseth all dignities above a Knight. So
that a Baron is the lowest degree thereof. Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. prim.
cap. 17. Bartolus in his Tractate De Nobilitate, which he compiled upon the
law, Si vt proponis C. de dignitatibus, libro. 12. rehearses four opinions
de Nobilitate, but rejects them, and himself defines it thus: Nobilitas est
qualitas illata per principatum tenentem, qua quis vltra honestos plebeios
acceptus ostenditur. But this definition is too large for us, except we will
account Knights and Banerets inter plebem, which in mine opinion were too
harsh. For Equites among the Romans, were in a middle rank inter Senatores
and plebem.

Nocumento. See Nuisance.

Nomination (nominatio) is used by the Canonists, and common Lawyers, for a
power that a man by virtue of a manner or otherwise, has to appoint a Clerk to
a patron of a benefice, by him to be presented to the Ordinary. New terms of
the law.

Non-abilitie, is an exception taken against the plaintiff or demandant upon
some cause, why he cannot commence any suite in law, as a Praemunire,
Outlawrie, Villenage, Excommunication: or because he is a stranger borne. The
Ciuilians say, that such a man has not personam standi in iudicio. See Broke,
hoc titulo. see Fitzh. not. br. fol. 35. A. fol. 65. D. fol. 77. C. The new
Expositour of law terms reckons six causes of Non-ability: as if he be an
outlawe, a stranger borne, condemned in a praemunire, professed in religion,
excommunicate, or a villein. Howbeit the second cause holds only in actions
real or mixed, and not in personal, except he be a stranger and an enemy.

Non admittas. See Ne admittas.

Nonage, is all the time of a man's age under one and twenty years in some
cases, or fourteen in some, as marriage. See Broke, titulo, Age. See Age.

Non capiendo clericum. See Clerico non capiendo.

Non claim, Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 144. seems to be an exception against a
man that claims not within the time limited by law, as within the year and
day, in case where a man ought to make continual claim, or within five years
after a fine leuyed. v. Coke. lib. 4. in prooemio. See Continual claim.

Non compos mentis, is of four sorts: first, he that is an idiot borne: next,
he that by accident afterward wholly leeseth his wits: thirdly, a lunaticke,
that has sometime his understanding, and sometime not: lastly, he which by his
own act depriueth himself of his right mind for a time, as a drunkard, Coke
lib. 4. fol. 124. b.

Non distringendo, is a writ, comprising under it diverse particulars, according
to diverse cases: all which you may see in the Table of the Register original,
verbo, Non distringendo.

Non est culpabilis, is the general answer to an action of trespass, whereby
the defendant does absolutely deny the fact imputed unto him by the plaintiff,
whereas in other especial answers, the defendaunt grants the fact to be
done, and alleges some reason in his defense, why he lawfully might do it.
And therefore whereas the Rhetoricians, comprise all the substance of their
discourses, under three questions, An sit, quid sit, quale sit, this answer
falls under the first of the three: all other answers are under one of the
other two. And as this is the general answer in an action of trespass, that
is, an action criminal ciuily prosecuted: so is it also in all actions
criminally followed, either at the suite of the king or other, wherein the
defendant denies the crime objected unto him. See the new book of Entries.
titulo, Non culpabilis, and Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 62.

Non est factum, is an answer to a declaration, whereby a man denies that to
be his deed, whereupon he is impleaded. Broke, hoc titulo.

Non implacitando aliquem de libero tenemento fine breui, is a writ to inhibit
Bayliffes, etc. from distraining any man without the kings writ, touching his
free hold. Register, fol. 171. b.

Non intromittendo quando breue praecipe in capite subdole impetratur, Is a
writ directed to Justices of the bench or in Air, willing them not to give one
hearing, that has under the color of intitling the king to land, etc. as
houlding of him in capite, deceitfully obtained the writ called: praecipe in
capite. but to put him to his writ of right, if he think good to use it.
Register orig. fo. 4. b.

Non mercandizando victualia, is a writ directed to the Iustic^es of Assise,
commanding them to inquire whether the officers of such a town, do sell
victuals in gross or by retaile, during their office, contrary to the statute,
and to punish them, if they find it true. Register, fol. 184.

Non molestando, is a writ that lies for him, which is molested contrary to
the kings protection granted him. Register fol. 24.

Non omittas, is a writ lying where the Shyreeue delivers a former writ to a
Bayliffe of a fraunchis, within the which the party, on whom it is to be
served, dwells, and the Bayliffe neglects to serve it: for in this case,
the Shyreeue returning, that he delivered it to the Bayliffe, this shall be
directed to the Shyreeue, charging him himself to execute the kings
commandment. Old. not. br. fol. 44. of this the Reg. orig. has three sorts.
fol. 82. b. and 151. and the Reg. Judicial one, fol. 5. and 56.

Non ponendo in Assisis and Iuratis, is a writ founded upon the stat. Westminster. 2.
ca. 38. and the stat: Articuli super chartas. ca. 9. which is granted upon
diverse causes to men, for the freeing them from Assizes and Iuries. See Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 165. See the Register, fol. 179. 100. 181. 183.

Non procedendo ad Assisam Rege inconsulto, is a writ to stop the trial of a
cause appertaining unto one, that is in the kings service, etc. until the
kings pleasure be farther known. Reg. fol. 220. a.

Non residentia pro clericis Regis, is a writ directed to the Ordinary,
charging him not to molest a Clerk employed in the kings service, by reason of
his non residence. Register orig. fol. 58. b.

Non-suite, is a renuntiation of the suite by the plaintiff or demaundant, when
the matter is so far proceeded in, as the Jury is ready at the bar, to
deliver their verdict. anno 2. H. 4. ca. 7. See the new book of Entries, verbo
Non-suite. The ciuilians term it Litis renunciationem.

Non soluendo pecuniam ad quam Clericus mulctatur pro non residentia, is a writ
prohibiting an Ordinary to take a pecuniary mulct, imposed upon a clerk of the
kings for non-residence. Regist. orig. fol. 59.

Non tenure, is an exception to a coumpt, by saying that he houldeth not the
land specified in the coumpt, or at the least, some part of it. anno 25. Ed.
3. stat. 4. ca. 16. West part. 2. Simbol. titulo. Fines. sect. 138. makes
mention of non-tenure general, and non-tenure special. See the new book of
Entries, verbo, Non-tenure. where it is said, that especial non-tenure is an
exception, alleging that he was not tenent the day whereon the writ was
purchased. Non-tenure general is then by likelihood, where one denies
himself ever to have been tenent to the land in question.

Non sum informatus. See Informatus non sum.

Non sane memory (Non sane memoriae) is an exception taken to any act declared
by the plaintiff or demaundant to be done by another, whereupon he groundeth his
plaint or demand. And the contents of this exception be, that the party that
did that act (being himself or any other) was not well in his wits, or mad,
when he did it. See the new book of Entries, titulo Non sane memory, and Dum
non fuit compos mentis. See also supra Non compos mentis.

Non term (non terminus) is the time of vacation between Term and Term. It
was wont to be called the times or days of the kings peace, Lamb. Archaiono.
fol 126. and what these were in the time of King Edward the Confessor, see
there. This time was called (Iusticium) or (Feriae) among the Romans, or (dies
nefasti) Ferias appellari notum est tempus illud, quod forensibus negotus and
iure dicendo vacabat. Earum autem aliae solennes erant, aliae repentinae.
Brisson. de verb. signif. lib. 6. vide Wesenbec: paratit. De Ferits. number. 6.

Note of a fine, (nota finis) is a brief of a fine made by the Chirographer,
before it be engrossed. The form whereof see in West. part. 2. symbol, titulo.
Fines. sect. 117.

Novell assignement (noua assignatio) is an assignement of time, or place, or
such like, otherwise then as before it was assigned. In Brocke you may find
these words in effect: titulo, Deputy. number. 12. See novell assignement of
trespass in a new place after Bar pleaded. Broke. titulo, Trespass. 122.
and, novel assignement in a writ de e^ectione custodiae. titulo, Eiectione
custodiae. number. 7. See Assignement.

Nude matter. See Matter.

Nun (Nonna) is the French word (nonnain) or (nonne) something altered, which
signifies a holy or consecrated virgin, or a woman that has by vow bound her
self to a single and chaste life, in some place and company of other women,
separated from the world, and addicted to an especial service of God, by
prayer, fasting, and such like holy exercises. If we would know whence this word
came into France, S. Hierome makes it an Egyptian word, as Hospinian
records of him, in his book De origin and progressumonachatus. fol. 3.

Nuper obtit, is a writ that lies for a coheire being deforced by her coheire
of lands or tenements, whereof the graundfather, father, uncle, or brother to
them both, or any other their common auncesters, dyed seized of an estate in
fee simple. See the form of the writ, origin. Regist. fol. 226. etc. Fitz.
not. br. fol. 197. If the auncestour dyed seized in fee tail, then the coheire
deforced shall have a Formdon. Idem. ibid.

Nuisance (nocumentum) comes of the French (nuire. i. nocere.) It signifies
in our common law, not only a thing done, whereby another man is annoyed in
his free lands or tenements, but especially the Assise or writ lying for the
same. Fitz. not. br. fol. 183. And this writ (de Nocumento) or of Nuisance is
either simply De nocumento, or de paruo nocumento; and then it is Vicountiel.
old. not. br. f. 108. and 109. and Fitzh. not. br. vbi supra. and fol. 184.
Britton calls it Nosance. whom also read. ca. 61. and 62. M. Manwood part
2 of his forest laws. ca. 17. makes three sorts of Nuisance in the forest, the
first is Nocumentum commune, the second Nocumentum speciale, the third
Nocumentum generale. which read with the rest of that whole chapter. See the
Register original, fol. 197. and 199.

Nutmegs (nux myristica vel nux muscata) is a spice well known to all. It
grows of a tree like a peach tree, and is enclosed in two husks, whereof the
inner husk is that spice which we call mace. Of this who will, may read more
in Gerards herball, lib. 3. ca. 145. It is mentioned among spices that are to
be garbled. anno 1. Iaco. ca. 19.

O
OBedientiae, was a rent, as appears by Roger Hoveden part poster: suorum
annalium, fol. 430. in these words: vt ergo eis, sc: regularibus, adimatur
oportunitas evagandi, prohibe(...), ne reditus, quos obedientias vocant, ad
firmam teneant, etc. Obedientia in the canon law is used for an office or the
administration of an office, ca. cum ad monasterium. 6. extra de statu monacho:
and cano. regula. And thereupon the word (obedientiales) is used in the
provincial constitutions for those which have the execution of any office
under their superiors. cap. pri. de statu. regula. For thus says Lyndwood in
his gloss upon that word: Hii sunt qui sub obedientia suorum praelatorum sunt,
and habent certa officia administranda interius vel exterius. It may be that
some of these offices called obedienti^ consisted in the collection of rents or
pensions: and that therefore those rents were by a metonymie called
obedientiae, quia colligebantur ab obedientialibus.

Oblations (oblationes) are thus defined in the canon law. Oblationes
dicuntur, quaecunque a pi^s fidelibusque Christianis offeruntur Deo and
ecclesiae, sieve res soli, sieve mobiles sint. Nec refert an legentur testamento,
an aliter donentur, cap. clerici. 13. quaest. 2. Read more of these in
Duarenus. De sacr. eccl. minister. ac benefi. cap. tertio.

Obligation (Obligatio) and Bill be all one, saving that when it is in English,
it is commonly called a Bill, and when it is in Latin, an Obligation. West
part 1. symbol. lib. 2. sect. 146. True it is that a Bill is obligatorie: but
we commonly call that an obligation, which has a condition annexed. The former
author in the same place says thus farther. An obligation is a deed, whereby
the obligour does knowledge himself to owe unto the Obligee, a certain sum
of money or other thing. In which, besides the parties names, are to be
considered the thing due, and the time, place and manner of payment, or
delivery. Obligations be either by matter in deed, or of record. An obligation
by matter in deed is every obligation not acknowledged and made in some court
of record. Hitherto M. West.

Occupauit, is a writ that lies for him, which is eiected out of his land or
tenement in time of war: as a writ of Novel disseisin lies for one eiected
in time of peace. Ingham. Bref de novel disseisin.

Octo tales. See Tales: See Brook tit. Octo tales.

Odio and atia, anno 3. Ed. 1. ca. 11: is a writ sent to the vndershyreeue, to
inquire whither a man being committed to prison upon suspicion of murder, be
committed upon malice or evil will, or upon just suspicion. Register
original, fol. 133. b. See Bracton li. 3. part 2. ca. 20.

Office (Officium) does signify not only that function, by virtue whereof a
man has some imploiment in the affairs of another, as of the King or other
common person; but also an Inquisition made to the Kings use of any thing by
virtue of his office who inquireth. And therefore we oftentimes read of an
office found, which is nothing but such a thing found by Inquisition made ex
officio. In this signification it is used anno 33. H. 8. cap. 20. and in
Stawnfords praerog. fol. 60. and 61. where to trauers an office, is to trauers
the inquisition taken of office. And in Kitchen fol. 177. to return an office,
is to return that which is found by virtue of the office, see also the new
book of Entries, verbo Office pur le Roy. And this is by a metonymie of the
effect: And there be two sorts of offices in this signification, issuing out
the exchequer by commission viz. an office to entitle the King in the thing
inquired of, and an office of instruction. which read in Sir Edw. Cokes
reports, vol. 6. Pages case. fol. 52. a. b. Office in fee, is that which a man
has to himself and his heirs, anno 13. Ed. 1. ca. 25. Kitchen fol. 152. See
Clerk.

Official (officialis) is a word very diversely used. For by sundry Ciuilians of
other countries, that write in these days, it appears to be applied in many
places, to such as have the sway of temporal justice. Aegidius Bossius in
pract. crim. tit. De officialibus corruptis, etc. But by the auncienter civil
law, it signifies him, that is the minister or appparitor of a magistrate or
Judge. l. 1.. si quis vltro. P. de quaestio. and Co. de filiis officialium,
etc. li. 12. In the Canon law, it is especially taken for him, to whom any
Bishop does generally commit the charge of his spiritual jurisdiction. And in
this sense one in every Dioces is (officialis principalis) whom the statutes
and laws of this Kingdom call chanceler. anno 32. H. 8. cap. 15. The rest, if
there be more, are by the cano^ law called officiales foranei. glos: in clem.
2. de Rescriptis, but with us termed Co^missaries (Commissarii) as in the
statute of H. 8. or some times (Commissarii foranei.) The difference of these
2. powers you may read in Lyndwood, titulo de sequestra posses. ca. 1. verbo.
Officialis. But this word (official) in our statutes and common law
signifies him, whom the Archdeacon substituteth in the executing of his
jurisdiction. as appears by the statute above mentioned and many other places.

Officiariis non faciendis vel amovendis, is a writ directed to the magistrates
of a corporatio^, willing them not to make such a man an officer, and to put
him out of the office he has, until inquiry be made of his manners, according
to an inquisition formerly ordained. Register original, fol. 126. b.

Onerando pro rata portionis, is a writ that lies for a joint tenent, or
tenent in common, that is distreined for more rent, then the proportion of his
land comes unto. Reg orig. f. 182. a.

Open Law (Lex manifesta; Lex apparens) is making of Law. which by Magna
charta ca. 28. Bayliffes may not put men unto upon their own bare assertions,
except they have witnesses to prove their imputation.

Orchel. anno. 1. R. 3. ca. 8: Orchall anno. 24. H. 8. ca. 2. and. anno. 3. and
4. Ed. 6. ca. 2. seems to be all one with cork.

Ordinance of the forest (Ordinatio Forestae) is a statute made touching forest
causes in the 34. year of Edward. 1. See Assise.

Ordinary (Ordinarius) though in the civil law, whence the word is taken, it
does signify any judge that has authority to take knowledge of causes in his
own right, as he is a magistrate, and not by deputation: yet in our common
law, it is most commonly, and for ought I remember, always taken for him, that
has ordinary Jurisdiction in causes ecclesiastical. See Brook hoc titulo.
Lindwood in cap. exterior. titulo de Constitutionibus. verbo Ordinarii, says
quod Ordinarius habet locum principaliter in Episcopo, and aliis superioribus,
qui soli sunt vniversals in suis iurisdictionibus, sed sunt sub eo alii
ordinarii, hii viz. quibus competit Iurisdictio ordinaria de iure, privilegio,
vel consuetudine, etc. v. c.

Ordinatione contra seruientes, is a writ that lies against a servant for
leaving his master against the statute: Register original, fol. 189.

Ordael (Ordalium) is a Saxon word, signifiing as much as Judgment, in some
men's opinions compounded of two Saxon words (or) a privative, as (a) in greek,
and (dael. i. pars) It signifies as much as expers: but it is artificially
used for a kind of purgation practiced in ancient times: whereby the party
purged, was judged expers criminis, called in the canon law purgatio vulgaris,
and utterly condemned. There were of this two sorts, one by fire, another by
water. Of these see M. Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words. verbo
Ordalium, where he expresses it at large, with such superstitions as were used
in it. Of this you may likewise read Holinshed in his description of Britanie
fol. 98. and also M. Manwood, part pri. of his forest laws, page 15. But of
all the rest, Hotoman especially, disput. de feud. ca. 41. where of five kind
of proofs, which he calls feudales probationes, he makes this the fourth,
calling it explorationem, and huius furiosae probationis 6. genera fuisse
animadvertit, per flammam, per aquam, per ferrum candens, per aquam vel gelidam
vel feruentem, per sorts, and per corpus Domini, of all which he alleges
several examples out of history, very worthy the reading. See M. Skene also
de verbor. significatione. verbo (Machamiu^) This seems to have been in use
here with us in Henry the seconds days, as appears by Glanvile. lib. 14.
cap. 1. and 2. Read also of this in M. Verstegans Restitution of decayed
intelligence. cap. 3. page 63. and seqq.

Orfgild, alias, Cheapegild, is a restitution made by the Hundred or County,
of any wrong done by one that was in plegio. Lamberd. Archaion. page 125. and
126.

Orgeis, anno, 31. Ed. 3. stat. 3. cap. 2. is the greatest sort of North
seafish, now adays called Organ ling.

Oredelfe, is a liberty whereby a man claims the Ore found in his soil. New
exposition of Terms.

Ortelli, is a word used in the book termed (pupilla oculi) in the chapter
containing the charter of the Forest. part 5. cap. 22. and signifies the
claws of a dogs foot, being taken from the French, orteils des pieds. i.
digiti pedum, the toes.

Osmonds, anno 32. Henr. 8. cap. 14.

Oath of the King, (Iuramentum Regis) is that which the King takes at his
Coronation, which in Bracton is set down in these words. Debet Rex in
coronatione sua, in nomine Jesus Christi praestito sacramento haec tria
promittere populo sibi subdito: Inprimis se esse praecepturum and pro viribus
opem impensurum vt ecclesiae dei and omni populo Christiano vera pax omni suo
tempore observetur. Secundo, vt rapacitates and omnes iniquitates omnibus
gradibus interdicat: 3. vt in omnibus iudieiis aequitatem praecipiat and
misericordiam, vt indulgeat et sua^ misericordia^ clemens and misericors Deus,
and vt per Iustitia^ suam firma gaudeant pace vniuersi. And in the old
abridgement of statutes set out in H. 8. days, I find it thus described. This
is the oath that the King shall swear at his coronation: That he shall keep
and maintain the right and the liberties of the holy church, of old time
granted by the righteous Christian Kings of England, and that he shall keep
all the lands, honors, and dignities righteous and free of the Crown of
England in all manner whole, without any manner of minishment, and the rights of
the Crown hurt, decayed, or lost, to his power shall call again into the
ancient estate, and that he shall keep the peace of the holy church and of
the clergy, and of the people with good accord: and that he shall do in all
his judgments equity and right justice with discretion and mercy: and that
he shall grant to hold the laws and customs of the realm, and to his power
keep them, and affirm them, which the folk and people have made and chosen:
and the evil laws and customs wholly to put out: and steadfast and stable
peace to the people of this realm keep and cause to be kept to his power: and
that he shall grant no charter, but where he may do it by his oath. All this
I find in the foresaid Book, titulo. Sacramentum Regis. and Charter of
pardon. quinto.

Oath of the Kings Justices is, that they well and truly shall serve the king,
and that they shall not assent to things, that may turn to his damage or
disinheritance. Nor that they shall take no fee nor liuerie of none but the
king. Nor that they shall take gift nor reward of none that has ado before
them, except it be meat and drink of small value, as long as the plee is
hanging before them, nor after for the cause. Nor that they shall give council
to none in matter that may touch the King, upon pain to be at the kings will,
body and goods. And that they shall do right to every person, notwithstanding
the Kings leters, etc. anno 18. Ed. 3. statut. 4. which the old abridgement
makes to be anno 20. eiusdem statuto per se.

Otho, was a Deacon Cardinal of S. Nichens in carcere Tulliam, and Legate for
the Pope here in England, anno 22. H. 3. whose constitutions we have at this
day: Stowes An. pa. 303. and see the first constitution of the said Legate.

Othobonus was a Deacon Cardinal of S. Adrian, and the Popes legate here in
England anno 15. H. 3. as appears by the award made between the said King
and his commons, at Kenelworth. his constitutions we have at this day in use.

Ouch, anno 24. H. 8. ca. 13.

Ouster le main (Amouere manum) word for word, signifies to take off the hand,
though in true French, it should be (Oster la main) It signifies in the common
law, a Judgment given for him that tends a trauers, or sieweth a Monstrance
de droit, or petition. For when it appears upon the matter discussed, that the
King has noe right nor title to the thing he seized, then Judgment shall be
given in the Chauncery, that the kings hands be amoued, and thereupon Amoueas
manum shall be awarded to the Escheatour: which is as much, as if the judgment
were given, that he should have again his land. v. Stawn. praerog. ca. 24. See
anno 28. Ed. 1. stat. 3. ca. 19. It is also taken for the writ granted upon
this petition. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 256. C. It is written oter le maine, anno
25. Hen. 8. ca. 22.

Ouster le mer (vltra mare) comes of the French (oultre. i. vltra) and (le
mer. i. mare) and it is a cause of excuse or Essoine, if a man appear not in
Court upon Summons. See Essoin.

Outfangthef, alias vtfangthef, is thus defined by Bracton li. 3. tra. 2. ca.
34. vtfangthef dicitur latro extraneus veniens aliunde de terra aliena, and qui
captus fuit in terra ipsius, quitales habet libertates, but see Britton
otherwise. fol. 91: b: It is compounded of three Saxon words (out. i. extra)
(fang. i. capio vel captus) and (Thef. i. fur) It is used in the common law,
for a liberty or privilege, whereby a Lord is inhabled to call any man
dwelling within his own fee, and taken for felony in any other place, and to
judge him in his own court. Rastals expos. of words.

Owelty of services, is an equality when the tenent parauaile owes as much to
the mesn, as the mesn does to the Lord paramont: Fitzh. not. br. fol. 136 A. B.

Outlawry (vtlagaria) is the loss or deprivation of the benefit belonging to a
subject: that is, of the Kings protection and the Realm: Bracton: li. 3.
tract. 2. ca. 11. number. pri. and nu. 3. Forisfacit vtlagatus omnia quae pacis
sunt: Quia a tempore quo vtlagatus est, caput gerit lupinum, ita quod ab
omnibus interfici possit, and impune: maxim si se defenderit, vel fugerit, ita
quod difficilis sit eius captio. and, nu. 4. Si autem non fugerit, nec se
defenderit cum captus fuerit: extunc erit in manu domini Regis mors, and vita.
and qui taliter captum interfecerit, respondebit pro co sicut pro alio, v. c.

Outeparters anno. 9. H. 5. ca. 8. seems to be a kind of thieves in
Ridesdall, that ride abroad at their best advantage, to fetch in such catell or
other things, as they could light on without that liberty: some are of opinion
that those which in the forenamed statute, are termed out-patters, are at this
day called outputters, and are such as set matches for the robbing of any man
or house: as by discovering which way he rides or goes, or where the house is
weakest and fittest to be entered. See Intakers.

Owtryders, seem to be none other but bayliffe errants, employed by the
Shyreeues or their fermers, to ride to the fardest places of their counties or
hundreds, with the more speed to summon to their county or hundred courts,
such as they thought good to work upon. anno 14. Ed. 3. stat. 1. ca. 9.

Oxgang of Land (Bouata terrae) Six oxgangs of land, seem to be so much as
six oxen will plough. Crompton. iurisd. fol. 220. but an oxegang seems
properly to be spoken of such land as lies in gainour, old not. br. fol. 117.
M. Skene de verbor. significat. verbo Bovata terrae, says, that an oxen-gate
of land should always contain 13. acres, and that 4. oxen-gates extends to a
pound land of old extent. See Librata terrae.

Oyer and Terminer, (audiendo and terminando) in true French (Ovir and
terminer) is, in the intendment of our law, a commission especially granted
to certain men, for the hearing and determining of one or more causes. This
was wont to be in use upon some sudden outrage or insurrection in any place.
Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 131. and 132. See The Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 29 anno,
13. Ed. 1. who might grant this commission. And see Fitzh. not. br. fol. 100.
for the form and occasion of the writ, as also to whom it is to be granted,
and whom not. See Broke, titulo, Oyer and determiner.

Oyer de Record, (Audire Recordum) is a petition made in court, that the
Judges, for beter proofs sake, will be pleased to hear or look upon any
Record.

P
PAcking whites. anno, 1. R. 3. cap. 8.

Pain fort and dure (poena fortis and dura) is in true French (peine fort and
dure.) It signifies in our common law, an especial punishment for those,
that being arraigned of felony, refuse to put themselves upon the ordinary
trial of God and the country, and thereby are mute, or as mute in
interpretation of law. This (as Stawnf. thinks, pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 60.) is
founded upon the Statute of Westminster. prim. cap 12. anno. 3. Ed. prim. His reason
is, because Bracton, who writ before that Parliament, makes no mention of it:
and Britton writing after that time, touches it in his 4. chapter; fol. 11.
viz. in words to this effect: If they will not acquit themselves, let them be
put to their penance until such time as they do desire trial: and let the
penance be such: viz. Let them be bare legged, without girdle, and without
hatte or cappe, in their coat only, and lie in prison upon the naked earth
day and night. And let them eat no bread, but of barley and branne, nor drink
any other then water, and that upon that day when they eat not. And let them
be chained. Stawnford in his said 60. chapter of his second book, expounds
it more plainly and particularly in this sort. And note, that this strong and
hard pain shall be such: sc. He shall be sent back to the prison whence he
came, and laid in some low dark house, where he shall lie naked upon the
earth without any litter, rushes, or other clothing, and without any raiment
about him, but only something to cover his privy members. And he shall lie
upon his back with his head covered and his feet. And one arm shall be
drawn to one quarter of the house with a cord, and the other arm to another
quarter: and in the same manner let it be done with his legs: and let there be
laid upon his body iron and stone, so much as he may bear or more: and the
next day following, he shall have three morsels of barley bread without drink:
and the second day, he shall have drink three times: and as much at each time,
as he can drink, of the water next unto the prison door, except it be running
water, without any bread. And this shall be his diet until he dye.

Palatine. See County Palatine. See Cassan. de consuetud. Burg. page 14.

Palingman, anno. 11. Henr. 7. cap. 22.

Panell (panellum) comes of the French (pan. i. pellis, or paneau) a piece
or pane, as we call it in English. It signifies in our common law, a shedule
or roll, containing the names of such Jurors, as the Shyreeue provides to
pass upon any trial. Register orig. fol. 223. a. Kitthin, fol. 266. See
Broke, hoc titulo. And thereupon the empaneling of a Jury, is nothing but the
entering of them into the Shyreeues roll or book.

Pannage (pannagium) is a toll or contribution. Fitz. not. br. fol. 227. D.
See Pawnage.

Paramounte, alias peremounte, comes of these two French words (par. i. per)
and (Monter. i. ascendere) It signifies in our law, the highest Lord of the
fee: for there may be a Tenent to a Lord, that houldeth over of another Lord.
And the former of those is called Lord Mesn, the second Lord paramount. And a
Lord paramount (as it seems by Kitchen, fol. 209) consists only in
comparison: as one man may be great being compared with a lesser, and little
being compared with a greater: and as Genus, among the Logicians, may be in
diverse respects both genus, and species. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 135. M. So that
none seems simply to be Lord paramount but only the King, as Genus summum is
simply Genus. For the King is patron paramount to all the benefices in England,
Doctor and student: ca. 36. See Parauaile, Manner. and Fee.

Parauaile, alias Perauaile, is compounded of two French words (par. i. per)
and (aualler. i. dimittere, demittere) It signifies in our common law, the
lowest tenent, or him that is tenent to one, who houldeth his fee over of
another, So is it used. pl. cor. fol. 197. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 135. M. See
Paramounte. See Mesn.

Parcel makers, are two officers in the eschequer, that make the parcels of
the escheators accoumpts, wherein they charge them with every thing they have
leuyed for the kings use, within the time of their office, and deliver the same
to one of the auditors of the court, to make an account for the escheatour
thereof.

Parceners. See Coparceners.

Parcinarie (participatio) comes of the French (partir. i. diuiduum facere.
It signifies in our common law, a houlding or occupying of land by more pro
indiviso, or by joint tenants, otherwise called Coparceners, of the French
(parsonnier. i. partiarius, particeps.) For if they refuse to divide their
common inheritance and choose rather to hold it jointly, they are said to hold
in parcinarie. Litleton, fol. 56. and 57. This by the Feudists and Lombards is
termed (adaequatio, vel paragium.) And among the ancient Romans particulones,
sic enim authore Nonio, a veteribus cohaeredes inter se dicebantur, quod parts
invicem facerent. Spigelius.

Pardon (Perdouatio) is a French word, signifiing as much as pax, venia,
gratia. It is used most notoriously in our common law, for the remitting or
forgiving of a felonious or other offense committed against the king. This
pardon is twofold: one ex gratia Regis, the other, per course del ley, by
course of law. Stawns. pl. cor. fol. 47. Pardon ex gratia Regis, is that, which
the king, in some special regard of the person or other circumstance, shows
or affoordeth upon his absolute prerogative or power. Pardon by course of law,
is that, which the law in equity affoordeth, for a light offense, as homicide
casual, when one kills a man having no such meaning. West. part 2. symbol.
titulo, Inditements. sect. 46. Of this see the new book of Entries, verbo,
Perdon.

Pardoners, anno 22. H. 8. c. 12. were certain fellows that carried about the
Popes Indulgences, and sold them to such as would buy them, against whom
Luther, by Sleydans report, in censed the people of Germany in his time,
exhorting them, ne merces tam viles tanti emerent.

Park (parcus) comes of the French (parquer. i. vallo, vel fossa
circundare.) It signifies with us, a piece of ground enclosed and stored with
wild beasts of chase. Which a man may have by prescription or the kings
grant. Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 148. M. Manwood part pri. of his Forest laws.
page 148. defines it thus: A park is a place of privilege for wild beasts
of venerie, and also for other wild beasts, that are beasts of the Forest, and
of the chase, tam syluestres, quam campestres. And all those wild beasts are
to have a firm peace and protection there. So that no man may hurt or chase
them within the park, without license of the owner of the same. Who also fol.
149. says thus: A park is of another nature, then either a chase, or a warren
is. For a park must be enclosed, and may not lie open: for if it do, that is
a good cause of seizure of the same into the hands of the king, as a thing
forfeited: as a free chase is, if it be enclosed. And moreover, the owner
cannot have action against such as hunt in his park, if it lie open. See
Forest. See Chase. See Warren. This word Park, Baldwinus deriueth a paradiso,
eumque locum esse dicit, in quo varia animalia ad vsum voluptatis, aut
venationis includuntur and possidentur, adempta naturali liberate. Ad tit. de
rerum divis. in Institutionib.

Parco fracto, is a writ which lies against him, that violently breaks a
pound, and takes out beasts thence, which, for some trespass done upon another
man's ground, are lawfully impounded. Register original fol. 166. Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 100.

Parish (parochia) comes of the greek ((...). i. Accolarum conuentus,
accolatus, sacra vicinia) it is used in the Cannon law, some time for a
Bishopric. But in our common law, it signifies the particular charge of a
secular priest. For every church is either Cathedral, Couentuall, or
Parochial. Cathedral is that, where there is a Bishop seated, so called a
Cathedra: Conuentuall consists of Regular clerks, professing some order of
religion, or of Deane and chapter, or other college of spiritual men.
Parochial is that, which is instituted for the saying of divine service, and
ministering the holy Sacraments to the people dwelling within a certain compass
of ground near unto it. Our Realm was first divided into parishes by Honorius
Archb: of Canterbury, in the year of our Lord. 636. Camden Britan. page 104.
Of these parish churches I find there were in England in the days of H. 8.
the number of 45000. Hotoman in his disputations de feudis. ca. 2. makes
mention of this word (parochia) out of Pomponius Laetus in these words. Nam sic
quoque Pomponius Laetus veterem consuetudinem fuisse scribit, eamque ab
Imperat(...) Constantino repetitam, vt Duc(...) praefectis, Tribunis qui pro
augend^ Imperio consenuerant, darentur agri, villaeque, vt necessaria
suppet(...), quoad viuerent, quas paroehias cabant. And a little after: ver(...)
inter feuda and parochias hoc (...) est, quod hae plerumque senibus(...)
veteranis, plerisque emeritae (...) dabantur, qui cum de Rep. been meriti
essent, publico beneficio reliquum vitae sustentabant: aut si quod bellum
nasceretur, euocati non tam milites, quam magistri militu^ viderentur. Feuda
vero plurimum I^ ^enibus robustis, and primo flore aetatis, qui militiae munus
sustinere potera^t: imo vero and vt posse^t and vt velle^t, etc.

Parliament (parlamentum) is a French word signifiing originally as much as
(Collocutio) or (colloquium) but by use, it is also taken for those high courts
of Justice throughout the kingdom of France, where men's causes and
differences are publicly determined without farther appeal. Whereof there be
seven in number: as Paris, Tolouse, Gresnoble in Daulphene, Aix in Prouence,
Bordeaux, Diion in Bourgogine, and Roan in Normandy. Vincentius Lupanus de
Magistrate. Franc. lib. 2. cap. Parlamentum. number. 28. whereunto Gerard de
Haillon adds the eighth. viz. Rhenes in Brettagne.

In England we use it for the assembly of the king and the three estates of the
Realm, videlicet. the Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal, and commons, for
the debating of matters touching the common wealth, and especially the making
and correcting of laws. which assembly or court is of all other the highest,
and of greatest authority, as you may read in Sir Thomas Smith. de Repub.
Anglo lib. 2. cap. 1. and 2. Camd. Britan. page 112. and Cromptons Iurisd. fol.
pri. and seqq. The institution of this court Polydor Virgil, lib. 11. of his
Chronicles, refers after a sort to Henry the first: yet confessing that it
was used before, though very seldom. I find in the former prologue of the
Grande Custumarie of Normandy, that the Normans used the same means in making
their laws. And I have seen a monument of Antiquite, showing the manner of
houlding this parliament in the time of King Edward the son of King Etheldred,
which (as my note says, was delivered by the discreeter sort of the Realm
unto William the Conqueror, at his commandment, and allowed by him. This
writing begins thus. Rex est caput, principium, and finis parlamenti, and
ita non habet parem in suo gradu. Et sic ex Rege solo primus gradus est.
Secundus gradus est ex Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus per
Baronia^ tenentibus. Tertius gradus est, de procuratoribus cleri. Quartus
gradus est de Comitibus, Baronibus, and aliis Magnatibus. Quintus gradus est de
militibus Comitatuum. Sextus gradus est de civibus and Burgensibus: and ita est
parlamentum ex sex gradibus. sed sciendum, licet aliquis dictorum quinque
graduum post Regem absens fuerit, dum tamen omnes praemoniti fuerint per
rationabiles summonitiones, parlamentum nibilo minus censetur esse plenum.
Touching the great authority of this court, I find in Stowes Annalls, page
660. that Henry the sixth directing his privy seal to Richard Earl of
Warwick, thereby to discharge him of the Captainship of Cales, the Earl
refused to obey the privy seal, and continued forth the said office, because
he received it by Parliament. But one example cannot make good a doctrine. And
of these two one must needs be true, that either the king is above the
Parliament, that is, the positive laws of his kingdom, or else that he is not
an absolute king. Aristotle lib. 3. Politico. cap. 16. And therefore though it
be a merciful policy, and also a politic mercy (not alterable without
great peril) to make laws by the consent of the whole Realm, because so no
one part shall have cause to complain of a partiality: yet simply to bind
the prince to or by these laws, wear repugnant to the nature and constitution
of an absolute monarchy. See Bracton. lib. 5. tract. 3. ca. 3. nu. 3. and
Cassan de consuet: Burg: page 335. and Tiraquel. in his book De Nobilitate,
cap. 20. page 68. nu. 26. See the statute anno 31. H. 8. cap. 8. in prooemio.
and many excellent men more, that handle this point. That learned Hotoman in
his Francogallia, does vehemently oppugn this ground, as some other that write
in corners: but he is so clean overborne by the pois of reason, that not only
many meaner men for learning triumph over him in this case, but himself, as I
have credibly hard, upon the sight of his fault, cried God and the world mercy
for his offense, in writing that erroneous and seditious book. The Emperors
of Rome had their semestria consilia, and their praetorium or place of
council, builded by Augustus in his palace, and thereupon called (palatium)
afterward termed (consistorium) where they, as in their principal court, did
both determine the greatest sort of their causes, and also made their
constitutions. And here had they assisting them many of the wisest of their
empire; whom Augustus first called (consiliarios,) Alexander Severus afterward
(scriniorum principes) others after that (palatinos) and then (comites
consistorianos) And these men in this respect, were endued with great honor,
and enjoyed many privileges. Yet were they but assistants to the Emperor to
advise him, not chalenging any power over him, or equal with him. More touching
the course and order of this Parliament, see in Cromptons Iurisdict. fol. pri.
and seqq. and Vowell, alias Hooker, in his book purposely written of this
matter. See King.

Parole (Loquela) is a French word, signifying as much as (Dictio, allocutio,
sermo, vox) It is used in Kitchen, fol. 193. for a plee in court. It is also
sometime joined with lease, as Lease parol, that is Lease per parole. a lease
by word of mouth.

Parson (Persona) comes of the French (Person). It peculiarly signisieth
with us, the Rector of a church: the reason whereof seems to be, because he
for his time represents the church, and susteineth the person thereof, as
well in siewing, as being siewed in any action touching the same. See Fleta.
lib. 6. ca. 18. Parson impersonee (persona impersonata) is he that is in
possession of a church, whether appropriated or not appropriated. for in the
new book of Entries, verbo Aid in Annuity, you have these words. Et
praedictus A dicit, quod ipse est persona praedictae ecclesiae de S.
impersonata in eadem ad praesentationem E. patronissae, etc. So I have reason
to think, that persona is the patro^ or he that has right to give the
benefice, by reason that before the Lateran council he had right to the
tithes, in respect of his liberality used in the erection or endowment of the
church, quasi sustineret personam ecclesiae. and he persona impersonata to
whom the benefice is given in the patrons right. For I read in the Register
Judicial personam impersonatam, for the Rector of a benefice presentatiue and
not appropriated, fol. 34. b. and see Dyer. fol. 40. nu. 72. where he says
that a Deane and chapter be persons impersonees of a benefice appropriated unto
them. who also fol. 221. number. 19. plainly shows that persona impersonata is
he that is inducted and in possession of a benefice. So that persona seems to
be termed impersonata, only in respect of the possession that he has of the
benefice or Rectorie, be it appropriated or otherwise, by the act of another.
And yet I have talked with men of good opinion in the common law, that hold
only the proprietarie of a benefice to be the person personee. But if that
wear true, he should rather be called person parsonnier. i. partiarius vel
particeps fructuum, because the Vicare has some part toward his pains in
serving the cure. For (parsonnier) in the french tongue. is (partiarius) or
(particeps)

Parts finis nihil habuerunt, etc. is an exception taken against a fine
levied. Cooks reports lib. 3. the case of Fines. fol. 88. a. b.

Parters of gold and silver. See Finours.

Partitione facienda, is a writ that lies for those, which hold lands or
tenements Pro Indiuiso, and would sever to every one his part, against him or
them that refuse to join in partition as Coparceners and Tenants in Gauel
kind, old: not. br. fol: 142. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 61. Register orig. fol. 76.
316. and Register Judicial, fol. 80. and the new book of Entrise. verbo
Partition.

Part let, seems to be some part of a man's attire, as namely some loose
collar of a dublet, to be set on or taken of by it self. without the bodies,
as men's bands or women's neckirchiefs be, which are in some places, or at least
have been within memory, called partlets. This word is read in the statute,
anno 24. H. 8. ca. 13. and seems to be a diminutine of the word (part.)

Paruo nocumen to, is a writ. See Nuisance.

Passage (Passagium) is a French word, signifying transitum, transitionem,
meatum. It signifies in our common law, the hire that a man pays for being
transported over sea, anno 4. Ed. 3. cap. 7. or over any river. Westminster. 2. cap.
25. anno 13. Ed. pri.

Passagio, is a writ to the keepers of ports, to let a man pass over, that
has license of the king. Register original. fol. 193. b. 194. a.

Passeport, is compounded of two French words (Passer. i. perambulare,
transire) and (port. i. portus) It signifies with us, a license made by any
that has authority, for the safe passage of any man from one place to
another. anno 2. Ed. 6. ca. 2.

Pasuage, pasuagium. See Pawnage.

Patent (literae patentes) is different from a writ, Cromptons Iurisd fol. 126.
The Coroner is made by writ and not by patent. See Leters patents. See also
Literae patentes in the table of the Register, where you shall find the form
of diverse patents.

Patron (Patronus) is used in the Ciule law, for him that has manumitted a
servant, and thereby is both justly accounted his great benefactor, and
challenges certain reverence and duty of him during his life: see the title
De iure patranatus: in the Digest: with the Feudists it is used pro authore
feudi. Hotom. verbo Patronus, in his commentary de verbis feudal. In the canon
law, as also in the feuds, and our common law, it signifies him that has
the gift of a benefice. And the reason is, because the gift of churches and
benefices originally belonged unto such good men, as either builded them, or
else endowed them with some great part of the reuenew belonging unto them. De
iure patronatus in the Decretals. Such might well be called patrons, as builded
the Church, or enriched it: but these that now have the gift of a benefice, are
more commonly patronized by the Church, though against her will, always selling
their presentations as dearly as they can: and therefore may be called Patroni
a patrocinando, as Mons a mouendo. Patronum faciunt dos, aedificatio, fundus,
says the old verse, Of lay patrons one writes thus. Quod autem a supremis
pontisicibus proditum est, (ca. cum dilectus, extra de iure patronatus) laicos
ius habere presaenta^di clericos Ordinarois: hoc singulari favore sustinetur,
vt allecte^tur laici, invite^tur, and inducantur ad constructione^ ecclesiaru^
(c. quoniam. eodem) Nec omni ex part ius patronatus spirituale censeri debet,
sed temporale potius spirituali annexum. (glos. in c. piae mentis, 16. qu. 7.)
These be Corasius words in his paraphrase ad sacerdotiorum materium, part pri.
cap. 2. and part. 4. cap. 6. in principio, he thus writes of the same matter.
Patroni in iure Pontificio dicuntur qui alicuius ecclesiae extruendae. aut
alterius cuiuscunque fundationis ecclesiasticae authors fuerunt, ideoque
praesentandi and offerendi clericum ius habent. quem ecclesiae vacanti
praeesse, and in ea collatis reditibus frui velint. Acquirunt autem hoc ius,
qui de Episcopi consensu vel fundant ecclesiam, hoc est, locum in quo templum
extruitur, assignant, vel ecclesiam aedificant, vel etiam constructas ecclesias
ante consecrationem dotant. vt non valde sit obscurum, ius patronatus quo de
agimus, finire, ius esse praesentandi clericum ad ecclesiam vacantem ex gratia
ei concessum, qui consentiente Episcopo, vel const^uxi^, vel dot avit ecclesiam.

Pannage (Pannagium, alias pasnagium) or (pennagium) as it is latined (in
pupilla oculi) may be probably thought to come of the French (panez) or
(panets) which is a root something like a parsnep, but somewhat less and
ranker in taste, which hogs in France feed upon, though it be eaten by men
also; and the French may seem to come of the latin (pamcium). i. that which
men use in the steed of bread (Isodorus) or (panicium) of the French. It
signifies in our common law, the money taken by the Agistors for the feed of
hogs with the mast of the kings forest: Crompton. Iurisd. fol. 165. Westminster. 2.
cap. 25. anno 13. Ed. pri. with whom M. Manwood part pri: of his forest laws
agrees in these words: Agistment is properly the common of herbage of any
kind of ground, or land, or woods, or the money due for the same: and pawnage
is most properly the mast of the woods, or lands, or hedgerowes, or the money
due to the owner of the same for it. But this learned man in his second part.
cap. 12. where he writes at large of this, drives the word from the greek
(...) at the which (I think) he smiled himself when he set it down. Lindwood
defines it thus: Panagium est pastus pecorum in nemoribus and in syluis,
vtpote de glandibus and aliis fructibus arborum syluestrium, quarum fructus
aliter non solent colligi. titulo de decimis. ca. sancta. verb: Pannagiis. M.
Skene de verborum signf. calls it pannagium, and defines it to be the duty
given to the king, for the pasturage of swine in his forest. The French word
for the same thing is (panage) or (glandee). i. glandatio, vel glandium
collectio, and pastio suum ex glandibus. And we surely take it from the French,
whence they had it, or what etimologie they make of it, let themselves look.

Peace (pax) in the general signification is opposite to war or strife. But
particularly it signifies with us, a quiet and harmless carriage, or behauiovr
toward the king and his people. Lamb. eirenarcha. li. 1. ca. 2. page 7. And
this is one way provided for all men by oath, as you may read in Frank pledge,
but more especially in case, where one particular man or some few go in
danger of harm from some other. For upon his oath made thereof before a
Justice of peace, he must be secured by good bond. See Lamb. eirenarcha lib. 2.
c. 2. p. 77. See also Cromptons Justice of peace. fol. 118. b. etc. vsque f.
129. This among the Ciuilia^s is called cautio de non offendedo. Gail, de pace
publ. lib. pri. c. 2. nu. (...).

Peace of God and the church, (pax Dei and ecclesiae) is aunciently used for
that rest, which the kings subjects had from trouble and suite of law, between
the terms. See Vacation.

Peace of the King. anno. 6. R. 2. stat. pri. ca. 13. is that peace and
security both for life and goods, which the King promises to all his subjects
or others taken to his protection. See Suite of the kings peace. This point of
policy seems to have been borrowed by us from the Feudists. for in the
second book of the seuds, there is a chapter viz. the 53. chapter entitled
thus. De pace tenenda inter subditos, and iuramento firmanda, and vindicanda,
and de poena iudicibus apposita, qui cum vindicare and Iustitiam facere
neglexerint, the contents of which chapter is a Constitution of Frederick the
first, as Hotoman there proves, expounding it very learnedly and like
himself. Of this kings peace, Roger Houeden sets down diverse branches,
part poster. suorum annalium. in Henr. 2. fol. 344. a. b. and fol. 430. b. he
mentions a sorme of an oath which Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, and chief
Justice of England in R. the first his days, sent through the whole realm, to
be taken by the kings subjects. See Deciners. See Suertie of peace. There is
also the peace of the Church, for which, see Sanctuary. And the peace of the
kings high way, which is the immunitie that the kings high way has, from all
annoyance or molestation. See Watling street. The peace of the plowe, whereby
the plow and plow catell are secured from distresses. For which, see Fitz. not.
br. fol. 90. A. B. So Fayres may be said to have their peace, because noe man
may in them be troubled for any debt elsewhere contracted. See Fair.

Pedage (pedagium) signifies money given for the passing by foot or horse
through any country. extra de Censibus, ca. Innovamus. I read not this word
in any English writer, but only the author of the book called pupilla oculi.
part 9. cap. 7. A. D. I think we rather use passage for it. Pedagia dicuntur
quae dantur a transeuntibus in locum constitutum a principe. Et capiens
pedagium debet dare saluum conductum, and territorium eius tenere securum.
Baldus in vsibus Feudorum. de pa. iura. fir.. Conventionales. Cassan. de
consuetud. Burg. page 118. has these words, Pedagium a pede dictum est, quod
a transeuntibus solvitur, etc.

Peer (pila) seems properly to be a fortress made against the force of the
sea, for the better security of ships, that lie at harbor in any haven. So is
the peer of Dover described in M. Camd. Brit. p. 259. in meo.

Peers (pares) comes of the French (per. i. par) it signifies in our common
law, plurally those, that are empaneled in an Enquest, upon any man for the
conuicting and clearing him of any offense, for the which he is called in
question. And the reason thereof is, because the course and custom of our
nation is, to try every man in this case by his equals. West prim. cap. 6.
anno. 3. Ed. prim. So Kitchen uses it. fol. 78. in these words: Mais si le
amerciament soit affirre per pares. And this word in this signification, is not
in use with us only, but with other nations also. For pares sunt conuasalli,
quorum sententia vasallus propter feloniam est condemnatus. Barklaius de Regno,
lib. 4. cap. 2. Et pares sunt qui ab eodem domino feudum tenent, lib. prim.
Feudor. cap. 26. But this word is most notoriously used for those that be of
the Nobility of the Realm, and Lords of the Parliament, and so is it used in
Stawnf. pl. of the Crown, lib. 3. cap. Trial per les Peers, being the first.
The reason whereof is, because though there be a distinction of degrees in our
Nobility, yet in all public actions they are equal: as in their voices in
Parliament, and in passing upon the trial of any Noble man, etc. This
appellation seems to be borrowed from France, and from those twelve Peers,
that Charles the Great, (or Lewis the younger, in some men's opinion) instituted
in that kingdom, which be next unto the King, and are of like dignity among
themselves, touching their power in public affairs. Of whom you may read
Vincentius Lupanus de magistrate. Fraunciae lib, 1. cap. Pares Fraunciae. So
that we though we have borrowed the appellation, and applied it with some reason
to all that are Lords of the Parliament, yet have we no set number of them,
because the number of our Nobles, may be more or less, as it pleases the King.

Pelota, is a word used in the book called (pupilla ocult) part 5. cap. 22.
signifying the ball of the foot, of the French (pelote.) i. pila.

Peru fort and dure. See Pain for and dure.

Pelt wool, is the woll pulled off the skin or pelt of dead sheep, anno 8.
H. 6. cap. 22.

Penon, anno 11. R. 2. cap. prim. is a Standard, Banner, or Ensign, carried in
war. It is borrowed from France: for pennon in the French language signifies
the same thing. See Baneret: yea read this word anno 21. R. 2. cap. 1.

Pen, See Baye.

Peper, (piper) is a spice known in a manner to every child, being the fruit
of a plant, that is between a tree and an herb: of whose diversities and
nature, you may read Genards herball, lib. 3. cap. ^46. This is set among
merchandise that are to be garbled. anno, 1. Jacob. cap. 19.

Peper lowse, anno, 32. H. 8 cap. 14.

Per. cui, and post, See Entry.

Perambulatione facionda, is a writ, that is siewed out by two or more Lords of
manets, lying near one another, and consenting to have their bounds severally
known. It is directed to the Shyreeue, commanding him to make perambulation,
and to set down their certain limits between them. Of this read more at
large in Fitz. not. br. fol. 133. See Rationabilibus diuisis. See the Regist.
orig. fol. 157. and the new book of Entries, verbo, Perambulatione facienda.

Perch (pertica) is a French word, signifying a long pole. It is used with us
for a Rod or Pole of 16. foot and a half in length. Where of 40 in length
and four in breadth make an acre of ground. Cromptons. Iurisd. fol. 222. Yet by
the custom of the country, is may be longer, as he there says: For in the
Forest of Sheerewood it is 25. foot, fol. 224. M. Skene de verbor. signif.
verbo, Particata terrae, says, that particata terrae is a Roode of land: where
he has also these words in effect: Three beer corns without tails set
together in length make an inch: of the which corns one should be taken of the
midde ridge, one of the side of the ridge, another of the furrow. Twelve inches
make a foot of measure: three foot and an inch make an elne; six elnes long
make one fall. which is the common lineall measure, and six elnes long, and
six broad, make a square and superficial fall of measured land. And it is to
be understood, that one rod, one raip, one line all fall of measure, are all
one, for each one of them contains six elnes in length. Howbeit, a rod is a
staff or pole of wood, a raipe is made of tow or hemp. And so much land as
falls under the rod or raipe at once, is called a fall of measure, or a lineal
fall: because it is the measure of the line or length only. Like as the
superficial fall is the measure both of length and breadth. Item, ten falls in
length and four in breadth make a Roode; four Roodes make an acre, etc. This
is the measure of Scotland, where of you may read more in the same place.

Perdonatio vtlagariae, in the Register judicial, fol. 28. is the form of
pardon for him, that for not coming to the kings court is outlawed, and
afterward of his own accord yeldeth himself to prison.

Peremptory (peremptorius) comes of the verb (perimere) to cut of, and
joined with a substantive (as action or exception) signifies a final and
determinate act without hope of renewing. So Fitzh. calls a peremptory
action, not. br. fol. 35. P. fol. 38. M. fol. 104. O. Q. R. fol. 108. D. G. and
non-suite peremptory. idem, eodem, fol. 5. N. F. fol. 11. A. peremptory
exception. Bracton li. 4. ca. 20. Smith de rep. Anglorum, li. 2. ca. 13.
calls that a peremptory exception, which can make the state and issue in a
cause.

Perinde valere, is a dispensation granted to a clerk, that being defective in
his capacity to a benefice or other ecclesiastical function, is de facto
admitted unto it. And it has the appellation of the words which make the
faculty as effectual to the party dispensed with, as if he had been actually
capable of the thing, for which he is dispensed with, at the time of his
admissio^.

Perkins, was a learned Lawyer, fellow and bencher of the inner Temple, that
lived in the days of Edward the 6. and Queen Mary. He writ a book upon
diverse points of the common law of very great commendation.

Permutatione Archidiaconatus and ecclesiae eidem annexae, cum ecclesia and
praebenda, is a writ to an Ordinary commanding him to admit a clerk to a
benefice, upon exchange made with another: Register orig. fol. 307. a.

Pernour of profits, comes of the French verb (prendre. i. accipere) and
signifies him that takes as pernour of profits, anno 1. H. 7. ca. pri.
Pernour de profits, and cesti quevse is all one, Coke li. i. casu Chudley. fol.
123. a. See Pernour, anno 21. R. 2. ca. 25.

Per quae seruitia, is a writ judicial issuying from the note or fine, and
lies for the cognizee of a manner, seignory, chief rent, or other services, to
compel him that is tenent of the land at the time of the note of the fine
levied, to atturne unto him. West part 2. symbol. titulo Fines. sect. 126. To
the same effect speaks the old not. br. fol. 155. See also the new book of
Entries. ver^^ Per quae seruitia.

Perquisite (perquisitum) signifies, in Bracton, any thing purchased, as
perquisitum facere. (...) 2. cap. 30. nu. 3. and lib. 4. ca. 22. Perquisites of
court, be those profits that grow unto the Lord of a manner, by virtue of his
Court Baron, over and above the certain and yearly profits of his land, as
escheats, marriages, goods purchased by villeines, fines of copy houlds, and
such like. New terms of the law.

Person. See Parson.

Personable, signifies as much as inhabled to hold or mainetaine plee in a
court. for example: The demaundant was judged personable to maintain this
action. old. not. br. fol. 142. and in Kitchen fol. 214. The tenent pleaded
that the wife was an alien borne in Portingall without the ligeance of the
King, and Judgment was asked whether shewould be answered. The plaintiff
says: she was made personable by Parliament, that is, as the Ciuilians would
speak it, habere personam standi in iudicio. Personable is also as much, as to
be of capacity to take any thing granted or given. Plowden, casis Colthirst.
fol. 27. b.

Personal (Personalis) has in our common law, one strange signification,
being joined with the substantive, things, goods, or Chatels: as things
personal, goods personal, Chatels personal, for thus it signifies any
corporeal, and moveable thing belonging to any man, be it quick, or dead. So
is it used in West, part 2. symbol. titulo Inditements, sect. 58. in these
words. Theft is an unlawful felonious taking away of another man's moveable
personal goods, and again, fol. 61. Larceny is a felonious taking away of
another man's moveable personal goods; and Kitchen f. 139. In these words: Where
personal things shall be given to a corporation: as a horse, a cow, an ox,
sheep, hogs, or other goods, etc. and Stawnford. pl cor. fo. 25. Contrectatio
rei aliena, is to be understood of things personal: for in things real it is
not felony, as the cutting of a tree is not felony. The reason of this
application, see in Chatell.

Personalty (Personalitas) is an abstract of persouall. The action is in the
personalty, old. not. br. fol. 92. that is to say, brought against the right
person, or the person against whom in law, it lies. I find these contrary
words. (Personalitas and Impersonalitas) in the author of the book called
vocabularius vtriusque iuris: as for example, Personalitas significatur per has
dictiones: tu, mihi, ego, tibi, cum alto significato quod probabiliter
conclulitur and si nullo modo concludatur, tunc est Impersonalitas, quia actum
vitiat, prout ratio dictat. verbi gratia. Ego stipulor: constituis te mihi
soluturum debitum a Titio mihi debitum: Tu respondes, Satisfiet. Haec
Impersonalitas non contrahit obligationem.

Persons ne Praebendaries ne seront charges as quinsimes, etc. is a writ that
lies for preb endaries or other spiritual persons, being distreined by the
shyreeue, or collectours of fifteenths, for the fiftenth of their goods, or to
be contributory to taxes. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 176.

Pesterable wares, seem to be such wares, as pester and take up much room in
a ship, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 14.

Peter pence (Denar(...) Sancti Petri) otherwise called in the Saxon tongue
Roomfooh. i. the sea of Rome, or due to Rome, and also Romescot, and Rome
penning, was a tribute given by Inas King of the west Saxons being in
pilgrimage at Rome, in the year of our Lord. 720. which was a penny for every
house. Lamberds explication of Saxon words. verbo Numus. whom see also fol.
128. in Saint Edwards laws. nu. 10. where it is thus written. Omnes qui habent
30. denariatus viuae pecuniae in domo sua de suo proprio, Anglorum lege dabit
denariu^ Sancti Petri, and lege Danorum, dimidiam merkam: Iste vero denarius
debet summoniri in solennitate. Apostolorum Petri and Pauli and colligi ad
festivitatem, quae dicitur ad vincula: ita vt vltra illum diem non detincatur.
Si quispiam detinuerit, ad Insticiam Regis (...) deferatur, quoniam denarius
hic Rogis eleemmoz(...) est, Iusticia vero faciat denarium (...) dear, and
foriffacturam. Episcopi^ and Regis. Quod si quis domos plures had buerit, de
illa, vbi residens fuerit infesto Apostolorum Petri and Paul^ denarium reddat.
See also King Edgars laws. fol. 78. cap. 4. which contains a sharp
constitution touching this (...)ter, Stowe in his Annals, page 67. says, that
he that had 20. peni worth of goods of one manes catell in his house, of his
own proper, was to give a p(...) at Lammas yearly. See Romes(...)

Petit Cape. See Cape.

Petit Larceny (parvum latr(...) nium) See Larcenye.

Petit treason (parua traditio) in true French is (petit trahizon. (...)
proditio minor) treason in a lesser or lower kind. For whereas treason in the
highest kind, is an offense done against the security of the common wealth
West part 2. symb. titulo Indi^ements, sect. 63. petit treason is of this
nature, though not so expressly as the other. Examples of petit treason you
shall find to be these: if a servant kill his master, a wife her husband, a
secular or religious man his prelate, anno 25. Edward 3. cap. 2. Whereof see
more in Staw^f. pl. cor. lib. 1. cap. 12. See also Crom(...) Justice of peace.
fol. 2. where he adds diverse other examp(...) those of Stawnford. For the
punishment of petit treason, see the statute, anno 22. H. 8. cap. 14. and
Crompton vbi supra.

Petition (Petitio) has a general signification for all entreaties made by an
inferior to a superior, and especially to one having jurisdiction: But most
especially it is used for that remedy, which the subject has to help a wrong
done, or pretended to be done by the King. For the King has it by prerogative,
that he may not be siewed upon a writ. Stawnf. praer. cap. 15. whom also read
cap. 22. And a petition in this case is either general, or special. It is
called general of the general conclusion set down in the same. viz. que le
Roy lui face droit and reison. that the King do him right and reason:
whereupon follows a general indorsement upon the same. soit (...) fait aux
partis. let right be done to the partise. Petition special is where the
conclusion is special for this or that: and the Indorsment to that is likewise
special. See the rest cap. 21.

Petra lanae, a stone of wool See Stone.

Philiser, See Filazer.

Piccage (Piccagium) is money paid in faires for breaking of the ground to set
up boothes or standings.

Picle, ali(...) p(...) seems to come from the Italian (piccolo vel picciolo.
i. parvus, minutus) and signifies with us a little small close or enclosure.

Pienour, comes of the French (Pionnier. i. fossor) and signifies such
laborers, as are taken up for the Kings host to cast trenches, or undermine
forts anno. 2. and 3. Ed. 6. cap. 20.

Piepowders court (Curia pedis pulverizati) comes of two French words (pie^.
i. pes) and pouldreux. i. pulverulentus) It signifies a court held in faires
for the redres of all disorders committed within them: which because it is
summarie, de plano, and sine figura iudicii, it has the name of dustie seete,
which we commonly get by sitting near the ground: of this see Cromptons
Iurisd. fol. 221. Read M. Skene. de ver. signif. verbo Pedepulverosus: which
word he reports to signify a vagabond, especially a merchant, which has no
place of dwelling, where the dust may be wiped of his feet or shoes, and
therefore must have justice summarily ministered unto him. viz. within three
flowings and three ebbings of the sea. Bract. calls it Iustitiam pepoudrous,
li. 5. tract. 1. ca. 6. nn. 6. Of this court read the statute anno 17. Ed. 4.
cap. 2.

Pille of Foddray, in the county of Lancastor, an. (...). H. 6. ca. 5. seems
to be a creek, and called pille by the ideom of the country for pile: for the
which see Pile.

Pillorie (Collistrigium, Pillorium) comes of the French (Pilorie) which may
seem to smell of the greek, and to proceed from ((...)) because one standing
on the pillory puts his head through a kind of door. i. ianua: and (...).
i. video: it signifies all one thing with it, saving that the French is used
for a tumbrell, as well as for that which we call the pillorie, There is a
statute made of the pillorie. anno 51. H. 3. wherein you may see who were then
subject to this punishment. This was among the Saxons called Healsfang of
(Heals) a neck and (Fang) to take, Lamb. explication of Saxon words. verbo.
Mulcta.

Pipe (pipa) seems to be a roll in the exchequer, otherwise called the great
roll, anno 37. Ed. 3. ca. 4. See Clerk of the pipe. It is also a measure of
wine or oil couteining half a tun, that is six score and six gallons,
anno 1. R. 3. cap. 13.

Piscarie (piscaria) comes of the French (peschario. i. piscatio) It
signifies in our common law, a liberty of fishing in an other man's waters.

Pittle. See Picle.

Placard, anno 2. and 3. Ph. and Mar. cap. 7. is a license whereby a man is
permitted to maintain unlawful games.

Plaint (Querela) is a French word, signifing as much as Questus, querimonia.
In our common law, it is used for the propounding of any action personal or
real in writing. So it is used in Brook, titulo. Plaint in Assise. And the
party making this plaint, is called plaintiff: Kitchen, fol. 231.

Plea (placitum) comes of the French (ploid. i. lis. controversia). It
signifies in our common law, that which either party alleges for himself
in court. And this was wont to be done in French from the Conquest until
Edward the (...) who ordained them to be done in English. a. 36. cap. 15. Pleas
are divided into pleas of the Crown, and common pleas. Pleas of the Crown in
Scotland be 4. roberie, rape, murder, and wilful fire, Skene de verb. sign.
verb. Placitum. with us they be all suites in the Kings name against offenses
committed against his Crown and dignity. Stawnf. pl. cor. cap. 1. or against
his Crown and peace. Smith. de Repub. Augl. li. 2. cap. 9. And those seem to
be treasons, felonies, misprisions of either, and mayhem. For those only does
that reverend Judge mention in that tractat. Common pleas be those that be held
between common persons. Yet by the former definitions, these must comprise all
other, though the king be a party. Plea may farther be divided into as many
branches as Action, which see. For they signify all one. Then is there a
Foreign plea, whereby matter is alleged in any court that must be tried in
another. As if one should lay Bastardy to another in a court Baron. Kitchen.
fo. 75. The word (placitum) is used by the Commentours upon the Feuds in the
same signification that pleas be with us. And (placitare) with them is
(litigare, and causas agere. Hotom. in verb. feudal. verb. Placitare.

Pledge (Plegius) comes of the French (Pleige. i. fideiussor) Pleiger ancun.
i. fideiubere pro aliquo. In the same signification is Plegius used by
Glanuile. libro decimo, capite quinto, and Plegiatio for the act of suretiship
in the interpreter of the Grand Custumarie of Normandy, capite. 60. Plegii
dicuntur persona^ qua se obligant ad hoc, ad quod qui eos mittit tenebatur. And
in the same book, capit. 89. and 90. Pligutio is used as Glanuile before does
use it. Salui plegii, be used for plegii, pupil. oculi, part quint. capit.
22. Charta de Foresta. This word plegius is used also for Frank pledge
sometime, as in the end of William Conquerours laws set out by Master Lamberd
in his Archaiononi. fol. 125. in these words. Omnis homo qui voluerit se teneri
pro libero, sit in plegio, vt plegius eum habeat ad Iusticiam, si quid
offenderit, etc. And these be called capital pledges. Kitchen. folio decimo.
See Frank pledge.

Plena forisfactura, and plena vita, fee Forfeiture.

Plegiis acquietandis, is a writ that lies for a surety against him, for
whom he is surety, if he pay not the money at the day. Fitzh. not br. fol.
137. Regist. original. 158. a.

Plenartie, is an abstract of the adjective (plenus) and is used by our common
Lawyers in matter of benefices* Wherein plenartie and vacation be merely
contrary. Stawnford. prarogativ. cap. octau. fol. 32. West. secundo, capit.
quint. anno 13. Edvard. pri.

Plevin (pleuina) comes of the French (plenine. i. sponsio)

See Replevin.

Plite of Lawne, etc. anno. 3. Ed. 4. cap. 5. seems to be a certain measure,
as a yard, or elle, etc.

Plonkets, anno 1. R. 3. cap. 8. is a kind of woollen cloth.

Pluries, is a writ that goes out in the third place. For first goes out the
original Capias: which, if it speed not, then goes out the Sicut alias: and
if that fail, then the Pluries. See old not. br. fol. 33. In the writ De
excom. capiendo, see in what diversity of cases this is used in the Table of
the original Regist.

Pole. See Perch.

Polein, anno 4. Ed. 4. cap. 7. seems to be a sharp or picked top set in
the forepart of the shoe or boott. This fashion was first taken up in Richard
the seconds days, the pickes being made so long as they were tied up to the
knees with silver or golden chains, and forbidden by Edward the fourth. Stow
page 4.

Policy of assurance, is a course taken by those which do adventure wares or
merchandise by sea, whereby they, loche to hazard their whole adventure, do
give unto some other a certain rate or proportion, as ten in the hundred, or
such like, to secure the safe arrival of the ship, and so much wares at the
place; agreed upon. So that if the ship and wares do miscarie, the assrer
makes good to the venturer so much as he promises to secure, as 20. 30. 100.
more or less: and if the ship do safely ariue, he gains that clearly which
the venturer compoundeth to pay him. And for the more even dealing between the
venturer and the securer in this case, there is a certain Clerk or officer
ordained to set down in writing the sum of their agreement, that they
afterward differ not between themselves upon the bargain. This is in course
Latin elsewhere called assecuratio. This term you have anno 43. Fliz. cap. 11.

Pondage. See Poundage.

Pone, is a writ, whereby a cause depending in the County court, is removed to
the common Bank. old not. br. fol. 2. See in what diversity of cases it is
used, in the table of the Original Register.

Pone per vadium, is a writ commanding the Shyreene to take surety of one for
his appearance at a day assigned: of this see five sorts in the table of the
Regists Iudic. verbo, Pone per vadium.

Ponondis in Assisis, is a writ founded upon the statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 38.
and upon the statute Articuli super chartas cap. 9. which statutes do show,
what persons Vicounts ought to impanell upon Assizes and Iuries, and what not:
as also what number he should empanell upon Iuries and Inquests, which see in
the Register orig. fol. 178. a. and in Fitz. not. br. fol. 165.

Ponendo in ballum, is a writ whereby to will a prisoner held in prison, to be
committed to bail in cases baylable. Register orig. fol. 133. b.

Ponendo sigillum ad exceptionem, is a writ whereby the king wills Justices,
according to the statute of Westminster. 2. to put their seals to exceptions laid in
against the plaintiffes declaration by the defendant.

Pontage (pontagium) is a contribution toward the maintenance or reedifying of
bridges Westminster. 2. cap. 25. anno 13. Ed. pri. It may be also toll taken to this
purpose of those that pass over bridges, anno 39. Eliz. cap. 24. anno 1. H. 8.
cap. 9. and see the statute, anno 22. H. 8. cap. 5.

Pontibus reparandis, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, etc. willing him to
charge one or more to repair a bridge, to whom it belongs. Regist. orig.
fol. 153. b.

Portgreue (portgreuius) is compounded of two words (port) and (grieve) or
(grave) i. praefectus. It signifies with us the chief magistrate in certain
coast towns, and as M. Camden says in his Britan. page 325. the chief
magistrate of London was termed by this name: in steed of whom Richard the
first ordained two Bayliffes: but presently after him, King John granted them a
Mayor for their yearly Magistrate.

Porter of the door of the Parliament house, is a necessary officer belonging
to that high court, and enjoys the privileges accordingly. Cromptons.
Iurisd. fol. 11.

Porter in the circuit of Justices, is an officer that carries a verge or white
rod before the Justices in Air, so called, a portando virgam, anno 13. Ed.
1, cap. 24.

Porter bearing verge (virgator) before the Justices of either benth, anno 13.
Ed. 1. cap. 41. See Vergers.

Portemote, is a word compounded of (port. i. portus) and the Saxon (Gemettan.
i. conuenire) or of the French (mot. i. dictio, verbum.) It signifies a Court
kept in haven towns, as Swainmote in the Forest. Manwood, part prim. of his
Forest laws, pa. 111. It is sometime called the Portmoote Court, anno 43.
Eliz. cap. 15.

Portsale, anno 35. H. 8. cap. 7. id est, sale of fish presently upon return
in the haven.

Possession (possessio) is used two ways in our common law. First for lands
and inheritance: as, he is a man of large possessions. In which signification
it is also used among the Ciuilians sc: for the thing possessed, l.
possessionum: Cod. commun. vtriusque Iudic. Next, for the actual enjoying of
that, which either in truth or pretense is ours. And in this signification
there is possession indeed, and possession in law: pl. cor. fol. 198. The
example there is this: Before or until an office to be found, the king has
only possession in law, and not in deed, speaking of the lands escheated by
the attainder of the owner. See praerog. fol. 54. and. 55. In this
signification also there is an unity of possession, which the Ciuilians call
Consolidationem. Take an example out of Kitchen, fol. 134. if the Lord purchase
the tenancie held by Heriot service, then the Heriot is extinct by unity of
possession: that is, because the seigneurie and the tenancie be now in one man's
possession. Many divisions of possession you may read in Bracton. lib. 2. cap.
17. per totum.

Post. See Per.

Post diem, is a return of a writ after the day assigned for the return: for
the which, the Custos breuium has four pence, whereas he has nothing, if it
be returned at the day: or it may be the fee taken for the same.

Post fine, is a duty belonging to the king for a fine formerly acknowledged
before him in his court which is paid by the cognizee, after the fine is fully
passed, and all things touching the same wholly accomplished. The rate thereof
is so much and half so much, as was paid to the king for the fine, and is
gathered by the Shyreeue of the County where the land, etc. lies, whereof the
fine was leuyed, to be answered by him into the Exchequer.

Post term, is a return of a writ, not only after the day assigned for the
return thereof, but after the term also; which may not be received by the
Custos brevium, but by the consent of one of the Judges it may be also the fee
which the Custos breuium takes, for the return thereof, which is twenty pence.

Postea, is a word used for a matter tried by Nisi prius, and returned into the
court of common pleas for Judgment, and there afterward recorded. See Plowden,
casu Saunders. fol. 211. a. See an example of this in Sir Edw. Cokes reports.
volum. 6. Rowlands case. fol. 41. b. 42. a. See Custos breuium.

Post disseisin (post disseisina) is a writ given by the statute of West. 2.
cap. 26. and lies for him that having recovered lands or tenements by
(praecipe quod reddat) upon default, or reddition, is again disseised by the
former diffeisour. Fitz. not. br. fol. 190. see the writ that lies for this in
the Register original, fol. 208. a.

Posteriority, (posterioritas) is a word of comparison and relation in tenure,
the correlatiue whereof is prioritie. For a man holding lands or tenements of
two lords, holds of his auncienter Lord by prioritie, and of his later Lord
by posterioritie. Stawn. praerog. fol. 10. and 11. when one tenent holds of
two Lords, of the one by prioritie, of the other by posterioritie, etc. old
not. br. fol. 94.

Pourchas (perquisitum) comes of the French (pourchasser, i. sollicitare,
ambire:) it signifies the buying of lands or tenements with money or other
agreement, and not the obtaining of it by title or descent. Coniunctum
perquisitum. Joint pourchase. Regist. original. fol. 143. b.

Pour fair proclaimer, que null eniect fimes ou ordures en fosses euriuers pres
cities, etc. is a writ directed to the Mayor, Shyreeue or Bayliffe of a city
or town, commanding them to proolaime, that none cast filth into the ditches
or places near adjoining: and if any be cast already, to remove it. This is
founded upon the statut, anno 12. Rich. 2. cap. 13. Fitzherb. not. br. fol. 176.

Pourparty (propars, propartis, vel propartia) is contrary to (pro indiuiso)
For to make pourparty is to divide, and sever the lands that fall to
Parceners, which before partition they hold jointly, and pro indiuiso. old.
not. br. fol. 11.

Pourpresture (pourprestura, vel perprestura, vel paraprestura) seems to come
from the French (pourpris. i. conseptum.) It is thus defined by Glanuile, lib.
9. cap. 11. Pourprestura est proprie, quando aliquid super Dominum Regem
unjust occupatur. Vt in Dominicis Regis, vel in viis publicis abstructis, vel
in aquis publicis transuersis a recto cursu: vel quando aliquis in ciuitate
super Regiam plateam aliquid adificando occupauerit: and generaliter, quoties
aliquid fit ad nocumentum Regii tenementi, vel Regiae viae, vel ciuitatis.
Crompton. in his Iurisd. fol. 152. defines it thus: Pourpresture is properly
when a man takes unto himself or incrocheth any thing that he ought not,
whether it be in any Jurisdiction, land or fraunchis: and generally, when any
thing is done to the Nuisance of the kings tenants. Et idem, eodem, fol. 203.
says to the same effect, but more at large. See Kitchen, fol. 10. and Manwood,
part prim. of his Forest laws, page 169. and part 2. cap. 10. per totum. See
Skene de verbor. signif. verb. Purpresture. Where he makes three sorts of this
offense: one against the King, the second against the Lord of the fee: the
third, against a neighbor by a neighbor lying near him.

Pour seisir terres la femme que tient en Dower, etc. is a writ whereby the
King seiseth upon the land, which the wife of his Tenent, that held in capite,
disceased, has for her Dowry, if she marry without his leave: and is
grounded upon the statute of the Kings prerogative. cap. 3. see Fitzh. fol. 174.

Poursuyuant, comes of the French (poursuiure. i. agere, agitare, persequi)
It signifies the Messenger of the king attending upon him in wars, or at the
counsel table, the Star Chamber, Exchequer, or commission court, to be sent
upon any occasion, or message, as for the apprehension of a party accused, or
suspected of any offense committed. Those that be used in marshall causes, be
called Poursw(...)ts at arms, anno 24. Hen. 8. cap. 13. whereof there be four
in number of especial names, which see in Herald. And M. Stowe speaking of
Richard the third his end. page 784. has these words: For his body was naked
to the skin, notso much as one cloute about him, and was trussed behind a
Pursuyuant at arms, like a hog, or a calfe, etc. The rest are used upon
other messages in time of peace, and especially in matters touching
jurisdiction. See Herald.

Pourueyour, (prouison) comes of the French (pour(...). i. prouidere
prospicere.) It signifies an Officer of the King, Queen, or other great
personage, that provides corn and other victual, for the house of him whose
Officer he is. See magna charta. cap. 22. and 3. Ed. prim. cap. 7. and cap. 31.
and anno 28. eiusdem. Articuli super chartas. 2. and many other statutes
gathered by Rastal under this title.

Powldauis. anno 1. Jacob. ca.. ^4.

Power of the county, (posse c(...)tatus) by M. Lamberds opinion in his
Eirenar. lib. 3. cap. 1. fol. 309. contains the aid and attendance of all
Knights, gentlemen, yeomen, laborers, servants, apprentises, and villains:
and likewise of Wards, and of other young men above the age of fifteen
years, within the county, because all of that age are bound to have harness,
by the statute of Winchester. But women, ecclesiastical persons, and such as
be decrepit, or do labor of any continual infirmity, shall not be compelled
to attend. For the statute 2. H. 5. cap. 8. (which also works upon the same
ground) says, that persons sufficient to travel, shall be assistant in this
service.

Pound (parcus) seems to signify generally any enclosure of strength to
keep in beasts: but especially, with us, is signifies a place of strength to
restrain catell being distrained or put in for any trespass done by them,
until they be repleuied or redeemed. And in this signification it is called a
pound ouert, or open pound being builded upon the wast of some Lord within his
fee, and is called the Lords pownd. For he provideth it to his use, and the use
of his tenants. See Kitchen. fol. 144. It is divided into pound open, and pound
close: pound open or ouert, is not only the Lords pownd, but a backside,
court, yard, pasture, or else what soever, whether the owner of any beasts
impounded may come to give them meat and drink without offense, for their
being there, or his coming thither: pound close is then the contrary viz. such
a one as the owner cannot come unto, to the purpose aforesaid without offense,
as some close house, or such like place.

Powndage, is a Subsidy granted to the King of all manner of merchandies of
every merchant denizen and alien, carried out of this realm, or brought into
the same by way of Merchandise, to the value of twelve pence in eeuery pound,
anno 12. Ed. 6. cap. 13. anno 31. Eliz. cap. 5. anno 1. Iacobi, cap. 33.

Pray age. See Age prier.

Pray in aid. See Aid.

Prebend (praebenda) is the portion, which every member, or Canon of a
Cathedral church receives in the right of his place, for his maintenance. And
though use have wrought the latin word into the nature of a Substantive: yet I
think it originally to be an Adjective, or participle, and to have been joined
with (pars or portio) as (Canonica portio) which is in a manner all one in
signification. How be it (Canonica portio) is properly used for that share
which every Canon or Prebendary receives yearly out of the common stock of
the Church: and praebenda is a several benefice rising from some temporal
land, or church appropriated, toward the maintenance of a Clerk, or member of
a Collegiat Church; and is commonly surnamed of the place, whence, the profit
grows. And Prebends be either simple, or with dignity. Simple Prebends be
those, that have no more but the reuenew toward their maintenance: Prebends
with dignity are such, as have some Jurisdiction annexed unto them according to
the diverse orders in every several church. Of this see more in the title. De
praebendis, and dignitat: in the Decretalls. Alciat says that (praebenda) in
the plural number and neuter gender was aunciently used: as now (praebenda) in
the singular number and feminine gender is used. parerg. ca. 43.

Praebendary (praebendarius) is he that has a prebend: See Praebend.

Praecept (praeceptum) is diversely taken in the common law: sometime for a
commandment in wrighting sent out by a Justice of peace, or other for the
bringing of a person one or more, or records before him: of this you have
examples of diverse in the table of the Reg. Judicial: And this use seems to
be borrowed from the customs of Lombardy, where praeceptum signifies
scripturam, vel instrumentum. Hot. in verbis feudal. and libro. 3.
Commentariorum in libros fendorum, in praefatione. Sometime it is taken for the
provocation, whereby one man inciteth an other to commit a felony, as theft, or
murder. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 105. Bracton calls it (praeceptum) or
(mandatum) lib. 3. tract. 2. ca. 19. whence a man may observe three diversities
of offending in murder: Praeceptum, fortia, consilium: praeceptum, being the
instigation used before hand, fortia, the assistance in the fact, as help to
bind the party murdered, or robbed: consilium, advise either before or in the
deed. The Ciuilians use (mandatum) in this case, as appears by Angelus in
tracta: de maleficus. verse. Sempronium Mandatorem.

Praeceptories, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 24. were benefices in a kind, and termed
preceptories, because they were possessed by the more eminent sort of the
Templers, whom the chief master by his authority created and called
(praeceptores Templi) Ioach. Stepha. de Iurisdict. li. 4. cap. 10. number. 27. See
Comaundry.

Praecipe quod reddat, is a writ of great diversity touching both the form
and use, for beter declaration whereof see Ingressu, and Entry. This form is
extended as well to a writ of right, as to other writs of entry, or possession.
old. not. br. fol. 13. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 5. And it is called sometime a
writ of Right close, as a praecipe in capite, when it issues out of the court
of common plees for a tenent holding of the King in chief, as of his Crown,
and not of the King, as of any honor, castle or manner. Register orig. fol. 4.
b. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 5. F. Sometime a writ of Right patent: as when it
issues out of any Lords court, for any of his tenants deforced, against the
deforcer, and must be determined there. Of this read more at large in Fitzh.
not. br. in the very first chapter or writ of all his book.

Praemunire, is taken either for a writ, or for the offense whereupon the writ
is granted. The one may well enough be understood by the other. It is
therefore to be noted, that the church of Rome under pretense of her supremacy
and the dignity of Saint Peter's chair, grew to such an incroching, that there
could not be a benefice (were it Bishopric, Abbathy, or other) of any worth
here in England, the bestowing whereof could escape the Pope by one means or
other. In so much, as for the most part, he granted out Mandats of
ecclesiastical livings, before they were void to certain persons by his
bulls, prete^ding therein a great care to see the Church provided of a
Successorbefore it needed. Whence it grew that these kind of Bulls were called
(Gratiae expectativae) or (Prouisiones) whereof you may read a learned
discourse in Duarenus that worthy Ciuilian in his tractat: De beneficiis lib.
3. c. 1. and in his treatise De immunitate ecclesiae Gallicanae. These
provisions, wereso rife with us, that at the last, King Edward the third, that
heroical Prince, not disgesting so intolerable an oppression, made a statute
in the 25. year of his reign, statuto 5. cap. 22. and another, statuto 6.
eiusdem anni. cap. pri. and a third anno 27. against those that drew the Kings
people out of the Realm, to answer of things belonging to the kings court; and
another anno 28. statu. 2. 6. 1. 2. 3. and 4. to the like effect whereby he
greatly restained this liberty of the Pope. Yet such was the wantonness that
grew out of his power, and the number patience of princes in those days, that he
still adve^tured the continuance of these provisions: in so much as King
Richard the second made likewise a statute against them in the 12. year of his
reign, cap. 15. and the 13. year statut. 2. ca. 2. making mention of the said
first statute of Edward the third, ratifiing the same, and appointing the
punishment of those, that offended against it, to be perpetual banishment,
forfeiture of their lands, tenements, goods, and catels, as by the same does
more at large appear. And again in the 16. year of his reign, cap. 5. to
meet more fully with all the shifts invented to defraude these former
statutes, he expresses the offense more particularly, and sets the same
punishment to it, that he ordained in the last former statute. for there
toward the end he has these words: If any purchase or pursiew, or do to be
purchased, or pursiewed in the court of Rome, or else where, any such
translations, processes, and sentences of excommunication, Bulls, Instruments,
or any other things, etc. After him K. H. the fourth in like manner grieved at
this importuny by other abuses not sully met with in the former statutes, in
the second year of his reign, cap. 3. and 4. adds certain new cases, and
lays upon the offenders in them the same censure, whereunto for shortness
sake I refer you: admonishing likewise to add the statute, anno. 9. eiusdem.
cap. pri. and anno 7. cap. 9. and 8. and anno 9. eiusdem. cap. 8. and anno 3.
H. 5. cap. 4. Out of which statutes have our professors of the common law,
wrought many dangers to the Jurisdiction ecclesiastical, thretning the
punishment contained in the statute anno. 27. Ed. 3. and. 38. eiusdem, almost
to every thing that the court Christian deals in, pretending all things dealt
with in those courts to be the disherison of the Crown. from the which, and
none other fountain, all ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is now derived: whereas
in truth Sir Tho. Smith says very rightly, and charitablely, that the uniting
of the supremacy ecclesiastical, and temporal in the king, utterly voideth
the use of all those statuts. Nam cessante ratione, cessat lex. And whatsoever
is now wrought or threatened against the Jurisdiction ecelesiasticall, by
color of the same, is but in emulation of one court to another: and by
consequent a derogation to that authority, from which all Jurisdiction is now
derived, and the maintenance whereof was by those Princes especially purposed.
But of this read Sir Thomas Smith, lib. 3. de Rep. Angl. cap. 9.

Some later statutes do cast this punishment upon other offenders: as namely
the statute, anno 1. El. cap. primo, upon him that denies the Kings supremacy
the second time, etc. and the statue anno 13. El. ca. 2. upon him that
affirms the authority of the Pope: or that refuses to take the oathe of
supremacy. and the statute, anno 13. El. cap. 1. fuch as be seditious talkers
of the inheritance of the Crown, or affirm the Queens Majesty to be an
heritique. And the word is applied most commonly to the punishment first
ordained by the statutes before mentioned, for such as transgressed them; but
in later times imposed upon other offenses. for that, where it is said that
any man for an offense committed shall incur a praemunire, it is meant, that
he shall incur the same punishment, which is inflicted against those that
trangresse the statute made, anno 16. R. 2. ca. 5. which is commonly called the
statute of praemunire, which kind of reference is not unusual in our statutes.
Cor example, I show only the statute, anno 5. El. ca. 5. where it is inacted
that if any man preach or teach by wrighting, that the common Counsel of the
Realm do by that statute forbid flesh to be eaten, as of necessity for the
saving of man's soul, that he shall for such preaching, etc. be punished as
they be, which be spredders of false news: having reference thereby to those
statutes, which contain the punishment of such offenders.

Now touching the Etymology of this word (Praemunire) some think it
proceeds from the strength given to the Crown by the former statutes, against
the usurpation of foreign and unnatural power: which opinion may receive some
ground from the statute, anno 25. Ed. 3. stat. 6. cap. pri. But other think it
to grow from the verb (Praemonere) being barbarously turned into (Praemunire)
which corruption is taken from the rude Interpreters of the Civil, and Canon
laws, who indeed do use the effect (Praemunire) many times for the efficient
cause (Praemonere) according to our proverb: He that is well warned, is half
armed. And of this I gather reason from the form of the writ, which is thus
conceived in the old. not. br. fol. 143. Praemunire facias praefatum
praepositum and I. R. procuratorem, etc. quod tune sint coram nobis, etc. for
these words can be referred to none, but parties charged with the offense.

Praepositus villae, is used sometime for the Constable of a town, or petit
Constable. Cromptons Iurisdict. fol. 205. how be it the same author, fol. 194.
seems to apply it otherwise. for there quatuor homines praepositi, be those
4. men, that for every town must appear before the Justices of the Forest in
their Circuit. It is used sometime for a Reeve. See Reeve.

Praerogatiue of the King (praeregatiua regis) is that especial power,
preeminence, or privilege that the King has in any kind, over and above
other persons, and above the ordinary course of the common law, in the right
of his crown. And this word (Praerogatiua) is used by the Ciuilians in the
same sense. l. Rescriptum. 6.. 4. P. de hono. and muner. But that privilege
that the Roman Emperor had above common persons, they for the most part
comprised (sub iurefisci. P. de iure fisct, per totum tit. and Co. li. 10. tit.
1. Among the Feudists this is termed (ius regalium, ius regaliorum vel a
nonnullis ius regaliarum) But as the Feudists, sub iure regalium, so our
lawyers (sub praerogatiua regis) do comprise also, all that absolute height
of power that the Ciuilians call (maiestatem, vel potestatem, vel ius imperii,)
subject only to god: which (regalia) the Feudists divide into two sorts, maiora
sc. and. minora regalia. for to use their own words, Quaedam regalia,
dignitatem, praerogatiuam, and imperii praeemmentiam spectant: quaedam vero ad
vtilitatem, and commodum pecuniarium immediate attinent: and haec
propriefiscalia sunt, and ad ius fisci pertinent. Peregri: de iure fisci, li.
pri. cap. 1. nu. 9. See also Arnoldus Clapmarius. de arcanis Imperii. lib. pri.
cap. 11. and seqq. who seems to make difference between maiestatem, and ius
regalioru^. Others also make those (maiora regalia) that appertain to the
dignity of the prince, and those minora, which enrich his cofers. Regnerus
Sixtinus, de iure rega. cap. 2. By this it appears, that the statute of the
Kings prerogatue made, an. 17. Ed. 2. contains not the sum of the Kings
whole prerogative, but only so much thereof, as concerns the profit of his
cofers growing by virtue of his regal power and crown. for it is more then
manifest, that his prerogative reaches much farther: yea even in the matters of
his profit, which that statute especially consists of. For example, it is the
kings prerogative to grant protection unto his debtours against other
creditours, until himself be satisfied. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 28. B. to
distreine for the whole rent upon one tenent, that has not the whole land.
Idem. fol. 235. A. to require the auncesters debt of the heir, though not
especially bound. Brit. cap. 28. fo. 65. b. to seize upon money paid by his
deptour into a court, for the satisfaction of an executor. Plowden, fol. 322.
a. to permit his deptours to siew for their debts by a (Quo minus) in the
exchequer. Perkins. Grawnts. 5. to be first paid by one that owes money both
to him and others. Dyer. fol. 67. nu. 20. to take the lands of accountants into
his hands for his own satisfaction. Plowd. casu Alms. fol. 321. and 322. to
take his action of accoumpt against executors, eodem, fol. 320. not to be tied
to the demand of his rent. Coke. li. 4. fo. 73. a. Now for those regalities
which are of the higher nature (all being within the compass of his prerogative,
and justly to be comprised under that title) there is not one that belonged to
the most absolute prince in the world, which does not also belong to our king,
except the custom of the nations so differ (as indeed they do) that one
thing be in the one accounted a regalitie, that in another is none. Only by
the custom of this kingdom, he makes no laws without the consent of the 3.
estates though he may quash any law concluded of by them. And whether his
power of making laws be restreined (de necessitate) or of a godly and
commendable policy, not to be altered without great peril, I leave to the
judgment of wisermen. But I hold it incontrowlable, that the king of England
is an absolute king. And all learned politicians do range the power of making
laws, inter insignia summae and absolutae potestatis. Maiora autem regalia
sunt haec: clausula plenitudinis potestatis, and ex ea aliquid statuere, leges
condere, ac eas omnibus and singulis dare, bellum indicere, belli indicenci
licentiam alii dare, pronunciare ita vt a sententia appellari non possit,
committere sive delegare alicui causam cum clausula appellatione remota,
cognoscere de crimine laesae maiestatis, legitimare per rescriptum eos qui
extra legitimum matrimonium nati sunt, ad famam, honores, and natales in
integrum restituere, veniam aetatis dare, creare Duces, Marchiones, Comites,
regnum in feudum concedere. Huc referri potest ius erigendi scholam, quae hodie
Vniuersitas vel Academia appellatur, etia^ ius crea^di doctores, gradu
licentiae aliquem insigniendi, creandi magistratus, tabelliones, sieve notarios,
ius dandi insignia nobilitatis, sieve nobiles creandi, ius cudendae monetae,
noua vectigalia instituendi, vel instituta vectigalia augendi; Sixtinus vbi
supra. So that those other which are mentioned in libris feudorum, and the
interpreters of them, are (at the least for the most part) justly called
regalia minora, as armandiae, viae publicae, flumina nauigantia, portus,
ripalia, vectigalia, monetae, mulctarum poenarumque compendia, bona vacantia,
bona quae indignis auferuntur, bona eorum qui incestum matrimonium contrahunt,
bona damnatorum, and proscriptorum, angariae and parangariae, extraordinariae
ad expeditionem imperatoris collationes, potestas creandorum magistratuum ad
iusticiam exequendam, argentarie, palatia in ciuitatibus constituta,
piscationum reditus, salinarum reditus, bona committentium crimen laesae
maiestatis, thesaurus inuentus. By setting down these regalities of both
sorts, as they are accoumpted in the Empire, and other foreign kingdoms, they
may be the more easily compared with our kings prerogatives, and so the
differences noted between us and them. And whereas some things are before
reckoned both (inter regalia maiora, and minora) the reader must understand
that this may be in diverse respects. For example, the power of raising a
tribute, or of coining money is inter maiora: but the profit that grows to
the Prince by the one or other, is (inter minora) Now may there also be noted
out of books a great number of prerogatives belonging to the king of this land,
which do not bring profit to his cofers immediately, and therefore may be
accoumpted inter regalia maiora, or at the least, in a middle or mixed nature,
or inter maiora and minora, because by a consequent they tend to the increase
of the kings exchequer. Of these such as I have observed in reading, I will set
down as they come to my hands, without farther curiosity in dividing. It is the
kings prerogative that he may not be siewed upon an ordinary writ as tenent to
lands, but by petition. Plowd. casu Walsingham fo. 553. to have a cecessary
consent in the appropriation of all benefices. Idem, casu Grendon. fol. 499. to
waiue and to demurre, and to plead to the issue, or to waiue the issue, and to
demurre upon the plee of the aduers part, yet not to change the issue another
term after he and the aduers part be once at issue. Idem, casu Willion. fol.
23. 6. a. and casu Mines fol. 322. a. to be received in a suite before issue
joined upon an (aid prier) Idem, casu Dutchry of Lancaster, fol. 221. b. to be
never in nonage, eodem, fol. 218. b. that a man indicted may not wage battle
with him. Idem casu nimes fol. 335. b. that no man upon any right may enter
upon him being in possession, but must be put to suite. Dyer fol. 139. nu. 33.
to seize the lands of his tenants that alienate without license. Plowd. casu.
Mines. fol. 322. a. that no subject may wage his law against him. Broke.
chosein action. 9. Coke. lib. 4. fol. 93. to present in the right of the
youngest coparcener being his word before the elder. Plowd: casu. Mines. fol.
332. b. and fol. 333. a. that a benefice by institution is not full against
him. Coke. Digbies case, fol. 79. a. not to find pledges for the persecuting
of any action. For he cannot be amerced. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 31. F. and fo. 47.
C. to siew in what court he will. Fitzh. not. br. f. 7. B. and 32. E. to siew
the writ Ne admittas after six months. Regist. orig. fol. 31. a. that a man's
villein having remained in his ancient demesne by the space of a year, may not
be recovered by the writ (de natiuo habendo) Fitzh. not. br. fol. 79. A. to
grant an office with the (babendum post mortem alterius) Dyer. fo. 295. nu. 1.
to shorten the ordinary time of summons (being 15. days) in writ of right.
Brit. ca. 121. to give what honor or place he lists to his subjects. anno
31. H. 8. ca. 10. to be owner of a forest. See Forest. to have free warren. See
Warren. Not to be owted of his free hold. Cromptons Justice of peace. fol. 59.
b. and 16. a. to araigne a man being both a Traitor, and a Felon, rather upon
the treason, than upon the felony, because he may have the whole escheats.
Idem. eodem. fol. 99. a. to warrant the day of appearance to his subject being
in his service, and summoned to appear at a day certain. Fitzh. not. br. fol.
17. a. Diverse of these and many others did belong (fisco imperatorum) which you
may find in the Digest: De iure fisci. and Co. lib. 10. tit. 1. Besides these
also many more may be observed to belong unto our King out of laws, which I
leave to their collection that are of longer reading, and more painful
industry.

Prerogative of the Archbishop of Canterbury, or York, (prarogatiua
Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis, seu Eboracensis) is an especial preeminence, that
these Sees have in certain cases above ordinary Bishops within their
Provinces. And that of the Archbishop of Canterbury, principally consists of
these points.

First, in the confirmation of all elections made of Bishops by the Deane and
Chapter of all Cathedral Churches, as also the consecration of them.

Next, in a power of visiting his whole Province, of assembling Synods, of
supplying the defects and negligences of inferior Bishops, of receiving
appeals from their courts, of assigning coadiutours to those Bishops, that
grow weak and insufficient to discharge their function, of appointing Vicars
general to those that have either none, or an insufficient man employed in
that office: and of dispensing in all ecclesiastical cases, wherein the laws
bear dispensation: of taking oath of every Bishop, at his confirmation, to
perform canonical obedience unto the Sea of Canterbury. But these seem to
belong unto him by an ordinary archiepiscopall authority.

Certain other things there be, that appertain unto him more then ordinarily
to other Archbishops: as the original calling of any person in any cause
belonging to spiritual jurisdiction, out of any part of his province, though
not appealed. But this point is now limited by the Statute made, anno 23. Henr.
8. ca. 9.

The receiving of an appeal from the lowest Judge ecclesiastical within his
province immediately. The appointing of a keeper or guardian of the
spiritualties during the vacancie of any bishopric. By which means all
episcopal rites of the Dioces for that time do belong unto him: as Visitation,
Institution to Benefices, and such like.

The visitation of every Diocese within his province, when and in what order
it pleases him. As also of all other privileged Churches. The probate of
Testaments and granting of administrations, in case where the party deceased
has goods of any considerable value out of the diocese wherein he dies. And
that value is ordinarily five pounds, except it be otherwise by composition
between the said Archbishop, and some other Bishop: as in the Diocese of
London it is ten pounds.

The probate of every Bishops Testament, or the administration of his goods
dying intestate, though not having any goods, chatels, or debts without the
compass of his own jurisdiction. The bestowing of any one dignity or prebend
in any Cathedral church upon the creation of a new Bishop, that himself
thinks good to make choice of.

There may be more particulars of this prerogative, that I know not: but these
may be sufficient to express the thing that I desire to declare. Who so
desires to read these more at large, and other privileges of this Church in
temporal matters, may resort to the book entitled: De antiquitate Britannicae
Ecclesia, and nominatim de priuilegiis Ecclesia Cantuariensis historia: and
especially to the 8. chapter of the said book. pa. 25.

Prerogative Court, (curia prerogatiuae Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis) is the
Court wherein all Wills be proved, and all administrations taken, that belong to
the Archbishop by his prerogative, which see in Prerogative. And if any
contention do grow between two or more touching any such will or
administration, the cause is properly debated and determined in this Court. The
Judge of this Court is called Iudex Curiae praerogatiuae Cantuariensis. The
Archbishop of York has also the like power and court, which is termed his
Exchequer, but far inferior to this in countenance and profit.

Prescription (praescriptio) is a course or use of any thing for a time beyond
the memory of man, as the exposition of the law terms does define it. Kitchen
fol. 104. says thus: Prescription is, when for continuance of time, whereof
there grows no memory, a particular person has particular right against
another particular person. And custom is, where by continuance of time beyond
memory, diverse persons have gotten a right: with whom agrees Sir Edward
Cook, lib. 4. fol. 32. a. And usage is by continuance of time the efficient
cause of them both, and the life of both prescription and custom. Thus says
Kitchen. But as in the Civil law, so I think likewise in the common,
Prescription may be in a shorter time. As for example, where the Satute anno,
1. H. 8. cap. 9. says, that all actions popular must be siewed within three
years after the offense committed, and the Statute anno, 7. eiusdem. cap. 3.
That four years being past after the offense committed in one case, and one
year in another, no suite can be commenced, and the Statute 31. Eliz. cap. 5.
says, (by way of correcting the two former statutes) that all actions, etc.
brought upon any Statute, the penalty whereof belongs to the King, shall be
brought within two years after the offense committed, or else be void. And
the Satute, anno 39. Eliz. cap. prim. and secund. says, that actions brought
after two year by any common person, or after three years by the king alone
for decay of husbandry or tillage, shall be of noe force. Whosoever offends
against any such Statute, and does escape uncalled for two years, or three
years, in one case of the two later of these three Statutes, may justly be
said to have prescribed an immunitie against that action. The like may be said
of the Statute made anno 23. Eliz. cap. prime. which says, that all offenses
comprised in the Statute made in the 13. year of Eliz. cap. 2. are inquirable
before both Justices of peace and of Assise, within one year and a day, after
the offense committed. Also the title that a man obtains by the passing of
five years after a fine acknowledged of any lands or tenements, may justly be
said to be obtained by prescription. And whereas the Statute, anno 8. R. 2.
cap. 4. says, that a Judge or Clerk convicted for false entering of plees,
etc. may be fined within two years; the two years being ended, he prescribes
against the punishment of the said Statute; and whereas the Statute anno 11.
H. 7. says, that he which will complain of maintenance, or embracery, whereby
perjury is committed by a Jury, must do it within six days, those six
days ended, the parties prescribe: and whereas the statute anno prim. Ed. 6.
says, that a man being not indicted within 3 months of any offenses there
mentioned touching Service and Sacraments, he shall be clear from thence
forward: the three months being ended, he prescribes: And the same may be
said of the statute anno 5. Ed. 6. cap. 5. which says that a man shall not be
indicted of any offense there mentioned touching the decay of tillage, after. 3.
years. And whereas it is ordained by the statute anno 8. H. 6. cap. 9. that
those which keep possession of lands by force after. 3. years possession held
by themselves and their ancestors, shall not be subject to the arbitrament of
Disseisours there set down, I hold this a prescription likewise against those
censures. v. anno 23. H. 6. ca. 15. Lastly a servant prescribes liberty after
a year. Bracton. li. 1. ca. 10. nu. 3. and the right that is gotten in any
Stray to a Lord of a manner, no man claiming it within the year and day after
proclamation made, is an vsucapion, or prescription. See Action perpetual, and
temporal. And see Cromptons Justice of peace. fol. 173. b. vbi habebis festum.
But see one rule for all in Lamb. Eirenarch. li. 4. ca. 5. pa. 469. Of this
prescription, and the learning touching the same, you may read a solemn
report in S. Ed. Cooks, and Luttrels case. vol. 4. fo. 84. b. and seqq.

Presentation (Praesentatio) is used properly for the act of a patron offering
his Clerk to the Bishop, to be instituted in a benefice of his gift: the form
whereof see in the Register original fol. 302. a.

Presentment, is a mere denuntiation of the Jurors themselves, or some other
offices, as Justice, Constable, searcher, surueiours etc. (without any
information) of an offense inquirable in the court whereunto it is presented.
See Lamberd Eirenarcha, lib. 4. ca. 5. pa. 467.

President (Praeses) is used in the Common law for the kings Liuetenent in any
Province or function: as President of Wales, of York, of Barwick. President of
the Kings Council. anno. 22. H. 8. cap. 8. and anno 24. H. 8. cap. 3. and 14.

Preignotarie (Protonotarius) is a word that seems to be made either of two
French words (Prime) or Primier. i. primus) and (Notaire. i. Notarius,
tabellio, or of two Latin words (prae) and notarius) quasi primus aut
principalis notarius. The office is likewise borrowed from the later Romans,
who made his name of half Greek, and half Latin, viz (...). i. primus,
principalis) and (Notarius). It is used in our common law for the chief
clerks of the Kings courts, whereof 3. be of the common pleas, and one of the
Kings bench. For the pregnotarie of the commmon plees, anno 5. H. 4. cap. 14.
is termed the chief clerk of that court. He of the Kings Bench records all
actions civil siewed in that court, as the Clerk of the Crown office does
all criminal causes. Those of the common plees do enter and inrolle all manner
of declarations, pleadings, Assizes, and Judgments: and all actions, the same
term that the appearance is made. Also they make out all judicial writs, as
the venire facias after issues joined, and Habeas corpus, for the bringing in
of the Jury, after it is returned upon the venire facias. They also make
forth writs of executions, and ofseisin, writs of supersedeas, for appearance
to exigents, as well as the exigents, and writs of privileges, for removing of
causes from other inferior courts of Record, in case where the party has
cause of privilege: Also writs of procedendo, of scire facias in all cases,
and writs to inquire of damages: and all process upon prohibitions, and upon
writs of audita querela, and false Judgment. Finally they inrolle all
recognisances acknowledged in that court, and all common Recoueries: and may
make exemplifications of any Record the same term, before the rols be
delivered from them.

Prender, comes of the French (prendre. i. accipere, acceptare, capere,
prehe^dere) it signifies in our common law sometime a power, or right to take
a thing before it be offered: as such things as lie in Prender, or such as lie
in render. West. part 2. titula Fines. sect. 126. where you have these words:
If the lord grant the services of his tenent by fine, or otherwise, the Lord
before atturnment, shall have such things as lie in prender: as the ward of the
body of the heir and of the land: escheats, etc. but not such things as lie in
prender, as rents, and releifes, heriots and other services. For he cannot avowe
for them before the atturnment.

Prender de Baron, signifies literally in barbarous French to take a husband:
but it is used in our common law, as an exception to disable a woman from
persiewing an appeal of murder against the killer of her former husband,
Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 3. cap. 59. The reason whereof whether it be, because by
her second marriage, she may justly be thought to have given up the interest
she had in her former husband, or for that she is now covert again, or for
both, I leave to consideration.

Prender del profits, signifies verbatim to take the profits. It signifies
substantiuely the taking of the profits. See Cromptons Iurisdict. fol. 185. See
Pernour of profits.

Pressed, is used for some duty in money to be paid by the Shyreeue upon his
accoumpt in the exchequer, anno 2. and 3. Ed. 6. cap. 4.

Pressed money, is so called of the French word (Pressed. i. explicatus, promptus,
expeditus) for that it binds those, that have received it, to be ready at all
times appointed.

Primage, is a duty due to the mariners and sailors for the loading of any
ship at the setting forth from any haven, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 14.

Primier seisin (Prima seisina) ad verbum signifies the first possession. It
is used in the common law, for a branch of the kings prerogative, whereby he
has the first possession of all lands, and tenements through the Realm,
holding of him in chief, whereof his tenent died seized in his demesne as of
fee; and so consequently the rents, and profits of them, until the heir, if
he be of age, do his homage, if he be under years, until he come to years.
See Stawnf. prarog. cap. 3. and Bracton lib. 4. tract. 3. cap. pri.

Primo beneficio. See Beneficio.

Prince (Princeps) is a french word, and taken with us diversely, sometime for
the king himself, but more properly for the kings eldest son, who is prince
of Wales, as the eldest son to the French king is called Dolphine, both being
princes by their nativity. M. Fearn in the glory of generositie. page 138. For
Edward the first to appease the tumultuous spirits of the Welsh men, who being
the ancient Indigenae of this land, could not in long time bear the yoke of
us, whom they call strangers, sent his wife being with child into Wales.
where at Carnaruan she was delivered of a son, thereupon called Edward of
Carnarvan and afterward asked the Welsh men, seeing they thought much to be
governed by strangers, if they would be quietly ruled by one of their own
nation; who answering him, yea: then (quoth he) I will appoint you one of your
own country men, that cannot speak one word of English, and against whose
life you can take no just exception: and so named unto them his son borne in
Carnarvan not long before. from which time it has continued, that the kings
eldest son (who was before called: Lord Prince, Stawnf. praerog: cap. 22.
fol. 75.) has been called prince of Wales: Stowes Annals, page 303. See anno
27. H. 8. cap. 26. and anno 28. eiusdem, cap. 3.

Principality of Chester. anno 21. Rich. 2. cap. 9. See Cownty palatine. and
Cromptons diverse jurisdictions, fol 137.

Prior perpetual, or datife and removeable. anno 9. R. 2. cap. 4. and anno 1.
Ed. 4. cap. 1. paulo ante finem. Lord prior of Saint John's of Jerusalem, anno
26. H. 8. cap. 2.

Priors aliens (Priores alieni) were certain religious men borne in France,
and gouerners of religious houses erected for outlandish men here in England:
which were by Henry the fifth thought, no good members for this land, after
such conquest obtained by him in France, and therefore suppressed. Whose
livings afterward by Henry the 6. were given to other Monasteries and houses
of learning. Stowes Annals. page 582. See anno 1. H. 5. cap. 7. but especially
to the erecting of those two most famous Colleges called the Kings Colleges
of Cambridge and Eton.

Prioritie, (prioritas) signifies in our common law, an antiquity of tenure
in comparison of another not so ancient. As to hold by Prioritie, is to hold
of a Lord more aunciently then of another. old. not. br. fol. 94. So to hold in
posterioritie, is used by Stawnf. praerog. cap. 2. fo. 11. And Crompton in his
Jurisdiction. fol. 117. uses this word in the same signification. The Lord of
the prioritie shall have the custody of the body, etc. fol. 120. If the tenent
hold by prioritie of one, and by posterioritie of another, etc. To which
effect, see also Fitz. not. br. fol. 142. F. Bartolus in his Tractate, De
insigniis and armis, uses these very words, prioritas, and posterioritas,
concerning two that bear one coat armor.

Prisage, seems to be that custom or share, that belongs to the King out
of such merchandise, as are taken at sea, by way of lawful prize, anno 31
Eliz. cap. 5.

Prisage of Wines, anno I. H. 8. cap. 5. is a word almost out of use, now
called Butlerage, it is a custom whereby the prince chalengeth out of every
bark laden with wine, containing less then forty tun, two tun of wine at
his price.

Prise (prisa) comes of the French (prendre. i. capere) it signifies in our
Statutes, the things taken by pourveyours, of the Kings subjects. As anno 3.
Ed. 1. cap. 7. and anno 28. eiusdem. stat. 3. cap. 2. It signifies also a
custom due to the King, anno 25. eiusdem cap. 5. Regist. origin. fol. 117. b.

Prisoner (priso) comes of the French (prisonnier) and signifies a man
restrained of his liberty upon any action civil or criminal, or upon
commandment. And a man may be prisoner upon matter of Record, or matter of
fact: prisonervpon matter of Record is he, which being present in court, is by
the court committed to prison, only upon an arrest, be it of the Shyrecue,
Censtable, or other. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. prim. cap. 32. fol. 34. and 35.

Prinie, comes of the French (prive. i. familiaris) and significth in our
common law, him that is partaker, or has an interest in any action, or thing:
as, priuies of blood, old not. br. fol. 117. be those that be linked in
consanguinitie. Eucry heir in tail is privy to recover the land intayled.
eodem fol. 137. No priuitie was between me and the tenent. Litleton, fol. 106.
If I deliver goods to a man to be carried to such a place, and he, after he has
brought them thither, does steal them, it is felenie: because the priuitie of
delivery is determined, as soon as they are brought thither. Stawn. pl. cor.
lib. prim. cap. 15. fol. 25. Merchants privy be opposite to merchant
strangers. anno 2. Ed. tertii. cap. 9. and cap. 14. and ann. eiusdem, stat. 2.
cap. 3. The new Expositour of law terms makes diverse sorts of priuics: as
priuies in estate, priuies in deed, priuics in law, priuies in right, and
priuies in blood. And see the examples he gives of every of them. See Perkins
Conditions. 831. 832. 833. and Sir Edward Cook lib. 3. Walkers case. fol. 23.
a. and lib. 4. fol. 123. b. and 124. a. where he makes four kinds of
priuies, viz. priuies in blood, as the heir to his fathes, etc. priuies in
representation, as executours or administratours to the deceased: priuies in
estate, as he in the reuersion, and he in the remainder, when land is given to
one for life, and to another in see: the rcason is given by the Expositour of
law terms, for that their estates are created both at one time. The fourth
sort of priuies are priuies in tenure: as the Lord by escheate: that is, when
the land escheateth to the Lord for want of heirs, etc.

Privy seal (priuatum sigillum) is a scale that the King uses some time for
a warrant, whereby things passed the privy signet and brought to it, are sent
farther to be confirmed by the great seal of England: sometime for the strength
or credit of other things written upon occasions more transitory and of less
continuance, then those be that pass the great seal.

Privilege (priuilegium) is defined by Cicero in his oration pro domo sua, to
be lex priuata homini ^^ogata. Frerotus in paratitlis ad titulum decretalium de
priuilegiis, thus defines it: priuilegium est ius singular, hoc est priuata
lex quae vni homini, vel loco, vel Collegio, and similibus aliis concedit ur:
cap. priuilegia, distinct: 3. priua enim veteres dixere que nos singula
dicimus. Insit Agellius lib. 10. ca. 20. Ideoque priuilegia modo beneficia,
modo personales constitutiones dicuntur, etc. It is used so likewise in our
common law, and sometime for the place, that has any special immunity.
Kitchen fol. 118. in the words: where depters make sained gifts and feofements
of their land, and goods to their friends, and others, and betake themselves to
privileges, etc. Privilege is either personal, or real: a personal
privilege is that, which is granted to any person, either against, or beside
the course of the common law: as for example, a person called to be one of the
Parliament, may not be arrcsted either himself, or any of his attendance,
during the time of the Parliament. A privilege real is that, which is granted
to a place, as to the Universities, that none of either may be called to Westminster.
hall, upon any contract made within their own precincts. And one toward the
court of Chauncery, cannot originally be called to any court but to the
Chauncery, certain cases excepted. If he be, he will remove it by a writ of
Privilege grounded upon the statute anno 18. Ed. 3. See the new book of
Entries. verbo Privilege.

Probat of testaments (probatio testamentorum) is the producting, and
insinuating of dead men's wills before the ecclesiastical Judge, Ordinary of the
place, where the party dies. And the ordinary in this case is known by the
quantity of the goods, that the party deceased has out of the Dioces, where he
departed. For if all his goods be in the same Dioces, then the Bishop of the
Dioces, or the Archdeacon (according as their composition, or prescription is)
has the probate of the Testament: if the goods be dispersed in diverse Dioces,
so that there be any sum of note (as five pounds ordinarily) out of the
Dioces where the party let his life: then is the Archbishop of Canterbury the
ordinary in this case by his prerogative. For whereas in old time, the will
was to be proved in cuery Dioces, wherein the party diceased had any goods: it
was thought convenient both to the subject, and to the Archiepiscopall See, to
make one proof for all before him, who was and is of all the general Ordinary
of his province. But there may be aunciently some composition between the
Archbishop and an inferior ordinary, whereby the sum that makes the
prerogative, is abouc five pound. See praerogatiue of the Archbishop. This
probate is made in two sorts either in common form or pertestes. The proof in
common form, is only by the oath of the exceutour, or party exhibiting the
will, who swears upon his credulity, that the will by him exhibited, is the
last will, and testament of the party deceised. The proof per testes is, when
over and beside his oath, he also produces witnesses or makes other proof,
to confirm the same, and that in the presence of such as may pretend any
interest in the goods of the deceased, or at the least in their absence, after
they have been lawfully summoned to see such a will proved, if they think
good. And the later course is taken most commonly, where there is fear of
strife, and contention between the kindred and friends of the party deceased
about his goods. For a will proved only in common form, may be called into
question any time within 30. years after by common opinion, before it work
prescription.

Procedendo, is a writ whereby a plee, or cause formerly called from a base
court to the Chau^cerie, Kings bench, or common plees, by a writ of privilege
or certiorare, is released, and sent down again to the same court, to be
proceeded in there, after it appears that the defendant has no cause of
priniledge; or that the matter comprised in the bille, be not well proned.
Brook hoctitulo. and Terms of law: Cook vol. 6. fol. 63. a. See anno. 21.
R. 2. cap. 11. in fine, leters of procedendo granted by the keeper of the
privy scale. See in what diversity it is used in the table of the original
Register, and also of the Judicial.

Process (Processus) is the manner of proceeding in every cause, be it personal,
or real, civil, or criminal, even from the original writ to the end.
Britton fol. 138. a. where in there is great diversity, as you may see in the
table of Fitzh. br. verbo Process, and Brooks Abridgement, hoc titulo. And
whereas the wtitings of our common lawyers sometime call that the process, by
which a man is called into the court and no more: the reason thereof may be
given, because it is the beginning, or the principal part thereof, by which
the rest of the business is directed, according to that saying of Aristotle.
(...). Diucrs kinds of process upon Inditements before Justices of peace: See in
Cromptons Justice of peace. fol. 133. b. 134. 135. But for orders sake, I
refer you rather to M. Lamberd in his tractat of ptocesses adjoined to his
Eirenarcha, who acording to his subject in hand, divides criminal process,
either into process touching causes of treason, or selonie, and process touching
inferior offenses. the former is usually a capias, capias alias, and exigi
facias. The second is either upon enditement, or presentment, or information:
that upon enditement or presentment, is all one, and is either general, and
that is a venire facias', upon which if the party be returned sufficient, then
is sent out a Distringas infinite until he come: if he be returned with a
Nibil habet, then ifsueth out a Capias, Capias alias, Capias pluries, and
lastly an Exigifacias. The special process is that, which is especially
appointed for the offense by statute. for the which he refers his reader to
the 8. Chapter of his 4. book being very different.

Processium continuando, is a writ for the continuance of a process after the
death of the chief Justice, in the writ of oyer and terminer. Register
original. fol. 128. a.

Prochein Amy (Proximus amicus, vel propinquior) is, word for word, a near
friend. It is used in our common law, for him that is next of kind to a
child in his nonage, and is in that respect allowed by law, to deal for him
in the managing of his affairs: as to be his Guardian, if he hold of any in
socage, and in the redress of any wrong done unto him, be it by his Guardian,
if he be ward and hold in Chivalry, or any others. Statut. West. pri. cap. 48.
3. Ed. pri. and Westminster. 2. cap. 15. anno 13. Ed. pri.

Proof, alias Prove, is used for an Enquest. anno 28. Ed. 3. cap. 13.

Proclamation (Proclamatio) signifies a notice publicly given of any thing,
whereof the King thinks good to advertise his subjects. So it is used, anno
7. Rich. 2. ca. 6. Proclamation of rebellion is a public notice given by the
officer, that a man not appearing upon a Sub poena, nor an attachment in the
Star Chamber or Chauncerie, shall be reputed a rebel, except he render
himself by a day assigned. Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 92. See Commission of
rebellion.

Proclamation of a fine, is a notice openly, and solemnly given at all the
Assizes, that shall be holden in the County within one year after the
engrossing of the fine, and not at the four general quarter sessions. And
these proclamations be made upon transcripts of the fine, sent by the Justices
of the Common plees, to the Justices of Assise, and the Justices of peace.
West. part 2. symbol. titulo Fines. sect. 132. where also you may see the
form of the proclamarion. Proclamare est pala^, and valde clamare, used by
Tullie, Liuie, and the Civilians. P. Quibus ad liberta proclamare non licet.
And Proclamator signifies him qui litem intendit, vel causam agit. Cicero de
oratore. lib. pri. Non enim causidicum nescio quem, neque proclamatorem, aut
rabulam hoc sermon conquirimus, etc. I read in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 85. C.
that the kings proclamation is sufficient to stay a subject from going out of
the Realm. See the force of proclamations. anno. 31. H. 8. cap. 8. see also
Proclamations in diverse cases. New book of Enteries. verbo Proclamation.

Procters of the clergy (procuratores cleri) are those which are chosen and
appointed to appear for cathedral, or other Collegiat churches, as also for
the common clergy of every Dioces, at the Parliament, whose choice is in this
sort. First, the king directs his writ to the Archbishop of each province
for the summoning of all Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, cathedral and collegiat
churches, and generally of all the clergy of his province, after their best
discretion and judgment, assigning them the time and place in the said writ.
Then the Archebishops proceed in their accustomed course. One example may
serve to show both. The Archbishop of Canterbury upon his, writ received,
directerh his leters to the Bishop of London as his Deane provincial. 1..
statuimui. de poenis and verb. tanquam in glos. first citing himself
petemptorily and then willing him to cite in like manner all the Bishops,
Deanes, Archedeacons, cathedral and collegiate churches, and generally all the
Clergy of his Province to the place, and against the day prefixed in the writ.
But directs withal that one Proctor sent for every Cathedral or Collegiat
Church, and two for the body of the inferior Clergy of each Diocese, may
suffice. And by virtue of these leters authentically sealed, the said Bishop of
London directs his like leters severally to the Bishop of every Diocese of
the Province, citing them in like sort* and commanding them not only to
appear, but also to admonish the said Deanes, and Archdeacons, personally to
appear, and the Cathedral(...) and collegiat Churches, as also the common
Clergy of the Diocese, to send their Proctors to the place, and at the day
appointed: and also wills them to certify the Archbishop the names of all
and every so monished by them, in a shedule annexed to their leters
certificatorie. The Bishops proceed accordingly, and the Cathedral and
collegiate churches as also the Clergy make choice of their Proctors: which
done, and certified to the Bishop, he returns all answerably to his charge at
the day. These proctors of the Clergy, howsoever the case of late days is
altered, had place and suffrage in the lower house of Parliament, as well as the
knights, citizens, Barons of the Cinque ports, and Burgesses. For so it
plainly appears by the Statute, anno 21. R. 2. cap. 2. and cap. 12. And
sithence they were removed, the Church has daily grown weaker and weaker: I
pray God that in short time she famish not, but that her liberties be better
maintained.

Procurator, is used for him that gathers the fruits of a benefice for
another man. anno 3. R. 2. stat. 1. cap. 2. And procuracy is used for the
specialtie, whereby he is authorized. Ibid. They are at this day in the West
parts called Proctors.

Profer (profrum vel proferum) is the time appointed for the accounts of
Shyreeues, and other officers in the Exchequer, which is twice in the year,
anno 51. H. 3. statut. quint. And it may be gathered also out of the Register,
fol. 139. in the writ De Atturnato Vicecomitis pro profro faciendo. I read
also of profers, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 21. in these words: Trinity term shall
begin the Monday next after Trinity Sunday, whenever it shall happen to
fall, for the keeping of the essoins, profers, returns, and other ceremonies
heretofore used and kept. In which place (profer) seems to signify the
offer, or endeavor to proceed in action by any man, whom it concerns so to
do. See Briton. cap. 27. fol. 50. b. and 55. a. and fol. 80. b. and Eleta lib.
1. cap. 38.. Vtlagati and seqq.

Profer the half merke. See Half merke.

Profession (professio) is in the common law, used particularly fot the
entering into any religious Order of Friars, etc. New book of* Entries, verbo
Profession.

Profits apprender. See Prender.

Prohibition, (prohibitio) is a writ framed for the forbidding of any court,
either spiritual or secular, to proceed in any cause there depending, upon
suggestion, that the cognition thereof belongs not to the said court. Fitz.
not. br. fol. 39. G. but is most usually taken, especially in these days, for
that writ, which lies for one that is impleeded in the Court Christian, for a
cause belonging to the temporal jurisdiction, or the cognizance of the Kings
court, whereby as well the party and his Council, as the Judge himself, and
the Register, are forbidden to proceed any farther in that cause: for that it
appertains to the disinheriting of the Crown of such right as belongs unto
it. In how many cases this lies, see* Broke, hoc titulo, and Fitz. na. br.
fol. 39. and seqq. This writ, and the praemunire, might in these days well be
spared: For they were helps to the kings inheritance and Crown, when the two
swords were in two diverse hands. Whereas now both the Jurisdictions being
settled in the King, there is small reason of either, except it be to weatie the
subject by many quircks and delays, from obtaining his right* of this
prohibition, you may read Bracton also, lib. 5. tract. 5. cap. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
8. 9. 10. 11. 12. who says, that it lies not after sentence given in any
cause, howsoever the case is altered: and again, the statute made, anno 50.
Ed. 3. which ordains, that above one prohibition should not lie in one cause.
See the diversity of prohibitions in the table of the original Regist. See the
new book of Entries, verbo, Prohibition, and Fitz. not. br. fol. 39.

Prohibitio de vastodirecta parti, is a writ Judicial directed to the tenent,
and prohibiting him from making waste upon the land in controversy, during the
suite. Register Judicial. fol. 21. It is sometime made to the Shyreeue, the
example whereof you have there next following.

Pro Indiuiso, is a possession, and occupation of lands, or tenements belonging
unto two or more persons, whereof none knows his several portion, as
Coparceners before partition. Bracton lib. 5. tracta. 2. cap. pri. nu. 7.

Prolocutour of the convocation house (prolocutor domus conuocationis) is an
officer chosen by persons ecclesiastical publicly assembled by the kings
writ at every parliament. And as there be two houses of convocation, so be there
two prolocutours, one of the higher house, the other of the lower house, who
presently upon the first assembly is by the motion of the Bishops, chosen by
the lower house, and presented to the Bishops for their prolocutour, that is,
the man by whom they mean to deliver their resolutions to the higher house,
and to have their own house especially ordered and governed. His office is to
cause the clerk to call the names of such as are of that house when he sees
cause, to cause all things propounded to be read by him, to gather the
suffrages, and such like.

Promoters (promotores) be those, which in popular and penal actions do
defer the names, or complain of offenders, having part of the profit for
their reward. These were called among the Romans Quadruplatores, or
Delatores. They belong especially to the Exchequer and the kings bench. Smith
de Repub: Anglo. li. 2. cap. 14.

Pro partibus liberandis, is a writ for the partition of lands between
coheires. Register original, fol. 316.

Prophecies (prophetia) be in our common law, taken for wiserdly foretellings
of matters to come, in certain hidden and enigmaticall speeches. Whereby it
falls out many times, that great troubles are stirred in our common wealth,
and great attempts made by those, to whom the speech framed, either by the
description of his cognizance, arms, or some other quality, promises good
success anno. 3. Ed. 6. cap. 15. and anno 7. eiusdem. cap. 11. and anno 5.
Eliza. ca. 15. But these for distinctions fake are called false, or
fantastical prophecies.

Property (proprietas) signifies the highest right that a man has or can have
to any thing, which is no way depending upon any other m^ns courtesy. And this
none in our kingdom can be said to have in any lands, or tenements, but only
the King in the right of his Crown. Because all the lands through the realm,
are in the nature of fee, and do hold either mediately or immediately of the
Crown. See Fee. This word nevertheless is in our common law, used for that
right in lands and tenements, that common persons have, because it imports as
much as (vtile dominium) though not (directum).

Proprietate probanda, is a writ. See the original Regist. fol. 83. a. and 85.
b. It lies for him, that will prove a property before the Shyreeue. Brooks
Property, 1. For where a property is alleged, a replegiare lies not. Idem
ibidem.

Proprietarie (proprietarius) is he that has a property in any thing but it
is most notoriously used for him, that has the fruits of a benefice, to
himself and his heirs or successors, as in time past Abbots and Priors had
to them and their successors. See Appropriation.

Prorata portionis. See Onerando pro rata portionis.

Protection (protectio) has a general and a special signification. In the
general it is used for that benefit and safety, that every subject, or
Denizen, or alien specially secured, has by the Kings laws And thus it is
used, anno 25. Ed. tertii. capite. 32. Protection in the special signification
is used for an exemption, or an immunitie given by the King to a person against
suites in law, or other vexations upon reasonable causes him thereunto
moving, which I take to be a branch of his prerogative. And of this
protection, Fitzh. makes two sorts in his not. br. fol. 28. The first form
or sort he calls a protection, cum clausula volumus, whereof he mentions
four particulars. A protection, quia profecturus, for him that is to pass
over sea in the kings service: A protection, quia moratur, for him that is
abroad in the Kings service upon the sea, or in the marches, anno 7. H. 7. cap.
2. A protection for the Kings debtor, that he be not siewed or attached until
the King be paid his debt. See anno 15. Ed. 3. This some Ciuilians call
moratoriam: which see In singularibus Marantae, verb. Princeps. page 79. col.
2. And a protection in the kings service beyond the seas, or on the marches of
Scotland: whereof you may read something, anno 1. R. 2. cap. 8. See the
Regist. orig. fol. 23. and Britton, cap. 123. The second form of protection is
termed cum clausula, Nolu(...) which is granted most commonly to a spiritual
company for their immunitic from taking of their catell by the Kings ministers.
But it may be granted also to one man spiritual or temporal. Of these things
read the same author: and the forms of these writs. See also in the Register
original. fol. 22. and 23. And see the new Expositour of law terms, to what
action the kings protection does not extend. See also the new book of Entries,
verbo Protection.

Protonotarie, (protonotarius.) See Preignetarie.

Protestation, (protestatio) is (as Justice Walsh defines it) a defense or
safeguard to the party, which makes it from being concluded by the act he is
about to do, that issue cannot be joined upon it, Plowden. fol. 276. b.
whereof see the Register original. fol. 306. b. And see Protest.

Protest, (protestari) has two diverse applications: one is by way of cautell,
to call witness (as it were) or openly to affirm, that he does either not at
all, or but after a sort yield his consent to any act, as unto a proceeding of
a Judge in a court, wherein his jurisdiction is doubtful, or to answer upon
his oath farther then he by law is bound. See Plowden. casu Gresbroke. fol.
276. b. and the Register orig. fol. 306. b. Another is by way of complaint to
protest a man's bill: For example, if I give money to a Merchant in France,
taking his bill of exchange to be repayed in England, by one to whom he
assigns me, if at my coming I find not my self satisfied to my contentment,
but either delayed or denied: then I go into the Burse, or some open concurse
of Merchants, and protest that I am deceived by him. And thereupon if he have
any goods remaining in any man's hands within the Realm, the law of Merchants
is, that I be paid out of them.

Prouuer (Probator) See Approuuer. anno 5. H. 4. ca. 2. See Approuours.

Province (Prouincia) was used among the Romans for a Country without the
compass of Italy, gained to their subjection by the sword. whereupon the part
of France next the Alps was so called of them, when it was in their
dominion, and of that carries the same name at this present: But with us a
province is most usually taken for the circuit of an Archebishops Jurisdiction,
as the Province of Canterbury, and the province of York. anno 32. H. 8. cap.
23. and anno 33. eiusdem, cap. 31. yet it is used diverse times in our statutes
for several parts of the Realm.

Provincial (Prouincialis) is a chief governor of an order of Friars, anno
quar. Henr. quar. cap. 17.

Protoforestarius, was he whom the ancient kings of this Realm made chief of
Winsour forest, to hear all causes of death, or mayhem, or of slaughter, or of
the Kings dear within the Forest. Camd. Britan. page 213. See Justice of the
Forest.

Prove. See Proof.

Provision (Provisio) is used with us, as it is used in the Canon law, for the
providing of a Bishop, or any other person of an ecclesiastical living, by the
Pope, before the Incumbent be dead. It is also called gratia expectatiua, or
Mandatum de providendo. The great abuse whereof in the Pope through all
Christendom heretofore, you may read, not only in Duarenus de sacris ecclesiae
ministoriis, and beneficiis. lib. 3. cap. 2. but also for England particularly,
in diverse statuts of the Realm. viz. anno. 25. Ed. 3. cap. 22 sttat. 4. and
statu. 5. commonly called the statute de prouiscribus. and. anno. 27. eiusdem.
cap. i. and anno 38. eiusdem. stat. 2. cap. 1. and 2. 3. 4. and anno 38.
eiusdem, and anno 2. Rich. 2. cap. 7. and anno 3. eiusdem cap. 3. and anno. 7.
eiusdem. cap. 12. and anno 12. eiusdem, cap. 15. and anno 13. eiusdem, stat. 2.
cap. 2. and 3. and anno 16. eiusdem cap. 5. and anno 2. H. 4. cap. 3. and 4.
and anno 5. eiusdem, cap. pri. and anno 7. eiusdem, cap. 6. and 8. and anno 9.
eiusdem, cap. 8. and anno 3. H. 5. cap. 4. See Praemunire.

Provisour (Provisor) is he that sieweth to the court of Rome for a provision.
old. not. br. fol. 143. See Provision.

Proviso, is a condition inserted into any deed, upon the observance whereof
the validity of the deed consists, which form of condition seems to be
borrowed from France. for (Pourve u Gallicum semper conditionem inducit.
Tiraquel. tomo. 3. page 216. Our common lawyers say that it sometime signifies
but a covenant, whereof you have a large disdispute in the 2. book of Sir Ed.
Cokes reports in the Lord Cromwels case. It has also another signification in
matters Judicial: as if the plaintiff or demaundant desist in prosecuting an
action, by bringing it to a trial, the defendant or tenent may take out the
venire facias to the Shyreeue: which has in it these words, Prouiso quod, etc.
to this end, that if the plaintiff take out any writ to that purpose, the
shyreeue shall summon but one Jury upon them both. See old natura breuium in
the writ Nisi prius. fol. 159.

Purchase. See pourchas.

Purfles of a woman's grown. anno 33. H. 8. cap. 5.

Purgation (Purgatio) is a clearing of a man's self from a crime, whereof he is
probably and publicly suspected, and thereof denounced to a Judge. Of this
there was great use in England touching matters of felony imputed to Clerks in
former time, as appears by Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 48. See Clergy. It
is still observed for matter pertaining to the ecclesiastical court, as
suspicion, or common fame of Incontinencie, or such like. Purgatio is either
canonical (canonica) or vulgar (vulgaris) Canonical is that which is
prescribed by the Canon law: the form whereof is usual in the spiritual
court, the man suspected taking his oath that he is clear, of the fault
objected, and bringing so many of his honest neighbors, being not above
twelve, as the court shall assign him, to swear upon their consciences and
credulity that he swears truly, or has taken a true oath. Vulgar purgation
was by fire, or water, or by combat, used by Infidels, and Christians also,
until by the Canon law it was abolished, tit. 15. de purgatione Can. and
vulga. in Decretalibus. Combat, though it be less in use then it was, yet is
it, and may be still practiced by the laws of the Realm, in cases doubtful,
if the defendant choose rather the Combat then other trial. See Ordel. See
Combat.

Purlue, is all that ground near any Forest, which being made Forest by Henry
the second, Richard the first, or King John, were by perambulations granted by
Henry the third, severed again from the same. Manwood. part 2. of his Forest
laws. cap. 20. And he calls this ground either Pourallee. i.
perambulationem, or purlieu. and purluy, which he says be but abusiuely taken
for pourallee. vbi supra. nu. 3. But with the license of that industrious and
learned gentleman, I am bold to say, that this word may be no less fitly made
of two French words (pur. i. purus) and (lieu. i. locus) and my reason is,
because that such grounds as were by those kings subjected to the laws, and
ordinances of the Forest, are now cleared and freed from the same: for as the
Ciuilians call that purum locum, qui sepulchrorum religioni non est obstrictus..
9. de rerum divis. in institut. so, no doubt, in imitation of that very point,
our ancestors called this purlieu, id est, purum locum, because it was
exempted from that servitude or thrauldom, that was formerly laid upon it. So
(ager purus est, qui neque sacor, neque sanctus, neque religiosus, sed ab
omnibus huiusmodi nominibus vacare videtur. l. 2.. 4. (...). de religio. and
sumptibus funerum.) And therefore M. Cromptons Purraile is not much amiss fol.
153. of his Iurisd. because we may also derive it from the French words (pur)
and (Allee) that is as much to say, as a clear, or a free walk or passage.
And where it is sometime called Pouralee, that may and does come from (pur) and
(Allee) i. Itio, profectio, ambulatio) because he that walks or courseth
within that compass, is clear enough from the laws, or penalties incurred by
them, which hunt within the precincts of the Forest. See the stat. anno 33. Ed.
pri. stat. 5.

Pourlie man, is he that has ground within the Purlieu, and being able to
dispend 40. shillings by the year of free hold, is upon these two points
licensed to hunt in his own purlieu. Manwood. part pri. of his Forest laws.
page 151. and 177. but what observations he must use in his hunting, see him
page 180 181. 186. See him likewise part 2. cap. 20. nu. 5. 8. 9. etc. See
Purlieu.

Purpresture. See Pourpresture.

Pursey, anno 43. Elizabeth. cap. 10.

Purswivant. See Poursuivant.

Purveyours. See Pourveyours.

Pyker, alias Pycar, a kind of ship. anno 31. Ed. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 2.

Q
QVadragesima, is the first sunday in lent, so called (as I take it) because it
is the fourtith day before Easter. The sunday before that is Quinquagesima, the
second before Sexagesima, the 3. septuagesima.

Quae plura, is a writ, that lies where an Inquisition has been made by the
Escheatour in any county, of such lands or tenements, as any man died seized
of, and all that was in his possession be not thought to be found by the
office. The form whereof see in the Register original, fol. 293. and in
Fitzh. not. br. fol. 255. It differs from the writ called melius inquirendo,
as Fitz. there says, because this is granted, where the Escheatour formerly
proceeded by virtue of his office: and the other, where he found the first
office by virtue of the writ called, Diem clausit exeremum. See the new book
of Entries. verbo. Quae plura.

Quaerens non invenit plegium. is a return made by the Shyreue upon a writ
directed unto him with this condition inserted. Si A fecerit B. securum de
loquela suae prosequenda, etc. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 38. O.

Quae seruicia, is a writ. See Per quae servitia.

Quale ius, is a writ Judicial, that lies where a man of religion has
judgment to recover land, before execution be made of the Judgment. for this
writ must between Judgment and execution, go forth to the Escheatour, to
inquire whether the religious parson has right to recover, or the Judgment is
obtained by collusion between the Demaundant and the Tenent, to the intent the
true Lord be not defrauded. See Westminster. 2. cap. 32. Cum virireligiosi, etc. the
form of this writ you may have in the Register Judicial, fol. 8. 16. 17. and
46. and in the old. not. br. fol. 161. See the new book of Entries. verbo.
Qualeius.

Quare eiecit infra terminum, is a writ, that lies for a leassee, in case
where he is cast out of his ferme before his term be expyred, against the
feoffee of the leassour, that eiecteth him. And it differs from the Eiectione
Firmae, because this lies: where the leassour after the lease made, infeoffeth
another, which eiecteth the leassee. And the Eiectione firma lies against any
other Stranger, that eiecteth him. The effect of both is all one: and that is
to recover the residue of the term. See Fitzh. not. br. fol. 197. See the
Register original, fol. 227. and the new book of Entries. verbo. Quare
eiecit infra terminum.

Quare impedit, is a writ, that lies for him, who has pourchased a manner with
an Advousen thereunto belonging, against him that disturbeth him in the right
of his Advowsen, by presenting a Clerk thereunto, when the Church is void. And
it differs from the writ called (Assisa vltimae praesentationis) because that
lies, where a man or his Ancestors formerly presented, and this for him,
that is the pourchasour him self. See the Expositour of the terms of law, and
owld not. br. fol. 27. Bracton. lib. 4. tracta. 2. cap. 6. Britton cap. 92. and
Fitzh. not. br. fol. 32. and the Register original. fol. 30. where it is said
that a Quare impedit is of a higher nature, then Assisa vltimae
praesentationis; because it supposes both a possession and a right. See at
large the new book of Entrise. verbo. Quare impedit.

Quare incumbrauit, is a writ, that lies agaiust the Bishop, which within six
months after the vacation of a benefice, conferreth it upon his Clerk,
whilst two others be contending in law for the right of presenting. Exposition
of the terms of law, old. not. br. fol. 30. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 48.
Register original. fol. 32.

Quare intrusit matrimonio non satisfacto, is a writ that lies for the Lord
against his tenent being his ward, that after couenable marriage offered him,
marieth another, and enters never the less upon his land, without agreement
first made with his Lord and Guardian. Terms of the law.

Quare non permittit, is a writ that lies for one that has right to present
for a turn against the proprietary. Fleta. lib. 5. cap. 16.

Quarentine (quarentina) is a benefit allowed by the law of England, to the
widow of a landed man deceased, whereby she may challenge to continue in his
capital message, or chief mansion house, by the space of 40. days after his
decease. Of this see Bracton lib. 2. cap. 40. And if the heir, or any other
attempt to eiect her, she may have the writ De Quarentina habenda. Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 161. see anno 9. H. 3. cap. 7. and anno 20. cap. pri. and Britton.
cap. 103. M. Skene de verborum significatione. verbo Quarentina viduarum,
deriueth this word from the French Quaresme. Who also have this custom called
lo quaresme des vefues granted to widows after the decease of their husbands:
as he proves out of Papon in his Arrests libro 15. titulo des dots. cap. 7.
and lib. 10. tit. Substitutiones cap. 30. Of this read Fleta also lib. 5. cap.
23.

Quarentena habenda, is a writ, that lies for a widow to enjoy her Quarentine.
Register original. fol. 175.

Quare non admisit, is a writ, that lies against the Bishop refusing to admit
his Clerk, that has recovered in a plee of Aduowsen. The further use whereof
see in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 47. and Register original: fol. 32. See the new
book of Entries. verbo quare non admisit.

Quare obstruxit, is a writ, that lies for him who having a servitude to pass
through his neighbors ground, cannot enjoy his right, for that the owner has
so strengthened it. Fleta: li. 4. cap. 26.. Item si minus.

Quarter Sessions, is a court held by the Justices of peace in every County,
once every quarter. The jurisdiction whereof how far it extends, is to be
learned out of M. Lamberds Eirenarcha. Sir Thomas Smith de Republ. Anglor. lib.
2. ca. 19. But to these you must add the late statutes of the Realm, for
their power daily increases. Originally it seems to have been erected only
for matters touching the peace. But in these days it extends much farther.
That these Sessions should be held quarterly, was first of all ordained (so
far as I can learn) by the statute anno 25. Ed. 3. stat. pri. cap. 8. of
these read Lamberds Eirenarcha the fourth book throughout, where he sets
them out, both learnedly, and at large.

Quashe (quassare) comes of the French (quasser. i. quassare, conquassare) it
signifies in our common law to overthrow, Bracton lib. 5. tracta. 2. cap. 3.
nu. 4.

Quekbord, anno 17. Ed. 4. ca. 2.

Que est mesme, signifies verbatim. Which is the self same thing. It is used
in our common law as a word of art in an action of trespass, or of like nature,
for a direct justification of the very act complained of by the plaintffe as a
wrong. for example, in an action of the case, the plaintiff says that the
Lord threatened his Tenants at will in such sort, as he drove them to give up
their tenures. The Lord for his defense pleads, that he said unto them, that
if they would not depart, he would siew them as the law would. This being the
same thretning that he used, or, to speak artificially, que est le mesme the
defense is good. Of this see Kitchen in the chapter. Que est le mesme. fol.
236. where you may have many like examples.

Que estate, word for word, signifies, Quem statum: It signifies in our
common law, a plee whereby a man intitling another to lands, etc says that the
same estate that he had, himself has from him: for example, in a Quare
impedit the Plaintiff alleges that such four persons were seized of lands,
whereunto the Advowsen in question was appendant in fee, and did present to the
Church, and afterward the Church was void, Que estat del, etc. that is which
estate of the four persons, he faith also, that he has now during the
vacation, by virtue whereof he presently, etc. Brook titulo Que estate. fol.
175. and 176. But it is harder to know when this Que estate is to be pleaded,
then to understand what it is, as by him may appear. See the new book of
Entries. verbo. Que estate.

Queen (Regina) is either she that houldeth the Crown of this Realm by
right of blood, or else she that is married to the King. In the former
signification she is in all construction the same that the King is, and has
the same power in all respects. In the other signification she is inferior,
and a person exempt from the King. For she may siew and be siewed in her own
name. Yet that she has, is the Kings, and look what she loses, so much
departs from the King. Stawnf: praerog: cap. 2. fol. 10. in fine. See Kitchen
fol. 1. b. See Cook lib. 4. Copy-hould cases, fo. 23. b. Augusta was the like
among Romans, how be it not euisdem iuris in all things.

Queens silver. See Kings silver.

Quem reditum reddat, is a writ Judicial, that lies for him to whom a rent
seck, or rent charge is granted by fine levied in the Kings Court, against the
Tenent of the land, that refuses to atturne unto him, thereby to cause him to
atturne. See old: not. br: fol. 156. and West. part 2. Simbol: titulo Fines.
sect: 125. See the new book of Entries. Verbo Quem reditum reddit.

Querela friscae fortiae, is a writ. See Fresh force.

Querela coram Rege and consilio discutienda, and terminanda, is a writ,
whereby one is called to justify a complaint of a trespass made to the king
and himself before the King and his counsel. Register original, fol. 124. b.

Questus est nobis, etc. is the sorme of a writ of Nuisance, which by the
statute anno 13. Ed. pri. cap. 24. lies against him, to whom the house or
other thing that breeds the Nuisance, is alienated, whereas before that
statute, this actio^ lay only against him, that first levied the thing, to the
hurt of his neighbor. See the Statute.

Quia improvide, seems to be a supersedeas granted in the behalf of a
clerk of the Chawncerie siewed against the privilege of that court, in the
common plees, and persiewed to the exige^d. See Dyer. f. 33. n. 18.

Quid iuris clamat, is a writ Judicial issuing out of the Record of the Fine,
which remains with the Custos breuium of the common place, before it be
engrossed (for afterward it cannot be had) and it lies for the Grauntee of a
Reversion, or Remainder, when the particular tenent will not atturne. West.
part. 2. symbol. titulo. Fines. sect. 118. whom see farther. See the Register
Judicial, fol. 36. 57. And the new book of Entries. verbis Quid iuris clamat.

Quinquagesima Sunday, is always the next Sabbath before Shrouetide, so called,
because it is the fiueteth day before Easter. The reasons of this appellation
who so desires to know, he may find diverse such as they be, in Durandi
Rationaeli diuinorum, capit. De Quinquagesima. Sexagesima Sunday is the next
Sabbath before Quinquagesima, so called in the opinion of the said author,
because the number of sixty consists of six times ten: six having
reference to the six works of mercy, and ten to the ten commandments.
Septuagesima is the next before Sexagesima, and isinstituted and so called, as
Durand likewise says, for three things: and (to use his own words,) Primo,
propter redemptionem Sabbathi, vel secundum alios, quintae feria, in quae
sancti Patres statuerunt ieiunari. Secundo, propter repraesentationem, quoniam
repraesentat septuaginta annos captiuitatis Babilonicae. Tertio, propter
significationem, quoniam per hoc tempus significatur deniatio, exilium, and
tribulatio totius humani generis ab Adam vsque ad finem mundi: quod quidem
exilium sub revolutione septem dierum peragitur, and sub septem millibus
annorum includitur. But of these three days, you may read him at large, that
have a mind to learn of him. I only take occasion to note, what time of the
year they be, because I find them spoken of in our ancient law writers, as
Britton ca. 53. and such like.

Quite claim (quiet clamantia, vel quieta clamantia) is a release or
acquiting of a man for any action, that he has, or might have against him.
Bracton lib. 5. tract. 5. cap. 9. number. 9. and lib. 4. tractat. 6. cap. 13. number.
prim.

Quittance (quietantia,) see Acquitance.

Quid pro quo, is an artificial speech in the common law, signifying so much
as the Greek (...), among the Ciuilians, which is a mutual pretestation or
performance of both parties to a contract: as a horse and ten pound between
the buyer and the seller. Kitchen, fol. 184.

Quinsieme (Decima quintae) is a French word, signifying a fifteenth. It is
used in our common law, for a tax laid upon the subjects, by the Prince. an.
7. H. 7. cap. 5. so termed, because it is rated after the fifteenth part of
men's lands or goods. See Fifteenth and Tax. The Fifteenth (as Crompton says
in his Iurisdict. fol. 21.) is levied more commonly in these days by the yards
of land: and yet in some places by goods also: and note also, that he there
says, that it is well known by the Exchequer roll, what every town through
England is to pay for a Fifteenth. Sometime this this word Quinsieme is used
for the fifteenth ^ay after any feast, as Quinsieme of S. John Baptist. anno
13. Ed. prim. cap. 3. and anno decimo octano. eiusd. capit. prim.

Quod ei deforciat, is a writ that lies for the tenent in tail, tenent in
dower, or tenent for term of life, having lost by default, against him that
recovered, or against his heir. Exposition of terms. See Broke hoc tit. See
the Regist. original. fol. 171. and the new book of Entries. verbo Quod ei
defortiat.

Quod permittat, is a writ, that lies for him that is disseised of his commune
of pasture, against the heir of the disseisour being dead. Terms of law.
Britton ca. 8. says that this writ lies for him, whose auncestour died seized
of commune of pasture, or other like thing annexed to his inheritance, against
the Deforceour. See Broke hoc titulo. See the Register origin. fol. 155, and
the new book of Entries. verbo, Quod permittat.

Quod Clerici non eligantur in officio Ballivi, etc. is a writ, that lies for
a Clerk, which by reason of some land he has, is made, or in doubt to be made
either Bayliffe, Bedell, or Reeue, or some such like officer. See Clerico infra
sacros, etc. See the Register orig. fol. 187. Fitz. not. br. fol. 175.

Quod Clerici beneficiatide Cancellaria, etc. is a writ to exempt a Clerk of
the Chauncerie from contribution toward the Procters of the Clergy in
Parliament. Register original: fol. 261. a.

Quod personae, nec Praebendarii, etc. is a writ, that lies for spiritual
persons, that are distrained in their spiritual possessions for the payment of
the fifteenth with the rest of the parish. Fitz. not. br. fol. 176.

Quod non permittat. See Consuetudinibus, and seruiciis.

Quo iure, is a writ, that lies for him that has land, wherein another
chalengeth commun of pasture time out of mind. And it is to compel him to
show by what title he challenges this commune of pasture. Fitzh. not. br.
fol. 128. Of this see Briton more at large, cap. 59. see the Register origin.
fol. 156. and the new book of Entries. verbo Quo iure.

Quo minus, is a writ, that lies for him, which has a grant of housebote,
and heybote, in another man's woods, against the graunter making such waste, as
the grauntee cannot enjoy his grant. old not. br. fol. 148. Terms of law:
see Brook, hoc titulo. See Kitchen fol. 178. b. This writ also lies for the
Kings fermer in the Exchequer, against him to whom he sells any thing by way
of bargain touching his ferme. Perkins Graunts. 5. For he supposes, that by
the breach of the vendee he is disabled to pay the king his rent.

Quo warranto, is a writ that lies against him, which usurps any Frawnchis
or liberty against the king, as to have wayfe, stray, fair, market, court
Baron, or such like, without good title. old. not. br. fol. 149. or else
against him that intrudeth himself as heir into land. Bracton, lib. 4.
tractat. 1. cap. 2. number. 3. See Brook hoc titulo. You may read of this also.
anno 18. Ed. prim. Stat. 2. and 3. and anno 30 eiusdem. And the new book of
Entries. Quo warranto.

R
Rack vintage, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 14. is a second vintage o^ voyage for wines
by our Merchants into France, etc. For rackt wines, that is, wines cleansed and
so purged, that it may be and is drawn from the leese. From this voyage* our
Merchants commonly return about the end of December, or beginning of January.

Radknights. See Rodeknights.

Ran, is a Saxon word, signifying so open a spoiling of a man, that it cannot
be denied. Lamb. Archan. fol. 125. defines it thus: Ran dicitur aperta rapina,
quae negari non potest.

Ransime, (redemptio) comes of the French (rancon) or (rencon) i.
(redemptio.) It signifies properly with us, the sum paid for the redeeming
of a Captive: and sometime a great sum of money to be paid for the pardoning
of some heinous crime. anno pri. H. 4. cap. 7. Note that when one is to make
fine, and Ransom, the Ransom shall be treble to the Fine. Cromptons Justice of
peace. fol. 142. a. and Lamb. Eirenarch: lib. 4. ca. 16. pa. 556. Horn in his
mirror of Justices, makes this difference between amerciament, and ransom,
because ransom is the redemption of a corporal punishment, due by law to any
offense, lib. 3. cap. de amerciament taxable.

Rape (rapus vel rapa) is a part of a county, signifiing as much as a Hundred.
As Southsex is divided into six parts, which by a peculiar name are called
rapes: viz: the Rape of Chichester, of Arundell, of Brember, of Lewis, of
Peuersey, of Hastings. Camden: Britan. page 225. whom also see page 229. These
parts are in other places called Tithings, Lathes, or Wapentakes. Smith de
Repub. Anglo. lib. 2. ca. 16.

Rape (raptus) is a felony committed by a man in the violent deflowring of a
woman, be she old, or young: Britton: cap. 1. whereof West. part. 2. Simbol.
titulo Inditements, secto: 54. has these words: Copulation violent, is termed,
a rape, or rauishment of the body of a woman against her will: which is
carnal knowledge had of a woman, who never consented thereunto before the
fact, nor after. (And this in Scotland ought to be complained of the same day,
or night that the crime is committed. Skene de verborum significa. verbo
Raptus. his reason. quia lapsu diei hoc crimen prescribitur) This offense is
with us Felony in the principal, and his ayders. anno 11. H. 4. cap. 13. anno
pri. Ed. 4. cap. pri: Westminster. 2. cap. 13. (But Fleta says that the complaint
must be made within forty days, or else the woman may not be heard. lib. 3.
cap. 5.. Praeterea. And carnal knowledge of a woman under ten years old is
felony. anno. 8. Elizab. cap 6. Thus far M. West: of the diversity of Rapes,
see Cromptons Justice of peace. fol. 43. b. and 44. See Rauishment. The civil
law uses (raptus) in the same signification. And (rapere virginem vel
mulierem, est ei vim infer and violere. Co. li. 9. de raptu virgins.

Raptu haeredis, is a writ lying for the taking away of an heir houlding in
Soccage, and of this there be 2. sorts, one when the heir is married, the other
when he is not; of both these see the Register original. fol. 163. b.

Rastall, was a Lawyer of reverend accoumpt, that lived in Queen Mary's days,
and was a Justice of the common plees. He gathered the statutes of the land
into an Abridgement, which carries his name at this day. He is also the author
of the new book of Entries.

Ratification (ratificatio) is used for the confirmation of a Clerk, in a pre
bend, etc. formerly given him by the Bishop, etc. where the right of patronage
is doubted to be in the King. Of this see the Register original: fol. 304.

Rationabili part bonorum, is a writ that lies for the wife against the
Executours of her husband, denying her the third part of her husbands goods
after debts and funeral charges defrayed. Fitzh. not br. fol. 222. Who there
cites the 18. chap. of magna charta, and Glanuile, to prove, that according to
the common law of England, the goods of the deceased, his debts first paid,
should be divided into three parts, whereof his wife to have one, his children
the second, and the Executours the third. Fitzherbert says also, that this
writ lies as well for the children, as for the wife. And the same appears by
the Register original fol: 142. b. I have heard some learned men say, that it
has no use, but where the custom of the country serves for it. See the new
book of Entries, verbo: Rationabili part: et Rationabili part bonorum.

Rationabilibus diuisis, is a writ, which lies in case, where two Lords in
diverse towns have their seigneuries joining together, for him, that finds
his waste, by little and little, to have been encroched upon within memory of
man, against the other that has encroched, thereby to rectify the bounds of
their seigneuries. In which respect Fitzherbert calls it, in his own nature,
a writ of right. The old natura breuium says also, that this is a Iusticies,
and may be removed by a pone out of the county to the common Bank: See farther
the form and use of this writ in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 128. and in the
Register, fol. 157. b. and the new book of Entries. verbo. Rationabilibus
diuisis. The ciuilians call this Iudicium finium regundorum.

Rauishment, raptus comes of the French (rauissement. i. direptio, ereptio,
raptio, raptus, raptura) and signifies in our law, an unlawful taking away
either of a woman, or of an heir in ward. Sometime it is used also in one
signification with rape, viz. the violent deflowring of a woman, See Rape. And
thereupon is the writ called Rauishment de guard, otherwise called de haerede
abducto, lying for the Lord, whose tenent by reason of his tenure in Knights
service being his ward, is taken and conveyed from him. See Fitzh. natu. br. in
the writ De recto de custodia. fol. 140. F. See also the old. not br. fol. 92.
93. and 94. See the new book of Entries. verbo. Rape, and Rauishment de guard.

Raw, anno 4. Ed. 4. cap. 1.

Rawnge, comes of the French (Ranger. i. astituere, ordinare) or else the
Substantive (Rang. i. ordo, series) It is used in our common law, both as a
verb (as to Raunge) and also as a substantive (as to make Rawnge) charta de
Foresta, cap. 6. The word is appropriated to the Forest, signifiing the office
of the Rawnger. The Rawnger is a sworn officer of the Forest (of which sort
there seem to be twelve) charta de Foresta. cap. 7. whose authority is partly
declared in his oath, set down by M. Manwood part pri. of his Forest laws,
page 50. in these words: You shall truly execute the office of a Rawnger in the
Purlieuse of B. upon the borders of the kings Forest of W. you shall rechase,
and with your hound drive back again the wild beasts of the Forest, as often
as they shall raunge out of the same Forest into your Purlieuse. You shall
truly present all unlawful hunting, and hunters of wild beasts of venerie, as
well within the purlieuse, as within the Forest. And these and all other
offenses you shall present at the Kings next court of Attachements, or
Swainmote, which shall first happen, so help you God. But the same author
sets down his office more particularly in his second part c. 20. n. 15. 16.
and 17. The sum whereof is this. A Raunger is an officer of the Forest, or to
the Forest, but not within the forest, having no charge of vert, but only of
venison that comes out of the forest into his charge, or part of the
pourallee, to sale conduct them back again. And therefore in those forests that
have no pouralleeses, there be no Rawngers, but Foristers serve the turn. This
Raunger is made and appointed by the King his leters patents under the great
seal, and for his beter encouragement in his duty, he has a yearly fee of
20. pound or 30. pound paid out of the Exchequer, and certain fee Dear both
read and falow. His office consists cheifely in these three points ad
perambulandum quotidie per terras deafforestatas, ad videndum, audiendum and
inquirendum, tam de malefactis, quam de malefactoribus in Balliua sua: ad
refugandum feras Forestae tam veneris quam chaseae de terris deafforestatis, in
terras afforestatas: and, ad praesentandu^ omnes transgressiones Forestae in
terris deafforestatis factas, ad proximas curias illius Forestae tentas.

Rawnsom. See Ransom.

Ray, seems to be a word attributed to cloth never colored or died. v. anno
11. H. 4. cap. 6.

Realtie. See Royalty.

Reasonable aid (Rationabile auxilium) is a duty that the Lord of the fee
claims holding by Knights service or in soccage to marie his daughter, or to
make his son Knight. Westminster. 1. cap. 39. See Aid. See Brook titulo
Reasonable aid.

Reattachement (Reattachiamentum) is a second attachement of him, that was
formerly attached, and dismissed the court without day, as by the not coming
of the Justices, or some such like casualtie. Brook tit. Reattachment; where
he makes a Reattachment general and a Reattachment special. Reattachment
general seems to be, where a man is reattached for his appearance upon all
writs of Assise lying against him. Brook eodem, nu. 14. Then special must be
for one, or more certain, Register Judicial, fol. 35. See the new book of
Entrise. verbo Reattachment.

Rebellion (Rebellio) is a French word signifiing the taking up of arms
against the King or present estate. This French comes from the Latin
(Rebellio) which signifies a second resistance of such as being formerly
overcome in battle by the Romans, yielded themselves to their subjection.
The French men and we use it generally for the traitorous taking up of arms
against the estate, be it by natural subjects, or by others formerly subdued.
Read more of this. lib. 3. feudorum cap. 61. and Hotoman upon the same
chapter. See the writ of Rebellion. Rebel is sometime attributed to him that
wilfully breaks a law. anno 25. Ed. 3. cap. 6. and anno 31. eiusdem, stat.
3. c. 2. sometime to a villein disobeying his Lord, a. 1. R. 2. c. 6.

Rebellious Assembly, is a gathering together of 12. persons or more, intending
or going about, practicing, or putting in ure unlawfully of their own
authority to change any laws, or statutes of this Realm, or to destroy the
enclosure of any park, or ground enclosed, or banks of any fisheponds, pale,
or conduict, to the intent the same shall remain void, or to the intent
unlawfully to have common, or way in any of the said grounds, or to destroy the
Dear in any Park, or any warre^ of conies, or deuehouses, or fish in any
pondes, or any house, barnes, mils, or bays, or to burn stacks of corn, or
to abate rents, or prices of victuals, an. pri. Mar. c. 12. and an. 1. Eliza.
cap. 17. See West part 2. symbol. titulo Inditem(...)s. Sectio 65. And
Cromptons Justice of peace. f. 41. b.

Rebutter, comes of the French (Bouter. i. pellere, impellere, propellere,
intrudere) and signifies in our common law the same thing. For example, a man
gives land to him and the issue of his body, to antoher in fee with warranty.
And the Donnee leaseth out this land to a third for years. The heir of the
Donour impleadeth the tenent, alleging that the land was intailed to him. The
Donee comes in, and by virtue of the warrantie made by the Donour, repelleth
the heir, because though the land were intailed to him: ye^ he is heir to the
warranty likewise; and this is called a Rebutter. See Brook. titulo Bar: nu.
13. And again if I grant to my tenent to hold sine impetitione vasti, and
afterward I implede him for waste made, he may debar me of this action, by
showing my grant, and this is likewise a Rebutter. Idem, eodem, nu. 25. See
the new book of Entries, verbo Rebutter.

Renant, anno 32. H. 8. ca. 2.

Recaption (Recaptio) signifies a second distress of one formerly distreined
for the self same cause, and also during the plee grounded upon the former
distress. It likewise signifies a writ lying for the party thus destreined,
the form, and farther use whereof, you may see in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 71. and
the Register orig. fol. 86. and the Register Judicial, fol. 69. and the new
book of Entries. verbo. Recaption.

Receyver (Receptor, or Receptator) generally and indefinitely used, is as with
the Ciuilians, so also with us, used commonly in the evil part for such as
receive stolen goods from thieves, and conceal them. l. 1. P. de
receptatoribus, but annexed to other words, as the receiver of rents, etc. it
signifies many times an officer of great accoumpte, belonging to the king or
other great personage. Cromptons Iurisdict. fol. 18. There is also an officer
called the Reiceiuer of Fynes, who receives the money of all such, as compound
with the King in the office of the finances for the buying of any lands, or
tenements houlden in Capite. West. part 2. symbol. titulo Fines. sect. 106.
Receiver of all offices accounptable. anno. 1. Ed. 4. ca. 1.

Receiver general of the Duchy of Lancaster, is an officer belonging to the
Duchy court, that gathers in all the revenues and fines of the lands of the
said Duchy, and of all forfeitures and assesments, or what else is thence to be
received.

Receiver general of the court of Wards and liueries, is an officer belonging
to that court, that is to receive all rents, revenewes and fines of the lands
belonging to his majesty's wards, as also the fines for licenses to the Kings
widows to mary, of ouster le main sued out, and for idiots and lunatikes land,
and finally all other profits whatsoever in money arising to his majesty out of
or by reason of the court of wards and lyveries.

Receiver general of the Muster rolls. anno. 35. El. ca. 4.

Receiver general of the Duchy of Lancaster of the wards, and liveries, anno
39. Elizab. cap. 7.

Receyt. See Resceit.

Recluse (Reclusus) is he, that by reason of his order in religion, may not
stir out of his house or cloister. Litleton fol. 92.

Recognisance (Recognitio) comes of the French (Recognoisance. i. agnitio,
recognitio) and in our common law is thus defined. A Recognisance is a bond of
record, testifing the recognizour to owe unto the recognizee a certain sum
of money, and is knowledged in some court of record, or before some Judge or
other officer of such court, having authority to take the same: as the Masters
of the Chancerie, the Judges of either Bench, Barons of the Exchequer, Justices
of peace, etc. And those that be mere recognisances are not sealed, but
enrolled. And execution by force thereof is of all the recognisours goods, and
chatels, except his draught beasts, and implements of husbandry, and of the
moitie of his lands, West. part prim. symb. lib. 2. titulo Recognisances.
sect. 149. And of these you may see there great diversity of presidents.

Note farther, that a Recognizance, though in the special signification, it do
but acknowledge a certain debt, and is executed upon all the goods, and half
the lands of the recognisour: yet by extention it is drawn also to the Bonds,
commonly called Statute Merchant, and Statute of the Staple: as appears by
the Register original. fol. 146. 151. and 252. and by West. vbi supra, and
others. See Statute Merchant, and Statute Staple.

Recognisance has yet another signification, as appears by these words in
the statute, West. 1. c. 36. anno 3. Ed. 1. It is provided also and agreed,
that if any man be attainted of disseisin done in the time of our King that now
is, with roberie of any manner of goods, or moueables, by recognisance of Assise
of nouel disseisin, the judgment shall, etc. In which place it is used for the
verdict of the twelve men empaneled upon an Assise, which twelve are also
called recognitours of the Assise, Litleton fol. 72. So also Bracton calls
them lib. 5. tractat. 2. cap. 9. number. 2. in these words: In essonio vero
reddendo exigentur omnes illi, quos causa tetigerit: sicut particeps, Warantus,
and alii vt. supra. Recognitores in Assisis, Iuratores in Iuratis, Inquisitores
in Inquisitionibus, etc. And again, lib. 3. tract. prim. cap. 11. number. 16. See
the Statute anno 20. Ed. prim. stat. 4. See the new book of Entries, ver.
Recognisance.

Recognitione adnullanda per vim and duritiem facta, is a writ to the Justices
of the common Bench, for the sending of a record, touching a recognisance,
which the recognisour suggesteth to be acknowledged by force and hard dealing,
that if it so appear, it may be disanulled. Register original. fol. 183. a. b.

Recognitours (recognitores) is a word used for the Jury empaneled upon an
assise. The reason why they be so called, may be, because they acknowledge a
disseisin by their verdict. See Bracton lib. 5. tract. 2. cap. 9. nu. 2. and
lib. 3. tract. prim. cap. 11. number. 16.

Record, (recordum) comes of the Latin (recordari.) The word is both French
and English, and in both tongs signifies an authentical or uncontrollable
testimony in writing. Britton cap. 27. and Lamb. Eirenarch. lib. 1. cap. 13.
In the Grand Custumarie of Normandy, there are several Chapters of diverse
records, expressing whose presence in each of the Courts, is sufficient to make
that which is enacted to be a record. viz. the 102. chapter, where you have
words to this effect. The record of the Kings Court, is a record of things
done before the King. All things done before the King, so he have one other
witness. This record may he and other make: if he himself will not make it,
it may be made by three others. And his person may not be impeached (or
excepted against) either in this or any other thing. The next chapter. viz. the
103. shows how many persons suffice to make a record in the Exchequer. The
next how many in an assise, etc.

I find not that we in our Courts (especially the Kings Courts) stand much
upon the number of recorders or witnesses for the strength of the testimony
which the record works: but that we take it sufficient which is registered in
each Court. Glanvile lib. 8. cap. 8. Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 37. number. 4.
Britton in the Proeme of his book, says, that the Justices of the Kings Bench
have a record, the Coroner, Vicount, Justices of the Exchequer, Justices of
Goal delivery, the Steward of England, Justices of Ireland, Justices of
Chester, Justices assigned by the Kings leters patents, in those causes they
have commission to take knowledge of. All which (as I take it) must be
understood with that caveat of Brook, titulo (Record) number. 20 and 22. that an
act committed to writing in any of the Kings Courts, during the term wherein
it is written, is alterable, and no record: but that term once ended, and the
said act duly enrolled, it is a record, and of that credit, that admits no
alteration, or proof to the contrary. Yet see Sir Edward Cooks Reports lib.
4. Rawlins case. fol. 52. b. ann. 12. Ed. 2. cap. 4. It is said, that two
Justices of either Bench have power to record Non suites, and Defaults in the
country. It appears by Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 2. c. 1. and 11. that quatuor
milites babent recordum, being sent to view a party essoined de malo lecti,
and lib. 5. tract. 1. cap. 4. nu. 2. that Seruiens Hundredi habet recordum in
testimonio proborum honinum. And in the Statute of Carleil, made anno 15. Ed.
2. it is said, that one Justice of either Bench with an Abbot, or a Prior, or a
Knight, or a man of good same and credence, has a record in the view of one
that is said by reason of sickness, to be unable to appear personally for the
passing of a fine. And anno 13. H. 4. cap. 7. and anno 2. H. 5. cap. 3. that
two Justices of peace, with the Shyreeue, or Vndershyreeue have power to
record, what they find done by any in a riot, or route, etc.

That which is before mentioned out of Britton touching the Shyreeue, seems
to be limited by Fitzh: not. br. fol: 81. D. Who allows him a Record in such
matters only, as he is commanded to execute by the Kings writ, in respect of
his office. And thence it comes that Kitchen fol. 177. says, that the
Escheatour, and Shyreeue be not Justices of record, but officers of record. In
which words he signifies, that their testimony is authentical only in some
certain things that are expressly enjoined them by virtue of their. Commission,
as ministers to the King in his higher Courts, whereas Justices of record have
in generality a record for all things within their cognizance done before them
as Judges, though not expressly or particularly commanded. Fitzherbert in his
Not: br. fo. 82. in principio, something explaneth this point, writing to this
effect: Every act that the Shyreeue does by virtue of his commission, ought to
be taken as matter of record, no less then the Justices of peace. His reasons
be two: the former, he cause his patent is of record: the other, because he is
a conseruatour of the peace. And then he adds, that the plees held before him
in his County be not of record. Yet is the county called a Court of record.
Westminster. 2. ca. 3. anno 13. Ed. 1. But it seems by Britton. cap. 27. that it is
only in these causes, whereof the Shyreeue houldeth plee by especial writ;
and not those that he houldeth of course or custom. And in that case also it
may be gathered out of the same author, that he has a record, but with the
testimony of those annexed, that be suitors to the Court. Which seems to
agree with Bractons words above specified. Seruiens Hundredi habet recordum in
testimonio proborum hominum. And to this purpose read Glanuile. lib. 8. cap. 8.
9. and 10. One Justice upon view of forcible detinew of land, may record the
same by statute. anno 15. R. 2. cap. 2. the Mayor, and Constables of the
Staple, have power to record recognisances of debt taken before them. anno 10.
H. 6. ca. 1.

Brook, titulo (Record) seems to say, that no court ecclesiastical is of
record: how truly, it is to be inquired. For Bishops certifiing bastardy,
bigamy, excommunication, the vacancy or plenarty of a Church, a marriage, a
divorce, a spiritual intrusion, or whether a man be professed in any religion,
with other such like, are credited without farther enquiry or controlment. See
Brook, titulo Bastardy. See Fleta. lib: 6. ca. 39. 40. 41. 42. Lamb.
cirenarcha: lib: pri. cap. 13. Glanuile. li. 7. ca. 14. and 15. the Register
original: fol. 5. b. Bracton. lib. 5. tracta. 5. ca. 20. nu. 5. Britton ca.
92. 94. 106. 107. and 109. Doct. and Stud. li. 2. ca. 5. but especially Cosius
apology, part pri. ca. 2. And a testament showed under the seal of the
Ordinary is not trauersable. 36. H. 6. 31. Perkins Testament. 491. Fulb. paral.
fol. 61. b. But it may be that this opinion grows from a difference between
that law, whereby the court Christian is most ordered, and the common law of
this land. For by the civil or canon law no instrument, or record is held so
firm, but that it may be checked by witnesses able to depose it to be untrue.
Co. plu^ valere quod agitur quam quod simulate concipitur. ca. cum Johannes.
10. extra: de fide instrumentorum. Whereas in our common law against a record
of the Kings Court, after the term wherein it is made, no witness can prevail.
Britton. ca. 109. Coke lib. 4. Hindes case. fol. 71. lib. assisarum fol. 227.
nota. 21. This reconciliation may be justified by Brook himself. titulo,
Testaments. number. 4. 8. and 14. and by Glanuile, lib. 8. cap. 8.

The King may make a court of record by his grant. Glanuil. li. 8. ca. 8.
Britton cap. 121. as for example, Queen Elizabeth of worthy memory by her
Charter dated. 26. Aprilis. anno 3. regni sui made the Consistory Court of the
University of Cambridge a Court of record.

There are reckoned among our common lawyers three sorts of records: viz: A
record judicial, as attainder, etc. A record ministerial upon oath, as an
office found. A record made by conueyance by consent, as a fine, deed
enrolled, or such like. Coke. li. 4. Andrew Ognels case. fo. 54. b.

Recordare facias, or recordari facias, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, to
remove a cause depending in an inferior court, to the Kings bench, or common
plees, as out of a court of ancient Demesne, Hundred, or County, Fitz. not.
br. fol. 71. B. out of the county Court. idem, fo. 46. B. or other courts of
record. idem fol. 71. C. and 119. K. Howbeit, if you will learn more exactly,
where, and in what cases this writ lies, read Brook in his Abridgm. titulo,
Recordare and pone. It seems to be called a recordare, because the form is
such, that it commands the Shyreeue to whom it is directed, to make a record
of the proceeding by himself, and others, and then to send up the cause. See
the Register, verbo, Recordare, in the Table of the original Writs. See
Certiorart. See Accedas ad Curiam.

Recorder (recordator) comes of the French (recordeur. i. talis persona quae
in Ducis Curia a iudicio faciendo non debet amoueri.) Grand Custumarie of Norm.
cap. 107. and 121. Whereby it appears, that those which were necessary
Judges in the Duke of Normandies Courts, were called Recorders: and who they
were, is showed in the ninth chapter of the said book. And that they, or the
greater part of them, had power to make a record, it is evident in the chapter
107. Here in England a Recorder is he, whom the Mayor or other Magistrate of
any city, or town corporate, having Jurisdiction, or a Court of record within
their precincts by the Kings grant, does associate unto him for his beter
direction in matters of Justice and proceedings, according unto law. And he is
for the most part a man well seen in the common law.

Recordo and processis mittendis, is a writ to call a Record, together with the
whole proceeding in the cause, out of one court into the Kings Court. Which see
in the Table of the Register orig. how diversely it is used.

Recordo vtlagariae mittendo, is a writ Judicial, which see in the Register
judicial. fol. 32.

Recovery (Recuperatio) comes of the French) Recouvrer. i. Recuperare. It
signifies in our common law, an obteining of any thing by Judgment, or
trial of law, as evictio does among the Ciuilians. But you must understand,
that there is a true recovery and a feigned. A true Recovery is an actual,
or real recovery of any thing, or the value thereof by Judgment: as if a man
siewed for any land, or other thing moveable or immovable, and have a verdict,
and Judgment for him. A feigned recovery is (as the Ciuilians call it)
quaedam fictio iuris. a certain form, or course set down by law, to be
observed for the beter assuring of lands or tenements unto us. And for the
beter understanding of this, read West. part 2. symbol. titulo Recoveries.
sect. pri. who says, that the end, and effect of a Recovery, is to
discontinue and destroy estates Tails, Remainders, and Reuersions, and to
bar the former owners thereof. And in this formality there be required 3.
parties, viz. the Demaundant, the Tenent, and the Vowchee. The Demaundant is he
that brings the writ of Entry, and may be termed the Recouerer: The Tenent
is he, against whom the writ is brought, and may be termed the Recoveree. The
Vowchee is he, whom the tene^t vowcheth, or calls to wartantie for the land
in demand. West. vbi supra. In whom you may read more touching this matter.

But for example to explane this point, a man that is desirous to cut of an
estate tail in lands or tenements, to the end, to sell, give, or bequeath it,
as him self sees good, uses his friend to bring a writ upon him for this land.
He appearing to the writ says for him self, that the land in question came to
him or his auncesters from such a man or his auncester, who in the conueiance
thereof, bound him self and his heirs to make good the title unto him or them
to whom it was conveyed. And so he is allowed by the court to call in this
third man to say what he can for the iustifiing of his right to this land,
before he so conveied it. The third man comes not: whereupon the land is
recovered by him that brought the writ: and the tenent of the land is left for
his remedy to the third man that was called and came not in to defend the
tenent. And by this means the entayle which was made by the tenent, or his
auncester, is cut of by judgment hereupon given: for that he is pretended to
have no power to entaile that land, whereunto he had no just title, as now it
appears: because it is evicted, or recovered from him.

This kind of recovery is by good opinion, but a snare to deceive the people.
Doctor and Stud. ca. 32. dial. pri. fol. 56. a. This feigned Recovery is also
called a common Recovery: And the reason of that Epitheton is, because it is a
beaten and common path to that end, for which it is ordained, viz. to cut of
the estates above specified. See the new book of Entries verbo. Recovery.

I said before, that a true recovery is as well of the value, as of the thing:
for the beter understanding whereof, know, that (In value) signifies as much
as (Illud quod interest) with the Ciuilians. For example, if a man buy land of
an other with warranty, which land a third person afterward by suite of law
recouereth against me, I have my remedy against him that sold it me, to
recover in value, that is, to recover so much in money as the land is worth, or
so much other land by way of exchange. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 134. K. To recover
a warranty. old. not. br. fol. 146. is to prove by judgment that a man was his
warrant against all men for such a thing.

Recto, is a writ, called in English, a writ of Right, which is of so high a
nature, that whereas other writs in real actions, be only to recover the
possession of the land, or tenements in question, which have been lost by our
auncester, or our selves, this aims to recover both the seisin, which some of
our Auncesters, or we had, and also the property of the thing, whereof our
Auncester died not seized, as of fee: and whereby are pleaded, and tried both
the rights together, viz. as well of possession, as property. Insomuch as if a
man once loose his cause upon this writ, either by Judgment, by Assise, or
batell, he is without all remedy, and shall be excluded (per exceptionem Rei
iudicatae) Bracton lib. 5. tract. 1. cap. 1. and seqq. where you may read your
fille of this writ.

It is divided into two species: Rectumpatens, a writ of right patent, and
Rectum clausum, a writ of right close. This the Ciuilians call Iudicium
petitorium. The writ of right patent is so called, because it is sent open, and
is in nature the highest writ of all other, lying always for him that has fee
simple in the lands, or tenements siewed for, and not for any other. And when
it lies for him that chalengeth fee simple, or in what cases, See Fitzh. not.
br. fol. pri. C. whom see also. fol. 6. of a special writ of right in London,
otherwise called a writ of right according to the Custom of London. This writ
is also called Breue magnum de Recto. Register original. fol. 9, A. B. and
Fleta li. 5. cap. 32.. 1.

A writ of right close, is a writ directed to a Lord of ancient Demesne, and
lies for those, which hold their lands and tenements by charter in fee simple
or in fee tail, or for term of life, or in dower, if they be eiected out of
such lands, etc. or disseised. In this case a man or his heir may siew out
this writ of Right close directed to the L. of the Ancient Demesne, commanding
him to do him right, etc. in his court. This is also called a small writ of
right. Breve parvum, Register original. fol. 9. a. b. and Britton, cap. 120.
in fine. Of this see Fitzh. likewise at large. not. br. fol. 11. and seqq.

Yet note that the writ of right patent seems farther to be extended in use,
then the original invention served: for a writ of Right of Dower, which lies
for the tenent in Dower, and only for term of life, is patent, as appears
by Fitzh. not. br. fol. 7. E. The like may be said of diverse others that do
hereafter follow. Of these see also the table of the original Register. verbo
Recto. This writ is properly tried in the Lords court between kindsmen, that
claim by one title from their Auncester. But how it may be thence removed, and
brought either to the County, or to the kings court, see Fleta, lib. 6. cap.
3. 4. and 5. Glanvile seems to make every writ, whereby a man sieweth for any
thing due unto him, a writ of right. lib. 10. ca. 1 lib. 11. cap. 1. lib. 12.
cap. 1.

Recto de dote, is a writ of Right of Dower, which lies for a woman, that has
received part of her Dower, and purposes to demand the Remanent in the same
town, against the heir, or his Guardian, if he be ward. Of this see more in
the old not. br. fol. 5. and Fitzh. fol. 7. E. and the Register original, fol.
3. and the new book of Entries, verbo Droyt.

Recto de dote vnde nihil habet, is a writ of right, which lies in case, where
the husband having diverse lands or tenements, has assured no dower to his
wife, and she thereby is driven to siew for her thirds against the heir or his
Guardian, old. not. by. folio 6. Register original, fol. 170.

Recto de rationabili part, is a writ that lies always, beweene priuies of
blood, as brothers in Gauel-kind, or sisters, or other Coparceners, as Nephews
or Neeces, and for land in Fee simple. For example, if a man lease his land for
term of life, and afterward dies, leaving issue, two daughters, and after
that the tenent for term of life likewise dies: the one sister entering upon
all the land, and so deforcing the other; the sister so deforced, shall have
this writ to recover her part. Fitz. not. br. fo. 9. Register origin. fol. 3.

Recto quando Dominus remisit, is a writ of right, which lies in case, where
lands or tenements that be in the Seigneurie of any Lord, are in demand by a
writ of right. For if the Lord hold no Court, or otherwise at the prayer of the
Demandant, or Tenent, shall send to the Court of the King his writ, to put the
cause thither for that time (saving to him another time the right of his
Seigneurie) then this writ issues out for the other party, and has this name
from the words therein comprised, being the true occasion thereof. This writ is
close, and must be returned before the Justices of the common Bancke. old. not.
br. fol. 16. Regist. orig. fol. 4.

Recto de Advocatia Ecclesiae, is a writ of right, lying where a man has right
of Advouzen, and the Parson of the Church dying, a stranger presents his
Clerk to the Church, and he not having moved his action of Quare impedit nor
darrein presentment within six months, but suffered the stranger to usurp
upon him. And this writ he only may have, that claims the Aduowzen, to
himself and to his heirs in fee. And as it lies for the whole aduowzen: so
it lies also for the half, the third, the fourth part. old. not. br. fol. 24.
Register original. fol. 29.

Recto de custodia terrae and haeredis, is a writ that lies for him, whose
Tenent houlding of him in Chiualry, dies in his nonage, against a stranger,
that enters upon the land, and takes the body of the heir. The form, and
farther use whereof see in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 139. and the register original:
fol. 161.

Recto sur disclaimer, is a writ that lies, where the Lord in the kings court,
sc: in the common plees, does avow upon his tenent, and the Tenent disclaimeth
to hold of him, upon the disclaimer he shall have this writ: and if the Lord
auerre, and prove, that the land is houlden of him, he shall recover the land
for ever. old. not. br. fo. 150. which is grounded upon the statute, Westminster. 2.
ca. 2. anno 13. Ed. pri. which statute begins. Quia Domini feudorum, etc.

Rector, is both Latin, and English, signifiing a Governor. In the common law
rector ecclesia parochialis, is he that has the charge, or cure of a parish
Church: qui tantum ius in ecclesia parochiali habet, quantum praelatus in
ecclesia collegiata. ca. vlt: De locat; and Conduct: in glos: verbo Expelli
potuissent. In our common law, I hear that it is lately over ruled, that
rector ecclesiae parochialis is he, that has a personage, where there is a
vicarage, endowed: and he that has a personage without a vicarage, is called
persona. But this distinction seems to be new and subtle praeter rationem. I
am sure Bracton uses it otherwise, lib: 4. tracta: 5. ca. pri. in these words.
Et sciendum quod rectoribus ecclesiarum parochialium competit Assisa qui
instituti sunt per Episcopos, and Ordinarios vt personae. Where it is plain,
that rector and persona be confounded. Mark also these words there following:
Item dici possunt rectores Canonici de ecclesus praebendatis. Item dici possunt
rectores, vel quasi, Abbates, Priores and alii, qui habent ecclesias ad
proprios vsus.

Rectus in curia, is he that stands at the bar, and has no man to object
any offense against him. Smith de repub: Angl: li. 2. c. 3. see a. 6. R. 2.
sta. 1. c. 12.

Reddendum, is used many times substantiuely for the clause in a lease, etc.
Whereby the rent is reserved to the leasour. Coke lib. 2. Lord Cromwels case.
fol. 72. b.

Redisseisin (redisseisina) is a disseisin made by him, that once before was
found, and adjudged to have disseised the same man of his lands, or tenements.
For the which there lies a special writ, called a writ of redisseisin. old:
not. br. fol. 106. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 188. See the new book of Entries.
verb. Redisseisin.

Redisseisina, is a writ lying for a redisseisin. Reg. orig. fo. 206. 207.

Reddicion, is a judicial confession, and acknowledgement that the land or
thing in demand belongs to the demaundant, or at the least, not to himself.
a. 34. and 35. H. 8. ca. 24. Perkins Dower. 379. 380.

Redubbours, be those that buy cloth, which they know to be stolen, and turn
it into some other form or fashion. Britton. cap. 29. Cromptobs Vicount, fol.
193. a.

Reentry, comes of the French (r^^trer). i. rursus intrare, and signifies in
our common law, the resuming, or taking again of possession, which we had
^^^st forgone. For example, if I make a lease, of land, or tenement, I do
thereby forgo the possession, and if I do condition with the Leassee, that
for non payment of the rent at the day it shall be lawful for me to reenter,
this is as much as if I conditioned to take again the lands etc. into mine
own hands, and to recover the possession by mine own fact without the
assistance of Judge or process.

Reere county. See Rier Cowntye.

Re extent, is a a second extent made upon lands, or tenements, upon complaint
made, that the former extent was partially performed. Brook, titulo. Extent.
fol. 313.

Regard (regardum) is borrowed of the French (Regard) or Regardure. i. aspectus,
conspectus, respectus.) and though it have a general signification of any care
or diligence: yet it has also a special acceptance, and therein is used only
in matters of the Forest: and there two ways: one for the office of the
Regarder, the other for the compass of ground belonging tothe Regarders office
or charge. Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 175. 199. Touching the former, thus says M.
Manwod, part pri. of his Forest laws. page 198. The Eire, general sessions
of the Forest, or Justices seat, is to be houlden, and kept every third year:
and of necessity before that any such sessions or Justices seat can be
houlden, the Regarders of the Forest must make their Regard. And this making of
the Regard must be done by the kings writ. And the Regard is, (as he afterward
there says) to go through the whole Forest, and every Bayliwicke of the same,
to see and enquire of the trespasses of the Forest: which he compriseth in
these 4. viz. ad videndendum. ad inquirendum, ad imbreviandum, ad
certificandum. Of every of which branches you may read there his exposition.

Touching the second signification, the compass of the Regarders charge is the
whole Forest, that is, all that ground, which is parcel of the Forest. For
there may be woods within the limits of the Forest, that be no parcel thereof,
and those be without the Regard, as the same author plainly declares, part
pri. page 194. and again part 2. cap. 7. nu. 4. where he shows the
difference between these words: (Infra Regardum) or (Rewardum) and Infra
Forestam.

Regarder (Regardator) comes of the French (Regardeur). i. spectator) and
signifies an officer of the Forest. Cromptons Iurisdict. fol. 153. where it is
thus defined. A Regarder is an officer of the Forest, appointed to survew all
other officers. He says there also, that this officer was ordained in the
beginning of King Henry the seconds days. M. Manwood in his first part of
Forest laws. page 188. thus defines him. A Regarder is an officer of the
Kings Forest, that is sworn to make the Regard of the Forest, as the same has
been used to be made in ancient time. And also to view and inquire of all
offenses of the Forest, as well of vert as of venison, and of all concealements
of any offenses or defaults of the Foresters, and of all other officers of the
Kings Forest, concerning the execution of their offices. He says there also,
that a Regarder may be made either by the Kings leters patents, or by any one
of the Kings Justices of the Forest, at his discretion in the general Air, or
at such time, as the Regard is to be made, by virtue of the Kings writ,
directed to the Shyreeue of the County for that purpose. The form of which
writ he there sets down.

After that page 192. he sets down his oath in these words. You shall truly
serve our sovereign Lord the King in the office of a Regarder in the Forest of
Waltham. You shall make the Regard of the same in such manner, as the same has
been accustomed to be made. You shall raunge through the whole forest, and
through every Bailiwicke of the same, as the Foresters there shall lead you to
view the said forest. And if the foresters will not, or do not know how to
lead you, to make the regard or raunge of the Forest, or that they will
conceal from you any thing that is forfeited to the King, you your selves
shall not let for any thing: but you shall see the same forfeiture, and cause
the same to be enrolled in your roll. You shall inquire of all wastes,
pourpre. stures, and Asserts of the Forest, and also of concealements of any
offense, or trespass in the Forest. and all these things you shall to the
uttermost of your power do, so help you God. Then you may read farther the
particulars of his office. eadem, page 195. And page 207. he says that their
presentiments must be upon their view, and so recorded, and that the Regarders
of themselves have power to hear and determine the fine, or amerciament for
expeditating of dogs. See Regard.

Regio assensu, is a writ whereby the King gives his Royal assent to the
election of a Bishop or Abbot. Register origin. fol. 294. b.

Registrie) Registrum) comes of the French (Registre. i. liber, librarium,
codex ratiocinarius, ephemeris, commentarius) it signifies with us the office,
or books, or rolls, wherein are recorded the proceedings of the Chauncerie, or
any spiritual court. The writer, and keeper whereof is called the Register,
in latin, Registarius. Register is also the name of a book, wherein are
expressed all the forms of writs used at the common law, called the Register
of the Chauncerie. anno 13. Ed. prim. cap. 24. Some say it is termed Registrum
quasi Regestum. Prataeus.

Regrator (regratator) comes of the French (regratter i. desquamare.)
Regratter quelque vielle robe and la fair neufue) is to scour or furbush an
old garment and to make it new again. Also (regratteur) signifies as much as
(Mango) in Latin: which kind of men sold children, and to sell them the beter,
mentiends coloris artem optime callebant. Martialis and Plinius. This word in
our common law, did aunciently signify such as bought by the great, and sold
by retayle. anno 27. Ed. 3. stat. prim. ca. 3. but now it signifies him, that
buyeth and sells any wares, or victuals in the same market, or fair, or
within 5. miles thereof. anno 5. Ed. 6. cap. 14. anno 5. Eliz. cap. 12. anno
13. Eliz. cap. 25. See Forestallers and Engrossers.

Rehabere facias seisinam quando Vice comes liberavit seifinam de maiore part,
quam deberet, is a writ Judicial. Regist. Judicial, fol. 13. 51. There is
another writ of this name and nature. eodem fol. 54.

Reioynder (reiunctio) signifies in our common law, as much as Duplicatio
with the Ciuilians, that is, an exception to a replication. For the first
answer of the Defendant to the Plaintiffes bill, is called an exception: the
plaintiffes answer to that, is called a Replication: and the Defendants to
that, Duplication in the civil law, and a Reioynder with us; especially in
Chauncerie. West. part 2. symb. titulo Chauncerie. sect. 56. where he cites
these words out of Spigelius. Est autem reiunctio seu duplicatio, vel
allegatio, quae datur reo ad infirmandum replicatione^ actoris, and
confirmandum except ionem Rei.

Relation (relatio) idem quod fictioiuris, to make a nullitie of a thing from
the beginning, (for a certain intent) which had essence, Cook lib. 3. Butler
and Baker. fol. 28. b. which in playner terms may be thus expounded. Relation
is a fiction of the law, whereby something is (for a special purpose)
imagined never to have been, which in truth was. Read the rest.

Release (relaxatio) comes of the French Relasche. i. cessatio, relaxatio,
lax amentum) and in our common law is thus defined: A Release is an Instrument
whereby estates, rights, titles, entries, actions, and other things be some
time extinguished, some time transserred, sometime abridged, and sometime
enlarged. West. part prim. symbol. lib. 2 sect. 509. And there is a Release in
fact, and a release in law. Perkins Graunts 71. A release in fact seems to
be that, which the very words expressly declare. A Release in law is that,
which does acquit by way of consequent, or intendment of law. An example
whereof you have in Perkins vbi supra. Of these, how they be available, and
how not, see Litleton at large. li. 3. cap. 8. fol. 94. of diverse sorts of
these Release see the new book of Entries. verbo Release.

Relief (relevium) comes of the French (relever. i. relevare) and fignifieth
in our common law, a certain sum of money, that the tenent holding by
knights service, grand sergeantie, or other tenure, for the which homage or
regal service is due, or by soccage, for the which no homage is due, and being
at full age at the death of his auncestour, does pay unto his Lord at his
entrance. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 36. gives a reason why it is called a Relief.
viz. quia haereditas, quae tacens fuit per antecessoris decessum, relevatur in
manus heredum, and propter factam relevationem, facienda erit ab herede quaedam
praestatio, quae dicitur Relevium. Of this you may read Britton. cap. 69. in a
manner to the same effect. Of this also speaks the Grand Custumary of
Normandy, cap. 34. to this effect: It is to be known, that the Lord of the
fee ought to have relief of the lands, which be held of him by homage, when
those die, of whom he had homage. And that this is not only proper to us in
Eng. or Normandy, appears by Hotoman in his Commentaries, de verbis feud.
verbo Relevium, who there defines it thus: Relevium est honorarium, quodnovus
vasallus patrono introitus causa largitur, quasi morte vasalli alterius, vel
alto quo casu feudum ceciderit: quod iam a novo sublevetur: and farther speaks
of it, that which is worth the reading, and contains great knowledge of
antiquity. See the like definition in Maranta singularibus. verbo Relevium.
For the quantity of this relief, see the Great charter, cap. 2. in these
words: If any of our Earls or Barons, or any other our tenants, which hold of
us in chief by knights service, dye, and at the time of his death his heir is
of full age, and owes to us relief, he shall have inheritance by the old
Relief: that is to say, the heir, or heirs of an Earl for one whole
Earldome one hundred pound: the heir or heirs of a Baron for one whole
Baronie, one hundred merkes: the heir or heirs of a Knight, for one whole
Knights fee, one hundred shillings at the most. And he that has less, shall
give less, according to the old custom of the fees. Read also. Glanvile lib.
9. cap. 4. fol. 68. who says, that in his days the Relief of a Baronie was
not certain. The heir in francke soccage, when he comes to his full age,
after the death of his auncester, shall double the rent that he was wont to pay
to the Lord, and that shall be in place of relief. old not. br. fol. 94.
Somewhat more hereof you may read in anno 28. Ed. prim. statut. prim. and
Kitchen fol. 145. ca. Relief. and Glanvile, lib. 7. cap. 9. The Feudists also
write of this at large. Among others Vincentius de Franchis descis. 121. says,
that Relevii solutioest quaedam extrinseca praestatio a consuetudine
introducta, quae non inest feudo, quodque soluitur proconsirmatione, seu
renouatione investiturae and possessionis. See Heriot. This Leo the Emperor
Novella 13. calls (...). By the auncienter civil law it is termed
(introitus) l. penult.. Alumno. P de legatis. Skene de verb. signif. says,
that Relief is a French word from the Latin relevare, which is to relieve or
take up that which is falen. For it is given by the tenent, or vassal being of
perfect age, after the expiring of the wardeship to his Lord, of whom he holds
his land by Knights service, that is, by ward and relief; and by payment
thereof he relieues, and (as it were) raises up again his lands, after they
were fallen down into his superiors hands by reason of wardship, etc.

Remainder (remanentia) signifies in our common law, a power or hope to enjoy
lands, tenements, or rents after the estate of another expired. For example, a
man may let land to one for term of his life, and the Remainder to another for
term of his life. Litleton cap. Atturnment: fol: 113. And this Remainder may
be either for a certain term, or in fee simple, or fee tail, as might be
proved by many places in the law writers. But in steed of the rest, take
Brook, titulo Done and Remainder, fol: 245. Glanuile. lib. 7. ca. pri: in fine
has these words: Not andum quod nec Episcopus, nec Abbas, quiaeorum Baroniae
sunt de eleemozina Domini Regis, and antecessorum eius, non possunt de
Dominicis suis aliquam partem dare ad remanentiam sine assensu and
confirmatione Demini Regis. Where it appears that Dare ad remanentiam is to
give away for ever. To the same effect does he use it cap. 9. eiusdem libri in
these words, speaking of the Lords of mancrs during the minority of their
wards. Nihil tamen de haereditate, de iure alienare possunt ad remanentiam. In
the like sort does Bracton use it. lib. 2. cap. 23. in fine: and also lib. 4.
tracta. 2. cap. 4. nu. 4. See the new book of Entries. verbo Remainder.

Remembrancers of the Exchequer (Rememoratores) be three officers, or clerks,
one called the Kings Remembrancer. anno 35. El. cap. 5. The other the Lord
Treasurers Remembrancer, upon whose charge it seems to lie, that they put all
Justices of that court, as the Lord Treasurer and the rest, in remembrance of
such things, as are to be called on, and dealt in for the Princes behoof. The
third is called the Remembrancer of the first fruits. Of these you may read
something. anno 5. Rich. 2. stat. pri: cap. 14. and 15. to the effect above
specified. These anno 37. Ed. 3. cap. 4. be called clerks of the Remembrance.
It seems that the name of this officer is borrowed from the Ciuilians, who
have their (Memoriales) qui sunt notarii Cancellariae in regno subjects officio
Questoris. Lucas de penna. C. lib. 10. tit. 12. nu: 7. The kings Remembrancer
enters in his office all recognicances taken before the Barons for any the
Kings debts, for apparences, or for observing of orders. He takes al bonds for
any of the kings debts, or for appearance, or for observing of orders, and
makes process upon them for the breach of them. He writes process against the
collectors of customs, subsidies and fiueteenthes, for their accounts. All
informations upon penal statutes are entered in his office. And all matters up
on English bills in the Exchequer chamber are remaining in his office. He makes
the bills of compositions upon penal laws: takes the stalments of debts:
makes a record of a certificate delivered unto him by the clerk of the
Star Chamber of the fines there set, and sends them to the pipe. He has
delivered unto his office all manner of indentures, fines, and other evidences
whatsoever, that concern the assuring of any lands to the Crown. He yearly
in crastino animarum reads in open court the statute for the elections of
Shyreeues, and gives those that choose them their oath: he reads in open
court the oath of all the officers of the court, when they are admitted.

The treasurers remembrancer makes process against all Shyreeues, escheators,
receivers, and bailiffs for their accoumpts. He makes process of (fieri facias)
and extent for any debts due to the King, either in the pipe, or with the
auditors. He makes process for all such reuenew as is due to the King by reason
of his tenures. He makes a record, whereby it appears whether Shyreeues and
other accountants pay their profers dew at Easter and Michelmas. He makes
another record, whereby it appears, whether Shyreeues and other accountants
keep their days of prefixion. All extreats of fines, issues, and amerciaments
set in any courts of Westminster, or at the assizes, or sessions, are certified
into his office, and are by him delivered to the clerk of extreats to write
process upon them. He has also brought into his office all the accoumpts of
customers, controllers, and other accoumptants to make thereof an entry of
record.

The Remembrancer of the first fruits, takes all compositions for first
fruits and tenthes: and makes process against such as pay not the same.

Remittere, comes of the French (remettre. i. restituere, reponere) and
signifies in our common law, a restitution of one that has two titles to
lands or tenements, and is seized of them by his later title, unto his title
that is more ancient, in case where the later is defective. Fitz. not. br.
fol. 149. F. Dyer fol. 68. nu. 22. This in what case it may be granted to any
man, see in Brook, titulo Remitter: and the terms of law. The Doctor and
Student of this matter has these words: if land descend to him that has right
to that land before, heshalbe remitted to his beter title, if he will. capite
nono. fol. 19. b. See the new book of Entries: verbo Remitter.

Render, comes of the French (Render. i. reddere, retribuere, restituere) and
signifies in our common law, the self same thing. For example, this word is
used in leuying of a fine. For a fine is either single, by which nothing is
granted, or rendered back again by the Cognizee, to the Cognizoumor double,
which contains a grant, or render back again of some rent, common, or
other thing, out of the land it self to the Cognizor, etc. West. part. 2.
symbol. titulo Fines. sect. 21. and 30. F. Also there be certain things in a
manner that lie in prender, that is, which may be taken by the Lord, or his
officer, when they chance, without any offer made by the tenent, as the ward
of the body of the heir, and of the land, escheats, etc. and certain that lie
in Render, that is, must be delivered or answered by the Tenent, as rents,
reliefes, heriots, and other services. Idem, eodem sect. 126. C. Also some
service confisteth in seisa^ce, some in Render. Perkins Reseruations. 696.

Rent (Reditus) comes of the French (Rent. i. vectigal, pensitatio annua) and
signifies with us, a sum of money or other consideration issuing yearly out
of land or tenements. Plouden, casu Browning. fol. 132. b. and fol. 138. a.
141. b. There be three sorts of rents observed by our common Lawyers: that is,
Rent service, Rent charge, and Rent seck. Rent service is, where a man houldeth
his land of his Lord by fealty, and certain rent, or by fealty, service, and
certain rent. Litleton lib. 2. ca. 12. fol. 44. or that which a man, making a
lease to another for term of years, reserueth yearly to be paid him for the
same. Terms of law. verbo Rents. who gives this reason thereof, because it
is in his liberty, whether he will distraine, or bring an action of debt. A
Rent charge is that, which a man making over an estate of his land, or
tenements to another, by deed indented either in in fee, or fee tail, or
lease for term of life, reserueth to himself by the said indenture a sum of
money yearly to be paid unto him with clause of distress, or to him and his
heirs. See Litleton, vbi supra. A Rent seck, otherwise a dry rent, is that,
which a man making over an estate of his land or tenement, by deed indented,
reserueth yearly to be paid him without clause of distress mentioned in the
Indenture. Litleton vbi. supra. and terms of the law. verbo Rents. see the
new expositour of law Terms: See Plowden, casu Browning. fol. 132. b. See
the differences between a rent, and an annuitie. Doctor and Student. cap. 3.
O^dialo. primo.

Reparatione facienda, is a writ, which lies in diverse cases, whereof one is,
where three be tenants in common, or joint tenants, or pro Indiviso, of a
mill, or house which is fallen into decay, and the one being willing to
repair it, the other two will not. In this case, the party willing shall have
this writ against the other two. Fitzh. not. br. f. 127. where read at large
the form and many uses of this writ. as also in the Regi. orig. fol. 153. b.

Repeal, comes of the French (Rappel. i. Revocatio) and signifies in our
common law even the same; as the Repeal of a statute, Rastall titulo Repeal.
Brook uses Repellance in this signification, titulo Repellance.

Repleader (Replacitare) is to plead again, that which was once pleaded
before. Rastall, titulo Repleader. See the new book of Entries, verbo
Repleder.

Replegiare. See Replevie. See Second deliverance.

Replevie (Pleuina) is the bringing of the writ called Replegiarifacias, by him
that has his catel or other goods distreined by another for any cause, and
putting in suerty to the Shyreue, that upon the delivery of the thing
distreined, he will persiew the action against him that distreined. Terms of
law. See Replegiare. It is used also for the bayling of a man. pl. cor. fol.
72. 73. 74. and West pri. cap. 11. and cap. 15. anno 3. Ed. 1.

Replegiare de averus, is a writ brought by one, whose catell be distreined or
put in pound upon any cause by another, upon surety given to the Shyreeue to
persiew the action in law. anno 7. H. 8. cap. 4. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 68. See
the Register original, of diverse sorts of this writ called Replegiare. in the
table, verbo eodem. See also the Register Judicial, fol. 58. and 70. see also
the new book of Entries. verbo Replevin. See Dyer. fol. 173. nu. 14.

Replevish (Replegiaro) is to let one to mainprise upon surety. anno 3. Ed. 1.
cap. 11.

Replication (replicatio) is an exception of the second degree made by the
plantife upon the first answer of the Defendant, West. part (...). symbol.
titulo Chauncerie. sect. 55. and Westminster. 2. anno. 13. Ed. pri. cap. 36. This is
borrowed from the Ciuilians, De replicationibus, lib. 4. Institutio. titulo. 14.

Report (Reportus) is in our common law a relation, or repetition of a case
debated, or argued. which is sometime made to the court, upon reference from
the court to the Reporter, sometime to the world voluntarily, as Ploydens
reports, and such like.

Reposition of the Forest, was an act whereby certain forest grounds being
made purlieu upon view, were by a second view laid to the Forest again.
Manwood, part pri. page 178.

Reprisels (Reprisalia) are all one in the common and Civil law. Represalia
est potestas pignorandi contra quemlibet de terya debitoris data creditori pro
iniuriis and damnis acceptis. Vocabularius vtriusque iuris. This among the
ancient Romans was called (Clarigatio) of the verb (Clarigo. i. res clare
repeto) It is called in the statute anno 27. Ed. 3. stat. 2. cap. 17. law of
Marque, of the German word March. i. terminus, limes. And the reason may be,
because one destitute of Justice in another territory, redresseth himself by
the goods belonging to men of that territory, taken within his own bounds.

Requests (Supplicum libelli, Curia Requisitionum) is a Court of of the same
nature with the Chauncerie, redressing by equity the wrongs that poor men do
suffer at their hand, whose might they are not able to withstand either in law
or otherwise. It took beginning as some men think, by commission from King
Henry the 8. before which time the Masters of Requests had no warrant of
ordinary Jurisdiction, but travailed between the Prince and petioners, by
direction from the mouth of the King. Guins preface to his readings, But see
Court of Requests.

Resceyt (Receptio) seems to be an admission of a third person to plead his
right in a cause formerly commenced, between other two. See the new book of
Entries. verbo Resceit. v. Aid prier. The Ciuilians call this admissionem
tertii pro suo interesse. Of this you have one example in the Terms of law,
viz. if Tenent for term of life, or tenent for term of years bring an
action: he in the reuersion comes in, and prays to be received to defend
the land, and to plead with the Demandant. Many more you may have in Brook,
titulo, Resceite. fol. 205. See Perkins Dower. 448. ^eceit is also applied to
an admittance of plee, though the controversy be but between two only.
Brook estoppell. in many places.

Resceyt of homage, is a relative to doing homage, for as the Tenent, who owes
homage, does it at his admission to the land: so the Lord receives it. Kitchen
fol. 148. See Homage.

Rescous (Rescussus) comes of the French (Rescourre se Rescourre du danger.
i. asserere se ab iniuria) It signifies in our common law a resistance against
a lawful authority: as for example, if a Baylife, or other officer upon a
writ do arrest a man, and another (one or more) by violence do take him away,
or procure his escape: this act is called, a Rescus Cassanaeus in his book de
consuetud. Burg. has the same word coupled with (resistentia) fol. 294.
whereby it appears, that other nations do use this word in the same
signification that we do, or the very like. It is also used for a writ, which
lies for this act called in our lawyers latin (Breue de rescussu) whereof you
may see both the form and use in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 101. and the register
original: fol: 125. See the new book of Entries. verbo rescous. This rescous
in some cases is treason, and in some felony. Crompton. Justice fol: 54. b.

Reseiser (reseisire) is a taking again of lands into the Kings hands, whereof
a general livery, or ouster le main was formerly missued by any person or
persons, and not according to form and order of law. Of this see Stawnf.
praeroga: 26. where it is handled at large. See resumption.

Resiance (resiantia) seems to come of the French (rasseoir, see Rasseoir. i.
residere) and signifies a man's abode or continuance in a place. Old not: br.
fo. 85. whence also comes the participle (resiant) that is continually
dwelling, or abiding in a place. Kitchen, fol. 33. It is all one in truth with
Residence, but that custom of speech tyeth that only to persons
ecclesiastical.

Reservation, signifies that rent or service which the graunter in any grant
tyeth the grauntee to perform unto him, or them, or the Lord Paramonte.
Perkins reseruations: per totum.

Residence (residentia) comes of the Latin (residere) and is peculiarly used
both in the Canon and Common law, for the continuance or abode of a Parson or
Vicar upon his benefice. The default whereof (except the party be qualified,
and dispensed with) is the loss of ten pounds for every month, anno 28.
Henr. 8. cap. 13.

Resignation (resignatio) is used particularly for the giving up of a Benefice
into the hands of the Ordinary, otherwise called of the Canonists
(renunciatio.) And though it signify all one in nature with the word
(Surrender) yet it is by use more restreined to the yielding up of a spiritual
living, into the hands of the Ordinary, and Surrender to the giving up of
temporal lands into the hands of the Lord. And a resignation may now be made
into the hands of the King, as well as of the Diocesan, because he has
supremam authoritatem Ecclesiasticam, as the Pope had in time past. Plowden.
casu Grendon. fol. 498. a.

Resort, is a word used properly in a writ of ayle, or cousenage, as descent is
in a writ of right. Ingham.

Respectu computi Vice-comitis habendo, is a writ for the respiting of a
Shyreeues account upon just occasion, directed to the Treasurer and Barons of
the Exchequer. Register fol. 139 and 279.

Respight of homage, (respectus homagii) is the forbearing of homage, which
ought first of all to be performed by the tenent, that holds by homage. Which
respight may be occasioned upon diverse good reasons: but it has the most
frequent use in such as hold by Knights service in capite: who because the
Prince cannot be at leisure to take their homage, do pay into the Exchequer, at
certain times in the year, some small sum of money to be respighted, until
the Prince may be at leisure to take it in person.

Responsions (responsiones) seem to be a word used properly and especially by
the knights of S. John of Ierusaiem, for certain accounts made unto them by
such as occupied their lands or stocks. anno 32. H. 8. cap. 24.

Responsalis, is he that comes for another at the day assigned for his
appearance in Court, Bracton. Fleta seems to make a difference between
atturn atum, essoniatorem and responsalem, lib. 6. cap. 11.. Officium: as if
essoniator came only to allege the cause of the parties absence, be he the
demandant or tenent, and responsalis came for the tenent not only to excuse
his absence, but also to signify what trial he meant to undergo, viz. the
combat or the country. lib. 6. cap. 11.. Si autem. A man in ancient time
could not appoint an Attorney for him, without warrant from the king. Fleta,
eodem cap. 13. in fine. See Attorney. This word is used in the Canon law, Et
significat procuratorem vel eum qui absentem excusat. cap. Cum olim propter.
extra. de rescript.

Restitution (restitutio) is a yielding up again of any thing unlawfully taken
from another. It is used in the common law, most notoriously for the setting
him in possession of lands or tenements, that has been unlawfully disseised of
them, which when it is to be done, and when not, see Cromptons Justice of
peace. fol. 144. b. etc. vsque 149.

Restitutione extracti ab Ecclesia, is a writ to restore a man to the Church,
which he had recovered for his sanctuary being suspected of felony. Register
ori. fol. 69. a.

Restitutione temporalium, is a writ that lies in case, where a man being
elected, and confirmed Bishop of any Diocese, and has the Princes royal
assent thereunto, for the recovery of the temporalities, or Baronie of the said
Bishopric with the appurtenances. And it is directed from the King to the
Escheatour of the County, the form whereof you have in the Regist. origin.
fol. 294. and in Fitz. not. br. fol. 169. Where you may read also, that it
lies for those Abbots and Priors newly elected and confirmed, that were of the
kings foundation.

Resummons (resummonitio) is compounded twice, that is, of re, sub, and Moneo:
and signifies a second summons and calling of a man to answer an action, where
the first summons is defeated by any occasion, as the death of the party, or
such like. Brook tit. See Resummons. fol. 214. See of these four sorts,
according to the four diverse cases in the Table of the Register Judicial.
fol. 1. See also the new book of Entries, verbo. Reattachement, and Resummons.

Resumption (resumptio) is particularly used for the taking again into the
Kings hands, such land or tenements, as before upon false suggestion, or other
error, he had delivered to the heir, or granted by leters patents to any man.
Brook, titulo Repellance, and Resumption. fol. 298. Thus it is applied, anno
31. H. 6. cap. 7. See Reseiser.

Retainer, comes of the French (retenir. i. detinere, retinere) It signifies
in the common law, a servant not meniall nor familiar, that is not continually
dwelling in the house of his Lord or Master, but only using, or bearing his
name, or livery. This livery was wont to consist of hats (otherwise hoods)
badges, and other suits of one garment by the year. anno pri: R. 2. cap. 7.
These were taken by great Lords, many times upon purpose of maintenance, and
quarrels, and therefore they have been justly, for the better freedom of law,
forbidden by many statutes: as namely by anno pri: R. 2. cap. 7. upon pain of
imprisonment, and grievous forfeiture to the King: and again anno 16 eiusd.
cap. 4. and anno 20. eiusedem, cap. 1. and 2. and anno pri. H. 4. cap. 7. by
the which the Lords offending herein should make ransom at the Kings will, and
any Knight or Esquire hereof duly attainted, should loose his said Livery, and
forfeit his see for ever; and any yeoman wearing the Livery of the King, or
other Lord, should be imprisoned, and make ransom at the Kings will, only
some few excepted in the said statute: which statute is farther confirmed, and
explaned anno 2. H. 4. cap. 21. and an. 7. eiusd. cap. 14. and anno 13. eiusd.
cap. 3. and anno 8. H. 6. ca. 4. And yet this offense was so deeply rooted,
that Edward the fourth was driven to confirm the former statutes, and farther
to extend the meaning of them, as appears by the statute made anno 8. Ed. 4.
cap. 2. adding an especial pain of five pounds to every man that gives such
Livery, and as much to every one so retained, either by writing, oath, or
promise, for every month. Yet is not this fault so well looked unto, but that
there is need of more pregnant laws for the redress thereof, or at the least
beter execution of those, that be already made. These be by the Feudists called
(affidati.) Sic enim dicuntur, qui in alicuius fidem and tutelam recepti sunt.
Neapol. constitu. li. 3. titulo 7. And as our retainers are here forbidden: so
are those (affidati) in other countries.

Retraxit, is an exception against one that formerly commenced an action, and
withdrew it, or was nonsuit before trial. Brook. titulo. Departure in
despite, and Retraxit. fol. 216. See also the new book of Entries: verbo
Deperter and verbo retrar it.

Return (returna) comes of the French (retour. i. reditio, reuersio,
recursus) and in our common law, has two particular applycations, as namely
the return of a writ by Shyreeues, and Bailiffs, which is nothing but a
certificate made to the Court, whereunto the writ directs him, of that which
he has done, touching the serving of the same writ. And this among the
Ciuilians is called Certificatorium. Of returns in this signification, speak
the statutes of Westminster. 2. cap. 39. anno 13. Ed. prim. and Tractatus contra
Vice-comites and Clericos, with diverse other, collected by Rastal, titulo
Return of Shyreeues. So is the return of an office, Stawnf. prarog. fol. 70.
a certificate into the court, of that which is done by virtue of his office:
See the Statutes of days in bank. anno 51. H. 3. and anno 32. H. 8. cap. 21.
And in this signification Hilary term is said to have 4. returns. viz.
Octabis Hilarii, Quindena Hilarii, crastino Purificationis, Octabis
Purificationis: and Easter term to have 5. returns, viz. Quindena paschae,
Tres paschae, mense paschae, Quinque pasche, and crastino Ascensionis. And
Trinity term 4. returns. i. Crastino Trinitatis, Octabis Trinitatis, Quindena
Trinitatis, Tres Trinitatis. And Michaelmas Term 8. returns. sc. Octabis
Michaelis, Quindena Michaelis, Tres Michaelis, Mense Michaelis, Crastino
animarum, Crastino Martini, Octabis Martini, Quindena Martini.

The other application of this word is in case of Repleuy. For if a man
distraine catell for rent, etc. And afterward justify or avowe his act, that
it be found lawful, the catell before delivered unto him that was distrained
upon security given to follow the action, shall now be returned to him, that
distrained them. Brook, titulo Return d'auers and hommes. fol. 218. you shall
find this word often used in Fitzh. not: br. as appears in the word Return
in his table: but in all those places it has the one or the other of these two
significations.

Returno habendo, is a writ, which lies for him that has auowed a distress
made of catell, and proved his distress to be lawfully taken for the return
of the catell distrained unto him, which before were expleuied by the party
distrained, upon suerty given to persiew the action. Terms of law, verbo
Repleuin.

Returnum aueriorum, is a writ Judicial, granted to one impleaded for taking
the cattle of another, and unjust deteining of them contra vadium and plegios,
and appearing upon summons is dismissed without day, by reason that the
plaintiff makes default, and it lies for the return of the cattle unto the
Defendant, whereby he was summoned, or which were taken for the security of his
appearance upon the summons. Register Judicial. fol. 4. a.

Returnum irreplegiabile, is a writ judicial sent out of the common plees to
the Shyreeue, for the final restitution or return of catell to the owner,
unjustly taken by another as damage seisant, and so found by the Jury before
Justices of Assise in the County. For which see the Register Judicial fo. 27.
a. b.

Reave, alias Grieve (Praefectus) is made of Gerefa the Saxon word for a
gouerner. Lamb: explica: of Saxon words, verb. Profectus, and that by rejecting
the first syllable, which (he says) among the Saxons is usual. It signifies
in our common law, the Bayliffe of a Fraunchis or manner, and especially in the
West parts. Of this you may see Kitchen. fol. 43. See Grieve. See Shyreeue. See
also of this word M. Verstigan in his restitution of decayed intelligence. cap:
10. speaking much to the same effect.

Revels, seems to be derived from the French word (Reueiller. i. excitari,
vel expergefieri) It signifies with us sports of daunsing, masking, comedies,
tragedies, and such like used in the Kings house, the houses of court or of
other great personages. The reason whereof is, because they are most used by
night, when otherwise men commonly sleep, and be at rest. In the Kings house
there is an officer called the Master of these Reuils, who has the ordering,
and dispositions of these pastimes in the court.

Reuenewe, is a French word, signifiing as much as Reditio, Reuersio, Reditus.
It signifies properly the yearly rent that grows to every man from his
lands and possessions.

Reuersion (Reversio) signifies in the common law, a possibility reserved to a
man's self and his heirs, to have again lands or tenements made over
conditionally unto others, upon the defect or failing of such condition. The
difference between a Remainder, and a Reversion is, that a Remainder is
general, and may be to any man but to him that grants, or conueieth the
land, etc. for term of life only or otherwise: a Reuersion is to himself
from whom the conveiance of the land, etc. proceeded, and commonly perpetual,
as to his heirs also, Litleton, fol. 112. in fine. See Cook lib. 2. Sir. Hugh
Cholmleis case, fol. 51. a. And yet a Reuersion is sometime confounded with a
remainder. Cook li. 2. Tookers case, fol. 67. b. Plowden, casu Hille. fol.
170. b. what this word Reuersion in a deed does carry. See Litleton lib. 2.
ca. 12.

Revocation (Revocatio) is the calling back of a thing granted. Of these you
have diverse in the Register original, as Reuovocationem brevis de audiendo and
terminando. fol. 124. Revocationem praesentationis. fol. 304 and 305.
Revocationem protectionis, fol. 23. Revocationem specialium Iusticiariorum
quia, etc. fol. 205.

Reviving, is a word metaphorically applied to rents and actions and signifies
a renewing of them, after they be extinguished: no less then if a man, or
other living creature should be dead, and restored to life. See diverse examples
in Brook titulo. Revivings of rents, actions, etc. fol 223.

Rewardum. See Regard.

Reweye. anno. 43. Elizab. cap. 10.

Rye, is a Saxon word signifiing as much as Regnum, in Latin. Camd. Britan.
page 346.

Riens pass perle fait, is a form of an exception taken in some cases to an
action. See Brook titulo Estaunger al fait or Record.

Riens dans le guard, was a challenge to a Jury, or Enquest within London. for
that four sufficient men of liuelyhood to the yearly value of forty
shillings above all charges, within the same City, and dwelling and having
within the same ward, wear not impanelled therein. But it is abrogated by the
statute. anno 7. H. 7. cap. 4.

Rier county (Retrocomitatus) seems to come of the French (Arriere. i.
posterior) and in the statute. anno 2. Ed. 3. cap. 5 is opposite to the open
county And by comparison of that statute with Westminster. 2. cap. 38. it appears
to be some public place, which the Shyreeue appoints for the receipt of the
kings money after the end of his County. Fleta says that it is dies
crastinus. post comitatum. lib. 2. cap. 67.. Quia Iusticiarii.

Right Rectum. See Recto.

Ridings, be the names of the parts or divisions of York shire, being three in
number. viz. West riding, East riding, and North riding. Camd. Britan. page
530. This word is mentioned in the statute, anno 22. H. 8. cap. 5. and 23. H.
8. cap. 18. and M. West. part 2. symbol. titulo Inditements says, that in
Inditements within that County, it is requisite that the town, and the Riding
be expressed. sect. 70. Q.

Right in the Court. anno 6. R. 2. stat. 1. cap. 12. See Rectus in Curia.

Ringhead, anno 43. Elizab. cap. 10.

Riot (Riottum) comes of the French (Rioter. (...)rixari.) It signifies in
our common law, the forcible doing of an unlawful act, by three or more
persons assembled together for that purpose. Westminster. part. 2. symbol. titulo,
Inditements. sect. 65. P. The differences and agreements between a Riot, a
Rout, and unlawful assembly. See in M. Lamb. Eirenarcha. lib. 2. cap. 5. etc.
See the statute. 1. M. 1. cap. 12. and Kitchen. fol. 19. who gives these
examples of Riots: the breach of enclosures, or banks or conduicts, parks,
pownds, houses, barnes, the burning of stacks of corn. M. Lamberd vbi supra.
uses these examples: to beat a man, to enter upon a possession forcibly, See
Route. and unlawful assembly. See also Cromptons Justice of peace diverse cases
of Riots, etc. fol. 53. See Trihings.

Ripiers (Riparii) be those that use to bring fish from the sea coast to the
inner parts of the land. Camd. Britan. page 234. It is a word made of the
latin (Ripa).

Rise (oriza) is a kind of corn growing in Spain, Asia, and India, with the
which both good foodes and medicines be made. whereof if you desire farther
knowledge, read Gerards herball. lib. 1. cap. 52. This is mentioned among
merchandise to be garbled in the statute. anno 1. Iaco. cap. 19.

Roag (Rogus) seems to come of the French (Rogue. i. arrogans) It signifies
with us an idle sturdie beggar, that wandering from place to place without
pasport, after he has been by Justices bestowed upon some certain place of
aboade, or offered to be bestowed, is condemned to be so called. who for the
first offense, is called a Roag of the first degree, and punished by whipping,
and boring through the grissell of the right ear with a hot iron an inch in
compass: and for the second offense, is called a Roag of the second degree, and
put to death as a felon, if he be above 18. years old. See the statute, anno
14. Elizab. cap. 5. and 18. eiusdem, cap. 3. and anno 36. cap. 17. If you will
know who be Rogues, and to be punished as Rogues by law, Read Lamberds
Eirenarcha. lib. 4. cap. 4. See Rout.

Robbery (Robaria) comes of the French (Rob. 1. vestis) and in our common
law, a felonious taking away of another man's goods from his person or
presence, against his will, putting him in fear, and of purpose to steal the
same goods. West. part 2. symbol. titulo Inditments, sect. 60. This is
sometime called violent theft. Idem, eodem. which is felony for two pence.
Kitchen fol. 26. and 22. lib. Assis. 39. Robaria is a word used also in other
nations, as appears by the annotations upon Mathaeus de Afflictis, descis.
82. nu. 6. page 122. See Skene verbo Reif. libro de verbo significat. See
Cromp. Justice of peace. f. 30. b.

Roberdsmen, anno 5. Ed. 3. cap. 14. and anno 7. R. 2. cap. 5. M. Lamb.
interprets them to be mighty thieves. Eironarch. lib. 2. cap. 6. page 190.

Rodknights, alias Radknights, are certain seruitours, which hold their lands
by serving their Lord on horseback. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 36. nu. 6. faith of
them, debent equitare cum Domino suo de manerio in manerium. vel cum Domini
vxore. Fleta. lib. 3. cap. 14.. Continetur.

Rod (Pertica) is otherwise called a pearche, and is a measure of 16. foot
and an half long, and in Stafford Shire 20. foot, to measure land with. See
^earch.

Rofe tyle, aliat Creast tyle, is that tyle which is made to lay upon the rudge
of the house. anno 17. Ed. 4. cap. 4.

Rogation week (dies rogationum) is a time well known to all, being otherwise
called Gang week. The reason why it is so termed, is because of the especial
devotion of prayer and fasting, then enjoined by the Church to all men, for a
preparatiue to the joyful remembrance of Christ's glorious ascension, and the
descension of the holy Ghost, in the form of cloven tongues shortly after. And
in that respect the solemnization of carnal matrimony is forbidden from the
first day of the said week, until Trinity Sunday. See Aduent.

Roode of land (Roda terrae) is a certain quantity of land being the fourth
part of an acre. ann. 5. Eliz. ca. 5. See Perch.

Roll, alias Roll (Rotulum) comes of the French (Rouler. i. volvere,
pervolvere, rotare) whence also is the French (Role ou Roll. i. volumen,
catalogus, Codex) It signifies with us a shedule of paper, or parchment
turned, or wound up with the hand to the fashion of a pipe. So is it used in
Stawnf. plees of the Crown, fol. 11. The chequer roll of the kings house, out
of the statute anno 3. H. 7. cap. 13. which signifies nothing but the
catalogue, wherein the names of the Kings household servants are set down. And
anno 5. Rich. 2. cap. 14. stat. pri: there is mention made of the great Roll
of the Exchequer which seems otherwise to be called the pipe. The Roules is
also a place destinated by Ed. 3. to the the keeping of the Rols, or Records of
the Chauncery situat between the two Temples in London. Camd: Britan: page
321. the Master whereof is the second man in Chauncery, and in the absence of
the Lord Chaunceler, or Keeper, sits as Judge, being commonly called the
Master of the Rols. See Master of the Rols.

Romescot, is compounded of Rome, and Scot, as you would say, the tribute due
to Rome: it is called by Mathaeus Westmonasteriensis, Consuetudo Apostolica, a
qua, neque Rex, neque Archiepiscopus, vel Episcopus, Abbas, vel Prior, aut
quilibet in regno immunis erat: and was first granted by Offa a Saxon King.
Camd. Britan. page 306. See Peter pence: and Roger Houeden part poster. suorum
annalium. fol. 344. a. in Henrico secundo.

Roundlet, is a certain measure of wine, oil, etc. containing 18. gallons and
a half, anno 1. R. 3. cap. 13.

Route (Routa) is a French word signifying a company, or flock: as (vne
grande route de gents, on de cerfs. i. grex hominum, longa ceruorum series.) It
signifies in our common law, an assembly of three persons or more, going on
about forcibly to commit an unlawful act, but yet do it not, Westminster. part 2.
sym. titulo Indictments. sect. 65. o. M. Lamberd thus says of it: A Route is
the same, which the Germans yet call Rot, meaning a band or great company of
men gathered together, and going about to execute, or executing indeed, any
riot or unlawful act: and (says more) it is said properly of the multitude
that assembleth themselves in such disorderly sort, for their common quarrels.
As if the inhabitants of a towneship do assemble to pull down a hedge, or
pale, to have their common, where they ought to have none, or to beat a man,
that has done them some public offense or displeasure. But the statute of 18.
Ed. 3. stat. prim. cap. vnico. which gives process of outlawrie against such
as bring routes into the presence of the Justices, or in affray of the people,
and the Statute of 2. Rich. 2. cap. 6. that speaks of riding in great routes
to make entry into lands, and to beat others, and to take their wives, etc.
do seem to understand it more largely. And it is a route, whether they put
their purpose in execution or no: if so be, that they do go, ride, or move
forward after their meeting. Broke, titulo Riot. 4. and 5. So (as it seems) a
route should be a special kind of unlawful assembly: and a riot the
disorderly fact committed generally by any unlawful assembly. Howsoever it be,
two things are common both to Riot, Route, and unlawful assembly: the one,
that three persons at the least be gathered together: for so it is commonly
taken at this day, as I have learned: the other, that they being together, do
breed disturbance of the peace, either by signification of speech, show of
armor, turbulent gesture, or actual and express violence: so that either the
peaceable sort of men be unquieted, and feared by the fact, or the lighter
sort, and busy bodies emboldened by the example. Thus far M. Lamberd in his
Eirenarcha. lib. 2. cap. 5. etc. Where you may read more worth the noting,
though too long to be copied out. See Riot, and Unlawful assembly. Kitchen
gives the same definition of a Route, fol. 20.

Rowing of clothes anno 27. H. 8. cap. 13.

Royal assent (regius assensus) is that approbation which the King gives to a
thing formerly done by others: as to the election of a Bishop by Deane and
Chapter. Which given, then he sends an especial writ to some person for the
taking of his fealty. The form of which writ you may see in Fitz. not. br.
fol. 170. C. And also to a bill passed by both the Houses of Parliament.
Cromptons Iuris. fol. 8. which assent being once given, the bill is indorsed
with these words: Le Roy veult, i. it pleases the King. If he refuse to agree
unto it, then thus: Le roy aduisera. 1. the King will yet think of it. See
Parliament.

Royalties (regalia vel regalitates) be the rights of the King. Iura Regis.
Hotoman in verbis feudal: verbo. Regum Feudistae. And so are they understood
of us likewise, who otherwise call them the Kings prerogative. See Prerogative.
And some of these be such as the King may grant unto common persous, some so
high, as may not be separated from his own Crown privative as the Ciuilians
term it, though cumulatiue he may. See Bracton lib. 2. cap. 5. These be in
some sort expressed in the first of Samuel. cap. 8. but these generalities be
specified more at large by those Lawyers that write of this point. Among whom I
especially commend Mathaeum de Afflictis upon the title of the Feuds. Quae sint
regalia. being the 33. title of the third book, as some divide them, but
according to others the 56. of the second book: where be named in the text 25.
specialties of Royalties. See also Hotomans Commentaries in lib. 2. Feudor.
cap. 56.

Rouge cross. See Herald.

Rudge washed Kersey. i. made of fleece wool washed only on the sheep
back. anno 35. Eliz. cap. 10.

S
SAbles. See Furre.

Sac (sacha vel Sacca) is a Royalty or privilege touching plee, and correction
of trespasses of men within a manner. Rastal, titulo expos: of words: where he
adds this reason: because (says he) Sac in english is (Encheson) in French:
as to say, for sick, sack, pour quel encheson. i. for what hurt. That which our
common lawyers call (encheson) the true French man terms (Achoise. i.
occasionem) as (Achoise fort grande, occasio ampla) or else may encheson come of
(Encheoir. i. incidere) which we in english call an accident, or incident. But
all this is far enough from (sac) and from the interpretation thereof, as it
is a liberty or privilege. Bracton has the word, as Stawnford not eth out of
him, pl. cor: li. pri: cap: 23. but neither of them both do particularly
interpret it. Bractons words be these lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 8. vel si sit
aliquis qui de concessione Domini Regis talem habeat libertatem (sicut sock and
sack, Tolnetum, Team, Infang thief, and Hutfanghhefe) qui inue^tus fuerit
seisitus de alique latrocmio, sicut Hondhabende and Backberend, tales habent
regale^ potestate^: and vnde qui tales libertates habe^t, habebu^t prisonam
suam de talibus, quia possunt tales in Curia sua iudicare. Of the which matter
he speaks also in lib. 2. cap. 24. nu. 2. and 3. and again lib. 3. tracta.
2. cap. 35. But in none of these places he gives any interpretation of the
word. Saxon in his description of England defines Sack to be a forfeiture, as
does Rastall vbi supra. fol, 132. M. Camden in his Britan: page 415. speaking
of Lincoln. has these words: Eduardo Confessore regnante, erant (ex censuali
libro loquor) 1070. mansiones hospitalae, and duodecim Lageman habentes socam
and sacam. To all these add Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 5. where he writes thus.
Sunt and aliaeres quasi sacrae, quae personam Regis recipient, and aliquando
transferri non possunt, nisi Iusticiariis Domini Rogis, ficut visus
Franciplegii, placita de vetito nannio, emendatio transgressionis Assisarum,
Iudicium latronum, sicut de illis qui habent sock and sack, and huiusmodi
omnia, quae pertinent ad pacem, and per consequens ad Coronam. I am informed,
that the word (sack) in the Saxon tongue does properly signify so much as
(causa) with the Latins: whence we in English have the word (sake) as (for
whose sake.) M. Skene de verbor. signif. verbo, Sack, writes thus. In some
old books it is called placitum and emenda de transgressione hominum in Curia
nostra. In the laws of king Edward set forth by M. Lamberd, fol. 132. it is
written, (Sacha) Sacha aute^ est, si quilibet alique^ nomin atim de aliquo
calumniatus fuerit, and ille negauerit, foris factura probationis vel
negationis, (si euenerit) sua erit. Which may be called the amercement paid by
him, who denies that thing, which is proved against him to be true, or
affirms that thing, the contrary whereof is true. Thus far M. Skene. Fleta
of this has these words: Sake significat acquietantiam de secta ad Comitatum,
and Hundredum. lib. pri. cap. 47.. Sake. But by all those I find not any reason
of the word, that is, why this liberty should be so called, and therefore I
must leave it to beter Antiquaries or Linguists. see Rog. H. part. poster.
suorum annaliu^. f. 345.

Saccus cum brochia, seems to be a service of finding a sack and a broch to
the King by virtue of a tenure, for the use of his army. Bract. li. 2. c. 16.
n. 6.

Sack of wool, (saccus laenae) is a quantity of wool, that contains 26.
stone, and a stone, fourteen pounds, anno 14. Ed. 3. stat. 1. cap. 21. See
Sarplar.

Sacramento recipiendo, quod vidua Regis se non maritabit sine licentia Regis,
is a writ or commission to one for the taking of an oath of the Kings widow,
that she shall not marie without the Kings license. Register original, fol.
298. a.

Safe conduict. See Saulf conduict.

Salus, is a coin of gold stamped by king Henry the sixth in France, which
only come, with another of Blanes of eight pence a piece, was current in those
places of France, where King Henry was obeyed. Stowes Annals, page 586.

Safe pledge (Salvus plegius) is a surety given for a man's appearance against a
day assigned, Bracton lib. 4. cap. 2. nu. 2. where it is also called certus
plegius.

Sailing ware. anno prim. R. 3. cap. 8.

Sak. See Sac.

Sakebere, in Britton cap. 15. and 29. seems to be he that is robbed, or by
theft deprived of his goods: with whom Bracton also agrees, lib. 3. tracta.
2. cap. 32. nu. 2. iu these words: Furtum vero manifestum est, vbi latro
deprehensus sit feisitus de aliquo latrocini o. sc. Hondhabende, and
Backberend, and insecutus fuerit per aliquem, cuius res illa fuerit. qui
dicitur Sacaburthe, etc. or Sathaber, as Stawnford calls it, pl. cor. lib.
pri. cap. 21. The interpretation of this word I find not. Only M. Skene de
verb. interpretatione. verbo. (Sacreborgh) thinks it should rather be
written. Sickerborgh, of (Sicker. i. Securus) and (Borgh. i. plegius)
signifiing a sure cautioner or surety which one finds to another for theft,
or slaughter: whereof he offers to accuse him iudicially. For in this case it
behooves the persiewer to oblige, or bind himself into the hands of the
officer, or before a Judge competent with Sicker borgh, or sure caution, that
he will persiew in form of law. And by this means it may be, that the
accuser was wont with us to be called Sakbere of a circumstance, because in
this case he was surely bound to persiew. Sycker is also an old english word,
signifiing as much as sure, secure, or certain, and see Borowe.

Salet, is a headpeece. anno 4. and 5. Phil and Mar. it seems to come from
the French (Salut. i. Salus).

Salmon sewse, seems to be the young fry of Salmon, quasi salmon issue. anno
13. R. 3. stat. pri. cap. 19.

Salva Gardia, is a security given by the King to a stranger, fearing the
violence of some of his subjects, for seeking his right by course of law: the
form whereof see in the Register original. fol. 26. a. b.

Sanctuary (Sanctuarium) is a place privileged by the prince, for the
safeguard of men's lives, that are offenders, being founded upon the law of
mercy, and upon the great reverence, honor, and devotion, which the Prince
bears to the place, whereunto he grants such a privilege. Of this you may
read a sufficient treatis in Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 38. This seems to
have taken beginning from the Cities of refuge, which Moses appointed them to
fly unto for safeguard of their lives, that had by casualty slain a man.
Exodus, cap. 21. In bastardly imitation whereof, first the Athenians, then
Romulus erected such a place of immunity, which they, and he after them called
Ayslum. Polidor: Virg: de inuentione rerum, lib. 3. cap. 12. The Emperors of
Rome made the places of their own statues or Images, a place of refuge, as
appears. Cod. lib. 1. titulo 15. De iis qui ad statuas confugiunt: as also
the Churches: eodem, titulo 12. De iis qui ad ecclesias confugiunt, etc. But
among all other nations, our ancient Kings of England seem to have attributed
most to these Sanctuaries, permitting them to shelter such, as had committed
both felonies, and treasons, so that within forty days they acknowledged
their fault, and so submitted themselves to banishment: during which time, if
any man expelled them, if he were lay, he was excommunicated, if a Clerk, he
was made irregular. But after forty days noe man might relieve them. Stawnf.
vbi supra. See of this the new book of Entries: verb Sanctuary: and Fleta:
lib. 1. cap. 29. And how by degrees they have been taken away, you may read
partly in him, and partly in the statutes. a. 26. H. 8. ca. 13. and anno 28.
eiusdem, ca. 7. and anno 32. eiusd. ca. 12. and anno 33. eiusdem, cap. 15. and
anno pri: Ed. 6. cap. 12. and ann. 2. eiusdem, cap. 2. and cap. 33. and anno 5.
eiusdem, cap. 10. See Abiuration.

Salarie (salarium) is a recompense or consideration made to any man for his
pains or industry bestowed upon another man's business. So called, as Pliny
says, qui tam necessarium quam sal homini. The word you have anno. 23. Ed. 3.
ca pri.

Salmon pipe, anno 25. H. 8. cap. 7. is an engine to catch Salmons and such
like fish.

Sandall, anno 2. Rich. 2. cap. 1. is a merchandise brought into England. And
it seems to be a kind of wood brought out of India. For (Sandal) in French
so signifies, and in latin it is called Santalum.

Sarcling time, or time of sarcling. Seems to be all one with hey seele. Or
the time when the country man weedeth his corn. And it proceeds from the
latin sarculare, to rake or weed. Or from the French (Sarcler) which has all
one signification.

Sarpler (Sarplera lanae) is a quantity of woll. This in Scotland is called
Serplathe, and contains fourscore stone, for the Lords in the counsel in
anno 1527. decreed four serpliathes of packed wolle to contain 16. score
stone of woll, by the trafique of Merchants now used. The Merchants use to
fraught for their goods to Flanders, by the Sack, to France, Spain, and
England, by the Tun, and to Dansken and the Easter seas, by the Serplia^the.
Skene de verbo. significatione, verbo. Serpliathe. with us in England a load
of wolle (as I have been informed) consists of 80. todde, each todde
consisting of two stone, and each stone of 14. pound. And that a Sack of wolle
is in common accoumpt equal with a load: and a Sarpler (otherwise called a
pocket) is half a Sack. Further that a pack of wolle is a horse load, which
consists of 17. stone. two pounds. Fleta lib. 2. cap. 12. says that all our
English measures are compounded of the penny sterling, which weighs 32. wheat
corns of the middle sort. and that 2. of those pence make an ounce, and 12.
ounces a pound in weight, or 20. shillings in number, and that 8. pound of
wheat makes a ialon or a galon as we now call it, and eight galons a bushel,
and 8. bushels a common quarter. Also that 15. ounces of the quantity
aforesaid do make a merchants pound. And that 12. such pound and a half,
make a stone, and that 14. stone make a weigh, and that two waighes or 28.
stone, make a sack of wolle, which ought to weigh a quarter of wheat, and that
12. sacks make a last. So that a weigh, and a sarpler seems to be all one,
but that the sarpler is the case, and the weigh respects the quantity of the
wolle it self: And that a load and a sack is all one.

Saunkfin, is a pharse used by Britton. cap. 119. for the determination, or
final end, of the lineall race, or descent of a kindred. It seems to come
from the French (Sang. i. sanguis) and Fine. i. finitus.)

Sauer de default, is word for word, to excuse a default. This is properly,
when a man having made default in court, comes afterward and alleges good
cause, why he did it, as imprisonment at the same time, or such like. New
book of Entries. verbo. Sauer de default.

Saulfe conduict (Salvus conductus) is a security given by the Prince, under
the broad seal to a stranger, for his quiet coming in and passing out of the
Realm, touching which you may see the statuts. anno 15. H. 6. cap. 3. and anno
18. eiusdem. ca. 18. and anno 28. H. 8. cap. pri. The form of this see in the
Register original, fol. 25.

Stawnford, was a man very learned in the common laws of the land, wherein he
wrote 2. books one termed the plees of the Crown, the other the Princes
prerogative. He flourished in the days of Ed. the sixth, and of Queen Mary,
being in Queen Mary's days a Judge, and knighted.

Scandalum Magnatum, is the especial name of a wrong done to any high
personage of the land, as Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and other Nobles:
and also of the Chanceler, treasurer, clerk of the privy seal, steward of the
kings house, Justice, of the one bench or of the other, and other great
officers of the realm, by false news: or horrible and false messages, whereby
debates and discords betwixt them and the commons, or any scandal to their
persons might arise. anno 2. R. 2. cap. 5.

Scauage, otherwise called Shewage is a kind of toll, or custom exacted by
Majors, Shyreeue, and Baylifs of Cities and Borough towns, of Merchants for
wares showed to be soulde within their precincts, which is forbidden by the
statute. anno 19. H. 7. cap. 8. It comes of the Saxon word (Sceawe) to behold
or view, or to show. whence is the word (Sceaw-stowe) a theater or show place,
a beholding place. M. Verstegan in his restitution of decayed intelligences.
litera S.

Scire facias, is a writ Judicial, most commonly to call a man to show cause
unto the Court, whence it is sent, why execution of a Judgment passed, should
not be made. This writ is not granted before a year and a day be passed after
the Judgment given, old not. br. fol. 151. Scire facias upon a fine, lies
after a year and a day from the fine levied. Otherwise it is all one with the
writ hababere facias seisinam. West. part. 2. simb. titulo fines, sect. 137.
See an. 25. Edwardi 3. Sta. 5. cap. 2. v. anno 39. Eliz. cap. 7. The Register
original and Judicial also in the table shows many other diversities of
this writ, which read. See also the new book of Entries. verb. Scire facias.

Scyra. Camd. Britan. page 103. and 544. See Shyre.

Scot, seems to come of the French (eseot. i. symbolum) Rastall says it is a
certain custom, or common tallage made to the use of the Shyreeue, or his
Baylifes. Saxon in his description of England. cap. 11. says thus: Scot a
gadering to work of Bailes: what he means God knows I think the place is
corruptly printed. Scot (says M. Camden out of Mathewe of Westminster:) illud
dicitur, quod ex diuersisrebus in vnum aceruum aggregatur. In the laws of
William the Conqueror, set forth by M. Lamberd: fol. 125. you have these
words, Et omnis Francigena, qui tempore Edwardi propinqui nostri fuit in
Anglia, particeps consuetudinum Anglorum, quod dicunt ane hlote, and aue scote
persol^antur secundum legem Anglorum.

Scot and Lot. anno 33. H. 8. ca. 19. signifies a custumary contribution laid
upon all subjects after their hability. Roger Houeden writes it Aulote and
Auscote, in principio Henrici secundi.

Scotall (Scotalla) is a word used in the Charter of the Forest. ca. 7. in
these words, as Pupilla oculi has them, part 5. cap. 22. Nullus Forestarius
vel Bedellus, faciat Scotallas, vel garbas colligat, vel aliquam collectam
faciat. etc. M. Manwood part pri. of his Forest laws. page 216. thus defines
it. A Scotall is where any officer of the Forest does keep an alehouse within
the Forest, by color of his office, causing men to come to his house, and
there to spend their money, for sear of having displeasure. It seems to be
compounded of Scot and Ale.

Scutagio habendo, is a writ that lies for the King or other Lord against the
Tenent, that houldeth by knights service, (wherein homage, fealty, and escuage
be contained) being to make a viage to war against the Scots, or French men.
For in those cases, this writ issues out to all such tenants to serve by
themselves, or a sufficient man in their place, or else to pay, etc. See Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 83. It is used in the Register original, for him to recover
escuage of others, that has either by service or fine performed his own to
the King. fo. 88. a.

Sealer (Sigillator) is an officer in Chauncerie, whose duty is to seal the
writs and instruments there made.

Seane fish, anno 1. Jacob. ses. 1. cap. 25. Sea ne fish, ibidem, seems to be
that fish which is taken with a very great and long net called a seane.

Second deliverance (Secunda deliberatione) is a writ that lies for him who
after a return of catel repleuied adjudged to him that distreined them, by
reason of a default in the party that replevied, for the repleuying of the same
catell again, upon security put in for the redeliuerie of them, if in case
the distress be justified. New book of Entries. verbo, Replevin in second
deliverance. fol. 522. col. 2. v. Dyer fol. 41. n. 4. 5.

Secta ad Curiam, is a writ that lies against him, who refuses to perform
his suite either to the County, or Court Baron. Fitz. not. br. fol. 158.

Secta facienda per illum qui habet eniciam partem, is a writ to compel the
heir that has the elders part of the cobeires, to perform service for all
the coparceners, Regist. origin. f. 177. a.

Secta molendini, is a writ lying against him, that has used to grind at the
mill of B. and after goes to another mill with his corn. Register origin.
fol. 153. Fitz. not. br. fol. 122. But it seems by him, that this writ lies
especially for the Lord against his frank Tenants, who hold of him by making
suite to his mill, eodem. See the new book of Entries. verbo Secta ad
molendinum. By likelihood this service is also in France. For Balduinui ad
titulum de servitutibus pradiorum, in Institut. has these words: Bannalis mola
nova and barbarae seruitutis species est, qua hodie passim rustici coguntur vna
mola, quam bannalem vocamus, vnoque furno vti ad quaestum Domini, qui fortasse
praeest iurisdictioni eius pagi.

Sectam proferre, est testimonium leg alium hominum qui contractui inter eos
habito interfuerint praesentes producere. Fleta lib. 2. cap. 63.. Nullus. And
secta is used for a witness. Idem, lib. 4. cap. 16.. final. Habes tamen sectam
vnam vel plures, etc.

Secta ad Iusticiam faciendam, is a service due for ^a man's see to be
performed, ^eing by his see bound thereunto. Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 16. number. 6.

Secta vnica tanium facienda pro pluribus haereditatibus, is a writ that lies
for that heir that is distreined by the Lord to more suites then one, in
respect of the land of diverse heirs descended unto him. Register orig. fol.
177. a.

Sectis non faciendis, is a writ, that lies for one in wardship to be
delivered of all suites of Court during his wardship, Register origin. fol.
173. b. See other use of ^^is writ, eodem, fol. 174. touching women that for
their dower ought not to perform suite of Court.

Seounda superoneratione pastura, is a writ that lies, where measurement of
pasture has been made, and he that first surcharged the common, does again
surcharge it, the measurement notwithstanding. Register origin. fol. 157.
oldnat. br. fol. 73.

Secundarie, (secundarius) is the name of an Officer next unto the chief
Officer: as the Secundarie of the fine Office: the Secundarie of the Counter:
which is (as I take it) next to the Shyreeue in London in each of the two
Counters. Secundarie of the office of the privy seal. anno 1. Ed. 4. cap. 1.
Secundaries of the Pipe two: Secundarie to the Remembrancers, two, which be
Officers in the Exchequer. Camden. page 113.

Securitatem inueniendi, quod se non diuertat ad parts exteras fine licentia
Regis, is a writ that lies for the King against any of his subjects, to stay
them from going out of his kingdom. The ground whereof is this, that every man
is bound to serve and defend the Commonwealth, as the King shall think meet.
Fitz. not. br. fol. 85.

Securitate pacis, is a writ that lies for one, who is threatened death or
danger, against him that threateneth, taken out of the Chauncerie to the
Shyreeue: whereof the form and farther use you may see in the Register origin.
fol. 88. b. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 79.

Se defendendo, is a plee for him that is charged with the death of another,
saying that he was driven unto that which he did, in his own defense, the
other so assaulting him, that if he had not done as he did, he must have been
in peril of his own life. Which danger ought to be so great, as that it
appear incuitable. As Stawnford says in his plees of the Crown. li. 1. ca.
7. And if he do justify it to be done in his own defense, yet is he driven
to procure his pardon of course from the Lord Chanceler, and forfeiteth his
goods to the King. As the said author says in the same place.

Seignior (Dominus) is borrowed of the French (seigneur) It signifies in the
general signification, as much as Lord: but particularly it is used for the
Lord of the sea, or of a manner, even as (Dominus) or (senior) among the
Feudists, is he, who grants a a fee or benefit out of his land to another.
And the reason is, (as Hotoman says) because having granted the use and
profit of the land to another: yet the property. i. (Dominium) he still
reteineth in himself. See Hotoman in verbis feudal. verbo Dominus, and Senior.
Seignior in gross, seems to be he that is Lord, but of no manner, and
therefore can keep no court. Fitz. not. br. fol. 3. b. See Seignorie.

Seignourage. anno 9. H. 5. stat. 2. cap. 1. seems to be a regalitie or
prerogative of the king, whereby he challenges allowance of gold and silver
brought in the mass to his Exchange, for coin.

Seignorie (Dominium) is borrowed of the French (seigneury. i. ditio, dominatus,
imperium, principatus, potentatus.) It signifies peculiarly with us, a Manner,
or Lordship. Seignorie de soke man's. Kitchen fol. 80. Seignorie in gross,
seems to be the title of him that is not Lord by means of any manner, but
immediately in his own person: as Tenure in capite, whereby one holds of the
King, as of his Crown, is seignorie in gross: because it is held of the king
for the time being, and not of the King, as of any honor, manner, etc. Kitchen,
fol. 206. See Seignior.

Seisin (seisina) is borrowed of the French (seisine. i. possessio,) and so it
signifies in our common law: and to seize, is to take possession. Primier
seisin (prima seisina) is the first possession. See Primier seisin, of the
French word (seisir) is made a Latin (seisire,) used by the Canonists. cap.
Clericis. Nos igitur non semel de immunitate Ecclesiae, number. 6. as also the
Ciuilians. Guido. Pap. singula. 865. Seisire est etiam possessionem tradere.
Tiraquellus in Tractatu. Le mort saisit le vif. page 53. number. 3. Seisin with
our common Lawyers, is two fold: seisin in fact, and seisin in law. Perkins
Dower. 369. 370. Seisin in fact is, when a corporal possession is taken:
seisin in law, is when something is done, which the law accompteth a seisin,
as an Inrolment. Seisin in law, is as much as a right to lands and tenements,
though the owner be by wrong disseised of them. Perkins Tenent per le
courtesy. 457. 478. And it seems by Ingham, that he who has had an hours
possession quietly taken, has seisin de droit, and de claim, whereof no man
may disscise him by his own force or subtlety, but must be driven to his
action.. Bref denovel disseisin. Sir Edward Cook lib. 4. calls it seisin in
law, or seisin actual. fol. 9. a. The Ciuilians call the one ciuilem
possessionem, the other naturalem.

Seisiua habenda quia Rex habuit annum, diem, and vastum, is a writ that lies
for the delivery of seisin to the Lord, of his land, or tenements, that
formerly was convicted of felony, after the King in the right of his
prerogative has had the year, day, and wast. Rog. orig. fol. 165. a.

Selion (selio) is borrowed of the French (sellon. i. terra elata inter duos
sulcos) in Latin (Porca) in english a Ridge, or land. It signifies even so
with us also: and is of no certain quantity, but some time contains an acre,
sometime half an acre, sometime more, and sometime less. West. part 2.
symbol: titulo. Recovery: sect: 3. Therefore Crompton in his Jurisdictions:
fol: 221. says, that a selion of land cannot be in demand, because it is a
thing uncertain.

Seneshall (senescallus) is a French word, but borrowed from Germany, being (as
Tilius says) compounded of Schal. i. servus, aut officialis, and (Gesnid. 1.
familia) we english it a Steward. As the high Seneshall, or Steward of England:
pl. cor: fol. 152. High Seneshall or Steward, and South seneshall, or
vndersteward. Kitchen fol. 83: is understood for a steward, or vndersteward of
Courts. Seneshal de l'hostel de Roy, Steward of the Kings household. Cromptons
Jurisdictions. fol. 102.

Senescallo and Mareshallo quod non teneant placita de libero tenemento, etc.
is a writ directed to the Steward or Marshall of England, inhibiting them to
take cognizance of any action in their court, that concerns either Freehold,
dept, or covenant. Register orig. fol. 185. a. 191. b.

Senie, alias, Seen, (sena) is a leaf of a medicinable herb, that brings
forth stalks of a cubite high, purging phlegmatic, choleric, and also
melancholicke humors, without great violence. The farther use whereof you may
read in Gerrards Herbal. lib. 3. cap. 8. This is mentioned among other drugs
and spices to be garbled. anno 1. Jacob. cap. 19.

Septuagesima is a sunday certain, and always the third sabbath before
Shrouesunday, from the which until the Octaues after Easter, the solemnizing
of marriage is by the Canon laws forbidden. The reason whereof is given, for
that all this time until Easter, is a time of mourning for the fall of Adam,
and for the misery of man thereof ensuing. And Easter with the Octaues thereof
is a time of Christ's glorification, and so of ours also in him, for his, and by
him our conquest over death and sin. And that therefore all carnal affection
ought, during that space, to be wholly mortified in us See Quinquagesima, see
Aduent, see Rogation week.

Sequatur sub suo periculo, is a writ, that lies, where a summons ad
warrantizandum is awarded, and the Shyreeue returns, that he has nothing,
whereby he may be summoned. For then goes out an (Alias) and (Pluries) And if
he come not at the (Pluries) then shall go out this writ. old not. br. fol. 163.

Sequestration (sequestratio) is a separating of a thing in controversy from
the possession of both those that contend for it. And it is double: voluntary,
or necessary Voluntary, is that which is used by the consent of each party.
Necessary is that, which the Judge of his authority does, whether the parties
will or not. It is used also for the act of the ordinary disposing of office,
the goods and chatels of one deceased, whose estate no man will meddle with.
Dyer. fol. 232. number. 5. and fol. 256. number. 8. and fol. 160. nu. 42. and fol.
271. number. 26. As also in the gathering of the fruits of a Benefice void, to
the use of the next incumbe^t. anno 28. H. 8. cap. 11. Fortescue cap. 50. and
in diverse other cases.

Sequestro habendo, is a writ judicial for the dissoluing of a sequestration
made by the Bishop, at the Kings commandment, of the fruits of a benefice,
thereby to compel the Parson to appear at the suite of another: for the
Parson upon his appearance may have this writ, for the release of the
sequestration. egist. Judicial. fol. 36. a.

Sergeant (seruiens) comes of the French (sergeant. i. satelles, accensus) a
man of the Guard, a kind of soldier, so called, because he was saepe aecitus
ad res necessarias in exercitu peragendas. Calepin. M. Skene de ver. sign.
verb. Seriant, has these words: Sergeant comes from Sergent: quae est vox
composita de (Serrer) quod est, includere, and gent, quod pro gente, populo vel
plebe vsurpatur. Itaque Seriandus dicitur, qui iussu magistratus, quemlibet de
populo reum crimin is in carcerem coniicit, seu includit. This word Sergeant is
diversely used in our law, and applied to sundry offices and callings. First, a
Sergeant at law, (or of the coyfe) is the highest degree taken in that
profession, as a Doctor is in the civil law. And to these, as men best
learned, and best experienced of all others, is there one court severed, to
plead in by themselves: (and that is the Court of common-plees) where the
common law of England is most strictly observed. These are made by the Kings
mandat, or writ, directed unto them, commanding them upon a great penalty, to
take upon them that degree by a day certain therein assigned. Dyer fol. 72.
number. 1. see Count. And of these one is the Kings Sergeant, being commonly
chosen by the King out of the rest, in respect of his great learning, to plead
for him in all his causes: as namely, in causes of treason. pl. cor. lib. 3.
cap. prim. And of these there may be more if it so please the King. This is
called in other Kingdoms, Aduocatus Regius. Cassan. de consuet. Burgund. page
850. With what solemnity these Sergeants be created, read Fortescue, cap. 50.
This word Sergeant seems to be used in Brition for an Officer belonging to
the County: who, in his first chapter speaking of Appeals made before the
Corones, has these words in effect: And then let the Coroner cause his appeal
to be entered, and the names of his sureties. And afterward let commandment be
given to the Sergeant of the country, where the felony was committed, that he
have the body of the persons appealed at the next County. And it is probable,
that this officer was all one with him, whom Bracton in his fifth book cap. 4.
number. 2. calls Seruientem Hundredi. of whom he has these words: Post
probationem defaltae, faciet seruiens Hundreds incontinenti summonitionem, vel
affidet partibus diem, si praesentes sint, ad proximum Comitatum, etc. This is
like to be the same Officer, which in ancient time was called the Bayliffe of
the Hundred, who (as is declared in Baylife) had the like authority in his
Hundred, that the shyreeue had in the County, though inferior to him, and to
be controlled by him, as appears by diverse ancient presidents set down by
Kitchen in his tractat of Returns in Court Hundred, Court Baron, etc. I read
also in Bracton lib. 3. tractat: 2. ca. 28. Of the Kings Sergeant, who is like
to be also an officer in the County, in these words: speaking of a woman
ranished, and what she ought to do for the persuite of the Rauisher and sic
ire debet ad praepositum Hundredi, and ad seruientem Domini Regis, and ad
coronatores, and ad vice-comite^, and ad primu^ comitatu^ faciat appellu^ suum.
And again eod. li: c: 32. in these words: and si sine secta cognouerit se inde
esse latronem coram vicecomite, vel coronatore, vel seruiente Domini Regis,
etc. And again lib. 5. tractat: 3. cap. 4. nu. 8. in these words. Quid si
seruiens Domini Rogis dederit partibus diem ad Comitatum, etc. And by Fleta it
seems, that this term was general to the Shyreeue, Coroner, and Bayliffes
of Counties, who in his sixth book. cap: 3.. 1. has these word: Cum quis
igitur senserit dominum suum vel curiam suam sibi de recto defecisse, tunc
ostenso hoc vicecomiti, statim praecipiat balliuo Hundredi, vel itineranti, vel
alteri seruienti Regis, quod assumptis sibi liberis, and legalibus hominibus de
vicineto illo, ad curiam illius domini, si quem habuerit accedat, etc. And to
help this probability, I find that the steward of a manner is termed seruiens
manerii. Coke Vol: 4. Copyhould cases. fo. 21. a. Then is there a Sergeant at
arms (seruiens ad arma) whose office is to attend the person of the King, anno
7. H. 7. ca. 3. to arrest traitors, or men of worth or reckoning, that do, or
are like to contemn messengers of ordinary condition for other causes, and to
attend the Lord high Steward of England sitting in Judgment upon any Traitor,
and such like: pl: cor. lib. 3. cap. pri: Of these by the statute anno 13. R.
2. cap. 6. there may not be above thirty in the Realm. This sort is called
del espee. In the custumary of Nor. ca. 5. which read. There be also some two
of these Sergeants of the Parliament, one for the upper, another for the lower
house, whose office seems to serve for the keeping of the doors, and the
execution of such commandments, especially touching the apprehension of any
offender, as either house shall think good to inioyne them. See Cromptons
Jurisdictions, fol. nono. See also Vowels, alias Hookers book of the order of
the Parl. There is one of these that belongs to the Chauncery, who is also
called a Sergeant of the Mace, as the rest may be, because they carry Maces by
there office. He of the Chauncery attends the Lord Chaunceler, or Keeper in
that court, for the means to call all men into that court, is either by this
officer or by sub poena. West. pa. 2. sym. tit. Chauncery Sect. 17. Then be
there sergeants that be the chief officers in their several functions within
the kings household, which be chief in their places, of which sort you may
read many named in the statute anno 33. H. 8. ca. 12. There is also a more base
kind of sergeant of the Mace, whereof there is a troop in the City of London,
and other towns corporate, that serve the Mayor or other head officer, both
for mesniall attendance, and matter of Justice. Kitchen fol. 143. And these are
called Seruientes ad claua^. New book of Entries. ver. scire facias: in
Mainperners. f. 538. c. 3.

Sergeantie) Seriantia) comes of the French (Sergeant. i. satelles) and
fignifieth in our common law, a service due to the King from his tene^t holding
by such service. For this service cannot be due to any L. from his Tene^t, but
to the King only. And this is either grand, or petit, as you shall find at
large set down in Chivalrie. Of this also you may read Bra l. 2. c. 16. etc.
37. n. 5. 4. and Brit.. c. 66. n. 1. and 2. See Service. M. Skene de ver.
signifi. calls this Sergeanterie, defining and dividing it as we do in
England.

Servientibus, are certain writs touching servants, and their Masters
violating the statutes made against their abuses. which see in the Regist.
orig. fol. 189. and 190. and 191.

Service (seruitium) though it have a general signification of duty toward
them unto whom we owe the performance of any corporal labor, or function:
yet more especially in our common law, it is used for that service, which the
tenent by reason of his see, owes unto his Lord. And so does it signify among
the Feudists also For Hotoman thus defines it. Seruitium est munus obsequii
clientelaris. verbo Servitium. De verbis feudal. or rather declares it so to
be defined. lib. feud. 2. titulo 51.. 8. It is sometime called seruage, as
anno. i. R. 2. cap. 6. This service is either military, and noble, commonly
called Knights service: or clownishe and base, commonly called socage. of both
which read Chiualry, as also socage. and Bracton lib. 2. cap. 16. Service is
divided by Britton into personal, and real. cap. 66. where he makes wards,
mariags, homage, Releifs, and such like, to be real services: personal, I
imagine, may those be called, that are to be performed by the person of the
Tenent, as to follow his Lord into war, etc. The Ciuilians divide munera in
this sort, either in personalia, or patrimonalia. Then Bracton vbi supra number.
7. distributeth seruitium in intrinsecum, and extrin secum alias forinsecum.
and medium. Seruitium intrinsecu^ is that, which is due to the capital Lord of
the manner, Forinsecum is that which is due to the King, and not to the capital
Lord, but when he goes in his own person to serve: or when he has satisfied
the king for all services whatsoever. And again in the same place he says, it
is called Fornisecum, quia fit, and capitur foris, sive extra seruitium, quod
fit Domino capitali. see Foreign service. Of this read him vbi supra, more at
large. and Fleta, lib. 2. ca. 14.. Continetur. Seruitia quae nec intrinseca nec
forinseca sunt, Bract. handles in the same chap. n. 8. saying thus: sunt etiam
quaedam consuetudines, quae nec dicuntur intrinsecae, nec forinsecae: sed sunt
quaedam seruitia concomitantia, sicut seruitia regalia, and militaria, and
etiam homagia: and ideo in chartis non sunt exprimenda. Quia si homagium
praecesserit, and regale seruitium, sequitur exinde quod ad capitalem Dominum
pertinebit Releuium, and custodia, and maritagium: sieve seruitium sit militare,
vel seriantia propter exercitum, etc. Here then Relief, Ward, and Marriage, be
those services, which he calls, nec intrinseca, nec forinseca, sed
concomitantia. Service is also divided into frank service, and base, or
villenous service: the one Bracton, calls (liberum seruitium) the other
(seruitium villanum) or (villenagium) lib. 2. cap. 8. nu. pri. This villenagium
is Socage in base tenure, as to dung the Lords ground, to serve him so many
days in harvest, to plash his hedges, etc. or else copy hold. All other
services seem to be frank. Service consists some in seisance, some in
render. Perkins Reseruations. 696. Service seems also to be divided into
continual, otherwise annual, and casual, or accidental. An example of the
former is the seisin of rent, and of the other, seisin of relief. Sir Ed.
Cooks reports. lib. 4. Bevils case. fol. 9. a. See Copy hold: See Socage. see
Aid.

Service secular. anno 1. Ed. 4 ca. 1. which may be contrary to spiritual,
viz. the service divine commanded to spiritual men by their founders.

Servitours of bills, seem to be such servants or messengers of the marishall
belonging to the kings bench, as were sent abroad with bills, or writs to summon
men to that court, being now more ordinarily called Tip. stafs.

Servitiis acquietandis, is a writ Judicial, that lies for one distreined for
services by John, which owes and performs to Robert, for the acquitall of
such services. Register Judicial, fol. 27. a. and 36. b.

Sessions (Sessiones) signifies in our common law a sitting of Justices in
court upon their commission: as the sessions of oyer, and terminer. pl. cor.
fol. 67. Quarter sessions, otherwise called general sessions. anno 5. Elizab.
cap. 4. or open sessions. ibidem. Opposite whereunto are especial, otherwise
called privy sessions, which are procured upon some special occasion, for the
more speedy expedition of Justice in some cause. Cromptons Justice of peace.
fol. 110. what things be inquirable in general sessions see Cromptons Justice
of peace, fol. 109. Petit sessions, or statute sessions, are kept by the high
Constable of every Hundred, for the placing of servants, anno 5. Eli. cap.
quart. in fine.

Sessour. anno 25. Ed. 3. cap. 6. seems to signify so much as assessing or
rating of wages at this day,

Set clothes, anno. 27. Henric. 8. cap. 13.

Setwell, Valeriana, is a medicinal herb, the nature and diverse kinds whereof
you have in Gerards herball, lib. 2. cap. 424. The root of this is mentioned
among drugs to be garbled, anno. 1. Ia. cap. 19.

Seuerance, is the singling of two or more, that join in one writ, or are
joined in one writ. For example, if two join in a writ de liberate probanda,
and the one afterward be non-suite, here seuerance is permitted; so that,
notwithstanding the non-suite of the one, the other may severally proceed.
Fitzh. not. br. fol. 78. I. K. Of this see Brook, titulo severance, and
summons. fol. 238. For it is harder to know in what cases seuera^ce is
permitted, then what it is. There is also seuera^ce of the tenants in an
Assise, when as one or two, or more disseisours appears upon the writ, and
not the other. New book of Entries, fo. 81. col. 4. and seuerance in attaints.
eod. fol. 95. col. 2. And seuerance in debt. verbo. debt. fol. 220. col. 1. see
the said book, verbo Seuerance.

Several tail (tallium separatum) is that whereby land is given and entayled
severally to two. For example, land is given to two men, and their wives, and
to the heirs of their bodies begotten: the Donees have joint estate for their
two lives, and yet they have several inheritance: because the issue of the one
shall have his moiety, and the issue of the other, the other moyetie, Kitchen
ibidem.

Several tenancie (tenura separalis) is a plee, or exception taken to a writ,
that is laid against two as joint, which are several, Brook titulo, Several
tenancie, fol. 237.

Sewantly wouen, an. 35. El. c. 10.

Sewar, has two significations with us, one applied to him that issues or
comes in before the meat of the King, or other great personage, and places
it upon the table: the other to such passages, or gutters as carry water into
the sea, or river, in lawyers Latin called Sewera, an. 6. H. 6. c. 5. which is
also used in common speech for commissioners authorized under the broad seal
to see draines, and ditches well kept, and maintained in the marish and fenne
countries, for the better conueyance of the water into the sea, and the
preserving of the grass for feed of catell. stat. anno 6. H. 6. cap. 5. It is
probable to bring this word from the French (issir) or (issue) as if we should
call them (Issuers) because they give issue or passage to the water, etc. And
the latin word (suera) sometime used in these commissions for these draines,
is a competent reason of this conjecture: see Eitzh. not. br. in oyer and
terminer. Yet I find in an old French book containing the officers of the
King of Englands court as it was aunciently governed, that he whom in court we
now call Sewer, was called (Asseour) which may seem to come from the French
(Asseour) wherein his office in setting down the meat upon the table is well
expressed. And Sewer as it signifies an officer, is by Fleta latined Assessor:
li. 2. ca. 15. All which argues that the descent of this word is from the
French (Asseoir) as signifiing a disposing or placing of any thing, or (as we
say in English) an assessing of any person toward the performance of a duty.

Sexagesima. See Septuagesima.

Shanckes See Furre.

Shares. See Flotzon.

Showing, is to be quit of attachment in any court, and before whom soever in
plaints showed and not avowed. New exposition of law terms. verbo, Showing.
See Scauage.

Shipper. anno 1. Iac. ses. 1. ca. 33. is a Dutch word, signifying the Master
of the ship.

Shire, (Comitatus, Shira) is a Saxon word, signifying Satrapian, of the verb
(scyran. 1. partiri.) Lamb. in his explication of Saxon words. verbo Centuria.
The word is in use so rife, that every child understands it. Who first thus
divided this land into shires, appears by M. Camdens Britan. pa. 102. in
these words. Nee dum tamen florente Heptarchia, Anglia ita in Comitatus diuisa,
(sic enim vulgo vocant) sed postea, cum solus Aluredus rerum potiretur. Vt enim
Germani maiores nostri, test Tacito, iura per pagos vicosque reddebant, and
centeni ex plebe comites ad rem administrandam adiungebantur: sic ille (vt
Ingulfi Croulandensis verbi. vtar) primus Angliam in Comitatus diuisit, quod
indigenae rapinas committerent exemplo and color Danorum. Comitatus porro in
Centurias. i. Hundreds, and Decimas. i. Tythings, distribus fecit: praecepitque
vt omnis indigena in aliqua esset Centuria, and Decima. Praefectos etiam
preuinciarum, qui antea Vicedomini vocabantur, in duo officia diuisit, viz
Iudices, nunc Iusticiarios: and Vice-comites, qui adhuc idem nomen retinent.
See the rest.

Shyreeue (Vicecomes) is compounded of these saxon words (Scyre. (...)
satrapia) and (Reave i. praefectus) and accordingly he is the chief officer
under the King of his Shyre, or County. See Ferme in Lacies nobility: page 12.
M. Camden: page 104. Thus describes his office: Singulis vero annis, nobilis
aliquis ex incolis praeficitur, quem vicecomitem, quasi vicarium comitis, and
nostra lingua Shief. i. comitatus praepositum vocamus: qui etiam comitatus, vel
prouinciae Quaestor recte dici potest Eius enim est publicas pecunias prouincia
suae conquirere, mulctas irrogatas, vel pignoribus ablatis colligere, and
aerario infer, Indicibus praesto adesse, and eorum mandata exequi, duodecim
viros cogere, qui in causis de facto cognoscunt, and ad Iudices referunt
(Iudices enim apud nos, iuris solum, non facti sunt Iudices) condemnatos ad
supplicium ducere, and in minoribus litibus cognoscere. In matoribus autemius
(...) Iusticiarii, quos itiner antes ad (...)sas vos ant, qui quotannis bos.
Comitatus bis adeunt, vt de causis cognoscant, and de incarceratis fententiam
ferant. Henricus secundus hos it inerantes instituit, vel poteus restituit.
Ille (vt inquit Mathaeus Parisiensis) consilio filii sui and Episcoporum
constituit Iusticiar os per sex paries regni; in qualibet part tres, qui
iurare nt quod cuilibet ius suum conseruarent illaesum. Of the antiquity and
authority of this officer, read Sir Edward Cooks Reports. lib. 4. Mittons
case. The manner of appointing these Shyreeues in Henry the sixth his days, see
in Fortescue. cap. 24. fol. 53. b. The name Vicecomes comes from the Normans,
as Shyreeue comes from the Saxons. For in the fifth Chapter of the Grand
Custumarie, you have (viconte) which the Latin Interpreter turns
(vicecomitem) whose office you shall find in that Chapter to be very like unto
ours. The form of the Shyreeues oath see in the Register origin. fol. 301. b.
Of this read M. Skene de verbor. signif. verbo Shyreeue: where he largely
describes the office of the Shyreeue in Scotland, in a discourse worth the
reading.

Shyreeue weke of Winchester and of Essex. anno 21. R. 2. cap. 10. and 11.

Shire Clerk, seems to be the Under shyreeue. anno 11. H. 7. cap. 15. It is
used sometime for a Clerk in the County court, deputy to the Vndershyreeue.
See Sir Edward Cooks 4. book of Reports in Mittons case.

Shire moote, see Turn.

Shorling, and Morling seem to be words to distinguish fels of sheep: as if
shorling should signify the fels after the fleeces be shorn off the sheep
back, and morling the fels fleane off after they be killed or dye alone. anno
3. Ed. 4. cap. prim. and anno 4. eiusdem, cap. 3. and anno 12. eius. cap. 5.
and anno 14. eiusdem, cap. 3.

Shot comes of the Saxon word, sceate, signifying pecuntam aut vectigal.
Lamberds explication of saxon words, verbo Primitiae.

Shrof metal.

Sicut alias, is a writ sent out in the second place, whereas the first sped
not. Coke libro quart. folio 55. b. It is so called of these words expressed in
it. For example. Iacobus dei gratia, etc. vicecomiti Kan: salutem: Praeciptmus
tibi (sicut alias praecepimus) quod non omittas propter aliquam libertatem in
Balliua tua, quin eam ingrediaris, and capias. A. B. de C. in comitatu tuo
Labourer, etc. as in the first capias. Lamb: in his tractat of processes in the
end of his Eiranarcha.

Sidemen alias Quest men, be those that are yearly chosen according to the
custom of every parish, to assist the church wardens in the inquiry and
presenting such offenders to the Ordinary, as are punishable in the Court
Cristian.

Significauit, is the writ de excommunicato capiendo, which issues out of the
Chauncery upon a certificate given by an Ordinary of a man that stands
obstinately excommunicate by the space of forty days, for the laying him up
in prison without bail, or mainprise, until he submit himself to the
authority of the church. And it is so called, because of the word
(significauit) mentioned in the writ (De exco^municato capiendo) which have
relation to the certificate, sent into the Chauncery by the Ecclesiastical
Judge. There is also another writ in the Register orig. of this name, fo: 7. a.
directed to the Justices of the bench, willing them to stay any suite depending
between such and such, by reason of any excommunication alleged against the
plaintiffer because the sentence of the Ordinary that did excommunicate him,
is appealed from, and the appeal yet hangs vnderided. Which see: and see
Fitz. nut. br. De excommunicato capiendo. fol. 62. N. but especially 66. A.
where you may find writs of this name in other cases.

Sine asseusu capituli, is a writ that lies in case where a Deane, Bishop,
Prebendarie, Abbot, Prior or Master of Hospital, alieneth the land held in the
right of his house, without the consent of the Chapter, Covent, or Fraternity.
For in this case his successor shall have this writ. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 195.

Si non omnes, is a writ of association, whereby if all in commission cannot
meet at the day assigned, it is permitted, that two or more of them may finish
the business. See Association. And Fitz. not. br. fol. 185. and 111. C. and
Register origin. fol. 202. 206. and 124.

Si recognoscant, is a writ that lies for a Creditour against his depter for
money numbered, that has before the shyreeue in the County court, acknowledged
himself to owe unto his creditor such a sum received of him in numeratis
pecunits. The form of the writ is this: Rex Vicecomiti salutem. Praec. tibi
quod si A. recognoscat se debere R. 40. solid. fine vlteriori dilatione, tunc
ipsum distringas ad praedictum debitum eidem R. sine dilatione reddendum.
Test, etc. Old not. br. fol. 68.

Skawe. anno 4. Ed. 4. cap. 1.

Skyvinage. anno 27. H. 6. cap. 2. a proper name, signifying the precincts of
Caleis.

Sluse (exclusa) is a frame to keep, or let water out of a ground.

Soc (Soca) is a word signifiing a power, or liberty of Jurisdiction, as
appears by these words out of Bracton, Sunt quidam Barons, and alii
libertatem habentes, sc: soc, and sac, Tol and Thean, Infangthefe, and
Vtfangthefe, and isti possunt iudicare in Curia sua, eum qui inuentus fuerit
iufra libertatem suam seisitus de aliquo latrocinio manifesto. and li. 3.
tractat. 2. cap. 8. In the laws of King Edward set out by M. Lamberd, fol.
132. you have these words: Socha est quod si aliquis quarit aliquid in terra
sua, etiam furtum, sua est Iusticia, si inuentum fuerit, an non. Saxon in the
description of Britany, cap. 11. says, that Sock is a suite of Court and that
thereof comes Soken. But the signification of the word (as I have been
credibly informed) is as much as Inquisitio which we in modern English, term
(seeking) Of this (Sok) Skene de verborum signify. speaks to this effect.
Sok is an old word used in Charters and feofments, which in sundry old books
containing the municipiall law of this Realm, is called Secta de hominibus
suis in curia, secundum consuetudinem Regni. So after my opinion he that is
infeoffed with Sck. (which now we call Soit (but we in England Suite) has
power to hold courts within his own Baronie, in which, homines sui should
give Soyt. Thus far M. Skene. Of this Fleta has these words. In huiusmodi
vero maneriis (speaking of the Kings manners) erant olim liberi homines libere
tenentes, quorum quidam cum per potentiores e tenementis suis eiecti fuerant,
and eadem postmodum in villenagium tenenda resumpseru^t: and quia huiusmodi
tenentes cultores Regis esse dinoscuntur, eis provisa fuit quies ne sectas
facerent ad comitatus vel hundredo^s, vel ad aliquas inquisitiones, assisas vel
iuratas, nisi in manerio tantum, dum tamen pro terra, quorum congregationem
tunc socam appellarunt. and hinc est quod Socmanni hodie dicuntur esse. A soco
enim deriuantur, quorum tonementa sunt villenagium domini privilegiatum, and
ideo dicuntur glebae ascriptitii, eo quod ab huiusmodi glebis amoueri non
deberent, quam diu soluerent debitas pensiones: nec compelli poterunt ad
buiusmodi tenementa tenenda, contra suas voluntates, eo quod corpora sua sunt
libera. Nec obstabit longa seruitutis possessio ad libertate^ extinguendam,
quamuis ad merchetum sanguinis sui compulsus fuerit quis pro tenemento
reddendo. Nulla enim servitus ratione praescriptionis temporis potest liberum
sanguine^ in seruitute reducere, non magis quam liberum tenementum potest
servum in libertatem, etc. By whose words it appears, that Soca is nothing
else, but the meeting or assembly of these kind of tenants in any place within
the manner or liberty: wherefore he that has soc may seem to have such a
manner, such tenants, and such a liberty belonging to his manner and tenants, as
is here described. Here you see diversities of opinions touching this word, one
saying that it is a power or liberty to seek after thieves and stolen goods
within a manner or fee, and to do justice upon such inquisition. others that it
is a liberty only to have suitors to his court. other (as Fleta, that it
contains both the former significations, and further that it is taken for the
company of tenants which live within such a liberty; and are exempled from
those common services of the Prince and country whereunto subjects are
ordinarily tied. This kind of liberty is in diverse places at this day in
England, and commonly known by the name of soke or soken. See Soke and
Sockmans.

Soccage (soccagium) comes of the French (Soc. i. vomer, a plowshare or
coulter). It signifies in our common law a tenure of lands by or for certain
inferior, or husbandly services to be performed to the Lord of the fee. See
Instituts of common law. 31. As I have showed in (Chivalrie), all services due
for land, is either knights service, or socage. So then, whatsoever is not
knights service, is soceage: Bracton in his 2. book cap. 35. number. primo.
describes it thus. Dici poterit soccagium a Socco, and inde tenentes qui
tenent in Sockagio, Sockmanni dici poterunt, eo quod deputati sunt, vt videtur,
tantummodo ad cultur am, and quorum custodia, and maritagia ad propinquiores
parents iure san guinis pertinebit. Et si aliquando inde de facto capiatur
homagium, quod pluries contingit, non tamen habebit propter hoc Dominus
capitalis custodiam, and maritagium. Quia non semper sequitur homagium, licet
aliquando sequatur. M. Skene de verborum significatione. verb. Sockmanria,
says, that Sockage is a kind of holding of lands, when a man is infeoffed
freely without any service, ward, relief, or marriage, and paieth to his Lord
such duty, as is called petit sergeantie, or when one holds land in the name
of burgage, or in libera elemozina, or otherwise in blenche ferme, sieve nomine
albae firmae, and opponitur militi, qui tenet per seruitium militare. Out of
the place above named in Bracton, you may find a division of Soccage, whereby
it is termed either Soccagium liberum, or villanum. frank or free Soccage, and
base, otherwise called villenage. The former is there thus defined. Soccagium
liberum est, vbi fit seruitium in denariis Dominis capitalibus, and nihil inde
omnino datur ad scutum and seruitium Regis. Where I gather that to be free
soccage which paieth a certain sum of money to the chief Lord in regard of
some tillage, or such like, and not of any Sergeantie, or eschuage. And to this
effect he writes also, lib. 2. cap. 16. nu. 9. etc. vnde si tantum in denariis
and sine scut agio vel seriantiis, vel si ad duo teneatur sub disiunctione, sc:
ad certam rem dandam pro omni seruitio, vel aliquam summam in denariis, id
tenementum potest dici Soccagium: si autem superaddas Scutagium, aut servitium
regale, licet ad vnum obulum vel seriantiam, illud poterit dici feudum
militare. This free Soccage, is also called common Socage, anno 37. H. 8. cap.
20. Soccage in base tenure, or villanum Soccagium, is divided again in
villanum Soccagium, and purum villenagium: Villanum Soccagium est illud, de quo
fit certum seruitium, idque ratione sui teneme^ti, non personae suae. Purum
villenagium est illud, in quo praestatur seruitium incertum, and
indeterminatum, vbi sciri non poterit vespere, quale seruitium fieri debet
mane. viz. vbi quis facere tenetur quicquid ei praeceptum fuerit. Bracton lib.
2. cap. 8. number. 3. The old. not. br. fol. 94. makes three parts of this
division. viz. Soccage of free tenure, Soccage of ancient tenure, and soccage
of base tenure. soccage of free tenure is (as the book says) where a man
holds by free service of 12. pence by year, for all manner of services, or by
other services yearly. Soccage of ancient tenure is of land of ancient
Demesne, where no writ original shall be siewed, but the writ of Right, that is
called secundum consuetudinem manerii. Soccage of base tenure is of those that
hold in Soccage, and may have none other writ, but the Monstraverunt: and such
Sockmen hold not by certain Service. And for that are they not free Sockmen.
Then again Soccage is divided into soccage in chief, and common soccage.
Soccage in chief or in capite, is that which holds of the King, as of his
Crown. Praerog. fol. 41. Common Soccage is that, which holds of any other
capital Lord, or of the King by reason of some honor or manner. Ibidem.
Burgage is also a kind of Soccage, See Burgage.

Sockmans (Sockmanni) are such tenants as hold their lands, and tenements by
Soccage tenure. And accordingly as you have 3. kinds of Soccage, so be there
3. sorts of sockmans. as sockmans of frank tenure. Kitchen, fol. 81. sockmans
of anncient Demesne. old not. br. fol. 11. and Sockmans of base tenure. Kitchen
vbi supra. But the tenants in ancient Demesne, seem most properly to be called
Sockmans, Fitzh. na. br. f. 14. B. Brit. c. 66. n. 2.

Soke, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 15. and cap. 29. Of this Fleta says thus Soke
significat libertatem curiae tenentium. quam socam appellamus. lib. 1. cap.
47.. Soke. See Roger Houeden, part poster. suorum annalium. fol. 345. b. and
See Soc.

Soken (Soca) see Soc. and Hamsoken. Soken is latined Soca Register original,
fol. 1. a.

Sokereue seems to be the Lords rent. gatherer in the Soke, or Soken, Fleta,
lib. 2. cap. 55. in principio.

Sole tenent (Solus tenens) is he or she which holds only in his or her
own right without any other joined. For example, if a man and his wife hold
land for their lives, the remainder to their son: here the man dying, the Lord
shall not have Heriot, because he dies not sole tenent. Kitchen, fol. 134.

Solicitour (Solicitator) comes of the French (Soliciteur) It signifies in
our common law, a man employed to follow suites depending in law, for the beter
remembrance and more case of Atturnies, who commonly are so full of clients and
business, that they cannot so often attend the seriants and counselors as the
case may require.

Solet and Debet. See Debet and solet.

Solidata terrae. see Farding deal of land

Sollace, anno 43. Elizabeth. cap. 10.

Sommons, alias summons (summonitio) comes of the French (semondre. i.
vocare) It signifies in our common law, as much as (vocatio in ius) or
(citatio) among the Ciuilians. And thence is our word (somner) which in French
is (semonneur. i. vocator, monitor) The Custumary of Normandy for our (sommons
has (semonse) ca. 61. summons of the Exchequer anno 3. Ed. pri: ca. 19. and
anno 10. eiusdem, cap. 9. How summons is divided, and what circumstances it
has to be observed. See Fleta, lib. 6. cap. 6. 7.

Solutione feodi militis Parlamenti, and solutione feodi Burgen. Parlamenti, be
writs whereby Knights of the Parliament may recover their allowance, if it be
denied, anno 35. H. 8. ca. 11.

Sontage. Stow. page 284. is a task of forty shillings laid upon every
Knights fee.

Sorting Kerseies. 3. Iacobi: ca: 16.

Sothale, is a kind of intertainment made by Bayliffes to those of their
Hundreds for their gain. Which sometime is called Filctale. Of this Bracton
lib. 3. tracta: 2. cap. pri. has these words: De Balliuis, quifaciunt
ceruisias suas. quas quandoque vocant (sothale) quandoque (Filctale) vt
pecunias extorque ant ab eis qui sequntur Hundreda sua, and Baliuas sitas, etc.
I think this should rather be written Scotale. See Scotale.

Southvicont (Subvicecomes) is the under Shyreeue. Cromptone Iurisdict: fol: 5.

Sown, is a verb neuter, properly belonging to the Exchequer, as a word of
their art, signifiing so much, as to be leuiable, or possible to be gathered or
collected. For example, estreats that sown not, are such as the Shyreeue by
his industry cannot get, and estreats that sown, are such as he can gather,
anno 4. H. 5. ca. 2.

Speaker of the Parliament, is an officer in that high Court, that is as it were
the common mouth of the rest: and as that honorable assembly consists of two
houses, one called the higher or upper house, consisting of the King, the
nobility, and Kings council, especially appointed for the same, the other
termed the lower or commonhouse, containing the Knights of the Shires, the
citizens, barons of the cinque ports, and the burgeses of borough towns: so be
there also two speakers, one termed the Lord speaker of the higher house, who
is most commonly the Lord Chaunceler of England, or Lord Keeper of the great
seal: the other is called the speaker of the lower house. And the duties of
these two you have perticularly described in M. Vowels, alias Hookers book,
entitled The order and usage of keeping the Parliament.

Special matter in evidence. See General issue. And Brook. titulo General
issue, and special evidence.

Spiritualties of a Bishop (spiritualia Episcopi) be those profits which he
receives, as he is a Bishop, and not as he is a Baron of the Parliament.
Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 132. The particulars of these may be the duties of his
Visitation, his benefit growing from ordering and instituting Priests,
prestation money, that subsidium charitatiuum, which upon reasonable cause he
may require of his Clergy. Johannes Gregorius de Beneficiis. cap. 6. number. 9.
and the Benefit of his Jurisdiction. Ioachimus Stephanus de Iurisd. lib. 4.
cap. 14. number. 14. for these reckons exactionem Cathedratici, quartam
Decimarum, and mortuariorum, and oblationum pensitationem, subsidium
charitatiuum, celebrationem synodi, collationem viatici vel commeatus, cum
Episcopus Romam proficiscitur, ius hospitii, Litaniam and Processionem.

Spikenard (spica nardi, vel nardus) is a medicinal herb, whereof you may for
your farther instruction read Gerards Herball. lib. 2. cap. 425. The fruit or
ear of this (for it brings forth an ear like Lauender) is a drugge
garbleable, anno 1. Jacob. cap. 19.

Spoliation (spoliatio) is a writ, that lies for an incumbent, against another
incumbent, in case where the right of patronage comes not in debate. As if a
Parson be made a Bishop, and has dispensation to keep his Rectorie, and
afterward the patron present another to the Church, which is instituted and
inducted: The Bishop shall have against this incumbent a writ of spoliation in
Court Christian. Fitz. not. br. fol. 36. see Benevolence.

Squalley. anno 43. Elizab. cap. 10.

Squyers. See Esquires.

Stablestand, is one of the four Evidences, or presumptians whereby a man is
convinced to intend the stealing of the Kings Dear in the Forest. Manwood.
part 2 of his Forest laws. cap. 18. number. 9. the other three be these
Dogdrawe, Backbeare, Bloudie-hand. And this stablestand, is when a man is found
at his standing in the Forest, with a Cross bow bent, ready to shoot at any
Dear, or with a long bow, or else standing close by a tree with Greyhounds in
a lease, ready to slip, Idem, eodem.

Stalkers, a kind of net anno 13 R. 2. stat. 1. cap. 20. and anno 17. eiusdem,
cap. 9.

Stallage (stallagium) comes of the French (Estaller. i. merces exponere,
expedire, explicare.) It signifies in our common law, money paid for pitching
of stalles in Fair or Market. See Scavage. This in Scotland is called
stallange. Skene de verbor. signif. verbo Stallangiatores. And among the
Romans it was termed (Siliquaticum) a siliqua, primo and minimo omnium
pondere apud illam nationem.

Stannaries (stannaria) comes of the Latin (stannum.) i. tynne, signifying
the Mines and works touching the getting, and purifying of this metal in
Cornwall, and other places. Of this read Camden. Britan. pa. 119. The
liberties of the stannarie men granted by Ed. 1. before they were abridged by
the statute, anno 50. Ed. 3. see in Plowden. casu Mines. fol. 327. a. b.

Staple (Stapulum) signifies this or that town, or city, whether the
Merchants of England by common order, or commandment, did carry their wolles,
wol-fels, clothes, lead, and tin, and such like commodities of our land for
the utterance of them by the great. The word may probably be interpreted two
ways: one taking it from (staple) which in the Saxon or old English language,
signifies the stay or hold of any thing. Lamb. in his duties of Constables.
number. 4. because the place is certain, and settled: and again, from the French
(estape. i. forum vinarium) because to those places, whether our English
Merchants brought their commodities, the French would also meet them with
theirs, which most of all consists in wines: but I think this latter the
truer because I find in the Mirror of the world written in French these
words. A Calais. (...) auoit Estape de le lain, etc. Which is as much to say,
as the staple for wols, etc. You may read of many places appointed for this
staple in the statutes of the land, according as the Prince by his Council
thought good to alter them, from the second year of Ed: 3. cap. 9. to the
fifth of Edw: the sixth. cap: 7. what officers the staples had belonging to
them you may see anno 27. Ed. 3. stat. 2. ca. 21.

Star chamber (Camera stellata) is a Chamber at Westminster so called (as Sir
Tho. Smith coniectureth lib. 2. cap. 4.) either because it is full of windows,
or because at the first all the roof thereof was decked with Images of gilded
stars. And the later reason I take to be the trewer, because anno 25. H. 8.
ca. 1. It is written the Sterred Chamber. In this Chamber every week twice
during the term, and the very next day after term, is there a Court held by
the Lord Chaunceler or Keeper, and other honorable personages of the Realm.
This Court seems to have taken beginning from the statute anno 3. H: 7. ca.
pri. Whereby it is ordained, that the Lord Chaunceler and Treasurer of England
for the time being, and the Keeper of the Kings privy seal, or two of them,
calling to them a Bishop, and a temporal Lord of the Kings most honorable
Council, and the two chief Justices of the Kings Bench, and common place, for
the time being, or other two Justices in their absence, should have power to
call before them, and punish such misdoers, as there be mentioned. The faults
that they punish, be Routes, Riots, Forgeries, Maintenances, Embraceries,
Periurics, and such other Misdemeanures as are not sufficiently provided for by
the common law. It appears both by Sir. Tho: Smith lib. 2. de Rep: Anglo:
cap. 4. and by experience also, that at this day, the whole number of the
Princes most honorable privy Council, and such other Barons spiritual, or
temporal as be called thither by the Prince, have place in this Court with
those above named. Of this Court thus speaks M. Gwin in the preface to his
readings: It appears in our books of the terms of K. Edward 4. And of the
report of cases happening under the usurpation of Richard the third that sometime
the King and his Council, and sometime the Lord Chaunceler, and other great
personages, did use to sit iudicially in the place then and yet called the
Star Chamber. But for as much as be like that assembly was not ordinary,
therefore the next Kings, Henry the seventh, and his some. H. 8. took order by
two several laws. viz. 3. H. 7. ca. pri. and 21. H. 8. ca. 2. That the
Chaunceler assisted with others there named, should have power to hear
complaints against Retainours, Embraceours, misdemenures of officers, and such
other offenses, which through the power and countenance of such as do commit
them, do lift up the head above other faults: and for the which inferior
Judges are not so meet to give correction. And because that place was before
dedicated to the like service, it has been ever since also accordingly used.
Touching the officers belonging to this Court, see Camden. page 112. and 113.

Statute, (statutum) has diverse significations in our common law. First, it
signifies a Decree or act of Parliament, made by the Prince and three estates,
which is the body of the whole Realm. And though it borow the name from that
kind of Decree, which those cities, that were under the Roman Empire, made
for the particular government of themselves, over and above the universal or
common law of the Empire: yet in nature it comes nearest to that which the
Romans called (legem) for that, as that was made by the whole people noble
and ignoble: so this is ordained by those, that represent the whole number,
both of prince, and subjects, one and other, through the whole kingdom. The
difference nevertheless was this, that Lex was offered to the consideration of
the people by the Magistrate of the Senate, or Consul: but the bills or
suggestions whence our statutes spring, are offered by any of either house, and
so either passed or rejected. In this signification a statute is either
general or special. Coke lib. 4. Hollands case, fol. 76. a.

Statute, in another signification is a short speech taken for a bond; as
statute Merchant, or statute staple. anno 5. H. 4. cap. 12. The reason of which
name is, because these bonds are made according to the form of statuts
expressly, and particularly provided for the same; which direct both before
what persons, and in what manner they ought to be made. West. part pri. symbol.
li. 2. sect. 151. where he defines a statute Merchant thus. A statute Merchant
is a bond acknowledged before one of the Clerks of the statutes Merchant, and
Mayor or chief Warden of the city of London, or two Merchants of the said
city for that purpose assigned, or before the Mayor, chief Warden, or Master
of other Cities or good towns, or other sufficient men for that purpose
appointed, sealed with the seal of the Depter, and of the King, which is of
two pieces, the greater is keept by the said Mayor, chief Warden, etc. and
the lesser piece thereof by the said Clerks. The form of which bond, you may
see in Fleta. lib. 2. c. 64.. 2. to be such; Noverint vniuersi me. N. de tali
comitatu teneri. N. in 10. marcis soluendis eidem ad festum Pent. anno regni
Regis, etc. and nisi fecero, concedo quod current super me and haeredes meos
districtio, and poena provisa in statuto domini Regis edito apud Westminster. Datum
London, tali die, an. supra dicta. The fee for the same seal, is for statutes
knowledged in Faires. for every pound an halfepeuy, and out of faires a
farding. The execution upon statute Merchant, is first to take the body of the
Deptor, if he be lay, and can be found: if otherwise, then upon his lands, and
goods: The bound is founded upon the statute, anno 13. Ed. pri. statut. 4. Of
this also as of the statute Staple, see the new book of Entries. verbo.
Statut Merchant. and read in Fleta vbi supra, more touching this matter worth
the reading.

Satute staple (to use the very words of M. West.) is either properly so
called, or improperly, A statute staple properly so called is a bond of Record
knowledged before the Mayor of the Staple, in the presence of one of the two
constables of the same staple, for which seal the fee is of every pound, if
the sum exceed not a 100. pound, an halfepeny, and if it exceed and 100.
pound, of every pound a farding. And by virtue of such statute Staple, the
Creditor may forthwith have execution of the body, lands and goods of the
Depter. and this is founded upon the statute anno 27. Ed. 3. cap. 9. A Statute
Staple improper, is a bond of Record, founded upon the statute anno 23. H. 8.
cap 6. of the nature of a proper statute staple, as touching the force, and
execution thereof, and knowledged before one of the chief Justices, and in
their absence before the Mayor of the staple, and Recorder of London. The
forms of all these bonds, or statutes, see in West. part pri. simbol. li. 2.
sect. 152. 153. 154. 155. Statutes is also used in our vulgar talk, for the
petit sessions, which are yearly kept for the disposing of servants in
service, by the statute, anno 5. Eliz. cap. 4. see Recognisance.

Statute sessions, otherwise called petit sessions, are a meeting in every
hundred of all the shires in England, where of custom they have been used,
unto the which the constables do repair, and others both householders and
servants, for the debating of differences between masters and their servants,
the rating of servants wages, and the bestowing of such people in service, as
being fit to serve, either refuse to seek, or cannot get Masters, anno 5.
Eliz. cap. 4.

Statuto stapulae, is a writ that lies to take his body to prison, and to
seize upon his lands and goods, that has forfeited a bond, called statut
staple. Register orig. fol. 15^. a.

Statutum de laboriis, is a writ Judicial for the apprehending of such
laborers, as refuse to work according to the statut. Register Judicial l. fol.
27. b.

Statuto Mercatorio, is a writ for the imprisoning of him, that has forfeited
a bond called the statut Merchant, until the dept be satisfied. Register orig.
fol. 146. b. and of these there is one against lay persons, vbi supra. and
another against Ecclesiastical. 148.

Stavisaker, staphis agria, vel herba pedicularis, is a medicinable herb, the
kind and virtues whereof, you have set forth in Gerards herball, lib. 1. cap.
130. The seed of this is mentioned among drugs to be garbled, anno prim.
Jacob. cap. 19.

Stennerie, is used for the same that Stannaries be, in the statute anno 4. H.
8. cap. 8. see Stannaries.

Sterling (Sterlingum) is a proper epitheton for money current within the
Realm. The name grows from this, that there was a certain pure coin,
stamped first of all by the Easterlings here in England. Stowes Annalls. page
312. The which I rather believe, because in certain old monuments of our
English, and broken French, I find it written Esterling. so To. Hoveden
writes it. part poster. annalium. fol. 377. b. M. Skene de verborum signif.
verbo. Sterlingus, says thus: sterling is a kind of weight containing 32.
corns, or grains of wheat. And in the Canon law mention is made of five
shillings sterling, and of a merke starling. cap. 3. de arbitris. and. c.
constituit. 12. de procurator: And the sterling penny is so called, because it
waighes so many grains, as I have sundry times proved by experience. And by
the law of England the penny which is called the sterling round and without
clipping wayeth 32. grains of wheat without tails, whereof 20. make an ounce,
and 12. onnces a pound, and eight pound makes a gallon of wine, and eight
gallons make a bushel of London, which is the eight part: of a quarter.
Hitherto M. Skene. Buchanan. lib. 6. says, that the common people think it so
termed, of sterling a town in Scotland. Our Lyndwood says that it is called
sterling of the bird which we call a sterling which as he notes, was engraven
in one quarter of the coin so termed. cap. Item quia. de testamentis. verbo.
Centum solidos. in glos.

Stews, are those places, which were permitted in England to women of
professed incontinencie, for the profer of their bodies to all comers: It is
derived from the French (Estuves. i. thermae, vaporarium, Balneum) because
wantons are wont to prepare themselves, to these venerous acts, by bathing
themselves. And that this is not, new, Homer shows in the 8. book of his
Odiss. where he reckons hot bathes among the effeminate sort of pleasures, Of
these stews see the statute anno 11. Henric. 6. cap. pri.

Steward. See Seneschall and Stuward, Steward of the Kings house anno 25. Ed.
3. statute. 5. ca. 21.

Stillyard (Guilda Theutonicorum anno 22. H. 8. ca. 8. and anno 32. eiusdem ca.
14.) is a place in London, where the fraternity of the Easterling Merchants,
otherwise the Merchants of Hawnse and Almaine. anno pri: Ed. 6. cap. 13. Are
wont to have their aboade. see Geld. It is so called of a broad place, or
court, wherein steel was much sold. upon the which that house is now
founded. Nathan Chitraens. See Hawnse.

Stone of woll. (Petra lanae) see weights. See Sarpler. It ought to weigh
fourteen pounds, yet in some places by custom it is more. See Cromptons
Justice of peace. fol. 83. b.

Straife alias Stray. See Estrae.

Straites anno 18. H. 6. ca. 16.

Streme works, is a kind of work in the Stannaries: for (says M. Camden
titulo Cornwall page 119.) Horum Stannariorum sieve metallicorum operum duo sunt
genera: Alterum Lode-works, alterum streme-works vocant. Hoc in locis
inferioribus est cum Fossis agendis stanni venas sectantur and fluuiorum alueos
subinde deflectunt: illud in locis aeditioribus, cum in montibus puteos, quos
Shafts vocant in magnam altitudinem defodiunt, and cuniculos agunt. These you
may read mentioned anno 27. H. 8. ca. 23.

Stirks.

Strip. See Estreapement.

Stuard, alias steward (senescallus) seems to be compounded of Steed and
ward, and is a word of many applications: yet always signifies an officer of
chief accoumpte within the place of his sway. The greatest of these is the
Lord high Steward of England, whose power (if those antiquities be true which I
have read) is next to the kings, and of that height, that it might in some
sort match the Ephori amongst the Lacedaemonians. The custom of our
commonwealth has upon great consideration and policy brought it to pass,
that this high Officer is not appointed for any long time, but only for the
dispatch of some especial business, at the arraignment of some Noble man in
the case of treason, or such like: which once ended, his commission expireth.
Of the high Steward of Englands Court, you may read Cromptons Jurisdiction.
fol. 82.

I have read in an ancient manuscript of what credit, I know not, that this
officer was of so great power in ancient times, that if any one had sought
justice in the Kings court and not found it, he might upon complaint thereof
made unto him, take those petitions, and reserving them to the next Parliament,
cause them there to be propounded, and not only so, but also in the presence
of the King openly to rebuke the Chaunceler, or any other Judge, or officer
whom he found defective in yielding justice. And if in case the Judge, or
officer so reprehended, did allege, that his defect grew from the difficulty
of the case, insomuch as he durst not adventure upon it: then the case being
showed, and so found, the Lord steward together with the Constable of England
there in the presence of the King and Parliament, might elect 25. persons, or
more, or fewer, according to their discretion, and the case or cases in
question, some Earls, some Barons, some Knights, some Citizens and Burgesses,
which upon deliberation should set down, what they thought just and equal: and
their decree being read and allowed by Parliament, did stand as a law for ever:
fardermore, if the Chaunceler or other Judge or officer, could not well
approve, that the delay of justice complained of, grew from just difficulty,
by reason that the case in question was formerly determined by law or statute:
then might the steward on the Kings behalf, admonish him of his negligence,
and will him to be more careful and studious. Or if there appeared malice, or
corruption, then the King and Parliament was wont to remove him and assign
another of better hope to the place. Lastly, if the king had about him any such
evil Counceller, as advised him to things unjust, or unanswerable to his
Majesty, as tending either to the disherifon of the Crown, public hurt, or
destruction of the subject. The office of the Steward was, taking to him the
Constable, and other great men, with some of the Commons, and giving notice to
the King of their intention, to send to that Counseler, and will him to desist
from misleading the king, yea, if need so required, to charge him to stay no
longer about him, but to depart from the Court, which if he neglected to
perform, then they might send to the King, and will him to remove him: and if
the king refused, then they might take him as a public enemy to the King and
Realm, seize on his goods and possessions, and commit his body to safe
custody, until the next Parliament, there to be Judged by the whole kingdom:
examples are brought of Godwin Earl of Kent in the time of King Edward next
before the Conqueror, of Hubert Burgh Earl of the same County, in the reign
of Henry the third, and of Peter Gaueston, in Edward the seconds days. But
experience (as I said) has found this officer more dangerous then profitable,
and therefore has time taught, though not wholly to suppress him, yet to
limite him to particular occasion, and to restrain his power. Then is there
the Steward of the Kings most honorable household, anno 24. H. 8. cap. 13.
whose name is changed to the name of great Master. anno 32. eiusdem, cap. 39
But this statute was repealed by anno prim. Mar. 2. Parlam. cap. 4 and the
office of the Lord Steward of the Kings household revived: where you may at
large read diverse things touching his office. As also in Fitzh. not. br. fol.
241. B. Of this Officers ancient power, read Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 3. There is
also a Steward of the Marshalsea. pl. cor. fol. 52. and anno 33. H. 8. cap. 12.
To be short, this word is of so great diversity, that there is not a
corporation of any account, or house of any honor, almost through the realm,
but it has an officer toward it of this name. A steward of a manner, or of a
household, what he is or ought to be, Fleta fully describes. lib. 2. cap. 71.
and 72.

Stranger, comes of the French (estranger. i. alienare.) It signifies in
our Language generally a man borne out of the land or unknown: but in the
law, it has an especial signification for him that is not privy or a party
to an act: as a Stranger to a judgment: oldna. br. fol. 128. is he to whom a
judgment does not belong. And in this signification it is directly contrary
to (party) or (privy.) See Privy.

Submarshall, (submarescallus) is an officer in the Marshal sea, that is,
deputy to the chief Marshall of the Kings house, commonly called the Knight
Marshall, and has the custody of the prisoners there. Cromptons Iurisdict.
fol. 104. He is otherwise called Vnder-marshall.

Subpoena, is a writ that lies to call a man into the Chauncerie, upon such
case only, as the common law fails in, and has not provided for: so as the
party who in equity has wrong, can have none ordinary remedy, by the rules
and course of the common law, West. part. 2. symbol. titulo Proceedings in
Chauncerie. sect. 18. where you may read many examples of such cases, as sub
poena lies in. There is also a sub poena ad testificandum, which lies for the
calling in of witnesses to testify in a cause, as well in Chauncerie, as in
orher courts. And the name of both these proceed from words in the writ, which
charge the party called to appear at the day and place assigned, sub poena
centum librarum, etc. I find mention of a common sub poena in Cromptons
Iurisdict. fol. 33. which signifies nothing else but such a sub poena, as
every common person is called by into the Chauncerie: whereas any Lord of
Parliament is called by the Lord Chauncelers leters: giving him notice of the
suit intended against him, and requiring him to appear. Crompton. eodem.

Subsidy, (subsidium) comes of the French (subside) signifying a tax or
tribute assessed by Parliament, and granted by the commons to be levied of
every subject, according to the value of his lands or goods after the rate of
4. shillings in the pound for land, and 2. shillings 8. pence for goods, as it
is most commonly used at this day. Some hold opinion, that this subsidy is
granted by the subject to the Prince, in recompense or consideration, that
whereas the Prince of his absolute power, might make laws of himself, he does
of favor admit the consent of his subjects therein, that all things in their
own confession may be done with the greater indifferency. The manner of
assessing every man's lands or goods, is this: first, there issues a Commission
out of the Chauncerie to some men of honor or worship in every County, by
virtue thereof to call unto them, the head Constables or Bayliffes of every
Hundred, and by them the Constable and three or four of the substantiallest
householders in every town within their hundred at a day certain: which men so
called, or so many of them, as the Commissioners think good to use, do rate
the inhabitants of their own town, in such reasonable manner, as they find
meet, yet by the discretion of the said Commissioners. And then every man
after his value set down, must at his time pay to the Collectour appointed,
after the rate aforesaid. Yet in ancient time, these subsidies seem to have
been granted both for other causes, as in respect of the Kings great travel,
and expenses in wars: or his great favors toward his subjects: as also in
other manner then now they be: as every ninth Lamb, every ninth fleece, and
every ninth sheafe. anno 14. Ed. 3. stat. prins. cap. 20. And of these you may
see great, variety in Rastals Abridgement. tit. Taxes, Tenths, Fifteenths,
Subsidies, etc. whence you may gather that there is no certain rate, but even
as the two houses shall think good to conclude. Subsidy is in the statute of
the land, fometime confounded with custom. anno 11. H. 4. cap. 7. See
Benevolence.

Surety of peace, (securitas pacis) is an acknowledging of a bond to the
Prince, taken by a competent Judge of Record, for the keeping of the peace.
Lamberds Eirenarcha, li. 2. cap. 2. page 77. This peace may a Justice of peace
command, either as a Minister, when he is willed so to do by a higher
authority, or as a Judge, when he does it of his own power derived from his
commission. Of both these see Lamberd. Eirenarcha. lib. 2. ca. 2. page 77. see
Peace, see Supplicauit.

Suffragan (Suffraganeus) is a titular Bishop ordained, and assisted to aid
the Bishop of the Dioces in his spiritual function. c. Suffraganeus. Extra de
electione. For the Etimology, Suffraganes dicuntur, quia eorum suffragiis
causae ecclesiasticae iudicantur. Ioach. Stephanus de Iurisd. li. 4. ca. 16.
nu. 14. It was inacted anno 26. H. 8. ca. 14. that it should be lawful to
every Diocesan at his pleasure to elect two sufficient men within his Dioces,
and to present them to the King, that he might give the one of them such title,
style, name, and dignity of sease in the said statut specified, as he should
think convenient.

Suyte (Secta) comes of the French (Suite. i. affectatio, consecutio,
sequela, comitatus) It signifies in our common law, a following of another,
but in diverse senses, the first is a suite in law, and is divided into suite
real, and personal. Kitchen, fol. 74. which is all one with action real and
personal. Then is there suite of Court, or suite service; that is an attendance
which a tenent owes at the court of his Lord. Fitzh. not. br. in Indice. verbo
Suite. suyte service and suyte real, anno 7. H. 7. cap. 2. The new expositour
of law Terms, makes mention of four sorts of suites in this signification.
Suite covenant, suite custom, suite real, and suite service. Suite covenant,
he defines to be, when your auncester has couenanted with mine auncester, to
siew to the court of mine auncesters. Suite custom, when I and mine auncesters
have been seized of your own, and your auncesters suite, time out of mind,
etc. Suite real, when men come to the Shyreeues Turn, or Leete, to which
court all men are compelled to come, to know the laws, so that they may not
be ignorant of things declared there, how they ought to be governed. And it is
called real, because of their allegance. And this appears by common
exeperience, when one is sworn: his oath is that he shall be a loyal and
faithful man to the King. And this suite is not for the land that he holds
within the County but by reason of his person and his aboade there, and ought
to be done twice a year: for default whereof he shallbe amerced and not
distreined. I think this should be called rather regal or royal, because it
is performed to the King for (royal). The French word in the usual
pronuntiation comes near to real, the leter (o) being almost suppressed.
see Leete. Suyte service, is to siew to the Shyreeues Turn or Leete, or to the
Lords court from three weeks to three weeks by the whole year. And for
default thereof a man shall be distreined, and not amercied. And this suite
service is by reason of the tenure of a man's land. Then does suite signify the
following of one in chase, as fresh suite. West. 1. c. 46. a. 3. Ed. 1. Lastly,
it signifies a petition made to the prince, or great personage.

Suyte of the Kings peace (secta pacis Regis) anno 6. R. 2. stat. 2. ca. pri.
and anno 21. eiusdem, cap. 15. and anno 5. H. 4. cap. 15. is the persiewing of
a man for breach of the K. peace, by treasons, insurrectio^s, rebellio^s, or
trespasses.

Summoneas, is a writ Judicial of great diversity, according to the diverse
cases wherein it is used, which see in the table of the Register Judicial.

Summoner (summonitor) signifies one used to call or cite a man to any court.
These by the common law, ought to be boni, that is by Fleta his Judgment,
liberi homines, and ideo boni, quia terras tenentes, quod sint coram talibus
Iusticiariis ad ce ^tos diem, and locum secundum mandatum Iusticiariorum
vicecomiti directum, parati inde facere recognitionemilib. 4. cap. 5.. Etcum.

Summons (Summonitio) see Sommons, Common Summons. Marlb. cap. 18. anno. 52.
Henric. 3. is l.

Summons in terra petita Kitch. fol. 286. is that summons which is made upon
the land, which the party at whose suite the summons is sent forth, seeks to
have, Summons ad Warrantizandum. Dyer fol. 69. nn. 35.

Sumage (Sumagium) seems to be toll for carriage on horseback, Crompton
Iurisd. fol. 191. Forwhere the Charter of the Forest, cap. 14. has these
words: for a horse that bears loades every half year, a half penny: the
book called Pupilla ocult, uses these words: pro vno equo portante
summagium, per dimidium annum obolum. It is otherwise called a Seame. And a
Seame in the Western parts is a horse load.

Superoneratione pasturae, is a writ Judicial that lies against him who is
impleaded in the County for the overburdening of a common with his catell, in
case where he is formerly impleaded for it in the county, and the cause is
removed into the Kings court at Westminster.

Supersedeas, is a writ which lies in diverse, and sundry cafes, as appears
by the table of the Register original, and the Judicial also, and by Fitzh.
not. br. fol. 236. and many other places noted in the Index of his book verbo.
Supersedeas. But it signifies in them all a command, or request to stay or
forbear the doing of that, which in appearance of law were to be done, were it
not for the cause, whereupon the writ is granted. For example: a man regularly
is to have surety of peace against him, of whom he will swear that he is
afraid, and the Justice required hereunto cannot deny him. Yet if the party
be formerly bound to the peace, either in Chauncerie, or else where: this writ
lies to stay the Justice from doing that, which otherwise he might not deny.

Superstatutum, Ed. 3. verse servants and laborers, is a writ that lies
against him, who keeps my servant departed out of my service against law.
Fitzh. not. fo. 167.

Super statuto de York quo null sera viteller, etc. is a writ lying against him,
that occupies vitteling either in gross or by retaile in a City, or Borough
town, during the time he is Mayor, etc. Fitzh. nature. bre. fol. 172.

Super statuto, anno pri. Ed. 3. cap. 12 and 13. is a writ that lies against
the Kings Tenent holding in chief, which alienateth the kings land witout the
Kings license. Fitzh: not. br. fol. 175.

Super statuto facto pour seneshall and Marshall de Roy, etc. is a writ lying
against the Steward, or Marshall for holding plee in his court of freehould, ot
for trespass, or contracts not made within the Kings household. Fitzherbert
not. breu. fol. 241.

Super statuto de Articulis Cleri, cap. 6: is a writ against the Shyteeue, or
other officer, that distreineth in the Kings high way, or in the glebe land
aunciently given to Rectories. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 173.

Super praerogatiuae Regis, cap. 3. is a writ lying against the kings widow for
marying without his license. Fitzherbert. not. br. fol, 174.

Supplicauit, is a writ issuing out the Chauncerie for taking the surety of
peace against a man. It is directed to the Justices of peace of the county, and
the Shyreeue: and is grounded upon the statute, anno pri. Ed. 3. cap. 16. which
ordeineth that certain persons in chauncerie shallbe assigned to take care of
the peace, See Fitzh. not. br. fol. 80. This writ was of old called Breve de
minis, as M. Lamberd in his Emenarcha. notes out of the Register original,
fol. 88.

Sur cui in vita, is a writ that lies fot the heir of that woman, whose
husband having alienated her land in fee, she brings not the writ Cui in
vita for the recovery of her own land for in this case her heir may take this
writ against the tenent after her decease. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 193. B.

Surgeon, comes of the French (Chirurgien. i. Chirurgus, vulnerarius)
signifiing him that deals in the mechanical part of physic, and the
outward cures performed with the hand. The French word is compounded of two
greek words ((...). i. manus) and (...). i. opus) And therefore are they not
allowed to minister inward medicine. See the statut. 32. H. 8. ca. 4. and M.
Powltons new abridgement titule Surgeons.

Surcharger of the forest, is he that does common with more beasts in the
forest, then he has right to common withal. Manwood, part 2. of his forest
laws. cap. 14. nu. 7.

Surplusage (surplusagium) comes of the French (surplus. i. corollarium,
additamentum) It signifies in the common law, a superfluity or addition more
then needs, which sometime is a cause that a writ abateth. Brook, titulo.
Nugation and Superfluity, fol. 100. Plowden casu Dine, contra Maningham, fol.
63. b. It is sometime also applied to matter of accoumpt, and signifies a
greater disbursement, then the charge of the accoumptant amounts unto.

Surreioynder, is thus defined by West. part 2. symb. titulo. Supplications.
sect. 57. A Surreioynder, is a second defense of the plaintifes actio^,
opposite to the Defendants Reioynder. And therefore (as he says) Hotoman call
eth it Triplicationem, quaeest secunda actoris defensio, contra Rei
duplicationem opposita. Not Hotoman only calls this triplicationem: but the
Emperor himself. De Replicationibus, libro. 4. Institut: titulo. 14.

Surrender (sur sum redditio) is an Instrument testifiing with apt words, that
the particular tenent of lands, or tenements for life or years, does
sufficiently consent and agree, that he which has the next or immediate
Remainder, or Reuetsion thereof shall also have the particular estate of the
same in possession: and that he yields, and gives up the same unto him. For
every surrender ought forthwith to give a possession of the things surrendered.
West: part pri: lib. 2. sectio. 503. where you may see diverse presidents. But
there may be a surrender without writing. And therefore there is said to be a
surrender in deed, and a surrender in law. A surrender in deed, is that which
is really and sensibly performed. Surrender in law is in intendment of law by
way of consequent, and not acutall. Perkins Surrender. 606. and seqq. as if a
man have a lease of a sermon, and during the term he accept of a new lease, this
act is in law a surrender of the former. Coke. vol. 6. fo. 11. b.

Sursise (supersisae) anno 32. H. 8. ca. 48. seems to be an especial name
used in the Castle of Dover, for such penalties, and forfeitures, as are laid
upon those that pay not their duties or rent for Castle ward at their days. a.
32. H. 8. ca. 48. Bract. hathit in a general signification lib. 5. tract. 3.
ca. 1. nu. 8. and Fleta lib. 6. ca. 3. in prin.

Surueiour (superuisor) is compounded of two French words (sur. 1. super) and
veoir. 1. ce^ert intueri, despioere, prospicere, videre) It signifies in qur
common law, one that has the ouerseeing or care of some great personages
lands, or works. As the Surueiour general of the Kings manners. Cromptons
Iurisd. fo. 106. And in this signification it is taken anno 33. H. 8. cap. 39.
where there is a court of Surueiours erected. And the Surueiour of the Wards
and Liueries West part 2. simbologr: titulo Chauncery, sect: 136. which
officer is erected anno 33. H. 8. ca. 22. who is the second officer by his
place in the court of wards and Liueries, assigned and appointed by the king.
His office seems especially to consist in the true examination of the lands
belonging to the Kings wards, that the King be not deceived. At the entrance
into his office, he takes an oath ministered unto him by the Master of that
Court, which see an. 33. H. 8. cap. 39.

Surueiour of the Kings exchange, anno 9. H. 5. stat. 2. ca. 4. was an officer,
whose name seems in these days to be changed into some other. For I cannot
learn that there is any such now.

Suruiuour, is compounded of two French words (Sur. 1. super) and viure. 1.
aetatem agere, viuere) whence also comes the compound (Suruiure. i.
superesse) It signifies in our common law, the longer liver of two joint
tenants. See Brook, titulo Joint tenants, fol. 33. or of any two joined in the
right of any thing.

Suspension (Suspensio) is used for a temporal stop of a man's right, and
differs from extinguishment in this, that a Right of Estate suspended
reuiueth again, but extinguished it dies for ever. Brook, titulo
Extinguishment and Suspension. fol. 314. Suspension is also used in our common
law, sometimes as it is used in the Canon law, pro minori excommunicatione.
As anno 24. H. 8. cap. 12. See Excommunication.

Suspirall, seems to be a spring of water passing under the ground, toward a
conduit or cesterne. anno 35. H. 8. ca. 10. and to be derived from the Latin
(suspirare) or the French (souspirer) i. ducere suspiria. And indeed the word
it self is French for (souspiral) in that tongue, signifies (spiramentum
cauernae) the mouth of a cave or den: or the tunnell of a chimney.

Swainmot, alias Swanimote, (Swainmotum) signifies a Court touching matters of
the Forest kept by the Charter of the Forest, thrice in the year: anno 3 Henr.
octau cap. 18. it is called a Swannie-mote: what things be inquirable in the
fame, you may read in Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 180. who says that this court of
Swainemote is as incident to a Forest, as the court of Piepowder is to a fair,
with whom agrees M. Manwood part pri. of his Forest laws, page 144. The
word seems to be compounded of (Swain) and (mot) or (Gemot). For swain, as
M. Manwood says vbi supra, page 111) in the Saxons tongue signifies a
Bockland man, which at this day is taken for a Charterer, or freeholder: and
(Gemot) as M. Lamberd says in his explication of Saxon words, verbo Conventus,
is Conventus, whereupon it is to be noted, as he says in the same place, that
the Swainemote is a court of freeholders within the Forest. Of the which you
may read him at large, page 110. etc. vsque 122.

T
TAbling of fines, is the making of a table for every county, where his
Majesty's writ runs, containing the contents of every fine, that shall pass
in any one term, as the name of the County, towns, and places, wherein the
lands or tenements mentioned in any fine, do lie, the name of the plaintiff
and Deforceant, and of every manner named in the fine. This is to be done
properly by the Chirographer of fines of the common plees: who the first day of
the next term after the engressing of any such fine, shall fix every of the
said tables in some open place of the court of Common plees: and so every day
of the said term during the sitting of the said court. And the said
Chirographer shall de^iuer to the Shyreeue of every County, his Vndershyreeue
or Deputy, fair written in parchment, a perfect content of the table so to be
made for that shire, in the term that shall be next before the Assizes to be
holden in the same county, or else in the mean time between the term, and
the said assizes, to be set up the first day, and every day of the next
assizes, in some open place, of the Court, where the Justices of Assizes then
shall sit, to continue there so long, as they shall sit in the said court. If
either the Chirographer, or Shyreeue fail herein, he forfeiteth five pounds.
And the Chirographers fee for every such table is four pence. anno 23. Elizab.
cap. 3. This says, West. part 2. symbol. titulo. Fines, sect. 130.

Tail (Tallium) comes of the French (tail. i. Sectura) or the verb
(tailler. i. scindere) signifiing in our common law two several things, both
grounded upon one reason. Plowden, casu Willi^n, fol. 251. a. b. First it is
used for the fee, which is opposite to fee simple: by reason that it is so (as
it were) minced, or pared, that it is not in his free power to be disposed of
him which owneth it: but is by the first giver cut, or divided from all other,
and tied to the issue of the Donee, Cook lib. 4. in prooemio. And this
limitation, or tail, is either general, or special. Tail general is that,
whereby lands, or tenements are limited to a man, and to the heirs of his body
begotten. And the reason of this term is, because how many soever women, the
tenent houlding by this title, shall take to his wives, one after another in
lawful matrimony; his issue by them all, have a possibility to inherit, one
after the other. Tail special is that, whereby lands, or tenements be limited
unto a man and his wife, and the heirs of their two bodies begotten: because
if the man bury his wife before issue, and take another: the issue by this
second wife cannot inherit the land, etc. Also if land should be given to a man
and his wife, and to their son and heir John, for ever: this is tail
especial. See more of this in see, and Litleton lib. pri: ca. 2. and the new
book of Entries. verbo Tail. Tail in the other signification, is that which
we vulgarly call a Tallie. For it is vne taille de bois a cloven piece of wood
to nick up an accoumpt upon, for in the statute anno 10. Ed. pri. cap. 11. and
anno 27. eiusdem, stat. pri. ca. 2. it is termed a Tail, and anno 38. Ed 3.
cap. 5. And so in Brook his Abridgement, titulo. Tail d'Exchequer fol. 247.
See Tails.

Tails (talliae) are in these days called Talleyes, well known what they be.
Of these read in our statutes two sorts, to have been usual in the Exchequer
for a long continuance. The one is termed tails of debt, anno 1. R. 2. cap.
5. which are a kind of acquittance for dept paid in to the king. For example,
the University of Cambridge pays yearly ten pounds, for such things as are
by their Charter granted them in fee ferme, five pounds at the Annunciation
and five at Michaelmas. He that pays the first five pounds, receives for his
discharge a tail or taley, and he that pays the other five, receives the
like. With both which, or notes of them, he repayreth to the Clerk of the
Pipes office, and there in steed of them receives an acquittance in parchment
for his whole discharge. Then be there also mentioned tails of reward, anno
27. H. 8. cap. 11. and anno 33. and 34. eiusdem. ca. 16. and anno 2. and 3. Ed.
6. ca. 4. And these seem to be tails, or talyes of allowances, or recompense
made to Shyreeues for such matters, as to their charge they have performed in
their office, or for such moneys as they by course have cast upon them in their
accounts, but could not leauie the^ where they were due. And these, as it
seems by the said statute, anno 27. H. 8. cap. 11. were of old granted in
the Exchequer unto them, upon warrant made to the Treasurer and Chamberlaines
there, by the Clerks of the signet upon bill assigned by the King. But
sithence the statute anno 2. and 3. Ed. 6. cap. 4. what the course in this case
is, I am not so well informed. Only I hear, that for some counties these
tails be still in use, and that the warrant comes now from the Auditour of
the receipts, unto those that make these taleys. And that the Shyreeue with
them proceeds to those who take his final account, and there has his
allowance accordingly.

Taylage (tallagium) alias, Tallage, comes of the French (taille) which
originally signifies a piece cut out of the whole: and metaphorically is used
for a share of a man's substance paid by way of tribute. It signifies with us
a toll, or tax, as anno pri. Ed. 2. cap. vnico. And Stowes Annals. page 445.
Thence comes Tailagiers in Chawcer for tax, or toll gatherers.

Taint (Attinctus) comes of the French (teinct. i. infectus, tinctus) and
signifies either substantiuely a conviction, or adiectiuely a person convicted
of felony or treason, etc. See Attaint.

Tales, is a latin word of known signification: It is used in our common
law, for a supply of men empaneled upon a jury or enquest, and not appearing,
or at their appearance, challenged by the party, or either party, if there be
two, as not indifferent. for in this case, the Judge upon petition grants a
supply to be made by the Shyreeue of some men there present, equal in
reputation to those that were impaneled. And hereupon the very act of supplying
is called a Tales de Circumstantibus. This supply may be one or more, and of as
many as shall either make defaulte, or else be challenged by each party. Stawf.
pl. cor. lib. 3. ca. 5. How be it, he that has had one Tales, either upon
default or challenge: though he may have another, yet he may not have the later
to contain so many as the former, for the first Tales must be under the
principal panell, except in a cause of Appeal, and so every Tales less then
other, until the number be made up of men present in court, and such as are
without exception to the party, or parties. Of this see Stawnford more at
large vbi supra. where you may find some exceptions to this general rule.
These commonly called (Tales) may in some sort, and in deed are called
(Meliores) viz. when the whole Jury is challenged, as appears by Brook,
titulo. Octo tales and auter tales, fol. 105. In whom you may likewise read
many cases touching this matter.

Tales, is the proper name of a book in the Kings bench office. Coke lib. 4.
fol. 93. b.

Tallage. See Taylage.

Talshide. See Talwood.

Talwood, v. anno 34. and 35. Henric. octau. capit. 3. and anno 7. Ed. 6. ca.
7. and 43. El. cap. 14. Talshide. ibidem. It is a long kind of shide riuen out
of the tree, which shortened is made into billets.

Tartaron, anno 12. Ed. 4. cap. 3. and anno 4. H. 8. cap. 6.

Tasels. anno 4. Ed. 4. cap. 1. is a kind of hard burre used by clothiers and
cloth workers in the dressing of cloth.

Task, alias Tare, by M. Camden following the authority of Doctor Powell
(whom he greatly commends for his diligence in the search of antiquities) is
a Britishe word signifiing tribute. Camden. Britan. page 304. And it seems,
it is such a kind of tribute, as being certainly rated upon every town, was
wont to be yearly paid. See Gild, and the places there cited out of M.
Camden. Now is it not paid, but by consent given in Parliament, as the Subsidy
is. And it differs from Subsidy in this, that it is always certain,
accordingly as it is set down in the Chequer book, and levied in general of
every town, and not particularly of every man. Lastly, it is a fifteenth of
that substance, that every town was first rated at, by the number of hides of
land in the same. Whereupon it is also called a fifteenth v. anno 14. Ed. 3.
stat. 1. cap. 20. for whereas M. Crompton in his Jurisdictions, says that it
is levied sometime by goods, as well as by lands, as also appears by the
statute, anno 9. H. 4. ca. 7. I take his meaning there to be, that though the
task in the whole were at the first by the Prince proportioned by the land: Yet
the towns men among themselves to make up that sum, are at these days
sometime valued by goods. See Fiftenth. It seems that in ancient times, this
task was imposed by the king at his pleasure, but Edward the first, anno 25. of
his reign, bound himself, and his successors from that time forward; not to
levy it but by the consent of the Realm. anno 25. Ed. pri. cap. 5. The word
Task may be thought to proceed from the French (Taux, alias Tax. i.
aestimatio, pretium) for we call it also Tax: but over curiously to contend in
these derivatio^s, may seem frivolous, considering that many words are common
to diverse peoples.

Telonium, or Breue essendi quietum de Telonio, is a writ lying for the
Citizens of any City, or Bourgesses of any town that have a Charter, or
prescription to free them from Toll, against the officers of any town, or
market constraining them to pay Toll of their Merchandise, contrary to their
said grant or prescription. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 226. Hotoman lib. 2.
commentariorum in feuda, cap. 56. verse. Vectigalia, has these words: Telonis
autem dicuntur, public anorum stationes in quibus vectigalia recipient: sed
apud istius generis scriptores, Telonium dicitur vectigal, quod pro pontium aut
riparum munitione penditur: and plerumque a principibus solius exactionis
causa, imperatur.

Team, alias Theme, is an old Saxon word, signifiing a Royalty granted by the
Kings charter, to a Lord of a manner. Bracton li. 3. tracta. 2. ca. 8. of this
Saint Edwards laws, nu. 25. say thus. Quod si quisquam aliquid interciet (id
est, penes alium defendat) super aliquem, and intercitatus, non poterit
warantum suum habere, erit forisfactura sua, and Iusticia similiter de
calumniatore, si defecerit. M. Skene de verborum significatione, verbo Theme.
says, that it is a power to have servants and slaves, which are called natiui,
bondi, villani; and all Baronies insoffed with Theme, have the same power. For
unto them all their bondmen, their children, goods and cattels, properly
appertain: so that they may dispose of them, at their pleasure. And in some
old authentike books it is written. Theme est potestas habends natinos, it a
quod generationes villanorum vestrorum, cum eorum catallis, vbicunque
inueniantur, ad vos pertineant, Theme comes from Than. i. servus, and
therefore some time signifies the bondmen, and slaves, according to an old
statute and law. De curia de Theme. Quod si quis teneat curiam de Theme, and
illa querela in illa curia mouetur, ad quam Theme vocatur: non debet illa curia
elongari, sed ibidem determinari, and omnes Theme ibi compareant. Which is
understood of the question of liberty, when it is in doubt, whether any person
be a bondsman or free man. Which kind of process should not be delayed but
summarily discided. And the new expositour of law terms. speaks to the like
effect, verbo Them. I read it also in an old paper written by an exchequer man
thus translated: Theme. i. propago villanorum.

Teller, is an officer in the Eschequer, of which sort their be four in
number. And their office is, to receive all moneys due to the King, and to give
to the clerk of the Pel a bill to charge him therewith. They also pay to all
persons, any money paiable unto them by the King, by warrant from the auditour
of the receipt. They also make weekly and yearly books both of their
receipts and payments, which they deliver to the L. Treasurer.

Templers (Templarii) See Knights of the Temple. These whil lest they flourished
here in England, which seems to be all that time between Henry the seconds
days, until they were suppressed, had in every nation a particular governor,
whom Brac. calls Magistru^ militiae Te^pli: l. 1. c. 10. Of these read M.
Came. in his Br. p. 320. See Hospitalers.

Temporalties of Bishops (Temporalia Episcoporum) be such revenues, lands, and
tenements, as Bishops have had laid to their Sees by the Kings and other great
personages of this land from time to time, as they are Barons, and Lords of the
Parliament. See Spiritualties of Bishops.

Tend, seems to signify, as much as to endeavor, or offer, or show forth, to
tend the estate of the party of the Demaundant, old n. br. f. 123. b. to tend
to trauers. Stawnf: prarog. fol. 96. to tend an auertment. Britton, cap. 76.

Tender, seems to come of the French (Tender. i. tener, delicatus) and being
used adiectiuely, signifies in english speech, as much as it does in French.
But in our common law, it is used as a verb: and betokens as much, as
carefully to offer, or circumspectly to endeavor the performance of any thing
belonging unto us: as to tender rent, is to offer it at the time and place
where and when it ought to be paid. To tender his law of non Summons. Kitch.
fo. 197. is to offer himself ready to make his law, whereby to prove that he
was not summoned. See law. See make.

Tenementis legatis, is a writ that lies to London, or other corporation,
where the custom is, that men may demise tenements by their last will, as well
as their goods and catels, to whom they list, for the hearing of any
controversy touching this matter, and for the rectifying of the wrong. Regist.
orig. fol. 244. b.

Tenant, alias, tenent, (tenens) comes either of the Latin (tenere) or of
the French (tenir) and signifies in our common law, him that possesses
lands, or tenements by any kind of right, be it in fee, for life, or for
years. This word is used with great diversity of Epithits in the law,
sometime signifying or importing the efficient cause of possession, as tenent
in Dower: which is she, that possesses land, etc. by virtue of her Dower.
Kitchen, fol. 160. Tenent per statute Merchant. Idem, fol. 172. that is, he
that holds land by virtue of a statute forfeited unto him. Tenent in franck
marriage. Kitchen, fol. 158. viz. he that holds land or tenement by reason of
a gift thereof made unto him upon marriage, between him and his wife. Tenent by
the courtesy. Idem, fol. 159 i. he that holds for his life by reason of a
child begotten by him of his wife being an inheritrix, and borne alive. Tenent
per elegit. Idem, fol. 172. i. he that holds by virtue of the writ termed
Elegit. Tenent in mortgage. idem, fol. 38. is he that holds by virtue of a
mortgage or upon condition, that if the lessour pay so much money at such a
day, that he may enter, and if not, that the leassee shall have a fee simple,
fee tail, or free hold. Sometime these Epithites import the manner of
admittance: as tenent by the verge in ancient demesne. Idem. fol. 81. is he
that is admitted by the rod in a court of ancient demesne. Sometime the
evidence, that he has to show for his estate: as Tenent by copy of court
roll, which is one admitted Tenent of any lands, etc. within a manner, that
time out of the memory of man, by the use and custom of the said manner, have
been demisable, and demised to such as will take the same in see, fee-tayle,
for life, years, or at will, according to the custom of the said manner. West
part prim. sym. lib. 2. se. 646. whom read more at large. Again, Tenent by
charter, is he that holds by feofment in writing or other deed. Kitchen;
fol. 57. Sometime these Epithites signify that duty which the tenent is to
perform by reason of his tenure. As Tenent by Knights service, Tenent in
socage, Tenent in burgage, Tenent in frank fee, Tenent in villenage. Sometime
they import the estate of the tenent, or his continuance in the land, as Tenent
in fee simple. Kitchen, fol. 150. Tenent in fee tail, Idem fol. 153. Tenent
for life, and tenent for years: Idem, fol. 163. Tenent at the will of the Lord
according to the custom of the manner. Idem fol. 132. and 165. Tenent at will
by the common law. Idem, eodem. Tenent upon sufferance. Idem, fol. 165. Tenent
of state of inheritance. Stawnf: praerog. fol. 6. Sometime they contain a
relation toward the Lord of whom he houldeth, as Tenent in chief. i. he that
houldeth of the King in the right of his crown. Fitz. not: br. fol. 5. F.
Tenent of the King, as of the person of the King. Idem, eodem. or as of some
honor. eodem: Very tenent. i. he that houldeth immediately of his Lord.
Kitchen fol. 99. For if there be Lord Mesn. and Tenent, the Tenent is very
Tenent to the mesn, but not to the Lord above. Tenent parauaile, pl. cor: fo.
197. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 136. D. is the lowest tenent, and fardest distant
from the Lord Paramont. It seems to be tenent per avail. See Diers
commentaries fol. 25. nu. 156. Noe tenent in right to the Lord, but Tenent as
for the avowrie to be made, Litleton, fol. 96. Sometime they have a relation
between Tenants, and Tenants in several kinds, as joint tenants. i. they
that have equal right in lands and tenements, and all by virtue of one title.
Litleton, li. 3. ca. 3. Tenants in common, be they that have equal right, but
hold by diverse titles, as one or more by gift or descent, and others by
purchase. Idem, eod. cap. 4. Particular tenent. Stawnf. praerog. fol. 13. that
is, he which holds only for his term, as tenent in dower, tenent by the
courtesy, or otherwise for life, West part 2. symbol. titulo. Fines. sect.
13. G. See anno 32. H. 8. ca. 31. and Cook in Sir William Pellams case. lib.
5. fol. 15. a. they be termours for years or life. See Plowden casu Colthirst.
fol. 23. b. Sole tenent, Kitchen 134. i. he that has none other joined with
him. If a man and his wife hold for both their lives, and the man dies, he
dies not sole tenent, Idem eodem. Several tenent, is opposite to joint
tenants or tenants in common. See Several tenencie. Tenent al praecipe, is he,
against whom the writ (Fraecipe) is to be brought. Cooks Reports. lib. 3. the
case of fines. fol. 88. a. Tenent in demesne, anno 13. Ed. 1. cap. 9. anno 32.
H. 8. cap. 37. is he that holds the demeanes of a manner for a rent without
service. Tenent in feruice, an. 20. Ed. 1. stat. pri. is he that holds by
service v. Britton. cap. 79. in principie, and ca. 96. Car fealte, etc. vel
quaere whether he may be termed tenent in demesne, that holds some of the
Demeanes howsoever, and he tenent in service, which is a freehoulder to a manner
houlding by service, for the free houlds of a manner are not accounted of the
demesne, but only that which the Lord keeps in his own hand or lets out
by copy, according to the custom of the manner. Tenent by execution an. 32.
Henr. 8. cap. 5. is he that holds land by virtue of an exeution upon any
statute, recognisance, etc.

Tendeheved (decanus, vel caput december familiarum) of this see Roger Hoveden,
part poster. suorum annalium. fol. 346. a. See Frank pledge.

Tenement (Tenementum) is diversely used in the common law, Most properly it
signifies a house or home stall: but in a larger signification it is taken for
either house or land that a man holds of another. And joined with the
adjective (Frank) in our lawyers French, it contains generally lands or
houses, yea or offices, wherein we have estate for term of life, or in fee.
And in this signification, Kitchen, fol. 41. makes frank tenement, and base
estate opposite the one to the other. In the same sort does Britton use it,
through his whole 27. chapter, as also Bracton does the latin (liberum
tenentum) lib. pri. cap. 5. and 6. and many other places.

Tenentibus in assisa non onerandis, etc. is a writ that lies for him to whom
a disseisour has alienated the land whereof he disseised another, that he be
not molested for the damages awarded, if the Disseisour have wherewith to
satisfy them him self. Register. orig. fol. 214. b.

Tenths (Decimae) is that yearly portion or tribute, which all livings
ecclesiastical do yield to the king. For though the Bishop of Rome do
originally pretend right unto this revenewe, by example of the high priest
among the Jews, who had tenths from the Levites, Numb. cap. 8. Hieronimus in
Ezechielem. yet Iread in our Chronicles that these were often granted to the
King by the Pope, upon diverse occasions, sometime for one year, sometime for
more, until by the statute, anno 26. Hen. 8. cap. 3. they were annexed
perpetually to the Crown. See Disms. It signifies also a task levied of the
temporalty. Holinshed. H. 2. f. 111.

Tenore indictamenti mittendo, is a writ whereby the Record of an indictment,
and the process thereupon, is called out of another court into the chauncerie.
Register orig. fol. 169. a.

Tenure (Tenura) comes of the Norman (Teneure) as appears by the Grand
Custumarie: cap. 28. where it is defined to this effect: Tenure is the manner,
whereby tenements are houlden of their Lords. What may make a tenure and what
not, see Perkins Reseruations, 70. And in that chapter shall you find the most
of those tenures recited, that be now usually in England. In Scotland I find
that there be four manner of tenures, which they call halding of land; the
first is pura eleemozina, which is proper to spiritual men, paying nothing for
it, but deuot a animarum suffragia: the second they call Few, or few ferme,
which houldeth of the King, Church, Barons, or others, paying a certain duty
called Feudi firma. The third is a hold in (Blench) as they term it, by
payment of a penny, rose, pair of guilt spurs, or some such like thing, if it
be asked, in name of Blench, id est nomine albae firmae. The fourth is by
service of ward, and relieve, where the heir being minor, is in the guard or
custody of his Lord, together with his lands, etc. And land houlden in this
fourth manner, is called there feudum de Hauberk, or Haubert. or feudum
militare, or feudum Hauberticum, or feudum loricatum: because it is given upon
condition, that the vassal possessor thereof, shall come to the host with a
lack, or Haubert which is a coat of maile. M. Skene de verb: significa: verbo.
Haubert. Tenure in gross, is the Tenure in Capite. For the Crown is called a
Seignory in gross, because it consists as a corporation of and by it self,
not tied to any honor, or manner. See Cromptons Iurisd: fol: 206. See the new
book of Entries, verbo Tenure.

Term (Terminus) signifies with us commonly, the bounds and limitation of
time: as a lease for term of life or term of years. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 6.
nu. 4. But most notoriously it is used for that time, wherein the Tribunals, or
places of Judgment are open to all that list to complaime of wrong, or to
seek their right by course of law, or action. The rest of the year is called
vacation. Of these terms there be four in every year: during the which,
matters of Justice (for the most part) are dispatched. and this Sir Tho. Smith
lib. 3. de Rep. Ang: cap. 2. reckons as miraculous: that in less time then
the third part of the year, three Tribunals, all in one city, should certify
the wrongs of so large and populous a nation, as England is. Of these terms one
is called Hilary term which begins the 23. of Iannuary, or if that be
Sunday, the next day following, and eudeth the 21. of February. Another is
called Easter term, which begins 18. days after Easter and ends the
monday next after Ascension day. The third is Trinity term, beginning the
Friday next after Trinity Su^day, and ending the Wedensday fortnight after. The
fourth is Mich aelmas term, beginning the 9 of October, or if that be Sunday,
the next day after, and ending the 28. of November.

Termor (Tenens extermino) is he that ^houldeth for term of years or life.
Kitchen fol. 151. Litleton fol. 100.

Terra extendenda is a writ directed to the Escheatour, etc. willing him to
inquire and find the true yearly value of any land, etc. by the oath of twelve
men, and to certify the extent into the Chauncerie, etc. Regist. orig. fol.
293. b.

Terris, bonis and catallis rehabendis post purgationem, is a writ that lies
for a Clerk to recover his lands, goods, or chatels formerly seized on, after
he has cleared himself of that felony, upon suspicion whereof he was
formerly convicted, and delivered to his Ordinary to be purged. Regist. orig.
fol. 68. b.

Terris liberandis, is a writ, that lies for a man convicted by attaint, to
bring the Record and process, before the King, and to take a five for his
imprisonment, and to deliver him his lands and tenements again, and to release
him of the Strip and Waste. Regist. orig. fol. 232. a. It is also a writ for
delivery of lands to the heir after homage, and relief performed. eodem fol.
293. b. or upon security taken, that he shall perform them. eodem, fol. 313.
b.

Terris and catallis ventis vltra debitum levatum, is a writ Judicial, for the
restoring of lands or goods to a deptour that is distrained above the quantity
of the dept. Register Judicial. fol. 38. b.

Terretenent, (terratenens) is he which has the natural, and actual
possession of the land, which we otherwise call the occupation. anno. 39. Eliz
cap. 7. For example, a Lord of a manner has a freeholder, who lets out his
freeland to another to be occupied: this occupier is called the Terretenent.
West. part 2. symb. titulo. Fines. sect. 137. Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 194.
Britton. cap. 29. Perkins feofments. 231. And Petrus Bellugain speculo
Principum. Rub. 46. versiculo, Restat videre number. 9. uses this word
Terratenentes in the same signification. See Land tenants. Yet I have heard
some learned in the law say, that the Tertenent, is the teuent in free, or
copyhold, according to the custom of the manner, and opposite to tenent for
term of years. Quaere.

Ters, is a certain measure of liquide things, as wine, oil, etc. containing
the sixth part of a Tun. anno 32. H. 8. cap. 14. or the third part of a pipe.

Testament, (testamentum.) See Will.

Testatum, is a writ that seems especially to lie against great personages of
the realm, whose bodies may not be meddled with in actions of dept. And
therefore if the Shyreeue return, (nihil habet in balliva mea) in a case of
execution, another writ shall be sent out into any other County, where such
personage is thought to have whence to satisfy, which is termed a Testatum;
because the Shyreeue has formerly testified, that he found nothing in his
Bayliweeke to serve the turn. See Kitchen in his Returns of writs. fol. 287.
b.

Test, is a word commonly used for the last part of any writ: so called,
because the very conclusion of every writ wherein the date is contained,
begins with these words, (test ^eipso, etc.) If it be an original writ, or
if judicial, test Thom. Flemming, or Edovar do Cook, according to the Court
whence it comes. Where I may note by the way, that in Glanvile lib. pri. cap.
6. and 13. and lib. 2. cap. 4. I find the form of an original writ in the
last clause to be (test Ranulpho de Glanvilla apud Clarindon, etc. And diverse
times in the Register orig. Test custode Anglu: as namely, in the title
Prohibition. fol. 42. a. and Consultation, fol. 54. b.

Thanus, is a made Latin word of the Saxon (thegn) which comes of (thenian.
i. alicui ministrare.) It signifies sometime a Noble man, sometime a free man,
sometime a Magistrate, sometime an Officer, or minister. Lamb. in in his
Explication of Saxon words. verbo: Thanus. See the place. See vavasour. M.
Skene de verbor. signif. says, it is the name of a dignity, and appears to
be equal with the son of an Earl. And Thanus was a free holder holding his
lands of the King. And a man not taken with the fang (that is, with the manner,
as we say,) accused of theft, no sufficient proof being brought against him,
must purge himself by the oath of 27. men, or of three Thanes. Thanagtum
Regis, signifies a certain part of the Kings lands, or property, whereof the
rule and government appertains to him, who therefore is called Thanus. For
Domania Regis, and Thanagia, idem significant. It is a Dutch word: For (teiner)
signifies a servant, and teiner to serve. And thane is likewise a servant, and
vnder-thane, an inferior thane or subject. Thus far M. Skene.

Thack tile. anno 17. Ed. 4. cap. 4. otherwise called plain tyle, is that tile
which is made to be laid upon the side, and not upon the rudge of a tyled
house. anno 17. Ed. 4. cap. 4.

Theme. See Team.

Theft (furtum) is an unlawful felonious taking away of another man's moveable,
and personal goods against the owners will, with an intent to steal them.
West. part 2. symbol. titulo Inditements. sect. 58. where also he says, that
theft is from the person or in presence of the owner, or in his absence. Theft
from the person or in presence of the owner, is of two sorts: the one putting
the owner in fear, the other not. Idem, eodem, sect. 59. The former is
properly called Robbery. ibid. sect. 60. The new expounder of law terms,
verbo Larconie, divides theft into theft so simply called, and petit or little
theft. Whereof the one is of goods above the value of twelve pence, and is
felony, the other under that value, and is no felony. But see Felony.

Theftbote, is made of (theft) and (boot) i. compensatio, and signifies
properly the receiving of goods from a thief, to the end to favor, and
maintain him. The punishment whereof is ransom and imprisonment, and not
loss of life and member. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. prim. cap. 43. and the myrror
of Justices. lib. 2. cap. des peches criminels al suit le Roye. And yet he
there makes mention of a Record alleged, which testified a judgment of life
and member given in this case.

Thegue. See Thanus, and Thingus.

Them. See Team. It signifies acquietantiam amerciamentorum sequelae
propriorum servorum. Fleta lib. prim. cap. 47.. Theme.

Thelonium. See Tholle, and Tholonium, and Toll.

Theolonio rationabili habendo pro Dominis habentibus Dominica Regis ad firmam,
is a writ, that lies for him, that has of the Kings demesne in fee ferme, to
recover reasonable toll of the Kings tenants there, if that his demesne have
been accustomed to be tolled. Register origin. fol. 87. b.

Thingus. Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 197. seems to be used for the Saxon Thegne.
See Thanus. His words are these, speaking of a Charter or Grant made by a Lord
of a Forest. Scietis me concessisse omnibus militibus, and omnibus thingis, and
omnibus libere tenentibus, qui manent in Forestamea do Honor de Lancaster,
quod possunt, etc. Fleta writes it Tlem, and says, quod significat liberum.

Then, significat servum. Fleta li. prim. cap. 47. See Thanus, and Thingus.

Thridborow, is used for a constable. anno 28. H. 8. cap. 10. which also is
noted by M. Lamberd in his Tractate entitled: The duty of Constables, page 6.
which seems to be corruptly used for the Saxon (freoborh. i. ingenuus fide
iussor,) or (freborheshe ofod. i. vas primarius) Idem. in his explication of
Saxon words. verbo. Centuria.

Third with hawan man (trium noctium hospes) who if he did any harm, his host,
by the laws of Saint Edward, and of the Conqueror, was answerable for the
harm. Rogerus Hoveden part poster suorum annal. fol. 345.

Thokei of fish, anno 22. Ed 4. cap. 2.

Tholl (Thollonium) est libertas emendi, and vendendi in terra sua. Archainom.
Lamb. fol. 132. See Toll.

Thraue of corn, anno 2. H. 6. ca. 2. consists of two shookes: and every
shoke contains 6. sheaues. It seems to be a word proper to the north parts.

Thrimsa, comes of (Threo) that is three, and signifies a piece of money of
three shillings. Lamb. expla. of Saxons words. verbo Thrimsa.

Tilsen of saten, anno 1. H. 8. ca. 14.

Tince^, comes of the French (Estincelle. i. scintilla) or the verb
(Estinceller. i. scintillare) It signifies with us a stuff or cloth made
partly of silk and partly of gold or silver, so called because it glistereth
or sparkleth like stars.

Tissu, is a French word signifiing as much as (wouen) Cloth of Tissue, with us
cloth of silk and silver, or of silk, and gould wouen together.

Tithe (Decimae) seems to be an abbreuiat of (tything) being the Saxon
(Teothung) a little altered, which signifies Decuriam, Lamb. explica. of Saxon
words. verbo. Decuria. It signifies in our common law, the tenth part of all
fruits prediall, or personal, which be due to God, and so consequently to his
Minister, toward the recompense of his pains taken in instructing his charge,
how to live after Gods commandments, and his continual intercession that he
does or ought to make unto God for their both spiritual and temporal blessings
Leuit. cap. 27. versu. 30. I say the tenth part, though Couarruvias with other
learned Canonists and Scholemen, hold the rate of tithes, not to be necessarily
the tenth part of the fruits by the moral law of God. Yet the beter and more
theological opinion is, that they are all deceived, and that from their error
has sprung much wrong to almighty God, and great mischief to his church: and
that by the law of God and nature no contrary custom ought to last any longer,
then the parson and parishioner shall both think well of it. Wherefore those
customs of paying a halfepeny for a lamb, or a penny for a calfe by such as
have under seven in one year, how long so ever it has endured, is but very
unreasonable in these days, when both lamb and calves are grown four times
deerer, and more then they were when this price was first accepted. And
therefore no man discharges well his conscience in this point that paieth not
duly the tenth of every Lamb, every calfe, and every otherthing titheable. For
by this course the minister fares well or evil in a proportion with his
parishioner, as it pleases God to give increase, whereas by any other order
the one or the other shall find want of indifferency, as the prices of things
shall rise or fall.

Tithing (Tithingum) is the Saxon word Teothung for the which see (Tithe) It
signifies (as M. Lamb. says in his duty of Constables) the number or company
of ten men with their families cast, or knit together in a society, all of
them being bound to the King for the peaceable and good behavior of each of
their society. Of these companies was there one chief or principal person,
who of his office was called (Toothung man) at this day in the West parts
(Tithingman) But now he is nothing but a Constable. For that old discipline of
Tithings is left long sithence. It signifies also a court, anno 23. Ed. 3.
cap. 4. and anno 9. H. 3. cap. 35. See Chief Pledge and Frank pledge, and
Decennier. Tithing is used for a Court. Magna charta, cap. 25. and Merton, cap.
10.

Todde of wool, is a quantity containing 28. pound in weight, or two Stone.

Tossed (Tostum) is a place, wherein a mesuage has stood West. part 2. symbol.
titulo Fines sect. 26.

Toil, comes of the French (Toil. i. tela) and signifies with us a net of
cord to compass or take Dear.

To lange and to bred. See Bred.

Toll (Tollere) as it is a verb signifies to defeat or take away, anno 8.
H. 6. cap. 9.

Toll, alias Tholl (Tolnetum, alias Theolonium) is a Saxon word, and has in
our common law two significations: first it is used for a liberty to buy and
sell within the precincts of a manner. Lamb. Archainom. fol. 132. which seems
to import so much as a fair or market. The words be these: Thol (quod nos
dicimus Tholoniu^) est scilicet quod habeat libertatem vendendi and emendi in
terra sua. In the second signification it is used for a tribute or custom paid
for passage, etc. as in Bracton. Si cui concedatur talis libertas quod quietus
sit de Theolonio and consuetudinibus dandis per totum Regnum Angliae in terra
and mari, and quod Theolonium and consuetudines capiat infra libertatem suam de
ementibus and vendentibus, etc, lib. 2. cap. 24. number. 3. But even there in the
end of the second number he has this word, Toll (as it seems) in the former
signification also, which by these words above written following a little after,
he interprets to be a liberty as well to take as to be free from Toll. The
made Latin word (Theolonium) Cassanaus in consuetud. Burgund. page 118,
deriueth a Tollendo) but I rather think it comes from the greek ((...)) or
((...)). i. vectigalium redemptio, vel etiam vectigalium exactio) Fleta has
these words of it: Tol significat acquietantiam Theolonii vbique in Regno, lib.
pri. cap. 47. M. Skene de verb. signifi. verbo Toll, says it is a custom, and
that it comes from the Greek word of the same signification ((...)) and that
he who is infeoffed with Toll, is custom free, and pays no custom: which is
manifest by sundry old books, wherein it is written: Toll, hoc est quod vos
and homines vestri de toto homagio vestro sint quieti de omnibus mercantus, and
de Tolneto, de omnibus rebus emptis and venditis. Thus far he. Kitchen fol.
104. makes mention of Toll through, and Toll Trauers, his words be to this
effect. Custom or prescription to have Toll through in the high way, is not
good: for it is against the common right. But to have prescription of Toll
Trauers, is good. In which place the difference between the one, and the other
the new expositour of law terms faith to be, that tolletrauers is that money,
which is taken for passing over a private man's ground. But this author seems
to differ from Kitchen touching the lawfulnes of toll through, saying that by
reason of a bridge provided at the cost and charge of the town, for the ease
of travelers, he thinks it reasonable, that toll through be exacted toward
the maintenance thereof: which writer also makes mention of toll turn: and
that he defines to be toll paid for beasts driven to be sold, though they
be not sold indeed. Where, I think, he must mean a toll paid in the return
homeward from the fair or market, whether they were driven to be sold.
Plowden, casu Willion, fo. 236. agrees in this definition of toll trauers.
And this the Feudists call parangariam, defining it to be sumptus and labores
ferendi referendiue alicui^s causa a principe impositi, cum non per viam, sed
alio versum iter suscipitur. l. 2. Co. de Episc. and cleri. a graeco ((...)).
i. transitus per viam transversam. Gothofred. ad. l. 4.. 1. P. de vetera. I
find in Andrew Horns mirror of Justices, lib. 1. cap. des articles, etc. that
by the ancient law of this land, the buyers of corn or catell in faires or
markets, ought to pay toll to the Lord of the market, in testimony of their
contract there lawfully made in open market: for that privy contracts were
held unlawful.

Toloneum or Breve de essends quietum de Toloneo, is a writ that lies in case,
where the Citizens of any City, or Burgesses of any town, be quit from toll
by the grant of the kings predecessors, or prescription: which you have at
large in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 226. See Telonium.

Tolt (Tolta) is a writ whereby a cause depending in a court Baron, is removed
into the county court. Old. not. br. fol. 2. The reason of the appellation
seems ^o come from the verb (Tollo) v: Cook, lib. 3. in praefatione ad
lectorem.

Tonne. See Tun.

Tonnage, is a custom or impost due for mercha^dise brought or carried in tonns
and such like vessels, from or to other nations after a certain rate in every
tonne anno 12. Ed. 4. ca. 3. anno 6. H. 8. ca. 14. and anno pri. Ed. 6. cap.
13. anno pri. Iacobi, cap. 33. I have heard it also called a duty due to the
Mariners for unloading their ship arrived in any haven after the rate of every
tonne.

Torny. See Turney.

Totted anno 42. Ed. 3. cap. 9. and anno 1. Ed. 6. ca. 15. is a word used of a
dept, which the foreign Apposer or other officer in the Exchequer notes for a
good dept to the King by writing this word (Tot) unto it.

Tourn. See Turn.

Tout temps prist and uncore est: that is to say in English, Always ready and is
at this present: this is a kind of plee in way of excuse or defense unto him
that is siewed for withhoulding any dept, or duty belonging to the plaintiff.
See of this Brook his Abridgement, fol. 258.

Traile baston. See Justices of trial baston.

Traitor (traditor, proditor) See Treason.

Transgressione, is ^writ, called commonly a writ or action of trespass. Of this
Fitzherbert in his Naturabre: has two sorts: one Vicountiel, so called,
because it is directed to the Shyreeue, and is not returnable but to be
determined in the county: The form whereof differs from the other, because
it has not these words: Quare vi and amiss, etc. and this see in Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 85. G. The other is termed a writ of trespass upon the case, which is
to be siewed in the common Bank, or the Kings Bench, in which are always used
these words vi and armis, etc. And of this you have Fitzh. not. br. fol. 92. E.
See Trespass. See the diverse use of this writ in the Register original, in the
table.

Transcript, anno 34. and 35. H. 8. cap. 14. is the copy of any original
written again or exemplified.

Transcripto Recognitionis factae coram Iusticiariis itiner antibus, etc. is a
writ for the certifiing of a Recognisance, taken before Justices in Eire, into
the Chauncery, Register orig fol. 152. b.

Transcripto pedis finis levati mittendo in Cancellariam, is a writ for the
certifiing of the foot of a fine levied before Justices in Air, etc. into the
Chauncerie, eodem. fol. 169. and Register Judicial, fol. 14.

Travers, comes of the French (Traverser. i. transfigere) It signifies in
our common law sometime to deny, sometime to overthrow, or undo a thing
done. Touching the former signification take these words in Wests symbol. part
2. titulo Chauncery, sect. 54. An answer (says he, speaking of an answer (...)
a bille in Chauncerie) is that, which the Defendant pleads or says in bar
to avoid the plantiffes bille, or action, either by confession and avoiding,
or by denying and traversing the material parts thereof. And again, sectio.
55. A replication is the plaintifles speech or answer to the Defendants answer,
which must affirm and persiew his bille, and confess and avoid, deny or
traverse the Defendants answer. And the formal words of this trauers are in
Lawyers French (sans ceo) in Latin (absque hoc) in English (without that.) See
Kitchen fol. 227. titulo Affirmative and Negative. In the second signification
I find it in Stawnfords praerog. cap. 20. through the whole chapter, speaking
of traversing an office: which is nothing else, but to prove, that an
inquisition made of goods or lands by the Eschetour, is defective and untruly
made. So traversing of an Indictment, is to take issue upon the chief matter
thereof: which is none other to say, then to make contradiction, or to deny the
point of the Enditement. As in presentment against A. for a high way overflowed
with water for default of scowring a ditch, which he and they, whose estate he
has in certain land there, have used to scower and cleanse. A. may trauerse
either the matter, viz. that there is no high way there, or that the ditch is
sufficiently scowred: or otherwise he may trauers the cause, viz. that he has
not the land, etc. or that he and they whose estate, etc. have not used to
scour the ditch. Lamb. Eirenarcha. lib. 4. cap. 13. page 521 522. Of Trauers
see a whole chapter in Kitchen, fol. 240. See the new book of Entries. verbo,
Trauers.

Treason (traditio, vel proditio) comes of the French, trahison, i. proditio)
and signifies an offense committed against the amplitude and majesty of the
commonwealth. West part 2. symbol. titulo Inditements. sect. 63. by whom it is
there divided into High treason, which other call altam proditionem, and petit
treason. High treason he defines to be an offense done against the security
of the common wealth, or of the Kings most excellent Majesty: whether it be by
imagination, word, or deed: as to compass or imagine treason, or the death of
the Prince, or the Queen his wife, or his son and heir apparent, or to
deflowre the Kings wife, or his eldest daughter unmarried, or his eldest sons
wife: or levy war against the King in his Realm, or to adhere to his enemies,
ayding them, or to counterfeit the Kings great Seal, privy Seal, or money,
or wittingly to bring false money into this Realm counterfeited like unto the
money of England, and utter the same: or to kill the Kings Chaunceler,
Treasurer, Justice of the one bench, or of the other, Justices in Air,
Justices of Assise, Justices of oyer and terminer, being in his place, and
doing of his office. anno 25. Ed. prim. ca. 2. or forging of the Kings seal
manuell, or privy signet, privy seal, or foreign coin current within the
Realm anno 2. Mar. cap. 6. or diminishing or impairing of money current, an.
5. Elizab. ca. 11. and anno 14. El. ca. 3. and 18. Elizab. ca. pri. and many
other actions which you may read there and in other places particularly
expressed. And in case of this treason a man forfeiteth his lands, and goods to
the King only. And it is also called treason Paramount. anno 25. Ed. 3. cap.
2. The form of Judgment given upon a man convicted of high treason is this.
The Kings Sergeant after the verdict delivered, craves Judgment against the
prisoner in the behalf of the King. Then the Lord Steward (if the traitor
have been noble) or other Judge (if he be under a peer) says thus: N. Earl
of P. For so much as thou before this time have been of these treasons indicted,
and this day arraigned for thee same, and put thy self upon God and thy
peers, and the Lords thy peers have found thee guilty, my Judgment is that
thou shall from hence be conveyed unto the Tower of London, whence thou came,
and from thence drawn through the midst of London to Tiburne, and there
hanged: and living thou shall be cut down, thy bowels to be cut out and burnt
before thy face, thy head cut off, and thy body to be divided in four
quarters, and disposed at the Kings Majesty's pleasure: and God have mercy upon
thee.

Petit treason is rather described by examples, then any where logically
defined: as when a servant kills his master, or a wife her husband, or when a
secular or religious man kills his prelate, to whom he owes faith and
obedience. And in how many other cases petit treason is committed. See
Cromptons Justice of peace. And this manner of treason gives forfeiture of
Escheats to every Lord within his own fee anno 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2. Of treason
see Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 3. nu. pri. and 2. Treason compriseth both
high and petit treason anno 25. Ed. 3. stat. 3. cap. 4.

Treasure troue (The saurus inuentus) is as much as in true French (Tresor
trouue). i. treasure found: and signifies in our common law, as it does in the
Civil law, idest, veterem depositionem pecuniae, cuius non extat memoria, vt
iam dominum non habeat. l. 31. prim. P. de acquir. rerum Dom. Near unto which
definition comes Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 3. number. 4. And this treasure
found, though the civil law do give it to the finder, according to the law
of nature; yet the law of England, gives it to the King by his prerogative,
as appears by Bracton vbi supra. And therefore as he also says in the sixth
chapter, it is the Coroners office to enquire thereof by the country to the
Kings use. And Stawn. pl. cor. lib. pr. cap. 42. says, that in ancient times,
it was doubtful, whether the concealing of treasure found were felony, yea or
not: and that Bracton calls it grauem praesumptionem, and quasi crimen furti.
But the punishment of it at these days, as he proves out of Fitzh.
Abridgment. page 187. is imprisonment, and fine, and not life and member. And
if the owner may any way be known, then does it not belong to the kings
prerogative. Of this you may read Britton also; cap. 17. who says, that it is
every subjects part, as soon as he has found any treasure in the earth, to
make it known to the Coroner of the country, or to the Bayliffes, etc. See
Kitchen also, fol. 40.

Treasurer, thesaurarius, comes of the French (tresorier) i. quaestor,
praefectus fisci) and signifies an Officer, to whom the treasure of another,
or others, is committed to be kept, and truly disposed of. The chiefest of
these with us, is the Treasurer of England, who is a Lord by his office, and
one of the greatest men of the land: under whose charge and government is all
the Princes wealth contained in the Exchequer, as also the check of all
Officers any way employed in the collecting of the Imposts, tributes, or other
revenues belonging to the Crown. Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. 2. cap. 14.
more belonging to his office, see ann. 20 Ed. 3. cap. 6. and anno 31. H. 6.
cap. 5. and anno 4. Ed. 4. cap. pri. and anno 17. eiusdom. cap. 5. and anno
prim. R. 2. cap. 8. and anno 21. H. 8. cap. 20. and anno prim. Ed. 6. cap. 13.
Ockams Lucubrations affirm, that the Lord chief Justice had this authority
in times past: and of him has these words: Iste excellens Sessor omnibus, quae
in inferrore vel superiore scacchio sunt, prospicit. Ad nutum ipsius quaelibet
officia subiecta disponuntur: sic tamen vt ad Domini Regis vtilitatem just
perueniant: Hic tamen inter caetera videtur excellens, quod potest his sub
testimonio suo breve Domini Regis facere fieri, vt de thesauro quaelibet summa
liberetur, vel vt computetur quod sibi ex Domini Regis mandato praenouerit
computandum, vel si maluerit, breve suum sub aliorum testimonio faciet de his
rebus. This high Officer has by virtue of his office at this day, the
nomination of the Escheatours yearly throughout England, and gives the places
of all customers, controllers, and searchers in all the ports of the Realm. He
sits in the chequer chamber, and with the rest of the court, orders things
to the Kings best benefit. He with the Barons may by statute stall depts of
three hundred pounds and under. And by commission from his majesty, he with
others joined with him, lets leases for lives or years, of the lands that
came to the Crown by the dissolution of Abbeys. He by his office gives
warrant to certain men to have their wine without impost. He takes
declaration of all the money paid into the Receipt of the Exchequer, and of
all Receivers accounts.

Then is there a Treasurer of the kings household, who is also of the privy
Council, and in the absence of the Steward of the Kings household, has power
with the Controller and the Steward of the Marshalsea, without commission to
hear and determine treasons, misprisions of treasons, murder, homicide, and
bloodshed, committed within the Kings palace. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 5.
In the statute anno 28. Rich. 2. cap. 18. and anno 11. H. 7. cap. 16. mention
is made of the Treasurer of Calis. In Westminster. 2. cap. 8. of the Treasurer of the
Exchequer. and anno 27. Ed. 3. stat. 2. cap. 18. and ann. 35. Eliz. cap. 4. Of
the Treasurer of the Navy, or Treasurer of the wars or garrisons of the
Navy. anno 39. El. cap. 7. Treasurer of the Kings chamber. anno 26. H. 8. cap.
3. and anno 33 eiusdem cap. 39. Treasurer of the wars. anno 7. H. 7. cap.
prim. anno 3. H. 8. cap. 5. Treasurer of the Chauncerie. West. part 2. symbol.
titulo Fines. sect. 152. Treasurer of the Kings Wardrobe. anno 15. Ed. 3. stat.
prim. cap. 3. and anno 25. eiusdem, stat. 5. cap. 21. whose office you have
well set forth in Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 14. Treasurer of the County for poor
soldiers. anno 35. Eliz. cap. 4. And most corporations through the kingdom,
have an officer of this name, that receives their rents, and disburseth their
common expenses.

Treat comes of the French (traire. i. emulgere) and signifies in the
common law, as much as taken out, or withdrawn. As a Iurour was challenged,
for that he might not dispend 40. pounds, and for that cause he was treat by
the Statute. old na. br. fol. 159. that is, removed or discharged. Bread of
treat, anno 51. H. 3. Statute of bread, etc. what it signifies, I cannot
learn.

Trespass (Transgressio) is a French word signifiing as much as Mors, obitus,
excessiss. The reason whereof I take to be, because in interpretation it is a
passage from one place or estate to another: for in Britton, cap. 29. I find
trespassants for passengers. In our common law and language, it is used for any
transgression of the law, under treason, felony, or misprision of treason, or
of felony, as may be gathered out of Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 38. where he says,
that for a Lord of the Parliament to depart from the Parliament without the kings
license, is neither treason nor felony, but trespass. And again, fol. 31.
saying, that where it was wont before the statute made anno prim. Ed. 2. called
Statutum de frangentibus prisonam, that the breach of prison was felony, if it
were the Kings prison: it is sithence but trespass, except the prisoner were
committed for felony. But it is most commonly used for that wrong or damage,
which is done by a private man to the King, as in his Forest, pl. cor. lib. 2.
cap. 18. or to another private man. And in this signification it is of two
sorts: trespass general, otherwise termed, trespass vi and armis: and
trespass especial, otherwise called trespass upon the case. And this seems
to be without force. Terms of the Law. Action upon the case, as appears by
Kitchen, fol. 176. The former I take to be called general, because it rises
from that general ground in law, that whatsoever is done by any private man's
humor vi and armis, is an offense. The later I call especial, because Kitchen
calls the other general: and another reason may be this, because it
springs from a particular case or fact, not contained under any other
general head. And the action lying for this trespass, is otherwise called an
action upon the case, as may be gathered out of diverse places under the title
Trespass, in Brooks his Abridgement. How to distinguish the form of these
writs or actions, See Fitz. not. br. fol. 86. I. and 87. H. I. In an action of
trespass, this is perpetual, that the plaintiff sieweth for damages, or the
value of the hurt cone unto him by the Defendant. It seems an hard thing to
distinguish these two kinds of trespasses so, as to be able to say when it is a
trespass vi and armis, and when upon the case: as may well appear to him that
shall peruse this title in Brook. But this is to be left to the experience of
grave and skillful pleaders. I find moreover in Kitchen, fol. 188 that there is
a trespass local, and trespass transitory: trespass local is that, which
is so annexed to a place certain, as if the Defendant join issue upon the
place, and trauers the place, only by saying, Absque hoc, that he did the
trespass in the place mentioned in the declaration, and aver it, it is
enough to defeat the action. Trespass transitory is that, which cannot be
defeated by the defendants trauers of the place, saying: without that I
committed the trespass in the place declared: because the place is not
material. Examples of both you have set down by Kitchen, in the place above
named, to this effect: trauers by (Absque hoc) of trespass in battery, or
goods brought in, is transitory, and not local: as it is of trees cut, or
herbs.

And therefore in trespass transitory the place shall not make issue, neither
is it trauersable: no more then is a trespass upon a case of an Assumption.
Bracton in his fourth book, cap. 34. number. 6. divides transgressione^ in
maiorem and minorem: which place read. See also great diversity of trespasses
in the new book of Entries. verbo Trespass.

Trial (triatio) is used in our common law, for the examination of all causes
civil or criminal, according to the laws of our Realm. Of this word Stawn.
pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 26. writes to this effect. There was a statute made
prim. and secund. Philip. and Mar. cap. 10. to this purpose. And be it further
enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all trials hereafter to be had,
awarded or made for any treason, shall be had and used according to the due
order and course of the common laws of this Realm, and not otherwise, etc. By
this word (trial) says Stawnf. in that place, some understand as well the
inquest that indicteth a man as the enquest upon the arraignment, that
attainteth or acquiteth him. For these two make but one entire trial, that
every man is to have, when he is impeached of treason. But others have answered
to this, that trial in common speech, is the trial that a man is to have,
after he is indicted, and not before. For in law the indictment is naught, but
the accusation against him, which he is to make answer unto and that being
tried, it either attainteth, or acquiteth him. So that the trial is the issue,
which is tried upon the Indictment, and not the Indictment it self. For that
is no part of the thing which tries, but the thing which is tried, and the
offense. And so is this word Trial understood in the statute, anno 33. H. 8.
cap. 23. where it says thus. must be indighted within the shires or places,
where they committed their offenses, and also tried by the Inhabitants, or
feeeholders. So he puts a differen ce between Indictment and Trial, as he
does also afterward in these words: There to be indicted and tried of their
offenses, etc. Thus far: Stawnf. Sir. Tho. Smith de Rep. Anglo. li 2. ca 5.
says, that by order and usage of England, there are three trialls, that is.
3. ways and manners, whereby absolute, and definite Judgment is given: by
Parliament, which is the highest, and most absolute. by battle and great
Assise: which he severally describes in 3. chapters following, though not so
fully as the thing requires. But of the great Assise, he speaks at large in
the 23. chapter of the same book. And of these trials see more in Stawnf. pl.
cor. lib. 2. cap. pri. 2. and 3. whereof he deuideth the great Assise into two
sorts: one proper to Baron of the Parliament, which is by 20. or 18. of their
Peers: the other common to others of lower condition, which is by 12. men,
that be neighbors to the place where the offense was committed, And of those
you may read him at large in the said chapters there following. See Twelve
men. See the new book of Entrise. verbo. Trial.

Trihing (Trihinga, vel Trithinga) seems by a place in Edward the confessors
laws, set out by M. Lamberd, nu. 34. to be the third part of a shire or
province, otherwise called (Leth) which we now call (Leete). The same law does
M. Camden also mention, page 102. and 103. This court is ahoue a court Baron,
and inferior to the Shire, or county. This word is also used in the sentence
of excommunication upon the great Charter and charter of the Forest. denounced
in the days of Edward the first, as it is latined in the book called pupilla
oculi. part 5. cap. 22. A. I. in these words: Visus autem de franco plegio sic
fiat, sc: quod pax nostra teneatur, and quod Trihing a integra sit, sicut esse
consueuit, etc. Of this Fleta lib. 2. cap. 61.. final. writes thus; Sciendum
est quod al^^ potestates erant super Wapentakia, quae Tritinga dicebantur, eo
quod erat tertia pars prouinciae, qni vero super eas dominabantur,
trithingreves vocabantur, quibus deferebantur causa quae non in Wapentakiis
poterant definiri in Schiram Sicque quod vocatur Hundredum, iam per variationem
locorum and idiomatis, Wapentakie appellatur, and tria vel quatuor velplura
Hundreda solebant trithinga vocari: and quod in trithingis non poterant
diffiniri in shiram. i. in comitatum deferebatur terminandu^. Modernis autem
temporibus pro vno and eode^ habentur apud homines Hundreda Wapentakia and
trithinga Learn whether those divisions in Yorke-shire called ridings, be not
quasitrithings. Of this Roger Houeden part post. suorum annal. fo. 346. b.
has the same words in effect.

Treswell of double soled shoes, anno 2. and 3. Ed. 6. cap. 9. which as I have
heard should rather be written creswel, signifies the broad edge or verge of
the shoe sole round about.

Trinity honse, is a certain house at Deptford which belongs to a company
or corporation of seafaring men that have power by the Kings Charter to take
knowledge of those that destroy sea marks, and to redress their doings, as
also to correct the faults of sailors, etc. and to take care of diverse other
things belonging to navigations and the seas. v. anno 8. Elizab. ca. 13. and
anno 35. eiusdem, ca. 6.

Trink, is a kind of net to fish withal. anno 2. H. 6. cap. 15.

Triours, be such as be chosen by the court to examine whether a challenge made
to the panell, or any of the panell, be just yea, or not. Brook titulo.
Challenge. f. 122. and old na. br f. 158.

Tritis, alias Tristis, is an immunitie from that attendance, in the forest,
whereby every man dwelling in the forest, is tied to be ready, houlding of a
Greyhound, when the Lord of the Forest is disposed to chase within his Forest,
at such place as he shall be appointed, or else to be amerced for dis default.
Manwood part pri. of his forest laws. page 86. and Cromptons Iurisdict. fol.
192. and 197.

Tronage (Tronagium) is a kind of toll, Westminster. 2. cap. 25. anno 13. Ed. 1.
taken (as it seems) for weying. For I find in Fleta li. 2. cap. 12.. Item
vlnas that trona is a beam to weigh with. See Weight.

Trover, comes of the French (Trouver. i. Invenire) It signifies in our
common law, an action which a man has against one that having found any of
his goods, refuses to deliver them upon demand. See the new bookof Entries
ver. Trover.

Troy weight (Pondus Troiae) See Weight.

Tumbrell (Tumbrellum) is an engine of punishment, which ought to be in every
liberty that has view of frank pledge, for the coertion of skowldes and
unquiet women, Kitchen. fo. 13. a. New book of Entries. Franchise 2. and Quo
warranto. (...). See Cucking stool.

Tun, is a measure of oil or wine containing twelve score and twelve
gallons, anno (...). R. 3. cap. 12. that is 4. hogsheads.

Tunnage. See Tonnage.

Turbarie (Turbaria) is an interest to dig turves upon a common. Kitchen,
fol. 94. old. not. br. fol. 70. It comes of the rude Latin word (Turba)
which is used for a turfe. Lynd, in provin. de de^imis cap. finali^

Turmerick (Turmerica) is a certain root of an herb growing in Arabia, as I
have been informed, very wholesome for diverse diseases in horses, and sometime
used for man also in the case of ieandes. It is reckoned among the garbleable
drugs anno 1. Iaco. ca. 19.

Turn (Turnum) is the Shyreeues court kept every year twice: once after
Faster, and again after Micheelmas. Magna charta cap. 35. and that within one
month after each feast, anno 3. Ed. 3. c. 15. from this court are exempted
only, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, all religious men,
and women, and all such as have Hundreds of their own to be kept. And these
are not bound to appear there except their appearance be especially required
upon some extraordinary cause, anno 25. H. 3. cap. 10. and Britton, cap. 29. It
seems to be called the Shyreeues Turn of the French word (Tour. i. ambitus.
circuitus, vicissitudo) and is of Britton called Tour, cap. 61. sub fine
capitis, as if we would say (The Shyreeue his course) for (as Britton notes in
the said 29. chapter) that which before the Shyreeue, is called the Shyreeues
Turn, is called in the court of Fraunchises and Hundreds, the view of
Frank-pledge: wherein inquiry is especially made of such as be not in any
dozin. with whom Fleta agrees: And by Fleta it appears that this Turn was
the Shyreeues course to keep his courtin every Hundred. lib. 2. cap. 52. in
princip. So that as the inferior courts had their times to take knowledge of
those, and other causes belonging to their cognizance: So the Shyreeue had his
course or turn to do the like at these two several seasons. That if there
were any defects in them, it might be redressed in these, and Gods peace and
the Kings so much the more carefully observed. This, as Lamberd says, was of
old called also the Shyreeues moote, lib. 4. cap. 4. In this court (as Britton
says vbisupra) the Shyreeue causes tobe found out 12. of the most sage,
loyal and sufficient men of all the Hundred (for he kept his turn twice every
year in each Hundred. Magna charta, cap. 35. and Britton vbi supra) whom he
charged upon their oaths, to present the truth touching the articles ministered
unto them, and set down by Britton in the same chapter. This done he put all
other to their oaths, according to their dozins and villages; truly to present
unto the former twelve all things concerning such articles, as by them they
should be asked of. But fithence the Hundred courts are all called to the
county by the statute anno. 14. Ed. 3. cap. 3. Statut. pri. these Turns be
likewise kept in one chief place of every shire; and not severally in every
Hundred, as before they were. Of this you may read more in Britton or in
Cromptons Jurisdiction fol. 230. and in the Mirror of Justices, lib. pri. cap.
de Turns.

Turney (Torneamentum) comes of the French (Tournoy. i. Decursorium) It
signifies a martial exercise of Knights or Soldiers fighting one with
another in disport, and is thus defined. ca^ felicit Extra de Torneamentis
Torneamenta dicuntur Nundinae vel feriae, in quibus milites ex condicto
convenire, and ad oftentationem virium suarum, and audaciae, temere congredi
solent. This word is used in the statute, anno. 24. Henric. octau. capit. 13.
and as I have heard, it signifies with us in England those combats, that are
made with arming swords on horseback. And I think the reason of the name to
proceed from the French (Tourner. i. vertere) because it consists much in
agilitie both of horse and man.

Turno vececomitum, is a writ, that lies for those that are called to the
Shyreeues turn out of their own Hundred. Register orig. fol. 174.

Tuain nithes gest. (hospes duarum noctium) Roger Houeden, part poster suorum
annalium, fol. 345. b. who if he did harm to any, his host was not
aunswerable for it, but himself. See Third nithes hawan man.

Twelve men (Duodecim homines legales) is a number of twelve persons, or up
wards to the number of 24. by whose discretion all trials pass both in civil
and criminal causes, through all courts of the common law in this Realm.
First for civil causes, when proof is made of the matter in question, as the
parties and their council think good, on both sides, the point of the fact,
that they are to give their verdict of, is delivered likewise unto them, which
we call the issue: and then are they put in mind of their oath formerly taken,
to do right between party and party, and so sent out of the court severally
by themselves to consider upon the evidence of both sides, until they be
agreed; which done they return to the court again, and deliver their verdict
by the mouth of the foreman. And according to this verdict, Judgment afterward
passes, either condemnatorie for the plantife, or absolutory for the
Defendant. These 12. be called 12. milites. Glanuilo, lib. 2. cap. 14. and 15.
and so be they in Bracton diverse times: but that word is altered.

In causes criminal there be two sorts of Enquests, one called the graund
Enquest, and the other the Enquest of life and death. The graund Enquest is so
called, either because it consists commonly of a greater number then 12. as
of 24. 18. or 16. at the least, or else because all causes criminal or penal
first pass through them: whereas the other Enquest is especially appointed for
one or few matters touching life and death, committed to their considerations.
Those of the grand Enquest are also called by Bracton 12. milites lib. 3.
tracta. 2. cap. pri. nu. 2. because they were wont to be Knights, as it see.
meth, and not inferiors, except so many knights could not be found. Idem
eodem. number. 1. in fine. And their function is to receive all presentiments made
unto them of any offense, and accordingly to give their general opinion of the
presentment by writing either these words (Balla vera) upon the bille of
presentment, which is an Indictment of the party presented: or else this word
(Ignoramus) which is an absoluing of him. Now as criminal causes be of two
sorts, either capital touching life and member, or finable: so is there a
double course of these Inditements. For in causes only finable, the party
indicted must either trauers the Indictment by denying it and so it is referred
to a petit Jury, whereby he is either convicted or discharged of the crime, or
else he confessing it, the court sets his fine upon his head wirhout more
work. But in matters of life and death, the party indicted is commanded to hold
up his hand, and answer (guilty) or (not guilty) if (guilty) he stands
convicted by his own confession: if (not guilty) he is farther referred to the
Enquest of life and death: which consider upon the proof brought against the
prisoner, and accordingly bring in their verdict, (Guilty) or (not Guilty) So
is he judged to dye, or delivered by the court. Of this read more in
Iuditement. Assise, Jury, See the statute anno 35. H. 8. cap. 6. and 37.
ciusdem cap, 22. and anno 2. Ed. 6 cap. 32. and an. 5. El. ca. 25.

V
VAcation (vacatio) has an especial signification in this kingdom, being
used for all that time respectively which passes between term and term at
London. And when such times begun and ended in our anncesters days, see
Roger Hovedens annals part posteriori fo. 343. a. where you shall find that
this intermission was called (pax Dei and ecclesiae.)

Vaccarie, alias vacharie (vaccaria, alias vacheria) seems to be a house to
keep kine in, Fleta lib. 2. cap. 41.. Item inquiratur 12. and Cromptons
Iurisd. fol. 194. in these words: without warrant no subject may have within
the Forest a vacarie. But in the statute anno 37. H. 8. cap. 16. I find
vacharie to be, as it were a special proper name of a certain quantity and
compass of ground within the forest of Ashedowne.

Valewe (valentia, valor) The word is in it self plain enough: But I cannot
omit one place in M. West. part. 2. symbol. titulo Inditements, sect. 70. V.
W. touching the difference between value and price. These be his words, And
the value of those things, in which offenses are committed, is usually
comprised in Inditements, which seems necessary in thest, to make a
difference from perit larceny: and in trespass, to aggrauate the fault, and
increase the fine. But no price of rhings ferae naturae, may be expressed, as
of dear, of hares etc. if they be not in Parks and warrens, which is a liberty
anno 8. Ed. 4. fol. 5. nor of charters of land. And where the number of the
things taken are to be expressed in the Indictment, as of young Doucs in a Dove
house, young hawks in a wood, there must be said (pretii) or (ad valentiam)
but of diverse dead things (ad valentiam) and not (pretii) of coin not
current, it shall be (pretii) but of co^ne current, it shall neither be said
(pret^) nor (ad valentiam) for the price and value thereof is certain. But of
counterfeit coin, shall be said (ad valentiam) and in couterfeiting of coin
shall not be said (december libras in denariis Dominae Reginae) nor (in pecunia
Dominae Reginae) but (ad instar pecuniae Dominae Reginae).

Valor of marriage (Valor maritagii) is a writ that lies for the Lord, having
proffered covenable marriage to the Infant, without disparidgement, against the
Infant, coming to his years, if he refuse to take the Lords offer. And it is
to recover the value of the marriage, Regist. orig. fol. 164. old. not. br. fol.
90.

Variance, comes of the French (varier. i. alter are) it signifies in the
common law, an alteration, or change of condition after a thing done. For
example, the communality of a town make a composition with an Abbot. Afterward
this town by a grant from the king obteineth Bayliffes. This is a variance,
and in this case, if the Abbotco^mence any suite for breach of the composition,
he must vary from the words of the communalty set down in the Composition,
and begin against the Bayliffes and the Communalties. Brook tit. Variance.
fol. 292. It is also used for an alteration of some thing formerly laid in a
plee, which is easilier known what it is, then when it may be used as it
appears by Brook through the whole title aforesaid: See variance in the
new book of Entries.

Vassal, (vassallus) signifies him, that holds land in see of his Lord,
Hot. verbo Feudal: we call him more usually a tenent in fee: whereof some owe
fidelity and service, and are called vassalli iurati: some that owe neither,
and are called vassalli iniurati. But of this later sort, I think that in
England we have not any. Of these thus writes Hotoman in his disputations upon
the Feuds, cap. 3. Proprie is vassa dicitur, qui ab Imperatore regale feudum
accepit, vassallus autem (...) diminutivo nomine qui ab illo feudale beneficium
adeptus est: quasi qui in vassi fide and clientela est etc. M. Skene de verbor.
signif. verb. Ligentia, says, that vassallus is divided into homologum, and
non homologum. Homologus is he that swears service with exception of a higher
Lord: and non homologus, is he that swears with out exception, all one with
Ligeus. And the same author verb. Vassallus, says, that it is vassallus,
quasibassallus, id est, inferior soctus. From the French (bas. i. humilis,
dimissus) and the Dutch word (gesel. i. socius:) his reason is, because the
vassal is inferior to his master, and must serve and reverence him: and yet he
is in manner his companion, because each of them is obliged one to the other. He
says farther out of Cuiacius, lib. prim. de Feud. that leads, leodes, fideles,
homines nostri, feudatarii, ministeriales, beneficiarii, beneficiati, vassalli,
signify almost all one thing. And a little after he says thus: In the laws of
the Feuds, vassallus is called fidelis, quia fidelitatem jurat. Amongst vassals
the first place of dignity is given to them, that are Duces, Marchion^s,
Comites, and are called Cap^tanti Regni. The second is granted to Barons and
others of like estate, and are called Valvasores Maiores. The third to them who
are called Gentlemen or Nobles holding of Barons, which also may have under
them vassals that be Gentlemen. And such vassals holding in chief of Barons,
are called Valv aso^ts minores. And they which hold of Gentlemen, are called
vassalli, valvassini, seu minimi valvasores. But in this Realm (he speaks of
Scotland) they that hold of Barons, are called Milites, and they that hold of
them, are called subvassores. Thus fa^e M. Skene.

Vasto, is a writ that lies for the heir against the tenent for term of life
or of years, for making waste, or for him in the Reuersion or Remainder.
Fitzh. (...). br. fol. 55. Regist. orig. fol. 72. and 76. and Regist. Iudic.
fol. 17. 21. 23. and 69. v. anno 6. Ed. pricap. 5.

Vavasour (vavasor, alias, valvasor) is one that in dignity is next unto
Baron. Camden Britan. page 109. Bracton lib. prim. cap. 8 says thus of this
kind of men. Sunt and alii potentes sub Rege, qui dicuntur Barons, hoc est,
robur belli: sunt and alii qui dicuntur Vavasores, viri magnae dignitatis.
Vavasor enim, nihil melius dici poterit, quam vas sortitum ad valetudinem.
Iacobutius de Franchis in praeludio Feudorum. tit. prim. number. 4. etc. calls
them valvasores, and gives this reason of it: Quia assident valva i. portae
Domini in festis, in quibus consueueruat homines curtizare and eis reuerentiam
exhibere, propter Beneficium eis collatum, sicut libertus patrono: M. Camden.
in his Britan. page 108. has these words of them. Primus etiam Normannorum
temporibus, and Thani proximi a Comitibus in dignitate censebantur. Et
valvasores maiores (si illis qui de feudis scribunt credimus) iidem fuerunt
Barons.

Venditioni exponas, is a writ Judicial, directed to the Vndershyreeue,
commanding him to sell goods that he has formerly by commandment taken into
his hands, for the satisfying of a judgment given in the kings Court. Register
Judicial. fol. 33. b.

Venire facias, is a writ Iudicall, and goes out of the Record, lying where
two parties plead and come to issue. sc: upon the saying of the country. For
then the party plaintiff, or Defendant shall have this writ directed to the
Shyreeue, that he cause to come twelve lawful men of the same country, to say
the truth upon the said issue taken. And if the Enquest come not at the day of
this writ returned, then shall go a habeas corpora, and after a distress
until they come. old. not. br. fol. 157. See how diversely this writ is used in
the table of the Register Judicial. There is also a writ of this name, that is
original, as appears in the Register orig. fol. 200. b. which M. Lamberd in
his processes annexed to his Eirenarcha says to be the common process upon any
presentment not being felony, nor especially appointed for the fault presented
by statute. Whereof he sets down an example in the same place. See also the
new book of Entries. verbo Enquest fol. 253. columna. 1. 2. and 3.

Venire facias tot matronas. See Ventre inspiciendo. See Lamb. Eirenarcha, li.
4. ca. 14. pa. 532.

Venew (vicinetum) is taken for a neighbor or near place. As for example
twelve of the Assise ought to be of the same Venew where the Demand is made.
old. not. br. fol. 115. and in the statute anno 4. H. 4. ca. 26. and anno 25.
H. 8. ca. 6. I find these words: And also shall return in every such panell
upon the (venire facias) six sufficient Hundreders at the least, if there be
so many within the Hundred, where the Venew lies.

Ventre inspiciendo, is a writ for the search of a woman that faith she is
with child, and thereby withhouldeth land from him that is the next heir at
the common law. Register original fol. 227. a.

Verdour (viridarius) comes of the French (verdior. i. Saltuarius, vel custos
nemoris) he is (as M. Manwood part pri: of his forest laws page 332. defines
him) a Judicial officer of the Kings forest, chosen by the King, in the full
county of the same shire, within the forest, where he does dwell, and is sworn
to maintain, and keep the Assizes of the forest, and also to view, receive,
and inrolle, the Attachments and presentiments of all manner of trespasses of the
forest of vert, and venison. And the same author upon the first artitle of
Canutus charter, in the beginning of the same part, says, that these in the
Saxons times were called (Pagened) being four in number, and they chief men
of the forest as then they were. Their fee was in Canutus time, each of them
every year of the Kings allowance, two horses, one of them with a saddle,
another of them without a saddle, one sword, five Iauelins, one spear, one
shield, and ten pounds in money. These four (as appears by the said charter,
nu. 11.) had regalem potestatem, and might proceed to a threefold judgment:
And if any man offered them, or any of them violence, if he were a free man, he
should loose his freedom, and all that he had: if a villein, he should loose
his right hand. All the officers of the forest were to be corrected and
punished by them. ibidem, nu. 10. The verdour is made by the Kings writ.
Cromptons Iurisd: fol: 165. the form of which writ you have in Fitzh. not. br.
fol. 164. which is directed to the Shyreeue for the choice of him in a full
County, by the assent of the said County. Yet if a verdour be suddenly sick
or dead at the time of the Justice seat, a new may be chosen without a writ.
Manwood parie prim. page 72. the office is (as Crompton says) loco allegato)
properly to look to the vert, and to see that it be well maintained. Also when
any forfeiture is taken in the Forest before the Foristers, or other ministers:
the price thereof shall be delivered to the verdour, who is to answer for it
before the Justices in Air. And if he die, his heir is chargeable therewith.
Crompton ibidem. The form of his oath at his admittance you may see in
Manwoods first part of his Forest laws. page 51. who there calls him
verderour, alias, verdictor. You shall truly serve our Sovereign Lord the King
in the office of a verderor of the Forest W. you shall to the uttermost of your
power, and knowledge, do for the profit of the King, so far as it does
apperteine unto you to do. You shall preserve and maintain the ancient rights
and franchises of his Crown: you shall not conceal from his Majesty any
rights or privileges, nor any offense either in vert or venison, or any other
thing. You shall not withdraw, nor abridge any defaults, but shall endeavor your
self to manifest and redress the same, and if you cannot do that of your
self, you shall give knowledge thereof unto the King, or unto his Justice of
the Forest. You shall deal indifferently with all the Kings liege people: you
shall execute the laws of the Forest, and do equal right and justice, as well
unto the poor, as unto the rich in that appertains unto your office: you
shall not oppress any person by color thereof, for any reward, favor or
malice. All these things you shall to the uttermost of your power observe and
keep. Their office is farther expressed, eodem page 93. which is to sit in the
court of attachment, to see the attachments of the Forest, to receive the same
of the Foresters and Woodwards, that do present them, and then to enter these
Attachments into their rolls.

Verdict, (veredictum) is the answer of a Jury or Enquest made upon any cause
civil or criminal, committed by the court to their consideration or trial.
And this verdict is twofold: either general or especial. Stawnf. pl. cor.
lib. 3. cap. 9. A general verdict is that, which is given or brought into the
Court, in like general terms to the general issue: as in an action of
disseisin the Desendant pleads, No wrong, no disseisin. Then the issue is
this in general, whether the fact in question be a wrong or not. And this
committed to the Jury, they upon consideration of their evidence, come in and
say, either for the plaintiff, that it is a wrong, and disseisin: or for the
Defendant, that it is no wrong, no disseisin. And again, the prisoner at the
bar pleading, Not guilty: the Enquest in like general terms bring in their
verdict, either for the King, Cuilty, or for the prisoner, Not guilty. A
special verdict is that, whereby they say at large, that such a thing, and
such, they find to be done by the Defendant, or Tenent, so declaring the course
of the fact, as in their opinions it is proved: and for the quality of the
fact, they pray the discretion of the Court. And this special verdict, if it
contain any ample declaration of the cause, from the beginning to the end, is
also called a verdict at large. Whereof read diverse examples in Stawnf. pl.
cor. lib. 3. cap. 9. and one or two in Litleton. fol. 78. and 79. See the new
book of Entries, verb. Verdict.

Verge (virgata) may seem to come from the French (verger i. viridarium,
hortus.) It is used here in England for the compass about the Kings court,
that boundeth the jurisdiction of the Lord Steward of the Kings household, and
of the the Coroner of the Kings house, and that seems to have been 12. miles
compass. anno 13. R. 2. Stat. prim. cap. 3. and Fitz. not. br. fol. 241. B.
and Britton. fol. 68 b. 69. a. and Fleta lib. 2. cap. 2. and Sir Edward Cooks
Reports. li. 4. fol. 47. a. For this see the Statute anno 33. H. 8. cap. 12.
toward the end. But Fleta says, that this compass about the Court is called
virgata, a virga, quam Marishallus portat vt signu^ suae potestatis. lib. 2.
cap. 4.. prim. Verge has also another signification, and is used for a stick,
or rod, whereby one is admitted tenent, and holding it in his hand swears
fealty unto the Lord of a manner: who for that cause is called Tenent by the
verge. old not. br. fol. 17.

Vergers, (virgatores) be such as carry white wands before the Justices of
either bank, etc. Fleta lib. 2. cap. 38. otherwise called Porters of the verge.

Very Lord, and very Tenent (verus Dominus, and verus Tenens) are they that be
immediate Lord and Tenent one to the other; Brook. titulo, Hariot. fol. 23. In
the old not. br. and in the writ (Replegiare de averits. fol. 42. I find these
words: And know ye that in taking of leases, six things are necessary: that is
to say, very Lord and very tenent, Service behind, the day of the taking,
seisin of the services, and within his Fee. And know ye, that a man is not very
tenent, until he have atturned to the Lord by some services. So that by
Brook, the very Lord, and the very Tenent, must be immediate, and by this
book there must be an acknowledgement. See an. 19. H. 7. cap. 15. See Tenent.

Vert, (viride) is made of the French (verd. i. viridis) and signifies with us
in the laws of the Forest, every thing that does grow, and bear green
leaf, within the Forest, that may cover and hide a Dear. Manwood in the
second part of his Forest laws, fol. 6. a. and fol. 33. b. (with whom also
Crompton agrees, fol. 170. of his Iurisd.) And vert (as the same author says,
eodem, fol. 34.) is divided into Over vert, and Nether vert. Over vert, is
that, which the Lawyers call (Hault bois) and Nether vert, is that which they
call (South bois.) And of this you may read him in his second part of Forest
laws. cap. 6. per totum. Where you shall find, that he divides vert into
general, and special: General is, as it is above defined: vert special, is
every tree and bush within the Forest to feed the Dear withal: as Pear
trees, Crabtrees, Hauthornes, Blackbush, and such like. And the reason of this
name is, because the offense of destroying of such vert, is more highly
punished, then of any other, according to the quantity thereof. eod ca. 6. nu.
2. fol. 35. a.

Vervise, otherwise called Plonkets. anno. 1. R. 3. cap. 8. a kind of clothe.

Vesses. anno 1. R. 3. cap. 8. and anno 14. and 15. H. 8. cap. 11. otherwise
called, Set clothes.

Vesture (vestitura) is a French word signifying a garment: but in the use of
our common law, turned metaphorically to betoken a possession, or an
admittance to a possession. So it is taken, Westminster. 2. c. 25. anno 13. Ed. prim.
And in this signification is it borrowed from the Feudists, with whom
(Investitura) signifies a delivery of possession by a spear, or staff, and
vestitura, possession it self. Hotoman. in verbis feudal. verbo Investitura.

Vesture of an acre of land. an. 4. Ed. prim. stat. prim. is the profit of it.
and anno 13. Edvard. 1. cap. 25.

Vice-treasurer of the Exchequer 1. Jacob. 26. See Undertreasurer of England.
See Treasurer of the Exchequer.

View of frank pledge, (visus Franci plegii) is the office which the Shyrecue
in his County court, or the Bayliffe in his Hundred, performs in looking to
the Kings peace, and seeing that every free man be in some pledge. This is
called of Bracton li. 2. ca. 5. nu. 7. in fine, Res quasi sacra, quia solam
personam Regis respicit, and quod introductus sit pro pace and communi
vtilitate. codem, ca. 16. nu. 8. in fine. See frank pledge, and Leete, and
Decennier. See the new book of Entries. verb: view of frank pledge.

Veiours (visores) comes of the French (Veoyr. i. cernere, intueri,
despicere, prospicere, videre) and signifies in our common law those, that
are sent by the court to take view of any place in question, for the beter
descision of the right: old. not. br. fol. 112. So does Bracton, use it, lib.
5. tract. 3. cap. 8. per totum. It signifies also those, that are sent to view
such as essoine themselves de malo lecti, whether they be in truth so sick, as
they cannot appear, or whether they counterfeit. Bracton lib. 5. tracta. 2.
cap. 10. and cap. 14. per totum. Lastly it is used for those that are sent or
appointed to view an offense, as a man murdered, or a Virgin ravished. See View.

Vicario deliberando occasion cuinsdam Recognitionis, etc. is a writ that
lies for a spiritual person imprisoned upon forfeiture of a Recognisance,
without the Kings writ. Reg. orig. fol. 147. See statuto mercatorio contra
personam ecclesiasticam.

Vicis and venellis mundandis, is a writ that lies for a Mayor and Bayliffes
of a town, etc. For the clean keeping of their streets. Register orig. fol.
267. b.

View (visus) comes of the French (veue. i. visus, aspectus, conspectus,
prospectus) and signifies with us, the act of viewers. For (as the author of
the Terms of law says) when any action real is brought, and the Tenent
knows not well what land it is, that the Demandant asks, then he may pray
the view: that is to say, that he may see the land, which is claimed: of this
Britton speaks, cap. 45. This point of proceeding we have received from the
Normans, as it appears by the Grand custumarie. cap. 66. where you shall
read to this effect. It is to be known that there be diverse sorts of viewes:
one of a fee, another of a man in sickness, another of an offense, as of a man
slain, or of a Virgin deflowred: all which he describes in that place, and
again, cap. 80. and 96. which are worth the reading: this view at this day is
used in an Assise of rent service, rent charge, or rent seck. Fitzh. not. br.
fol. 178. D. and in a writ de Curia^ claudenda. Idem, fol. 128. B. In a writ of
Nuisance. Idem, fol. 183. L. N. O. In a writ Quoiure. Idem. fol. 128. L. In the
writ de rationalibus diuisis. Idem. fol. 129. D. And in the writ de secta ad
moliendinum. Ide^f. 123. B. See the new book of Entries: verbo: View. and see
Fleta how this view is made. lib. 4. ca. 6. See Veiours.

Vicechamberlaine, called vnderchamberlaine anno 13. R. 2. stat. 2. cap. 1. is
a great officer in court next under the Lord Chamberlain, and in his absence,
has the command and controlme^t of all officers superior and inferior
whatsoever, appertaining to that part of his majesty's household, which is
called the chamber, wherein is included as well the bed chamber, as the privy
chamber, the presence and the great Chamber, and all other rooms, as galeries,
etc. thereto belonging, with the Council chamber, priuic closet, etc. And in
the Lord Chamberlaines absence he keeps his table in the great chamber,
commanding and overseeing the attendance of all, to whom it appertains to be
ready and waiting on his majesty going to the chapel, or to speak with
ambassadors, or else walking or riding forth.

Vicount, alias Viscount (vicecomes) comes of the French (vicompte. i.
Procomes) and signifies with us as much as Shyreeue. Between which two words
I find no other difference, but that the one comes from our Conquerours the
Normans, and the other from our Auncesters the Saxons, wherefore see more of
this in Shyreeue. Vicount also signifies a degree of nobility next unto an
Earl, which (as M. Came. Brita. p. 107. says) is an old name of office, but a
new one of dignity, never heard of amongst us, until Henry the sixth his
days. But this degree of honor is more ancient far in other countries.
Cassan in gloria mundi, part 5. consid. 55. whom you may read.

Vicountie, is an adjective made of vicountie, and signifies as much, as
belonging to the vicount; as writs vicountiel are such writs as are triable in
the county or Shyreeues court. old. not. br. fol. 109. Of this kind you may
see diverse writs of Nuisance set down by Fitzh. in his not. br. fol. 184. b.
There be also certain fermes called Vicountiels, which the Shyreeue for his
time pays a certain rent for to the King, and makes what profit he can of
them. See the statutes, anno 33. and 34. H. 8. ca. 16. and anno 2. and 3. Ed.
6. ca. 4. and anno 4. H. quint. capite secund.

Vilaica removenda, is a writ that lies for the remooving of forcible
possession of a benefice kept by lay men. And this writ is granted some time
upon the Certificate of the Bishop into the Chauncerie, that there is such a
force in his Dioces: some time upon a surmise made there of by the Incumbent
himself, without the certificat of the Bishop, and has a several form for
either case. Fitzh. not. br. fol. 54. Register orig. fol. 59. and 60.

Villanis Regis subtractis reducendis, is a writ that heth for the bringing
back of the kings bondmen, that have been carried away by others out of his
manners, whereunto they belonged, Register origin. fol. 87. b.

Villein (villanus) comes of the French (vilain. i. illiberalis, impurus,
vilis, turpis) and signifies in our common law a bondsman, or as much as
Servus among the Ciuilians. Of these there be two sorts in England, as Sir Tho.
Smith says in his repub. Anglo. li. 3. cap. 8. one termed a Villein in gross,
which is immediately bound to the persons of his Lord and his heirs, the other
a villein regardant to a manner, whom the Ciuilians term (Glebae ascriptitium)
being bound to their Lord, as members belonging and annexed to such a manner,
whereof the Lord is owner. This division is affirmed by diverse places of our
common law writers: as in the old. not. br. fol. 8. You have these words. Know
ye that a woman shall be endowed with a villein in gross, etc. and again.
fol. 39. If a man do menace or threaten any villeins, which are regardant to a
manner, etc. Bracton has another division of villeins, which is all one with
the Ciuilians. For in his first book, cap. 6. nu. 4. he says thus: Serui
autem nascuntur aut fiunt, and then thus goes forward: Nascuntur ex nativo and
natiua alicuius copulatis vel solutis, sive sub potestate Domini constituti
sint, sive extra potestatem. Item nascitur seruus, qui ex natiua soluta
generatur, quamvis ex patre libero: quia sequitur conditionem matris quasi
vulgo conceptus, etc. And after diverse things delivered of this sort, he says
again thus: Fiunt etiam servi liberi homines captivitate de iure Gentium: etc.
Fit etiam servus liber homo pro confessione^ in Curia Regis factam: vt cum
liber homo sit in Curia Regis, and se cognoscat ad villanum. Item liber homo
fit servus, si cum semel manumissus fuerit, ob ingratitudinem in seruitutem
reuocetur. Item fit liber homo seruus, cum ab initio clericus vel monachus
factus fuerit, postea ad secularem vitam redierit. Quia talis restitus debet
Domino suo. v. Tiraquellum de Nobilitate. cap. 2. page 14. number. 54. In very
many provinces of France there be certain men called (homines manus mortuae,
qui tanta iuris similitudine adscriptiis colonis coniuncti, and prope iidem
videntur. Non autem serui sunt omnino, sed in territorio domini sunt, tanquam
alligati, non habentes demigrandi potestatem. Itaque serui corporis and
prosecutionis vulgo dicuntur, quod si fugerint, potest eos profequi dominus and
capere. Tributum antem isti and nonnullas commoditates domino praestant: in
quibus haec maxima, quod ipsis vita functis sine sobole, succedit dominus vel
ex toto vel ex part. Connanus. li. 2. cap. 10. number. 3. whose words I thought
not unfit for this place, because they express the nature of our villenage
something aptly.

Villein fleeces: anno 31. Ed. 3. cap. 8. are fleeces of wolle that are shorn
from scabbed sheep

Vidimus, anno 15. H. 6. ca. 3.

Villenage (Villenagium) comes of (villein) and signifies a servile kind of
tenure belonging to lands or tenements; that is, a tenure of lands or
tenements, by such a service, as villeins are fittest to perform. For every
one that houldeth in villenage, is not a villein, or a bond man. Villenagium
vel seruitium nihil detrabit libertatis, habit a tamen distinctione, vtrum
tales sint villani, and tenuerint in villano soccagio de dominico Domini Regis.
Bracton, lib. pri. ca. 6. nu. pri. Britton in his 66. chapter speaks to this
effect: Villenage is a tenure of the demesns of a Lord delivered to a Tenent at
the Lords will, by villenous services, to improoue it to the Lords use, and
delivered by the rod, and not by any title of writing, or succession of
inheritance, etc. And a little after he has words to this effect: In the manners
of our ancient Demesns, there be pure villeins both by blood and tenure: the
which may be cast out of their tenement, and deprived of their chatels, at the
pleasure of the Lord. By which two places I gather, though villein tenure do
not always make the Tenent a villein: yet that there is a two fold tenure called
villenage: one wherein both the person and the tenure is bound, and in all
respects at the disposition of the Lord: and another, which in respect of the
tenure is after a sort servile, though the person be not bond. This is well
proved by Bracton, li. 2. ca. 8. nu. 3. in these words. Item tenementum non
mutat statum liberi, non magis quam serut: Poterit enim liber homo tenere purum
villenagium, faciendo quicquid ad villanum pertinebit, and nihilo-minus liber
erit, cum hoc faciat ratione villenagii, and non personae suae: and ideo
poterit, quando volucrit, villenagium deserere, and liber discedere, nisi
illaque atus sit per vxorem natiuam ad hoc faciendum. ad quam ingressus fuit in
villenagium, and quae praestare poterit impedimentum, etc. So that a man may
hold in pure villenage, and yet be a free man in respect of his person. But
what is pure villenage? Bracton answers in the words there next following:
Purum villenagium est, a quo praestatur seruitium incertum and indeterminatum,
vbi scirinon poterit vespere, quale seruitium fieri debet mane. viz: vbi quis
facere tenetur quicquid ei praeceptum fuerit. The other sort of villenage which
is not pure, is there called of Bracton (villanum soccagium) which differs
from the other in this, because it is only tied to the performrnce of certain
services agreed upon between the Lord and the Tenent. Whereof see Bracton also
in the same place: by whom you may perceive, that a man may hold (per villanum
soccagium) and yet have (liberum tenementum if he have it to himself and his
heirs. This villainous soccage is to carry the Lords dung into his feilds, to
plow his ground at certain days, sow and reap his corn, plash his hedges,
etc. See Soccage.

Villenous judgment (Villanum iudicium) is that which casts the reproach of
villeny and shame upon him against whom it is given, as a Conspiratour; etc.
Stawnf: pl: cor. lib. 3. 12. f. 175. This M. Lamb. in his Eirenarcha, lib. 1.
ca. 13. page 63. calls villenous punishment, and says that it may well be
called infamous, because the judgment in such a case shall be like the ancient
judgment in Attaint (as it is said anno 4. H. 5. Fitzh. Judgment 220.) and is
(in 27. lib. Assis: pl. 59.) set down to be, that their oaths shall not be of
any credit afterward, nor lawful for them in person to aproch the Kings
Courts: and that their lands and goods be seized into the Kings hands, their
trees rooted up, and their bodies imprisoned, etc. And at this day the
punishment appointed for perjury, (having somewhat more in it, then corporal or
pecuniary pain) stretching to the discrediting of the testimony of the
offender from ever after, may be partaker of this name. Thus far M. Lamberd.

Virgata terrae. Register orig. fol. 167. a. See yard land.

Viridario eligendo, is a writ that lies for the choice of a verdour in the
forest. Register orig. fol. 177.

Visitation of manners (Visitatio morum) was wont to be the name of the
Regarders office in ancient time. Manwood, part pri. of his forest laws,
page 195. See Regarder.

Visne (Vicinetum) signifies a neihgbour place, or a place near at hand anno
16. R. 2. ca. 6.

Vtsu Franciplegu^, is a writ to exempt him from coming to the view of
Frankpledge, that is not within the Hundred resident. For men are bound unto
this view by reason of their habitation, and not of lands held where they dwell
not, Register orig. fol. 175.

Vitteller (victualarius) comes of the French, victuailes. i. commeatus) and
signifies with us, him that sells victuals. For these there is a writ in
Fitz. not. br. fol. 172. if they exercise their trade, bearing a magistracy in
any town corporate.

Vmple. anno 3. Edvard. 4. cap. 5.

Uncore prist, is a plee for the Defendant, being siewed for a debt due at a
day past, to save the forfeiture of his bond; saying, that he tendered the dept
at the time, and place, and that there was none to receive it, and that he is
now also ready to pay the same. 7. Ed. 6. 83. Dyer. See Vnquest prist.

Vncuth, is a Saxon word signifying as much as (incognitus) It is used in the
ancient Saxon laws, for him that comes to an Inn guest wise, and lies
there for two nights at the most. In which case his host was not bound to
answer for any offense, that he committed, whereof he was guiltless himself.
But if he laid there the third night, then he was called (guest, hospes) and
the^ must the host answer for him, as for one of his own family. And if he
tarried any longer, then was he called Again hine, that is to say, familiaris.
Whom, if he offend against the Kings peace, his host was to see foorthcomming:
or if he could not bring him out within a month and a day, he must satisfy
for his offense. Lamberd. Archaiono. fol. 133. number. 7. Of this Bracton. lib. 3.
cap. 10. number. 2. writes thus: Item secundum antiquam consuetudinem dici
paterit de familia alicuius, qui hospitatus fuerit cum alio per tres noctes:
quia prima nocte poterit dici Vncuth, secunda vero Gust, tertia nocte
Hoghenhine, etc. This law was made for the better preservation of the Kings
peace, and to show in what pledge every man was to be accounted, that traveled
by the way. See Tuainnithes: gest.

Vnde nihil habet, is a writ. See Dote vnde nihil habet.

Vnder-chamberlaine of the Exchequer, is an Officer there, that cleaves the
taileys written by the Clerk of the Taileys, and reads the same, that the
Clerk of the Pel and the controllers thereof may see their entry be true. He
also makes searches for all Roords in the Treasury. There be two Officers
there of this name.

Vnderescheateur. Subescheatour. anno 5. Ed. 3. cap. 4. See Escheatour.

Vndershyreeue, (Subvicecomes) See Shyreeue.

Vndersitter is an Inmate. See Inmate.

Undertakers, be such as are employed by Pourueyours of the King as their
deputies. anno 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. cap. 6. and such as undertake any great
work, as drying of Fennes, etc. anno 43. Eliz. cap. 11.

Undertreasurer of England, (viccthesaurarius Angliae) anno 39. El. cap. 7.
and anno 43. eiusdem. Subsidy of the Clergy. This Officer (as some Exchequer
men think) was first created in the time of king H. the seventh, to chest up
the Kings Treasure at the end of every Term, and to note the content of money
in each chest, and to see it carried to the Kings Treasury in the Tower, for
the ease of the Lord Treasurer, as being a thing too mean for him to be
troubled with, and yet meet to be performed by a man of great secrecy and
trust. He in the vacancie of the Lord Treasurers office, does all things in the
receipt, that the Lord Treasurer does. He nominateth the two Praysers of all
goods seized as not customed, and orders, whether the party shall have them
at the price or not. He appoints the Steward, Cook, and Butler for the
provision of the Star Chamber. But this Officer in other men's judgment, is
far more ancient then Henry the seuenths days, yet named Treasurer of the
Exchequer in the Statutes until Queen Elizabeth's time, where he is termed
Undertreasurer of England. Nevertheless, anno 35 Eliz. he is also written
Treasurer of the Exchequer. Read the Statutes, anno 18. Ed. 3. stat. 2. cap.
17. and 27. eiusdem. Stat. 2. cap. 18. 1. Rich. 2. cap. 5. 4. Hen. 4. cap. 18.
8. H. 6. cap. 17. 27. H. 8. cap. 11. with diverse other places, that seem to
approve this to be true.

Union (vnio) is a combining or consolidation of two Churches in one, which is
done by the consent of the Bishop, the Patron, and the Incumbent. And this is
properly called an Union. Howbeit, that there be two other sorts: as when one
Church is made subject to the other, and when one man is made Prelate of both,
and when a conuentual is made Cathedral, as you may read in the Gloss of the
chapter, Licet. De locato and conducto, in Lyndwoods Prouincials.. Et quia.
versu Appropriationis. Touching Union in the first signification there was a
statute, an. 37. H. 8. cap. 21. that it should be lawful in two Churches,
whereof the value of the one is not above six pounds in the Kings books of the
first fruits, and not above one mile distant from the other. Union in this
signification is personal, that is, for the life of the Incumbent: or real,
that is, perpetual, whosoever be Incumbent.

Unity of possession, is called consolidatio vsus fructus, and proprietatis in
the Civil law, signifying a joint possession of two rights by several
titles. For example, I take a lease of land from one upon a certain rent:
afterward I buy the Fee-simple. This is an unity of possession, whereby the
lease is extinguished: by reason that I, which had before the occupation only
for my rent, am become Lord of the same, and am to pay my rent to none, but my
self. Also an Abbot being seated within a certain parish, afterward obtains
an appropriation of the tithes belonging to that Church, for the use of his
house. Here is an unity of possession, by reason that the tithes, which before
were to be paid to the Incumbe^t, are now to be paid to none but himself, by
virtue of the appropriation.

University, (Vniuersitas) is by the Civil law any body politic, or
corporation: but in our language it is (at the least most ordinarily) taken for
those two bodies, that are the Nourishes of learning, and the liberal
Sciences, Cambridge and Oxford: endowed with great favors, and privileges,
for their beter maintenance, as appears not only by an. 2. and 3. Ph. and
Mar. c. 15. a. 13. El. c. 21. and a. 18. eius. c. 6. but much more by their
several charters, granted unto them by diverse godly and magnanimous Kings of
this land.

Unlawful assembly, (Illicita congregatio, illicita assemblata) is the meeting
of three or more persons together, with force to commit some unlawful act, and
abiding still, not indeuouring the execution thereof, as to assault or beat any
person, to enter into his house or land, etc. West. part 2. symb. titulo,
Inditements, sect. 65. M. Lam. in his Eirenarcha. cap. 19. says thus: An
unlawful assembly is the company of three persons or more, gathered together,
to do such an unlawful act, although they do it not indeed. So says Kitchen
in effect, fol. 20.

Vnques prist, is (word for word) always ready. And it signifies a Plee,
whereby a man professes himself always ready to do or perform that, which the
Demaundant requires, thereby to avoid charges. For example: a woman sieweth
the tenent for her Dower: and he coming in at the first day, offers to
auerre, that he was always ready and still is, to perform it. In this case
except the Demaundant will auerre the contrary, he shall recover no damages.
When this Plee will serve to avoid Charges, and when not, see Kit. fol. 243.
See Uncore prist.

Voydance (vacatio) is a want of an Incumbent upon a benefice: and this
voydance is double: either in law, as when a man has more benefices
inco^petible: or indeed, as when the Incumbe^t is dead, or actually deprived.
Brook, titulo Quareimpedit. n. 51.

Voucher (Aduocatio) is a calling in of one into the Court at the petition of a
party that hops to be helped thereby. New book of Entries. verbo. voucher.
voucher de garantie Brit. ca. 75. in latin (Aduocatio ad war antizandum) is a
petition in court made by the Defendant to have him called, of whom he or his
Auncester bought the land or tenement in question, and received warranty for
the secure inioying thereof against all men. Britton of this writes a long
chapter. vbi supra, intituling it Garant voucher. But Bracton writes a large
tractate of it, lib. 5. tracta. 4. per totum. Litleton also handles it not
minsingly, in the last chapter of all his Tenures. Of this you may read Fitzh.
also in his not. br. fol. 134. De warantia chartae. All this law seems to
have been brought into England out of Normandy. For in the Grand Custumary you
have likewise a chapter entitled (vouchement de garant, cap. 50. id est,
vocamentum Garanti) where it is set down, what time ought to be given, for the
appearance of the warrant called in this case, how many warrants may be
vouched, one calling in another, and diverse other points touching this
doctrine. All which, and many more, you may read in Bracton vbi supra. A common
voucher, a double voucher. Coke lib. 2. Sir Hughe. Cholmleis case, fol. 50. b.
This is very aunswerable to the contract in the Civil law, whereby the buyer
binds the seller, sometime in the simple value of the thing bought, sometime
in the double, to warrant his secure enjoying of the thing bought. But this
difference I find between the Civil law and ours, that whereas the Civil
law binds every man to warrant the security of that which he sells, ours
does not so, except it be especially couenanted. The party that voucheth in
this case, is called the Tenent, the party vouched is termed the Vouchee. The
writ whereby he is called, is termed Summoneas ad warrantizandum. And if the
Shyreeue return upon that writ, that the party has nothing, whereby he may be
summoned: then goes out another writ. viz. Sequntur sub suo periculo. See
Terms of the law. verbo Voucher. And Lamb. in his Explication of Saxon
words, verbo Advocare. See Warrantie. I read in the new book of Entries, of
a forain voucher, which has place properly in some Franchise, County
Palatine, or other where one voucheth to warrantie one not dwelling within the
Franchise. fol. 615. columna. 1. whereupon because the foreyner need not be
tried in that Court, the record and cause is removed to the common plees, etc.
See of this Fitz. not. br. fol. 6. E.

Vser de action, is the persiewing or bringing of an action, which in what
place and county it ought to be, See Brook, titulo Lieu and County. fol. 64.

Use (vsus) is in the original signification, plain enough: but it has a
proper application in our common law, and that is the profit or benefit of
lands or tenements. And out of M. Wests first part of his simbol: lib. pri
sect. 48. 49. 50. 51. and 52. I gather shortly thus much for this purpose.
Every deed in writing has to be considered the substance, and the adjuncts.
Touching the substance, a deed does consist of two principal parts, namely
the premises and the consequents. The premises is the former part thereof,
and is commonly said to be all that, which preceedeth the (Habendum) or
limitation of the estate, which be the persons contracting, and the things
contracted. The consequent is that which follows the premises, and that is
the (Habendum) In which are two limitations: the one of the estate, or
property, that the party passive shall receive by the deed, the other of the
use: which is to express in the said (Habendum) to or for what use, and
benefit he shall have the same estate. And of the limitation of those uses,
you may read many presidents set down by the same author in his second book
of his said first part, sectio. 308. and so forth to 327. These uses were
invented upon the statute called, West. 3. or Quia emptores terrarum, before
the which statute no uses were known. Perkins. Devises. 528. And because men's
wits, had in time devised many deceits, by the settling of the possession in one
man and the use in another, there was a statute made, anno, 27. H. 8. ca. 1.
whereby it was inacted, that the use and possesssion of lands and possessions
should always stand united. New expositour of law terms, verbo. Use. v. Coke
lib. 1. Chudleise case. fol. 121. and seqq.

Usher (Ostiarius) comes of the French (Huissier. i. Accensus, apparitor,
Ianitor) It signifies with us first an officer in the Eschequer: of which sort
there be four ordinary vshers that attend the chief officers and Barons of
the court at Westminster, and Iuries, Shyreeues and all other accoumptants at
the pleasure of the court. Therbe also Vshers in the Kings house, as of the
privy chamber, etc.

Vtas (Octavae) is the eight day following any term or feast: as the vtas of
Saint Michaell, the vtas of Saint Hilary, the vtas of Saint Martine, of
Saint John Baptist, of the Trinity etc. as you may read. anno 51. H. 3.
stat. concerning general days in the Benche. And any day between the feast
and the eighth day, is said to be within the vtas. The use of this is in the
return of writs, as appears by the same statute.

Vtfangthef, is an ancient Royalty granted to a Lord of a manner, by the King
which gives him the punishment of a thief dwelling out of his liberty, and
having committed theft without the same, if he be taken within his fee.
Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 24. who in his third book, tract. 2, ca. 35. seems
rather to interpret the word, then to express the effect, and says thus.
Vtfangthef dicitur extraneus latro, veniens aliunde de terra aliena, and qui
captus fuit in terra insius, qui tales habet libertates. It seems to be
compounded of these three words. Vt, fang, thef. which in our modern English
be, out, take or taken, Thief. Of this Fleta has these words. vtfangenthef
dicitur latro extraneus veniens a liunde de terra aliena, and qui captus fuerie
in terra ipsius qui tales habet libertates. Sed non sequitur quod possit ille
hominem suum proprium extra libertatem suam captum reducere vsque in
libertatem, and ibi eum iudicare: reducere tamen poterit indicatum, and
iudicium in proprio patibulo exequiratione libertatis: commodum tamen non
video. Debet enim quilibet iuri subiacere, vbi deliquit: proprios tamen
latrones and alienos iudicare possunt, dum tamen infra libertatem fuerint
capti, etc.

Vtlaghe, significat bannitum extra legem. Fleta. li. 1. cap. 47. See Vtlawrie.

Vtlagato capiendo quando vtlagatur in vno comitatu, and postea fugit in alium,
is a writ, the nature whereof is sufficiently expressed in the words set down
for the name thereof. See the Register original, fo. 133.

Vtlawrie (vtlagaria, alias vtlagatio) is a punishment for such as being called
into law, and lawfully sought, do comte^ptuously refuse to appear. And as
Bracton says li. 3. tract. 2. ca. 11. He that is siewed must be sought, and
called at 5. counties, a month being between every county, to answer to the
law. And if he come not within that time, pro exlege tenebitur cum principi
non obediat, nec legi: and ex tunc vtlagabitur: that is, as the author of the
terms of law says, he shall be pronounced by the coroner, to be out of the
Kings protection, and deprived of the benefit of the law. The effect of this
is diverse (as the same Author says). for if he be outlawed in an action
personal, (he means) at the suite of another in a civil cause: he shall
forfeit all his goods and cattells to the King: if upon felony then he shall
forfeit all his lands and tenements, that he has in fee simple, or for term
of his life, and his goods and cattles. Bracton: vbi supra, nu. 5. says, that
such as be outlawed upon felony, ex tunc gerunt caput lupinum, ita quod sine
iudiciali inquisitiene rite pereant, and secum suum iudicium portent and merito
sine lege pereunt, qui secundum legem viuere recusarunt. Et haec ita, si cum
capiendi fuerint, fugiant, vel se defendant si autem vivi capti fuerint, vel se
reddiderint, vita illorum and mors erit in manu Domini Regis. See Horns mirror
of Justices, lib. 3. cap. des fautes punishables. Bracton says in the place
above specified (with whom also Fleta agrees, lib. 1. cap. 27.) that a Minor
or a woman cannot be outlawed. But take his own words: Minor vero, and qui
infra aetatem. 12. annorum fuerit, vtlagarinon potest, nec extra legem poni,
quia ante talem aetatem non est sub lege aliqua, nec in Decenna, non magis quam
foemina, quae vtlagari non potest, quia ipsa non est sub lege. i. Inlaugh
Anglice, sc: in fra^co plegio, sive decenna: sicut masculus, 12. annorum, and
vlterius. Et ideo non potest vtlagari. Waiviari tamen been potest, and pro
derelicta haberi, cum pro felonia aliqua fugam fecerit sieve ceperit. Est enim
waiuium, quod nullus aduocat, nec princeps eum advocabit, nec tuebitur, cum
fuerit rite Waiviata: sicut fit de masculo, qui secundum legem terrae rite
fuerit vtlagatus, etc. To the same effect writes Fitz h. in his na. br. fo.
161. viz; And because women be not sworn in leetes to the King, as men be of
the age of 12 years or upward: it is said, when a woman is outlawed, that she
is waiued, but not outlawed. for she was never under the law, nor sworn unto
it. More of this you may read in Bracton, lib. 3. tracta. 2. cap 12. and. 13.
and then in the 14. how an outlaw is inlawed again, and restored to the Kings
peace and protection. See also Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 28. per totum.

Virum. See Assise.

Viter Baristers, be such as for their long study and great industry bestowed
upon the knowledge of the common law, be called out of their contemplation to
practice, and in the face of the world to take upon them the protection and
defense of clients. These are in other countries called, (Licentiati in iure).
How be it in modesty they still continue themselves hearers for diverse years,
like the scholars of Pythagoras, that for the first five years never adventured
to reason or discourse openly upon any point of their masters Doctrine, which
their silence (a cohibendo sermon) was termed (...) as Suidas and Zenedorus
do report.

Vtlepe significat escapium latronum. Fleta lib. 1. ca. 47.

W
Wage (vadiare) proceeds of the French (Gager. i. dare pignus, pignore
certare) and signifies in our common law the giving of security for the
performing of any thing: as to wage law, and to wage deliverance which see
before in Gage. None wageth law against the King. Brook tit. Chose in action,
number. 9. The substantive of this verb is (Wager) in the latin (vadium) which
some Feudists call (wadium) as testifies Hotoman in his Commentaries de verbis
feudalibus. verbo Wadium. See Law.

Wainage (Wainagium, alias Wannagium) signifies as much as peculium servorum
of the Saxon word wouen. i. habitare, and woeuing. i. habitatio. See. Gainage.

Waiue (waiuiare) Register orig. fol. 277. a) is to forsake (habere pro
derelicto) as the Ciuilians term it. Waiviare feudum suum. Bracton lib. 2.
cap. 7. that is to forsake. Many of the Kings liege people to be outlawed, and
many waiued by erroneous process. anno 7. H. 4. ca. 13. See Vtlawrie. To waiue
the company of thieves. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 26. To waiue his benesit. Idem
fol. 46. to waiue the advantage. Idem praerog. fol. 17. Persons attainted or
waiued. West. part 2. simbol. titulo Fines, sect: 13. D. This word waiued
waiuiata properly belongs to a woman that being siewed in law contemptuously
refuses to appear, as outlawed does to a man. Registerorig. fo. 132. b. and
277. a. The reason whereof see in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 161. A. See Weif.

Wales (Wallia) is a part of England, on the west side inhabited by the
offspring of the ancient Britons chased thither by the Saxons, being called
hither by them to assist them against the might of the Picts. The reason of the
appellation comes from the Saxon (wealh. 1. exterus, vel peregrinus) for so
the Saxons both called them and held them, though now to the great quiet of
this kingdom they be incorporated unto us See M. Lamb: explication of Saxon
words. verbo. Wallus.

Walkers, seem to be those that are otherwise called Foresters. Crompton in
his Jurisdictions, fol. 154. has these words in effect. There be Foresters
assigned by the King, which be walkers within a certain space assigned them to
look unto.

Waiuiaria mulieris, is as much as vtlagatio viri. Register original fol. 132.
b. See Waiue.

Wapentake (Wapentakium) is all one with that, which we call a Hundred, as
appears by Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. ca. pri. nu. pri. in fine. Conuocentur
(says he) postmodum seruientes and Baliui Hundredorum, and per ordinem
irrotulentur Hundredarii, sieve wapentakia, and nomina seruientium, quorum
quilibet affidabit, quod de quolibet Hundredo eliget quatuor milites, qui
statim veniant coram Iusticiariis ad faciendum preceptum Domini Regis, and qui
statim iurabunt, quod eligent duodecim milites, vel liberos and legales
homines, si milites non inueniantur, etc. M. Lamberd in his explication of
Saxon words, verbo Centuria, is of the same mind: and farther says, that this
word is especially used at this day in the countries be north the river Trent.
And in the laws of King Edward set forth by him nu. 33. it is most plain in
these words. Et quod Angli vocant Hundredum, supradicti comitatus vocant
wapentakium. But there he names some shires of this side Trent, as Warwick
shire, Leicester shire, and Northhampton-shire. In the words there following,
there is a reason given of this appellation in these words. Et non sine causa:
Cum quis enim accipiebat praefecturam wapentakii, die statuto in loco, vbi
consueuerant congregari, omnes maiores contra eum conueniebant, and descendente
de equo suo, omnes assurgebant ei. Ipse vero, erecta lancea sua, ab omnibus
secundum morem foedus accipiebat. Omnes enim quotquot vtnissent, cum lanceis
suis ipsius hastam tangebant, and ita confirmabant per contractum armorum, pace
palam concessa. Anglice enim arma vocantur (waepun) and taccare confirmare:
quasi armorum confirmatio. Vel vt magis express secundum linguam anglicanam
dicamus, waepentak armorum tactus est (waepun) enim arma sonant (tac) tactus
est. Quamobrem poterit cognosci, quod hac de causa, totus ille conuentus
dicitur (wapentae) eo quod per tactum armorum suorum ad inuicem confoederati
sunt. Thus far the book goes word for word. With whom Fleta agrees, saving
that Fleta says, that this word is used in all counties be north
Watlinstreete, li. 2. ca. 61.. vniuersimode. Take Sir Tho: Smithes opinion
also: whose words in his second book de Rep: Anglo: ca: 16. be these:
Wapentak. I suppose, came of the Danes, or peradventure of the Saxons. For that
so many towns came by there order then into one place, where was taken a
mouster of there armor and weapons: in which place, from them that could not
find sufficient pledges for their good abearing, their weapons were taken
away. The statute anno. 3. Henrici 5. ca. 2. and anno 9. H. 6. cap. 10. and
anno 15. H. 6. ca. 7. T. makes mention of Stainctife Wapentake, and Frendles
Wapentake, in Crauen in the County of York. See Roger Houeden, part poster:
suorum annalium, fo. 346. b.

Wards and Liueries (wardi and liberaturae) is a Court first erected in King
Henry the eighth his time, and afterward augmented by him with the office of
Liueries, and therefore called by him (as now it is) the Court of wards and
Liueries. The chief of this Court is called the master of the Court, etc. To
whom are joined the Surueiour, Atturny, and Receiver of the said Court, as his
Assistants: then as Ministers the Register, two inferior Atturnies or Clerks,
and a Messenger.

Ward (Custodia) is the German word, as (Guard) is the French. Both these be
used among our common lawyers: the one by those that write in French, the other
by those that write in English. Wherefore for your farther understanding, See
Guard and Gardein. Yet is Guard sometime used in the Englishbookes also: as
yeomen of the Guard. And also the keeper of one in his minority, is not called a
warder but a Gardein or Guardian. Ward has diverse applications, as a Ward in
London, latined (warda) which is a portion of the City committed to the
especial charge of some one of the 24. Aldermen of the city, in such sort as
every one knows his certain ward assigned unto him, and has dwelling within
the same compass some one grave Citizen for the good government thereof: who is
in that respect a Deputy to the said Alderman, and commonly called the
Aldermans Deputy. Of these there be 25. within the city, and one without,
beside other liberties and the suburbs. Stowes Survey of London. Also a Forest
is divided into wards: Manwood, part prim. of his Forest laws. page 97.
Lastly, a prison is otherwise called a Ward. And the heir of the Kings tenent,
houlding by knights service, or in capite, or of any common person by Knights
service, is called Ward, during his nonage. See anno 32. H. 8. cap. 46.

Warden (Gardianus) signifies al one thing with the French (Gardien.) And
therefore of this see more in Gardien. But it is the more usual word of all
that writ in English, for him that has the keeping or charge of any person or
thing by office: as Wardens of Felowships in London. anno 14. H. 8. cap. 2.
Warden courts, anno 31. H. 6. ca. 3. Warden of the Marches, anno 4 H. 7. cap.
8. Wardens and Communaltie of the lanes contributorie to Rochester bridge. anno
18. Eliz. cap. 7. Wardens of peace. anno 2. Ed. 3. cap. 3. Statute Northampton.
Warden of the West Marches. Camd. Brit. page 606. Warden of the Forest.
Manwood, part prim. page 111. and 112. Warden of the Aulnage. anno 18. H. 6.
cap. 16. Chief Warden of the Forest. Manwood part prim. page 42. and 43.
Warden of the Kings wardrobe. anno 51 H. 3. statut. quinto. Wardens of the
tables of the Kings Exchange, anno 9. Ed. 3. stat. 2. cap. 7. and anno 9. H.
5. stat. 2. c. 4. Warden of the rolls of the Chauncerie. anno 1. Ed. 4. cap.
1. and cap. 5. Warden or Clerk of the hamper of the Chauncerie. ibid. Warden
of the kings writs, and Records of his common bench, ibid. Warden of the Kings
armor in the tower. anno 1. Ed. 4. cap. 1.

Wardnote; is a court kept in every ward in London. anno 32. H. 8. cap. 17.
ordinarily called among them, the Wardmote Court.

Ward penny, is money to be contributed toward watch and ward.

Warantie, (warantia) comes of the French (garantie) or (garant) i. vindex
litis:) which is a word of great antiquity with the French men, being brought
first thither by the Francogalli. And thence do they make a Latinish verb,
viz. (guarentare) vel, vt est in aliis libris, guarentisare. i. causam alterius
suscipere, se defensorem profiteri. The Feudists also use this word (guarentus)
quo significatur is, qui Latinis author dicitur, and euictionem praestat. lib.
2. Feud. titulo 34.. 2. The Ciuilians have a stipulation (habere licere)
whereby is signified a power of perpetual and quiet possession to be given: l.
11. final. P. de action empt. and vend. But this reaches not so far as our
warrantie. For the seller hereby is bound but to a kind of diligence and care
to maintain the buyer in his possession. For if he be euicted, the buyer is
not tied to recompense. Doctores in l. stipulatio ista, Habere licere. P. de
verb. obliga. Warrantie signifies in our common law, a promise made in a deed
by one man unto another for himself and his heirs, to secure him and his
heirs against all men, for the enjoying of any thing agreed of between them.
And he that makes this warrantie, is called Warrantus by Bracton, lib. 2. cap.
10. and 37. The Romans called him Auctorem, as Hotoman testifies in his
Commentary upon Tullies oration pro Aulo Caecinna. verbo, Cesennius author
fundi, whom you may read more at large. And that which we term vocationem
warranti, the Ciuilians call authoris laudationem vel nominationem. Eimer
pract. cap. 48. This warranty passes from the seller to the buyer, from the
feoffer to the feoffee, from him that releaseth, to him that is released of an
action real, and such like. And for the form it passes in a clause toward
the end of a deed in these words: Et ego vero praefatus I. and haeredes mei
praedictas december acras terrae cum pertinentiis suis praefato H. haeredibus, and
assignatis suis contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus in perpetnum per
praesentes. West. part prim. symbol. lib. 2. titulo Feofments. sect. 281. and
288. So a release may be with a clause of warrantie. Idem, eodem. titulo
Releases. sect. 510.

There is also a warrant of Attorney, whereby a man appoints another to do
some thing in his name, and warranteth his action, West. eod. sect. 181. And
these warra^ts of Attorney seem to differ from leters of Attorney, because
that, whereas leters pass ordinarily under the hand and seal of him, that
makes an Attorney by them, before any credible witnesses: warrants of Attorney
be acknowledged before such persons, by such means and in such manner, as Fines.
West. part 2. symbol. titule Recoueries. sect. prim. F. See Attorney.

But these waranties in passing land from one to another, be of greatest
consequent, and of more intricate understanding. And therefore of these, diverse
have written at large: as Glanvile lib. 3. per totum. Bracton lib. 5. tract. 4.
per totum. Britton. cap. 105. Litleton in the last chapter of his tenures: the
form and effect whereof Bracton in his second book cap. 16. number. 10.
declares thus: Et ego and haeredes mei warrantizabimus tali and haeredibus
suis tantum, vel tali and haeredibus and assignatis, and haeredibus
assignatcrum, vel assignatis assignatorum, and eorum haeredibus, and
acquietabimus, and defendemus eis totam terram illam cum pertinentiis (secundum
quod praedictum est) contra omnes gentes in perpetuum, per praedictum
seruitium. Per hoc autem quod dicit (Ego and haeredes mei) obligat se and
haeredes suos ad warrantiam, propinquos, and remotos, praesentes and futuros ei
succedentes in infinitum Per hoc autem quod dicit (warrantizabimus) suscipit in
se obligationem ad defendendum suum Tenementum in possessione res datae, and
assignatos suos and eorum haeredes, and omnes alios, secundum quod supradictum
est, si forte tenementum datum petatur ab antiquo in Dominico. Per hoc autem
quod dicit (acquiet abimus) obligat se and haeredes suos ad acquietandum, si
quis plus petierit seruitis, vel aliud seruitium, quam in charta donationis
continetur: per hoc autem quod dicit (Defendemus) obligat se and haeredes suos
ad Defendendum, si quis velit seruitutem ponere rei datae contra formam suae
donationis, etc. But the new expounder of law terms says, that this warranty
begins two ways: one by deed of law: as if one and his auncesters, have
held land of another and his auncesters, time out of mind byhomage (which is
called Homage auncestrell) for in this case, the homage continually performed
by the tenent is sufficient to bind the Lord to warrant his estate. The other
is by deed of the party, which by deed or fine tyeth himself to warrant the
land or tenement to the tenent. And Sir Ed: Cook in the fourth book of his
reports, mentions the same distinction. Nokes case, fo. 81. a. calling the
one a warranty in law, the other an express warranty. Ciuilians would call
these species, tacitam and expressam.

Warranty (as the said author of the terms of law says, is in two manners:
warranty lineall, and warranty collateral. But (Litleton says vbi supra) it
is threefold: warranty lineall, warranty collateral, and warranty that
begins by disseisin. Warranty by disseisin what it is, is partly declared in
Sir Ed. Cooks reports, li. 3. Fermors case, fol. 78. a. Whether of them
deuideth more aptly, let the learned judge. For my part, I think that lineall
and collateral be no essential disserences of warranty, as it is originally
considered in the first warranter. For he binds himself and his heirs in
general. And such be bound, be they lineall or collateral unto him. Therefore
this division rises rather from the event of the original warranty:
videlicet, because it so falls out, that the tenent, to whom the warranty was
made, or his heirs, when he or they be called into question for the land
warranted formerly by the first feoffour, is driven by the means of the first
warranters death, to call or vouch him to waranty that is his heir, and now
presently living, be he descending or collateral, as it falls out. For
example. A. infeoffeth B. in twenty acres land, with clause of warranty against
all men. So long as A. himself lives, he is liable to this covenant, and none
else: after his discease his heir is subject unto it, be he his son, brother,
uncle, or what else. And whether of these, or neither of these it will be, none
knows until he be dead. Wherefore I conclude that this distinction of
lineall or collateral has no use originally in this contract. For (as the
author of the terms of law says) the burden of this warranty, after the death
of the first warranter, falls upon him, upon whom the land should have
descended, if the warranty had not been made. And that is the next of blood to
the warranter, be he in the defcending or collateral line. And therefore I
resolve that this distinction grows from an event, after the death of him
that couenanteth to warrant. But to make this plain, I find warranty to be
used equiuocally: signifiing in one sort, the contract, or covenant of warranty
first made, as appears by Bracton in the place formerly noted: and in another
sort the very effect and performance of this contract, either by the warranter
or his heirs, when he or they be by the tenent thereunto vouched, or called:
As also I show out of Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 4. ca. pri. nu. 2. in these
words. Imprimis videndum est quid sit warrantizatio. Et sciendum quod
warrantizare, nihil aliud est, quam defendere and acquietare tenentem, qui
warrantum vocabit in seisina sua, etc. With whom agrees Fleta saying that
warrantiz are nihil aliud est, quam possidentem defendere, li. 5. ca. 15.. 1.
and lib. 6. ca. 23. quod lege per totum. And the former division of lineall and
collateral warranty, rather belongs to warranty in this second signification
then the former.

And that this way it is imperfect or at the least obscure, I think it not
hard to declare. First to show this I note out of Bracton, who may be called to
warrantie. And he lib. 5. tractat. 4. cap. pri. number. 5. says thus: Videndum
est quis vocari possit ad warrantum, and sciendum, quod tam masculus quam
foemina, tam minor quam mayor (dum tamen si minor vocetur, remane at placitum
de warantia in suspenso vsque ad aetatem, nisi causa fuerit ita fauorabilis,
quod aetas expectari non debeat; sicut ex causa Dotis) Item non solum vocandus
est ad warantum ille qui dedit, vel venddit: verum etiam vocandi sunt eorum
haeredes descendentes in infinitum propter verba in Chartis contenta, (Ego and
haeredes mei warantizabimus tali and haeredibus suis, etc.) Et in quo casu
tenentur haeredes warantizare, sive sint propinqui, sive remoti, remotiores,
vel remotissimi. Et quod de haeredibus dicitur, idem dici poterit de
assignatis, and de illis, qui sunt loco illorum haeredu^, sicut sunt capitales
Domini qui tenentibus suis quasi succedunt, vel propter aliquem defectum, vel
propter aliquod delictum, sicut de eschaetis Dominorum: By which words we
perceive that the burden of this warrantie is not tied to heirs only, be they
in the descending or collateral line, but that under this word (Haeredes) are
comprised all such, as the first warranters lands afterward come unto either by
descent, or otherwise ex causa lucratiua So that if a man have 20 children, yet
if he will, and may give his land to a stranger, leaving his children no land:
that stranger in this case is his assign, and is contained under this word,
heir. So if he commit felony after such warrantie covenanted, and forfeit his
lands to his Lord by escheate: the Lord is quasi haeres in this case, and
liable to the warrantie formerly passed. And in these two later cases, warranty
in the second signification seems to be neither lineall, nor collateral: at
the least as Litleton, and the other author have defined, or by examples
expressed them.

But yet let us define these two species, as they be. wherefore lineall
warranty is that, which he is called unto by the tenent, upon whom the land
warranted had descended, if the warranty had not been couenanted. For example;
A sells to B. 20. acres land with clause of warranty, and afterward dies
leaving issue. C. soon after B. is impleaded for this land by D. and voucheth.
C. This is called a lineall warranty: because but for it the land had descended
from A. to C.

Warranty collateral, is that whereunto he is called by the tenent upon the
covenant of him, from whom the land could not descend to the party called. For
example; B. the son pourchaseth tenements in fee, whereof A. his father
disseiseth him, and sells them to C. with a clause of warranty. A being
dead, C. is impleaded for the tenements, and calls B. to warranty. This
warranty whereunto B. is caled, is collateral: by cause the tenements, if the
warrnty had not been couenanted by A. could not have descended from him to his
father A. for they were his own by Pourchase. Many other examples there be of
this in Litleton. And this very case he makes his example of warranty by
disseisin, as also of warranty collateral. which plainly argues, that
warranty by disseisin, and warranty collateral, are not distinct members of
warranty, but may be confounded: though one warranty may carry both names in
diverse respects. For there is some warranty collateral that begins not by
disseisin. For example. A. tenent in tail, alienateth to B. in fee, and dies
leaving issue. C. Afterward. D. brother to A. and uncle to C. releaseth to B.
with warranty, and dying leaves. C. his heir being next of blood unto him.
This warranty is collateral, because it descends upon. C. from his uncle. D.
and yet it begins not by desseisin of his said uncle.

Warranty, has a double effect: one to debar him upon whom it discendeth
from the first warranter as his next of blood, from claiming the land
warranted: and another to make it good to the tenent, if by him he be vouched
thereunto, or else to give him as much other land by exchange. But as the former
of these effects takes place with all heirs, except those to whom the land
warranted was intailed, and that reap no equivalent benefit by the first
warranter. anno 6. Ed. pri, ca. 3. so the latter preiudiceth none that
receives not sufficient land from the first warranter to make it good.
Bracton, lib. 5. tractat. 4. ca. 8. nu. pri. and cap. 13. nu. 2. In the
custumaric of Norm. ca. 5. you have vouchement degarant, which the Interpreter
translateth, Vocamentum Garanti. a voucher or calling of the wartanter into the
court to make good his sale or gift.

Warantiadiei, is a writ lying in case, where a man having a day assigned
personally to appear in court to any action wherein he is siewed, is in the
mean time by commandment employed in the Kings service, so that he cannot
come at the day assigned. This writ is directed to the Justices to this end,
that they neither take nor: record him in defaulte for that day. Register
original, fol. 18. Of this you may read more in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 17. and
see Glanuile, lib. pri. ca. 8.

Warantia. chartae., is a writ that lies properly for him who is infeoffed in
land or tenements with clause of warranty, and is impleaded in an Assise or
writ of Entry, wherein he cannot vouche or call to warranty: for in this case
his remedy is, to take out this writ against the seoffour or his heir.
Register orig. fol. 157. Fitzh. not. br: fol. 134 Of this you may likewise
read Fleta, lib. 6. ca. 35. and West part 2. simb. titulo Fines. sect. 156.

Warrantia custodia, is a writ Judicial, that lies for him that is challenged
to be ward unto another, in respect of land said to be houlden in Knights
service, which when it was bought by the auncesters of the ward, was warranted
to be free from such thraldom. And it lies against the warranter and his
heirs, Register Judicial, fol. 36.

Warrant of Attorney. See Leter of Attorney, and Waranty.

Wardwite significat quietantiam misericordia in casu quo non invenerit quis
hominem ad wardam faciendam in castra, vel alibi. Flet a lib. 1. cap. 47.

Warren (Warrenna, alias varrenna) comes of the French (Garrenne. 1.
vivarium, vel locus in quo vel aves, vel pisces, vel ferae continentur, quae ad
victum di^ntaxat pertinent) Calapine out of Aulus Gellius. lib. 2. Noct.
Attica: cap. 20. A warren (as we use it) is a prescription or grant from the
king to a man of having fesants, partridges, connies, and hares, within
certain of his lands, Cromptons Iurisdict. fol. 148. where he says, that none
can have warren, but only the King, no more then Forest or chase. Because it
is a special privilege belonging to the King alone. And a little after he
has words to this effect. The king may grant warren to me in mine own lands,
for fesants and partridges only. And by this grant no man may there chase
them without my license. And so of Hares, but not of Connies. For their
property is to destroy the (...) of the (...), as to eat corn, and pille the
bark of apple trees. M. Manwood in his first part of Forest laws, says thus
of it: A warren is a fraunchise or privileged place of pleasure, only for
those beasts and fowls that are beasts and fowls of warren, tantum campestres
and non syluestres. viz. For such beasts and fowls as are altogether belonging
to the feilds, and not unto the woods: and for none other beasts or fowls.
There are but two beasts of warren, that is to say Hares and Connies: and there
are also but two fowls of warren, viz. Fesants and partridges. And none other
wild beasts or birds have any firm peace, privilege, or protection, within
the warren. If any person be found to be an offender in any such free warren,
he is to be punished for the same by the course of the common law, and by the
statute. auno 21. Ed. 3. called the statute de male factoribus in parcis and
chaceis etc. For the most part there are not officers in a warren, but the
master of the game, or the keeper. A free warren is some time in closed, and
also the same some time does lie open. for there is no necessity of enclosing
the same, as there is of a park, for if a park be suffered to lie open, it
ought to be seized into the kings (...) Manwood.

Warscot, is the contribution, that was wont to be made toward armor in the
Saxons time. In Canutus his charter of the Forest set out by M. Manwood in the
first part of his Forest laws, number. 9. you have these words: Sint omnes tam
primarii quam mediocres, and minuti, immunes, liberi and quietiab omnibus
prouincialibus summonitionibus, and popularibus placitis, quae Hundred laghe
Angli dicunt, and ab omnibus armorum oncribus, quod Warscot Angli dicunt, and
forinsecis querelis.

VVarwit, alias, VVardwit, is to be quite of giving money for keeping of
watches. New exposition of law terms.

Waste (vastum) comes of the French (gaster. i. populari. It signifies
diversely in our common law, first, a spoil made, either in houses, woods,
gardens, orchards, etc. by the tenent for term of life, or for term of
another life, or of years, to the prejudice of the heir, or of him in the
Reuersion or Remainder. Kitchen fol. 168. etc. vsque 172. upon this committed
the writ of waste is brought for the recovery of the things, whereupon the
waste is made. See Vasto. Waste may be also made of tenants or bondmen
belonging or (...) to the manner. Regist. orig. fol. 72. a. and 73. a. See the
new book of Entries. verbo Waste. A waste of the Forest (as M. Manwood says,
part prim. of his Forest laws, page 172.) is most properly where any man does
cut down his own woods within the Forest, without license of the king, or of
the Lord chief Justice in Air of the Forest. But it is also, where a man does
plow up his own meadow or pasture, and conuerterh it unto tillage. And of this
you may read him at large, in his second part, cap. 8. number. 4. and 5. Waste
in the second signification is taken for those parts of the Lords Demesns, that
be not in any one man's occupation, but lie common for bounds or passages of the
Lord and tenent from one place to another, and sometimes for all the Kings
subjects. Which seems to be called waste, because the Lord cannot make such
profit of it, as he does of other of his land, by reason of that use which
others have of it in passing to and fro. Upon this none may build or feed, or
cut down trees, without the Lords license. Waste has a third signification,
as year, day, and waste. Annus, dies, and vastum: which is a punishment or
forfeiture belonging to petittreason, or felonle: whereof you may read Seawnf.
pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 30. And see Year, Day, and Waste.

VVasters. anno 5. Ed. 3. cap. 14 See Roberds men. See Draw latches.

VVastell bread; anno 51. H. 3. statute of bread, and statute of pilorie.

Water bayliffes, seem to be officers in port towns for the searching of
ships, anno 28. H. 6. cap. 5.

Watling street, is one of the 4. ways, which the Romans are said to have
made here in England, and called them Consulares, Praetorias, Militares,
Publicas. M. Camden in his Britannia, persuades himself that there were more
of this sort than 4. This street is otherwise called Werlam streat, (as the
same author says, and howsoever the Romans might make it and the rest, the
names be from the Saxons. And Roger Houeden says, it is so called, because the
sons of Wethle made it, leading from the East sea to the West. Annal. part.
prior. fol. 248. a. This street leads from Dover to London, and so to S.
Albons, and there onward directly toward the North-west through the land, as
from Donstable to Westchester: anno 39. El. cap. 2. the second street is called
Ikenild street, beginning ab Icenis, who were the people inhabiting Northfolke,
Southfolke, and Cambridge shire, as M. Camden declares, page 345. The third is
called Toss: the reason of the name he gives, because he thinks it was
ditched of each side. The fourth is called Ermin street, Germanico vocabulo, a
Mercurio, quem sub nomine Irmunsull. i. Mercurii columna, Germani maiores
nostri coluerunt. Of these read more in the said author, page 43. and 44. In
the description of England going under Saxons name, cap. 7. I read that
Belinus a Briton king made these 4. ways: whereof the first and greatest he
calls Fosse, stretching out of the South into the North, and beginning from
the corner of Cornwel, and passing soorth by Devonshire, Somersetshire, and so
along by Tetburie upon Toteswould besides Couentree unto Lecester, and thence,
by the wide plains to Newarke and to Lincoln where it ends. The second he
names Watling street, coming out of the South-east toward the Fosse,
beginning at Dover, and passing through the middle of Kent over Thames beside
London nere Westminster, and thence to S. Albons, by Donstable, Stratford,
Towceter, Weden, Lilborn, Atheriston, Gilberts hill, now called Wreaken, by
Seuerne, Workecester, Stratton, and so forth by the middle of Wales, unto
Cardican and the Irish seas. The third he calls Erminagestreet, stretching
out of the West North-west into the East South-east, from S. David's in the west
Wales unto Southhampton. The fourth he called Rikenild street, stretching
forth by Worcester, by Wicombe, Brinningham, Litchfield, Derby, Chesterfield,
and by York forth into Tynmouth. But he that lists to read at large of
these ways, let him have recourse to the first volume of Helinsheds Chronicle,
and the description of England there, the 19. chapter. Where this antiquity is
far otherwise declared, then by the former writer. Henry of Huntington
likewise in the first book of his history, not far after the beginning
mentions these 4. streets, terming them calls Regia sublimatos authoritate,
ne aliquis in eis inimicum invadere auderet, etc.

Waterbayliffes. anno 28. H. 6. cap. 5. is an officer belonging to the city of
London, which has the superuison and search of fish, that is brought to that
city, as also the gathering of the toll rising from that water. He is
reckoned an Esquier by his office, as the Sword Bearer, the Huntsman, and the
chief Sergeant is. He also attends upon the Lord Mayor for the time being,
and has the principal care of marshalling the guests at his table.

Way. See Chimin.

Weife (wauium) whence it has his original, I cannot certainly say. But I
find the nineteenth chapter of the Grand Custumary of Normandy to be entitled
(De chooses gaiues) and latined by the interpreter (De rebus vaiuis) which are
there thus defined vaiua sunt res, vel alia, qua nullius proprietati attributa,
six possessionis reclamatione sunt inuenta, quae vsque ad diem and annum
seruanda sunt. Et de iis modo, quo dictum est de veriscis, that is (weeks)
easua esse probantibus est restitutio facienda, etc. This weife or things
weiued have the very same signification in our common law, and be naught but
things forsaken. The Ciuilians call it (Derelictum) or (Quod est pro derelicto)
Bracton in the twelve chapter of his first book nu. 10. reckons them inter
res quae sunt nullius ea quae pro waiuio habentur: sicut de aueriis, vbi non
apparet Dominus, where he also says, quodo lim fuerunt inuentoris de iure
naturali, and iam efficiuntur principis de iure Gentium. That this is a
Regality, and belonging to the King, except it be challenged by the owner
within a year and a day, it appears by Britton in his uenthteene chapter.
Now the Kings in their times have granted this and such like prerogatives unto
diverse subjects with their fees. who there likewise says, that weifes, things
lost, and estrayes, must by the Lord of the fraunchise where they are found, be
caused to be cried and published in markets and churches nere about, or else
that the year and day does not run to the prejudice of him that has lost
them. See Waiue. M. Skene de verborum signifi. verb. waife, says, that waife
est pecus, vel animal aberrans, which wanders and wauerrs without a known
master, and being found by any man within his own bounds, must be by him
proclaimed upon diverse, and sundry market days, at the parish church, and
within the shyreeuedome. Otherwise the deteiner may be accused of theft. And it
is lawful for the owner to challenge the beast within a year and day. Whereby
it appears, that in Scotland that is called a weife which we here call a
stray or estray.

Weald of Kent, is the wooddie part of the Country. Camden Britannia, page
247. M. Verstegan in his restitution of decayed intelligence says, that Wald,
Weald, and Would differing in vowell, signify one thing, to wit a Forest. See
the rest luera. W.

Wedding (Nuptiae) comes of the German (wed). i. pignus. and wedde in
Scotland signifies so much at this day. Skene de verborum signifi. verbo
Vadium.

Weigh (waga) is a certain weight of cheese or wool, containing 256. pounds
of avoyr de poyce. See Clove.

Weights (Pondera) what they be, it is wellknowne. There be 2. sorts of them in
use with us. The one called Troy weight, which contains 12. ounces in the
pound, and no more: by the which, pearl, precious stones, electuaries, and
medicinal things, gould, silver, and bread be waied: The other is called Aver
de pois, which contains 16. ounces in the pound. By this all other things are
waied, that pass between man and man by weight, saving only those above
named. why the one should be called Troy weight, I have not learned. though I
read it termed libram and vnciam Troianam: as if it came from Troy. But Georg.
Agricola in his learned tractate de ponderibus and mensuris pa. 339. terms
the pound of 12. ownces libram medicam, and the other of 16. ownces libram
ciuilem. saying thus of them both: Medica and ciuilis libra, numero non
grauitate vnciarum differunt. The second seems so to be termed by reason of
the more full weight. for (Avoir de pois) in French, isas much to say, as to
have full weight. But by these words (Avoir de pois) are some time signified
such marchandies as are bought and sold by this kind of weights. the first
statute of York anno 9. Ed. 3. in prooem. and anno 27. Ed. 3. stat. 2. ca. 10.
and ann. 24 H. 8. ca. 13. Of weights in Scotland. See Skene de verb: signif.
verbo Serplathe. All our weights and measures have their first composition from
the penny sterling which ought to weigh 32. wheat corns of a middle sort, twenty
of which pence make an ownce and twelve such ownces a pound or twenty
shillings, but 15. ownces make the Merchants pound. Fleta, li. 2. ca. 12. It is
not unlike that this merchants pound, though an ounce less, should be all one
in signification with the pound of auoir de pois: and the other pound, called
by Flata trone weight, plainly appears to be all one with that which we now
call trole weight. And I find not Troie weight mentioned by any other that
ever I read upon this subject, but only our own contry men. See Tronage.

Weights of Awncell, anno. 14. Ed. 3. stat. pri. c. 12. See Auncell weight.

Were, alias werre signifies as much as (Aestimatio capitis, aut pretiu^
hominis. M. Lam. exp. of Saxo^ words, verbo: Aestimatio. That is to say, so
much as one paid for killing of a man. Whereby he gathers that slaughters,
and such other great offenses, were more rarely committed in ancient times,
then now: when as for the multitude of offenders, death is most justly
inflicted for those crimes, that then were redressed by pecuniary mulcts. Of
this see Roger Houeden, part poster. suoruns annalium, in Henrico 2. fo. 344.

Weregelt thef. significat latronem quire dimi potest. wera enim anglice idem
est in Saxonis lingua, vel pretium vitae hominis appraetiatum. Fleta lib. 1.
ca. 47.

West Saxon lage, alias West sexenlage. See Law.

Wharfe (wharfa) is a broad plain place near to a Creek or hithe of the
water, to lay wares upon, that be brought to or from the water to be
transported to any other place. New book of Entries, fol. 3. col. 3.

Wharfinger, is the keeper of a wharfe, anno 7. Ed. 6. ca. 7.

White heart silver (Candidi Cerui argentum) is a tribute or mulct paid into the
Eschequer out of the Forest of white heart: which (as M. Camden reports in his
Britan. page 150.) has continued from Henry the thirds time, and was imposed
by him upon Thomas De-la-linde, for killing of a most beautiful heart, which
himself before had purposely spared in hunting.

Widow (vidua) seems to come of the French (vide. i. inanitus, exinanitus) or
the verb (vuider. i. inaniare) quasi priuata atque orba marito. Macrobius lib.
pri. saturn. ca. 15. draws it from the Hetruscan verb (Iduare. i. diuidere.
Vnde vidua quasi valde idua. i. valde diuisa: aut vidua. i. a viro diuisa. The
signification with us is apparent. But there is one kind of widow, called the
widow of the King, or the Kings widow (vidua Regis) that requires exposition.
And she is that widow, which after her husbands death being the Kings tenent
in capite, is driven to recover her Dower by a writ De dote assignanda. Of whom
you may read Stawnf: praerog. cap. 4. The words of the statute of the prarog:
made anno 17. Ed. 2. be these. Item assignabit viduis post mortem virorum
suorum, qui de co tenuerunt in capite, dotem suam, quae eas contingit, etc:
licet haeredes fuerint plenae aetatis, sividuae voluerint. Et viduae illae ante
assignationens dotis suae praedictae, five haeredes plenae aetatis fuerint,
sieve infra aetatem, iurabunt, quod se non maritabunt sine licentia Regis. Tunc
Rex capiet in manum suam nomine districtionis omnes terras, and tenementa, quae
de eo tenentur in dotem, donec satisfecerint ad voluptatem suam: ita quod ipsa
mulier nihil capiet de exitibus, etc. quia per huiusmodi districtiones
huiusmodi mulieres, seu viri little sinem facient Regiad voluptatem suam. Et
illae voluntas tempore Regis Henrici patris Regis Edwardi aestimari consueuit
ad valentiam praedictae dotis per vnum annum adplus nisi vlteriorem gratiam
habuerint. Mulieres, quae de Rege tenent in capite aliquam haereditatem,
iurabunt similiter, cuiuscunque fuerint aetatis, quod se non maritabunt sine
licentia Regis. Et sifecerint, ^errae and tenementa ipsarum eodent modo
ca(...)tur in manum De^ini Regis, (...)usque satisfecerint ad voluntatem Regis.
Of this see likewise the great charter cap. 7. whereby it appears that other
common Lords have the same power over their widows, touching their consent, in
their marriage, that the King has. Of this you may read more in the writ De
dote assignanda. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 263. C. See also the statute anno 32. H.
8. cap. 46.

Windelesor. a Herald. See Herald.

Withernam (vetitum Namium) Master Lamberd thinks to be compounded of
(wither. i. altera, sieve secundae) and (Nam. i. pignoris captio) marueiling
much why it should so far be depraved in the interpretation, as to be
translated (vetitum Namium.) Read him in the explication of Saxon words,
verbo, Pignorari. The concord of the thing signified with the meaning of the
Latin words, makes some to think, that it is compounded of (wehren. i.
veto,) and (nyman,) or nemmen. i. capio.) For withernam in our common law is
the taking, or driving a distress to a hold, or out of the county, so that
the Shyreeue cannot upon the repleuin make deliverance thereof to the party
distreined: In which case, the writ of Withernam, or de vetito Namio is
directed to the Shyreeue, for the taking of as many of his beasts that did thus
unlawfully distrein, or as much goods of his, into his keeping, till that he
has made deliverance of the first distress. Also if the beasts be in a
fortlet or castle, the Shyreeue may take with him the power of the county,
and beat down the castle, as it appears by the Statute. Westminster. pri. cap.
20. Britton. cap. 27. But M. Lamberds interpretation seems more consonant to
the writ, the form whereof is thus in part, (Fitz. not. br. fol. 73.) Tibi
praecipimus quod averia praedicti B. in Balliva tua capias in withernam, etc.
and the Register orig. fol. 82. and 83. and 79. a. and 80. a. and in the
Register Iudic. fol. 29 a. and 30. a. Whereby it appears, that the Shyreeue
by these words is willed to take in compensation of the former taking, so many
cattle, etc. But yet this may qualify M. Lamberds maruelling, because they
that translated this word into such Latin, seem to have been deceived by the
propinquitie of the word, (wehren) both to the word (withernam) and also to the
meaning. This error (if it be an error) has a probable likelihood of descent
from the Normans, as appears by the grand Custumarie. cap. 4. where you have
words to this effect: Deficientes (sc. Baliuos) facere iusticiari, and ca, de
quibus iudicium vel recordatio habet fieri in curia: debet (sc. Iusticiarius)
retrahere vel recitare. Treugam dari debet facere, quod est assecuratio pacis
observandae. Nampta unjust capta per ius facere liberari, etc. Here you may
see (nampta) referred to the first taking or distress, which is unlawful. Sir
Thomas Smith in his Repub. Anglor. agrees with M. Lamberd in these words: This
(withernam) he (meaning Litleton, with whom Bracton also agrees. lib. 2. cap.
5. and lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 36.) interprets vetitum Namium, in what
language I know not. Whereas in truth it is in plain Dutch, and in our old
Saxon language (wither nempt. i. alterum accipere, alterum rapere,) a word that
signifies all one with that barbarous Latin word, (Repraesalia) when one
taking of me a distress, which in Latin is called (pignus) or any other
thing, and carrying it away out of the Jurisdiction, where I dwell, I take by
order of him that has jurisdiction, another of him again, or of some other of
that Jurisdiction: and do bring it into the jurisdiction, wherein I dwell: that
by equal wrong I may come to have equal right, etc. Namatio animalium in
Scotland is used for the pounding of cattle, Skene de verbor. signif. verbo,
Averia: whom also read, verbo, Namare. Withernam in Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2.
cap. 37. and also in Westminster. 2. ca. 2. seems to signify an unlawful
distress, made by him that has no right to distreine. an. 13. Ed. prim. cap.
2. See the new book of Entries. verbo Withernam.

Woad, (glastum) is an herb brought from the parts of Tolouse in France, and
from Spayno, much used and very necessary in the dying of woollen cloth. an 7.
H. 8. cap. 2. we call it woad of the Italian word (guado) or the Germane word
(weidt.)

Woodgeld, seems to be the gathering or cutting of wood within the Forest, or
money paid for the same, to the use of the Foresters. And the immunitie from
this by the Kings grant, is by Crompton called Woodgeld. fol. 197.

Woodmen, seem to be those in the Forest, that have their charge especially to
look to the Kings woods. Manwood part pri. of his Forest laws page 193. and
Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 146.

Woodmote court, is the Attachment of the Forest. Manwood part pri. of his
Forest laws. page 95. See Attachment.

Woodward (Woodwardus) is an officer of the Forest, whose function you may
partly gather by his oath set down in Cromptons Iurisd. fol. 201. which M.
Manwood has also in his first part of his Forest laws page 50. to the same
effect, but something more at large. viz. You shall truly execute the office of
a woodward of B. woods within the Forest of W. so long as you shall be woodward
there: you shall not conceal any offense either in Vert or in Venison, that
shall be committed or done within your charge: but you shall truly present the
same, without any favor, affection or reward. And if you do see or know any
malefactors, or do find any Dear killed or hurt, you shall forthwith do the
verderour understand thereof. And you shall present the same at the next court
of the Forest: be it Swainmote, or court of Attachments, so help you God.
Woodwards may not walk with bow and shafts, but with Forest bills. Manwood
part pri. of his Forest laws page 189. and more of him page 97.

Wooldriuer, anno 2. and 3. Ph. and Ma. ca. 13. be those that buy wool abroad
in the country of the sheep masters, and carry it by horse back to the
clothyers or to market towns to sell it again.

Woolferthfod (Caput lupinum) is the condition of those, which were outlawed in
the Saxons time, for not yelding themselves to Justice. For if they could be
taken alive, they must have been brought to the King: and if they in fear of
apprehension did defend themselves they might be slain, and their heads
brought to the King. For they carried a woolues head, that is to say: their
head was noe more to be accoumpted of, then a woolues head, being a beast so
hurtful unto man. See the laws of K. Edw: set out by M. Lamberd fol. 127. b.
nu. 7. The very like whereof Bracton also says lib. 3. tract. 2. ca. 11. See
vtlarie. Roger Houeden writes it (Wuluesheued. part poster, suorum annalium
fol. 343. b.) whom read of this matter because you shall there see what it was
in those days to violate the peace of the church.

Woolstaple, anno 51. H. 3. stat. 5. See Staple.

Wool winders, be such as wind up every fleece of wool that is to be packed
and sold by weight, into a kind of bundle after it is cleansed in such manner
as it ought to be by statute. And to avoid such deceit as the owners were wont
to use by thrusting locks of refuse wool and such other dross to gain weight
they are sworn to perform that office truly between the owner and the
merchant. See the statute, anno 8. H. 6. cap. 22. and anno 23. H. 8. ca. 17.
and anno 18. Eliza. ca. 25.

Would. See Weald.

Wranglands, seem to be misgrowne trees that will never prove timber. Kitchen
fol. 169. b.

Wormseede (semen santonicum) is medicinal seed browght forth of that plant
which in Latin is called (Sementina) in English, holy wormwood, whereof you
may read in Gerards Herball li. 2. ca. 435. This is a drugge to be garbled,
anno 1. Jacob. cap. 19.

Wreck (wreccum vel wrectum maris) is the loss of a ship and the goods
therein contained by tempest, or other mischaunce at the sea. The Ciuilians
call it (Naufragium) This wreck being made, the goods that were in the ship,
being brought to land by the waves, belong to the king by his prerogative. And
thereupon in many books of our common law the very goods, so brought to land
are called wreck. And wreck is defined to be those goods which are so brought
to land. Sir Ed. Coke vol. 6. relatio, f. 106. a. and the statute anno 17. Ed.
2. ca. 11. in these words. Item Rex habebit wreccum maris, per totum Regnum,
ballenas, and sturgiones captas in mari vel alibi infra Regnum, exceptis
quibusdam locis privilegiatis per Regem. Whereby it appears that the King
has them, or such as have by grant this liberty or privilege of him. And
that this statute does but affirm the ancient law of the land, it appears
by Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 5. number. 7. hiis verbis: Suntetiam alia res quae
pertinent ad corona^ propter privilegium Regis, and it a communem non recipient
libertatem, quin dari possint, and ad alium transferi. Quia si transferantur,
translatio nulli erit damnosa, nisi ipsi Regi five principi. Et si huiusmods
res alicui concessae fuerint, sicut wreccum maris, etc. The reason of this he
touches shortly in his first book. cap. 12. number. 10. where he reckons these
goods (iure naturali) to be (in bonis nullius) quia non apparet Dominus eorum,
sed iure Gentium fieri principis: And see him also, lib. 2. cap. 24. number. 1.
and 2. It is worth the asking to know: what is a wreck, and what not in this
stricter signification. And the author of the terms of law says, that if any
person of the ship come to land, it is not a wreck, or the wreck is not such,
that the king ought to have the goods. with whom agrees S. Ed. Coke vol. 6.
f. 107. a. No, if either Dog or Catte escape alive to the land: the goods are
the owners still, so he come within a year, and day to claim them. And for
this the statute is plain Westminster. pri. ca. 4. anno 3. Edw. pri. which doctrine
Fitzh. in his not. br. fol. 112. (...) extends thus far, that if any of the
goods be cast upon the dry land by any in the ship, it is no wreck subject
to the prerogative, for by this some of the ship are presumed to come to
land, and still to have a custody of the goods. Cook vbi supra. This in the
Grand Custumarie of Normandy. cap. 17. is called (varech) and latined
(veriseum) where it appears that the like law to ours was in Normandy
almost in all points. But some sorts of their precious Merchandise do by their
law appertain to the Duke by his prerogative, though a just challenge of the
goods be made within the year and day. The Emperors of Rome made no advantage
of this pitiful event, as appears: titulo De Naufragiis 11. Cod. And it
appears that Richard the first had some remorse of poor sea men's miseries in
this case. For he quietum clamavit wreck suis subditis. Rog. Hoveden part
poster. suorum annal. fol. 386. Of this M. Skene de verb. signif. speaks to
this effect: wreck signifies a power, liberty, and prerogative appertaining to
the King, or to any person, to whom the same is granted by him by feofment,
or any other disposition, to take up and gain such goods as are ship broken,
or fall to him by escheate of the sea.

Writ, (breue) is that with our common lawyers (in Sir Tho. Smiths judgment
lib. 2. de Repub. Anglorum. cap. 9.) which the Civilians call (Actionem, sieve
formulam) But I am rather of his judgment, that has added the marginall note
unto him, saying that (Actio) is the parties whole suite: and that (Breue) is
the kings precept, whereby any thing is commanded to be done touching the suite
or action: as the defendant or tenent to be summoned, a distress to be taken,
a disseisin to be redressed, etc. And these writs are diversely divided, in
diverse respects. Some in respect of their order, or manner of granting, are
termed original, and some Judicial. Original writs be those, that are sent
out for the summoning of the Defendant in a personal, or Tenent in a real
action, or other like purpose, before the suite begins, or to begin the
suite thereby Those be judicial, that be sent out by order of the court, where
the cause depends, upon occasion growing after suite begun. old. not. br.
fol. 51. And Judicial is thus by one sign known from the Original, because
the Test bears the name of the chief Justice of that Court whence it
comes, where the Orig. bears in the Test the name of the Prince. Then
according to the nature of the action, they be personal or real: and real be
either touching the possession, called writs of Entry, or the property, called
writs of right. Fitzh. not. br. sparsim per totum. Some writs be at the suite
of a party, some of office. old. not. br. fol. 147. Some ordinary, some of
privilege. A writ of privilege is that which a privileged person brings to
the court, for his exemption, by reason of some privilege. See Pro cedendo.
See the new book of Entrise. verbo. privilege. See Brief.

Writ of rebellion. See Commission of rebellion.

Writer of the talies (Scriptor talliarum) is an officer in the Exchequer being
clerk to the auditour of the receipt, who writes upon the talies the whole
letters of the tellers bills.

Y
YArd land (Virgataterrae) is a quantity of land called by this name of the
Saxon (Gyrdlander (but not so certain a quantity, as that it is all one in all
places. For in some country it contains 20. acres: in some 24. in some 30. as
M. Lamb. says in his explication of Saxon words: verbo virgata terrae. This
yard land Bracton calls (virgatam terrae. lib. 2. cap. 20. and 27.) but he
expresses no certainty what it contains.

Year and day (annus and dies) is a time thought in construction of our common
law fit in many cases to determine a right in one, and to work an vsucapion
or prescription in another. As in a case of an estray, if the owner
(proclamations being made) challenge it not within that time, it is forfeit. So
is the year and day given in case of appeal, in case of descent after entry
or claim; of no claim upon a fine or writ of right at the common law: so of
a villein remaining in ancient demean, of the death of a man sore bruised or
wounded: of protections; essoines in respect of the Kings service: of a wreck,
and diverse other cases Coke. vol. 6. fol. 107. b. And that touching the death
of a man seems an imitation of the civil law. Nam si mortifere fuerit
vulneratus, and postea post lon. gum intervallum mortuus sit, inde annum
numerabimus secundum ^ulianum. l. ait lex. P. ad lege^ Aquil.

Year, day, and waste, (annus dies, and vastum) is a part of the Kings
prerogative, whereby he challenges the profits of their lands and tenements
for a year, and a day, that are attainted of petit treason or felony,
whosoever be Lord of the manner, whereunto the lands or tenements do belong, and
not only so, but in the end wastes the tenement, destroys the houses,
rooteth up the woods, gardens, pastures, and ploweth up meadows, except the
Lord of the fee agree with him for the redemption of such waste, afterward
restoring it to the Lord of the fee. Whereof you may read at large in Stawnf.
praerog. cap. 16. fol. 44. and seqq.

Yoman, seems to be one word made by contraction of two Danish words (young
men) which I gather out of Canutus Charter of the Forest set out by M. Manwood
part prim. fol. prim. number. 2. in these words: Sunt sub quolibet horum quatuor
ex mediocribus hominibus, quos Angli (Legespend) nuncupant, Dani vero (young
men) vocant, locati, qui curam and onus tum viridis tum veneris suscipiant.
These M. Camden in his Britan. page 105. places next in order to Gentlemen,
calling them (Ingenuos) whose opinion the statute affirms, anno 16. R. 2.
cap. 4. whereunto add the statute anno 20. eiusdem Regis cap. 2. Sir Thomas
Smith in his Repub. Anglor. lib. prim. cap. 23. calls him a Yoman, whom our
laws call legalem hominem: which (as he says) is in English a Free man borne,
that may dispend of his own free land, in yearly reuenew, to the sum of
forty shillings sterling. Of these he writes a good large discourse, touching
their estate and use in this common wealth. The former etymology of the name
he likes not, making question whether it come of the Dutch (yonker) yea or
not, which in the Low countries signifies a mean Gentleman, or a gay fellow.
But he that has added the marginall notes to that book, seems to draw it
from the Saxon (Geman) which signifies a married man. M. Versteg an in his
restitution of decayed intelligence, cap. 10. writes, that (Gemen) among the
ancient Teutonicks, and (Gemein) among the modern, signifies as much, as
Common, and that the first leter G. is in this word, as in many others, turned
into Y. and so written Yemen, and that therefore Yemen, or Yeomen signifies so
much as Commoner. Yoman signifies an Officer in the Kings house, which is in
the middle place between the Serge ant and the Groom: as Yoman of the
Chaundrie, and Yoman of the Scullerie. anno 33. H. 8. cap. 12. Yoman of the
Crown. anno 3. Ed. 4. cap. 5. and anno 22. eius. cap. 1. and anno 4. H. 7.
cap. 7. This word (Yongmen) is used for Yomen in the statute. anno 33. H. 8.
cap. 10.

(...)
FINIS.

