A Modest and reasonable examination, of some things in use in the Church of
England, sundry times heretofore misliked, and now lately, in a Book called
the ( Plea of the Innocent:) and an Assertion for true and Christian Church
policy, made for a full satisfaction to all those, that are of judgment, and
not possessed with a prejudice against this present Church Government, wherein
the principal points are fully, and peaceably answered, which seem to be
offensive in the Ecclesiastical State of this Kingdom.

The Contents whereof are set down in the Page following.

By William Couell, Doctor of Divinity.

Eccles. Chap. 3.1. The children of wisdom are the Church of the righteous,
and their offspring is obedience, and love.

AT LONDON, Printed by Humfrey Lownes for Clement Knight, and are to be sold
at his shop at the Sign of the holy Lamb in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1604.

The Contents of this Book.
Chap. 1 KIngs and Princes have authority, and ought to have care, for the
Church government. page. 1 2 The Church visible of all other Societies is
fittest to have a Discipline, but never the same that some men desire. page. 13
3 The Censure of a book called The Plea of the Innocent. pa. 25 4 The
proceeding of the Reformers wholly unlawful. page 32 5 Of Contention. page 46
6 Of Ceremonies. page 55 7 Of Subscription. page 75 8 Of Discipline. page 94 9
Of Archbishops and Bishops. page 103 10 Of Ministers, their Office, and
learning. page 124 11 Of the maintenance of Ministers, and of Tithes. page 142
12 Of Non Residencie, Pluralities, and Dispensations. page 159 13 Of public
prayer, and of the defectes supposed to be in the Liturgy of the Church of
England. page 174 14 Of Tolleration of diverse Religions, and how far
dissenting opinions from the true Christian faith, may and ought to be
permitted in one and the same Kingdom. page 196 15 An humble conclusion to his
sacred Majesty and the Right Honorable Lords of his Highness privy Council,
together with the rest whom it may concern to defend this Church. page. 206
Deo omnis Potestas and Gloria.
To the Right Honorable and most Reverend father in God etc. my very good
Lord, the Lord Bishop of LONDON. ()
THe word (Right honorable) is in great travel with much evil, and when she
shall be delivered he only knows who measures al times with his hand, and
before whose eye lies open that bottomless aeternitie it self. The faces of
Kingdoms and States according to the prosperity and adversity of the Church
amongst them sometimes look heavily and sometimes cheerfully as refreshed
with more good. Man whose Reason and Religion serves to number these things
feels in himself a true divinity manifested by that pure ambition of being
greater than he yet can be; whilst notwithstanding in the sense and fear of
these things he stoopeth as to a burden that is too heau^e. Religious and
mature wisdom (the safest builders of true greatness) assures men in
providence to prevent the worst things or at least by foresight growing
familiar with the^ teaches how to bear them with much patience; few
Kingdoms there are which have not either more scarres in the Church not fully
cured or else greater signs of greater ensuing evils than our own. I am loath
to be thought to flatter (a fault whereunto I am not usually subject and a
thing needless, being the greatest hatred from the greatest love which every
bears to himself;) but I may say truly, and I doubt not but what I say the
world thinks, the greatest part of this good (next our dread Sovereign) is
now (without envy be it spoken) your own. The consideration whereof has
made me out of that infinite love and duty which I owe to his Grace being dead,
and your Honor yet alive to dedicate these labors to you both, The late Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury.
in the defense of that Church, which truth, experience, and her adversaries
have proved (for government) the most absolute since the Apostles time. That it
is undertaken by me is the greatest disadvantage to this cause; that it is
continued and daily receives strength from authority is amongst infinite
blessings the greatest and most unspeakable of this Church. I have dealt (as
your Honor well knows) in this cause with a threefolde disadvantage, one,
that it has so fully been handled by so many of great learning heretofore, so
that at this time a defense was rather requisite to tell those that hope for
alteration that our Church is still of the same judgment, and spoke not
heretofore only to please that State; a second is, that the things disliked
are not differences of any great learning, seeing we deal with adversaries
whose chiefest hope depends upon the allowance of unlearned followers; so
that Demonstrations of reason are more requisite than proofs from authority.
Last of all, they are a generation apt and skillful to speak evil, I have
carefully and according to my natural disposition avoided all occasion that
might provoke them to it, yet I look for no other, neither by the grace of God
(so that this pains may benefit the Church) do I much care; the strongest
tyrant of things and men is fancy; the truest governor Religion, hallowed
follies when they are unmasked are but at the best the weak opinions of simple
men; of whom (notwithstanding) if they had learned humility and obedience,
this Church might have much use; your Lordship is (besides that particular duty
and thankfulness which I owe unto you) executor of his Testament and
Inheritour of his virtues that was the true owner and possessor of these
labors; which if it please your Honor to accept with their unworthy Author
into your more private and inward affection, It shall be my happiness to be
your servant and their credit by your Lordships means to do service to this
Church. Thus in the assurance of this hope craving pardon for my boldness, I
humbly take my leave: desiring God to bless you with all Graces fit for so
high a place, and with contentment and long life to my singular comfort, and
the especial benefit of this Church. May 27. 1604.

Your Lordships in all duty* WILLIAM COVELL.

To the Christian Reader.
IF the immoderate desire of reformation in some men had not extended it self
further than either Religion or reason would well permit, and especially at that
time when thankfulness exacted from us all something like a Sabbath for that
blessed Rest continued to this Church by the means of our dread Sovereign
this cause and some others not yet published had with their unworthy authors
slept in a long and a charitable silence, and whereas the miraculous blessings
bestowed and continued upon this land could no otherwise rightly be understood,
than the true effects of that Church which was planted in it (seeing as S.
Ambrose says: Haec est charitas expectanda, haec est charitas mayor imperio,
si fides tuta sit qu^ seruat imperium. Ambrose. ep. 31. ad Valentinianu^. The
Assertion for Church policy.
That is Charity to be expected, that is Charity greater than the Empire, if
that faith be inuiolate which preserves the Empire.) I thought it unfit to
let these men understand that the peace of this Church was little beholding to
their pains, who in the midst of an universal joy sounded a seditious
Alarm to a second war which as it could be no less than inconsiderate Zeal
in some of the Tribe of Leui to draw their swords against their Reverend
Religious Fathers as if with Aaron they had been guilty of erecting a Golden
Calfe; so we hope, in the opinion of the most severe, our defense shall neither
be thought needless, nor out of season; wherein peradventure our labor is of
less use, because we encounter in particular men of no great authority in
this Church, whom our directions were first to have answered in another manner,
but finding that to follow their steps had been only but to tread often in
the same paths which were wearisome in themselves and could have brought
little advantage to this public cause, we rather resolved (having the
approbation of authority to give allowance) to defend a necessary, weighty,
^ighteous and public Church government, than only to reprove and confute some
particular obscure, and private men; for accusing gains not that admittance
in the ears of indifferent Readers, which defending does, and herein I may
safely protest I looked at no other scope in the labor and cost of this
unpleasing employment than the discharge of my particular duty, and the
performance of that service which I owed unto this Church, and yet if I had
known which I understand since that some more of Master Hookers works had been
recovered from the injury of men and time once again to speak in the defense
of this truth, I would most willingly have observed the praecept of the Son
of Sirach: Thou that art young speak if need be, and yet scarcely when thou art
twice asked: Eccles. 32.
for the same things (but who is able to speak the same things that he did?)
being spoken by diverse are not the same, and for my self if any man think
this defense a presumption, I may boldly say as E^^u did, Job. 32.
Behold I did wait upon the words of the ancient and hearkened to their
knowledge. But seeing we are children of that Church whose prosperity was
envied and peace hindered by the adversaries of this cause, we could not but
let them understand that the voices of Angels, of men and of time and all
against them; and if we were in the comparison of them (as they bo^st of
number) but like the children of Ruben and the children of Gad, and the Tribe
of Manasses in respect of all Israel besides, yet if they will needs send us
a message by Phyneas the son of Eleazar and ten Princes with him saying:
Joshua. 22.16.17.
What transgression is this that ye have transgressed against the God of
Israel to turn away this day from the Lord in that ye have built you an Altar
for to rebel this day against the Lord? Have we too little for the
wickedness of Peor whereof we are not cleansed this day though a plague came
upon the congregation of the Lord? We must answer them as they did: The Lord
God of Gods, the Lord God of Gods he knows, Verse. 22.
and Israel himself shall know, if by rebellion or by transgression against
the Lord we have done it, save thou us not this day. If we have built us an
Altar to return away from the Lord either to offer burnt offerings or meat
offerings, or to offer peace offerings thereon, let the Lord himself require
it. And if we have not rather done it for fear of this thing, etc. unto verse.
30. We hope they will give us leave if their Zeal make them jealous of any
thing used or admitted in our Church, to tell them that these are witnesses
betwixt them and us. etc. Between our forefathers, and our generations after
us to execute the service of the Lord before him, Apud Christianos non qui
patitur, sed qui facit contumelians miser est. Hier. Vi^t qui patitur. In bona
consc^entiateneo, quisguis volens detra^it fame meae, nolens addi^ merced^
meae. Ne aestimet quis plus ponderis esse in alienoconuitio quam in testimoni^
suo. Ambrose.
in our Lyturgie, in our prayers, in our Sacraments, and that neither their
children, nor the children of any Idolatrous Church should say to our children
in time to come, Ye have no part in the Lord: and if for all this they cease
not the heap reproaches upon that Church, whose absolute government they ought
with thankfulness to embrace, and with love to honor, we must tell them as
Saint Hierom does that amongst Christians not he that suffers, but he that
offers reproach is wretched. Wherein surely of all that ever labored in this
cause, he endured most, and with most patience, whom virtue crowned with much
Honor in this life, and according to his own prophetical word (overcame
whilst he suffered) and now triumphs. And for my self (Gentle Reader) I
resolve humbly to endure whatsoever it pleases the usual impatience of their
fury to lay upon me, saying with Saint Austen, In a good conscience I speak
it, He that willingly does detract from my good name unwillingly does add to
my reward. For I lay with Saint Ambrose, Let no man think that there is more
weight in the slander of another, than in the testimony of his own
conscience. Farewell.

CHAP. 1. Kings and Princes have Authority, and ought to have care for the
Church government.
WWhere right has no other advantage but Fortune, and Weakness has got
strength from opinion of Zeal, there it is no less safe to maintain error,
than amongst better dispositions to defend a truth. The Circle of time, the
best discouerer of men's secret ends (and not the least, nor the least violent
circumstance over the means) must at length make known to the weakest eye that
is able to discern least, who have been thought wicked and profane in
humility for maintayning a truth; and who proudly have been opposites to this
end, that being ignorant and dishonest, they might be thought to be learned,
and seem righteous. As there is not any one action since the time that this
Land first embraced true Religion, wherein more violent and unnatural
dispositions, have discovered themselves, than in, and for the Church
government; so is there nothing wherein the Wisdom, Virtue, and Souereigntie
of Kings, does and ought more to appear, than in the well ordering of that
Society, where unto the most usual and greatest harms have commonly
proceeded from too much Zeal: For that which man once apprehends as virtuous
to be done without great judgment and moderation, he seldom tempereth
himself from doing it either ouer-eagerly, or overmuch. This as it swayeth
with Inferior persons, (who for the most part have no easier and speedier
means to become eminent) so it is hardly tempered in those Princes being
eminent already, whose virtuous education has made them religious; this being
in one action to the people, the best assurance they can expect; for
themselves, the best testimony of a good conscience; and toward God, a
demeanor least unthankful for any strange or miraculous deliverance that
they have received. All these being made stronger, when a new people are become
subjects; when all men are disposed to give strength to their hopes; and make
collection from Signs; and when deliverances are seconded by the peaceable and
happy access of a greater Kingdom. So that in this case (unless to a mind
that has no Religion at all) it shall be much harder to persuade a moderation
than too little. For with righteous Kings, and of understanding, as nothing is
dearer than Religion; so in nothing they employ their labor and authority
more willingly, than for the preservation, and honoring of the Church it
self; all kingdoms having no other safety but this, Their prosperity to
flourish for no longer time, than the prosperity of the Church is maintained
among est them. This being by all observation the truest sign of a decaying
Kingdom, To have a Clergy unhallowed, and the Church vnhonoured. But whilst
all men are careful that the Church may be well governed, every man
obtrudeth his own fancy, and likes best of those Rules, which have nearest
affinity with his own brain. Hence comes it to pass, that some men are
not fully resolved, to whom especially belongs the Authority to prescribe
(with warr^nt) the direct form of the Church gonernment. Other offices for the
attainment of this end (as to instruct, and to advise) may in all reason, to
make the burden of government both more virtuous and more easy, belong unto
other men; But to provide for the safety of the Church, for the public
enjoying of the Word of God, for the manner of government, for the maintenance
of the Clergy, all these ( in a strict understanding) are the religious
duties, and the honorable effects of the King, so that what authority is
derived unto any, ^yther in a blind and false obedience to the Sea of Rome, or
through a partial affection to a new Consistory, are both (if not equal) yet
equally usurpers of the Kings right. Nay whilst some of late have been
earnest, though ignonorant refusers of Subscription, they hane showed in their
actions, how uncharitably they have thought of their late Souereigns sincere
Religion. For to mislike the book of Orders is indirectly to affirm that we
have no ministry (which some impudently shameless have dared to affirm
plainly:) not to subscribe to the Book of Common Prayer, is to teach that we
have no form of Church Liturgye: And lastly, to refuse to subscribe to the
Articles of Faith, is to make men believe, that our Church maintains unsound
doctrine. This as it was alleged once by a Reverend bishop in a Sermon, so it
is an accusation not yet cleared by any that I know; By Ios^^s Nichols in the
Plea of the Innocent. Page 135.
by one it is slubbered over unhandsomely, making the Objection stronger than
himself was able to answer truly: but this we shall have better occasion to
confute hereafter. And it is too plain what opinion they had of Her Religion
(living) whom so boldly they dare deprave being once dead: But flattery looks
no further, than either to escape punishment, or receive a benefit; so that
when the one is past fear, and the other past hope, we dare then speak what
we think, and more irreverently oftentimes of the same party being a Saint
in Heaven, than we durst being a Prince in earth. It were fit all men
considered (but especially Kings, whose authority it does secretly undermine)
how far the admission of a Consistoriall Government in a kingdom may
suddenly usurp upon that right which Scripture, and Laws have ascribed to the
King. That Kings ought to have rule in all causes, ouerall persons, as it is
warranted by the word, so it is confirmed to the Princes of this Land by Act of
Parliament. This gives unto them Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Government,
Exempteth from Inforcement of any Domestical or foreign power, and freeth
them from the penalty of those laws, both Ecclesiastical and Civil,
whereunto all inferior persons in a Kingdom are tied. And howsoever sins in
Princes ought to be reproved, and rights of Claim may be recovered against
Kings, yet in nothing are they liable to penal laws, much less subject to
the Jurisdiction of Elders, or Excommunication of this Tyrannous Consistory.
Unhallowed blouldnesses attempted in other Kingdoms, and Imperionsly affected
and urged by some amongst us, nay the power to call Synods (an Authority by
Parliament granted unto the Prince) some violent spirits have attempted with
that boldness, as if those only were Laws, which were warranted by this
Consistory, (Princes being but to Execute what they appoint them out of Gods
word,) whereof notwithstanding themselves must be only Judges. Thus whilst the
Prince, warranted by his own Law, (which is the public Act of his whole
people) gave Authority to some grave Commissioners for Reformation of
Ecclesiastical disorders, They deny that any such ought to be appointed
Judges and often both in private and public, depraved that honorable and high
Commission; a thing, as it is unseemly for them to control, so if our late
Sovereign in great Wisdom, and care of the Church, had not given it
authority and strength, the bolddnesse of a great number, pretending a Zeal,
had grown to be so strong, that in all appearance, There had been little
likelihood of safety to the Queen her self. And seeing all attempts are most
violent, that have their beginning and strength from a Zeal to Religion, be
it never so false; there can be nothing (doubtless) of greater use, either for
the safety of the Prince, the peace of the Church, or the quiet of the
Commonwealth, than the severe and Reverend authority of this high Commission;
without which assuredly long since we had miserably tasted of all those
euilles, which uncontrolled ignorance, Hypocrisy, and cruelty cculd have
brought amongst us. It is small reason Princes should give ear unto these
plots, which leave them naked without means to defend themselves, or their
Subjects in the time of danger; nay, those of the honorable and high Court of
Parliament, are to think themselves (and I doubt not but will) injured by
such, who have taken from them on of the three States (a State not of the least
wisdom and gravity) and from them all that Authority, which they ascribe to
a number of ignorant and silly Artificers (for such some Consistories must
needs be) and guided by a youth sometimes, neither of wisdom nor
understanding. It is miserable where men are ruled by no laws, seeing nothing
is in man of greater danger, (unlimited) than his own will, which imperiously
commands over his fancy, that is able to corrupt and pervert all Rules of
order. Thus they interpret Tell the Church, tell the Consistory; Which
because John Morrell did expound otherwise, himself was excommunicated and his
Book burnt: there is nothing more vsull, than their pleasures to become Laws;
(A thing peradventure men may affect, which either desire Change, or do hate
government, (but doubtless in it self Tyrannous and insufferable, and so much
the more odious and dangerous, by how much the Rulers are base, there
government less equal, and once admitted, not easy to be shaked of. In on
word, There is nothing in the Laws of this whole Land, (nay not in the
possession of any private person) safe, if this Consistoriall Government may
take place; the benefit whereof as they magnify (little weighing those yet
unexperienced Evils which must needs follow;) so the harms of it are at large
set down by diverse others, who with learning and judgment have labored in this
point. There is doublesse no Society deerer unto God than his Church; in the
government whereof he has made choice of two sorts of men to be employed under
him; The first are Ministers of his word, and Sacraments, whose calling is
perpetual and necessary in the Church; for so long as the Church is in this
world, it cannot possible be continued without these: of wihch we shall more
fitly speak hereafter. The other are Kings and Magistrates: whom to the happy
estate of the Church, we hold with all reverence, of such use, that those are
worst that mislike their government, and that Church (in all reason) like to be
most happy, which God, in his mercy, has blessed with the best King. This
appears in the Kings of Judah, who being virtuous, Religion (that was decayed)
was restored, and what the Idolatry of others had corrupted, the vprightnes of
some which followed did purify again; God in his love performing that promise
unto his Church, that Kings should be her Nursings-fathers, and Queens her
Nursing-mothers. In this respect (more specially than others) they are called
Gods servants; not only because they serve him in the government of the
commonwealth (a thing common with them and the worst Princes) but because he
vouchsafes to use their means, as the fittest Instruments to advance his
Church upon earth. And surely a double service God expects from them; the one
Common with all Christians; the other peculiar, to serve him in that place as
Kings and Princes. To have performed the first is an action of praise and may
give great hope; but to fail in the second, is staynd with reproach, and
usually accompained with much danger: Evil Princes serving oftentimes to Act
but the ruins of that Kingdom by the fall of the Church, in whose misery
themselves for the most part do perish. In the first duty (as Christians) they
are not privileged above other men, they are tied to same obedience, bound to
as many virtues (nay more for example) and must in the end (being called to the
same account) be judged with as much seuerite as the meanest subject. Be wise
now therefore, O ye Kings, be learned ye that are Judges of the Earth. Psalm.
2.10.
Serve the lord with fear and rejoice unto him with Reverence: In the latter
the service of Princes has two parts, the one concerning the Commonwealth, the
other Religion, and the Church: to the first they are tied as Kings; to the
latter they are bound, as they are virtuous, and Religious Kings. The first in
doing mercy, and judgment, in defending the fatherless and poor, in seeing
that such as be in need and necessity have right, in bestowing duly
punishment, and reward; and in all those other polliticke virtues, Romans 13.1.
Pet, 2.
they are happy Instruments, to make a prosperous and flourishing Commonwealth;
The second concerns his Religion; a duty, as it lies upon all (for all ought
to be Religious) so especielly upon the Prince, who must not only be, but be
the means to make all other to become Religious: a thing, though not ever true
under virtuous Kings (whose holy examples sometimes prevail no farther but to
make Hypocrites) but seldom, or never, to be expected, where the Princes
themselves delight to seem openly profane. If man had no other light but the
light of Nature, and would not so willingly believe what were done with, as
without the Scripture; yet even this point will appear to be most true, being
the practice of those men, who had no other guide for their Actions, than the
unchangeable directions of the light of Nature; for whatsoever the Religion
was, (as in most it was nothing but Idolatrous Superstition;) yet the
transgression thereof was esteemed worthy to receive punishment, and the
appointment of this punishment was thought to be peculiar to those, who had
principal authority to govern the Comonwealth. Thus the Athenian took upon
the^ the power to condemn Socrates (a man peradventure wiser tha^ any of the
rest) but faulty (as they thought) in Religion, and therefore to be censured by
the Authority which they al had. The like we read of the Romans. Tyberius
would make Christ a God without the authority of the Senate (where though the Act
was needles, and to Christ little honor;) yet it shows that both the care of
Religion belonged to the Roman Emperor, and that men (even Heathe^s) were not
hastily carried to perform any actio^ of that nature, without the advice of
others judgment: neither ever the Apostles or Prophets reprehe^d this care in
the Rulers in any age. It was easy to err what Religion was, but all men saw
to whom the care did principally belong; neither should any man deserve
commendation for performing that which were wholly exempted from the limits of
his own calling. But al Antiquiti^ has given in this kind, honorable
Testimony to Constantine and Theodosius, two Emperors of much virtue. Nay
Religi^n it self, which gives the best Rules to preserve Religion, being
contained in the Two Tables, expressly commands, who ought to be the ouerseer,
the keeper and preserver of both. Inwardly the strongest mo^tiue is Religion,
and they are most (for the most part) Religious, who are Religious for
conscience; but there is a fear from the hand of the Maiestrate, able to
restrain those (at least from outward being evil) whom neither Conscience,
nor Religion could make honest. Christian Emperors have with their Zeal
gained much honor for this in the eye and Judgment of Gods Church. This made
them when contentions arose, to call Counsels as that of Nice, Constantinople,
Ephesus, Chalcedon to purge the Temples both from Heathenish Idolatry, and
Christian superstition; to make laws, the better to keep men in obedience
toward God; the irreligious contempt of whose worship (though in the
Subjects themselves) have brough a just ruin, even for not forbidding, both
upon the Prince and the Commonwealth. Reason then, which tyeth Princes to
procure the prosperity of that land, over which they govern, exacteth from
them a principal care of the Church, and of Religion, the decay and the
contempt whereof, are the original causes of pestilence, dearthes, wares, and
such like. For where humors are infected a little, it is like that the manners
are first distempered a great deal, the most of the Fathers are plentiful in
this point. This made Saint Austine, learnedly to confute the Donatists whose
Haerecy was like the error of some in our days, holding that Princes ought to
permit every man to enjoy, what Religion he likes, and to persecute no man for
Religion at all; this serves to confute the two great Errors of our time; the
one of the Anabaptists, the other of the Church of Rome; The first holding it
unlawful for a Christian to be a Magistrate, much less to use his authority
in matters that concern Religion; the other that the care of Princes to
maintain Religion, ought only to be with these word; but to confute errors, to
reform Churches, to call Synods, These they think to be peculiar to the Pope
himself. The contrary to both these, we are taugh by Scriptures, by History,
by Fathers, and by Testimony of some of the Popes themselves; who have
earnestly entreated the Christian Emperors to call Councels. This then being
in the opinion of all that are of sound judgment, both the greatest care and
honor to a Christian prince, let us consider a little those points that are
absolutely requisite for the Religious performing of this duty; the person whom
we call the Prince, is he that has supreme authority according to the
form of that kingdom wherein he rules. In humane actions that they may be
performed aright, it is requisite, that we are willing, that we have knowledge,
that we have power; with out the first our knowledge and ability do want
motion; without the second our motion and ability shall want skill; without the
third our motion and skill shall want strength. The first is an inestimable
benefit bestowed upon religious princes from the powerful Author of all
piety; in this respect all men are bound to commend them to God more
especially in their prayers, assuring our selves, that unless we or they
fail, he that has given them to will shall inhable them at length to
perform it likewise. The best assurance to discern the Author of this will, is
the considerations of the ends which are only two; Gods glory, and the good of
others, which being not the scope of their actio^, it is no more possible that
God should be the Author of that will, than that goodness is possible to be
the Author of much evil; Ends of doing which lie in the heart of man, and are
only discerned by God himself, are the true discouerers what is the original
fountain of that we do. For the same things are not always of the same
nature, though the manner of performing be all one, if the ends be diverse. The
second thing is knowledge, not of much less necessity than the former, whereby
he may be truly assured, what things are unfit, and what are warrantable to
be reformed; neither this only in general, and by others, but if it be
possible in every particular, and of himself; A happiness wheresoever it is,
neither least worth, nor least power, to make happy both the Church, and
Commonwealth. This only was thought to bring greatness, and ruin, both at once
into the Church of Rome; whilst Emperors being busied with other affairs, left
the government to the Bishops; the Bishops to the Suffragans; these to the
Monks; whose authority and knowledge, being much less, all things were ruled,
with greater corruption and less truth. To auod this, Moses, commands the
Princes, day and night to be exercised in reading the holy Scripture; next, to
have those about the^ who are learned, and honest; it is a maime to a Prince to
be assisted by any that do want either. For to be learned without Zeal, is to
make advantage to themselves by a public loss, and to be Zealous without
skill, is to counsel oftentimes to matters that do much hurt. As the former
makes a King commonly to be over dissolute, so these other do make him to be
too rigorous; it is a memorable example of Ioas the King of Judah, whilst he had
Ieboida the priest assista^t to him, al things happily succeeded to him, and to
his whole Realm; but with his death (the King being destitute of such) all
things as speedily came to great ruin. To further the Kings knowledge, it is a
means neither of least honor nor use to call Synods, of those Churches that
embrace the truth; and in them to asemble men of best learning, moderation, and
least partial, whose consultatio^ (for disputation is a means both to
conte^tious and insolent to find a truth) may serve for resolution of such
points, as weakness in humility would be glad to learn. It is lost labor in
any, and far unbefitting the honor of Kings, to undertake with Curiosity
and pride to get knowledge, seeing the one is not desirous to learn, and the
other desirous for to learn too much. This has bin the Care of all religious
Emperors; Constantine the great, in the case of Arrius called the Council of
Nice. Thus Theodosius the great, in the case of Nestorius, the Council of
Ephesus, Valentinian and Martian, the Council of Chalcedon against Eutiches,
Justinian the Council of Constantinople, against Seuerus, the Patriarch of
Antioch which renewed the error of Eutyches, Constantine the fifth, The sixth
Synod against the Monothelyts, George the Patriarch of Constantinople,
Macharius the Patriarch of Antioch, and their followers: the third thing is
ability which shall easily receive greatest strength from hence, if all lesser
differeces removed, a perfect concord and agreement be made with those of the
same Religion. If Israel and Judah be at variance, both shall be carried into
Captivity; the one into Assyria, the other into Babylon. Thus the Eternal
power punishes our pride, the fountain of our dissension with captivity, to
learn us amity, and friendship in a strange land; Oh that Jerusalem were built
as a City at unity in it self! If any man yet doubt of the authority of kings
in Ecclesiastical causes, and over such persons; let them know that in^ al
ages, with good warrant, Princes have displaced and judged men of the Church;
as Religion, reason, and desert have moved them. Solomon displaced Abyathar,
and placed Zadock; Theodosius, and Valentinian, made a decree that those which
were infected with the impiety of Nestorius, should be deposed. Justinian is
commended for deposing Silueirus and Vigilius; Jeremy his case was heard of the
Princes; Cecilian and Athanasius being wronged, Ier. 26.
appealed to Constantine: seeing the^ this cloud of witnesses against the^, let
the^ hereafter not so irreverently (as some have done) account those persons
Bauds to al manner of sins in Princes, T.C. in his second reply.
who maintain the^ to be free from excommunication; neither need they to fear
(as some of them say) tha^ this opinion proceeds from a worse cause than from
simple error. But the boldness of some to excommunicate the Prince at their
pleasure, has both given encouragement, to seek alteration without reverence,
and pere^ptorily to call that reformation, which is but their own fancies;
hereunto I might add which is observed by others, that this Consistory takes
appeals, D. Sutcliffe.
or the right of redress for all wrongs, offered in Ecclesiastical Courts,
from the power of the Prince, for they themselves sitting in Christ's Tribunal
seat, it can be neither lawful, nor warrantable, to appeal from them; besides
the law gives unto the Prince the Nomiuation of Bishops, and some other
Elective dignities in the Church: the custody of Bishops Temporalties, during
the vacation; And patronage paramo^t, or right to present by the last lapse:
but these give election of Church Offices to their Consistories, and people,
and would divide all livings among their Elders and Decons, whom they appoint
to be paymasters of their Pastors, if either I charge them with untruth, or any
indifferent understanding can think this not danngerous to the Church and the
Commonwealth, let their petitions have success; their complaints have
audience; their cause find favor: and in that one Act, let Religion, the
Prince, peace, and all utterly perish. I omit first fruits, Tenthes,
subsides, co^tributions of Ecclesiastical persons, all which are granted by
the laws unto the Prince of this Land, all which by the^ are accounted
sacrilege and robbery, and left wholly to the disposition of their polliticke
Consistory; and where as (as we shall have occasion to handle heareafter)
some special men in particular cases, both in equity, and conscience, are to
be exemted by privilege, In their Eccles. dis.
from those laws that do bind all, (a power only reserved to the Prince
himself,) These hold all dispensations unlawful, and howsoever they favor
it in themselves, no less than superstitious, and Antichristian, in others. A
thing doubtless of much use, and great necessity in all kingdoms, and of no
danger at all, where the King is virtuous. Whilst the true conseque^ts of
their false opinions, have taught the world that these and such like
derogations of the Kings authority, have been maintained in that unlearned
School, they labor to make all men believe that Princes have not more honest
Religious and loyal Subjects than they are; A thing surely by experience never
to be found, so long as they have entered, under pretense of Religion to
become abbaters and disposers of the Kings Revenues; as if he that were
governor of the Church and the Commonwealth, were bound in duty by power and
reuenewe but to have care of the Church only; a Diminution of all greatness is
affected by the^, that by the disposition of that which they esteem to be the
superfluity of all States, necessary defenses, and moderate Ornaments may all
fail to make them rich.

CHAP. II. The Church visible of all other Societies is fittest to have a
Discipline: but never the same that some men desire.
TO think that either the Church (how putrified soever the Religion be) be in
so good a case for government, that nothing can either be added, or taken away,
to make it better; or that the same society, how much soever disordered, be to
be altered, by private warrant; is very daungerously, and apparently, to err
in both. The first being the effect of too much flattery, and self love: the
latter, the dangerous attempt of an insolent presumption; both hazardous to
that holy Society, whom either they think for government to be absolute, or
absolutely to be governed by their own fancies. In these two Errors, the
difference is this, that they first may easily err, in thinking* that to be
best which Experience has taught them to be good: in the latter there is less
excuse because they mislike all, whatsoever may not be esteemed to proceed
from their own device, that there is a government requisite for that Society
which we call the Church, the wisdom of God has made known unto us, both by
proportion of those natural, and Civil Societies, to which the Church is
compared, and by the perfection of that fellowshippe, which the Saints in all
ages, and places, where the true worship of GOD has prevailed, have had from
the foundation of the world, amongst themselves.

The first root of humane Society (as being impossible to continue without
order) is distinguished by God himself into several degrees and prerogatives
of Husbands, Parents, Masters, above Wife, Children, and Servants; and yet all
linked in the mutual agreement of like duties. The greater Branches that rise
out of these roots; Cities, countries and kingdoms are neither destitute of
laws, to prescribe, nor Magistrates to execute for the common good; all
receiving dignity, and strength, from this fountain, that by the benefit of
Good laws, they are well governed. If men were of themselves either willing,
or constant in that which were good, It were needles to have a discipline for
all, where every man's virtue were a law to himself; but seeing our corruption
is such, that we are easily deceived by our selves, more easily seduced by
others, but most and most daungerously perverted through fear, and desire (the
one to spurn us that we go not too flow, the other to bridle us that we run
not too fast) there is a line, both to direct, and to amend, necessarily
limited to all sorts; and this, in due season, lest disorder endured, bread
confusion, the forerunner of all ruin. Seeing then the Church of Christ is
the house of God, the City of the living God, 1. Tim. 3. Hebr. 12. Coloss. 1.
the kingdom of his beloved Son, can we think that he is careful for
others, and careless, or negligent for his own? or that disorder is less
dangerous, or less to be feared in the Church, than in the Commonwealth;
surely he that in all places is the Author not of confusion but of peace, 1.
Cor. 14.
will have all things performed decently and in order for the Government of
his Church. 2. Cor. 4. Hebr. 13. Luke. 10.
To this end he appointed Stewardes oouer his household, Watchmen, and
leaders, over his flock; laborers in his harvest; Husbandmen in his Tyllage;
and being proportioned to a body, makes some to be Eyes, Ears, Tongues,
Hands; that is principal members, Basil. in Psalm. 33
for directing, and assistance of the whole; without which (in all reason) it
must needs be unable to provide for the safety and security of it self; so
that the Honor, or happiness had been small, to have made it a Church,
unless this likewise had been added, To have made it a Church that is well
Governed: for the unity of of the Spirit is not kept, Ephesians. 4.
but in the band of peace.

This Regiment of the Church, is as well Extelternall, as Internal; The latter
is that government which God has by his holy Spirit, and truth, in the hearts
of the faithful; which as it is never varied, so it is not questioned amongst
us in the Church of England. By this which is the Kingdom of his Son, all
men confess, that GOD inwardly, and effectually works in his Saints the
Faith of his truth; the feeling of his grace; and other spiritual blessings
according to the purpose of his will, for the praise of his own Glory, in
which no earthly creature is able to join or to concur with him; saving only
in this, that the Word and the Sacraments being left as external means, there
must be fit persons for both, and a power in them to admit, and reject,
lest happily, holy things be defiled, whilst Pearls are cast unto Dogs and
Swine. Math. 7.
From hence arises a necessity of external Government in Gods Church; which
respects the appointing of meet men, and the due approbation of such, as are
to be credited with the free dispensation of such inestimable Treasures
committed to their Charge. In this, whilst all men agree that it ought, and
many that are religious are desirous that the Church should be rightly ordered;
many Intemperat men, without any learning, or care, have offered unto us that
kind of government, which had it been once admitted, could not choose but
time have pocured a ruin to the whole Church, whose labors (as far as they
were honest) no man has reason to dispies: but being daungerou^, they are to
be diswaded from attempting, and frendely to be counsailled, to advise better.
For to allow the best and fauorablest excuse that this cause can afford, (a
courtesy perhaps they desire not at our hands) is to think they have dealt as
men, that coming in love, to visit a sick friend, have every man geauen his
advise without skill. The best reason (in wise Judgments) to deny alteration
of any well established order, as also to procure approbation, with good
conscience to such customs as are publicly in use; is when there rises from
the due consideration of them, apparent reason (allthough not all ways to
prove them bettter) than any other, Master Hooker.
(for who did ever require this in man's ordinance (yet competent to show their
convenient fitness in regard of the use for which they should serve; duties of
Religion performed by the Church, ought to have in them according to our power,
a sensible excellency, Correspondent to the Majesty of him whom we worship;
yea then are public duties in the Church best ordered, 2. Chro. 2.5.
when the militant does resemble by sensible means, as it may in such cases,
that hidden dignity, and glory, wherewith the Church Triumphant in Heaven is
beutified; how be it as the heat of the Sun, which is the life of the whole
world, was to the people of God in the Desert, a grievous annoyance; (for ease
whereof his extraordinary providence ordained a Clowdy Pillar to ouershadowe
them) so things of general use and benefit (for in this world what is so
perfect that no inconvenience does ever follow it) may by some accident, be
incomm^dious to a few; in which case for private Evils, reamedies there are of
like conditions, though public ordinances wherein the common good is
respected, be not stirred. Let it be therefore allowed that in the external
form of Religion, such things as are apparently and have been sufficiently
proved effectual, and generally fit to set forward godliness, either as
betokening the greatness of God, or as beseeming the dignity of religion,
(both which are shadowed in the riches and ornaments of our Church) or as
concurring with Celestial impressions in the minds of men, may be reverently
retained, some few, rare, casual, and tolerable, or otherwise cureable
inconveniences, notwithstanding. And in this case, it is not a consideration
either of least reason, or least use, to observe what has been allowed as fit
in the judgment of all Antiquity, for the good government of the Church; from
which either easily, or much, to swerve, was never yet in experience, warranted
to be safe.

Wherefore in the altering of forms of Church government, Reason does not
allow it to be good either to change what Experience has taught to be without
much hurt, or in the change to follow the direction of young heads. For though
Ripenes of understanding, Job. 10.12.
be grayehairs and the virtues of such be old age, yet wisdom and youth are
seldom joined; for we must seek it among the Ancient, and in the length of
days understanding. So that if the contention be, to whom we must harken, and
who are they that rule us in this case, doubtless the aged for the most part
are best experienced, least subject to rash and unadvised passions, seldom
carried with an affectation of novelty, or change, and therefore best in
matter of Counsel to be best trusted, and safest in matter of Change, to be
wholly followed; for as hands are seldom profitable to any great attempts,
longer than youth strengthen them; so Wisdom is not of much value, till age
and experience have brought it to perfection. In whom therefore time has not
perfected knowledge, such must be content to follow them, in whom it has,
sharp and subtle discourses of wit (which are not the ordinary felicities of
those that have labored in this cause) procure many times great applause,
butbeing laid in the balla^ce with that which the habit of sound Experience
plainly delivers, they are ouer-weighed. Let us therefore as in all other
things of deliberation and Counsel, follow the advice of him, Deuteronomy. 23.7.
who said, Ask thy Father, and he will show thee, thine Ancients, and they
shall tell the. They which do nothing (as one wisely notes) but that which
men of account did before them, are although they do amiss, yet they less
faulty, because they are not the Authors of harm; and doing well their
actions are freed from prejudice of Novelty, an imputatio^ alone able to
diminish the credit of that which is well done; The love of things ancient
does argue stayednesse, but leuitie and want of Experience, makes apt to
innouations. For usually (where Scripture does not gain say) that which
wisdom did first begin, and has been with good men long continued,
challenges allowance of them that succeed, although it plead for it self,
nothing, but that which is new (as their discipline is) if it promise not much,
does fear condemnation, before trial, till trial noe wise man (although
women and some rash heads do) does acquit, or trust it, what good soever it
pretend or promise. So that in this kind, few things being known to be good,
till such time as they grow to be ancient, as we have small reason to
dislike, or alter, what by continuance we have found to be profitably honest;
so we have much less cause to admit that which in our selves, and our Church
does want trial, and with others abroad, has been the Original of much
evil. Now because all things can not be Ancient which are expedient, and
needful, in the Church; This being a body which never dies, has ever
power, no less to ordain in things indifferent, that which never was, than to
ratify that which has been before. for surely the Church (howesoeuer some
men distaste this point) has Authority to establish that for an order at one
time, which at an other, it may abolish, and in both do well. Laws concerning
outward order are changable, articles concerning doctrine are not. Cassina. de
Incar (...) lib. 1. cap. 6.
There is (says Cassianus) no place of audience left for them, by whom
obedience is not yielded to that which all have agreed upon; for it is to be
feared that the sacred word shall at their hands, hardly receive due honor,
by whom the holy ordinances of the Church, do receive contempt; It being a
virtuous obedience in both, as well to the rest in that which the Church
commands unto us, as in that which God commands unto his Church. And if
those things which are misliked, (peradventure of a number without reason) were
evils of that nature that could not be removed, without manifest danger to
succeed in their rooms; wisdom (of Necessity) must give place to
Necessity; all that it can do, is as much as may be, to mitigate the evils,
that when the best things are not possible, the best may be made of those that
are. Wisdom will rather tolerate some evil in A form of government that is
tried, Than in a Government untried; to stand to the hazard of a far greater.
It is the honor of all Kings that which is the Title of the Princes of this
Land, to be as they are called, Defendours of the Faith: and this not only in
regard of Enemies abroad, but in respect of those also which desire alteration
at home, oftentimes A hope of ease gives men that justly suffer, occasion to
complain, whose discontentments (how lamentably soever diplayed) are not
always the evidences of true grief; nor ever the arguments of a just wrong.
For doubtless let a Church be as well governed, as ever was any either in, or
before the Apostles time; Let Moses and Aaron both labor to make it Excellent;
Numb. 16.
Let David and all his Counselors advise for the good of it; yet she shall
never want those within the bosom of her, who either weary with that which is
ancient, or in love with some new devise of their own, are ready to deprave
that Government, which they ought for to reverence, as being the Orders of that
Society whereunto in all duty they do owe obedience. There will ever be
some Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, to tell Moses and Aaron, that they take too
much upon them. Such is the frailty of humane nature, and so great our
unwillingness to live in subjection to the government of other men, That we
will rather, hazard an opposition to God himself, than have our Zeal to be
guided by the limits of any Laws; doubtless those that are thus proud, may
justly suspect that GOD has not placed them as workmen, in the reformation of
the External government of that Kingdom, whose foundation was first laid with
so much humility; This if the first authors of these troubles had well
considered, they would not in a matter of so great Consequent, have allotted
the power, and authority of alteration, unto the violent, and unlimited
passions of the rude multitude; a thing in it self as without warrant, so
incredible almost to have proceeded from men that were furnished but with
common sense. Could any thing sound more pleasing to the lowest and worst parts
of a Kingdom? Could any thing move sooner to rebellion, than to tell them that
Reformation of Religion belongs to the Communaltie? Knox to the Communaltie
Fol. 49.50. Ibid. Fol. 55.
that the Communaltie may lawfully require of their King to have true
Preachers, and if he be negligent they justly may themselves provide them,
maintain them, defend them against all that persecute them, and may detain
the profit of the Church-liuings from the other sort? If these strange
opinions which must needs sound harshly in the ears of all Kings, had not
dispersed themselves like a poison into the veins of this Kingdom, the
Authors might have slept in silence, and their hallowed treasons have remained
untouched; But seeing those who were sollicitours abroad, are now so near that
they be dangerous perswaders at home, it is a consideration not of small
importance, as well to look at the Authors and the means (with what pretenses
soever they are ouershadowed) as at the thing it self, neither much needful,
nor very safe. And howsoever (in humane reason we have now less cause than
ever, to fear the danger of this evil; yet seeing no harm in a religious
Kingdom, with a virtuous Prince finds as little resistance, as that which is
covered with the name of Zeal; all men have cause both to pray, advise, and
assist, that the mysteries of this evil (the just punishment for the contempt
of his truth) light not upon us, in our days nor in the days of our Children,
that shall succeed after. There is not any fancy grounded upon so little
truth, that has so speedely grown to that greatness, as the discipline of
Geneua has; It is like in our Kingdom (yet fit enough peradventure for them)
unto the Gourd that shadowed Jonas, but of a small continuance, and yet some
great Prophets are content to rest under the shadow of it; we shall easily
forgett the Author of greater benefits, unless some Worm in mercy be sent
for to eat it down; at the first in the Ancient Disputations, against the
Papists and Anabaptists, Bertra^. page 15 Morna. page 37 Calvin Inst. lib. 4,
1.9.
both in France, and Geneua, there could be found but two essential notes of
the Church; The true preaching of the word, and the right administration of the
Sacraments, but when some of ours were returned from Geneua, they were not
affraied to tell us, (a strange opinion to be published by learned wise men)
That Master Beza held the Geneua Discipline, the third note of the Church,
T.C. his second reply. Page 53.
and of as much necessity as the Sacraments or the word it self; which
thing if it were as soundly proved, as it seems it is constantly believed by
them, all men had reason to acknowledge them the Authors of much good, and to
adventure themselves far, in the defense of it. Out of this strong opinion
have proceeded these irreverent speeches against our Land: Penrie ^ Epist.
before the Humblmotion. Suppl. to the parliament. page 67.
England with an Impudent forehead, has said, I will not come near the Holy
one: we are never the better for her Majesty's reformation. seeing the Walls
of Sion, lie even with the Ground. Rome is come into our gates. Antichrist
reigns amongst us, Infinite are the speeches collected out of their own
writings by others in this kind; and yet for all this, Gilbyes Dial: Page 151.
Admonit. pa. 34.
they would seem both to flatter the Prince (if so worthy a Prince could be
flattered) and highly to commend her happy government, so many ways
profitable both to the Church and the Commonwealth: but whilst we charge them
with Innovation (a thing whereunto wise Governors must have good regard) One
comes forth with great boldness (yet one of the weakest that has labored
in this cause) and says, Nich, in the plea of the Innoc, p. 130.
we crave no alteration in Religion, but only, that the things which are
(standing as they do) may be brought to the order of the Apostles use, and to
the Canon of Gods holy word in those circumstances which remain yet unreformed.
Do you speak co^sideratly in this plea? were all things that are desired by
you, and others used in the Apostles time? Are they all warranted by the Canon
of Gods word? Doubtless if you had perused with any indifferency, all the
learned discourses, of those that have labored in this, you should easily have
found that most things demanded, and so much desired, are new, and that we
are not now absolutely tied, to all these things that were in use in the
Apostles time. It shall not be amiss (howsoever it has been already most
learnedly performed by others) to let them Understand, My Lord his Grace of
Canterbury. Doctor Bilson. Doctor Sutcliff. Master Hook, and many other.
that the orders of the Church, have been at times diverse, Whereof some have
been added, some ceased; and that we are not absolutely tied to imitate the
times that have been before in every particular; the Church as it is Militant
here on earth, lives not always in the same state, it labors sometimes
(seeming to decay) under the Cross, sometimes it flourishes in the abundance
of much peace; sometimes it is governed by these, who are Nurses of it, and
sometimes by such whose hands are readiest to pull it down; now, where the
affection of Princes that govern is not all one, the condition and state of
the Church, must needs alter; besides even the chief officers, erected by our
Savior, of the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, in that kind
notwithstanding are all ceased; for although Apostolical Jurisdiction, do now
continue* in Bishops, yet no man is ordained to be an Apostle: that which is
answered of ordinary, and extraordinary, overthrows the cause; for if
these be extraordinary, and all offices that are reckoned up by the Apostle
be not ordinary, then the Governors of the Church ceasing, no man can say
with reason, that form of the Church government is all one. To hold that all
that was diverse at diverse times, was the same government, is to make things
continuing, and ceasing, distinguished, and confounded, to be all one. And if
we look further to that which seemed to be most solemn, the Senedrin and
great Council at Jerusalem, is no where extant. And if they allow the form at
Geneua, they are popular, but surely though in this no man, could look for
other, than difference to arise where truth has not laid the foundation of
what they hold; yet this is most strange, that they are so firm for Doctors,
to be distinguished from Pastors, for several Consistories for every parish;
widows, and such like; whereas Geneua has but one Consistory for diverse
Parishes; no Doctors, distinct from Pastors, no widows, and in France only
Pastors, and Elders, are thought necessary; yea besides this, there were many
things, commendably, in use in the former times, which as the Church has power
to remove, John. 13. Cyprian de ablutione pedum.
so likewise has she authority to appoint new; our Savior instituted a
Ceremony which he enjoined his Disciples to observe, of washing of feet; the
same continued long in the Church as may appear by a Treatise attributed to
Saint Cyprian, but now out of use, and utterly ceased. The Apostles decreed
that all should abstain from blood and from things strangled, the Apostle
wills the Romans to greet one another, with a holy kiss; yet both these
discontinued amongst us, every man praying or prophesying with his head covered
dishonoreth his head; 1 Cor. 11.
a thing at this day not of that strict observance, but that it may be done
without breach of humility, or the Apostles precept. That all the laws and
orders in the Church are not durable appears, by ceasing of the Ceremonial
law, and the Jewish policy, so that the observation of the Moral, and
whatsoever has dependence upon that, is the true rule of discipline for
manners; other things are but the violent fancies of some weak men, who have
abused their Zeal to do much hurt. Neither need we stand to prove much the
alteration of this government, seeing themselves have varied in the demanding
of it. In the year 1572. the first admonition (which the late most Reverend
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury did after confute) was offered to the Parliament,
as containing a perfect platform of the discipline they desired to be
established in this Realm. Within few years after they altered it again; In
the year 1584. an other, which seemed to have received as much perfection, as
they could desire; but presently after the Parliament this was found amongst
them to have some thing amiss, and the correcting being referred to one, who
had trauersed the matter a new, it came out more perfect in the year 1586, an
other in the year 1588; and it is like, as most of these were, against
Parliaments, so some thing now is to be performed for this, if their cause can
have patrons, or the patrons can find hope; but I hope by this time, our
Governors are more wise, and he who is able to discern these plots, has
found by experience their desires to be too proud, and in reason not likely to
benefit this Church, with a better peace; so that we may safely conclude this
point; That though the Church of all Societies be fittest to be Governed with
an ancient and veriuous discipline, yet that discipline is far differing
from the same that they do require.

CHAP. III. The Censure of a Book called the Plea of the Innocent.
WHere the persons of men, have so near affinity with the actions performed
by them, it will require great moderation and care, so to censure the one, as
that we may not justly be suspected to disgrace the other: the neglect of
this, (a fault which is too common both in the times before us and in our age)
has turned the confutation of errors to personal reproves, and has made the
defendors, weakness, or Indiscretion, the greatest adversary to a good cause;
and howsoever some partial men are carried with as much love to all they do,
as they are to themselves that do it; and with like disposition, are impatient
to be touched in either; yet no man of wisdom or understanding, can think it
to be all one, to have his action or his person, censured; some Actions I
confess there are of that nature, which are the defectes of our ordinary
weakness; and therein though not Excusable, yet carry some reason to
challenge a favorable compassion, extending either to forgiveness or to
concealments; (which both doubtless are the effects of men that are truly
virtuous) where as some others, as it were by covenant are performed to that
end, that they rest amongst all men, and in all ages, liable to that censure
which time shall give them, And they merit. Of the first sort are our sins,
in which kind our profession has had some evil Confessors; of the Latter
are Books, which as they are acts performed; with the best of our judgment,
voluntary, with deliberation, and with a resolution by covenant either to
answer or endure what Censures shall light upon them, it cannot be any
breach of Charity, or modesty, where the opinions misliked are defended, to
censure the Books, which are made in defense of them. And although every man
in reason is tied, to be cerefull of his good name, yet seeing that both
every hard Censure, is not a proof to continue error, nor every error an
imputation to a man that deserves well; It is not all one to say such a Book
is evil written, and to say such a one is not an honest man; The first is
allowed in the warrantable liberty of all learning, but the latter, Charity,
and Humility, do both forbid, as being but the dangerous effect of too much
pride. Things that are evil in manners, are evil in that they are done, and
are a just imputation to the party in that they are known; but writings that
are Censured, carry not ever that sentence among them, which some ignorant, or
partial opposite, shall impose upon them; nor ever do men censure, as some
enemies peradventure would make them speak. There are Commentaries we know
upon Saint Luke, which pass under Saint Ambrose name, of which Ruffinus in his
second Book of Inuectiues, makes Saint Hierome to give this Censure, Ludere
in verbis and dormitare in sensibus. Si merito obiurgauerit te aliquis, scito
quia profuit; si immerito, scito quia prodesse voluit. Seneca.
that he dallyed in the words, and slept in the sense. Which surely as the
best writers are of opinion, was rather forged by Ruffinus, to make Saint
Herome odious, than spoken by Saint Hierome, to disgrace Saint Ambrose.
Doubtless it were great pity, that seeing the world so much erreth in the
choice of friends, that this so necessary an office rather than omitted, should
not be performed by our worst acquaintance, and the resolution of all men ought
to be this (which I thank God I find in my self) if thy friend chide justly
in his Censure, he has profited thee, if undeservedly yet he meant to do
thee good, so that to the first being bound for that which he has done, and
to the other for that which he would have done, in reason for this good office,
Poem^ita.
were tied to both; and for my self I never wrote any thing, with that mind to
have it published in print (although some things I have don for which with
Master Beza I crave pardon) but I am very willingly content to be Censured for
them; when the chief troubles of the Church for discipline were either
appeased with discretion, or else buried with the Authors of them, suddenly in
the year 1602 came forth a Book written by Master Nicholles, as an Apology
for the dealing in that cause Entitled the Plea of the Innocent. Wherein as
there were many things, that served to little use, saving only to express that
honest desire to be well thought of, which peradventure the Author had; so the
first thing, though not the greatest in my opinion to be misliked, was the
want of due consideration of the time, for surely if Solomon said true (which
no man has reason to make doubt of) that there was a time for all things;
Eccles. 3.7.
a time to keep silence and a time to speak, Priests and Jesuits not feigned.
in my weak judgment, it had been much sitter (considering the eager
contention amongst those of the Church of Rome) to have been lookers on,
rather at the event of that quarrel, than to have been Authors of any new
disagreement amongst ourselves; but so different are the dispositio^s of men,
that what one man takes to be a reason why a thing should be done, and other
peradventure takes it to be a reason why it should not be don; to have
forborne a little had been much safer for the Church, and in all reason more
honorable for your selves. Silendi patientia oportunitas loqueudi, contemptus
diuitiarum, sunt maxima fundamenta virtutum; Hier Epist.
I wish the Author of that book had those three ornaments, with S. Hierom
calls the foundation of all virtue; a patience to be sile^t, an opportunity
to speak, and a contempt of riches. Doubtless to renew an unnatural contention
that was almost buried, and especially at that time, when all proceedings in
the Church were without rigor, as it could not choose, but be labor evil spent,
so it was likely to bring little advantage unto Gods Church, Peradventure I
mistake the cause, which moved him then to undertake that Trettise, we will
hear himself in his Preface what he says, Preface. B. 2.
we have suffered (meaning himself and others that have labored for
reformations, and endured much reproach, and contempt, which we have patiently
borne, and with great silence, for diverse years sustained, that on our part
the sacred word of righteousness, might not be evil spoken of, and as much as
in us lies, we might cut off all occasions to the common adversary to
prevail against the holy Church of Christ Which is among us. This surely was
just reason, and if it were performed as he says, it was not performed without
Just cause; for doubtless there is nothing of so small moment that has brought
greater disadvantage to our Church, than that with so much violence we have
deferred amongst our selves and blessedness surely shall be their portion, who
in this kind have been forward to make peace; but it is not these imbracings
of Ioab, nor the kisses of Judas, that can bury from the worlds eye, those
bitter Inuectiues, of Whittingam, Good man Knox, Buckanan, Gilby, Martin,
Throgmorton, Pennry, Fenner and sundry other, most odious and unsavory books
(besides a great number of others without name) all which must needs testify,
that for this whole time of our happy peace, whatsoever the occasions were,
the matter has been carried with little silence, and less patience. These
men in this case (how well soever they have deserved otherwise,) have not bin
for bitterness of speech much inferior to the Heretics of former times, and
of whose followers I may say, with Saint Chrisostom; In age they are younger but
in malice Equal; the Brood of Serpents are of less stature, but have not
less poyso^ The Whelps of Wolves, though they cannot hurt so cunningly, ye
will hurt with biting, and desire to suck Blood. The some of all is as
Sidonius speaks; Aperte inuidet, Abiecte fingit, seruiliter superbis Sidon.
lib. 2. Epist.
openly they envied, basely they forged, and seruilelie they were proud; and
that which made all this to be much worse, was that the Authors of this
euillspeaking, made Religion to be a warrant to speak evil; and whilst they
offended upon this ground, others were desirous to offend, that they might not
differ, from their example so that a double fault lies upon the first Author;
one that they offended in their own person, the second that they were examples
to others to the like offense. But why continued you not in this silence still?
notwithstanding all this (say you) The state of things is worse than ever
before and I cannot tell whether our conniuence in suffering of evil speeches
against us, Plea: page 10. line: 5.
has done the Church harm. For now Papists begin to comfort themselves, yea
they challeng unto the^ the name of honest and true men, and good subjects, and
by the reproachful name of Puritan, All godly Protestats are most cunningly
depraved. Give me leave quietly to tell you this much; That (unless I mistake
it) you have little reason or any that has labored in that cause to think
that the state of things is worse than before, At that time when you wrote thus
what men were committed for their disobedience? Ibid. page 10. line. 5.
arraigned for their treasons? or where was that assault as you call it of
Subscription? besides, all Godly Protestants are not termed Puritans; no it is
but the singular affection of a some few, that would seem upright, which have
gained that name, wherein they do much glory, last of all if by your
suffera^ce, some Priests grew insolent, and were not affraide in comparison to
make themselves to be more righteous than you, this was no reason so
unreasonably to provoke the Reverend Fathers of the Church against you; but
rather all to have joined and your selves foremost against them, and yet he not
gniltie that is accused, but he that is convinced in this cause. But to let
pass the occasion of that treatise; Fenner Philips.
give me leave without offense to give you my opinion of the whole Book: it is
a verbal reiterating of the same things; handled and discoursed by some of
those with whom by some occasion you have much neernes, I speak it not that I
think you had their help, for to this their needs none, but to show that the
labor might well have been spared seeing others with far better success,
had traveled in that same cause; Contradictions there are diverse and all is
unsaid in the last Chapter, Page 60. ad. 59*
which before you have handled in the whole Book; speeches that savor of
slattery too plain. First of the Queen whose worthiness far exceeded
whatsoever you could speak of her, but surely you cannot possibly commend her
government, who as it seems by your complaints was no more careful to have
the Church reformed, Page 68. Reverend Fathers in the co^tents of the 5. Chap.
Page 232. Page 110. Page 113. Omnia cu^ licea^t, non licet esse bonum. Preface
to the Demo^str. A, 4 Page 120. From page 45. to 47. which were handled from 17.
to 27. And again in page 73.78.79. from 124.129 Page 53. lin. 13. Writed page
53 L. 2. vndeceable milk. page 9 lin. 20. Page 8. lin. 18. D. Whitaker for his
private kindness;
as you deal with the Queen so you deal with the Council, nay rather than
fail you will flatter the Bishops also. You reckon vpa true Catologue of their
excellent uses in this Church; and yet notwithstanding, if any harm should
have come to our late Queen, you threaten a little after to lay it their
charge. Much like unto the Author of the demonstration of discipline who says
that the Bishops by their government give leave to a man to be any thing, but a
sound Christian; nay your self fear not to say, (which certainly is not
true,) they that were incensed against the Puritanes, by the Papists means;
nay you spare not our first Bishops, in our late Souereignes time, which having
fledd in Queen Mary's days, were not likely in reason to be favorers of the
Church of R^me; hereunto I may ad your often repetitions of the same things;
besides is not this a strange phrase? We cannot tell whether we might by the
laws and order of this Realm subscribe, although it were otherwise lawful by
Gods word. As if the Laws of this Land could be a restraint for subscribing
being warra^ted in Gods word, which they so earnestly impose only in this
respect because it is so warranted. I omit false English, which could not be
the Printers fault. The principal points which you seem to handle we will
answer, God willing, in the Chapters following; and with this desire rather to
find out the truth than to confute you, the one is a duty, but the other can
be small honor. Neither are you to think me over arroga^t in this ce^sure,
seeing I may much better do it to you than you to his Grace whom you ought in
all duty not to have named, but with greater honor, having showed unto you
more favor, as yourselfe connot but confess, than many others of your
quality and deserts. Non viua^ si quid vnqua^ viderim dissolutius as pene
puerilius. Indignus est quia quopiam docto refutetur.
I will therefore conclude this point, saying with that learned man (whom I
must ever reverence) as he spoke of Master Cartwrights second Reply. Let me
not live if ever I saw any thing written more loosely or almost most
Childishly, and after much to the same effect, the conclusion is this, he is
altogether unworthy to be confuted by any man of learning. Surely there is
nothing we do taste worse tha^ to have a true censure of those things, which
oftentimes either out of ignorance or affection are much esteemed, which
serves in the end only to delude our selves and deceive others; but though
the flattery of Parasites do seem pleasant, yet the wounds of a Lover are
much better.

CHAP. IIII. The proceeding of the Reformers wholly unlawful.
IT falls oftentimes out in the deliberations of men, that where they have
just reason to desire reformation of that which is faulty, the means many
times to attain this are in themselves unlawful and less safe. Their arc few
Kingdoms which have not found this to be true, both in the Church and the
Commonwealth. For as in all States the lowest are aptest to reeciue harm, and
so ever to pretend that they receive wrong, and having least judgment to
moderate the sense of evil, are most impatient to suffer evil; so whilst they
become unskillful Physicians to a pub like sickness, they make usually the
remedy worse than the disease it self; that there is any kingdom governed
with so much happiness, wherein the hand of authority is carried with that
equal tenor, that either rewards or punishments are not, or are not thought to
be bestowed by favor, as we scarcely read of any that have been before us so
neither can we hope for a better fortune, to those that are present or shall
succeed hereafter. For where true causes of Complaint are wanting,
unnecessary discontentments are ready to make them to seem true, nay the
Church it self (a Society that has far better laws to govern it than any
Kingdom) seldom gains this opinion from all, but that some violent spirits,
dare undertake by orders derived out of their own fancies, to frame a
government that should be more holy, and more excellent. So that whilst they
are earnest conceitours of this form, (a form peradventure without warrant
and therefore in the end not likely to prove safe) they fall (a thing usual)
into so great an admiration of their own creature, that any other government
(be it never so profitable and virtuous) is despised, and in the end, nothing
is of power to hinder the building of this Babell, but the confusion of
tongues. So that Reformation (by a long continued diste^per) which ought to be
the care and the conscionable desire of all, comes at the length to be the
preposterous and violent misshapen disorder of some few; all men having this
defect by nature, that where they have power to discern an evil, they have
not the understanding to find out the means for to make it less, the
consideration of this as it ought to make those in Authority to have more care
and digligence; so undoubtedly it serves to restrain the uncharitable
constructions of private men, who must not think all men to be Hypocrites that
are in this case carried with less learning, and more Zeal; for doubtless in
our Church, a great number have unfeignedly though without discretion wasted
their Zeal, and their labor, in that cause with much hurt, which if they
could have been so content, might have served the Church to a better use. But
seeing that cause (how evil soever handled) has found so much favor even at
their hands who in reason had least cause to allow disorder; and that nothing
is to be more suspected as evil to be don than that which we find to be evil
done, we will make a short but a true narration of this course, which has
been held from the beginning for the establishment of this government. Neither
is it fit that the particular ouersigts of some few, and peradventure of such
as either were, or were thought least fit to be employed in a matter of that
moment, should be any just exception to that proceeding, if men of greater
learning, and cheifest in that action, it had been carried without violence,
with much gravity, moderation, and Zeal, but if we find both the words, and
the deeds of the best amongst them, to have been such as no man has reason to
allow, it cannot choose but seem strange, that any one (careful of what he
utters) should become a patron to that proceeding, which is no sooner barely
rehearsed, but must unto all men of necessity, appear to be without warrant.
For iffailing in Cmilitie of terms, their actions, had been more mild; or
if over seen in their Actions, their words had been of a better temper; some
colorable snow might have been their excuse, Sente^tia; vestras prodinisse
superasse est. Hiero. ai Ctesiphont.
which now is wanting* seeing they do fail in both; and therefore even to
discover their proceedings is to overthrow the^. As few Societies are or can be
hoped to be without some evil, so the principal remedies in the judgment of
wise men have been thought to be three. First that all things corrupted by time
should with discretion be brought to their first Institution. Grego. Tholosse.
de Rep. lib. 13. cap. 3. Sect. 2.
Secondly if this were not to be hoped for, they might utterly be abolished.
Thirdly, that no Innocatio^s were permitted to begin; and being begun
immediately by the hand of Authority, to be cut of. The first of these was
called Reformation; which is a repetion or Restitution of the ancient deed.
In proemio Clement. S.S. h^c sane.
So that to Reform, is not to make new, but to restore to his former well
being, what time and corruption by continuance had made evil. Now as
authority and wisdom are both requisite to perform this, so must it needs
be a disorder in those that would reform, and do want both; And it cannot be
but a great oversight in them, Who having thus erred ought to be silent, and
crave pardon, dare adventure notwithstanding, to plead this cause, and to
publish Apologies in there own defense. We will not touch the first Authors
and Originalles of this evil, being derived from those, who then both for
situation and government, The plea of the Innocent.
were strangers to our state. But only make it appear that since the
beginning of our last Soueriegnes reign, what holinesses so ever was
pretended, the whole proceeding in matters of Reformation both in word and
deed, Suruay of discipline. Danger: posit.
was altogether unlawful, and without warrant. A thing howsoever observed by
diverse heretofore, M Hooker in his Preface to his first book. D. Sutclisf.
That of Queen Matie and of those reform.
yet not unfit to be handled in this place, and at this time. The ground of
that evil which followed was laid in Queen Mary's time, in whose Zealous
government; (a Zeal in others of our Country, from other foreign places)
(in both peradventure a like evil) sowed the unclean seed of those immoderat
growing tares, which since have daungered our whole Church. Neither can the
goodness of Religion be any warrant for evil doing, seeing what is lawful
where true Religion does seem to give leave, must of necessity be as Lawful
being permitted by a Religion, or don for a Religion, though it be false.

So that it was no more fit for private and Inferior persons at that time by
violence to remove Idolatry (the contrary whereof was their Doctrine) than in
times much purer which have since followed it was or could be lawful for any
of the Church of Rome, Goodman. page 73.74.77.
by invasion or treason to establish the Doctrine of that Sea. This ever
remaining a true rule, That good then deserves the name of evil, when being
good it cease to be well done, and no Religion can warrant to pull down
Kings when true Religion does command that whatsoever their Religion is, we
must obey them, Aut agendumi Aut patien^^.
either in suffering with patience what they impose, or in doing with
obedience what they do command. So that the just hatred of Idolatry serving
to give warrant to what they did then, in times when the Church was much
polluted, has been not the least occasion since, to attempt the like and far
worse, when by many degrees the times and the Religion was more pure. And I am
sorry so good a man by name, should publish to the world a Doctrine so false
and dangerous, Goodman of obedince. page 99, 103.
that it should be lawful to kill wicked Kings and Tyrants.

Neither had this (being but the private error of one) been in all respects so
dangerous, if an other, Whitingame.
for his place a Deane, (and not meanly esteemed) had in not his preface to
that Book, affirmed it to be the doctrine of the best, and most learned in
those parts: meaning (as I think) Calvin and the rest. So that all things
being duly weighed, the practice of those in that time for religion, was
neither more honest, nor lawful, than the late practices of those of the
Church of Rome, The Jesuits.
neither let any man think that Religion can be a warrant for that deed, which
must remain an everlasting blemish to that Religion, that caused it to be
done. Others our country had at that time men of famous and worthy memory
which lived in Zuriech, Bas^ll and Franckefort; these discretly observed
without Innovation the reformation established in King Edwardes days. Now
when those that had lived in Geneua, and observed with what policy Calvin and
others swayed the whole government, (a thing peradventure neither much
contradict seeing the worthiness of the man, nor Difficult to effect
considering the form of that state) they began (sailing in both repects (being
equal only in a violent Zeal) to attempt the like discipline in their own
Country. A thing so much the less sufferable, by how much the parties were
meaner, the government of their Country far better, and the alteration not
safe in so great a Kingdom. And yet at that time the Zeal of these contented
it self, little to meddle in show, with the matters of disciplie, but rather
was busied about the apparel of Ministers, Ceremonies prescribed and amendment
(as they thought) of the Communion book. But after (so hardly are those things
limited which are but the works of a strong fancy) those that succeeded made
their discipline, an essential Note of the true Church, and were as ready (as
they said) to become Martyrs in that quarrel, Martyrs St^lt^ philosophiae
as for the defense of any Article of the Christian faith; of whom I may say
(as Saint Austine does of some such) they were Martyrs if they had died, of a
foolish Philosophy. Out of this strong and vehement persuasion of well doing,
By Gilby. 1.5. Vtalle Thro^mor. Pe^ry etc.
and from a desire of goodness peradventure in some (although it is like that
those who were most earnest had not the best conscience;) were published
sundry Dialogues, able to have injured a good cause; complaints, petitions to
her Majesty and the Parliament, in the name of the Comunaltie; their
appellations, their exhortations, five or six several supplications to the
Parliament; Martyns unhallowed Imitations of Passauantius; The humble motion to
the Lords of the Council; and diverse other of the like nature, in manner of
Register collected into one volume. These, and many such (for it were infinite
and of small use to reckon all) were the chief, and the best means, their
learning, wisdom, and holiness, thought fit, for the gaining of Authority
to this new discipline, but if these immodest libelles, had been the worst
fruits of those times, and the Art to speak evil, had extended it self no
further, but to the infinite injury of the worthiest in this Church, their
error peradventure might have had pardon, and that which was indeed the
malicious consultation of a number, would have been thought, to have been,
but the madness of some few; but after all this (as either desiring
themselves a sedition, or being misledde by some politic Atheist to be the
actors of the Churches ruin,) they assemble in diverse places, they make laws,
despise Authority, A presbitarie erected at Wandsworthin Surrey. 1572 Noue. 20
and leave nothing that is violent vnate^pted. In the midst of all which, the
happiness of the Church was this, that malice had not so much force as she
had Endeavor. I am sorry that men endued with understanding, Been quod malitia
non habet tantos vires quantas conatus. Hieron. lib. 2. contr. Ruffin
and making Religion to be the ground of what they did, could so far deceive
themselves, and delude others, as to think a practice so disordered, so
inconsiderat, so uncivil, could possibly be allowed in an understanding and
well gouernd Kingdom, only because it seemed to be masked with an Idle shadow
of a pure Zeal. Now these proceedings that seem to be warranted by Religion,
are most easily spread abroad, because all men presume themselves to have an
interrest in Religion, and they are for the most part more hotly pursued, than
other strifes, for as much as coldness which in other contentions, may be
thought to proceed from moderation, is not in this so favorably co^strued.
This made them (that if all other means failed them) they hoped to effect
their desire by force of Arms; To this end they write that in this quarrel
(for reformation) a hundred thousand hands would be gotten, Dange. pos. Page
137. Humble motion, Page 39.
and then (say they) you may easily think what stroke, so many would strike
together.

Doubtless there is nothing that could savor of greater sedition, (especially
under so gracious a government) than being so violently addicted to their own
fancies, what they could not obtain by any quieter means, rather than fail,
to seek to establish it, with the hazard of so much blood. Nay all seditions
almost and the open Rebellions of all times, have proceeded at first from this
ground; that what in the beginning was but weakly thought upon, grew
afterward to be affected with more violence, and in the end rather than to
fail, to be attempted by open war.

I confess the part against whom we strive, was a long while nothing feared,
the wisest contented not to call to mind how errors have their effects many
times not proportioned to that little appearance of reason, whereupon they would
seem built; but rather to vehement affection of Fancy, which is cast toward
them, and proceeds from other causes. And surely if a spark of error
lightening in those dispositions, which in all men's thinking were farthest from
any inclination unto furious attemptes, was in all reason like to be very
dangerous, must not the peril thereof be far greater, in men whose minds
are of themselves as dry fuel, apt before hand unto the tumults? For surely
in a cause of Religion men will strain themselves unto desperate adventures,
for the reliese of their own part, though Law and authority be both against
them.

This then will be a consideration of importance at this time, both for the
King and the high Court of Parliament, (when as it is like those humors will
grow strong through confidence in their cause, and a hope of friends) how
unsafe in reason it must needs be, to suffer the sparks to be blown that
are almost quenched, or to hazard an Established form of Church Government, by
experience found profitable with much peace, in exchange with any new
imaginary form less warrantable in truth, and in all reason less possible
to stand, with the safety of the Commonwealth. Danger. posit. Survey of discip.
Now that we have laid open some part of their proceeding for this Discipline;
(a point handled by us sparingly and with great unwillingness) (for he that
desires to see more of their practices may read some Books written already
to that end) we will briefly examine whether any man (and upon what reason)
does endeavor to justify the proceeding of the Reformers in this kind.

The Book which we Censured in the former Chapter, called the Plea of the
Innocent, undertakes (very straungely in my opinion) the defense of the
proceeding in this whole cause. For although the Author himself might have
assurance of his own sincerity, I know not any thing we did in our meetings
or in our supplications or Apologeriall writings but that which was comely for
men of our sort. M. Nick. in the Plea. Page 29. lin. 24.
whereof I can not accuse him (though some do) yet surely he could not be so
ignorant of what had past, since the beginning of her late Majesty's Reign,
nor so charitable to excuse the manner of it, but that a defense of the whole
Story might have been better spared than written at that time, and doubtless
if all other means of opposition had failed, their own dealing was an
overthrow sufficient to that cause. The first thing that he misliketh is that
they are called Puritanes; and in the clearing them from all effectation of
this name, he spends the whole Chapter; making other of his brethren that
seemed to be less Religious, and the Universities (places which in duty he
ought to have more honored) to be the principal Authors of this name, for
to term them Puritanes. But seeing the end of names is but to distinguish,
and those who first used it amongst us, did rather show what their own
followers did esteem of them, and what themselves affected, than what they
were; It cannot in reason be an imputation to any, that they were termed by
that name. Neither do I think (although diverse of them did glory to be so
termed) that this name first proceeded from us, but rather that the Church of
Rome, seeing us to reform our selves to a purer Religion than they professed,
and that diverse amongst us not content with that, desired yet to be more pure,
accounting all of us to be Heretics, these by a special name, as affecting
to seem more holy than others, (a common practice of the Heretics in old
time) they termed by the name of Puritanes; so that the fault which he lays
upon us, doubtless had his original from those of the Church of Rome; The
Protest. in England be in a manner in heart al Purita^s. Bristow in his motiue^.
40.
and therefore one Rishton in a Table dedicated to Cardinal Allen then
Governor of Doway makes Puritanisme an Heresy which began in the year 1563.
neither do I think it can easily be found that any Protestant in England
before that time, in any public writing, used the name of Puritan; for no man
can be ignorant but that he who was the strongest and first opposite to this
new discipline, and handled this argument with greatest learning, The Lo.
Archbishop of Canterbury. Whitgift.
was himself in all precisenes far purer, than those that most gloried in
that name; and was never an adversary to any of this cause, that was not either
malicious, arrogant, or an hypocrite; neither is it fit to lay that distinction
upon the University, of youths and Prescisians, (as this pleader does) as
though all that were not for this new Reformation were like one Athacius who
bending himself by all means against the heresy of Priscilian (the hatred of
which one evil was all the virtue he had) became so wise in the end, Page 11.
lin. 23.
that every man careful of virtuous conversation, studious of Scripture, and
given unto any abstinence in diet, Sulp. Seu. Epit. Hist. Eccles:
was set down in his Calendar of suspected Priscillianistes. For whom it
should be expedient to approve their soundnes of faith, by a more licentious
and loose behavior; neither do I think unto a great number that desired this
name, could any thing more fitly be applied than that unto the Cathari,
Mundanos potius q^am mundos.
a sect of Heretics, not clean but worldlings; or as Epifa^i^s calls them,
pure impure ones. But surely if either the Cathari, the Nouatians, the
Pelagians, the Donatists, or any sect of the papists at this day worthily
deserve to be termed by the name of Puritan, the^ surely it is no great error
to apply that name to a number amongst us, who are ever ready to boast of
their innocence, and in respect of themselves, to account all of a contrary
faction unholy, and profane. Others this Author accounts old barrels. And
yet if he had well remembered what he says in any other place; That who so
fears an oath or is an ordinary resorter to Sermons earnest against excess,
riot, Popery, or any disorder, they are called in the University, Prescisians,
and in other places Puritans. Surely if this description of a Puritan were
true, neither were there much reproach in the name, nor would a great number be
left out of that sect, who in all humility, religion and conscience, have
learned to submit themselves to the present States; and I doubt not but very
truly a great number of the Reverend Fathers of the Church, might more fitly be
called prescise, than those that for the earnest affectatio^ of a new
discipline, desire by their followers to be called pure. For surely in all
those things mentioned as notes to discern a Puritan, many that are very far
from that peevish singularity of some amongst us, have done the Church more
seuice in one year, and lived with greater sincerity their whole life, than
the principal of those who are distinguished by that name; Is it not a strange
presumption to Impropriat Conscience, Holiness, Innocence, and Integrity only
to some few, as if all the rest who have severed themselves from the Church of
Rome, were no better than Athiests, time-seruers, profane, and irreligious,
only in this respect because by their authority and learning, they have
resisted this unreasonable desire of a new disciplne? So hardly do (...)
temper our selves, when we are strongly persuaded of our own fancies, but
that all that are contrary or repugnant to us, we traduce the^ to the world,
as men without conscience, only for this that they are apposite. A practice
which alone is able to discover to the world, our exceeding pride, and
intolerable self-love; for no man can doubt but the adversaries to this cause
have exceeded the other, in all (...) wherein they are or would seem to be
most excellent; only they have learned to obey, which is much better than all
the sacrifice of fools. But seeing words have so many Artificers, by whom they
are made, and the things whereunto we apply them, are fraught with so many
varieties, it is not always apparent what the first inuentours respected, much
less what every man's inward conceit is, which uses their words; doubtless
to distinguish things that are of a different condition, is the most ordinary,
and the safest use of names, seeing necessarily to collect what things are,
from names by which they are called, can have small warrant, these being but
effects oftentimes of malice, sometimes of ignorance, mistaking sometimes of
some particular accident; all which serve but in the construction of wisemen,
to make their estimation by a better rule; and where things are not in nature
such, not to condemn them, though they called by evil names. The name of
Puritan or Prescisian no man has reason to use it as a disgrace, seeing with
us it serves, but to signify such, as being more strict for observation of
Ceremonies, than others (both parties being opposite in that) they both
notwithstanding may be equally distant from the Church of Rome, and therefore
as I cannot excuse such, as profanely make it any imputation to be prescise,
(a duty which surely ought to be performed by us all in a stricter manner) so
neither do I think the proceeding of those to be altogether lawful, who
under this name having shrouded themselves, account all men besides, to be
profane Atheistes, and the resistance which they find in their violent
course, to be a cruel persecutor of innocent men in a good cause. They that
teach the world to think and to speak thus, must needs be judged both to
slander the profession of the Gospel amongst us, and to make themselves the
best part of that Church which is severed from the customs of the Church of
Rome. But lest peradventure none of them either mislike the name, or make the
original of their sufferings to be their innocence, Ios. Nich in the Plea.
page 11, ^in. 14.
let us hear one of them plead for the rest, Men which made consceince of many
things, which the Reuereud Fathers and many learned men affirmed to be
lawful, and for this they were called Puritans; There is no man can think, but
in matters of this nature, the judgment of the Reverend Fathers, and many
other learned men that were not Bishops, might have ouerswayed the stiffness of
some few (for so they were at the first) without enforcing any faction or
breach of the Churches union; this phrase is usual in that Book (the goodness
of our cause) and the innocence of our persons, Page 31. lin. 6.33. lin. 23.
God delivered his innocent servants; and being reproved for their proceeding,
their answer is, the innocence of our cause does constrayne us, Page 53. lin.
2
and that the world may know the reason of their sufferings, they say the
chiefest cause of their trouble and reproach, Page 5925.
is their careful and zealous following of Gods holy Word, and their tender
conscience in offending God. Would not a man think that the Church of England
which has severed it self not without many Dangers from the Church of Rome,
had looked back and become a Harlot and a bloody Kingdom? surely there cannot
be a greater blemish laid upon this Church (which both is, and is desirous to
be thought reformed) than that it has persecuted for their conscience, men
holy, religious, Innocent, and it a good cause. The whole tenor of that plea of
the Innocent runs on in this course as if it were the sighs and mournings
of a Church upright and pure, laboring under the burden of persecution,
because they cannot in conscience yield unto Superstition as others do; from
hence are these speeches. Page 58. lin. 19. Page 71. lin. 1. Page 100. l. 19.
Page 103. lin. 7. Page 114. l. 28.
They seeing our Innocence that of mere conscience our uprightness makes us
poor innocent men. And in an other place to the same purpose. We can boldly
and in the sight of God protest our Innocence, we and our honest and just
cause. It is now at the least three and thirty years since our troubles began
to be beauie upon us, let them show how we have moved our finger against our
dread Sovereign, and in defense of all those who have labored in this cause
he is not afraid to say: Was not all our doings by humble Supplications, Page
80. lin. 22.
honest and Christian Apologeticall writings, and by lowly and earnest suing by
our friends? And further: Page 120. lin. 7.
In this we have done no otherwis^ ^han all Christian Ministers may and ought
to do. And if any man marvel how the Bishops became their enemies he
answers; Bishops were our enemies by the Papists means. Could any man
Imagine that either so much without cause against the Bishops, or so many
things without truth for themselves, could have been uttered, if an opinion
peradventure of that wherein themselves were Innocent, did not carry them with
overmuch charity, both to think all which was against them to be too vehement
and too much, and all for them over modest and too little. Can it be thought
that the Author of the plea of the Innocent, should be persuaded that the
Papists had made any of the Bishops to be their enemies? or that those libels
which past under the name of Admonitions, Supplicatio^s, Demonstrations,
Martin, Dialogues and such like should by any indifferent reader be thought to
be either humble, honest, or Christian? or that they had done nothing in this
cause more than all Christian Ministers may, and ought to have done? no surely;
the Christian part of the world to whom our unnatural, violent, and unholy
contentions have common, are able to witness too well that he who has brought a
willingness to speak evil, and has performed it (in how unseemly a manner
soever) has been thought by the patrons of that cause, to have merited
sufficiently the name of a brother, and to have been a deserved partner of
their liberal contribution; This to many young men has been a dangerous
temptation (I mean those of the meanest sort,) who in themselves naturally
have a double advantage to give strength to this dangerous weakness, The one a
disposition to reprove wherein their own innocence is thought greatest when
they dare in unseemly terms take upon them to control others; The other a
hasty desire to seem of some account, which, in an ordinary course without
great labor is not easily attained, where as evil speaking and unseasonable
raylings (Commonly called Zealous preaching) brings them (at least among
their partial followers) into an opinion of learning, innocence; and purified
Zeal; But let these men understand, that where readers are of Indifferen^y (as
some times their Books fall into the hands of such) (though for the most part
they are dispersed amongst the Breathren of the cause) they gain this Just
Censure; That that cause cannot be good which has not other patrons to support
it, than those who have learned nothing, but only to speak evil. I am sorry
the inferior sort of our Clergy, are both so ignorant themselves, and have
possessed their auditors with the same error, that we may not allow any thing
used in the Church of Rome, no more than any thing used in any assembly of the
Heathen whatsoever; So that whilst over bitterly we distaste every thing, which
is in use in that Church (whose greatest part is infected with much error) we
breed an opinion in those who are not fully resolved, that we rather mislike
many things because they use them, than for that we are able to give a reason
why we do mislike them. The best course in this had been first to have made
Demonstration that the same things being used by diverse are all one; or that
those things conte^ded for by authority in our Church, were not in the better
and former times of the Church or are not of an indefferent nature, neither can
be made lawful by any circumstance. These things being neglected and other
means used, less reasonable, and less honest, we conclude that the
proceeding of the Reformers hitherto, has been altogether unlawful and
without warrant.

CHAP. V. Of Contentions.
THere was never any thing more fatal to the prosperity of Gods Church tha^
the violent nourishing of contention within her Bowels, and especially by
their means, who ought to have been the principal Authors to procure her
peace; for where every man is violent for that which himself likes; and
partial affection through strong humors becomes the best reason to plant a
Religion, (a falt most usual in those Kingdoms that are most virtuous) every
man becomes so great an opposite, that in the end they are in hazard to be
deprived of all truth; There is nothing safer to a Kingdom than that the
Religion professed be but only one, and this safety then shall be accompanied
with much honor, when those of the same Religion, are desirous and careful to
preserve the Unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; otherwise it must
needs come to pass that those small and first beginnings which received life
and increase from an holy Union, must in the end by discord and discention, al
perish. And therefore not unwisely the Cities of Greece received of their
Citizens, no other oath saving only this, to preserve Union; That Satan has
had apt instruments to hinder this in all ages, those Scarres in the Church
which are not yet thoroughly cured, shall witness well to the ages that succeed
after; and the hateful note of reproach shall remain as a blemmish unto their
names, who rather than they would yield, have been content in the midst of
these flames, that the Church perish; This being the blessing annexed to the
commandment of the holy Prophet; Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall
prosper that love thee; As though the happiness of prosperity could not light
upon their heads, whose Tongues have been the principal actors of contention
in Gods Church; this being an evil by so much the less cureable, by how much
the oppositions for Religion be more violent. This made the Apostle to frame
that most Eloque^t Exhortation to humility and peace; Phil. 2.1.
If there be any Consolation in Christ, If any comfort of love, if any
fellowshippe of the spirit, if any compassion and mercy, fulfill my joy that
ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of
Judgment, that nothing be done through contention, or vain Glory. This being
the means to attain unto this perfection, if in meekness of mind, every
man esteem better of others than of himself, for says the wise man, as the
Cole makes burning Coals, Prou. 26.1.
and wood a fire; so the Contentious man is apt to kindle strife. In the case
of the Church, we ought to have remembered long since, the great reason of that
atonement betwixt Lot and Abraham; Genesis 13.1.
We are Breathren; unless they in discreatio^ of some few have carried them so
far that they can hardly afforde those to be termed by that name, who
because their Judgments and wisdom are far greater, Their Religion and
Zeal is thought to be far less. But we will hope much better of these men,
than that sufferance has made them proud. and their pride more contentious,
than heretofore; And therefore me thinks it is most straung that any man
should have so little understanding, as one of them has, who make us believe
that the Countenance of the Bishops, were more estraunged from them now than
ever before; for doubtless if the great moderation of those persons* whom our
late Sovereign of blessed memory thought fit to be aduansed to that place to
be called Bishops, In the plea. of the Innoc. page 83. l. 3.
had not with more than fatherly care, ^estrained it self in compassion
toward them, from severe execution of Just laws, their occasions of complaint
peradventure would have been far greater, (though not more reasonable) but
surely the Unity of the Church had been much more; There is nothing so
dangerous as lenity in that case, where patience gives occation for insolent
contention, to be more proud; a thing as insufferable in it own nature at all
times, so then especially most destitute of all excuse, when inferior persons
are aptest to provoke, and the things in question in their own judgment, are
of no great moment: as those then have don evil offices, Ib. Plea. page 84.
lin. 2.
who have renewed the memory of almost outworne errors, so are they less
tolerable in this, that having poisoned the world with so evil opinions, they
seem notwithstanding earnestly, and humbly, desirous to live in peace;
assuring themselves that what difference soever prosperity breeds, Plea. page
96 line 4.
doubtless persecution would make us to be all one; but ever reserving this
privilege to themselves, that the Bishops in submission (as offenders) must
first yield. But if a man rightly consider the original of this sin of
contention and what affections they are which give strength unto it, he can
hardely in reason expect quietness to be found in the patrons of this cause;
pride, envy, and vain Glory are the original fountaies of this evil; for
where inferior persons both for place and Judgment, have ouerualued their own
fancies by their own conceit, it is no more like that in humility they should
once yield, tha^ it is possible for obedient humility, to become proud. The
distance being equal in both, only in this the disadvantage greater, that we
have all of us an aptness to do evil, but without grace, no possible means
in our selves to become good. Hereunto if we add the second, that as out of
pride we love our selves, so out of envy we hate others, no man can marvel
if men that are proud, vain glorious, and envious, easily also be found
contentious; for that which in different opinions makes conten^i^^s to cease,
is when men are persuaded of their betters, that they are not easily deceived,
and of themselves, that they may, and do easily err; but all contentions are
not of the same nature; Thom. Aq^. 22. quest. 38. act. 1.
for some need no excuse when we resist as we are bound for the defense of a
good cause; for other a small excuse may serve, in that being without order yet
they are not scandalous; but that which is common with these men, is highly
sinful, without all colorable show of excuse, when they are more irreverently
bitter than is beseeming the gravity of the persons with whom they strive, and
more vehement than is aunswerable to the cause that they would defend. For the
servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be gentle toward all men, 2,
Tim. 2 24: Verse* 25.
apt to teach, suffering the evil men patiently; so that if any man had these
defects that were an adversary in this cause, We must instruct them with
meekness, that are contrary minded, proouing if at any time God will give
them repentance, 1. Tim. 6.4.
that they may know the truth; If any man teach otherwise he is puffed up, and
knows nothing, but doteth about questions, and striffe of words, whereof
comes envy, strife, raylings, evil surmisings, all which are to no profit,
but to pervert the hearers. And surely as the Apostle tells us Where envy
and strifes is, 2. Timoh. 2.54
there is sedition and all manner of evil works. But if after so much
patience, so many fould, clear, and modest defenses of a just cause, Iame. 3.6.
any man lust to be contentious, we have noe such custom, neither the Churches
of God. 1. Cor. 11.16.


Thus Coutention through the corruption of our nature being seldom limited, in
the end becomes Inordinate, and a foul sin; and so consequently without
warrant, when either we contend about that which is so true, 1: de eo quod non.
2: modo quo non. 3: Loco: 4: personis.
or so trifling, that we ought not, or whether we contend in that manner that
does not become us, or in that place; or last of all with those persons that
are unbefitting. The error in the first is that of the disciples which should
be the greatest, Luke. 22.
which example says Beda is willingly read of many that desire f^o^ the
Scripture to find^ example to warrant them to the like contention, but says S.
Ambrose if the Apostles contend it is not made a pretense of excuse for us, but
set down for a Caveat. In the second the fault in those clamorous, railing,
and vuciuill speeches by adversaries of all sides; wherein if some in our
Church had not been too forward to answer their adversaries in the same
kind, the best causes had been handled with better praise, and the worst had
been performed with less blame; hence comes it that he who for learning
has not deserved least, May. Hooker.
for the defense of our Church, for modesty of writing (only excepted) has
deserved best. The place and the persons are ordinary circumstances to make our
contentions to be more faulty; Lawyers may.
but seldom (though the Scholeman say otherwise) do I find any reason for
men of the Church for to warant either* 1. Cor. 3.3.
For^whereas there is amongst us Envying, and strife, and divisions, are we not
Carnal and walk as men? For says Solomon, Prou. 20.3.
it is a man's honor to cease from strife, but every fool will be meddling. And
doubtless if in this cause of the Church government, many whose conditions and
learning might Justly have enjoined them silence, had not been meddling,
Moderation with Gravity might have determined that cause, which stood only
supported with a hott Zeal; And seeing the best warrant of our actions must be
the sincere Testimony of our conscience from a true fear, May. Nichols in
his plea.
I wonder how some Inferior and mean men; could think it lawful for them to
undertake a matter of that moment, (nay to receive it being almost dead) when
men of far greater learning, and dwiseome did remain silent; some excuse
peradventure I could allow him, if others far more worthy had not had as
much Zeal, and had not been as far better able to defend the cause; but it
may be he takes his labor to be well employed, having made in his opinion for
the good of the Church, a benifit of that small Talent, which God has given
him. Other ends (for which the world has censured him hardly) I dare not
acc^^^ him of, for Romans 14.4.
who am I that I should condemn an other man's servant? He stands or falls
to his own Master* And yet as that moral wise man says, Nihil Interest quo
animo facimus quod vitiosum est fecisse, quia facta cernu^tur, a^^imus no^
videtnr.
It little skillet^ with what mind that is d^^^, which is evil done; because
the ^^ede is seen, but the mind is not. Nulla enim l.^^^ est n^ ^ facere quod
facere non ^ossis. Senec.
It is no praise not to do th^^ ^^ich thou can not. And if the best excuse
be allowed both to him and others, which can be afforded in so evil a cause,
we must needs say; That centention in the Church, is the hurtful effect of
indiscrete Zeal. And howsoever men bouldly apply that to themselves, which was
spoken by our Savior Christ. Mat. 2.
The Zeal of thine house has even eaten me; yet they little consider that
with this Zeal of Gods honor, which eats them, they have no warrant that
Gods house should be eaten by them; Emendare non quiescit si eme^dare non
potest, tollerat, et gemit. Aug.
true Zeal says S. Austine desires in his place to amend what is a miss,
but if he cannot, he does tolerate it, and sigh; for there is a Zeal that
proceeds from rancor and malice, but not from love.

Extraordinary Zeal which exceeds the limits of our private calling, is
then only no sin, when it proceeds from the power of the spirit, Zealus
Liuoris, non amoris.
and not a private motion; the same spirit warranting that Zeal by giving an
extraordinary power, as also an irresistable strength; all which were found in
our Savior, Math. 21, Numb. 25.7, Exodus 32. 1. King. 18.4.
in the son of Eleazer, in the Sons of Levy, in Elias; and diverse others.
And if the Pleader has performed any thing either more powerfully or more
effectually than other men, we are ready to confess that this new Contention
arose from a holy Zeal; But under this color, dangerous attempts have been
committed in Gods Church. Thus Anabaptist in Germany cut off his brothers head
in the sight of his Parents, persuading them that the holy Ghost was the Author
of that fact; But because he could not make the Magistrate to beleuee so much,
he himself by their sentence endured the same death.

And it were fit all these Zealous murderers of their brethren by their hot
contentions, were examined by the Magistrate of their lawful calling, for it
is great pity that Religion and Zeal (and sometimes peradventure a good
cause, all which are most innocent) should suffer the reproach of a shameful
Act; but such Zealous persons have been in all ages who under pretense to
reform Religion have been the worst me^ and the greatest enemies that Religion
had, when Claudins and Nero governed, there were some that called themselves
(Zealatours) and under that name were earnest for Religion, Zelatores. Joseph.
lib. 5. de bells Iudaico. cap. 5. et lib. 6. cap. 1.2.
until themselves had brought fire to consume the Temple for which they strove;
and surely if humane reason have leave to conjecture what is like to be the
event of these evils, Atheism, propanenes and sacrilege, must al enter at the
door of Contention, to burnvp Religion, and to rob the Church. And howsoever
peace be best built upon rede^ptio^ of wrongs, for otherwise to make an Unity
without repeting the causes of discord is but rather to please us with the
name, than with equity to compound the wrongs; wherein if we had been the
first (yet it may appear, that we are not willing to urge the Authors of these
Contentions too far) in giving a beginning to his evil, surely their fault
must needs be the greater which will not suffer it to have an end; alter
principium malo dedit, alter modum abstulit; neither can we excuse the
bitterness of some whose pains were little required to have labored in this
cause as the former in the impure co^tentions of Martinisme defaced the
government of the Church in the persons of Bishops and Prelates, so the other
sort did lead into contempt, the exercises of religion in the persons of
sundry Preachers, disgracing (as one well notes) the higher matter though in
the meaner person; we can be content to think that in many the beginning of
these evils was a detestation which they had to the Church of Rome. But we wish
such men to know, that first they have injured greatly the Church of Christ by
hindering that increase which Religion in this Land might have had, if these
violently had not been over willing to contend with all men; and then that as
there is nothing of more use, so nothing in respect can be of greater danger
in Religion tha^ Zeal is; for this if it be directed aright, is mother of much
^olines, but being mislead, is the Adulterous stepmother of much Hypocrisy;
and doub^lesse the corrupt fountain of the greatest and most dangerous
contentions that have troubled this Church, ha^^ bin the faise opinion of
indiscreet Zeal, Prou. 17.1
and when our contentions grow strong they spoil (says Solo^^^) a house full
of facrifices; and lest they should think we are willing and esteem it an
honor to contend with them, we say we have taught the truth, the ancient and
perpetual government of the Church, we have maintained the reformed
discipline, by the example of the first and best Churches after the time of
persecution; we teach nothing but the pure Gospel of Christ; we administer
the Sacraments as we ought; we are and have learned to be obedient to those
that rule over us; we wish and provide that the Ministry of England may be
learned, that men may be diligent in that honorable fruction committed to them,
that all Idolatry and superstition may be banished, in one word that the
Church may be cured from all their infirmities by the hand of authority, and
those lawful means provided for her safety; that noe railing and contentious
speeches to the disgrace of any man's person may be used by us; and if any man
teach otherwise and consents not to the wholesome words of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to Godliness, 1. Timoth. 6.4.5.
he is puffed up and knows nothing, but doateth about questions and strife of
words whereof comes envy, strife, raylings, evil surmisinges, froward
disputation of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, which think
that gain is godliness; for doubtless the wrath of man does not accomplish the
righteousness God; Iame. 1.20.
for where envy and strife is there is sedition and all manner of evil works,
but wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to
be entreated, Iame. 3.16.17.
full of mercy and good fruits, without judging, and without Hypocrisy; and
the fruit of righteousness is sown i^ peace, of them that can make peace. We
therefore beseech you breathren by the mercies of Christ, Let us be all of one
mind, Genesis 13.^.
let us seek peace and ensue it, let there be noe strife I pray you betwext
you and us neither betwext your beardme^ nor our beard-men, for we are
Breatheren. But if they will needs proceed in this intemperat manner, to
nourrish the flame of these unhallowed Contentions, which both strengthen the
adversaries, and weaken our selves; we can but wish that authority may cause
their writings to be abortiue and not see the Sun; but if their policies in
this do prevent laws, our next desire is, they may be censured by all that
have Understanding and Conscience, as the intemperate and extrauagant conceits
of some giddie headed persons, and that men beware (except they mean to
adventure to deprive themselves of all sense of Religion, and to paue their
own hearts, and make them like the high way) how they be consuersant in them,
and give credit or belief unto them. Therefore to conclude this point, seeing
contentions are of that danger, and that zeal is no warrant to overthrow the
Church, let us all follow the counsa^le which the Angel gave unto Agar, Genesis
16.9.
Return unto thy dame, and humble thy self under her hands. There is no
virtue that better beseems us that are inferiors, than Patience and
Humility. Therefore we exhort with the Apostles. Romans 16.17.
But God be thanked, that ye have been the servants of sin, but ye have
obeyed from the heart unto the form of the doctrine, 18.
whereunto ye were delivered. Being then made free from sin, Gal. 5.26.
ye are made the servants of righteousness. Let us not be desirous of vain
glory, provoking one another, envying one another. For where envying and strife
is, there is sedition, and all manner of evil works. James. 3.16, 17
But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle;
easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without judging, and
without hypocrisy. 18
And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace, of them that make peace.

CHAP. VI. Of Ceremonies.
WHere men are apt to mislike things of necessary use, the entrance for the
most part into that contempt is through the distasting of those things which
are of a meaner nature, and serve but in the opinion of wise men only to make
the act of devotion to be more solemn; Solemnity in some measure being a
necessary adiunct to all public service. And whilst it stirs men with
greater holiness to become outwardly religious, whilst it stays men from
wavering in that they do, and others from contempt of that which is done (all
being by these outward Sole^nities better prepared) we cannot but account them
the hedge of devotion, Secundae intentiones Legis.
and though not the principal points, yet as some of the fathers call them the
second Intentions of the law; Intermeditate means not to be despised of a
better and more religious service. This whilst some in our Church have either
not understood, or not much regarded, they have earnestly labored (as for a
matter of great moment) that because the Jews had a religion full of Ceremonies,
the most part whereof being types are in their particular so far ceased; and
be^^use the Church of Rome has not limited the infinite burden, in this kind;
partly idle, partly needles, and the greatest part through the corruption of
^lme, being grown superstitious; these in opposition to all the rest, only
misunderstanding the time of Grace, are desirous to have Religion, without any
Ceremonies at all. As if the same God who seeing the weakness of his own
people, and therefore ledd them as if it were by Ceremonies to that worship
which was fittest for them, and for that time; and who ever since has been
the Author, and approouer of solemn order, especially in the public action of
Religion, did now either see us to be so absolute, as that these outward
helps were of no use, or that all Ceremonies were but shadows of things to
come, not ornaments and helps to things present, did merely with the passion
of his Son, cancel all kind of worship that had any solemnities or
Ceremonies (how virtuous soever) annexed to it. But as to think that Ceremonies
without true and inward holiness, could cleanse them from their sin were to
err, and to be Jewish and superstitious, so to account them of no use, were to
be merely profane. We call them Ceremonies, properly all such things as are
the external act of Religion, which have their commendation and alowance, from
no other cause but only that in Gods worship they are virtuous furtherances of
his honor. For Religion which is the height and perfection of all Moral
virtues, conteyneth in it three acts as all other virtues do; the first the
Internal, which is the willing desire to give unto God his due worship and
honor; secondly, the external, aunswering to this, which is no otherwise
good, or commendable than that it virtuously serves to this end; thirdly, the
commanded act, that is the act of every virtue ordained by religion to Gods
honor; so fasting, alms, and such like are termed the Acts of Religion,
when they are done for Gods worship, howsoever othe^^ise they are properly the
acts of other virtues. This the Apostle calls pure Religion and vndfiled
bofore (...) the Father, Iam. 1.27.
to visit the fatherless, and widows, in their ad^^rsity, and to keep
himself unspotted of the world. Saint Austine says that God is worshipped
with Faith, Encherid. cap. 3.
Hope, and Charity, of these three the first is no way Ceremonial, The third
likewise is no Ceremony, but as it is an act enjoined by Religion; but the
second is properly that which concerns the Ceremonial part of Gods worship.
All antiquity was ever so far from misliking of those, that they had almost
placed Religion in them only. The name which the Hebrews gave unto Ceremonies
signifies not so much the external act, as the law and the precept by which
is was commanded; so that in the new Testament even those which had no longer
continuance but until John, (for then began the Jewish Ceremonies to decline)
are termed by our Savior by the name of the Law and the Prophets. Matthew. 11.
Saint Paul calls them Iustifications, because they were Rites instituted
and ordained to that end. Gal. 5.
With them they were the Images of heavenly things opposite to the Images of
the Heathen; and howsoever we follow neither of them in the particular, the one
being the Idolatrous profanation of an Heathenish superstition, the other but
the external service appropriate to that people, and to that time: yet we
dare not, seeing no Religion can want all Ceremonies, fall so headlong to the
error on either side, as to embrace or refuse, all those Ceremonies that the
Church has. Now as it is the unhappiness of Religion to be ouerloaden with
Ceremonies, so in those that have authority, not to establish by law such as
are needful, is a defect; to neglect them in those that ought to be
obedient, is a fault; but to contemn them in any that live in the bosom of
the same Church, must needs be the manifest argument of their pride, and in
the end the utter ruin of Religion it self. Iudicidia sunt moralia in ordine
ad proximum. Ceremonialia sunt moralia in ordine ad deum.
For in the Ceremonies of the Law, there were three things to be observed;
first, that they were all ordained for the expressing of the inward and moral
worship, to serve to true holiness, Faith, Hope, and Charity, without which
all the rest were rejected (even as a burden) by him that commanded them; 1.
Sam. 15.22.
saying, I will have mercy but not sacrifice: for obedience is better than
sacrifice, and to hearken is better than the fat of Rams. Secondly, if
Ceremonies be contrary to true holiness, they were to be omitted, (for their
end was to further devotion, not to hinder it) In this respect they were
dispensable, when either by the place or time, (two violent circumstances of
all our actions) or for some impediments they could not well be reserved; Ios.
5.
in this respect Circumcision was omitted for those that were borne in the
desert, as being unfit to move immediately after that wound, and being
uncertain to rest, seeing they must follow the fire, or the cloud when they
moved. Thus in persecution we are content rather to exercise Religion without
Ceremonies, than to want it* which in peace to neglect, or contemn, must needs
be a great offense. Those times being fittest to serve God with greater
reverence and holier solemnities, which are compassed about with greater rest
and more happy blessings. Lastly, when Ceremonies are requisite to testify
our faith; (as doubtless they are then when they are through misunderstanding
oppugned) we may not in conscience remit any part of them; for the refu^ing of
such, can be no small sin, where the using is blessed with the crown of
martyrdom. 1. Match. 6. and 7.
But seeing as some think, from the particular devotion of the town Cere,
Liu^e. lib. 5. Val. Max. li. 1.1 a Carendo, Aug. lib. 2. Retract, cap. 37.
Gell. lib. 4.9. Mocrob. Satur. lib. 2. cap. 3,
or as others from wanting (being a religious restraint) they are called
Ceremonies, we need not to doubt in the beginning, either that virtuous office
which they did, or those religious abstinences which they performed, joined
Religion and Ceremonies with that nearness, as that neither was absolutely
perfect, where both were not. This unkind separation, (one of the sower fruits
that have grown in this latter age) is a great wound given unto Religion,
doubtless in many (for I will not excuse all) only from the abundance of too
much love. Al himself, some by the Apostles, and the Bishops, that succeed in
her place; Thirdly, some are parts of the immediate fa^^ing upon the Sabbath in
S. Austins time was observed at Rome but not at Millan; as also the washing of
feet after baptism, was observed at Millane but not at Rome; Nec disciplina
vlla in his melior graui prudentique Christiano quam vt eo mod^ agat quo agere
viderit ecclesia ad quamcunque deuenerit. Aug. Epist. 118.
in all which says the same Father there is no discipline can be better, than
in these to follow the custom of the place whereunto we come. This counsel
gave Saint Ambrose to Saint Austen, that none might offend him, nor he might
offend any. A grave moderation, which doubtless if it were found in all, which
desire to be examples to others of a better life, the shows of Religion could
not have wanted so much devotion, nor the sinews of the Church, could have
been racked with so little pity. For in this kind, the same persons may in
contrary places perform contrary things, Luke. 18.
and both well. As Zachaeus receive Christ into his house with joy, and the
Centurion with as much praise say, Matthew. 18.
Lord I am not worthy that thou should enter into my house; both honoring
their Savior by a diverse manner, both miserable in their sins, and both
obteyning mercy. For in alterations of custom, that which may help
peradventure with the profit of it, doubtless with the novelty of change will
do more hurt. The best remembrance in this ca^e will be this, Ipsa quippe
mutatio Consuetudinis etiam quae adiu^at vtilitate nouitate perturbat. Aug. 1,
Tim. 1.5.6.7. Romans 13.10.
That the end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart and a good
conscience and of faith unfeigned; from the which things some have erred, and
have turned unto vain iangling; they would be doctors of the law, and yet
understand not what they speak (...) wh^r^f they affirm. For love is the
fulfilling of the (...) therefore whosoever thou art says S. Austen, that
read either this, or any other, so read and so learn that thou think this
to be truly spoken, knowledge puffs up, but Charity builds: 1. Cor. 13.4.
this suffers long, it is bountiful, enuieth not, does not boast it self,
is not puffed up; for preservation of Unity, being that whereunto in this
kind all must aim, it is fittest for those who find Ceremonies in use not
unlawful in any Church, rather to observe them keeping the Unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace, than with the hazard of scisme, to strive to
annihilate these, and to establish those that are much better. For in the use
of Ceremonies at this day our Church does not so far differ from the ends of
the first institution of them, that though her reasons be not the same, yet
she retains nothing, that in substance and truth, is directly opposite. The
first end of the Jewish Ceremonies, was that by them as by certain elements
the people might be retained in the service of God, as a child under the
government and discipline of his father; for where men are not restained within
some bounds and limits for external worship, discentions through affectation of
singularity, serve as well by a general contempt to make men profane, as
continual new and unlimited additions of Ceremonies do make them
superstitious. Those rites then to them (and ^o in proportion to us) served as
sinews to hold all and every several member of the Church, in Religious
invocation and worship of the true God. A second end was, that they might have
a worshipp, neither outwardly over naked, nor apparelled like that which the
Gentiles had; a reason doubtless to us, not less forcible than to them, who
have in our eye near at hand, such as are richly attired in this kind, with
whom we shall over easily fall in love, and dislik our own service of God, if
we have not some external Ceremonies, which we are able to defend both to be
as fit for Gods service, as natural and comely warranted by Gods word, and
serving as well to that end, namely his worship as all the Ceremonies either of
Heathens, the Jews, or the Church of Ro^^ do.

And surely whilst some honest minds, for profitable ends have labored to
unburden the Church of many Ceremonies, they have done nothing else, but vntyle
the house, that the Rafters the Beams and the maine timber might with the
violence of tempests more speedily perish. The third end was, to make known
unto men by an external worship, that holiness which in heart they professed
unto him; that man having two parts, and he the Author of both, it might not be
his fault, to be defective in either of them. Yet as wholly to depend upon
outward Ceremonies is but Hypocrisy, so altogether to neglect them under
pretense to worship him in spirit, is but to sin with more liberty
unpunished, and uncontrolled. Lastly, the comeliness of order, and the
preservation of humane Society, are not the contemptiblest ends for the use of
Ceremonies. For seeing order is the ornament of all Societies, and seeing the
Church, of all Societies is most excellent, it must needs follow, that those
things which (Ciuilie done) do adorn others, uncivilly neglected, or
continued, do disgrace the Church. And I am sorry that in the earnest
contention for Church government men are so backward in the allowance of
Church Ceremonies, Zanch. in 4. praecep. page: 696.
seeing wise men of found judgment, have made them a part of the Church
discipline. Yet Ceremonies are not all of like nature, some being absolutely
necessary and common to all, others not so necessary, and to some; it is fit
that for all men in the furtherance of Gods worship, there should be a
sanctification of persons, times and places, which if either they were not done
at all, or done without Ceremony, the corruption of man's nature would easily
esteem them to be unholy.

For although God be to be worshipped at all times, and that as Christ says,
the Kingdom of Heaven comes not by observation either of time or place; yet
because whole Churches must assemble, which cannot be done without these, nor
these rightly be thus severed without Ceremonies, Religiosum a relinquendo,
Massarius S^binus in Gell: lib: 4: cap: 9:
all antiquity has allowed the distinction of these, and the use of sober and
moderate Ceremonies in the separation of them; that being rightly to be termed
Religious, which for the holiness we leave to employ unto common uses. And
howsoever it may be not altogether unfit, (at least it ought not to be
offensive) that Churches, though all reformed are in this different (for so in
the observation of Easter the East and the Weast were diverse Africa and Italy
Rome and Millaine) in which our Rule must be with humility and love, 1. Cor. 9.
to be all things to all, yet it is many ways convenient, to have an unity if
it were Deuteronomy. 14.2.
nor the fancies of private men; as if the obedience of inferiors with
humility in this case, were like the sin of the sons of Elie, 1. Sam. 2.17.
for which men abhorred the offerings of the Lord. All men confess that the
Ceremonies of the Jews, (prefiguring) are to be removed, but not those in the
Church which established by Authority, serve only for order, and the better
worship. Yet all men of sound judgment must needs grant, that for their
virtue, they are all inferior to the word and the Sacraments; and for their
number, they ought to be so limited, that with their unseasonable multitude,
they ouerwhelme not that worship, which with their order and comeliness they
ought to further. For as husbandmen are content the Branches of the Vine so
long to grow, and spread, until thereby they procure the grapes to become
fewer; so in the Church the admission and retaining of Ceremonies are so far
lawful, until by their error and defect, either in substance or number,
religion and devotion become colder. And if the opinion of them, who hold the
Church may ordain Ceremonies for instructions, Luther in lib. de pijs
Cermonijs. Melanch.loc. co^.
ornament, and order, had extended it self likewise to account them, a bond of
divine worshipp (so far as positive laws may serve to increase devotion)
their assertion doubtless had been much sounder, and the people had
excercised religion with greater holiness, and more peace; Nihil ordinatum est
quod precipitatur et properat. Sen. epist. 40
but in this we have dealt (as in our religious service) where few things can
be rightly ordered that are carried with a doubtful and headlong course. The
original of this evil, is as a wise man notes; That we have numbered the
opinions of others, but not weighed them; a sweet error serving but to make us
to love that, A thowsend.
wherein, at length we must needs perish.

But if any man think (as surely it is the opinion of some) that those
Ceremonies ordained by Christ or his Apostles, are fit inought to be retained
in the Church, but the rest as being made without warrant have no warrant to
remain still, we answer that of all which Christian Churches (how much soever
corrupted do, or shall use) there is by us noe defense undertaken for them; yet
we doubt not that every particular Church, may and our Church has, lawfully
ordained some Ceremonies, which ought religiously to be observed, and more also
if the church so thought fit; not hereby to justify any and to make him
righteous, but for ends that are spiritual, and many ways behouefull to Gods
worship. First for orname^t, a thing which I wonder in all other cases should be
accounted a virtue, and in religion only should be esteemed a vice. Herein
whilst we have shu^ned justly, the glorious vanity of superstitious worship, we
have familiarly fallen to despise the persons, the place, the times, and almost
that duty, which we would honor; and all only through the neglect of some due
Ceremonies. Secondly, to stir up devotion, a thing apt enough through our
vanities to become small, unless some external helps may be added for to make
it greater. Neither can the access of Coremonie in the consecration of new
times, or new places, be otherwise understood, than the faithful
acknowledgment of special new, and extraordinary favors, that we have
received. Neither ought the memory of the resurrection so to swallow up, in
vnthankesfulnesse all other benefits of a lesser nature, as if the observation
of other times were to be accounted an unhallowed prophanatio^ of the Lords
Sabbath. Romans 13. 2. Cor. 13. Hedr. 13.
And surely those Rites, which before lawful ordination were left free, after,
in conscience do bind to the observation of the^. So that what private
opinions may fancy unto them selves, are but slender exemptions for the breach
of laws; these imposing a restraint with their due Ceremonies established by
authority from using respects, and behauiours that are common, toward
persons, places, and times which are all solemnly appointed to a holy use. If
this had been thoroughly weighed by a number i^ our Church, neither would the
contempt of them have been so usual and so pardonable a fault, nor the
defense have been thought over violent love to superstition only.

In quibu^ ^ee ego dissentire a nostris salua gratia, ^ec consentite sal^a
Conscientia possum. Sen. epist. 117:
But in these things with some amongst us can neither diffent with their good
favor, nor consent with them with a good conscience.

And if any man think that Ceremonies are of that nature, that the observation
of them is only indifferent and less free, let him consider the great and
violent discentions in the Church that have risen for them, and how Councills
have condemned them as heretics, only for being stiffly opposite in this
kind. The first dissension almost in the Church was for legal Ceremonies
which afterward was determined with this word; these necessaries, to abstain
from blood, and from strangling. The second great dissension was for Easter
day: neither was it thought then a small matter for which Pope Victor the first
of that name, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 25.
would have separated all Asia from the unity of the faithful, only for
being disobedient in that point; which afterward was not the least occasion
for assembling the counsel of Nice, Epiph. here is. 70. Athanas. in Epist. de
Synod. A^imin. and Seleuciae. Can. 1.
the council of Antioch not long after excommunicating all such, as for the
observation of Easter rested not in the determination of the Nicen Council. To
conclude, all that were willing to observe it otherwise, by Epiphanius, Epiph.
baer. 50. Aust. Haeres. 29. Theodor. lib. 3.
Austin, and Theodoret, are accounted heretics. After this some such
dissentions arose about baptism, not for the essence, but the ceremonies in
it; the violence of which resisting, was not the least impuratio^ to all the
Donatists. After these succeeded hotter contentions, but for matters of less
moment; in all which the oppugners of established order, August. Haeres. 23.
Epiphan. b.er. 46.
even in the lowest parts of religion, were little better accounted of the
fathers, than plain heretics. The beginning of things (says Seneca) proceed
slowly, Incrementa lent exeunt; sestinatur in damnum; Nibil stabile est
tumultuantibus causis, mala v^de minime expectabantur erumpunt. Sen. epist. 91.
but losses run headlong; the causes of evil, are usually in a tumult, and
break out (as in this) from whence they are often feared; for whatsoever either
person, or place, or custom, has many admirers for the holiness, must needs
for the holiness have many to be enuiers of it: but in things whereunto men do
easily fall, discipline by authority must restrain such when singularity is
in danger to make a schism; for where to make alteration in this kind is
allowed to all men, a dissolution says Calvin, must needs follow in the
sinews of that Church, Quam magnu^ mirantium tam magnus innidentium. Sen. de
vita beata.
neither do we make (as in precepts of a higher nature) every defect to be a
great sin, but neglect in ceremonies is then no small fault, when
disobedience and contempt are joined with it. Our care in religion appearing by
so much the greater, Calvin Instit. lib. 4. cap. 10.27.
that we are loath to neglect the adherents of it. For the contempt which
willingly is offered unto these, will easily without resistance extend it self
to the overthrow of all religion. There is nothing can be a surer preserver of
religion, than to keep it from contempt; a thing not easily done, where it is
left destitute, and deprived of holy ceremonies. For the principal excellency
of our religion being spiritual, is not easily observed, of the greatest
number which are carnal; and therefore we propound not naked mysteries, but
cloth them; that these offering to the senses a certain majesty, may be
received of the mind with a greater reverence. Aug. lib. 9. contr. Faust.
mani^b. cap. 11.
And therefore some of the fathers, accounting them as the shell to the
kernel, have said that no religion either true or false, was possible to
consist without them. So that amongst the ancient to be a divine, Theologus.
Plato in Dial. de Regno.
was nothing else but to know what deities were to be worshipped, with what
ceremonies. Exodus 18.20.
And amongst the Jews as a thing of greatest importance Ierbro* wishes Moses
to refer civil judgments to others, and himself to instruct them in the
ceremonies and rites of Gods worship; the ignorance whereof as it has brought
much harm into the Church, so it is sharply reproved by some of the Fathers
that have been before us. Basil. epist. 63. Leo. epist. 4. Innoc. epist. 1.
These if they had served to no other use yet were they manifest and honorable
distinctions betwixt them that were heretics, and those of the true Church; in
whom howsoever we cannot judge of their sincerity, Placendum est diuinis
oculis and habitu corporis and modo vocis; Cypr. in S^r. de. orat. do^. lib. de
Coron. militis.
and religion that is inward, yet by the use of these, we may easily discern,
what Church in her worship they would seem to follow; for to cast away in time
of persecution, the badge and signs of their warfare, was to discover unto the
world that they were cowardly soldiers. Tert^llian reports of one, who chose
rather to die, then with the rest of the soldiers to be crowned with laurel;
only in this respect, that the christians had a ceremony not to do it. Now
if any man ask me a rule, whereby to discern in this variety of ceremonies
which are to be rejected and which allowed; we say with the Apostle; 1. Cor.
14.40.
Let all things be done honestly, and by order; for true wisdom teaches
sobernes, and prudence, righteousness, and strength, Wisd. 8.7.
which are the most profitable things that men can have in this life. But if
any man shall think, that ceremonies being external things in religion, are
not to be exacted with such violence, that their careful refusing should
deprive them of performance of greater good; these in my opinion first err in
the over slight estimation of ceremonies, and then if they were but of that
nature (as contemptibly they think of them) the alteration of such belongs
not to them, neither have they (where obedience is commanded) reason to refuse
conformity with so much stomach; especially in matters which by them are
accounted of that nature. But because some of them think that ceremonies are
but small things, and yet that a small thing may trouble the eye, Nichols in
the Plea. page 16. lin. 1.9.
as these the conscience; I am sorry that they have so far weighed the hurt
which themselves might receive by doing of them, and so lightly valued the
harms they have offered by their wilful disobedience, to the lawful
ordinations of a reformed member of Christ's Church. If the Church of England
retained any ceremonies that were unholy and superstitious, demonstration
should have been made in this kind, What they are: how many: of what nature:
why dangerous: to which doubts (being the sober demands of a weak
conscience) if due satisfaction could not have been given, doubtless those who
had the execution of such laws, would have given tolleration for a time, that
they might be resolved, if by their humility they manifested a desire that
they had to learn: but se^ing they confess that by the late Queens
Injunctions, Nichols in the Plea of the Innoc page 43. lin. 10. Mark the word
all.
all superstitious ceremonies are taken away, ^s shrines, tables, pictures, and
such like (a testimony not unworthily given to the reformed government of so
good a Prince) it is but a slender exception annexed, such do we take the
surplesse to be. A weak eye surely would have seen a difference, and an
humble mind would have endured much more, rather then by such violent
oppositions to have so far troubled the Churches peace. I cannot well observe
in the tennor of that last defense, the Plea of the innocent, what their
constant opinion is concerning the ceremonies misliked in our Church; unless
they mean that they are idle, indifferent, and humane ordinations, whilst
they are commanded; but being disobeyed by them, they are waight^i, and great
causes, able to warrant resistance and rebellion in the highest measure. I wish
they would either account them as trifles, and so being commanded not so
stiffly refuse to use them; or else esteem them matters of great moment, and so
think the governors of the Church have reason, and warrant so much to urge
them. But the things say they in controversy which we desire to be reformed
and others earnestly maintain, Nichols page 91. lin. 27.
are but accessarie additaments, brought into the Church by humane
constitution, and without these the religion would stand. Page 92. lin. 17.
But we are sure that once being brought in, they are to be obeyed for
conscience; and surely the religion that would stand without them, with them
shall be able to stand much better. Many things which are not requis^t for the
being, are notwithstanding required, to the well being. But afterward speaking
of themselves, as desirous to be justified for their dealing in this cause,
Nichols in the Plea page 124. lin. 18.
they call it a good just and wa^ghtie cause founded in Gods word; injuriously
reputed and termed, an accidental fancy, and devise. I hope wise men from
their own wrytings will observe the dealings of these men; that they may not
be urged by authority to obedience (a point of religion I wish they had well
learned) they call these things but additaments, Nichols. page 91.27.
fit enough to be contemned, because they are humane constitutions; and yet
after to approve their obstinacy for refusing of them, they call them weighty
causes; this contrariety may peradventure deceive some, Tenue est (...),
perlucet si dili^enter inspe^eris. Se^ec.
but truth at the length will discover it self. Falsehoode is slight and
shines through if we look into it. These only mislike what they are not
autho^s of themselves, and ever labor for excuses, as reasons to warrant what
they do mislike. Nich page 171 lin. 9.
They think and say it is pitrie necessary service (wherein I think they
understand their preaching) should be houlden back, by these unnecessary
ceremonies. But if unnecessary (whereof it is not fit for them to be judges)
why do they not rather yield unto them by conformity, then deprive themselves
by their obstinacy, of doing that good, which by obedience they might? and if
any man think these ceremonies unlawful (as weakness may stumble in the
plainest way) why do not they who have cast these doubts, show which they are,
the dangers of them; and aduer tise those as becomes them that make laws,
seeing we use none but those which the law does warrant? besides if abuses had
crept in with these ceremonies, and things tolerated first for good ends,
could not afterward be retained, but with great abuse, these only had been to
be removed by authority, and not from the fancies of private men. It is their
error who think it the act of reformation to take things away and not only
the abuse; Reformatio est repetitio vel restitutio facti antiqui. In pro^m.
Clement. lib. 3.. penult. de itiner. act. 1. August. ad Publicolam. epist. 154.
for reformation is properly the repetition and restitution of the ancient
use; neither can that be said to be reformed which is made new; far be it from
us faith an ancient Father that things which are good and lawful, if through
the corruption of some few they become hurtful, that this should be imputed to
us as our fault. For thus the use of all things were dangerous and unlawful,
seeing nothing can be so profitably employed from whence danger may not arise,
unto those that snall use them otherwise. Multum egerunt qui ante nos fuerunt,
sed non peragerunt. Senec. epist. 65.
Doubtless they have done much in this that have been before us, yet some thing
may be added by those which follow; wherein if we alter or dissent from them,
it can be no blemish to their names, which are not mentioned by us, but with
much honor. It is sufficient Rome knew not Cato but when she lost him. Catonem
non intellexit ciuitas nisi cum perdidit. Inuadit temperatissimos morbus;
innocentissimos paena; secretissimos tumultus. Sen. epist. 91.
And the innocence and virtue of Rutilius had lain secret, if he had not
received injury. But diseases (as a wise man notes) sometimes overtake those
that are most temperate; punishment those that are most innocent; and tumults
those that are most secret. But to conclude this point (and to i^stifie the
Church of England, in the matter of ceremony, wherein she has heard evil, by
some of her own children without cause) I doubt not to affirm, that few men
have ever red any judgment, or censure of ceremonies written with greater
moderation and learning, then that which is published next after the preface in
the communon book, out of which it shall not be amiss, to note the just
reprehension of the intemperat affectours of innovation, as also the lawful
defense of such ceremonies as soberly they are used in our Church. Ceremonies
there are which though they have been devised by man, yet it is thought good to
reserve them still, as well for a decent order in the Church for the which they
were first de^ised, as because they pertain to edification whereunto all
things done in the Church, as the Apostle teaches o^ght to be referred; and
although the keeping or omitting of a cerimonie in it self considered, is but
a small thing, yet the wilful and contemptuous transgression and breaking of
a common order and discipline is no small offense before God; let all things be
done among you says Saint Paul in a seemly and due order; the appointment of
which order pertains not to private men, therefore no man ought to take in
hand, nor presume to appoint or alter any public or common order in Christ's
Church, except he be lawfully called and authorized thereunto. And as
concerning those persons which peradventure will be offended for that some of
the old ceremonies are retained still, if they consider that without some
ceremonies, it is not possible to keep any order or quiet discipline in the
Church, they shall easily perceive just cause to reform their judgments, and
if they think^ much that any of the old remain, and would rather have all
devised anew, then such men granting some ceremonies convenient to be had,
surely where the old may be well used, there they cannot reasonably reprove the
old, only for their age, without bewraying their own folly. For in such a
case, they ought rather to have reverence unto them for their antiquity, if
they will declare themselves to be more studious of unity, and concord, then
of innouations and new fanglnes; which as much as may be with the true setting
sorth of Christ's religion, is always to be eschewed. In these our doings we
condemn no other nation, nor prescribe any thing but to our own people only.
An excellent censure and grave moderation fit to be considered by all that are
desirous to alter our church ceremonies. And surely it must needs seem
strange that when all opinions how false so ever, have had this happiness that
some of their maintainers have had the coullorable helps of learning to defend
their cause; the chief adversaries in this, have dealt at all times so
weakly, as if all of them purposely had meant to have betrayed it. For to
speak without partiallity what truth requires in this point, the principal
and first opposites, that I read of unto our Church ceremonies, were those
that in Queen Mary's time got the liberty to plant a Church at Franckford;
where first joining with the French afterward out of their humors strengthened
with some counsel from Geneua, so far dissented from their religious and
learned countriemen, which having left their country for the profession of the
Gospel, Read the discourse of the troubles begun at Franckford, 1555. about
the book of common prayer and ceremonies.
lay then at Zurick, Strausborugh, Wezell, and Emden, that some books, and the
greatest part of christendom was filled with the vnreuerent, unholy and
unnatural contentions of that time. This unwise and inconsiderate dislike (yet
then much more tolerable where they had some show of authority to plant a
Church) kindled that fire which has burned ever since, and without great
resolution and wisdom of some in authority, doubtless long ago, had burst
fourth into a dangerous flame within the very bowels of our Church; and all
only from this head, that whilst the greater part was loath to yield to the
wiser and more learned, some sparks of that opposition (notwithstanding their
show of reconcilement when they heard of Queen Mary's death, daungerously
brake out, when they returned home. They from Franckeford, This letter was
subscribed with 17. hands whereof Knox, Whittingam, and Fox were three.
wrote to them of Zuricke by Master Grindall (after that reverent Archbishop)
and master Chambers, that they thought not that any godly man would stand to
the death in the defense of ceremonies; which as the book specified upon just
occasions may be altered and changed; accounting it an argument that they are
slenderly taught which for breach of a cerimonie will refuse such a singular
benefit as to join with the Church. They likewise from Strausgburgh only
desired such use of the communion book, This letter written, December. 13. 1554.
as no reasonable man shall justly reprove; a grave moderation doubtless in them,
and a just censure against all those, as being unreasonable men which reprove
it at this day. Some of those that fled vertously out of their own country
(which was then for the most part an altar for ye bodies of ye dead, or a
prison^^ the souls of the living) unadvisedly were content to make a schism,
as the Donatists from the Roman Church, for the keeping of Easter, This letter
was subscribed with eleven of their hands, whereof Knox, Gil^y, Whittingam, and
Goodman were four. From these; Horn. D. Cox. D. Sands and diverse others did
not nor would not dissent.
and only through the dislike of a few ceremonies, which in a letter that they
wrote after Queen Mary's death for ending of these contentions, they call
trifles, and superfluous ceremonies. I cannot enough wonder how men of learning
and judgment (as most of them surely had both) could in time of banishment, in
a strange city, and amongst themselves, for the space of four or five years,
nourish a contention with that bitterness, for things of that nature which the
most eager amongst them, did account but trifles. It had been surely a great
honor to them, and a greater happiness to this Church, if they had remembered
themselves (though in exile) to have been a part of it, and so have framed
their orders to the government, Ianu. 3. 1559. This was subscribed with eleven
hands. James Pilkinton, John Mullings, Henry Carow, Edmund Isaac, etc. Read
the discourse of the troubles begun at Franckford page 189. Master Gilby. This
letter was written Anno 1570. to Master Couerdall, Master Turner, Master
Whittingam, Master Sampson, Master Humphrey, Master Leauer, Master Crowley.
and those ceremonies which were established by law, and used by them in King
Edwards time. To this letter they of Franckeford make a wiser and far more
reasonable answer, that it shall be to small purpose for them to contend for
ceremonies, where it shall lie neither in your hands nor ours to appoint what
they shall be; but in such men's wisdoms, as shall be appointed to the
devising of the same, and which shall be received by common consent of the
Parliament: and a little after, All reformed Churches differ amongst themselves
in ceremonies, and yet agree in the unity of doctrine, we see noe
inconveniences if we use some ceremonies diverse from them, so that we agree in
the chief points of our religion. If all of them at their return home, had
observe the moderation that was in some few, such clamorous inuectiues had not
been used against those, whose places inioyne them to see an observation (for
the uniformity of the Church) of those few, modest, and comely ceremonies,
which the law appointed. But at their return, one of them a man (otherwise in
the opinion of some virtuous, and learned) charge us that we make these
Antichristian rags (for so it pleases him in his heat to call them) causam
sine qua non, in Christ's holy ministry; so that these make an english priest
be he never such a doult or villane, and without these Romish reliks not Paul
himself should preach. What could any of our adversaries have spoken more
bitterly against our clergy? and surely in the ears of any temperate, and
wise man, it must needs seem a strange and inconsiderate speech, to slander
a whole Church with so little reason, especially that Church, whose honor and
peace should have been maintained by him. We dare in this take their own
offer, to rest upon melancholy judgment (a thing peradventure not so fit in
another case) that when the opinion of holiness, Melanch^. in Rom, 14.
of merit, of necessity (meaning a religious necessity) (not a necessity of
obedience) is put into things indifferent, then they darken the light of the
Gospel, and ought to be taken away. But they are with us, as all other things
of that nature, of comlines, of order, of obedience. And the same which was the
reason to those in authority to remove others, was likewise their reason to
retain these; wherein if their wisdoms saw not so much (as others
peradventure would have done if they had been in their places) we dare not take
upon us to censure their doings, but where scripture is not against it, we are
desirous to be obedient unto those, that do rule over us. And where some
think it is as lawful (if the Prince command) to wear Aarons garments,
Regest. page 41.
as these, and if not Aarons much less the Popes; first we say not that these
are the Popes, (howsoever peradventure by them used before us) neither are we
bound (for any thing that I know) so precisely in all things to dissent from
them. We are willing to retain of theirs what we may, that those amongst us
which superstitiously are addicted to them, may see that it is not of malice,
that we are parted, and themselves may have less couller of excuse, for
dissenting from us But for any Prince to command the wearing of Aarons
grrments, in that manner, and to that end that Aaron ware them, were to erect
that priesthood which is abolished, and those ceremonies which were types and
ended at the passion of Christ in despite of his passion to call again.
Neither can there be a comparison more inconsiderately made, then betwixt these
two, seeing for the one not to be used their reasons are neither many nor of
great weight, and for the other to be used, there is none at all. For if the
law be taken away, whose priestly apparel and garments were only a figure
and shadow of Christ to come, he then which does use such garments of Aaron,
does heretically with the Jews confess that Christ is not yet come, and does
as much as in him lies renew the shadows by him abolished, and receiving
again his schoolmaster Moses, does forsake Christ. Gal. 5.
Therefore stand in the liberty wherewith Christ has delivered you, and be
not wrapped again in the yoke of bondage; wherefore seeing these ceremonies
are neither the dregs of popery, nor cannot in reason offend the weak, nor
have any religion actually placed in them, we see no cause as yet why they may
not be continued in our Church.

CHAP. VII. Of Subscription.
AS there is little hope of peace in the outward government of that Church,
where the leaders of others are not willing, or think it not lawful, to be
obedient; so there is no one act, in the observation of al wise man, more
available, and in reason more likely, to procure this, then that which tyeth
the tongue, and hands, from any way resisting these lawful ordinances that
preserve peace. A thing (doubtless) if it had been well wayed, by those holy
disturbers of the Churches rest, who (notwithstanding all this) are desirous to
seem innocent; surely themselves would have been foremost both to have done and
suffered whatsoever would have served to have furthered the offices of
devotion, and to have blessed the Church with so much happiness. Neither can
they be excused in this, as men wholly ignorant, seeing all know that the best
times for performing religious duties, is when the Church is at unity in it
self; and the means to attain this, is for inferiors to be subject to those
reasonable directions that others give. Both because submission in them, is a
part of duty, and few that have authority to command, if they want reason
for that they do (a thing not to be thought in men of that wisdom and in a
matter of so great importance) yet seldom they want resolution, severely to
exact dutiful obedience, where they do command, Mildnes which in some other
cases may be a virtue being in this a vice; Exodus 18.2.
opposite to that courage required in those who are to rale over us. So that
whilst some men have published to the world, what others have done, and they
suffered in this kind; In the Plea of the Innocent.
a hard censure of reproach for wilful resistance will blemish them to the
worlds end, and a memorable testimony of the others courage, shall follow
amongst all posterities their blessed names, even from the writings of such, as
do most dispraise them. The fruit of their righteousness being the Churches
peace, whilst the peevish refusal in others, Iam. 3.18.
served only but to make a schism. And as the glorious Saints in heaven
(those blessed spirits freed from the troubles of this life) enjoy in Gods
presence an eternal peace (who before in their flesh were comforted with the
peace of the holy Ghost:) so if against outward enemies, both at home and
abroad, they might have obtained peaceful days and nights, There is pax. 1.
Temporis 1. Pectoris. 3. Aternitatis. Ber.
this threefould cable should be hardly broken; and the Church might sing as we
have cause (and more might have had if these men would) that God has done
great things for us already whereof we rejoice; for that blessing which is the
happiness of all other societies, cannot in reason but be a singular advantage
for the better performance of our religious duties in Gods service. This being
the principal end of that great benefit of peace, that all men inioying those
particular things without danger, which God has given them, have stronger
motions to give him praise, and better means without disturbance to glorify
that name, which is great wonderful and holy. Psalm. 99.
And surely if it had not been for the ouerheadie disobedience of some men, we
might have given this glorious testimony of the happiness of this land, that
peace was within our walls, and plentiousnes within our palaces, and that all
the days of Queen Elizabeth the Church had rest. A blessing doubtless so long
continued, such as our fathers never saw the like, and when it shall be told
to our childrens children that are to come, they will not believe it. I have
ever in my weak opinion so far honored the holy instruments of peace, that I
did always think, that their could not be a surer argument of an evil cause,
Nolumus hun^ regitare.
then in a Church reformed to resist authority, and to disobey those that
should rule over us. All other things observe that law which their maker
appointed for them; Psalm. 148.6.
for he has given them a law which shall not be broken. This must needs be
the reproof of man (says Saint Ambrose) but most of all unto such, In Hexamer.
who being the children of the Church (nay which is more ministers to serve in
it) are notwithstanding disobedient unto those laws which in great wisdom
for her own safety, the Church has made. As if she now might complain as
Saint Bernard did out of the Prophet Esaias; Esa. 38.16.
behold for felicity I had bitter grief; Amara prius in nece martyrum;
amarior post in conflictu^. ereticorum; amarissimanunc in moribus domesticorum.
Ber. in Cant. Sen. 23. Ne perderet obedie (...) ^uit (...) tam (...) Man (...)
ratio, (...) peior. (...) Quod (...) sanctu^ (...) Vera o^ (...) tianihil (...)
de suo (...) tum de. (...) ^er. 28.^ (...) Gen 3. 1 King. 20 ^
bitter before in the death of Martyrs, more bitter after in the conflict with
heretics; but most of all now with my own house. Unlike in this to that
master, whose scholars they desire to seem, who chose rather to loose his
life, then to disobey. We had rather all of us invent, and teach, then hear
and follow; for our reason is but an evil lackey, but our will is worse.
Seeing we want not reasons (as we think) to warrant us in that we do;
accounting the commandments of others to be against right, and what we will
our selves that to be most holy. Whereas true obedience has nothing of his
own, but is wholly another; it is dangerous when we say desperately, surely
we will walk after our own imaginations, and do every man after the
stubbornes of his wicked heart. This virtue of obedience makes good things
unlawful as the eating of the forbidden tree to Adam; and evil things to be
good and lawful, as to smite the Prophet; the one because he did what he was
forbidden was punished with death, and the other was devoured of a Lion because
he did it not. That which at another time ought to have been omitted and could
not be done without a great sin, now (being commanded) without a great sin
could not be omitted. Neither is the fault much less (though the parties be
diverse) so long as the authority that commands is all one; nor can we
(unless we flatter our selves over much) think that we are obedient to God,
whilst we are willing to disobey those whom he in his wisdom has placed
over us. Neither are we so much to way (in things not simply unlawful) what
that is that is commanded, Non attendit verus obediens quale sit quod
precipitur hoc solo contentus quia precipitur. Ber. in lib. de precep and
dispens. In vitia alter alterum tradimus. Sen. epist. 41. Authoritatem habemus
senum vitia puerorum Senec. epist. 4. Qui virtutem suam publicare vult non
virtuti laborat sed gloria. Sen. epist. 113. Nemo amplius in ecclesia nocet
quam qui perverse agens nomen vel ordinem sanctitatis habet. Delinquentem
namque hunc redarguere nullus presumit and in exemplis culpavehementius
extenditur quando pro reuerentia ordinia peccator honoratur Gregor. in past.
as with this to be content, that it is commanded. This if it had been duly
considered by some in our Church, they had neither gloried so much that in not
yielding to order they were unlike others, neither had they with such show of
reason, labored to make the ignorant believe, that the lawful, wise, and
religious exacting, of subscription, was like unto an inquisition and the
tyranous requiring of an unlawful thing. But in this fact wherein the wisdom
of authority was thought too cruel, they are able to answer why they did
refuse. For what men being enjoined by order do not, doubtless of that (in
equity) they are bound to give a reason: which whilst some have labored to
perform in this kind, the world has seen what small and weak excuses they
have had to refuse obedience; a thing which must in the end lie heavy upon
them, that have made resistance without cause, or else upon them that without
warrant, did exact it from them. Neither have these refusers of subscription,
been only actors themselves in this disobedience, but the authors by their
example have thrust with violence, men of less learning and greater
moderation, into the like contempt. This being as one notes the principal
unhappiness of those men, that they had the authority of the aged, and the
faults of youth. Who being in this (as they thought) to publish their virtue;
were supposed not without cause, in the opinion of wise men, that they affected
glory. The Church has found the example of these to be very dangerous, who
were thought in that wherein they did amiss to be very holy. For such a one
few are willing to reprove; and example does enlarge the fault when the sinner
is honored for the reverence of his person. Doubtless there was no act since the
death of Queen Mary, either of greater wisdom to preserve the peace of the
Church in those that were first authors of it, or of more dangerous
disobedience in the refusers, then the act of subscription was. A practice not
first invented by us, but arising of it self, even from that natural care,
which ought to be in all of authority, to take security (as it were) for the
good behavior, of all such as are admitted to teach others. By this one act
both binding their hands and tongues from any way disabling the Churches
orders, and testifying to the world, the unity of that Church where all of one
calling, have given their approbation, to those lawful ordinations, which
authority in wisdom, moderation, and virtue have set down. Whereby it
appears, as their grieuance to be less, so their fault to be much greater
then they think, who have refused to subscribe, and have labored with others
to do the like; A thousand of them.
whilst notwithstanding they have given their hands (and do daily) not only
to their own dicipline (wherein the best amongst themselves agree not and the
meaner have not knowledge toexamine) but also to false suggestions, intemperate
petitions, unjust complaints, laws and ordinances of their own. For all which
they have (by many degrees) less warrant, than to subscribe, to that which
they do refuse. This only being the difference, that they distaste any thing
that is not new, and their hands are ruled by example, and fancy, in that they
do. Wherein if they had well considered in humility, that obedience which the
Church might exact of them, as also (without prejudice) the lawfulnes of those
things, whereunto they were required to set their hands; doubtless the urging
would not have been thought a matter of so much rigor, nor the refusing be so
much defended, as a thing lawful. For what indifferent man can think it
unmeet, that when the Prince, and the Parliament have made orders, Ca^ons,
Injunctions, Articles, or any thing of that kind, for the uniformity in the
Church government, that a Bishop having authority to institute into spiritual
livings with cure, should require by subscription a consent unto these things,
before he be admitted in to that charge? A thing if by his own authority for
the peace of that dioces committed to his care the Bishop had done, surely the
fault had been much less, then in any that had refused to perform obedience.
But seeing the law does inioyne subscription, and that they (howsoever wronged
by the clamorous complaints of some) are but ministers to see the due execution
of the law, for the peace of the Church, they have as little reason to lay the
burden of this upon the Bishops shoulders, as a robber by the high way* his
apprehension, arrainment, and execution to the justice charge. The law in them
both having made that provision, that they which do what the law forbids, or
do not what the law commands, must be content (for their own fault)
willingly to suffer what the law inflicts. And therefore it must needs be by
so much the more strange, that men who are content to flatter the Prince, the
Parliament, and those that do make laws, can think themselves warranted to
refuse obedience, and revile those honorable and reverend persons to whom only
is committed the execution of them. Besides, places, times, and persons,
orderly with judgment and conscience concurring to make laws, every person in
the land having resigned his particular intrest to those, who are assembled to
that end, all after examination is debarred, to all how wise so ever, who are
not admitted to that, and at that time; much more to the rest, whose weakness
of judgment cannot without apparent suspicion of intolerable pride, take upon
them the examination of those laws, before they can easily be drawn to
subscribe unto them. The particular exceptions that are made by them (although
severally answered by sundry most learned and grave men heretofore) yet then
we shall better examine when we come to the defense of the Communion book.
Chap. 13.
Only we say now, that the urging of subscription, so far as the Bishops
do, and ought, is warranted by law from man, and the disobedience of those
who refuse to do it, is no way warranted by the laws of God. So that both the
tumultuous and clamorous outcries, which they have raised, only for this, and
the slender excuses pretended for so foul a fact, are but like the coullerable
rebellions, which for enlarging of commons, the basest of the people have
stirred up. But least peradventure I should do them wrong, I am willing that
the reader should hear them speak. And herein I will make choice of him, who
coming later then the rest, undertaking from the writings of others to plead
the cause, has labored to free them from this great fault, and to justify
that they have performed so much as the statute required in this kind. It is
like he rather desired to tell the world that he was an actor in the troubles
of that time, then to give reasons, for that which he and they did, or to crave
with submission, pardon of the Church, for that which they did not. About the
year (says one) 1571. subscription was enforced upon the Ministry, Nichols
in the Plea of the Innoc page 8. lin 9.
for which cause in that time, certain men wrote an admonition to the
Parliament opening diverse things worthy of reformation, whereupon arose great
volumes of proving, and defending, etc. But in the midst of these fiery
contentions, a goodly space of quietness about the time that the reverend father
Master Grindall was Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. after the said archbishops
death there came forth a new and fresh assault of subscription, universally
imposed, and again enforced, upon all the ministers in three articles; first
of the Queens majesty's sovereign authority over all persons, etc. secondly
that the book of common prayer, and of ordayning Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, contain in it nothing contrary to the word of God, etc. thirdly to
allow and approve all the articles of religion, agreed upon by the Archbishop
and Bishops, etc, 1562, and to believe all therein contained to be agreeable to
God. The Ministers offered freely and willingly to subscribe to the first
article of her Majesty's most lawful authority: Which they do not whilst
they break that statute. Anno 1. Eliz. for uniformity of prayer. Nichols
Plea. page 54. lin. 14. and page 79. lin. 3.
and for the other two they refused to do any further then by law they were
bound; and namely according to the statute made for that purpose Anno 13.
Hereupon many in diverse shires were suspended from the execution of their
ministry and some deprived. And in another place, We cannot tell whether we
might by the laws and order of this realm, subscribe although it were
otherwise lawful by Gods word; it concerns the whole state advisedly to
consider that the holy ministers of God be not oppress lwith an unjust
subscription. This the author calls in another place the first great storm
that fell upon them, Nichols Plea page 80. lin. 8.
and in another place this he makes to be the fruits of subscription that the
unpreaching minister, and the nonresident are both warranted by it; and in
another place it is, (meaning subscription) against many good and learned
ministers, Nichols. Plea page 223. lin. 13.
and some it thrusts out. Others before this author, both for time and
worthiness, have stiffly (but I doubt scarce considerately) refused obedience in
this point. Subscription shaked the heavens and darkened the skies. Nich page
226 lin. 11.
The some of all their reasons tending to this end, that many obscure
untruths, were contained in those things, whereunto they required that they
should subscribe; all aiming at this, that nothing was ever so grievous in the
Church, to the humors and dispositions of these men, as to give by
subscription their allowance unto that which the laws had done. One of them to
the Lords of the council, speaking of subscription; Humble motion page 43.
lin. 24.
when D. Whitgift was made Archbishop, and set forth his unadvised devise, of
subscription, it seemed as a strong pot of brass that would soon have broken
in pieces all the power of poor ministers and made discipline in utter
contempt; I will only put the reader in mind, that though it were no dishonor
unto his grace, to be the author of so wise an order, for the Church, yet the
same (by their own confession) was a law, before her Majesty had called him
to be a Bishop; A Gentleman of the country to a Londoner touching an answer to
the Archb. articles. Regest. page 178.
another (for it were endless and of little use to allege the reasons of
Johnson preacher at Northhampton, of Grayer and many besides published to this
end) being more learned (yet in my opinion less religious the^ the rest) has
set down some reasons, why the Bishops doc urge subscription t^ her Majesty's
authority in causes ecclesiastical; first for a hope of a more sure setlednes
to themselves and their followers; that none may hereafter preach against the
lordlynes of prelates, that none may preach against civil offices in a
preiate; that none may speak against baptism by women; that none may preach
against an unlearned ministry; that none may preach against any corruption
yet established whatsoever. A strange collection thus to aim at the intention
of making laws. But we say no otherwise of him, then a father did in the like
case. Libritui pene totum ^enobis exbibent. Si enim propt^res te non no^imus,
quia saciem corporis t^^non vidi^^us, hoc modo nec ^^se tenos^i, nam in quoque
non vides ca^^ Aust. epist. 9. ^iero. Sibi'a antiqui Serpe^^is. Hi^ron.
Yea^bitrari possunt homine nibil in^enisse quod diceres nisitibi proponeres c^i
malediceres. Aust. contr. Petilian. Donatist. Agnoscens loquacitatis culpam
vsque ad mortem silentium ^enuit, vt quod loquendo contraxerat tacendo
emendaret. Gennad. Catalog.
His words show us wholly what he is, and if we therefore know him not, because
we have not seen his face, neither does he know himself because he does not
see his face. But these doubtless and such like are but as Saint Hierome calls
them, the hissings of the old serpent. For wise men would have thought that
these had had nothing to have spoken, unless they had propounded this to
themselves to have spoken evil. But seeing the tenor of them all is all one
(an vnreuerent estimation and speaking of men in authority and laws that are
made by them) a fault surely not small nor easily forgiven, if the cause were
virtuous; I must needs before I answer them, give them this advise, which I
hope some will follow, they that do as Gennadius reports of one Seuerus
seduced to be a pelagian, acknowledge their loquacitie with him and keep
silence unto death; that they may recompense by their silence what they have
offended in speaking. Now before we answer this, which they have alleged
against subscription; the consideration of the nature of that, doubtless must be
fittest which in all reason ought to be accounted the best warrant to excuse
them, both in this and the rest which they do refuse; a reason which cannot be
the same to all, and in those in whom it is found, without deceit, they are
rather to be pitied and instructed, then to be urged to that (which how
lawful so ever) (their conscience gainesaying) they do make a sin. For
though the conscience of man allowing cannot make that to be no sin, which
the law does, yet the conscience forbidding, may make that to be a sin,
which the law does not. And therefore amongst men of wisdom, and virtue,
there is no Plea that ought to be heard with so much attention, as when men for
that which they do, or do not, truly and sincerely do allege their
conscience. Now as the coullorable excuse for refusing to subscribe, must be
the weakness of such men's conscience, who were persuaded in themselves, the
things to be unlawful whereunto they were required to give allowance; so
surely a double fault must lie upon them (if there be any such) who making no
conscience of those things, pretend only the greatest bond upon earth, to be
the lawful warrant of refusing of that which they would not do. And surely
where fear and humility are both wanting, there it is over much charity to
think that they make a conscience. All men understand not aright, what that is
which they allege for themselves, when they say ( their conscience.) There is
naturally ingrafted in the heart of man, that light of nature which never can
be put out, that tells him that no evil is to be done. Now reason according
to the knowledge that it has (which in some is more, and in some less)
delivers his judgment of particulars, that they are evil or good; from
whence the conclusion follows, they are to be done being good, or omitted
being evil. And this is our conscience; Conscientia est applicatio notitiae
nostrae ad actum particularem Aquinas 2. Script. sent. did. 14. art. 4.
Eccles. 7.23.24.
which is nothing else, but an application of our knowledge to a particular act.
This application is made in a threefould manner; as first to consider whether
such a thing be done or not done; and doubtless in this, our consciences can
best tell the actions and intentions of those which are done by us. Give not
thy heart (says Solomon) to all the words that men speak, least thou do hear
thy servant cursing thee, for oftentimes thy heart knows, that thou likewise
have cursed others. The second application is when we judge of the fact which
is done, whether it be well or evil; the measure of our knowledge in this
making us to mistake, as evil for good, so that to be evil which indeed is
good. The third is, that this, or that, is to be done, Conscientia testis.
Mill. Accusator. Vinculum. Judge. 16.9.
or to be left undone. In the first it is a witness, which will not lie; in the
second, it may accuse, but not absolutely excuse; in the last it may bind,
though it want strength, in this respect only that we are weak. For those new
cords (and such are new opinions) which were not able to hold Sampson, may
easily hold him fast, that is many degrees weaker then Sampson was. 1
Testificatio. 2. Examinatio. 3. Consiliatio.
The first of these respects the time past; the second the time present; the
third for the well or evil doing to the having or suffering the joy or torment
that is to come; 1. De praeteritis. 2. De praeteritis factis and de futuris
faciendis. 3 De faciendis tantum. 1. Dictamen. 2. Examen. 3. Ligamen.
as if he that had made time, the pretiousest circumstance of all our actions,
had set our conscience as the severe and diligent watchman of all our times.
Thus seeing the use of conscience; the next consideration is for the original
of the errors in it: these are two, a false assumption, and a false
application. In the first we take those things to be good or true, which
indeed directly are evil, and false; (an error peradventure that misleadeth a
number in this point;) so those that put the Apostles to death, did think in
that action that they pleased God; for the time was come that our Savior
foretold, whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service. Ioh.
16.2.
In the second a false application, arising out of a true ground; because he
hears that God is to be loved above all things, thinks it unlawful to
love any thing except God. Both these err not alike, but the error of
conscience does infect both. Neither ought a conscience that thus erreth to
bind, seeing the force and strength of conscience, is not built upon himself,
but upon some precept ( seeming so unto it self, being no good reason) but
either because it is commanded, or else forbidden. All the actions of man are of
three sorts; good, evil, and indifrent. If our conscience say that is to be
done, which is naturally good, Eadem ratione prohibentur mala qua praecipiuntur
bona.
it is no error. If it deny that to be done which is evil it is no error; for
by the same reason, evil is forbidden which commands good. But if on the
contrary, it say that is to be done which is naturally evil, or not to be
done which is good (a thing fit to be considered in this case) it is doubtless a
conscience which does err in both. Likewise in indifferent things (as the
removing of a straw) (and yet some wise men have made these things refused by
them, of that nature) to make them of necessity, on either part where
authority has not determined, is a conscience without doubt that does much
err. For every will that disagreeth from reason, Romans 14.
either true, or false, directly sins; for whatsoever is not of faith is
sin: and yet every thing which is done by the will, given assent unto reason,
is not void of sin, because that ignorance which is a fault, Quia ignorantia
quae est ex culpa nocet. Ambros.
cannot possible make the action to be without fault. The conscience as it
includes knowledge and is conjoined with the light of nature is ever right,
yet as it is joined to reason, and about particulars it often erreth; the light
of nature makes the first proposition that it is not lawful to do evil; our
reason (which often erreth either through ignorance or the strength of fancy)
says this is evil; whereupon the conscience being misled, makes a firm and
a strong conclusion, therefore by no means I ought to do it. In the first
proposition there can be no error; Esa. 5 10.
sometimes there is in the second (as peradventure in this act of subscription
whilst we call good evil and evil good) and so a falsehoode in the
conclusion; which as the logicians say, ever follows the weaker part. The
errors on both hands are, when it is either too large tending to presumption,
making evil good; or to strait tending to despair; making good evil; whereas
the Prophet pronounces a woe to both. Now because every conscience that would
not err, ought to be grounded upon the commandment that God gives, doubtless
it is more safe to obey a conscience that erreth not, then the commandment of
any who is but a mortal creature. But those who wilfully suffered martyrdom,
for opinions which they fancied, Martyrs stulta philos. Aust.
and willingly should have disclaimed, were not commended for that they did,
being but the martyrs of foolish philosophy, and no way to be praised for that
they suffered. But in things which are indifferent (as many things misliked
peradventure are) the precept of the superior does bind more, Aquinas in
disput. de veritat. quest. 17. art. 5.
then the conscience of the inferior can; for though the conscience be judge,
yet the other is more immediate under God; and this is but in those things,
which either directly are commanded, or else forbidden. For the subject has
the commandment of the superior for his warrant, Alex. 2 part. Summae. quest.
35 art. 2.
and in things of this nature, his duty is not to examine; but only to
perform what he sees commanded. Wherein surely the consideration ought to be
greatest of those in authority what they do command; but to determine this
point (which peradventure is the case in question) according to that which the
schoolmen say; we answer that the bond of an erring conscience is greater,
because it is more vehement, and binds longer, then in things of this nature
the commandment of a superior does; but directly it is less on the other
side, because it is fitter to be unloosed; for both the bond, and the
conscience are to be reformed, where as the obedience to the superior in this,
can admit no dispensation (things now ceasing to be what they were by nature)
and this being no part of the inferiors duty, to examine the lawful
ordinations that superiors make. Now whether these men that in refusing to
subscribe, say they follow their conscience, are ruled by that which is to be
reformed, or directed by that which shall be their warrant, reason and time
will easily find out, if due examination be taken both of their refusing, and
of the things themselves which they do refuse. The conscience which does err
though it bind until it be reformed, ought notwithstanding to be reformed;
because, either ignorance, negligence, pride, inordinate affection, faintnes,
perplexity, or self love, are the corrupt and original causes of the errors
of it. So that if none of these have ouerruled the conscience of these men, but
that knowledge with due consideration has directed them in that they did, we
have great reason to harken to their excuse, and to regard them with more
attention, whilst with reverence and humility they allege their conscience.
In the mean time for remedy against these errors, let them not disdain the
counsel which wise men have found to be most safe, if it be of ignorance to
say with Iehosaphat, 1. Chro. 20.12
we know not what to do but our eyes are toward thee; if of negligence to
come without partiallitie or prejudice as Nichodemus to Christ, Ioh. 3.
to those that for knowledge are fit to teach them. If of pride to submit our
selves one to another, 2. Cor. 10.18.
and especially to those that have more learning and do rule over us; for he
that praises himself, is not allowed but he whom the Lord praises. A
singularity in this kind has been the original of most heresies in all
ages, and not the least occasion of the troubles of these times; for he that
walks uprightly walks bouldly (the rest are presumptuous) but he that
peruerteth his ways, Pro. 10.9.
shall be known. If from inordinate affection, making that lawful which we
have a mind to do, we must harken to judgment, and refuse our affections in
this case; Perit omne iudicium cum res transit in affectum. Sen.
for judgment turned into affection, does all perish. If from faintnes, then
only to be scrupulous and fearful when we have cause, least we think it
lawful because we streane a knat, for to swallow a Cammell. If of perplexity,
when a man is closed as it were betwixt two sins, where he is not able
(though willing) to avoid both; that which will not make either to be lawful,
will make one of them directly a less sin. This is not ever to do evil,
that good may come of it; for though the casting away of things profitable for
the sustenance of man's life, be an unthankful abuse of the fruits of Gods
good providence toward mankind; yet this consideration did not hinder Saint
Paul from throwing corn into the sea, when care of saving men's lives made it
necessary to loose that which else had been better saved. For of two such
evils being not both euitable, the choice of the less is not evil; Hooke^.
lib 5. page 15.
and evils (as a wise man notes) must be in our construction judged
inevitable, if there be no apparent ordinary way to avoid them; because where
counsel and advise bear rule, of Gods extraordinary power without
extraordinary warrant we cannot presume. Last of al, if of humility, (an
error surely of least danger;) we wish them only to take heed of to much
fear; Bonarum mentium est ibi culpas agnocere vbi culpa non est Gregor. Dum
perturbatur conscientia hominis, reparatur in homine similitudo conditoris.
else we say it is the property of good minds there to acknowledge a fault,
where no fault is. For whilst the conscience of man is troubled in this
manner, grace repaireth in man the excellent image of his first maker. Thus
giving our simple direction, and not daring to censure the consciences of such,
as think their refusal to be warranted with pretense of conscience; we will
examine a little what they have said, and done, and whether the exacting or
refusing of subscription, was a greater sin. If the urging of subscription
which the law required, was the cause of those several admonitions which the
Parliament had, surely a worse effect could not have proceeded from so good a
cause, then that which was a virtuous invention to make peace, by the unquiet
disposition of some few, should become the original fountain of so much
war. And surely that mildnes, which that reverend Archbishop Grindall used in
those times, little auailed with those men for to make them better; which in
wisdom ever since, has caused others in that place, for to use the less.
For experience (even in them) finds it to be most true, that favor in that
kind they esteem but desert, and the patience of others but their own merit.
Yet wise men in the same place, at diverse times, to the same persons, may use
direct contrary courses and both well. The second enforcing of subscription in
the three articles of supremacy, the book of common prayer, with those things
annexed, and the book of articles made in the Synod 1562. the first they
allow, but as for both the other they esteem them unlawful, Elizab. 13.
and such as the statute requires not of them; where me thinks it is strange
that men which do not so much as the law requires, will allege
(notwithstanding) the law for their warrant, in that which they do not. For
if either the urging of law, by the virtue of law, or not against law, could in
wisdom have served to make peace; those men had little reason to have been
against it, who were not able to prove that it was unlawful, and knew the
authority to be lawful that required it of them. Neither was there any great
reason, to hope for obedience in subscribing to the articles (if the law
required it) seeing they are not willing toward the communion book to afford
that allowance which the law required. 1. Elizab.
And howsoever I take not upon me to interpret the meaning of that statute, yet
surely the pretended exception of law, is of little force, seeing both the
Archbishops and Bishops and all the clergy in the conuocatio^, subscribed unto
them; and that all Canons which the Church does make, have either confirmation
under the great seal, or the parties that make them, have warrant by the
statute for that they do. And if it had not been, ever their practice to make
a pretense of law, for that for which they have no warrant, neither would they
do it if the law commanded; it were better to be excused in that they refuse
with pretense of law. With the same boldness some have affirmed that the present
government of the Church of England by Archbishops and Bishops under the Prince
is to be accounted unlawful by the statutes of this land, Martin Junior These.
50.
and that to be a Lord Bishop is directly against the statute Eliz. 13. A
practice like this some of the Church of Rome have lately used against us,
Apologeticall epistle.
as though our oppositio^ against them, were beyond law; and the instruments
made for our defense, and to cut them off, were intruth the safest protection
their actions had. But have these men that thus earnestly pretend law, either
never subscribed to any thing of their own without law, or ever been obedient
to the laws of others? surely if they had, the contention in this kind, had
been buried that day when it was first borne. But the English when they came to
Franckeford were tied to subscribe to the same confession of faith, Discourse
of the troubles. page 6.
which the French had: after they themselves enjoined all to subscribe to their
discipline, Ibid. page 8.
that they might show that they were ready and willing to be subject to it.
Nay D. Cox (a man at that time far better I think then any that refuse
subscription) and his company were not admitted to have voices in the Church
of Frankeford, Ibid. page 39.
until they had subscribed to the discipline as others had done before them.
These holy conscionable refusers to assent to the ordinations that others make,
are violent exactors of subscription, and obedience, in a strange country, at
their betters hands, to those petty orders, which are of their own making.
March. 1.1556.
When Master Horn was made pastor of the Church at Frankeford, he received
all such persons as members of that Church, which were contented to subscribe
and to submit themselves to the orders of it. Ibid. page 62.
A wise course not unfit for a greater government, wherein all men ought to
bind themselves some way or other, unto the obedience of those under whom they
live. Nay if any minister appeal to the magistrate, and be found to do it
without just cause (a fault surely less then their refusing to subscribe) yet
then he shall be directly deposed from his ministry by them. Ibid. page 132.
Neither was this the practice of those times, and in that place, but even at
home those men, who had neither authority to make laws nor to exact of others
allowance of them, Danger. pos. page 98.
have required, and had, a general subscription to that discipline, which
neither scripture, wisdom, law, or themselves, could approve unto us. So that
all those inconsiderate and irreverent terms which most of them have
intemperately uttered, against subscription, Quicquid lacerato animo dixeris
punientis est impetus non charitas corrigentis: diligeand di^ quicquid voles.
August.
are but the violent courses of men, that desire to punish, and not the
charity of such as should (if they had authority) correct. Let them show
their affection, that they love our Church, and then we will allow them to
utter and advise what they think good. In the mean time, those false
coniecturall effects, for which subscription was required (as they think) are
but uncharitable devises of their own, only to make those in authority to be
more odious; that contempt of their persons, breeding disobedience to their
government, either a general dissolution may bring a palsy into the Church,
or else we must only be ruled by orders of their making. Which because neither
reason, nor experience has taught us to be so safe, we hold the exacting of
subscription to be lawful and necessary, in those that do it, and the
refusal to be dangerous, unholy, and unwarranted, in those that are
disobedient. They which have labored in their zealous defenses, to make the
world for to think otherwise, they have taken upon them to justify themselves
with to much love, and to censure our Church with to much rigor. But it is like
a better consideration will possess them now, when they shall have small
reason to fear, either partiallitie, or want of understanding, to make the
chief in authority either not willing, or not able, to perceive their
weighty reasons, alleged against those things, which they do mislike. But
wise men surely have cause to fear, that nothing will either much, or long,
please them, which is not some transformed monster of their own making. So
that if any defect be in that statute (as they urge) made by our late
sovereign of blessed memory, whereby the refusers may pretend a warrantable
excuse for not yielding by subscription an absolute obedience both to the
doctrine, We desire humbly his M^iestie and the whole Parliament to consider
this.
government, and ceremonies of the Church, we hope that now having tasted of
the sower fruits, of their disobedience, and seeing without prevention that
more dangerous inconveniences, are like to follow it will not be thought
unfit, either in his majesty's singular wisdom and great judgment, or in the
honorable consideration of the whole Parliament, is stricter laws be now made
to take security by subscribing, of the tongues and the hands of these men,
which so often with so much liberty, and boldness they have wilfully employed
to the hinderance of the Churches peace; we demand but in this, what they
think reasonable in their own discipline; not only for men but for women, to
the avoiding of heresies and sects, in the Church. And if he that has most
learning and has been most earnest for the alteration of our Church government
be able to make demonstration, that their hands are required to give consent to
any one syllable, either in our ceremonies, our liturgy or our discipline,
which truth will not warrant, and obedient humility exact from them, I doubt
not but the Bishops of our land are, and will be ready, either to give them
satisfaction why they ought to do it, or yield unto their earnest demands,
that it may not be done. But if any man think that the urging of this (wherein
doubtless a remisnes in some has done more hurt then rigor) is either to
confirm those things, which without the allowance of these great refusers to
subscribe, might peradventure be thought to want authority; or that it is
merely a politic invention, besides law, whereby the practices of the Bishops
and others, may be free from reproof, he does uncharitably misconster a
religious ordination, for great use, and to the wrong of himself, sinisterly
suspect in both. So that we think we may (notwithstanding their great
complaints of cruel^ie, persecution, and tyranny, wherewith diverse of their
books have slaundered the most pure, peaceable, and reformed government that
ever this nation had since it was christian, giving occasion to the common
adversary, to write as they have done of the English justice) safely
conclude, that the exacting of subscription used by the Bishops, in the Church
of England is lawful, and ne^essarie, and the refusers, are immodest,
disturbers, of the unity, and peace, both of the Church, and the Commonwealth.

CHAP. VIII. Of Discipline.
SEeing that no society upon earth can long (without authority to correct)
retain all her parts in due obedience, and that the disorders of none are of
more danger then of that society which we call the Church; it is of all civil
considerations the greatest, to think of that discipline which is best
warranted, most agreeable to the state of that kingdom where the Church is,
and in all reason likelyest to obtain that end for which discipline is allowed
unto Gods house. So that herein if either their skill had been so great, or
their moderation in that business so much (as peradventure their desire was to
do good) doubtless the Church ought in all reason, to have given great
attention to these careful aduisers, and to have showed her self ready with
thankfulness, to make use of those virtuous endeavors, religiously employed for
her good. But now that they have obtruded a discipline with that violence, and
such a one as must quiet overthrow, both the practice of other Churches, and of
this in all other ages that have been before us, nor this as the invention of
wise men, not against the word, but the express commandment in every
particular of God himself, accounting those to have no Church (this being as
essential as either the word or the sacraments) where this is wanting; we
have great cause both to examine the practices of these men, and to consider
that discipline which they tender unto us, for that which we now have; and what
benefit by this exchange is likely to redownd unto Gods Church. And surely if
both our Disciplines had the like warrant, that they were the lawful
^rdinations of men for the well governing of the Church, not repugnant to the
word of God, yet it is like the advantage would be far greater on our side,
being ancient, not the invention of our selves, found to be safe by
experience, and duly proportioned with the greatness, riches, freedoms, glory
and government of this kingdom, whereas theirs, in their own opinions (if
they were not over partially addicted to it) is new, the invention of late
time, dangerous by experience in a kingdom, and no way proportioned but to the
limits and bounds of some private City; we have known the advocates of this
discipline to have much grace (for which I do honor them) in exhortation and
prayer; but to be either inuentors, or aduisors of laws and ordinations fit
for a Church discipline, their manner of living does not allow them that
wisdom: so that we hold it much safer to retain our own (reforming such
parts as the boldness of sin makes us to think now to be too remiss)
rather than to adventure an exchange, even for that which by so many titles,
they commend unto us. For surely no man is less fit to lend his tongue to give
praise to a work, than he or they, who have lent their heads and their hands
to be authors of it, both because all of us naturally, love what we do our
selves, and seldom have we so much understanding that we do a^^isse, when we
had no more understanding but to fail in the doing of it. But where their own
weakness or want of experience might fail, as not affoording them so much
wisdom to make laws, if there they will urge us with express commandment
of holy Scripture, then it must not seem strange unto them, if that for which
they pretend scripture, without warrant of scripture be not admitted by us,
wherein if they fail, the Church at their hands receives a double wrong,
first a contention to disturb her peace, and secondly, the false pretense of
an everlasting truth, to give authority and warrant to the late, unwise,
inconsiderate and unholy inventions of silly men. Dealing in this but
peradventure with less malice (as Satan and all heretics have done) to
couller temptations and heresies with Gods word. For seeing that with man
(especially in the Church) nothing is, or ought to be of that account as the
scriptu^es are, all men are d^sirous for that which they are willing to
maintain, to allege that proof which having g^eatest authority, must with
men of reason find least resistance. Quod de Scriptura sacris anthantatem non
(...) cadem facilitate contemnitur qua probatur. H^er. in Matt. 26. Scriptura
sacra in (...) and monendo recta est and promittendo al^a and minando ter.
ribilis. Gregor. in Ezech. In sacra scriptura qutequid docetur verit^s;
qui^quid piaecipitur bonitas quicquid promi^titur felicitas est. Hugo.
For in all other things let reason be never so apparent with some men, they
are as easily contemned as they are alleged; this only contained in the two
testaments, both in admonishing is upright, in promising is heavenly, and in
threatening is fearful. All other writings as the assurance is but weak which
they can afford, so their proofs are but the opinions or judgments of
mortal men, and where the hearer is of the same nature with him that
persuades, reason oftentimes does bel^^ue, that he has not much reason to be
persuaded. But in the scriptures (as Hugo says) whatsoever is taught is truth;
whatsoever is commanded is goodness; and whatsoever is promised is happiness;
and therefore these men have proceeded aright (if they be able to prove what
they undertake) in making the plain scripture to be the commander of all
parts of that discipline, which doubtless whithout scripture, reason has
little warrant to think that lawful; we understand then by discipline in this
chapter (which notwithstanding few of the patrones have defined unto us) that
eternal government of the church, and of every member thereof, in respect they
are of the Church, whereby manners are reformed, the peace of the Church
maintained, God glorified, and order and decency procured; this whether in
substance it be such that nothing is to be added, altered, or diminished, is
the principal contention betwixt them and us; our Church holding that it has
this liberty to prescribe orders for the whole assembly; to give direction
for the goods of the Church; and the maintenance of the clergy; for the
proceeding in matters of Church government; making laws and ord^rs; judicial
notice, censures, election of offices, and such like; and this not without the
authority of him, who has the supremacy in all causes; all these we hold
changeabl^ according to times, and places, whereas those (who will needs be
our adversaries in this cause) will have all such as concern the substance of
discipline to be appointed by God, and to be always firm, and immutable, and
the Eldership to have the execution of them; and to this end in every parish or
precinct, there must be a presbytery of doctors, pastors, elders, and deacons;
and of diverse presbiteries, conferences and synodes; all which (say they) are
precisely required in Gods word. D. Sutcliff.
But seeing remonstrance has been made both of the errors of them all, and the
infinite dissentions amongst themselves, we can be content to let that
discipline fall, which stronger then they (if they were willing) could hardly
have strength for to hold up. This discipline of the Church ought to see the
execution of those laws, and ordinances, which God by his Apostles in their
time, and daily since by the Church makes; neither do we think that any in
the bosom of the Church, after so long a time of knowledge, can now doubt, but
that God has left unto his Church, an authority to make laws, the execution
whereof in reason is committed to those, who succeed in place and authority,
the Apostles of Christ, that did plant the Church; whose dominion
(notwithstanding) we make not so absolute, 1. Pet. 5.
that like tyrants at their pleasure, they may rule over Christ's flock; yet
the power that the rulers of the Church have, in matters of a lower nature, are
less limited by far (having warrant to ordain and appoint things
indifferent) which serve for order, Zanch. in decal page 671. Omnia decenter.
comlines, and the edification of Christ's Church. By this authority the
Apostles ordained many things in the Church, 1. Cor. 14.
whereof from Christ they had no express mention; by this power S. Paul
ordained that gatherings should be made at Corinth, upon the Lords day; that
the man should pray bare headed, and the woman covered. Such autho^itie at this
day a particular Church has (as of England France end Scotland, or any other)
that the clergy with the allowance of the prince and the rest, whom it may
concern for to make laws, may ordain, and appoint, ^uch ordinances, as
serving for edification, order, and comlines in the Church, are so long in
force, until they shall be abrogated by that authority that did first make
them. To this we refer, the time, and manner, of public prayer, administering
the Sacraments, ecclesiastical censures, apparel for divine service,
ornaments of Churches, and such like; all which as the Church from Christ has
lawful authority to ordain, so it is peevish disobedience in those men, who
had rather without warrant, impose upon the Church laws of their own making,
then by commandment obey the lawful ordinations that others make. Now because
in no society, al men will be obedient at all times, and that it is little
available to make laws, and no way to see to the execution of them; as the
Church has left unto her admonitions to warn the^, and correctio^s to
restrain; so last of al she has power to suspend, from partaking of the best
things, that the church has, because they have refused to obey, the voice of
the Church, in those lesser ordinations that she made; the severity of the
Church tending to this end, the amendment of such who^ she does correct, and
the terrifying of others from the like offense; wherein if our Church,
administer this discipline with two much lenity (a fault surely if at all in
inferior officers) we had rather adventure the manifest inconvenience of that
evil, then hazard by a new course, the certain molestation of a far
greater. Now because all men will seem to have reason for that they do, and
no reasons are equal to those which the scripture yield, some wise men amongst
them have vndertake^ to make proofs from hence, absolutely in their opinions
sufficient, to establish this new discipline. The consideration of which
weakness, as also the great injury unto Gods word, must needs make, that their
discipline does want proofs, which themselves are rather desirous the^ able to
allege for it. It must needs seem strange, that because Moses and Aaron when
they came into Egypt, Exodus 4 29. Cartwright.
did at Gods commandment call together the elders of the children of Israel
that the very mention of their names, should be alleged as a warrant for the
elders of the church in this new discipline. Nicholas Gallasius.
But one of Gene^a writing upon that place faith, such were understood as by
doctrine, and example did rule, the people; whereas their elders are laymen and
by no means are admitted to teach others. Pelican. and Siml^rus in exodus 4.
Cornel. Bertram de politeia Iudai. dedicated to Master Beza.
Others, peradventure more truly, men of that time, and not much diffe^ing from
that humor, sa^ that neither preachers, nor lay elders are understood by it,
but only such civil governors as were Senators and princes to bear rule And
doubtless whatsoever they wrest out of the old testament to make Moses the
author of it, yet Calvin to whose judgment the chiefest amongst them has
promised to stand in this case, T. C. lib. 1. page 33.
says that the pretended eldership till after the time of the captivity was
never thought of, Calvin in Math 18.
and the reason (as M. Cal^i^ says why they thought of it then) was because it
was not lawful for them, to have a King; as if the government by a King, which
in former times they had, might have bin granted to the^, this institution of
their Sanedrim of elders, had been of no use. So that all those scriptures out
of the old testament by them alleged to this end (as they have alleged many)
are to small purpose; Exodus 4 29. and 17 5. Deuteronomy. 1.15. and 17.12. 2. Chron.
19.8 Ierem. 19.1. Ezech. 8 1.
or if they were, that government were needles, in a realm where there were a
King. And that Sanedrim or council of the Jews erected after their return
from Babylon being seventy elders were of the stock of David, and of their
former Kings; but to bring these into the Church by the mistaken example of
those times, cannot but be dangerous; and the foundation being so weak, this
building of theirs cannot long continue. Doubtless it is not safe in wresting of
scriptures to follow the streme of their own fancies, seeing he that held that
all who would be saved must go to Jerusalem, Ket burnt at Norwich.
forced all places out of the scripture that gave any testimony to commend
Jerusalem either litterall or otherwise, as apparent demonstration to maintain
his error. As these men have dealt in the old testament, so in the new, what M.
Calvin does expound of pastors, and preachers only, some others do wrest for
the establishing of these lay elders, in their Church discipline. I am sorry
that men of learning that would seem virtuous and holy, should be charged so
truly with so manifold wresting of the scriptures, as in this whole matter of
discipline they are by sundry that do write against them. By D. Sutcliffe and
the suruay of discipline, page 414.
Let men love and advance their own fancies as they think safe, but let the
scripture not be urged to give strength unto them. For doubtless heresies and
erroneous opinions do no otherwise spring up, then when the good scriptures are
not well understood, Aust. in tract. in lob.
and because that which is not well understood, is notwithstanding boldly
affirmed to be the meaning of them. For few things hitherto have been so fondly
devised, but the authors did pretend they had scripture for it: Hiero. ad Tit.
2.
or else says S. Hierom, the garrulity of such persons, would hardly have got
credit; for when through vanity and pride men have engaged themselves by the
broaching of new opinions, they will rather labor to bring the scripture to
yield unto their fancies, Aust contra. faust. lib. 32. cap. 19.
then suffer their fancies to be ouerruled by them; a fault as it is great in
it self, so it carries a manifold disadvantage with it, that the adversaries
of the truth, want not a couller to refuse the interpretations of such at
another time, whom men of the same profession, for says, and the sacraments,
have worthily charged to have wronged the scriptures. It had been doubtless a
greater honor to them, much better dealing with the word of God, and a course
of more reason in the opinion of wisemen, that this discipline, had been
commended to us, as a politic government which they found safe; as the best
devise which necessity in Geneua, betwixt the putting out of their Romish
Bishop, and the keeping out of the Duke of Sauoy did enforce upon them; as a
platform suitable enough for such a city, at such a time. But to offer it to
the greatest kingdoms that embrace the truth, who happily flourish under the
prosperous government of virtuous princes; where all things are established in
the Church with a most ancient, Apostolic, and holy order, and all this under
the name of Gods word; It is to poison the world with much evil, and to cover
the policy of their first teachers, with the unhallowed contentions of all
after times. And yet for all that we can neither mislike the government of our
Church, which already we have by Bishops, nor accept theirs by Elders, until
they have answered all such as soundly and with judgment do write against
them. Add surely I may make the same protestation which a wise man does in this
case, that if I were to leave this life, and should speak what I thought of
the present form of Ecclesiastical government at this time in the Church of
England, Suruay. p. 80.
I would take it upon my soul (so far as my judgment serves) that it is
much more Apostolical, then the government of any Church, that I read of; and
if it were not for Prohibitions (such peradventure as good intentions found
out) (and some few hindrances of the Common Law) a government without
exception more holy and of greater peace. For whilst every man will adventure
to offer unto the Church, fancies of his own making, as H.N. and many others,
saying lo here is Christ, and lo there is Christ, we shall stand need to be
put in mind of that caveat, go not after them. And whereas the two forciblest
reasons to give any thing allowance in the opinion of men, is that it is
warranted for the institution, and profitable for the use: these politic
masters of the new discipline, having proved neither, yet do offer both. To
think that if we had this government (which doubtless God in his mercy has
thus long kept from us) that then God would bless our victuals, Humbl. motion.
page 31.
and satisfy our poor with bread, that he would cloth our priests with
health, and his Saints should shout for joy; Page 27.
that it is best and surest for our stare; that it would cut of contentions,
Page 74.
and suits of law; Page 64.
that it would nourish learning; Page 37.
that then there would be unity in the Church; Page 79.
that it would bring strength and victory, and many other benefits like these;
which is experience of these that have tried them, could as well assure, as
these men's words, doubtless the Church had great reason to think of it; and yet
these are benefits no greater, then already by Gods mercy, our Church has
inioyed without this. But they imitate ^aith a learned and grave man of their
country those seditious Tribunes of Rome who by virtue of the Agrarian law
bestowed the public goods only to this end to enrich themselves; Bullinger in
a letter to a Bishop of England. 1574. March. 10.
that the Bishops being overthrown, they might succeed into their places. And
a little after, it ought especially to be provided, that there be not any high
authority given unto this presbytery, whereof many things might be said, but
time will reveal what yet does lie hid. Wherefore says Gualter writing to the
Bishop of London at that time, and touching some abuses (as they are infinite of
this new discipline) we are carefully to be vigilant, least new heads do bud
out of the wounds of the romish Hydra scarce yet subdued. Anno. 1574.
The same author in a letter to Bishop Sands, after many troubles procured by
this new discipline, I hope (says he) the frame of it will in short time fall
of it self, considering that many, who before had it in admiration, are now of
themselves become weary of it. Another says, Heart, a preacher at Emden to M
Feeld.
that by the means of this discipline, the magistrates have invaded the Church
goods, the ministers have little alowance, there is no respect of the study of
divinity. And another complaining of the disorderly fruits of this discipline
says; If you did see the confused state of the Churches of these countries,
you would say that England (and mark it for it is true) how bad soever, were a
paradise in comparison, to be thought; but if these men could have bin content,
only to have praised their own; without opposition, defacing, and slaundering
the government of our Church, we would have been willing to have furthered
their inioying of so much happiness in their own relmes, if the peace, and
prosperity of our own, had not been envied by them; whereas now we must tell
them, and when we have done, the Church shall have some to perform this duty
to the worlds end, that a discipline erected by fancy, and policy,
consisting upon parts unsound, disagreeing, dangerous in themselves,
chargeable to parishes, and without profit, derogatorie to Princes, banishing
Apostolical Bishops appointed by Christ, in one word a discipline new, full of
cruelty, ambition, and pride, cannot be safely admitted into that Church,
which is seated in a kingdom, where a Prince has authority, both over the
Church, and the commonwealth. By the right reverend the L. Archbishop of
Canturburie.
There is no part of it unanswered that I know, and our purpose in this, is but
only to let them see, that a church being happily planted, and governed (as
ours is) they that are strangers, are charitably to think of us, and those
amongst our selves, ought all to be furtherances of our common peace. That
sin out of our dissentions may not grow strong, and whilst unthankfully with
Israel we reject Samuel, we have not either a government that is tyrannous, or
no Church at all. For that providence which powers down mercies whilst me^
are thankful, raineth down judgments, for the peoples sins. Let us the^
hereafter in sted of filling the world with our clamorous outcries for a new
Church government, approach the throne of his mercy with prayers for our
sins, that they may be pardoned.

CHAP. IX. Of Archbishops and Bishops.
IF in the general dislike which diverse not well advised have had toward the
ecclesiastical state in this kingdom, things of principal and chief use
might have escaped the unreasonable and intemperate reprehension of some
mouths, neither should a thing of so great necessity, nor a condition and
estate both by example and reason so much warranted, stand in need of any
defense at this time. But seeing amongst those ambitious humors (which under
pretense of an equality more then is fit, aspire unto a tyrannous authority
more then is safe) there is nothing less willingly endured, then the title and
authority of Bishops, which by establishing an order does frame all parts of
the Church to a due obedience and by making several dignities (which for order
are different) do impose a virtuous and humble obedience even amongst them,
whose ministry and ordination is all one; we cannot but think it a thing
unreasonable in those which demand it at our hands, and great folly in us if
we yield unto it, that an office of that use, of that lawfulnes and
continuance, should be removed as tyrannous and antichristian in Gods Church,
only because it pleases the wisdom and violence of some men, so to have it.
Now as to think that the state of the Church, might either continue better, or
continue at all without these, is but the strong fancies of some, which
ouerloue themselves; so to maintain after so long practice of the most
ancient Churches, that Archbishops and Bishops, both for name, title, and
authority are lawful, and to the well governing of the Church necessary, is
but to confess that order, must as well be a safeguard to the church, as the
commonwealth; and that subordination of men in authority, can be well wanting
in neither; but if in either, surely in that society far less, where
disorders in manners are not much fewer (considering the number of persons) and
the errors in opinion are more usual, and more dangerous; and none of these
possible with any conuenience to be remedied but by this means. In regard
whereof being neither safe to trust all without rule, nor all with authority
to rule, Apostolical ordination, reason, the custom of all Churches ancient,
and well gouernd, and lastly nature it self, does ordain Archbishops in their
provinces, as Bishops also in their dioces, and both in their places, and under
the Prince, for to rule the Church. And herein, we may boldly say without
offense, that the causes of displeasure conceived against Bishops (how
vehemently soever they are followed) are surely less reasonable, then against
any one thing which they do mislike; seeing the use of all other things may
either be touched in show, with some coullerable pretense of fault, or the not
using warranted with some likely excuse, whereas in this, the greeuances (if
there be any) that are just, are in the persons not in the office, and the
removing them away, must leave a passage to a disorderly confusion, and
possess the Church with that fatal disease of all societies, want of order,
whereby for the present she must needs do many things confusedly, and
doubtless in short time miserably perish. So that to make ambition, and
covetousness, the original of this honor; and tyranny over their brethren, to
give continuance unto it; is to make the best things in the outward policies
of the Church, to proceed from the worst authors, and to lay too great an
imputation to their charge, whom in all reason, by the benefit of this
government we ought to acknowledge, as our spiritual fathers, for deriuing the
Gospel unto us, and by a continual succession even from the Apostles hands.
The best warrants that we have for the execution of our spiritual functions,
to us the greatest calling upon earth, and to the world the hallowed and
blessed instruments of all happiness, which being employed to that end, it must
needs be an intolerable presumption in any to undertake the same, but by
authority and power given them in lawful manner; for the same God which is no
way deficient unto man in things necessary, and has given us to that end the
light of his heavenly truth, without which we must needs have wandered in
continual darkness, has in the like abundance of mercies, ordained certain to
attend upon the due execution of requisite parts, and offices therein prescribed
for the good of the whole world: which men thereunto assigned do hold their
authority from him, whether they be such as himself imediatly, or as the
Church in his name, inuesteth: It being neither possible for all, nor for every
man without distinction conucnient, to take upon him a charge of so great
importance. The power of this ministry translareth out of darkness into
glory; it raises men from the earth, and brings God himself down from
heaven; by blessing visible elements it makes them invisible grace. It gives
daily the holy Ghost. It has to dispose of that flesh which was given for the
life of the world; and that blood which was powered out to redeem souls. When
it powers out malediction upon the heads of the wicked they perish, when it
reuoketh the same they revive. O wretched blindness faith one if we admire not
so great power, Hook. lib. ^. page 228.
more wretched if we consider it aright, and notwithstanding imagine that any
but God can bestow it. It is a power which alone ought to make the authors of
it to man under God dear unto us; which neither Prince nor Potentate King nor
Caesar on earth can give. Yet neither is it being duly waied, in the Bishops
successors to the Apostles which bestow this, nor in those who are desirous to
enter into that calling, any ambition (as some men surmise) seeing such
reputation it has in the eye of this present world, that both need rather
incoragement to bear contempt, then deserve blame as men desirous to aspire
higher. Now because men dying there must be a continual supply into this
calling, and that those who had first the authority to ordain (I mean the
Apostles) were mortal; their care doubtless must extend it self thus far,
though they could not indew men with the same measure of grace which themselves
had, yet they should (and so doubtless did) impart the same power to ordain
which was given to them; that neither men might rush into it without admission,
nor the power of admission be granted to all, nor the Church be left destitute
of so great a blessing. And because in the execution of holy things, where the
persons put in trust are but men, discord and disorder usually do break in;
the wisdom of God thought it necessary, that amongst them who for their
ministry were equal, an inequality for order, and superiority to command
should be granted; Order is the mother and preserver of all things. Greg.
Nazian. de moderatione in disput. servanda.
that by this means order and union should both be preserved in Christ's
Church. They that most dissent in the kind of government, doubtless will
confess with Nazianzen, that order is the mother and preserver of all things.
Which if it concern all persons, and ages in the Church of Christ (as surely
it does) the government must not cease with the Apostles, but so much of that
authority must remain to them, who from time to time, are to supply that
charge, and doubtless to that end have succeeded in the apostles rooms. For we
easily see that equality does breed factions, Hieron. ad Euagrium.
and therefore wise men to suppress the seeds of dissentions have made one
above the rest. And the best deuisers of the new presbytery do hold it
necessary, that one chief in place and dignity, Beza in Respo. ad Fractat.
de mi^ist evangel. grad. sol. 153.
moderate, and rule every action, with that right which is allowed him by Gods
law. For surely a multitude ungoverned, must needs be easily confused, and
there cannot well be obedience, where all are equal; where shepherds lead
sundry ways, it is hard for the sheep to know whom to follow; and if no man
can serve two masters, which have equal authority over him, and perhaps
command contrary things (for whilst they agree, though diverse, they are but
one) then surely the Church ought not to be put to this hazard, by multitudes
equally ruling in one place, seeing to dissent is usual in all places, and if
not, yet in all persons it is casual; whereas the wisdom of the Church in
them that govern, must as well look unto that which may happen, as unto that
which already is. Now if this were the principal means to prevent schisms
and dissentions in the primitive Church, when the graces of God were far more
abundant and eminent then now they are; nay if the twelve were not lik to
agree except there had bin one chief amongst the^; for (says S. Hierom)
amongst the twelve one was therefore chosen, Hiero contrae Iouini. lib. 1.
that a chief being appointed occasion of dissension might be prevented; and
if every presbytery by Gods ordinance must have a ruler (as themselves
confess) how can they think that equality would keep all the pastors of the
world in peace and unity? or that the Bishops of a whole province or kingdom,
could meet, confer, and conclude, as often as need requires, unless their
assemblies were moderated, and ruled by some one? For in all societies,
authority (which cannot be where all are equal) must procure unity, and
obedience, if virtue will not. Now seeing that all men may easily err, and
that no errors are so dangerous as those which concern religion, the Church
should be in a far worse case then the meanest commonwealth (nay almost then a
den of thieues) if it were left destitute of means, either to convince
heresies, or to suppress them; yea though there were neither help, nor
assistance, of the christian magistrate; without which it were not possible for
truth and equity any long time to harbor amongst the sons of men. The remedy
which in these cases the primitive Church had, and when occasion was offered
used against heresy and injury, she derived as well from the promise made by
Christ's own words, as from the Apostles example in the like case. Christ
willing them that were grieved by their brethren, after the first and second
admonition to tell it to the Church. And adds for direction and confirmation
of all religious assemblies and conferences; Matthew. 18.
where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them; and whatsoever you shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Now whatsoever is
meant here by the name of Church, in the reasonable exposition of any, to me it
is all one, to prove this order; that from private admonition they went to
witnesses, and from them to assemblies; and seeing there must be an end of
controversies amongst men (unless we will pluck up by the roots all charity
and right) when neither private persuasion, not friendly mediation can appease
parties that violently contend, what other order could be prescribed, but a
judicial hearing and determining of things in question? Now because Christ did
not set the sword to be the general, and perpetual rule to govern his Church
(for then without a Prince there could be no Church, and so consequently there
was none either in the Apostles time or three hundred years after) (though,
where they believe, the defense and maintenance of the Church is committed to
their charge) it must of necessity follow that either there is no judge (which
were the utter subversion of all peace) when the christian magistrate is
wanting, or else the pastors and stewards of Christ's Church to whom this care is
committed, must assemble together, and with mutual conference perform those
duties to the Church in general, which otherwise they are bound to do to each
particular place and person. By Gods law what obedieuce and reverence the
father may expect from his own child, the same or greater, must all believers
yield to the fathers of their faith; the one begets us to this life, the
other to a life that is much better. Those then whom Christ has placed to be
watchmen and leaders, the light and salt of his Church, must not only warn
and guide, but also lighten and season in their measure that whole body; for
when all other fails, this only is left to cleanse the house of God from
vessels of dishonor, yea when there were no believing Magistrates to assist
the Church, this only was left, as the best means; and after when christian
Princes began to protect the truth, they never had nor can have safer direction
amongst men, then by the Synods of wise and godly Bishops. Thus a Synod at
Antioch about threescore years before the council of Nice, condemned and
deposed Paulus Samosatenus, for heresy; and when he would not yet yield to the
Church, but keep it by violence, Eusebius. lib. 7.30
upon complaint to Aurelianus the Emperor (though he were a heathen)
Samosatenus was with extreme shame driven from the Church by the worldly
Prince. All countries in all ages, Cap. 5.
have had the benefit of this, not as a thing arbitrarie and left free to those
that peradventure were careless of the Churches welfare, but prescribed by
sundry councels; Cap. 20. Cap. 2. Cap. 19. Nouel. constable. 123. cap. 10.
as Nice, Antioch, Constantinople, Chalcedon; and commanded by the imperial
laws, in this manner; That all the Ecclesiastical state, and sacred rules,
may with more diligence be observed, we require (says the Emperor) every
Archbishop, Patriarch, and Metropolitan to call unto him once or twice every
year, the Bishops that are under him in the same province, and thoroughly to
examine all the causes, which Bishops, Clerks, or Monks, have amongst
themselves; and to determine them, so as whatsoever is trespassed by any person
against the Canons, may be reformed. So that we must either clean reject
Synods (a thing doubtless of no small danger as the times may fall out) and
make the presbyters in every parish supreme judges, or else admit some (which
be no other but the Bishops) both to call and to moderate these meetings; for
in all those Synods which continued in the Church (even when she mas most
sharply pursued by the sword from the death of the Apostles to the reign of
Constantine) they were assembled and governed by the Bishops of the chief, and
mother Churches, and Cities, in every province; who by the ancient councels
were called Metropolitanes. And after when Princes came to embrace the faith,
the best means they could devise to procure peace, and advance religion, was
by their laws to refer Ecclesiastical causes to Ecclesiastical Judges. And
least they should be long in strife, they charged the Metropolitan to assemble
the Bishops of his province twice every year, and there to examine, and order,
what matters of doubt should arise, which happily might disturb the Churches
peace. Thus the Synod of Rome, called by Cornelius against Nouatus, Anno do.
255.
consisted of threescore Bishops, and many others of the clergy. In the
councels of Rome, under Hilarious and Gregory, Eusebius. lib. 6.43 Epist. lib. 4.
cap. 88.
where four and thirty presbyters subscribed after two and twenty Bishops;
infinite are the examples in this kind, which teach us that neither the Church,
at any time was, or in deed^ can, safely be without tempests, if Synods want;
nor Synods can be tightly ordered, if the Metropolitans and Bishops should be
wanting in them. Seeing then they have this use if this were all to make that
society able with order to suppress heresies and redress wrongs) (without
which doubtless the Church of all assemblies were worst governed) it ought not
to seem unreasonable to any, that a thing so necessary, and ancient, should
with honor, and reverence, be retained amongst us. But least the name of
Bishops, should be offensive to any (as some have thought it only the
ambitious title of a tyrannous government) these that would seem moderate
aduisers to equality and humility, in this case, must give us leave to tell
them, that the name is ancient the office needful, and both so warrantable,
that they must needs be thought (at the least) malicious enuiers of the peace
and prosperity of Gods Church, who are desirous or can be content, that order
observed in the Apostles time, and those Churches which were purest, and next
unto them, should be banished as Antichristian from amongst us, only because it
is the pleasure of those men, to admit no superiors. For if the name of
Archbishop be not to be found in scripture, considering the thing it self is
of necessary use in Gods Church, they have as little reason to except against
it as if Homonsion were not warrantable, because Arius gave occasion, that the
Nicen council did first invent it. Many names are invented since the Apostles
time, and yet both lawfully, and necessarily used; for these men have been told
long since, The defense of the answer to the Admon^ page 310.
that the authority and the thing whereof the Archbishop has his name, was in
Saint Paul's time, and therefore the name lawful; and if it were not, yet both
might be lawful, seeing they appertain to the external policy, and
regiment of the Church; which according to time, place, persons, and other
circumstances, is not tied of necessity, to be always one. And surely those
that mislike this over proud title (as they term it) have least cause:
seeing they of the Discipline challenge as great jurisdiction over their
Parishes, and as lofty dominion over Prince and Nobles, as ever any Pope did
over the whole Church. And if Clement (whom Polydore alleges to that end)
said that Peter in every Province appointed one Archbishop, Polydor. lib. 4. de
Ixuent. c. 12.
whom all other Bishops of the same Province should obey, I see no reason why
any man for that, should so far forget both modesty and charity (as some
have done) to call him a hell hound, a natural son of Satan (surely natural
he was not) and the sworn soldier of Antichrist. T.C. page 66. Sect. 4.
I wish these to remember, that the slander of authors, is no good answer,
when better reasons can be alleged then only to say, that they say it. But if
they think the title unlawful (as some of them write) because the Scripture
does appropriate it to our Savior Christ, I wish them to remember,
Archshopheard. 1. Pet. 5.
that if Archshepheard and Archbishop be all one, then the name is to be found
in Scriptures: and that names proper unto God, as Shepherd, light of the
world, and such like; may be in a diverse sense, and are often communicated with
other men. Hereunto we may add, that the famous Council of Nice, Anno. 330.
(which by all men of wisdom is reverenced, esteemed, and embraced as the
soundest and best testimony next the Scriptures) does not only allow of the
name, but also of the office of Metropolitan and Archbishop; Can. 6.
determining him to be no Bishop, which is made without the consent of the
Metropolitan; and to show that this name and office was more ancient, than
that famous Council, the Canon says, Can. 33.
Let that old custom be observed, alluding peradventure to those Canons which
pass under the Apostles names. Neither was this name or title so strange
imediatly after the Apostles time, that Volusianus was affeard to say,
Volusianus wrote, Anno. 965.
that Diomysius Areopagita was by S. Paul, made Archbishop of Athens, or
Erasmus to call Titus Archbishop of Crete, and Eusebius gives the authority
to John the Evangelist; Theod. in arg. in epist. ad Tit. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23.
whose suruiuing the rest, brought this benefit unto the Church, that for
consecrating of Bishops and other uses, he was as Archbishop, or Metropolitan
to the whole Church. For in Saint Cyprians judgment, Lib. 1. Epist. 3. ad
Cornelium.
heresies and schisms have risen from no other occasion then from this, that
the Priest of God is not obeyed, neither one Priest for the time in the Church,
and one Judge for the time in stead of Christ thought upon, to whom, if the
whole brotherhoode would be obedient, according to Gods teaching, no man would
move any thing against the College of Priests. This speech of that ancient
Father, was to comfort Cornelius, showing, that faintnes in that case was to
betray the Church, and that sects and schisms, must needs arise, where the
authority of Bishops is despised. For this place was not to confirm the
authority of the Church of Rome, but as the best expound him, that he would
have an Archbishop in every Province to bear rule over the rest of the
Clergy. For he that attempteth any thing in the Church, Ignat. in Epist. ad
Smirnenses.
without the Bishop, breaks peace and confounds good order; and Cyprian
being Bishop of Carthage, had the charge and oversight of all the Churches in
Afric, in Numidia, and in both the Mauritanes; and not only these, but (as
Gregory Nazianzene says) the whole East parts; for the which cause Illiricus
does call him Metropolitan. Lib. 4. epist. 8.
So that if herein wise men, had only invented what was fit, and not followed
what was before them, their action had not been without warrant, seeing in the
outward policy of governing the Church, where precepts and examples are
wanting, it is not forbidden for those that come after, as well to be examples
to others, as to follow the examples of such as have gone before them. But if
in the first planters of the Church (which both in comparison of the rest were
few, and blessed with graces far more excellent than any in our time)
inequality was allowed, and that allowance without fault, it must needs in
all reason follow, that the authority of Archbishop was not thought so
dangerous as now, to the governing of Christ's Church; wherein if either their
maintenance be greater, or their outward honor more in these Christian times
of peace, then could be expected amongst Pagans (and they tyrants) no man can
in reason, or ought with out blame, to oppugn these, who will not be thought
an enemy to the former; seeing the times and names being diverse, the
authority notwithstanding is all one. But it is the unnatural fault of this
age, through the sides of those whom peradventure in some private respects we
mislike, to wound even our fathers in religion, whom we ought to honor. But
seeing these men doubtless are much wiser, who take upon them to be the
reformers of our Church, then that they should be offended with the names,
where the things are lawful; it is surely to be thought in all reason, that
the superiority of Bishops, is not by them accounted so great a fault, as that
any amongst the clergy, whose office and ministry is all one, should by a
special name above the rest of theirbrethren, be called Bishops. As if to over
see that flock committed to their charge, were a duty belonging, and by our
Savior imposed upon them only. But because the names of things have so many
artificers, by whom they wore first made; but more who after have used them to
an other sense; it shall not so much concern us, to inquire what in the
beginning was the difference betwixt Bishop and presbyter, as to learn
afterward what the Church meant when these names expressed those persons which
for office and ministry of word and sacraments, not for order and
jurisdiction, were all one. The clergy of the Gospel, were at the first after
the Apostles time, either Presbyters or Deacons: for those who advisedly at the
first did impose names unto things, had either regard unto that which
naturally was most proper, or if peradventure to some other speciallitie, to
that which is sensibly most eminent in the thing signified: and therefore what
better title, could be given to all that were employed in this work, then the
reverend name of presbyters or fatherly guides? For a presbyter according to
the proper meaning of the new testament, Hook. lib. 5. 236.
is he unto whom our savior Christ, has communicated the power of spiritual
procreation. Out of the twelve patriarchs issued the whole multitude of
Israel, according to the flesh; and according to the ministry of heavenly
birth, our Lords Apostles we all acknowledge to be the patriarchs of his whole
Church. Revel. 4.4.
S. John therefore beheld sitting about the throne of God in heaven, four and
twenty presbyters; the one half fathers of the old, the other of the new
Jerusalem, in which respect the Apostles likewise gave themselves the same
title, Revel. 21.14.
albeit that name were not proper, but common unto them with others. Matthew.
19.28.
For of presbiters some were greater, some less in power; and that by our
Saviors own appointment; the greater they which received fulness of spiritual
power, the less they to whom less was granted. The Apostles peculiar charge
was to publish the Gospel of Christ unto all nations, and to deliver his
ordinances received by immediate revelation from himself; (which preeminence
excepted) to all other offices and duties, incident unto their order, it was in
them to ordain and consecrate, whomsoever they thought meet; even as our
Savior did himself assign seventy disciples of his own, inferior
presbyters, whose commission notwithstanding, to preach and baptize, was the
same which the Apostles had. But when time, and observation, had made a
difference in the Church of these two, every Bishop being a presbyter, but not
every presbyter a Bishop, the Church condemned it as the heresy of Acrius,
Aust. de har. cap. 53. Epiph. har. 75.
to hold that a presbyter and a Bishop were all one. The Bishops (as Epiphanius
reasons) begot fathers in the Church, but the presbyters only begot Sons.
Hiero. ad euagr.
For the priests did chose (says Saint Hier^^) one amongst themselves, whom
they placing in a higher degree, called a Bishop. For unless (says the same
father) the chief authority were given to one, there would be as many
schisms as priests. T^t essent sci^mata quot sacerdotes. Hiero. contr.
luciferi^.
So that their collection out of Saint Ambrose, and Hierom, is so much the more
strange, who think that bishops, and presbyters did not differ, in the
Apostles time. In respons. ad Tractat de grad. ministr. Ab eo tempore quo cepit
dici ego sum Pauli ego Appollo ego au tem Cephae. Hier. in cap. 3. ad Titum.
Eusebius. lib. 6. Cap. 43.
It must at least be an imitation of their pride, who in former time have
troubled the Church with the like errors. Cornelius Bishop and Martyr, long
before the Council of Nice, reporting to Fabius Bishop of Antioch, the
original of Nouatus schism, says; this jolly inquisitor of the Gospel,
understands not, that there ought to be but one Bishop in that Catholic
Church, in which he knows there are forty and six presbyters. Neither
have there wanted rules, whereby if it please them, they might easily make a
difference betwixt these two; the presbyters were many in every Church, D.
Bilson Bish. of Winchester page 247.
of whom the presbytery consisted; Bishops were always singular, one in a
city; and noe more except an intrusion, which made a schism. This singularity
descended, from the Apostles, and their scholars in all the famous Churches of
the world, by a chare of succession, and continues to this day, where
abomination or desolation (that is heresy or violence) have not broake it off.
The second sign of Episcopal power, was imposition of hands, to ordain
presbyters, and Bishops; for as pastors had some to assist them in their
charge, which were presbyters, so were they to have others to succeed, in
their places, which were Bishops. And this right by imposing of hands to
ordain presbyters, and Bishops, was derived at first from the Apostles, not
unto presbyters but Bishops only. A thing continuing for this fifteen hundred
year, without example or instance to the contrary; and has only found
resistance in our age; which surely in my opinion, cannot be ignorance so much
in them, as willingness to oppugn the government of our Church; seeing there
have been few Churches of account, through all christendom, that had not (as
may be showed) Bishops and presbiters both at the same time. Eris presbyter
^tes and quando deus voluerit futurus Episcopus. Aust. Epist. 210. D. Bills. p.
274.
But Austin is most plain who writing to one that was but a presbyter, says,
Thou shall be a presbyter as thou art, and hereafter when God will thou shall
be a Bishop. This point is learnedly observed by that reverend and worthy
Bishop, whose labored defense, may shorten our travel in this point. Now
besides these, many other things were peculiar to Bishops, by the authority of
the Canons, and custom of the Church; as reconciling of penitents,
confirmation of infan^s, dedication of Churches, and such like, which were as
Saint Hierom says, Hierom aduers. Lucifer.
rather to the honor of priesthood, then to the necessity of any law. Now if
any man think this office superfluous in the Church, and of no use; let him
well consider before he censure them, what it is to see the Church continually
stored, with sound, and able pastors to watch over their souls; to take care
that the flock of Christ be rightly taught, and soberly guided; to keep both
presbyters, and people, from schism, heresy, and impiety; to direct in times
of danger; to determine doubts, without troubling the whole province; and if
he shall think either these needles to be done, or lawful and fit to be done
by any other, we could (peradventure) think it more tolerable, tha^ an
ordination, so ancient, and so much warranted, never interrupted in the
orderly government of any Church since the Apostles time, should
notwithstanding be removed, as a calling tyrannous, and antichristian, only
to content the humorous fancies of these men. But (doubtless) that which
reasonably they mislike in this case, is, that men called to the office of the
ministry (a function merely spiritual) and ordained to the dispensation of
heavenly graces, should so far either forget the virtuous example of our
Savior, or the humility of such whom they desire to succeed, that swelling
with ambition, they renew the contention long since controuled in the disciples
of Christ, Luke 9.
which should be the greatest; and are content if not to affect, yet to accept
of those civil employments, which belong unto the Princes counsel; whereby
not only they are made idle, and hindered from that duty, which the Church
requires, but are puffed up, with those Lordly titles which are directly
unlawful, and without warrant. Now to prevent this, we admit Synodes (say
they) and some to gather, and govern those assemblies; but for fear of
ambition, we would have that privilege to go round by course, to all the
pastors of every province. Where men are irregular, we will not ask them,
either for reason, or example for that they do; but a chief man amongst them,
Beza in Resp. ad Tract. de minist. grad. fol. 143.
confesses, that this going round by course, to govern the Church, does
maintain disorder, and faction; and ambition is not at all decreased by it;
and the choosing of one, to continue chief for his life, began at Alexandria,
from the Evangelist Saint Mark, six years before Peter and Paul were
martyred; six and thirty before the death of Saint John; in the which there
is nothing that can, or ought to be misliked. This as it is true, so it is
warranted with much reason; for unless we suppose (a thing surely not likely,
if possible) all in a presbytery to be men without fault, a power to do harm
unto Christ's Church, must by this curcular revolution, fall into their hands,
whom wisdom of election, would hardly have called to that place. Besides,
what men shall worthily suffer, whilst they are inferiors, there is some
likelyhoode, they will offer the like, when they do command. Neither is this
to quench ambition (as they think) but to kindle a far greater, in the whole
clergy. For what we give unto one experienced of years, tried in government,
freed for the most part from the passions of young men, these without
difference propound to all. And thus they cure this fever of ambition, by
infecting many; as if diseases were therefore less, because more were sick.
For what cannot be inioyed without pride, is not easily expected without sin;
fruition, and expectation of one and the same thing, are so near, that neither
can be vertu^^s where both are not. Neither do we give unto Archbis^ops or
bishops, power or honor by Gods law, but what their people must needs yield
unto their pastors and presbyters, if they will have any. We are not to limit
Princes whom they shall use in council, or to whom they shall commit the
execution of their laws, especially such as are made for the Churches good,
seeing we find that God has blessed those Princes and kingdoms most, where
virtuous Bishops have been admitted to the Princes Council; wherein surely
they have brought a far greater benefit to the peace and prosperity of the
Church, then in reason they could by any other employment besides. Neither was
it a means for to be idle, either in Calvin, or Beza (both of them fit men for
that place) that they were both admitted as counselors of that state. It
cannot choose, but be great intemperancie in them, who have so dishonorably
labored to deface that dignity, so ancient and of such use in the Church of
God, as also to wound even the best, and the worthyest in that place with
terms far unbeseeming, as if their ungoverned humors, had fully resolved to
belch out poison, against all that were thought excellent. It pleases one of
them to censure them all thus; Nay you any work page 21.
Archbishops, and Bishops are unlawful, unnatural, false, and basterdly
governors of the Church; and the ordinances of the devil. Another says, Vdal.
dial. c. 1.
they are in respect of their places enemies to God. Much has the unwise and
immodest dealings of sundry in our Church, labored to dishonor so honorable
and so great an office; experience has taught us the good of them, and to
these we only make this answer; that we are sorry to see them, so skillful,
and so willing to speak evil. But doubtless it is love to our present state,
Josias Nichols in the Plea of of the Inoc. page 76.
which has made them so zealous in this cause; for (says one) If we be sworn
to her majesty's most lawful supremacy over all persons, and epsy in our
Church a lordly prelacie, a thing brought into the Church by humane invention,
by means weereof it is apparent that the Pope of Rome has climed about all
states both Ecclesiastical and civil, if now, our desire extend it self,
that our lordly dignities, and power of our Bishops might be examined by holy
scripture, and brought back a degree or twain nearer to the apostolic
practice, and Christ's institution, that so all occasions might be cut off
hereafter, that this climing usurpation, might never take hold upon England
any more, are we troublers of the state? Doubtless we are. If it were not a
thing possible to make a difference betwixt the clyming usurpation of the
Church of Rome, and the lawful prelacie, how lordly so ever established in our
Church, I doubt not but all our Bishops, would cast themselves at his Majesty's
feet, and entreat his highness to unburden them of all that honor, which
hitherto they have held, injurious to his supremacy, and contrary to the
scriptures, and the Apostles practice. To men of understanding things could not
be thus odiously compared, that are most unlike. The Pope challenges
authority over all christendom, so do not our Archbishops; the Pope exalts
himself above Kings and Princes, but our Archbishops, with reverence and
humility, acknowledge their subjection; and more dutifully (I doubt not) then
those, who thus carefully are fearful, of their clyming. The Pope says, that
to be subject unto him, is of necessity to salvation, our Archbishops
acknowledge no such thing; and as their limits of government are far unlike,
so the manner of their gonernment, is far more lawful; the one being an
usurpation, which ambition sought out, superstition and policy have holden
up; the other a necessary authority, which schisms and dissentions in the
Church invented, the Apostles used, all antiquity followed, and the peace of
the Church did impose upon them. So that one of the most modest, and most
learned, that seems to favor the cause of discipline, makes it a principal
point of the Ecclesiastical government, Vt peculiarem promitterent obedientiam
in rebus honestis suo episcopo, and episcopi Metropolitano. Zanch. de. Relig.
cap. 25. Sect. 38.
that the inferior clergy in things honest, be obedient to the Bishop, and
the Bishop to the Metropolitan; expressing the use of that which others
vehemently mislike, and acknowledging the names, and subordination of both. But
as it is an imputation, in their opinion, to the Archbishops that their place
and authority is like the Popes, so it is a blemish to our Bishops, in the
judgment of these men, that for learning and virtue, they are not like unto
those holy fathers of the Church that have gone before them. We dare not take
upon us to think, that our times are better, and more fruitful in virtue
then other were, or that the Bishops of our land, (a thing to be wished) are
all of them without fault; but seeing it pleases some to compare them thus, I
hope it shall neither be dishonor to the virtuous memories of those that are
dead, nor be thought a flattery toward those that do live, if we say
(considering we may say it with much truth) that for soundness of doctrine, As
my Lord Archbishop answered long since to T.C.
honesty of life, and the moderate use of external things, they are not
inferior, to the most reverend of those Bishops, that have been before them.
For doctrine, we are loath to rippe up the errors that the anncient Bishops
were infected with; Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 39. and 35. millenarij.
Papias Bishop of Jerusalem (who lived in Ignatius and Policarpus time) held
the error of a thousand year after the resurection, wherein the kingdom of
Christ, should here remain upon earth. Most of the ancient fathers, Iustar
fontis purissimi.
were infected with this opinion. Saint Cyprian that same clear fountain, as
Saint Hierom calls him, failed in the opinion of rebaptisation; diverse both of
the Greek and Latin Church, were spotted with the errors about freewill,
merits, invocation of Saints; many things might be alleged in this kind (if
it were any virtue to rippe up their faults, whom we ought to honor) where as I
hope the adversaries to our Bishops, will confess, that never any company of
Bishops, since the Apostles time, taught, and held such sound doctrine, in all
points as the Bishops of England at this day. For the second which is honesty
of life, every age has some imperfections amongst all conditions, and the most
worthy are not free from the slanderers tongue. In the council of Nice, in
the presence of the Emperor, the Bishops libeld one against another;
contentions over eager and bitter, were betwixt Epiphanius and Chrysostom,
both very worthy and very reverend Bishops, betwixt S. Austin, and S. Hierom,
whereas doubtless, if some zealous for discipline had held their peace, the
Church of England had been as Jerusalem a City, built at unity in it self.

Now for the last, which is the moderate Employment of external things, we
reckon it amongst the greatest felicityes, of our time, that when the
expectation of greedy cormorants, was big with hope, of the devouring the
riches and reuenews that the Church had, that even then, the conscionable zeal
of the prince, by virtuous and wise laws, manacled their hands, whose desires
were vnsatiat, and their hearts unhallowed, and left unto the church, a rich and
honorable patrimony, for Indowment, whereby worthy rulers, may not want double
honor, labor may have her merit, and religion may be able to relieve the
poor. Herein if any couetously do retain, or riotously mispend, what
virtuous authority confirmed unto better uses, (a thing which I hope no man can
accuse in the Bishops of our church) let them amend their faults, and not their
offense be made, a cloak to those monsters, that thirst with desire for to
rob the church. More perticulerly amongst the rest, of him who being the
worthiest amongst the clergy, and worthylie in the highest place, is by an
intemperate spirit with unholy sacrilege, said of all the Bishops in the sea
of Canterbury, to have done most harm, The Dialogue that came from Throg. D.
3.
and that none had so ambitious, and aspiring a mind, as he; no not Cardinal
Wolsey* none so proud as he no not Stephen Gardener; none so Tyrannical as
he, no not Bonner. I may say truly of him, that if the church government of
this land, which he defended with great Judgment with his pen, he had not
with as great authority protected for the space of this twenty years in the
place of an Archbishop (which God grant for the good of his church may
continue still) doubtless Contention, Ignorance, and Atheism, long since had
overrun the Church.

Of whom, because it is neither honor to him to be commended by me, nor
disgrace to be reproched by them, I will say considering his justice in
government, his care in providing for the Clergy, his wisdom in Counselling,
his Integrity in preferring* his Diligence in Preaching, his gravity in
behavior, his humility in conuersing, his care to the Church, his zeal to
religion, his courage to the truth as Theodosius spoke of S. Ambrose, Ambrosium
noui vnum qui s^lus digne vocetur Episcopus.
I know only Ambrose, who is most worthy to be^ called a Bishop. But not to
labor any further in this cause, (which has had so many of singular worthy
men ab^e to defend it much better) we say this calling so much misliked,
serves to a greater perfection, to a fitnes in action, and to a singular
ornament, in governing the Church. For the first the fulness of grace, which is
in the heads of the Church distilleth as by several ways, ^ph 4.11.
to the singular benefit of all parts, whilst he has given some to be
Apostles, some to be Prophets, some to be Evangelists, some to be Pastors,
and Doctors, for the consummation and Perfection of his Church, for the fitnes
in action, the Church having diverse Employments, as well for government, as
doctrine, requires and allows several ordinations, Romans 12.34
to serve these. Let no man therefore presume to understand above that which is
meet, to understand, but that he understand according to sobriety, as God
has dealt to every man, the measure of faith. For as we have many members in
one body, and all members have not one office, so we being many, are one
body in Christ, and every one another members.

Last of all for Ornament; that Atheists, unbelievers, may wonder and be in
love, with the comely and beautiful government of Christ's Church, 1. King.
10.5.
as the Queen of Saba was with the order of Salomons house, for in a great
house are not only vessels of gold, 2. Tim. 2.20.
and ^f silver, but of wood and earth, some for honor, and some unto dishonor:
unity and variety, are the ornaments of the church of Christ; Unity of
Faith, Charity, and Peace; Variety of Offices and degrees, Ephesians. 4.12.
and these says the Apostle for the repairing of the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ; 1. Cor. 12.17
18.19.
for if the whole body were ancare? where were the seeing, if the whole were an
eye? where were the heating? but now has God disposed the members every one of
them in the body at his own pleasure; for if they were all one member, where
were the body? And who are these, that they should mislike what Example,
Authority and Experience, have found sufficient.

CHAP. X. Of Ministers their office and learning.
IF the passage from earth to heaven, were either not needful at all, or
possible to be performed ordinarily by any other means, then a virtuous
meditation betwixt God and man, then peradventure Instruments of best use, for
the defects of this life, were wholly to be regarded, and the utter want of
the Clergies service, were as lawful in the best kingdoms, as the contempt of
their persons, is usual and common with the worst subjects. But seeing
universal Corruption, is the truest inscription of mankind, and holiness to
the Lord is the great title, that God has, that man by that power may be made
like unto him that did first make him, he has appointed for the performance
of this work, holy times, holy places, holy things, and holy persons; all
chiefly to this end, that as he is himself so man likewise by these might
be made holy. As if the same purity which could not endure those blessed
spirits, once stained to continue in a place of bliss, but cast them down, did
less reasonably allow, that creature (whose greatest happiness peradventure
was but upon earth) to be carried up to heaven* into those joys, unless
redeemed by his Son, and sanctified by his holy spirit, and by both these by
the service and ministry of men, and not Angels, darkness were made light,
rebellion obedience, the children of wrath the sons of an infinite love,
enmity reconsiled, and made peace, and lastly sinful men were become holy. So
that the sum of their duty, whose labors are employed in this kind, is
only to honor God, and to save m^n. And their difference from all the world
besides, is principally this, that being a several portion of men, consecrated
unto the service of the most high, in things wherewith others may not meddle,
as the peculiar lot of the Lord himself, they are a di^uict order, not
unfitly expressed by the name of Clergy. Whose spiritual power, consisting
in the execution of holy things, properly is conversant in the affairs of God.
Now as no kingdom can stand without Religion (wherein though they err yet a
religion they must hold) so no religion can in several duties, be possibly
performed amongst men, 28 Flamines turned into so many Bish. and 3 Archflamins
into 3. Archbi. in the da^es of Eleuthe^g. Fox. Tom. 1. page 146. Platin.
Galfrid Momu. Heb. 2.16.
where there are not with some fitness instruments allotted to that use. And
herein Christianity has builded a liberal maintenance, in this land, to
those that are now governors in the church of Christ, where blind
Superstition, laid the foundation for the Priests of those Idols, which the
heathen worshipped. As for the persons employed in this action, he fitted
those likewise in a celestial manner, proportioned with his own working; who
as in no sort, he took upon him the Angels nature, but took on him the seed
of Abraham, so he used in this, the ministry of men not of Angels, because
where weakness from above is able to receive strength, there the exelentest
creatures, and the best means, are not all one; Amazement out of fear, making
our capacities more dull where our teachers are too glorious, and charity not
to be so thankful, when we are not indebted to men of our own nature nor
our Preachers are clothed with the same infirmities, that we are. This being
the greatest reason, why Profaneness does scorn, and Wisdom despise, what
Simplicity and Humility do both worship. Yet the course of Instruction
serves to teach all, that the ways in these things which God and man uses
are not both alike. Neither was this Office (though his work) befitting the
Majesty of God himself, seeing we are apt to contemn that presence (how
glorious soever) if it be common, or to tremble at the brightness of so great
a power, if it be not common. In which respect, that wisdom which knew best,
how most fitly to provide for (...) weakness, did sometime (though seldom)
in a cloud, in a fire, in the shape of a man, appear unto his own people,
sometime with Moses he spoke face to face, yet granted the desire of his
fearful servants, when they spoke to Moses, Exodus 20.19.
talk^ thou with us, and we will hear, but let not God talk with us least
we die. Deuteronomy. 5 28 19.
This Wisdom of theirs, having approbation from God himself; I have heard
the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken unto thee, they
have well said, all that they have spoken; Oh that there were such an heart in
them to fear me, and to keep all my commandments always, that it might go
well with them, and with their children for ever. But to the Son of God, when
he became man, so being made fittest, both to do, and to suffer for us, the
voice from heaven gave this testimony hear him. Math. 3.
As if the same power which by religion purposed to bring man from earth to
heaven, found no Instrument fitter for this use, then only the service of man
himself Nothing being so comfortable to us, as that voice of the Apostles to
the men of Listra, Act. 14.15.
we are even men subject to the like Passions that ye be and preach unto
you, that ye should turn from these vain things, unto the living God, which
made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things that in them are; Heb. 4.15.
this makes the Church to go^ boldly to the throne of grace, that she may
receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Thus al things which
are from God, are sodred, as it were together with so much art and love, causing
a mutual assistance that the lowest of mankind, are appointed to receive from
the nearest unto themselves, what the mercy and the influence of the highest
yields, wherein as those whom God imployeth in this business, being
Ambassadors receive commission only from him, whose inward affairs they
menage, he being the father of Spirits and souls the purchase of his own
son, and thereby may challenge of the children of the Church honor and
respect above other men, so does the Church likewise require virtuous
abiliments, matched with good learning at their hands; hereof they are fitly
remembered by that Vrim and Thummim, upon Aarons breast, and by those names of
Watchmen, Lights, Salt, Guides, and such like, which the scripture does give
unto them. Requiring in all (yet accepting though not excusing a less measure)
in some sort an ability sufficient to inform the Church. The small difference
in this kind from the common sort, in some of those ages that have been
before us, gave men occasion to thinck and say, that the Laity and the Clergy
were all one. Nay diverse amongst us, have laid this untrue accusation upon our
Church, (with what conscience and honesty the world may judge) as if our land,
only of all those kingdoms that are reformed, were not careful, to have a
learned ministry, but were absolutely content, with those persons, who for the
discharge of this duty, could but only read. Let them first understand what
we say, and then let the world be our Judge, if we say true.

Doubtless if the heathen required in those that were their Priests, that they
should be able for knowledge to perform those duties, of Counsel and
Devotion which others could not, let no man think but that we principally
desire, a soundness of Judgment, knowledge of scripture, wisdom to
Interpret, an eloquence to utter, power to exart, zeal to reprove, in the
ministers of God, and all these in far greater measure, then in other men;
but may we not seeing he that lives made all things together, the Lord who
only is just, and there is none other but he, and he remains a victorious
King for ever, he orders the world with the power of his hand, and all
things obey his will, for he governs all things by his power, and deuideth
the holy things from the profane, Eccle 1.23.
say with the son of Sirach, to whom has he given power to express his
works, 2 Cor. 2.16.
or who is sufficient for these things? neither must this hold all those back
who are willing to bestow their labors for the benefit of gods Church, because
they are not able (no not in any tolle^able manner) to perform all these; 2.
Cor. 12.
seeing his strength is oftentimes perfected in our weakness, and to discharge
our calling (as to avoid temptations) this must be our comfort, whilst we
desire for to grow better, that his Grace is sufficient for us. Math 25.
For as in distribution of gifts, God gives not the same number of talents, to
all, neither does he expect equal proportion of increase, nor blames him
that had but one talent, that he got not five, or two, but only for this that
he did not use it. So that if those of the lowest sort of Clergy, who in the
plentiful knowledge of this age, modestly content themselves only to read
the Scriptures, and the profitable endeavors of other men (whilst some not much
their betters for learning out of a bold presumption arising from a false
opinion of equality in all degrees, dare approach the honorablest and grauest
assemblies in this land) shall we think their modesty deserves so much
blame, as that they are not worthy to be termed ministers? and not rather
blame the immodest presumption of others, who unskillfully and boldly, have
taken upon them, the dispatch of those duties, which doubtless by many
hundreds, might have been performed much better. And I am sorry it fares with
us in this case, worse then it does in all other courses besides, seeing
commodities, and services, are worthily suspected, only in this respect that
they are offered; and in these functions much holyer, and of more weight, they
are thought by some to deserve better, in that they boldly and unconscionably,
outrun the rest. As if in the discharge of these sacred duties, an Unhallowed
Emulation were the best virtue, or that a lawful ordination to preach, were a
warrant sufficient, allwaies to preach where it pleases them. This error to
bold and ouerfoule, if it were not the usual misdemeanor of those men, who to
rigorously (being unlearned themselves) call for a learned ministry, we
could as easily afford them their desired happiness, as we are willing to
crave pardon for others, that being better learned, are not endued with the
like boldness. We doubt not but all men in this calling, have great reason to
use, the uttermost of their learning to the benefit of Gods Church, and that
those who are not so well able to teach others, should endeavor themselves to
be more learned. Which virtuous trauells of theirs, so much deserves the more
favor, in that there is no calling, which has not more ease, and whose scope
is not shorter, then the unlimited, and endless desire to obtain knowledge.
In which respect, men endued with greater gifts should receive from the Church
a better recompense; and where there worthynesse is far unequal, there both
with Prince and people, (which is some men's error) their estimation and honor
ought not to be all one.

For even the heathen Philosophers (who in comparison of these drunk but of the
standing waters which were dry in the time of heat) forsaking the fountain
of life, even the Lord himself, for that glorious show (which was nothing else
but like the beams of a Comet, to be wondered at, for a time, but neither of
continuance, nor influence) amongst many, they were much esteemed; the heathen
Princes finding this benefit at their hands, that those Moral virtues, Falsa
est eoru^ scientia qui quod necessariu^ est pro superfluo deseru^t quod solidu^
pro vacuo, vtile proinutili, bonu^ pro malo. Gregor. Ezekiel. Contention. Sitnah.
Hatred Genesis 26.20.2.
wherein they were excellent, like sweet flowers had withered long since, if
men of learning, like skilful Apothecaries had not distilled them. But the
knowledge of these, surely was amiss, in leaving that which was necessary for
a thing superfluous, a thing sound for that which was empty, profitable for
that which to a better life served to small use, and a thing (in comparison)
evil for that which was absolutely good. Yet whilst we have despised these
(digging wels unto our selves like those of Isack, Contention and Hatred) were
puffed up with an opinion that we know much; as if our weakness, could
encounter the worthiest for learning that the Church has. Who in deed as
concerning time, Heb. 5.12.
ought to be teachers, yet have need again to be taught, what are the first
principles of the word of God, and surely the most faults in the Kingdom have
proceeded from this fountain, that the Priesthood for doctrine is not sound:
^ victim in rep. Sacerdotiu^ non est sanu^.
Who being faulty in this kind, if they had tempred themselves from teaching
so much, until they had learned more, it is like the Church had been healed
of a great part of that malladie, wherewith she is now sick. Whom I would be
loath to take upon me to reprove, (seeing in their opinion they are wise men)
but only to put them in mind of this, that an Ecclesiastical Ministry is
their function. This ought to teach them, that corners are no fit temples to
preach their doctrine, especially now in the time of peace, or if necessity at
sometimes require it of them, yet that their doctrine be such, as for
soundness and truth, it may beseem the Temple Secondly that the Church by
those whom she has invested with that power, should call such unto that place,
whose labors she pu^poseth to use in that kind. For the Church has no
reason to hear their voice, whom Christ has not commanded for to feed his
sheep. Wherein if those in authority (by ordaining men altogether unworthy)
vnhonestlie discharge that trust, which the Church does Impose upon them, it is
their fault who abusing that honor, which they have received, have nourished
some Wolves, to devour the flock. In detestation whereof multitudes often
times cry out, whilst Foxes are honored as holy creatures.

But seeing it is true, that the dullness of our wits, and the strength of our
fancies, makes us run after to believe, (and those whom authority suppress
as men that deserve evil we relieve them as martyrs that suffered for well
doing) our Church had small gain to exchange the ignorance of her worst
ministers, for the factious Im^loyments of those men Now, seeing these men by
reason of their holy function are called stewards, Over the Church, Luke 12.24.
which is Gods household, the holy Ghost tells us who is a faithful and
wise steward whom the master shall make ruler over all his household, to give
them their portion of Meat in due season; commending unto us (as some of the
fathers observe) those five properties; Truth, Humility, Discretion, a lawful
Calling, fit execution of the Place, which are requisite in him who desires the
approbation of a good steward that neither he be a betrayer of the flock nor
wastfull; Non prodito^ aut raptor. Chrisost.
accounting that his own which is but only committed to his charge; of such a
one we say as the holy Ghost in another case, 1 Samuel 22 14. Prou. 20.6:
who is so faithful amongst all thy servants as David. For doubtless many
men, will boast every one of his own goodness, but who can find a faithful
man. Secondly that he be humble, remembering that he is but a fellow servant,
which virtue is not so repugnant (as some think) to the highest title of office
in our Church, but that experience has taught us, how both of them fitly may
be joined together. Thirdly, wise, not blind, A Lay man: Es. 56 10. This was
s^oke against Kings, Princes and Magis. Calvin. Ber.
nor an Idiote, of whom the Prophet speaks, their watchmen are all blind,
they have no Knowledge, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark, they lie and
sleep and delight in sleeping; surely Fortitude, and Constancy are required
of such as have set their hands unto the Lords plough, wisdom in those that
are made watchmen over the Lords house, Justice, in that they are Debtors, both
to wise and foolish; and Temperance in the performance of this duty. We may and
ought to say (I hope without off^ce) to the Honorable Bishops, Genesis 41 33.
the fathers of our Churches, as Joseph said to (...), provide for a man of
understanding, and wisdom, and set him over the Land of ^egipt. there is
nothing surely more dangerous then a watchman, Speculator (...). Preco nintus.
D^ cto, ^^lciu^ (...)^nissu^.
that is blind, a Preacher that is dumb, a Teacher that is Ignorant, or a
Prelate that is Remi^^e, neither do I think our Church, has so much cause to
complain, (as some men bear us in hand) nor if it had (as may appear
hereafter) it is neither only nor Principally, the Bishops fault. Fourthly a
lawful caling, whom the lord has made not he whom favor, nor any other
corruption, nor the peoples unwarranted vocation, nor his own Intrusion has
placed in that room. For this shall remain vndispensable to the worlds end,
Heb. 5.^^.
let no man take upon him that honor, but he that is called of God as Aaron
was.

Lastly is required the fit execution of his Place, that he give them their
meat in due season; the parties are those, which are of his family, the Lords
house, to them it must be Meat, not Poison, as many give; and it must be in
Due season, that is when it can seasonablie be performed. For he that has
allotted a time for all things, has given this allowance, Eccle. 3.7.
that there is a time to keep silence, and a time to speak. Which some not
considering, have made the Apostles commandment ( Be instant in season and
out of season) to lie with equal necessity, 2. Tim. 4.2.
upon the former clause, Preach the word: As if this eagernes in the dispatch
of this duty, might warrant them, loosely, negligently, unlearnedly (for want
of time) to preach those profound mysteries, Prou. 25.11.
which uttered in due season, are like Aples of Gold with pictures of Silver.
Surely to Preach diligently, is not to Preach often, but rather to be diligent
in studying, for that we preach; which a great number nelecting (men otherwise
zealous and able to do well) have thought it not only Excuse, but
Commendation sufficient, that they preach often.

Wherein doubtless the Church receives at their hands a double wrong; both a
Contempt of those mysteries, wherinto they search not, for want of time, and an
uncharitable Condemning of others, who wanting peradventure that felicity of
tongue which they have, or rather who are loath to handle those holy things
unlike themselves, are thought by many, to be Idle, for not Preaching so
often, as others do. A thing certainly more excusable by much, if men in
Preaching were only to have respect, to the Capacity of the hearers, and not
to the Majesty of that word, which they expound unto them. Math. 13.52.
For-getting that Every Scribe that is taught unto the Kingdom of Heaven, is
like unto a househoulder, which brings forth out of his treasury things both
new and old. (...). Eupolis. Eccle. 2, 16.17.
I hope the due meditation of this text, will put them in mind, that to speak
often, is not ever to say much; for says the son of Sirach, The talking of a
Fo^le, is like a burden in the way, but there is comeliness in the talk of a
Wise man; verse. 25.
they inquire at the mouth of the wise man in the congreg^tion, and they shall
ponder his words in their heart, for the words of such as have understanding,
are waighed in the balance. Doubtless I can never persuade my self, Psa. 45.
when We speak of those matters, which we have made unto the King of Heaven,
that the exactest Industry, which either tongue or pen can take in the
handling of this work can displease God; wherein I will not condemn (as
unprofitable) the labors of such, who are defective in this kind; no more
then I hope they will, the Seldom, Reverend, and learned Preaching of those
men, who in these respects are not so common speakers; as others be. But not
to handle the excellencies of some, and the virtues which were to be wished in
all, let us consider a little better, the nature of this Ministry, and see how
sufficiently our Church is provided in this kind. And the defects (if there
be any as we may not supose that we have none) from whence they proceed, and
how the best remedies may be provided for them.

We call then the Ecclesiastical Ministry a sacred Action, Public, Zanch in.
4. Prec. Cap. 19. page 654.
Instituted of Christ in the Church of God, for the salvation of the elect, and
his own glory, until the end of the world, wherein some several men, Lawfully
elected, called, and ordained to this function, Externallie and Visiblie, serve
both to offer up the Public and Common prayers of any one Church, and by the
pure Preaching of the word, and the lawful administration of the Sacraments,
and holy Discipline, they serve Instrumentallie to Christ, who Inwardly and
Invisibly, by his holy Spirit, does Teach, Correct, Comfort, Nourish with his
flesh and blood, his mystical Body, which we call the Church. The
consideration it is like of this office, has neither fully possessed all who are
desireous to enter into this calling, (because whom all other worldly hopes
have forsaken they commonly reserve ministerial vocation as their last and
surest refuge, ever open to forlorn men) nor those who blame some part of the
Clergy of this land; whereas in deed the greatness of the harvest, and the
scarsetie of able workmen has made it necessary that Law should yield to
admit numbers of men, but slenderly and meanly qualified; now as we cannot
excuse the former fault, whether it be the corruption in their own desires,
or the greediness of those who are the Patrons of Church livings, making that
the Church, that should nourish them, whose service she needs, has obtruded
upon her their service that know not otherwise how to live, and sustain
themselves. Yet surely for the other neither is the fault so common, Apollos
preached diligently and knew only the Bap. of John Act. 18. Nec ignoro maxim ^s
honor; ad paru^ dignos penuria melioru^ s^lere defferri. Ma^mertius Panager.
ad Iulianum.
as it has been in times past, nor altogether so great, (if these Reformers
who have so much knowledge themselves could but with patience endure a smaller
proportion in other menn^) for it fares with the Church as with a common
wealth, where many governors are needful, and they not many whom their
quality can commend* the penu^ie of worthier, must needs make the meaner sort
capable, who notwithstanding are not altogether so unfit as some men think to
discharge the greatest if not the principallest part which is committed to them.

For seeing no man of sound Judgment, can doubt but that Sacraments, where the
Ministers have lawful ordination (nay peradventure Baptism where they have
not) is as available to salvation, as administered by the best Preacher; and
that preaching it self, is not only to make, and frame of themselves (which
many do foolishly, which are thought by their followers that they preach
well) but also to read the Scriptures, and those learned Homelies of other
men, My L. Grace. M. Hooker. Perkins upon the L. prayer.
as some unanswerably have confirmed unto us, and that not the least part of
this duty is the public offering up of the prayers of the whole Congregation,
which themselves confess to be Prayers, though the other to be no Sermon; we
may boldly say (which they hitherto are both to confess) that Ministers unable
to preach in that manner as they understand preaching, and of less profound
learning then these great Reformers have in themselves, and do wish in others,
are notwithstanding True Ministers, Lawfully ordain^d, and that the Church is
not simply faulty, for admitting of these men, to the performance of those
duties. Hereunto we add, that seeing Private Instruction, and Exortation, was
the most usual kind of teaching in the Apostles time; Into what house soever
ye enter say Pax huie dom^ Luke 10.
both because Public authority did not favor public Assemblies to this
end, and that simple men are better informed by private conference, and
considering the nature of profound Scholars, is not altogether so easily
framed to go from house to house to this purpose, nor can if they had
inclination and leisure* probably frame themselves to the small capacities of
the poor people, which (notwithstanding) greater employments of the Church, if
they were willing would deny unto them; we rather choose to have them receive
Instruction, from mean Scholars, such as our Church admits (not
unprofitably) to that use, Maximu^ viu^di impedune^tu^ est expectatio que
pende^ ex crastino pe^ dis hodiernu^. Seen. de breu^^ vitae. 1. Tim. 3.2.
Titus. 19. 2. Tim 2.15. Hos. 4.6.
then wholly in expectation of great learned men, to live and die with no other
Information then they hear at Se^mons. So that touching those Arguments taken
from the Principles of common right, to prove that Ministers should be
learned, as likewise those authorities of the Apostle aledged to that end,
because S. Paul req^ireth in a Minister ability to teach, to convince, to
distribute the word rightly, because also the Lord himself, has protested
they shall be no Priests to him, which have rejected knowledge, and because if
the blind lead the blind, they must both needs fall into the ditch, we hold it
just, and requisite, according to the laws and statutes which the Scripture
has the Cannons that are taken out of ancient Sinods, Math. 15.14.
the decrees and constitutions of sincerest times; the sentences of all
antiquity, and the conscience of men; that Ign^rance is a great sin, in
those that have taken upon them the cure of souls.

But seeing to furnish all places of Cure in this Realm, it is not an army of
twelve thousand men, A true observation of M. Hooks.
that would suffiice, nor two Universities (though both well stored) can
always supply so many as decay in so great number; nor the fourth part of the
livings with Cure able when they fall to give maintenance to learned men; It
must needs in reason be allowed (unless the greatest part of the people
should be altogether left void of the use and exercise of Religion) that a
number must be admitted into Ecclesiastical Order, which doubtless for
learning, are but meanly furnished. For whatsoever we may conceive in our
plots, priuatlie in our studies, or utter to others to maintain argument, yet
surely reason will tell us, that (all inevitable necessities considered) besides
eminent and competent learning, we shall be forced, for supply of this
calling, to descend a step, which is neither, but only tolerable.

Wherein if he that is Judge, for the allowance of those men, shall find them
able to perform the service of public Prayer, to minister the Sacraments unto
the people, to solemnize Marriage, to visit the Sick, and bury the Dead,
(which some fondly think to be no part of the Ministers duty) to instruct by
reading (although by more learned preaching as yet they cannot) we hold in
this case, Titus. 1.9.
that the law of the Apostle is not altogether broken. In this respect we obey
necessity, which we know not how possibly to avoid otherwise, and of two
evils make choice of that, which is less dangerous: seeing some inconveniences
being tolerated in this, it may notwithstanding be recompensed with greater
good; and if even these men (the lowest almost of the Clergy which our Church
has) who are accounted by others to be dumb and silent, may and do in some
degree, as profitably instruct their Parishioners as some others, who of as
mean gifts but of more audacitie then they, dare take upon them to expound and
divide the Scriptures by Preaching upon some text, whereunto notwithstanding
they come nothing near: Que Prophetae vaticinati sunt populis predicare hoc
est legere. Gloss* in verb. predicare did. 25. C. perlectis ^^. ad Lectore^.
whereas the only reading of Scripture in the other, is properly to be termed
a Preaching, what reason have they with disdain so to think and to speak of
them? for surely when the world most abounded with just, righteous, and perfect
men, their chief study was the exercise of piety, wherein for the safest
direction they reverently harkened to the reading of the law of God, they kept
in mind the Oracles and Aphorisms of wisdom, which tended unto virtuous
life, if any scruple of conscience did trouble them for matter of actions,
which they took in hand, nothing was attempted before counsel and advice were
had, for fear least rashly they might offend, we are now more confident, M.
Hook. lib. 5. page 263:
not that our knowledge is more, but because our desires are an other way,
their Scope was Obedience, ours is Skill, their Endeavor was reformation of
life, our Virtue nothing but to here gladly the reproof of Vice, they in the
practice of religion wearied chiefly their knees and hands, we especially
our ears and tongues, we have grown to an intemperancie (as one notes) that
the desire of Sermons, has brought almost all other duties of religion out of
taste: and in these we think only such, to be most excellent, who are aptest
to mislike what superiors in their wisdom aloweth, and what the giddiness of
our fancies desire to have changed. These compared with the other, which do
only read, and yet are obedient to the Princes laws, are to receive
encouragement and alowance, when as the other, (better learned paraduenture in
small measure) for their vurulie disobedience deserve neither. For it is much
better that the Church should want altogether the benefit of such men's labors,
then endure the mischief of their inconformitie to good laws.

In which case if any by being put to silence, repine at the course and
proceedings of Justice, they must learn to content themselves, M. Curlus.
with the answer of that wise Roman, which having occasion to cut off one from
the body of the common wealth, in whose beehalfe because it might have been
pleaded, that the party was a man serviceable, he therefore beegan his
Judicial sentence, with this preface; Non est opus rcip. eo ciue qui parite
nesciret. Val. Max^ lib. 6. cap. 3.
The common wealth needs men of quality, yet never those men, which have not
learned how to obey. Now because neither any man in our Church takes upon him
the defense of unlearned Ministers, nor the laws of our land inclyne not to
the favoring of that defect, (as if we expected no more of any then we allow
in some.) It must needs be a slander in them, who think there are worthy men
enough, Nichols in the plea. page 145. Lin 12.
if they were sought after, both in the Universities and other where; but while
men are suffered to run, and ride, and catch before they fall, many worthy men
are passed over and not known, some are feign to be schoolemaisters, and some
because of these troubles, change their Audies. First I desire this man to
remember his own words in another place; If he think there are worthy men
enough, why does he complain of the silencing of some as a great wrong to the
Church, which in this great scarsitie of good, and lawful Ministers, Nichols.
page 171. Lin. 1.1. Tim. 5.
did much want their service. Secondly, that the Apostle described, the
qualities required in men of this calling, does not say, that if none can be
found, or not a sufficient man, in whom all these qualities concur, that then
the Church shall rather be destitute of Ministers, then have such. For there
were in the Apostles time, that swarued from this rule, and yet he was glad
that they preached the Gospel. Herein we differ not from the confession of
the Heluetian church, (which it is like our adversaries in this cause do more
reverence then they do our own) who say, Confess. Heluet.
we condemn all unmeet Ministers not endued with gifts necessary for a
shepherd, that should feed his flock, how be it we acknowledge that the
harmless simplicity of some shepherds in the old Church, did sometime more
profit the Church then the great exquisit, but a little to proud learning of
some others.

Wherefore we reject not now a days the good simplicities of certain so that
they be not altogether unskillful of God and his word; and yet for all this,
let no man think, but there are as many learned, godly, grave, and worthy
Ministers of the word in this Church of England at this day, (be it spoken
without pride to Gods honor and the joy of our whole land) as in any one
realm, or particular Church in all Christendom, that either is now, or has
been before us. But for the scarsetie (not of our own in comparison of
others) but rather in respect of the multitude of our parish Churches, Which
are above 8000.
I hope they will give us leave to render them better, and truer reasons then
as yet we have received at their hands, who only with out cause to make it
the Bishops fault, are willing to tell the world that if these, urging of order
and obedience, which it pleases them to tea^^^e beggarly trifle of man's
devise were not) that then learning and religion would not be of so little
account, Nichols plea. Page 171. Lin. 14.
and estimation amongst us. But I hope all men see, that the defect of
provision in this kind, (and yet I wish that most reformed Churches were but so
well furnished) is neither from religion professed, nor from the government
that is used, nor from the governors of the Church, but the cruelty of the
times past, wherein numbers of meet Ministers have been consumed, the
unwillingness of many at this present, who seeing the contentions amongst our
selves, and by reason of these the contempt of the Clergy, are unwilling to
enter into this calling, the schisms and deuisions which have made a number
renounce this office, others worthily to be suspended and deprived, from all
which the Church (which ought to have had the use of the labor and learning of
men of ability) is forced to crave a supply at their hands, who are not
altogether so sufficient to perform that charge. But the greatest occasion of
this evil, is where law and reason have given authority to some to be patrons
to present, their consciences have been corrupt, and they have failed of that
trust which former times have justly reposed in them. Wherein if the people
complain, that their authority to choose is defeated by this means, surely
it is but unthankfulness in them, to mislike a thing begun with so great
reason for their good, continued now more then a thousand years, warranted by
laws, and practiced with the liking of all nations, the beeginning of
patronages is not expreslie mentioned in the laws of this land, Magna Charta
33. and. 13.
Aduocations and Presentations are remembered in Magna Charta, as current by the
laws before that time, the plea of Quare Impedit, Ann. 52. Hen. 3 Ansegisus
legum. Franciae. lib. 1. cap. 84. Anno. 827.
when Bishops refuse the patrons clarke, is mentioned long since, for this
custom was most usual, that the patron might not place a Clarke without the
Bishop, nor the Bishop refuse the Clarke of the patron, if he were such as
were alowable by the Canons of the Church.

Anno. 654. Concilij Tol. 9. cap. 2.
In Spain before that time, the council of Toledo made this Canon; we decree
that so long as the founders of Churches remain in this life, they shall be
suffered to have the chief and continual care of the said place, and
themselves shall offer meet Rectors, unto the Bishop to be ordained in those
Churches, and if the Bishop (neglecting the founders) shall presume to place
any other let him know that this admission, shall be void and to his shame,
others shall be placed in their steads, even such as the founders shall choose,
being not unworthy. Long before this the like was determined by the Roman
laws, Nouella Constit* 123. cap. 18
strictly to be obserue^d through the Roman Empire. If any build a Church or
house of prayer, and would have Clarks to be placed there, he or his heirs,
if he allow maintenance for those Clarks, and name such as are worthy, let them
be ordained upon his nomination, but if such as they choose be prohibited by
the Canons, as unworthy, then let the Bishop take care to promote some whom he
thinks to be more worthy. It seems this law had two reasons, for the
patronage, which doubtless are not the least ground of that intrest which they
now have. The first the building of the Church, a work which while the world
was in love, with religion gaind greatest reverence, to those of whom it could
point and say, these are the men that have built us Sinagogs.

Herein if any fraudulently discharge, that virtuous trust which through many
discents is derived unto them, Omnia ista ta^^ propitius aspiciet quam aegros
suos medicus. Sen. lib. 2. de Ira. 1. Sam. 30.
I hope God will look upon them in mercy to amendment, as the careful
Physician upon sick persons: in the mean time I must tell them what I hear,
that the church by their means is like the body of the Amalekite, sick, and
unless it be refreshed, like spedily to die for famine. For whilst meaner
men, content with less alowance having been important suitors for places in
the Church, obtain them; the Patrons have divided the maintenance of the
Clergy, and the small alowance has deprived them peradventure of a better
teacher. And howsoever good laws have been made, to avoid the corruptions of
Patrons in this kind, yet the covetous desires of such, as hardly satisfied,
are able to find means to escape the danger, and yet falselie notwithstanding
to defraud the Church. For humane laws (how virtuous or religious soever)
where the uprightness of conscience is wanting, serves for the most part, not
to make the sin to be less common, but the sinner in the fact to be more
secret: seeing betwixt God and man, this is the difference, that the law of
man, what it sees does account sin; but God punishes as a fault what no man
can reveal, saving only the conscience of him that sins. In the one
Confession is a way to obtain pardon, but in the other a means to procure
punishment; T. C. aloweth only readers. page 104. Sect 3 Some godly grave man
which can do nothing else but read, may be appointed to be reader in the
church.
They only are virtuous, who without all respects in respect of Conscience,
are only virtuous. To conclude then this point, we say our laws, and our
tongues desire that our Ministry may be learned, through the whole land: that
the hinderance of this is not wholly in the governors of the Church: that a
less portion of learning may serve, then some men exact in all; and until
better supply may be had, we Reverence, Use, and Esteem, the meanest of these,
as the Ministers of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XI. Of the maintenance of the Ministers, and of Tithes.
AS it is of all virtuous considerations to a Prince not one of the lest
moment, (if both for the safety of his subjects, for removing of scandal, and
the discharge of his own conscience in the day of account, it be not the
greatest) to provide for a learned Ministry in all parts of his kingdom; so
it is not either of least difficulty or least use, to ordain a convenient and
bountiful allowance for them; neither can this (how wisely soever gouernd) be
a perpetual maintenance, if it shall depend upon the voluntary contribution of
rich men; or to be thought an allowance fit and convenient for them, if it be
not. So that the wisdom of devout men in times past, from their religion, were
as careful to have allotted a perpetuity of living to them whose continual
successors could not dye, and were not lykely to be very evil; as natural
parents, for that race, which proceeding out of their own bodies, (more
subject both to end and miscarry) are notwithstanding desirous, that they may
be richly furnished, and plentifully maintained for a long time. Virtue working
as strongly and prouidently in the one, as nature and affection in the other.
So that what care those that were before us, virtuously employed in this
kind, by indowing both Churches, and other places, 1 Universities
(both to furnish and give rest to the Clergy) with honorable, 2 and Cathedral
Churches.
and perpetual alowance to this end, serves both to make the labor now far
easier, to provide maintenance for a learned Ministry, the greatest part
whereof their religious devotion has performed unto us; as also to make us, so
holily to esteem of those things which their wisdom did consecrate to this
end; that policy cannot think alterations or diminutions in this kind to be
safe, even where unhallowed, Profane, and cruel Sacrilege, were accounted to
be no sin.

For seeing the Chruch peradventure does now want, what authority thought fit,
to take from her, because Superstition had made her too rich, and Alterations
only might have given some hope, that time would have brought those religious
houses and lands into their possessions again, whose erroneous blindness
deserves an everlasting banishment: it is wisdom rather to tolerate some
things, for the maintenance of the Clergy, which a few wandering person (made
rich by contributions, whilst a great number zealously blind are made poor to
maintain them) think and write against with great bitterness, (as the means
of idleness and a superfluous pomp) then stirred up by the inconsiderate
envy of these men, being upon the Church such unnecessary want, that if the
devotion of the Apostles time, wherein they sold their possessions, and laid
the price at their feet, fail, (as no doubt they do) the Church must either
be desperately poor, or beg her relief from those kingdoms that are next
unto her. Wherein besides the injury to God, which is no less then a boulde
profanation of holy things* the Church receives at their hands a double
wrong. First an apparent discouragement from entering into that calling, wherein
how faithfully soever they employ themselves, and with how great sincerity
soever it be undertaken by them, yet few or none (doubtless) will be willing to
undergo either the labor or the contempt, where so slender recompense, and so
small rewards, are allotted to them. Both which of necessity must be, seeing
alms, seldom, when it is no matter of extraordinary zeal, flows with so
great a stream from worldly men, that it has or can have, any possibility to
effect either: the other is the intolerable burden of the poor, which now
lies upon the shoulders of the laity; in former times whilst the church was
rich, being chiefly the humble almes-men of religious houses, and now because
both the charity, and the means fail, the Clergy (who for the most part are
fitter to receive then to give relief) have referred this weight to the
laity, which neither they can well bear, nor easily put off. And yet an
extremity in this kind, has been the original of good laws, for the
redress of it.

Anno. 39. Elizab.
Now surely all this must of necessity be more desperately evil, if either
our own covetousness, or the clamorous zeal of some inconsiderat men, cause
us to make a division, (as of pray) (whatsoever our pretenses are) of that
last, and least portion of the Churches wealth. Now because the first ground of
that plentiful alowance, which the Church had, was the religious consecrating
of a portion of our goods to his service, who had reserved a part of our time
meerelie to that end: and seeing our liberal dealing with God, was the best
and most thankful acknowledgment, of his bountiful and liberal dealing with
us, holy men did confess, (as well in the one as in the other) that in mercy,
they did receive both their time and their riches from his hand: so that by a
part (and that small in comparison of what we allot unto other uses) we
confess his absolute dominion, by whose fatherly goodness, we receive the
whole. Wherein through covetousness, or any other sinister occasion to be
defective, were to deny unto God, that which belongs unto him, seeing never
any nation in the world did honor him, and not account it a special part of
their duty, to do him honor with their very goods. A part doubtless in
christianity of our Moral duty, seeing for the sway riches carry in the
world, and for that inclination which men's minds have to cleave fast unto these
things, we are naturally more apt, to honor our riches as God, then to honor
as we ought God with our riches. So that unless this tribute (as it were)
daily put us in mind whose subjects we be, we are apt to make our selves
Kings, and the world to be our own free, and independent inheritance. Now
seeing what we offer unto God, serves us well for the perpetuity of
religion, (which cannot possibly continue without a convenient alowance for
such as are necessarily to be employed in the Ministry thereof) as it does
to express our thankful acknowledgement, of his mercy from whence we
receive all that we have, in all ages both the gift has been refused, and
the giuers reproved, whenever the coldness and want of devotion in the
people, made their oblations to be sparing, and little worth: for there ought
to be some proportion, both betwixt him whom we desire and hope that he will
accept our oblations, as likewise betwixt the principalest end, and the things
themselves: wherein whatsoever either our error or defect be, the burden of
that evil, must in the end fall upon our own heads. In which respect, even
the heathen themselves: thought it unmeet, to offer that unto God, Puru^,
probu^, prophanu^, suu^ fest. lib* 14.
which was impure, or unsound, or already given, or else not truly their own
to bestow.

Now concerning the use of those riches, whether in moueables, or lands, which
out of men's devotions were consecrated to holy ends, their bestowing is not for
God; who has no need of any thing that is ours, seeing the earth is the
Lords, Psalm. 24.1^
and all that therein is; but because it is our good and advantage to be
exercised with donations of that kind, and he accepts them to no other end,
but to have them employed to the endless continuance of religion it self. So
ye, inexcusable is the sacrilege of those men, who robbing the Church, seek
by that policy to overthrow religion; and their opinion is not altogether
sound, who think no more fit to be the possession of the church, then may
serve by a false proportion of theirs; to make a naked, and bare allowance to
some inferior, worthless men of the Clergy; to whom notwithstanding whilst
necessity and want of due provision inforceth them to beg their maintenance
from the Layetie, they vnproportionably commit the greatest and weightiest
authorities in the church, wholly or principally, to be ruled by them; as if
natural and politic wise men did not think that they might justly challenge
an ouerswaying of their Counsels, whose very living, food, and raiment, must
be deducted out of their coffers; to whom they will be content, so long to be
beneficial and liberal, as nothing by the Clergy, either in doctrine, or
discipline, shall be performed contrary to the liking of these men. So that the
complaint of the pride and authority in churchmen, is only from hence, not
that in deed their riches are too great, but that the maintenance which they
have allotted from antiquity, (and happily by good laws confirmed unto them)
is a free, and absolute right, and possession, no ways depending upon the
courtesy and favor of lay men; who for the most part expect obedience, and
service, where they are voluntarily content, to afford alowance. Men seldom
being willing to be reproved by those men, whose condition is absolutely, to
depend upon their maintenance. This being the ordinary effect of liberality
in this kind, beesides that patrons to the Clergy may grow poor, and that
all men at the length become weary to be continual giuers. Seeing then we can
have no exemption from publishing of that gospel, without a woe; by which the
earth has men virtuous, and the heaven glorious, and that without maintenance
all the fathers are of opinion, it is lawful to substract our labor; and that
this maintenance can neither be convenient nor perpetual, if it be Alms;
wisdom has found it out, (which our Fathers before us have practiced) that it
was not (thought a great honor to those that did it) enough only to build
churches, and to furnish them with rich ornaments, (not so much to further
devotion as to be a treasury for what want soever the church might have) as
also because these moueables, were subject to casualtie, to provide that the
church might have for perpetuity, a large indowment of inheritance, 1. Cor.
9.7.8.
in lands: so that seeing we go not a warfare upon our own expense, nor
plant not those vineyards whereof we are, or can be debarred to eat the fruit;
nor feed not those flocks, whose milk ought not to be our food; and seeing
all that we do, is accompanied with a hope, which seldom fails to answer
the sowing, and the reaping of other men; It were a thing unreasonable, and
dishonest, to cry so much for either learning, or pains, extraordinary in the
Clergy, until first we had in all parts of the land, sufficiently provided
for the maintaining of them.

For doubtless seeing their function deserves honor, (which seldom amongst
men is performed what worth soever be in the persons where their abilities are
small) (this being the common fault of our corruption to think a want of
desert whersoeuer there is a want of reward) It is fit that the maintenance for
all (though not for all alyke) were such, that the reverent and estimation
which many desire, and ouergreedely hunt after, Honores quos expetunt multi
Cato petere non debuit sed eos ciuitas ob eius virtute^ non petenti dare. Aust.
lib. 5. de ciui Dei.
Cato might not ask but the common wealth should bestow it upon him for his
virtuous merit without suit. And doubtless without convenient living, virtue
shall want honor, and contempt must needs follow where that is wanting.
Praedicatores boni and honore^ propter elationem sugiunt and honorari tamen
propter imitationem volunt. Greg. in moral.
For howsoever the best preachers ought to shun it, to avoid pride, yet they
are willing to be honored, that they may be followed; and though we preach not
to receive reward, or recompense, which we ought to be willing, if we were
able to do without others; Vetus predicatorno^ ideo hic predicare debet vt in
hoc tempore mercedem recipiat sed ideo debet mercedem recipere vt predicare
sufficiat, Greg.
yet we receive recompense, and reward, that we may preach. Neither in this
do we demand, what nature and reason can deny unto us; for the labourer is
worthy of his hyer. Now seeing the Clergy ought to have a fit maintenance,
and that some cause, there was in all ages, why besides sundry other more rare
Donations of uncertain rate, the tenth should be thought a reuenew so natural
to be allotted out unto God; let us consider a little without offense both the
conueniencie of this proporcion, and what some reformers displeased with the
name of Tithes, Nescio quid habet sordidi singulorum agros aestimare Trauers,
in discipt. Eccl. fol. 95.96.
(a thing in their opinion Jewish and Cerimoniall) have in stead thereof
offered by way of advise unto the church, as a convenient means of allowance
for her. Where seeing maintenance for the Clergy is all that we stand for;
we hope their indifferency cannot but grant us this favor, that it may
arise out of that proportion, and in that manner as all antiquity before us,
have thought fit; until they shall find out some other means whereby the
allowance may be certain and much better.

And herein though we make not the practice of Abraham, Genesis 14.20.
who gave the tithes of what he had taken in war unto Melchisedech, to be a
rule of an absolute necessity to all men, that any way are increased, and
shall live now, yet seeing it was then done by him, who it is like knew better,
what was fit then we do, and paraduenture was to be an example to the
faithful, as well in this as in other things: (who therefore amongst other
reasons are called the sons of Abraham) and at that time, when the
cerimoniall law was not commanded with so great strictness, it may be a
better warrant for the children of the Church to provide for her allowance by
example, then to hazard, such new inventions of our own, as being rejected in
this respect only that they are new, wherein they are subject to much
prejudice, are not altogether so like to afford unto the Church a maintenance
either of that indifferency, or continuance as tithes do. For doubtless even
these, would be much diminished, and detaind if antiquity, and custom, did
not tell us, that were fit which laws and ordinations command to be done by
us, wherein to refuse what has been the practice of former times, (only
because it was proportionable to that age) is over well to esteem of our
selves, and rather to hazard an opinion of singularity, then to be thought
wise. Besides if Jacobs vow, at such time, as he took his Journey toward
Haran was, Genesis 20.28.
that if God will be with me, and will keep me in this voyage, which I am to
go, and will give me bread to eat, and clothes to put on, so that I may
return, to my fathers house in safety, then shall the Lord be my God, and
this Stone which I have set up as a Pillar, the same shall be Gods house, and
of all thou shall give me, I will give unto thee, the tithe: be a rule not
only of prescription, but an example of warrant (what ought and is fit to be
done by us in the like case. Doubtless we are no sooner to think of Gods
protection and his blessing of our increase, but withal to think of the
furtherance of his worship, and that not the least effectual to this end, is
our just and liberal paying of our tithes. Wherein if vows, be but a more
special obligation of our duty, in those things which religion generally
does require at our hands, it must needs seem equal and just, (both for
others who are free in the like case for to vow the like) and for those who
already by laws stand bound to the same duties, to perform them sincerely
and with much truth. Now this which nature taught, unto the heathen themselves,
making ten that portion which they paid for divine tribute, the law after by
Moses imposing equally upon all (even by this means the poorest among them
yielded equally the same proportion as the greatest did) in affection
peradventure much more. It was to them an undoubted assurance that in Gods
sight, from whom all good is expected concerning acceptance, and protection,
they were all one: and that this thus bestowed was not lost, but that the
remainder was sanctified by this means, and that God receiving a part,
undertakes to bless all.

And doubtless if we were as virtuously inclined, either to depend upon God
for new blessings or humbly to give thanks for those we have already received
(as sometimes the Jews were) we must needs account our tithes, a hedge and a
wall to the rest we possess besides. Diuitiarum sepes decimae R. Aquila in
pirk. Aboth. Malach. 3.
For these being truly brought into the storehouse, that there may be meat in
my house, prove if I will not (says God) open unto you the windows of heaven,
and power down upon you, an unmeasurable blessing. So that although the Church
be now free from the law of Moses, yet because nature has taught men to
honor God withal that they possess, and the scripture has left us an
example of that particular proportion, which for Moral considerations has been
thought fittest by him that could best judge; and seeing the Church has entered
into the like obligation long since; it must needs be a question altogether
supersluous to dispute whether tithes be a matter of divine right. For
doubtless that which lawfully (whilst it was ours) we might retain, now
being once by our own consent for that which our fathers did, the law
accounts to be our act) alienated from our selves, we can no more
warrantablie retain back, then Ananias the price of those possesions, whereof
voluntarily he made sale for the Apostles use: for they no sooner by
alienation pass from us, but the property being altered, God for ever after,
does account them and reckon them to be his own. Whose tribute either to
diminish, or to wash and to clip that coin, whereupon God has placed his own
mark, must in the end prove heavy, and shall be punished as the robbing of God
himself.

And therefore least any man should challenge a propriety, by any interest in
these things, the laws do account, them the possessions of none. Nullius
aute^ res sa^rae and religiose and sacte quod enim diuini iurisest id nullius
in bonis est lustini. lib 2. Tit 1.
The virtuous consideration whereof, made those princes memorable and famous,
which took upon them inuiolablie to defend the Churches right; whereas the
bold profanation in others, pulled down the walls of their kingdom, Nouimus
multa regna and regeseorum propte^eac^cidisse quia Eecle^ias spoliaue^^t ^esque
earu^ vastauerunt, alienaueru^t, veldirupueru^t Episcopisque and sacerdo. ^ib^
at^; quod maius est Ecclesijs coni^abstuleru^t and pug nanti^^ dedeni^t Verba.
Caroli Magni.
and their hands were over weak to rule those scepters committed to them,
because before they were unhallowed and poluted, by presumptuouslie aduenturing
for to rob the Church. Wherein the resistance of some inferiors in this
case, were of a little merit, if nature had not taught all men to abhor
Sacrilege. For this alone ouerturneth Kingdoms, when soldiers are made rich
by the churches spoils; And these for the most part as a Hook lib. 5. page.,
249.
wise man notes, suffer both the misery of beggars and the infamy of
robbers; seeing then the indowment of our church, for the continual supplye
and reward of the Clergy, aryseth from some lands, but principally from
Tithes, and these well and conveniently allotted, by former Kings, to give
maintenance both to Colleges, which may breed deuines, as to Cathedral
Churches, where deuines after their pains may well rest, (both places being
the rich storehouses of learned men serviceable to the Church for many uses) it
cannot be but an intention of overmuch envy, and violence, to seek
inconsideratlie an alteration, and impouerishing of these honorable allowances
for these places, by which in the end all fervent study of deuinitie in the
best dispositions must needs perish, so that if men had as much freedom to
alter, and diminish the living of the Church, as of other persons, yet no man
can think it safe, nor possible for a Ministry to continue learned in that
kingdom long, when other professions grow rich, and the reueneues of the
Church fail. Tithes then being a duty whereunto all men are now bound, both
by law of nature, divine positive, and a virtuous voluntary obligation to the
Church, we can see no great reason in the refusers of them, why they shoud
either altogether be kept back, or else be alienated to other ends. For where
the law of nature requires a sufficient maintenance for the Minister, the law
positive being a determination of the former, allows the tenth to be the
best proportion, wheerein if this be remembered, that the maintenance be
sufficient, we doubt not but the prince may determine the tenth, or the fifth,
or any other number, to be the measure. Yet surely stronger reasons, and of
more equality in all ages, have been found, for the tenth, then for any other
number besides, that ten being the perfection of all number, and this duty
(as it were) a quit rent to him that is the author of all perfection, as it is,
or has been moderatlie convenient to maintain those, whom he imployeth in
that business, so most fitly, it is answereable to his own perfection. And if
the bond of allowance arise from the benefit which we receive at their hands,
whom Gods ordination for our good, imployeth in that kind, it must needs
follow, that the tenth under the law, being the proportion which the Clergy
had, there is small reason why now, (their service being more honorable and the
benefits more singular) their maintenance and allowance should be made less.
In all things surely, this being the rule of our savior Christ, Math. 5.
that our righteousness should exceed theirs: so that though Christians now
be all freed from the burden of ceremonial precepts, yet from oblations, and
tenths, they are not.

Maiores nostri adeo copijs omnibus abundabant quia deo decimas dabant and
Caesari censum reddebat modo autem quia disces^it deuotio de^acces^it indictio
fiscal noluimus partiri cum Deo decimas modo autem totum tollitur. Aust. Homel
48.cx lib. 50. Homel.
And whereas in S. Austins time, some part of Africa, were not accustomed to pay
Tithes, he exhorts them to this duty, from the consideration of those
blessings which came upon their labors, whilst they were not slack in these,
which once beginning to fail, they found by experience, that they lost all. A
duty as tribute unto Kings, not only to be paid there where the Prince is
virtuous, but also (with as much conscience) where they are not: for duties
belonging unto callings, are not dispensable for the unworthiness of the
persons: seeing Gods ordinations, must not be altered without his warrant:
neither are these therefore to be retained or diminished, because the
abilities of some persons, is able to live without them (which has been the
heresy of some men) but being the recompense of their charge, and labor, to
those that are appointed, (whether poor or rich) they are due unto both alike.
Whereunto though we lean not either so strongly (as some Canonists) to make
ten, ^Error fratri cellorum. Ioh. de Turre cremat. lib 4. pact. 2. cap. 57.
S^amae.
an absolute neccessitie of the maintenance for the Clergy; or so weakly to
make Tithes (as some do) either Alms, or Ceremoniall^ yet we think, as a
mainetenance for the Ministry is necessary, so the Tithes are the fittest,
from whence this maintenance may arise unto them; which being in many places
either small, or otherwise employed, so that a convenient allowance can not
arise from thence, to maintain the Clergy, some other means must be thought
of, by those whom it may concern fitly, and without injury, to supply that
want.

And if Counsel to that purpose may seem needful, this Church (God be
thanked) is not destitute of men in both the Universities and else where,
endued with ripe judgment, whenever any such thing shall be thought
necessary, who as their care is originally the greatest, for the continual
supply of a learned Ministry (the rest without them for the most part being
but troublers of the Churches peace) it shallbe a consideration (if so it may
stand with his majesty's most Royal, virtuous, and Princely wisdom) in all
reason fitest to be thought of by their care. For which end at this present,
to propose any special inventions of my own, might argue in a man of my place
and calling, more presumption perhaps then wit. But seeing there are some who
though they can be content, that the Clergy should have a maintenance, yet
think notwithstanding, that the tenth is no fit proportion, because the reason
for the Levites and our Clergy is far different, they being the twelfth or the
thirtenth part of the people, ours not the hundredth, it is fit though all men
see that this proportion is to many but a mean living, to give some reason to
satisfy these men, why with equal conuenience, the tenth is a number, as
proportionable to us, as it wasto the Levites in the old time. To omit then,
what some of the schoolmen write, that the Clergy are to maintain the poor,
Caiat. in 22. quest. 87.
which are without number, (a burden now we are not unwilling, but unable to
bear) yet we answer further, first that the Levites were not the thirtenth
part of the Jews, and ours the hundred, for the Hebrews are numbered, Numb.
1.46.
(without Levites) from twenty years old upward; Six hundred and three
thousand, five hundred and fifty men fit to go to war, (children and old
men not reckoned) all which being added to the former, it may be thought
likely, that the number might arise to a million and three hundred thousand.
Numb. 3.36.
Now the Levites, all from the infant to the old men, were but two and twenty
thousand, so that adding these to the rest, and dividing the whole by two and
twenty thousand, the parts divided are threescore: Which was much about that
proportion which the Levites were, in respect of the other people; which number
peradventure some think, when all religious places did stand (as now in other
countries) was not any great difference, from the proportionate number betwixt
the Clergy and the Laity at this day.

But this is not the whole reason, for seeing the christian Clergy, are liable
to greater labor, and more cost, then the tribe of Levy amongst the Jews,
then but one Temple, one high Priest, and a few priests, of the house of Aaron,
which in their course served in the Temple (the rest being allotted to
inferior uses) whereas now the temples are innumerable to be maintained, from
the Church, many Bishops, and prelates, whose places are more needful to the
benefit of religion, then the inferior Clergy, many Ministers, and learned
deuins, whose labor, and expenses are infinite to gain knowledge, and
afterward they serve not by turns, but continually attend unto their charge,
where it is fit they should live able to maintain hospitality, in a
bountiful manner (which is not so much for their own families as for the
entertainment of strangers) (the former being House keeping the latter
Hospitality) whereunto if we add, that many are free, from tithes, and that
tenthes and other payments, are a part of the Clergies cost, we see no great
reason, but as a maintenance is fit for the Clergy now, so this proportion of
ten, (if it be not too little) is as agreeable to us, as it was to the
Levites in old time. Suruay. page 117.
Neither do we hereby bring unto all parishes, that superfluous charge,
(which they of the new discipline do) as first besides in every parish a
Pastor or two, there must be a Doctor at the least, M. Beza. contr. Erast.
lib. script T. C. lib. 1. page 1^7.
many Elders, (two and twenty some say) (though Geneua have but twelve)
certain Deacons, a college of widows, and all these (as they say) must be
found, by the parish charge. Now what were convenient severally to be allowed
unto their maintenance, (though we cannot find, The humble motion.
an Unity in their diversity of opinions) yet for the Pastor they are clear
two hundred pound yeerelie, in chieffer places more, and in none less then two
hundred marks; this with the rest amounting to so great a sum, and all from
the maintenance of the Church, which yet experience tells us is scarce able
to maintain one learned divine in every parish) we demand (without offense
at their hands) from whence they can hope or imagine, such maintenance to arise,
to be the strength and the sineues of their new discipline? but because in
this to follow any other conjectures then their own words, were perhaps to
wrong them, (which willingly we would not) it shall not be amiss to consider
that advice, which they have given, how for the expense of all this, in their
wisdoms, the maintenance of the Church, may be made sufficient. First one
says (if it were but the act of one as commonly in this case they pretend
number) The 2 Admonit. page 12.
If no other way may be found then have the Bishops, and Cathedral Churches,
Temporalties enough, to redeem those livings, that be impropriated; other
counsel the same author gives, which have been all answered; The humble
motion. page 40.
another says the same which the Lord B. B. and the Cathedral Churches do
possess, if it be taken in time, before it be to much scambled, how well
would it serve, to redeem Impropriations, and augment the smaller things, and
with the overplus to serve to other good uses for his Majesty's wars, and
increase of learning; and a little after, (as if his counsel were worthy twice
to be repeated) he adds the same: nay he wishes all to be taken from the
Bishops. Yet still they must remain to the Ministry, Page 97.
and the common wealth: only to change the order, and manner of the applying,
that whereas before they served to uphold a Lordly pomp, Idleness, and bravery
in some few, they might now by a wise, and godly distribution be communicated
unto many, for the benefit of many Churches: Page 98. Lin. 3. Page 103.
and if Bishops livings be to little, a free benevolence, and as it were an
offering of all sorts of people, young and old, through this land, ought to
be. Heereunto I might ad the counsel which others give, all tending to this
end, that whatsoever the church has, and is not bestowed according to the
fancy of these men, should presently be altered, and undoubtedly by many
degrees lamentably, be employed to worse use. It pleased that wisdom and
Majesty which then ruled over us, to discern the cruel purpose of these men,
and to hold it unsafe to adventure a worse maintenance for the clergy, by a
worse means. And surely we doubt not, but this great understanding, to whom
God for our happiness, has committed the government of the church and the
common wealth, whose days we desire may continue, as the days of heaven,
will thoroughly understand, that a maintenance thus procured, can bring little
advantage unto Gods church, when by this means colleges, Bishops, or
cathedral churches, are pulled down. For if the fountains be dried up, a
general thirst, must be the disease of our whole land. If the clergy want
governors, better to be without maintenance, then without order. And last of
all if recompense be taken away, wherewith the clergy maintained, may take
rest, not ease, for the time to come, benefiting the church peradventure in
another manner, lamentable experience must needs tell us, that in short space,
the number of divines will be very few. In times past there was in every city a
College of Ministers, over whom the Bishop bate rule, the which Saint Hierom
terms the Senate of the Church, and with us it is called a Collegiat, or
Cathedral church: wherein for the most part (for we cannot excuse all) after
their labor in the university, in the Kings house, in Bishops palaces, in
their painful employment, either by writing or teaching in other places, are
plentifully maintained (as it is most fit) the best, the wisest, and the most
learned of the clergy in this land, which not only (as that most reverend
Archbishop worthy of all honor sometimes said) My L. his grace of Cant. in the
defense of the answer to the Admonit. page 747.
in respect of their soundness in religion, profoundnesse in learning,
diligence in preaching: but wisdom also, experience, and dexterity in
governing, are not only a singular ornament to the Realm, profitable to the
church, an honor to the prince, but also a stay from barbarism, a bridle to
sects and heresies, and a bulwark against confusion. From whence I doubt not
(next unto those two famous noursing places of learning the Universities) but
when our kingdom shall have cause to send to the greatest council, that the
church shall have, men of wisest moderation, best lives, and deepest
judgments, that these places, shall be able to furnish them, with much honor:
and therefore as it is a bold presumption in those men, who (without degrees)
for some commendable pains in preaching, think it merit enough, to advance
them to that honor, so the sacrilegious impiety of those is without excuse,
who wish and desire all places of that nature, to be pulled down, or their
revenues to be altered to some other use: make them (O Lord) and their Princes
like Oreb and Zeb, yea all their princes like Zeba, Psalm. 82, 11, 12 13.
and Zalmana, which have said, let us take the houses of God in possession: O
my God make them like unto a wheel, and as the stubble before the wind. To
conclude then this point, as we heartily wish the Ministry of England to be
learned, so we hope the wisdom and virtue of those whom it does concern,
without injury of any person, state, or condition will in due time, think of
convenient allowance for them: Vrban^ prim^ epist. ad omnes Episcopos.
and this not by selling, or changing of any thing to a stock of money, (which
was the manner of the maintenance in the primative Church) seeing we are
taught by experience, that things of that nature are uncertain, and are not so
likely to carry to those that come after a perpetuity with them, it may be
that if any age were so profane, or authority were carried away with the
violence of these spirits, by the wounds of the Church, to cure the Wants of
some few, and mean persons (a thing God be thanked not much to be feared in
this religious and understanding age under the government of so virtuous and so
wise a King) the Church paraduenture might keep a Festival day of solemnity,
plenty, and all abundance, for some few years, and for ever after, Lament
her desolation and ruin, in want, Penury, Ignorance, and Contempt, unto the
worlds end. And whereas the ages before us gave this deserved honor to some
few, These were those holy and religious men that did build us Temples,
Colleges, Cathedral Churches, and gave ample reueneues unto them all, for the
continual supply, of a learned Ministry, our posterity in the unfortunate
times, of fasting and mourning, after so unhallowed a feast, and so profane a
surfeit, should have cause to bemoane their loss, and lament the times, where
unto they were reserved, cursing these sacrilegious Reformers, that have spoild
the Churches, the riches whereof being put to sail, have served but to
satisfy the covetous policy of some few, and those neither of much worth,
not for long time) it will be a most virtuous consideration, wherein his Majesty
shall give perfection to the happy beginnings of our late Queen Elizabeth,
(the nursing mother of our Church whose memory shall be sacred to all
posterities) by providing that the allowance for the Clergy may be good, and
convenient and that those only be suffered to enter into, and to execute
that function, who have learned themselves, and will teach others, in thankful
obedience, to be governed by those whom reason and religion have placed over
them, the other course must needs breed confusion, contempt of authority,
needless discontentments, indiscret reprehensions, ignorant teachers, and the
disorder of all states, whereas the wisdom, and counsel of those, who are
already advanced in our Church, conspiring with so learned, and so wise a
King shall fill his landfull of good subjects; his Universities full of good
scholars; all Churches (in time) with excellent Deuines, and in one word our
whole land, with men of singular worthiness in all professions.

CHAP. XII. Of Non Residencie, Pluralities, and Dispensations.
WE cannot but commend the religious disposition of those men, if their
intentions be as good, as their care doubtless seems to be great, who
awaking that Idle Ministry, which in their opinion sleeps in our church,
call all men to a necessary consideration of those duties, which beelong unto
them: which either ease, or other employments, might paraduenture, cause them
to forget. Negligence which in other cases, runs not either into that
hazard, or can be likely to be the original of so great dangers, being in
the calling of the Clergy, over that flock, whereof the holy ghost has made
them overseers, the very downfall (so far as man's, reason is able to
discern) into an everlasting woe; both unto themselves, and unto those souls,
which are committed to their care. So that the same spirit, which in other
cases, and at other times, utters those comfortable promises, of the greatest
love, beegetting in man, by his blessed working, an assured hope of an endless
mercy, heapeth upon him in this kind, and for this sin, even upon those,
who above others he has honored with these titles, to be watchmen,
Shepherds, and the leaders of Christ's flock, the names of blind watchmen,
dumb dogs, which can never have enough, Idle Shepherds, that leave their
flocks: the sword shall be upon his right arm, and upon his right eye: woe unto
the shepherds which feed themselves, should not the shepherd feed the flock?
Of. 56 10. 11. Zachar. 11. 17. Ezech. 34 2. Math. 15. 14. Act. 20 18. Act. 20 2.
they be the blind leaders of the blind, imposing this duty upon all, to
take heed unto themselves and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost has
made them overseers to feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his
own blood, so that Teachers being those Shephards, whose flocks cannot at any
time be without danger, Elezh. 23.
those Watchmen whom the most malicious enemy, does always beseege, those
laborers in that Harvest, which neither can have end or Intermission in this
life, those living Oracles of God, to whom men must resort in all doubts, 2.
Sam. 1. 19.
those Spiritual fathers, which must be always ready in private conference
to admonish, to reprove, to Exhort, to Instruct, to Comfort, as well as to
teach in public, it cannot be but an intolerable, inexcusable fault in those
men, whose care is only to be rich, by the multitude of Cures, whose absence,
and negligence is all one with ignorance and want of ability to teach, saving
that the sin is greater in them, who are able with learning (if they were
diligent) greatly to benefit Gods Church. And doubtless it is to be feared,
(unless their Consciences be without feeling) that this secure, negligence in
them, is but like a heavy Lethargy, which commends them as it were by certain
steps, to a dangerous and eternal sleep: so that as all the fathers of former
ages, have filled their writings, with eloquent inuectiues against these men,
and all the Councels almost have sharply decreed against them, the Canonists
likewise and Scholemen, have concluded their offenses to be great sins, and
their drousie negligence without excuse, couetously rather heaping up the
livings of many, then conscionably performing the duty of any one: we can
with as much patience and thanks be content to hear, the loud declamations
against non Residents, and Pluralities, by some in our Church, only if it
please them to remember, their own usual absence, less warranted, and to
look with what sincerity of Conscience and Zeal, unto Christ's flock, they
have undertaken, the Vehement, continual, loud, and intemperate reprehension
of these faults, as if they only in our Church, had a tender care of the
peoples instruction and none else, and that all besides them, (some few
conscionable Ministers who can be content with one flock) were nothing but a
number of proud ambitious, Lu^. 13.7.
and idle Prelates, like that unprofitable fig tree, serving to little use
saving only to be cut down, or that these were that evil and slothful
servant, which must be cast into utter darkness, Math. 25. 30. Nichols in the
plea page 212. Lin. 23.
where shallbee weeping and gnashing of teeth. And further which ought least of
all to be endured by any well affected to the credit and estimation of this
Church, which doubtless for Reformation is, and shall be famous through all
parts of the christian world, that our state did vnresonablie and
unconscionably by their own laws, grant Dispensations, both for pluralities,
and absence, Ezech. 34.2.
only to further the corrupt desires of some few, to the infinite wrong of the
whole Clergy, besides the hazard of many thousand souls, the intolerable
dishonor of Gods truth, and the exceeding disadvantage of Christ's Church.

Doubtless we cannot but confess, that learning is of little use in the
Ministry, unless they be faithful to discharge that duty: and that
ability to teach, brings small profit, where care and endeavor are both
wanting, to further that good which our place exacteth: we neither do, nor
can stop our ears, against the whole book of God, which requires labor at
our hands, and diligence in our Ministry; neither do we think, that all
places alike, may challenge our pains, seeing it is in this, as in all other
things besides, which are through private interest, dearer then that which
concerns either others wholly, or us but in part, and at our own pleasure:
or if in duty, only according to the rate of a General regard. Yet I hope
these men, will give us leave to tell them without offense that the no^
Residencie and Pulralities warranted by the positive laws of this land, M.
Hooker. lib. ^. page 251.
are neither of them, so clearly convicted as incurring the penalty of so
high displeasure, but that indifferent minds may find peradventure good reason
as yet to defend them both: which if neither we much attempt, nor be thought
sufficiently performed by us, we are prevented (as they know) by the most
learned, and reverend endeavors of other men, and are not greatly willing,
that either Idleness, or Ambition, should cover it self under that shadow in
a great number, which is in a true intention, a Privilege and Dispensation,
the lawful and virtuous merit, of some few.

But because it seems that the original of this error, is from the not
justly considering, either what Benefices are, or the first limitation of them
(whereof whilst some are ignorant they rigorously conclude, all duties required
in a Minister, necessarily to be performed in one particular parish,) Anno.
112. Gloss. in verbo aut in elect. cap. nec Numer^. 10. q. 3. Anno. 636. Camde^.
we must put them in mind, that either Euaristus Bishop in the sea of Rome, or
as some others say Dionisius, first assigned the Precincts to every parish, and
appointed to each Presbiter, a certain compass, whereof himself should take
charge alone; and in this kingdom, one Honorius sometime Archbishop of
Canterbury, did first divide them, so that from hence, was understood by the
name of a Benefice, A pastoral cure of souls, over the people of some parish,
whereas formerly it signified some standing Ecclesiastical revenue, taken out
of the treasure of God, and allotted to a spiritual person to the end he may
use the same, and enjoy it as his own for term of life, unless his default
cause deprivation. And we know that the Clergy for many years after Christ,
had no other Benefices, but only their Canonical portions, or monethlie
Diuidends, allowed unto them according to their several degrees, and
qualities, out of the common stock of such gifts, oblations, and Tithes, as
the feruor of christian piety did then yield. In the Apostles time Churches
were only in the cities, in regard whereof those that lived in villages,
being without instruction, were called Pagans, which after by the example of
others, both intertaining and giving allowance, for the maintenance of the same
truth, those to whom principal care was committed in this kind, appointed
meaner men of less learning, and lower quality, to undertake the instruction
of those places, who were desirous and willing, This the Lords did for which
they were allowed to be patrons.
to yield after the example of others; oblations and tithes for maintenance of
those, that were placed over them. Now to say that either several parishes
thus distinguished, might by no permission be allotted to the care and
instruction of one man, or that it were not lawful for any reason, how
beneficial soever to Gods Church to be absent from that particular care
committed to him, were in the former to deny all better trust, and reward to
men of more worth and greater abilities and desert: and in the latter to be
over Tirannous in considering, and allowing the cause of absence, and
peradventure in a true construction, over rigorously severe in both. But seeing
all men know which we doubt but our adversaries in this cause will conffesse
that this limitation of particular parishes was meerlie positive, and the
inventions of men, thought, and found better, for the better performance of the
Clergies duty, it cannot be the absolute transgression of a divine ordination
in that sense, as if either to have more parishes then one, or from one to be
absent at sometime, were a direct, and inexcusable breach of the moral law. For
the duties commanded not to be done in them, are by no means (not for a
moment) ever allowed to be done at all: which thraldom if in severity they
bring upon Gods church, let them take heed what dangers they fall into
themselves, and that by this means, the church receive not a greater harm,
whilst peradventure in this case, their remedy is worse, then the disease is.
Now to allow absence upon reason, without appointing those causes, and such as
must judge which are reasonable, were to make all men to think that they had
reason that were willing: neither is there any great force from the nature of
Relatiues, (if that were all) why one may not as well have diverse parishes, as
one parish have diverse Pastors. And howsoever we hold not the reason good,
that because Tymothie, and Titus had many congregations committed to their
charge, therefore others may: This M Rogers Martyr wisned Anno. 1554. Act. and
Monu. fol 1492.
yet the reason in their opinion, from this example ought not to want strength,
who think a Bishop, and a Minister is all one. In this first distribution for
the best discharge of their calling, and the greatest benefit to the church of
Christ, if some under the Bishops and above their brethren, M. Hooper and he
wished they might have. 10
which had more and more distant parishes then any in our church, and all termed
by one name though some were Suffraganes to Bishops, it ought not to seem a
matter of unreasonable favor; Chore Piscopi villaru^ Episcopi. Damas. epist. 3.
and unlawful, to commit several churches, to the instruction and government
of some men, whose learning, discretion, and care, is more eminent, Concit.
Neocesar. cau. 13. and Antioch. cau 8 Some of these being Suffraganes did
ordain Presbiters. Council. Antio. cau. 10
and that these may whilst their labors are used for the benefit of Christ's
flock, lawfully be absent, and have inferior men of the Clergy for a time to
supply, and to execute their rooms: so that doubtless a zeal in these
reprouers did carry them to far, when alleging those extrauagant reasons
against Pluralities, they yield them, to tend to covetousness, that one man
had the stipend of many; that they make non Residents; that it maintains
Ambition; that it is the occasion of a gadding and roaguing ministry; Reasons
all edged in the Abstract, out of the Extragauants.
no small cause why others want; and lastly a taking away of that recompense,
which belongs to others, these reasons in their opinion of some force,
(howsoever they have already been profoundly answered with much judgment) yet
because they still please themselves, By D. Cosen.
in the rehearsal of them, we can be content both with patience to give them
hearing, and withal to hope for this favor at their hands, that they will
yield thus much to us, that many things may occasionally be the accidental
procurers of much evil, which are originally no causes, nor justly can suffer
a reproof as unlawful things. Neither are these only the occasions of the
evils which they lay upon them, seeing either all, or most are commonly to be
found amongst the^, who notwithstanding would seem to be furthest from this
sin. But seeing whatsoever in our Church is practiced in either of these two (
Pluralities or non Residencie) is not the corruption of some private man, but
(the approbation and allowance of the Court of Parliament, wherein what soever
is established, all men in the eye and construction of the law, are thought and
deemed to have consented, we cannot but think it unreasonable and irreverent
for these men, 4. Hen. 7.10.
to disanull or make question, of an Act of their own making; and withal we
hope it both has and shall appear, to the world, that as it is not lawful
without dispensation to have, or to do either, so that authority to dispense
in both, is most agreeable to reason, and Gods truth. For seeing the
disposition and limitation of private parishes, extends no further, but to be
the wise, Positive invention, and ordination of those, who formerlie have
governed in Gods Church, and that all humane laws, Dispensatio estiuris
co^mumis relaxatio facta cu^ causae cognitione ab eo qui ius habet dispe^sandi.
Dispensare est diuersa pensare; which they do not who disallow all
dispensations. Lex humana qua^ vis Iusta sit commutari tame^ pro tempore just
potest. Aust. lib. 1. de liber arb.
are dispensable by supreme authority (a dispensation being but the
relaxation of a common right, made upon knowledge of the cause by him that has
right to dispense) we hope that likewise these may, and that the laws
forbidding non Residencie and Pluralities are in force still, notwithstanding
by Privilege, some particulers are, and are fit to be exempted from the
common right. Doubtless never mere human law, was either made with that
wisdom, or was in execution of so necessary use, but that sometimes, it was
fitter to receive Dispensation, then to stand in force; for seeing the best
laws of men are but the evidences of Humane reason, which we find by
experience grows from a weakness to be more strong, and from imperfection
to be more absolute; we cannot in reason (without inthralling our selves in
too great a bondage) deny Abrogation and Dispensation to humane laws, which
are not to be like those of the Medes and Persians that might not be changed.
For though reason, from whence laws of this kind have their original, be but
that voice of nature, which never changes, concerning generals, Aquinas. 12.
qu 97. act. 1. fol. 1.
yet laws shall follow reason, reason follow nature, (both immutably) and
nature ever the same, and yet laws concerning particulers, shall change often.

But if any man think, that Privileges and Dispensations, either are to be
granted often, or when they are granted upon just cause are contrary to
common right, doubtless he erreth in both; for the first, surely we owe that
reverence to those that have been before us, Ridiculum est and ^atis
abominabile dedec' vt traditiones quas antiquitus a patribus accipimus infringi
patimur Decret. did. 12 ca. ridiculu^ est Euidens debet esse vtilitas vt
rectarecedatur ab eo iure quod diu aequum visum est. Aqui. 12. q. 97. Act. 2.
that it is an injury to them, and for our selves ridiculous, to alter over
easily the laws, which antiquity has commended to us. Yet if advantage
apparantlie, and without question redound unto that society, whose benefit is
principally intended in those laws, we have as little cause, to wish them
perpetual, as otherwise to dispense or to break them when there is not; for
in abrogating of old, or establishing of new, the commodity ought to be
evident, which must warrant us to depart from that which long custom has
found to be right: for seeing to the observation of all laws, Custom has
not the least force to procure obedience, whatsoever is deprived of this
strength, is seldom regarded with so much care, so for the second either never
to dispense, or not then, when the measure of the common good, shall be
evidently proportioned to a private case, is to make laws for to want life,
and those which were in the first intendiment a benefit to all, to make them a
captious Tirannie to some, and those neither of worst, nor of least merit:
which as over easily to grant in some Princes, could not but be injurious to
the public state, so in others over rigorously to deny, (having princely
wisdom to discern a particular worthiness in a common right) could but be,
that unwarranted severity, which surely in the end, would do great hurt.

Seeing then all humane laws, are only the conclusions of the law of nature,
such as reason has fitted for the benefit of some society, either the church,
or the common wealth, and that all these are and ever must be subject to
dispensation, and privilege, from those that have supreme authority, and
that (as we think) limitation of Cures, either for many, or attendance upon
some one, is meerlie a law positive, we hope, that what the vehemency of some
men's zeal accounts a great offense, reason and deuinitie, will warrant to
be no sin. For seeing as well in the Church as the common wealth, honors and
rewards are to be given, not by an Arithmeticall, but a Geometrical
proportion, and that honor and maintenance for the Clergy being from the law
of God, Benefices and Cures are by the law positive, surely it cannot well be
denied, but that how much of either shall be given to this, or that particular
person, must be in the Prince to dispose only; now because laws have already
set down how much may or ought to be granted to any one man, and what
Residence and attendance he ought to perform there if more then this, (for
the good of the Church) by Privilege and Dispensation over and besides (not
Contrary or against the common right) be granted to some one, can we think
it unwarrantable and to be a fault? Dispensations for Pluralites have been in
all times; Abstract. page 128.
and the necessity and utility of the Church are confessed by themselves to
be the only just causes, to make them lawful; neither does our Church
require other allowance at their hands, then that in these cases it would
please them to think, and to write, that the dispensations which are given, are
not contrary, and repugnant to common right. If any think or speak otherwise,
in cases dispensable, it is their error; for it is the voice of Equity, and
Justice, that a general Law does never derogate from a special Privilege:
and that a Privilege is not opposite, unto the principles of common right;
because it dispenses with that, which common right does prohibit, for in the
one it is respected by way of generality, in the other beset with limited and
special circumstances, so that in the eye of law, and reason, they seem to
be the same, though they be not, wherein because men often times (as one
notes) weigh things stripped of some particular circumstances, which add
weight unto them, they weigh them vneuenlie, and thereupon oftentimes pronounce
that to be to light, which is not in truth, if they had skill to weigh it. Now
seeing the absence of all Privileges Non Residencie and Pluralities, is in the
intendement of the law for the advantage of the Church, whether it be by
parties aboade in the University, to get more learning, or attendance in the
families of noble men, in Princes Courts; or Cathedral Churches: it ought not
to seem unreasonable, that some part of the revenues of the Church is allotted
to their use, who though yet in person they bring not that benefit to some
particular flock, which in time they may, yet the Church at their hands shall
receive no loss: for if the whole riches of the Church were a stock of money
(as some Deacons paraduenture desire it might be) it can be in reason no
greater fault to give maintenance now from some parish to some one absent for a
time, and in that absence profitable to the Church, then in their division to
give that allowance, which seldom they bestow for so good desert. Yet
whatsoever under pretense of Privilege is practiced by any, for to wrong the
Church, in a true construction, is neither defended by us at this time, nor fit
to be suffered in admitting (as I think it is not) often mean persons, to
have the benefit either of Non Residencie or Pluralities, which were in the
first intendement, only for men of better degree, of more worth, and of some
special employment in some other kind, for the singular benefit and advantage
of the Church of Christ.

Which as we cannot excuse, if it be granted with over much facility to all
those, whom either idleness shall make absent, or covetousness make them
desire Pluralities, so we are not as yet of their opinion, who think all
dispensation, and privilege in this kind, to be against law, or if not, yet
both the law, and the privilege to be against truth. We desire them without
offense, who urge so strictly the laws of our land for both these, to consider
this, which is not altogether impertinent to this cause: that if a strict law
were made for a city, that were beeseeged, that no man upon any occasion might
open the gates of the same city, (whereby the keeping of them shut, was
intended to be for the good and safety of the whole city,) now if afterward
some of the army be without the gates, Zanch in decat. lib. 1. cap. 10. page
180.
who unless they be received in, neither they, nor the city can remain in
safety, shall we think the very meaning of the law, is that the gates should
not be opened to receive them, which is the very end of that law which forbad
it to be done, and the law of nature? it cannot but be a severity in those,
that deny it, which must needs in the other be excusable, furthering that
end, for which the law was made. Ocatus ad scopum.
In all laws as in all actions the end is the mark; and this commonly is the
public good, of that society, for which the law is made, now if the same
public end, whereat the church aymeth, in prohibiting either Pluralities, or
non Residencie, may be procured best by granting dispensation, for both these,
Intelligentia distoru^ ex causa est assum e^da quia non sermoni res sed rei
debet esse sermo subiectis. Hilar. in lib. 4. de Trinit. 14
to some particular men, we hold the law in forbidding, intends so much, and
therefore in this case, to dispense is not to break the law of common right,
but rightly to apply it to his proper and peculiar use: wherein captiously to
cleave over strictly to the letter of it, is rather to understand laws by the
words, then the intents of them: which practice if we shall use, in those
laws which had the best author, and doubtless was able to set them best
down, we shall Iewishly keep a Sabbath, in abstayning from all things,
Waldenses and some of the Cathari. Alph. de Castr lib. 8 Haeres. Iuramentum.
Ma^h. 5.
by the virtue of that law, which commands thou shall do no manner of work;
and fall into the heresy of some, who held it unlawful upon any occasion to
swear, because our savior said, thou shall not swear at all: and yet in
both whilst we cleave unto the letter, utterly dissent from that which the law
requires.

Now so far as laws are Positive, and merely humane, it is in the power of
their makers, to dispense with them, by virtue whereof whatsoever is done, is
not contrary to the precept, Quod fit authoritate superioris non fit contra
preceptum.
because for the doing he has the superiors warrant; which if we allow not
in Gods laws, many things must be sin, which doubtless were none. Herein
if these men can prove that that which man dispenses withal God does not, we
will be content to hear them, and must needs grant, that they have not the
authority of the superior, and that such Dispensations are without warrant.
But we are and shall be ever ready by the grace of him upon whose mercy we
rely in all that we do, to justify and maintain, the religious practice of
our late Sovereign in this, against those who are willing unthankfully,
unnaturally, and irreligiouslie, to deprave and traduce her most virtuous,
blessed, and happy government: For seeing that Dispensations are some merely
of grace, wherein the Prince may lawfully respect one above another, as in
Legitimations, Pardoning of heinous faults, and such like, in which for the
dispensed, or the dispenser, there is no other necessity, either in the court
of man, or the court of conscience, saving only grace; because (it is to be
thought the people and the laws of every country in these and other such
matters, Arg. L. Scio. ff. de minoribus.
have yielded this power unto their Sovereign Princes, even where they cannot
by prerogative as with us challenge so much right) we doubt not, but their
assertion is to manacle the Kings hands, and to bind them in these chains of
their own making, who teach the world that Laws must have that force, that
all Dispensations, are unlawful, and transgressions of them. Now touching
other dispensations which are called of justice, they are conversant either
about the law of God and nature, or about the positive law of man, in the first
there is no dispensation from man, yet interpretations are allowed, to show
that the generallitie of the words, do not indeed extend to some special
cases, and that of those things which strong and manifest arguments teach us
that God himself would not have included, in the generality of his law,
Interpretation, Declaration, and Limitation, may be made, and this by the
lawyers is called one kind of dispensation of justice, whereby the bond of the
law is not released, but the law is interpreted in such case, not to have
force, according to the true mea^ing of it. Now in the other dispensations of
Justice, which are bestowed about the positive laws of man, we must observe
two things, first that the law remaining, yet the reason in some particular
case does cease, which ought by the prince, or the inferior Judge, in
dispensing to be so declared: the second is when the law is grounded upon
diverse reasons, whereof some ceasing, and some continuing, the law is
notwithstanding in force, unless a dispensation of Justice, be granted to
us. There are also besides these dispensations mixed partly of grace and
partly of Justice, because that he grants it, it is grace and favor, and
yet it is Justice, because he grants it to none but upon just cause; so that
when a King dispenses with any positive law of man, the law teaches us to
intend and presume both, that there is a cause why he should so do, and that
the same cause is just and sufficient, and doubtless he that receives such
dispensation sins not against the law, nor his own conscience, because he
is by the same authority delivered from the bond of that law, by the which he
stood bound. So that if the Church ought to honor learned personages,
Panormit. in C. de multa extr. de Preb. vlt. notab. Answer to the Abstaact.
page 230. My L. his grace of Cant. in the defense of the answer to the Admo.
Tract. cap. 1. diuis. 1. page 236. D. Bridges. page 488.
not only in word, but indeed, as in providing more liberally to help, and
relieve them, by the Church reueneues, then for others not so learned, (because
learning does not only profit the owner, but the Universal Church) and that
causes of absence from their several Cures, may be such as shall be beneficial
to the Church and just, as for recovery of Health, if called by his Superiors
authority; if for repulsing of grievous Injuries; if sent upon embassage, or
to give attendance, if his help be required for pacifiing of Scismes in other
places, if his pains be necessary for the confirming of the doctrine of the
Church either by speaking or writing; if his presence be necessary for
consultation about Church matters at some Sinode particular, provincial,
National, or general, if some other parts of the Church were in more need,
and wholly destitute of a Pastor; or for any other such cause allowed by those
whom the laws have trusted with the examination of these things, shall we
that are inferiors out of envy toward other men's respect and grace, Nichol.
in tho plea. page 210. Lin. 14.
(the due merit of their worthiness) whereof we are far short, make the world
believe, that the great Sin of Non Residencie, has three goodly
vndersetters, which are also broad fig leaves, to cover the nakedness of
these learned men, whereby many are vpholden in their sin, first rewards of
learning, secondly the power of the state to order the living of the Church,
thirdly that so they preach they are not to b^e charged although they Preach
not in their own parish, Page 221.
and make this only the original of the ignorance of the whole land, Page 35.
whom to reprove (say they) was to be accounted a conuentickler, a Puritan, an
enemy to the state: could any thing in the ears of wisemen, have sounded more
sharply, or be uttered more irreverently, against that mother that has
given them suck, against those men who have been the fathers of our faith,
through the whole land, against that Prince whose blessed government, procured
them and many thousands peace, which peace made them something (if they be any
thing) could I say, any words be uttered with more folly, and less truth?

We hope that neither they themselves nor the world will believe, that the
church of England, so happily reformed, so mercifully blessed, so wisely
governed, so sufficiently supplied, so honorably esteemed, both at home, and
abroad, either does, or will maintain and defend, the sins of non
Residencie, and idle absence, or covetous heaping up of many things
unconscionably, Canon Residentia. 1571. and 1597.
and without desert; seeing they are faults controwled, and forbidden by so
many good laws of the realm, and the virtuous constitutions and Canons of our
church; wherein if they understand (as they ought) what a cure is, what
Residencie is required; what absence tolerated by the law of God: when and how
long: what rewards of learning are due in the church to men of better quality:
what disposition of these things rests in the power of the prince: what
union, or limitation of parishes is merely positive: what dispensations are
conscionable and agreeing to Gods law: what privileges are the right
application, and not the violent breach of the laws. Lastly what is fit, and
what is holden, in our Church, (for things forbidden, neither do we nor does
our church defend) we are and will be ready, to give them the right hand of
fellowship, in the reproof of these sins, which we doubt not may be
dangerous, to the souls of many. But if they, desirous to outrunne us in an
unlearned zeal, teach the world, that all absence is unlawful: that division
of parishes are from divine right: and so one only for one Pastor; that
princes cannot Dispense: that the inioying of these, is Covetousness, Idleness,
Theft, and the ground of all ignorance: then we must tell them (which we have
proved already) that these reprouers themselves are not only Idle, 1. Tim.
5.13.
but also pratlers, and busy bodies, speaking things which are not comely; and
that our conclusion is this, that all dispensations for non Residencie and
Pluralities, are not against law, nor that law that gives dispensations
against conscience; and that neither all giving, or taking of them is so great
a fault, as it pleases some* men, to make the world beeleeue that they both
are.

CHAP. XIII. Of Public Prayer and of the defects supposed to be in the
Liturgye of the Church of England.
IF our prayers were only the performance of our own duty, and not a
Religious act, whereby our minds being lift up to heaven, even all graces
both Spiritual and Temporal descend upon our heads, 1. Tim. 4.^.
Godliness having the promise both of this life and the life to come) it might
be paraduenture of some doubt, whether they were any part of our religious
service, or only the pollitick invention of the church, to breed a
superstitious opinion in the simple people, of that almighty power, whom
because they see not, Atheism labors to parswade that they need not fear.
But seeing the intercourse betwixt heaven and earth to us in Doctrine, from us
in prayer, is the assured evidence of that merciful love, which desires to
make us conquerours in the day of victory, it must needs be (if assistance
do want to obtain this) the only fault of man himself not to ask, seeing
the promise is past, and sealed, that whatsoever ye ask the father, Ioh.
16.23.
in my name, he will give it you. Which if ever we find not come to pass,
(measuring things by our weakness which is not always able to discern what
mercy denies and justice grants) after our Asking we must Seek, if that
fail cry aloude, and with Importunity knock, not doubting of his promise,
ye shall receive, Luke 11.9.
ye shall find, it shall be opened unto you. Thus we sanctify in this
Principal Act of our Religion, and offer unto the Trinity, the three
especial parts of our body, as an acceptable sacrifice, correcting our
tongues, being commanded because God some time seems not to hear to ask;
erecting our hearts and because God seems to be lost, bidding us Seek,
directing our hands, and because God (as it were) sometimes shuts the door
against us, willing us to Knock, in the first our prayers do awake him, who
seems to sleep as Elias said of Baall, (but he that keeps Israel shall
neither slumber nor sleep.) In the second to deal as our Savior whom Joseph
and Marie thought to be lost, whilst he tarried to do the will of his father.

In the third like the Pharisees, who shut the kingdom of Heaven, least any
man should enter, but he says as the Psalmist, Psa. 24.9.
Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors,
and the King of glory shall come in; and not only he himself, Psalm. 118.
but all the righteous: for this is the gate of the Lord, and the Righteous
shall enter into it, so that then every faithful man performing this duty as
he ought, may say with David, I will thank thee, for thou have heard me, and
art become my salvation; for the promise is without exception, Luke 11.10.
Every one that asks receives, he that seeks finds, and to him that
knocks it shall be opened. So that though Wine be strong, though Women be
likewise strong, 1. Esdr. 3.11.
though the King be strong, and above all things the trurth be strong; yet
doubtless the Prayer of the Righteous (especially if it be fervent) is
stronger then all these. The Earth is strong which supporteth all this great
weight of creatures and sin; and is so made by the mouth of truth, that it
never should move at any time* yet the Prayer of Moses and Aaron, was so strong
and so powerful that she divided her self, and rent a sunder, like the veil
of the Temple, and opened her mouth, like the great Whale to swallow up Dathan,
and the congregation of Abiram. The Sea is strong, which supporteth the burden
of all this (for thou have founded it upon the floods) but the prayer of Moses
made it to fly, that Israel might pass on dry land; What aild thee thou
sea, that thou fleddest, and thou Jordan that thou wast driven back? Psa.
114.5.
surely Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion, and his servant
Moses prayed for their safety, and the Sea answered, as Adam, Genesis 3.
I heard thy voice, and I was affraied. Like effects even weakness has had,
from the strength of Prayer, over the Fire, the Air, and the Sun: But why
do I speak of these, seeing the Almighty seems to be bound by our prayers?
Exodus 32.10.
that he asks leave of Moses, Let me alone that my wrath may wax hot
against them: To whom the humble suppliant, having fastened his prayers, as with
a chain to the throne of mercy, Genesis 32, 26.
may answer confidentlie with out presumption, as Jacob to the Angel, I will
not let thee go except thou bless me. Yet let not our importunity exclude
humility, but that still we pray (as if the smallest grasshopper upon earth (a
worm and no man) were to speak with fear, and reverence, before the majesty
of God himself. Seeing then prayer is that name, which expresses all that
service, that our religion can perform, being the best means both to
testify our dutiful affection, and most effectual to obtain, what soever
we wanting can desire at Gods hands; seeing it is the easiest and most
comfortable alms, which all men have power to give, and no man to refuse,
seeing it is that office from performance whereof, neither time, nor place
(violent circumstances in other things) are able to hinder us, seeing it is and
ought to be the first duty, wherewith a religious soul, begins his life,
and the last wherewith he ends it, seeing it is the service of all Saints,
as well those that Triumph in heaven, as that are Militant on earth (the one
praising God for their glory, the other praying for their victory) and seeing
amongst all prayers those are most powerful, and effectual, which having the
fervor of many, and the promise of presence, are rather powered out in the
Temple then our private chambers; for in a congregation a house of prayers,
there may be amongst many, some Moses, or Samuel, which shall be heard both
for themselves and others (one righteous in the midst of a froward, and
crooked generation) let from henceforth all impiety stop her mouth,
Zwengfeldia^^
which heretofore has blasphemed a holy ordination of so much use, (thrusting
it out of our Churches, Brownists.
under pretense of preaching) and that open prophanes by severity of laws,
be taught obedience, which either in purity, or superstition have refused in
our Temples, to offer up their Prayers, as the rest do.

It is no small blessing, to have the liberty of the sons of God, to enter
into the house of the Lord, the house of prayer, the place where his Honor
dwells (for in his temple does every man speak of his honor) yet we deny
not but in the most desolate, and solitariest place, more void of resort then
the ransackt sanctuary of Jerusalem, in the vncomfortablest vault that ever
was entered, his ears shall be open unto our Prayers, that go not out of
fained lips; Basil. Epist. 6^
but even prayer it self (as one notes) when it has not the comforts of many
voices to strengthen it, is not it self.

So that whereas secret neglect of our duty in this kind, is but only our
own hurt, one man's contempt of the Common prayer of the Church of God, may be
(and often times is) prejudicial, and hurtful unto many thousands: and
doubtless in time of persecution, when we are in exile, the principal grief
to any Christian soul must be this, even the uncomfortable absence from the
house of God, that we cannot praise God in the great Congregation, that even
in this respect, the Sparrow and the Swallow are in better case then we are;
That all our Melody is buried in this one evil: for how should we sing the
Lords song in a strange land? For if there be in the Lords Sanctuary, in the
Courts of the house of our God, the holy Angels mix^ amongst us, it ought
surely to be our care (even for prayer) to refort thither, with joy above all
other places whatsoever: and there to power out our prayers, with that
solemnity, and devotion, as those virtuous and humble requests, which the
Church appoints, the Saints upon earth power out, the almighty sits to
hear, and the Angels attend to further.

Now for the religious performance of this duty, no wise man can doubt, but
that solemnity of place, is a circumstance neither indifferent, nor of small
force: the authority of their calling, whom the Church imployeth to offer up
the prayers for the whole people, is no small assurance of obtaining, what is
presented by their means: in whom if zeal and feruencie of spirit concur,
with a virtuous life, they are no small advantages to make the rest of the
multitude to be more holy, and to teach all the people of God, both what
reverence they owe unto such, whom God vouchsafes to be mediators beetwixt
him and them, and with what devotion and reverence, they are to esteem and
frequent, those holy places, for the performance of those duties, which out of
all circumstances rightly are termed by the Church, holy and divine Service.
Hereunto if we ad the strongest motive unto a mind sober and humble, that
these prayers are not the voluntary, sudden, and extemporal supplications of
one man, who (though zealous and honest) yet may easily fail in asking what is
behoueful for the whole Church (for we know not how to pray as we ought) but
that they are those holy sacrifices of our lips, Romans 8.26.
made and allowed by the considerate deliberation of men virtuous, and duly
proportioned with the sacred, and solemn Lyturgies of the Church in all ages:
he must needs think the injury offered by some men, to be insufferable, who
esteem all corners equal to the church for this use, all persons as
convenient as those who are elected and appointed to this end, and senseless
effusions of idle, reiterated, unhallowed, indigested prayers, as available in
the ears of God, as the best either places, persons, or order, that the Church
has. This being the dangerous policy of satan, to frustrate the Church of
so great a benefit: and because no man d^^st be so impious as absolutely to
condemn public prayer, to stir up those who should draw the people, both by
example and precept to a contempt of that form, which taken from the purity
of all times, is worthily thought by the Church, a Lyturgie most reformed,
whereby, we must serve God: and doubtless not to lay upon them a greater
burden, then the weight of this sin does necessarily impose upon the
consciences of such, who are and have been, the authors of this contempt, we
cannot easily be persuaded otherwise; But what prophanes has crept into our
church, what unhallowing of the Sabbath, what want of reverence in divine
Service, what loathing of prayers without Sermons: in one word what Athisme, or
Hippocresie is in all states in this kingdom, has (originally) proceeded from
this fountain, the bold and unhallowed despising of the Communion Book; Anno.
27. Eliz.
whilst in the mean time, they have offered unto the Parliament in the days of
our late Sovereign, a Book of the form of Common prayers, of which, we dare
not (as yet) give that testimony, which truth compels them to give of ours;
T. C. lib. 1. page 131.
That gross errors and manifest impieties is taken from it.

But seeing all of us agree in this, that a Prescript form of prayer is
convenient and necessary for the Church (they only permitting a greater
liberty, for us then we do) both because it brings much advantage to have
the people familiar with those prayers, which concern all; and that they may
not say Amen, to any thing that is unsound (a thing justly to be feared
whilst men have no better direction but the sudden motion (as they call it) of
the spirit, and lastly because uniformity in this worship, is best befitting,
them, whose doctrine and religion is all one, we cannot but both marvel at
them who devise continually new forms of prayer, in their public service,
injuriously deprave in sundry points, that Liturgy, which in the judgments
of moderate, and wise men, is both least different from antiquity, and withal
most absolute for perfection, of any that is used in the Churches reformed at
this day; and how soever it lies not in the power of any one Prince to
prescribe an Uniformity of worship, over all Christendom (a thing happy to
be prayed for that the whole Visible Church in doctrine and Ceremonies as it
has but one faith, one Lord, so it had but one heart, and one mouth: yet
doubtless in the limits of the same kingdom, it is possible, easy and very
necessary, Conci. Lat. sub Inno. 3 cap. 13 Council. Lugil. a Grego. 10. Council.
Carth. 3. can. 23.
that the manner of divine Service be preciselie one. For seeing wise men
before us, feeling those harms which we fear have ever accounted (which the
common people do now) a new Liturgy to be a new religion, (the form of
worship being diverse though the doctrine be the same) and therefore ever
prohibited all new manner of assemblies, it ought not to seem strange, if our
maiestrates heretofore have forbidden all Conuenticles, (and such are all
those who assemble to worship God after a manner not allowed by the law of the
land) or that in this they have dealt either rigorously, or against law, for as
one says to the furtherance of religion, men may and ought to assemble
together, Martianus Iurisconsul. in lib. 1. de Colleg. Illic.
so long as it is not against that Law, whereby unlawful societies are
forbidden; but when danger may arise from the hazard of a new worship (by the
example of him, that forbad all private Sacrifices, Nouel. 58 ca 8 siquid in
sua domo. Ne forte aliquid contrafidem aut p minus studiu^ fit co^positu^
Council. mileuit sub Inno 1. can. 2. Leu. 17. Deuteronomy. 12. 13. Magistri erroris
existu^t quia veritatis discipuli no^ fueru^t. Nemo priuatim deos habes fit.
Lex. 12. tab Amil. pro Plutarch Thacid.


in private places) wise men have thought it not safe, for every man to take
liberty to have private Chappells.

The counsel before this having made this Canon, that all Clerks which
minister or baptize in private Chapels without the allowance of the Bishop,
were to be deprived: the equity of this for prevention of all new Worship
being from that law, Take heed that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in every
place that thou see: a facility in permission of which abuse has filled the
Church of God with Contempt, Profanation, and Confusion of all worship: This
being in Justice the punishment of these men, that because they wanted Modesty
to be Scholars of Truth, they were filled with Pride to be Masters of
Error. Antiquity thought Alcibiades worthily condemned for this fault, that
he took upon him the use of those sacred mysteries in private, which the
Athenians thought unlawful; thinking him by this means rather to use
coniuration, then to exercise Devotion: the wisdom of all, aiming at this,
Seperatim nemo habessit deos neue nouos sieve aduenas nisi public ascitos
priuatim colunto 12* Tabul.
that Innovation in Religion, was no way safe: and that liberty for private
assemblies, to the contempt of public, was in all likelihoode a means to
invent, as many sundry religions, as men had fancies.

And howsoever the number is not many, which misliked all set forms of
Prayer, and their reasons not much stronger that refuse ours, and so
consequently whether we take account of our adversaries, in this cause, either
by weight or number, there can be no great danger: yet for a further
satisfaction to all such, whom either ignorance, or credulity has made our
opposits, Sundry Martirs in Q. Mary's time. Diverse Bish. of our nation in Germ.
we are willing first to let them understand, what the Liturgy of the Church
of England is, and then that in our opinion, there is nothing either
superstitious, or unsound contained in it. And howsoever sundry times, by men
of great learning (whom I presume not to mention without honor) this Book
heretofore has been strongly defended, My L. his grace in def. of the answer
to the Adm. M. Hook, lib. 5
against al her adversaries, yet it shall not I hope, be offensive to any, to
let the world understand, that the greatest and most bitter reprehentions of
this book, have been stirred up (through want of Charity, misaplying some
places) even for matters of small weight; at what time the virtuous King Edward
had restored this Church from the burden of those Ceremonies, wherewith she
lay grieuouslie oppressed, the care and consultation of the most learned and
religious in that age, framed by authority A public order for prayer and the
Sacraments to be used in this Church.

This continued not long (good things for the sins of the people being showed
unto the world but they not suffered to enjoy them) before the most religious
in this kingdom, whom persecution pursued, and opportunity gave means to
escape, beetooke themselves to the mercy of that Lord, whose truth they
desired might be kept inuiolate, and planted the Church in a strange land: for
that favor which they found as a comfortable refreshing in so great a storm,
we and our posterity shall say (for saving the bodies of the living, as David
to the men of Iabis Gilead for burying of the dead) Blessed are ye of the Lord
that ye have showed such kindness unto your Lord Saul, 2. Sam. 2.5. 6
that ye^ have buried him, therefore now the Lord show mercy and truth unto
you, and I will recompense you this benefit, because ye have done this thing.

1554 June. 72.
The first place of their aboade where they found favor to plant an English
Church was at Francford; where joined with the French and others they
ouerhastely fell in love with the orders and Liturgye of those Churches: which
because the English at Zurick, and Strausburge, did not; but rather with
wisdom and moderation (as they were) so desired to retain the shape and the
fashion of an English Church. Knox and others
Bitter contentions arise amongst them, only for retaining or rejecting of the
Communion book; Those who came from Geneua, being desirous to rest upon
Caluins judgment, who was in a manner, as the oracle of God to all Churches
that were reformed, translated into latin the Liturgy of the Church of
England, Discourse of the trouble at Franckford. page 28. Knox and Whittingam.
Discour. pa. 35
and sent it to him to have his Censure of it. Neither did their description
much differ, from that which is used at this day: whereunto it pleased Master
Calvin to give this answer; In the Liturgy (says he) I see there were many
tolerable foolish things; by these words I mean (a strange meaning) that
there was not that purity which was to be desired; these vices though they
could not at the first day be amended, yet seeing there was no manifest
Impiety (mark it) they were for a season to be tolerated; Therefore it was
lawful to begin off such rudiments, or Abcedaryes; but so that it behooved the
learned Grave and Godly Ministers of Christ, to enterprise further and to set
forth some thing more field from rust, and purer; If godly religion had
flourished till this day in England, there ought to have been a thing better
corrected, and many things clean taken away; now when these principles be
overthrown and a Church must be set up in an other place, where ye may freely
make an order again, From Geneua Ian. 20, 1555.
which shall be apparent to be most commodious to the use and edification of the
Church etc. We will not take upon us to censure this letter, only we see not
how the same things could be thought in his judgment Foolish, and yet termed
Tolerable in a Church Liturgy, or how they are called vices, which
notwithstanding he freeth from manifest Impiety, or if that this liberty of
reformation were to be given where a Church was to be new set up, how it
could be agreeable to them who still I think desired, to be a part even for
outward ceremonies, of that Visible Church, which then suffered persecution in
England. But it suffices in these troubles all were not of one mind, the most
and the best were before their departure and in their banishment, after their
return, Zealous, discreet and learned maintainers of the Communion Book. D.
Horn. D. Lever. D. Humphry. D. Sands. D. Grindall. D. Cox. D. Scorie. D. Jewel.
And most of them afterward became worthily worthy governors in this Church.
For God who saw their Fidelity, constancy, and truth, rewarded them seven
fould into their bosom, this book then (but somewhat purer and more reformed
then at that time) is that huge volume of Ceremonies (for I use their own
words) which is in their opinion unlawful, and Idolatrous but in ours a most
holy, and chaste form of Church Service, and least in this case, our opinion
and defense, In his conference betwixt him and B. Gardener. Ianu. 22. 1555. Act
and Monu* fo. 1521 Note that this censure of D. Tailour martyr was given in
England within 2 days of that ce^sure which M. Calvin gave at Geneua.
should be thought but the corrupt flattery of those, who are or hope to be
advanced by the present time, the wise and grave approbation of the holy
Martire Doctor Tailour, is fit by us to be alleged in this place. There was
(says he) set forth by the most innocent King Edward (for whom God be
praised everlastingly) the whole Church service with great deliberation and
the advice of the best learned men of the Realm, and authorized by the whole
Parliament, and received and published gladly by the whole Realm, which Book,
was never reformed but once and yet by that one reformation it was so fully
perfected, according to the rules of our Christian religion in every behalf,
that no christian conscience, can be offended with any thing therein
contained, I mean of the Book reformed. Thus far Doctor Tailour, Vide
Bucerum Cranmerum. Ridleum.
and shall we now make light account of so honorable a Testimony, or alter
these things only to satisfy the unreasonable fancies of some men? nay
surely in that most memorable Act, of our gracious and dread Souerai^gne,
(whose wisdom appears in these Importunate suits, like the wisdom of
Solomon) there is no one thing which shall heap more honorable and everlasting
glory unto his name, which is, or can be a greater blessing, to this land, a
more religious duty toward God, a more thankful requital of all the favors
that Queen Elizabeth did perform unto him, Vide libru^ nuperim^ressum
then without any alteration or change in the strict commandment of
publishing this order of common prayer, in any matter of substance. Let thy dew
(O Lord) from above fall down upon his head to make him wise in the counsels
of thy law, sanctify his heart with the reverend and holy estimation of thy
truth, make his wisdom powerful against all Achitophells; perfect (O Lord)
and bless these beginnings, that we and our posterity (without change) may
worship thee in this land, so long as the son is before thee; that it may
never sound in tents of our enemies, that thy worship (as erroneous) is now
altered which in mercy thou have protected forty and four years in the
happy days of Queen Elizabeth. And surely reason must needs tell us, that
if we should over easily yield to alter what paraduenture they wish,
doubtless the same reproof, must justly fall upon our own Liturgy, of
Variety, uncertainty and Inconstancy, which one lays very truly upon
the Roman Missall. Sutlif. de mis^a. page 146* This letter was sent Noue^. 28,
and subscribed with 16 hands to them of Franckford.
Besides it were as they of Strausburge wrote of them of Francford, to condemn
the chiefest authors thereof who most of them suffered as Martirs, it would give
occasion to our adversaries to accuse our doctrine of imperfection, and us of
mutabilitie, and the godly to doubt in that truth, wherein before they were
persuaded, and to hinder their coming hither which before they had purposed.
Thus far did they of Strausburg wisely answer to them of Francford, Si per
omnia precationum sanctoru^ verba discurras qua^tu^ existimo nihil inuenies
quod non ista dominica contineat and concludat oration, etc. Aust. epist 12. ad
probam viduam.
so that we may safely conclude, and say of this Book, as S. Austin does in
another case, if thou runnest through all the words of the holy Prayers, I
suppose thou shall find nothing which the Lords prayer does not contain and
comprehend, therefore we may in other words speak the same things in our
prayers, but we may not speak contrary things.

Yet because reason has not been sufficient to restrain the intemperate
proceedings of some men, and they think this Church is little beholding unto
them (unless they traduce the government and the Liturgy which she uses) for
which notwithstanding others out of greater wisdom and conscience have made
against the common adversary this challenge; Look if any Line be blameable
in our Service and take hold of your advantage: Deering against Hard. in a
book called a sparing restraint, etc.
I think M. Jewel will accept it for an Article; our Service is good and
Codly, every title grounded upon holy Scriptures, and with what face do you
call it darkness: We are content after the learned endeavors of other men,
to add some thing to those principal points, which in the Communion book is,
and has been misliked by them, that to whose hands the writings of other
peradventure come not, this short answer to such, may give some satisfaction
in the principal things which they do mislike.

1 The form of the Liturgy of the Church of England, is taken from Antichrist.

We are sorry that their weakness takes offense at that which we hold as
an honor, and a virtue in the Church of England; namely that we have so
sparingly and as it were unwillingly disented, from the Church of Rome (for
surely by Antichrist they mean her) with whom if the corruptions of that
Church would have given us leave, we would have willingly consented in their
whole service: which being unsafe and unlawful, we follow them
notwithstanding in all, wherein they follow those holy, and ancient fathers
which first planted the truth amongst them; And as we acknowledge them our
fathers in the Faith, so we are willing even to borrow that from them, which
virtuously was used in that Church, when it was worthy to be called our
mother^ and if now the holy City be become an harlot, E^. 1.^.
yet we (as most Churches) have received light from them, for there was a time,
that their Faith was published over all the world, and if now they be at
enmity with God, Romans 1.8.
and us, yet we had rather follow the perfections of whom we like not, then
the defects and Imperfections of those we love, nay the spoils of the heathen
taken from the Devil, Mil. in psa. 67.
are divided to the furniture and ornament of the Church of God. For doubtless
as one says all true Godly men may virtuously use those rites, M. Bucer in a
letter to Archbish. Cranmer.
which wicked men have abused, howsoever ungodly.

2 It is unlike the Reformed.

If they mean Geneua, we cannot but acknowledge both the great mercies of God
toward them, and the singular benefit from them to the whole Church. But wherein
we differ as there may be reasons in respect of place and people warrantable
for both, and without offense, so if difference were a fault it may be as well
in them, not to follow us, as in us not to follow them, but the strife for
pre-eminence of example, is a weak contention, whereas for Antiquity there is
no great difference; we thank God for them, and reverence that truth which is
taught amongst them, In arg. in Epist ad Galat. Pauli res ipsas sequntur plures
nomina reru^ plurimi magistrorum.
but it is (says Master Calvin) a pestilent mischief, when we will have the
manner of one Church to be in place of an Universal law. And doubtless if we
were as willing to give them our reasons, why we cannot conform our selves to
the orders of that Church, (as some amongst us have be^ violently bold, for to
urge us to it) surety the world would thinck, we had rather a desire to
reprove them, then to amend our selves: an Uniformity in all Churches were to
be wished, but it is not ever absolutely necessary, Consentimus in eo quod
conuenit non in eo quod receptum est.
where the form of the common wealth is not all one; in this case all being
lawful, that is best that is fittest for us.

3 The reading of Epistles and Gospels so cut and mangld.

That we read them at all is that which they do mislike, but seeing men are
easily wearied in those duties, that are best, and Prayer making us apt to
fall into Speculations. concerning God both that our weariness may be less,
and our thoughts more sound, and more agreeable to the present business, those
wise men that have been before us, have chosen lessons, for the Church, as
also Epistles, and Gospells, suitable to the present time and occasion, that as
Prayer makes us fitter to hear; Just. Martyr. 2. Apol. Tertul. in apol. cap.
39.
so the hearing of these, may make us likewise fitter to pray. To read
Scriptures in the time of divine Service, we hope (being ancient and of such
use) their wisdom will not much mislike, and if the name of Epistle and
Gospel do offend, they cannot but know that the original of this both for
the name and the thing was from Paul himself, commanding the same Epistle,
Colos. 4.16.
which he sent unto the Collossians to be read in the Church of the
Laoditians. And of that to the Thessalonians he says, 1. These. 5.27. S. Aust.
in many places mentions this custom to be ancient and usual. De ciuit. lib.
22 Ser. 236.
I charge you in the Lord that this Epistle be read unto all the Brethren, the
Saints. From which custom the Church having appointed that portion of
Scripture (which circumstances being weighed) is then fittest to be read unto
the people, as if it were directly sent unto them (thereby procuring their
attention) is not unfitly termed by the name of Epistle, to these as S.
Chrysostom notes, the Minister stood up, and with a loud voice cried (let us
attend.) Stat minister, comunis minister alta voce clamat attendamus. Chris.
Hom. 9. in cap 9. Act. Luke 4. Act. 13.15.17.18.
In one word the original of this custom which so much offends them, has
better likelihood of warrant from the Hebrews (then their Sanadrin) seeing it
was the custom amongst them, every Sabbath (which continues yet in their
Sinagogues) that some thing is read out of Moses or the Prophets. And we hope
the name of the Gospel shall not displease them, unless they be offended with
Glad tidings, and if to read only so much as fitteth with the present
occasion, be to cut and mangle, their wisdom can tell that division of
Chapters, is not so ancient, that it may not be altered, and their practice
is usually to read sometime, but a part of a chapter, sometimes two, as the
matter it self has dependence with it.

4 It maintains an unpreaching Ministry, by banishing preaching under the
color of long prayer.

To accuse us of long prayer, will little beeseeme them, who are long and
tedious. If we esteem not of Sermons, as we ought it is our fault; And
doubtless if there had but been that respect in them, which was in us, to a
thing of so great use, surely many of their sermons, would be shorter, and
much better: we are content that they shall extol either them, or themselves,
but withal let them remember, that the Church of God has as much need,
sensibly and orderly to pray, as to hear a Sermon, wherein if it shall be
only ouer-short, M. Hook.
(being a duty solemn and public) the world will learn to think that we
make little account of that, whereunto we allow so little time: words surely how
few soever are then long and paraduenture tedious, when they benefit not the
hearer, but whosoever speaks much, and by much speaking does much edify,
doubtless is undeservedly blamed for much speaking.

It is likely that they who labor for much time, to be long in preaching, are
of more singular ability then other men, or intend to trouble their hearers
with impertinent discourses: Nemo paucis explicat quod ^on recte intelligit.
Eras. in praef. in Arnob in Psalt.
or else that they cannot express in few words which themselves before do
not rightly understand. But seeing the general fault is, that we are swift to
speak, and had rather that the people should hear us, then God himself; the
time which we think ouerlong for divine service, is accounted ouershort for to
utter our own fancies: but such Sermons are far less then prayers, to the
Edification of Gods Church.

The Collect on Trinity Sunday.
5 That we pray ( without faith having no promise) that we may evermore be
defended from all adversity.

If either we know some adversity against which we may not lawfully pray,
or that there be some adversity which is not evil in it own nature, or some
evil that is not to be shunned by us, or what we would shun that prayer is
not a means for to escape it: Aliud est petere liberatione^ presentem aliud
est petere liberaria male pen^presentis
if all these or any of these can be proved, we refuse not to forbear to
ask; That we may be defended from all adversities But seeing that the same
things which when they happen both we endure with patience, and God is able to
turn them to our great advantage, yet because we neither know our strength
(unable of it self to overcome the least trial) and that God has promised,
Psalm. 91. Math. 6.
that no evil shall come nigh our dwelling, we pray but deliver us from
evil, that is, defend us from all adversity: to think we may pray for nothing
for which we have not warrant in Scripture is paraduenture an error.

6 Which for our unworthiness we dare not ask; 12 Sunday after Trinity.
a note of a servile fear.

There is no virtue that better beeseemeth suitors then humility, no humility
better beeseemeth suitors to God then the unfeigned acknowledgement of our own
unworthiness, wherein if we should rest, it were needless to ask, seeing
there must be a hope to receive, as well as a sense of our want: so that whilst
we have confidence to obtain that in Christ's name, which for our own
unworthiness we dare not ask, we rather express the loving humility of
Sons, then the fear of servants; but it is marvel how they can say, T.C.
and think; That there is nothing which in his name we dare not ask, being
needful for us, seeing they deny that it is unlawful to pray to be
delivered from all adversity.

7 To be delivered from Lightning and Tempest (which T.C. calls Thundering)
when none is nigh.

Doubtless we have greater reason to fear, and so consequently to pray
against these, then any other danger of this life: Si quoties homines peccant
It is the fearful executioner of Gods wrath, manifested in the giving of the
law, to teach the transgresser, what he must expect, we want not examples;
The Heathen knew it, dangers above the means of man's wisdom to prevent, are
only to be escaped by prayer.

8 The Singing nunc Dimittis, Benedictus, Magnificat, we know not to what
purpose.

You cannot but know to what purpose they were first made, and that the
occasion of their first making, was the memory of a benefit, not fit ever to
be forgotten: the Church in this performs, and learneth a duty; by the same
reason we may not read the Psalms of David, unless we were in David's case:
In Scripture the fence is one, but the use and application is diverse, and yet
warrantable.

9 The Letanie all Popish.

We cannot do our adversaries a greater honor, then to make them the
founders of these Prayers. Whether Mamercus or Gregory, made them it skilleth
not. The general callamitie of the Church was the cause, and seeing the
presumptuous iniquities of these times, may i^stly cause us fear what we
feel not, we have as much reason to pray to be kept from them before they
happen, as to have them removed when they do happen.

10 Gloria Patri and Athanasius creed to what use?

To give honor to the Trinity; for as they were made to teach the Arrians to
confess what they believed not, so they are for us to praise and express what
we do believe.

11 To say after the Minister is a loss of time.

Just. Martyr 2. Apol.
That Scripture which commands the people to say Amen, does not forbid them to
say more: custom and example tell us that this loss is to the people an
advantage, Basil. Haxame.
whose universal consent expressed by their voices, is like the roaring of the
waves against the sea banck.

12 Baptism by women commanded and allowed. Nay rather forbidden, and the
action not allowed, though the act be.

We are sorry if any inconsiderately and presumptuouslie do it; but being
done (we hold a greater necessity of Baptism) then that we dare think them,
fit to be baptized again. Herein if there be any fault, surely it is not a
fault in the Communion book.

13 Private Communions to the sick.

If the Minister and the sick person communicate, how can they call it private?
for there be not many, yet there are two: and where two or three are assembled
as they ought, they need not doubt of the blessing of a Congregation: but
seldom so few are, and things of that use, in such extremity desired, it is
Tirrannie to deny them, for the not concurring of some solemn, and convenient
circumstance.

14 Churching of women. And that Psalm^ appointed. Psa. 12^.


If that Childbirth be a curse for the labor, and sorrow in it; because then
(naturally) an enemy is borne to Gods kingdom: if many hardly escape those
dangers, which fitly are called by us labor and travel; how can w^ but
think it convenient to give thanks and in that to acknowledge the author of
their safe deliverance to be the Lord, who protecteth his own day and night:
they look not at any means upon earth, but unto the hills from whence comes
their help.

15 Holidayes a superstitious honor to Saints.

No, a memorial of that benefit which the Church has received by that
particular occasion; which therefore it wants not warrant to appoint, as
occasions of mercies, and deliverances are new, so new solempnities: and
therefore we will ever say, This is the day of the Lord; Psa. 118.
and sing praises unto the Lord: the fifte of August, and the four and twenty
of March; for in them the Lord has done great things for us already, whereof
we rejoice. 2. Kings 7 9.
Let the leprosy of those four lepers cleave unto us, if we hold our peace,
from Psalms, and thanksgiving, Luk* 19.
seeing it is a day of good tidings: for surely as Zachous heard Christ speak,
so God shall hear us thankfully confess, that this day Salvation is come unto
this land: Luke 2.
for he that is mighty has magnified him and holy is his name.

16 Reading of Homelies and Apocrypha.

If they serve to edify, why do they refuse them; if they be not Canonical,
neither are they so esteemed. If nothing be to be read in the church but
Scripture, Discourse of the troubles page 133.
why is it a law amongst them, to have their orders for governing the church,
read publicly, once every quarter* the supposed errors in the Apocrypha
makes us with the warrant of the Church, to refuse them; for Canonical
scripture to inform our faith: but the excellent precepts that are in them,
make us by the same warrant think them profitable, to be read for to reform
our manners.

17 The Ring in Marriage Superstitious.

To finish an act of that solemnity without some visible and significant
assurance, as it were no wisdom (seeing vows were never thought so firm as
when they received a strength from some outward action,) so many reasons are
given, why this cerimonie is most fit, and less harmless, both betokening
the affection of the heart, the linking them together vnchangeablye, the
continuance of their affection, without end, the purity of that ordinance
which is heavenly, and last of all, an humble submission to the ordinance of
that Chrurch, which has authority to appoint ceremonies, and has appointed
this as one most fitting to the gravity of this action.

18 In Baptismo regeneramur ad vitam post Baptismu^ confirmamur ad pugnam Euse.
Emissen.
Confirmation unlawful.

What we promise by others in our Baptism, that we then undertake in our
own names; and remembering the conflict we have undertaken, we come for an
addition of new forces, in Baptism we are regenerate to life, but in
confirmation we are strengthened to battle: memorialls to this are not, nor
are not to be thought needless, for many know they have names, who little
remember that they are Baptized, but whom the Church on earth has once
received to be her children, she cease not to pursue with favors and helps,
until she delivers them to their father, which is in heaven.

19 Burialls are heathnish, and superstitious, either in meeting the dead body
with prayers, mourners, and such like.

It is well beseeming that hope which we have of the Resurrection, and in this
the living receive profit, though the dead do not. We esteem the bodies of
the faithful, as sometimes the vessels of the holy Ghost, we hold them fit
to be laid up, Non amissi sed premissi fulgent. Disperandi sunt vt absentes
non deplorandivt mo^^ul.
not to be cast away, and though they are not lost but sent before us, yet we
sadly lament our want, and their absence, though over vehemently we mourn
not as those that had no hope, we may wish for them, because they are not with
us, but not too much lament for them, because they are with God. This stoicall
age, need not this doctrine, it is sin to forget that we are friends, and
christians.

20 The Priest prays for the Prince, and the people answer of another matter.

That prayer which we offer up for that power upon earth which does rule over
us, if the people answer with this voice ( and mercifully hear us when we
call upon thee) is no fault to be done, and peradventure were a fault not to
be done. Little things will offend them, who can be so curious to mislike this.

21 Crossing in Baptism Popish.

And yet to Baptize using the sign of the Cross is not popish. Standon in the
Register. page 409.
We are not of their mind who think the cross whereupon Christ suffered was
like Pithagoras letter, neither is this crossing a sacrament though it put us
in mind of our manfull fight under the banner of Christ crucified, we use it
not as bestowing a grace upon us but thankfully remembering what was done for
us: a Sign that may be used amiss, we can forbear if it please the Church,
but in the mean time we can and do use it with obedience, because we do
know how.

22 That all may be saved, all travailing by land, or by water.

It were pity but their mouths were stopped who forbid us to pray that all men
may be saved. It is the revealed will of God; and although we know that all
are not, yet because we know not exactly who are, and that our desire is
extended without exclusion, equally to all, in that sense, as our savior
wills, so we wish and desire, that all men may be saved; for those that
travel if a blessing come upon them, whilst they travel to good ends by land,
or by water (and this for our prayer) the church has an interest by the
communion of Saints; if they travel to evil ends, and find success, this
mercy serves to make them better; and therefore as we pray that God would
strike through the loins of those, who rise up against him and against his
anointed, so whilst we know not definitiuely who are such, Indeffinitly we
pray for his defense, to all those ( which travel by land or by water) where
politic respects, or Gods revealed will particularly forbid not, there Charity
commands for to pray for all.

23 Bells and Organs are from Popes.

To refuse them for that reason were rather malice then wisdom: for seeing
the one calls by the sound the people to the Temple, the other by sounding,
furthereth the praise of God in the temple, it is not their author, that can be
a reason to make us mislike either: they aim at some other end whom so
harmless inventions can so much displease. That we worthily lamenting our
sins, may obtain of thee perfect remission; In the Collect for the first day
of Lent. Regist. Page 82
they tell us not in this, what they do mislike, and therefore we will accept
of their gentle allowance, wherein they say this requires a favorable
exposition, and that the words were well meant, as they were appointed for us.

24 On Christmas day it is said thou have given us thy Son this day to be
borne of a Virgin; the same words we use all the week after, as if Christ
upon every day, had been borne a new.

I hope it is not the memory of his Nativity that does displease them: If
this day, when perhaps it was not, be that which in this they do mislike, the
Church tyeth no man to so strict an acception of this day, as if it were meant
this very particular day, but that it may without offense, be understood of
the solemnity of that feast, if they have learned to think and to speak
otherwise, we have no such custom, neither the Church of God.

25 Scripture openly abased to show a necessity of Baptism, from that place
(except a man be borne again of water and of the Spirit.)

We hope a necessity they will not deny of Baptism and if this place be not
sufficient to prove it, we will be, ready to afford them other; if this be
that which offends them, our interpretation of it; other have told them
concerning this, (wherein their negative is all that is alleged) that in
expositions of Sacred Scripture, where a litterall construstion will stand, the
farthest from the letter is commonly the worst.

26 That we pray for the dead when we say remember not O Lord our offenses
nor the offenses of our forefathers.

No, but because God punishes temporallie sons even for the iniquities and
transgressions of their fathers: as the infants in the flood, John. 9.
and in Sodom (which they well knew who asked our Savior (who had sinned this
man or his father) and that we go on for the most part to fill up the measure
of our fathers sins, which must fall heavy upon us, when it comes with a
double force, therefore not for them but our selves we say: Remember not O
Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers.

27 Out of the Collect upon Saint Michaels day, prayer is made for the help of
Angels.

And why not? does any man think that they do not help us (being ministering
spirits?) and seeing he has given his Angels charge over us, may not we pray
to have their assistance: we only ask them as Christ, think thou that I
cannot pray to my father, Math. 26. 53.
and he will give more then twelve legions of Angels.

If any thing be misliked beesides these, (these being but small occasions of
so great a difference) our Church doubtless has many which are able and will be
willing, to give them what satisfaction they can demand: but if it offend them
because it is ancient, or solemn, or sober, or charitable, we are sorry for
their weakness, but we had rather offend them, then the whole Church of God.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Tolleration of diverse Religions and how far discenting
opinions from the true Christian faith may and ought to be permitted in one
and the same kingdom.
THere are few kingdoms in the world which have not at some times diversities
of religion nourished and brought up in the bosom of them: for the envious man
whilst others sleep, is watchful and diligent to sow Tares: and these usually
either in mercy, or for their nearenesse, to that which is good, are suffered
to grow, till the time of harvest. If natural bodies of men either had no
diseases, or that rest were not sometimes available to procure their health;
Wisdom were a virtue in Physicians of little use, and undoubtedly patience
would be thought Sloth. But seeing the eyes of council in all evils that
are, look not so much what they be, as what they may be: and that the best
perfection which humane endeavors do, or can receive, is from that leysurable
maturitie, that times afford, (moments and instants being only fit either for
powers infinite, or for weakness that is furthest from them) all men have as
much reason not over hastily to censure what the wisest do, as the wisest have
warrant and example, not over hastily to perform what they do intend. Few
do or can doubt, but that the foundation of all happiness to a realm is true
religion: it is the walls of defense to the greatest kingdoms, Princes have
their best security from this, both for Crown and Scepter, and their
adversaries shall all fail, in the justice of the highest, that do rise
against it. The power how to ordain that worship which God requires and man
owes (which we call Religion) is neither in our weakness to invent, nor
being taught and instructed in it, have we willingness or strength to yield
an outward obedience without laws. As the care then of this in all kingdoms
chieffly concerns the Prince, so the best entrance and assurance to the well
performing of this duty, is the sanctification of of the Lords Rest. Without
this, the slumber of peace shall be no prosperity, health shall be but a sweet
poison to make us distaste what doubtless would be better for us, and in the
end, the felicity of such states, shall but resemble the grass upon the house
top which withers before it be pulled up, and their fair day shall be
suddenly over cast, or concluded and shut up, with a black and a long night.
Where it is easy to err, seldom do men look at vices with so much
severity, as where it is not: custom haueing both the Privilege of a
multitude to be without shame, and the lenity of a pardon, because few men
think it a duty to be honest, where the most are not, or that to be an
offense in one, which is the fault of all.

Now the persons of men being swaied many times to error, by lighter occasions
then mere fancy, and all men des^ring a Religion, yet most careless of the
means that do lead unto it, and nothing surer to find more resistance, then
that counsel that crosses affection or custom: it must be a consideration
of great consequence, to further (by an absolute unity) the true Religion: no
examples being suffered that do lead from it, and all men to be truly
taught, that they neither can with happiness want this, nor without misery
think this to be any other, saving only one. But because all men traduse
(even without respect of nature) that devotion which they see in others, who
look not the same way that they do, it shall not be amiss, to consider,
who, and what they are, that usually dissent in religion in any kingdom. And
from the Prince and the state, what favor, tolleration, or respect is to be
had toward them: for seeing all men (though their Religion be false) have
reason both to love, and to be earnest for the religion which they pro^esse,
it cannot be in a realm where diverse stand diversely affected toward this,
but that all will look with a jealous eye at the state, and either obtain or
procure equal freedom of that which they call their conscience, to
themselves, or complain as suffering a harder persecution, and paraduenture
be ready when opportunity shall serve, to become Traitors. But because even
the most absolute Monarchs, have not an vndependant liberty, to incline with
mercy toward these in this case, as much and as far as their princely Grace
could be content to yield: it shall not be amiss for the satis^action of
those, who importune and hope for favor in this kind, if we let them
understand, who they are that do hold diversity of opinion, concerning
Religion in any kingdom, and what favor and tolleration may and ought by the
Prince to be granted toward them.

And because we have heard, the greatest Prince in the world tell us, that
Kings are Physicians in this kind, we may safely resolve that where Patients
and Diseases are not all one, there the remedy and the cure is not all alike.
There may be in a kingdom (for we are not now to speak either of Hippocrits,
or open profane persons) Heathen, Idolatours, Heretics, those that err and
fail in some points of Religion publicly professed in that state, and lastly
upright and true Christians. Toward all these (if all happen to be in one
kingdom) as paraduenture Poland can tell they are) the state is to carry a
diverse respect, both for the curing of them that are thus sick, and for the
safeguard of those that are yet whole.

Heathens or Infidels we call them who profess not Faith, as Jews and Turks:
Idolatours Superstitiously fallen back, from the true Religion of Christ: in
place whereof either Saints, or reliquies, have a great part of that honor which
is due unto God only, such are a great number of the Church of Rome; these
usually we call by the name of Papists, and so we must term them in this
Chapter. Heretics are they who strike through the very Arrians, Eunomians,
Seruetians, Anabaptists, and such like. Yet in these all are not alike, some
being Seducers, and others by them simply seduced. The Lutherans and the
Zwinglyans, about the Sacrament, both holding each other to err, whereas
neither sentence as yet has been lawfully condemned. To these may be
referred all those erroneous opinions, which take not away the foundation of

Concerning the Jews a Prince may lawfully permit them to dwell in his
Kingdom, and to traffic in it, so that marriages with Christians,
communicating with their religion and all nearer familiarity betwixt such, be
denied unto them: these were the limitations which were set betwixt them and
the heathen, by the law of Moses, the laws of Emperors have permited the
like; some of the fathers but especially S. Austin, was so favorable toward
them, that he alleges several reasons, for the doing of it; first that
above others they had the promise of Salvation, and though their case be
lamentable, yet it is not desperate, for even at this present, there is a
remnant according to the election of Grace; for God is able to graft them in
again. For I would not brethren that you should be ignorant of this secret,
least ye should be arrogant in your selves, that partly obstinacy is come to
Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in; for that prayer says
Saint Austin, was made for them: Slay them not least my people forget it, but
scatter them abroad among the people, and put them down O Lord our defense.
Pf. 59. 11.
There cannot be doubtless (and so they are dispersed in most kingdoms)
better objects to consider the justice and the mercy of God, then they are
Justice to them, mercy to us: and that we unless we repent, we shall
likewise perish. But concerning the permission of Sinagogues unto them, all men
are not of one mind: seeing daily in them blasphemies are uttered against our
savior Christ; yet we doubt not to affirm, that these may be granted with
some cautions, as only to read the Scriptures, and to pray, but not to teach,
where the reason for them, and the Turks to have Temples, is not all one:
seeing these both have the promise; Council 4. Tolet* sub Honorio primo. can.
56. De Cret. did. 45. can. 5.
Call upon God, read the Bible, but the Turks do not. If Kings for
intolerable exactions, as hurtful to their state, banish them out of their
realms, it is lawful, and yet if otherwise they permit them, surely in
neither they offend God. Charity ought to make us careful to instruct them in
the way of truth, but unwillingly we dare not compel either them, or their
children, to be Baptized.

2 The next are Idolatours, to whom we deny not, but permission if it please
the state, may lawfully be granted to live amongst us. Yet even these with
the same limitation as the former were, neither that we communicate in their
Idolatry, nor be of too great a familiarity and nearness with them, nor be
suffered (as some think) with such to contract marriage, for seeing the
Infection of Idolatry creeps as a contagious disease, and that all near
conuersing, must gain at length, if we cannot alter them, an approbation or
tolleration of what they like, it is not ever safe (though to permit them in a
kingdom) yet to converse any nearer with them, then with mere strangers. But
I see not how this can be the opinion of those men, who think it unlawful to
shun the plague. But we think not as they do, who hold it less safe to have
any nearenesse with an Idolatrous Church, than with Turks or Jews. Imitating
the blindness of the Israelites in times past, which had the Jews in greater
detestation, than the Idumaeans, the Aegiptians or the Assyrians; but the wrath
of God, was kindled against them for this sin, and the comparison betwixt
these, is not all one, where the disstance from true Religion is not all alike.
Now a greater question, concerning Idolatours is this, Whether a Prince may
tolerate and grant Churches to Idolatours for Idolatrous worship? One of the
best learned in our age, Zanch. in decal. page 727.
thinks that to say, it might, so that they abstain from balsphemous
Doctrine, and Idolatrous worship, were in his opinion not to answer ill;
but seeing the custody of both the tables, is committed by God unto virtuous
Kings, and that pure Religion, is or ought to be, Deuteronomy. 17.18.19
the principal part of their care; seeing they bear the sword of authority
to make such to fear as do evil; and that few evils are worse than
Idolatry, we say it is not lawful to permit Churches to Idolatours, but
rather to overthrow their Idols, and superstitious worship; yet not their
Temples, but to convert them to a holy and a better use, a du^tie surely well
performed as it has and shall be the honor, and happiness of virtuous Kings,
so it is not a work to be permitted to the audatious, violent, and unruly
multitude. Neither do we think all overthrowing of Idolatrous Temples to be
unlawful, seeing those which virtuously Constantine the great did only shut,
and Julian afterward did set open, Valentinian and Theodosius did worthily pull
down.

It was fatal To David's house, But we plead not as that harlot before
Solomon, diuidatur. All or none. Page 117. Henr. 3.
Salomons promission of two religions; and we will require no better testimony
to disprove this, tha^ the eloquent oration of the league, to the King of
France; a speech surely as fit for us if either there were danger or fear of
so much evil. Your Majesty (says he) looking into the memory of things
past, may sufficiently perceive, that as long as France has been united under
one Christian religion, she has made her glory and renoun spread through all
countries: she has caused her valor in arms to be proved and felt in all
places of the world, she has always been victorious over all the enemies of
Catholic religion and has done so many honorable actions, and atchiued so
great and happy conquests against Infidel^, that it (...) such glory among the
Asians, Africans, Indians, Persians, Tartarians, Moors, Sarrazins and others,
that all the Christians in Europe by them are called Frenchmen, for that because
those strange Nations, have only felt the arms of Frenchmen, they have also
comprehended all the Latin Churches under the name of France and Frenchmen. But
since France has been divided and rent with two Religions, let us see how much
it has lost of her ancient renoun she that commanded a great part of Europe,
that conquered countries f^r distant from her, that at her only name, made
diverse warlike nations to tremble, is found since this unhappy and unfortunate
diui^i^n, to be reduced into such extremity, that in the middle of her breast,
she has received foreign powers, she has in a manner received the law of her
neighbors, and of her enemies: and that cruel turning her sword against her
own Intrayles: and although she was Invincible in respect of all other Nations,
she is now her self so Imbased, vanguished and ouerthrown, which is the fruit
that this venomous plant of new opinion has Induced which seems to be at the
point ready to give more dangerous thrusts, if according to to the expectation
which we all have conceived of your wisdom and piety, It pleseth not your
Majesty spedely to take order therein; much more was uttered to this effect
showing the opinion which they have for any Tolleratio^ of diverse religions,
which since some of the^ in other places have been well content earnestly to
solicit that they might obtain, it was the error of S. Austin, to think that
men by violence ought not to be compelled to the faith* But after seeing many
cities of the Donatists converted by the Imperial laws, and returning to the
true Church, he thought severity fit to be used, where linity, and mercy would
do no good. The next are Heretics who are neither simple Infidels, nor
Idolatours, but obstinately erring in some fundamental point, these neither
fail all alike nor fall all at once For the beginnings to slide in this case
are easy, and thought to be without danger, whereas in the end it is deadly,
and such prove Apostataes from the whole Church. The Arrians and the Nouatians
the one denying the divinity of Christ, the other Repentance unto those that
sin, were not hoth a like dangerous, although both by the Church were condemned
as Heretics.^. Cyprians opinion, and some other in Africa, who held such as
were Baptized by Heretics, that they ought to be Baptized again, The
Reformer boaste* of 1000 hands. Danger pos, page 137.
and some peradventure amongst us, whose errors concerning our Church, are not
less dangerous, are to be respected by the Magistrate in a different manner,
from such Heresies as Arrius held; with these, persuasions and conferences are
to be used, after which if they continue obstinate, Excommunication (the
censure of the Church) is to cut them off, wherein notwithstanding to avoid
tumults if their number were dangerous, like the Nouatians in S. Chrisostomes
time, It were lawful and convenient for the Governors of the Church to be at
peace with them, Phil. 3.15. Quisquis post veritatem reperta^ aliquid vlterius
diseutit, me^dacium querit. Quoru^ studiu^ in expugnandis heretecis non
reprehenderem, si non studio vi^e^di plus quam opertuit certa^^e^t. Sulp.
Sever. Epi. 27. Seuire se nolle aliquando Donatistae di^eba^t, ego vero non
potuisse* ^^bitror Aust. Nulla ^^stias^ nemane^ vulnerae man uetadicitur, quia
dentes and vngues non habet.
the ecclesiastical authority aiming at this scope, rather to build than to
pull down. Concerning the fourth which only do, or seem to err, in some
point, that comes not so far to be thought an heresy, doubtless a greater
moderation is befitting such, and violent condemnations are unlawful, until
both have been heard with indifferent trial. Inuectiues, alienations of mind,
partaking and such like are both scandalous to the Church, enemies to peace,
and in the end are little available to find the truth. It were fit al to be of
one mind until more warra^table proceedings might resolve our doubts; let us
therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded, and if ye be otherwise minded,
God shall reueile even the same unto you and after this whosoever he is that
seeks further, having found a truth, labors but with pains to inue^t an
error. Their diligence if it were upright, the church cold not refuse; of whom
now it is like she may say (as one does of the accusers of Priscillian) their
desire to overthrow Heretics, I could not reprehend, if they had not
contended more tha^ was fitting to ouerco^e; What mildnes they have used, we
take it as the speech of the Donatists, who as S. Austin reports, said they
would not be cruel, but I think they could not: no man cou^teth that beast
meekest which hurts not, bccause teeth and claws are denied him: but if any
man be ignorant, and desire to know, what courses have been taken with these
men whom we cannot defend and the state of our Church has supposed to err;
whilst over eagerly they have sought a Reformation of some things we are
content for defense of our selves, in not yielding to all which they demanded
of us, and most earnestly from the purified example of some other Church, to
let them know, that the Church of England, being to enter into a considetion of
those laws, which were thought fit to be altered, concerning matter of
Religion, knew by experience both at home, and abroad, that howsoever the best
humane laws have much imperfection annexed to them, yet ouergreat or
ouerspeedy alteration, could neither argue much wisdom, nor be thought safe.
For to alter laws of continuance and especially in this kind, must needs with
the common sort, Impair and weaken the force of those grounds whereby laws
are esteemed to have greatest strength. For if we have neither voice from
heaven (the ground of the first alteration in the Apostles time) that
pronounces them fit to be thus changed; neither sentence of wise men, built
upon manifest evil; nor clear proof that they in whose hands it is to alter
them, may likewise infallibly even in heart and conscience judge them so; upon
necessity to urge alteration, is without necessity, to trouble and to weaken
the whole stare. But such is the lot of all that deal in public affairs,
whether of Church or commonwealth, that which men list to surmise of their
doings, be it good or ill, they must before hand, arm their mind to endure it
with much patience. Now if it were a fault in the Church of Rome, through a
love to some thing that is harmles, obstinately to maintain what is not
lawful; had it not been an Imputation to our church from the dislike of those
things, which were neither warrantable, nor just, to proceed to an alteration
of such, as in the judgment of the best undoubtedly were both. But when
experience shall have showed the several fruits of both kinds of reformation, as
well moderate with us, as violent rigorous and extreme in other Churches, it
is the voice of truth will express it self, even from their consciences; we
are they that have hindered the happiness of the Church of England; for the
way of peace have we not known. In the mean while not to advise those, whose
authority is powerful, and their wisdom excellent, we can but wish
suspense of judgment, and exercise of charity, to those that do think
otherwise, adutie much safer and seemelier for Christian men, than the over
hot, and violent pursuit, of these controversies, wherein they that are most
fervent to dispute, be not always the most able to determine; now for the last
of those which we termed professors of Religion in a sound manner, as honor
and respect is their merit, so doubtless in this Kingdom at this time if they
be humble, obedient, and patient, they can want neither.

Thus much we have written, not that we take upon us either to prescribe unto
the Prince what he may, or to direct the State what they ought to perform in
this case, but plainly to deliver our own weak opinion which very willingly
in all humility we submit to the Censure of this Church.

An humble conclusion, to his Sacred Majesty and the right Honorable Lords of
his Highness privy Counsel together with the rest whom it may concern to
defend this Church. CHAP. V.
IT is not the least happiness to a kingdom (if it be not of temporal
felicities the greatest) to have a King every way so enabled, that every man's
particular case is like enough to come to his particular view; for nature has
made all men to bear with greater moderation that done, which proceeds from
those who do and ought to govern, than from others; and grace (even that grace
that comes from above) has inspired a greater feeling of each man's
particular want and a better understanding of some men's eminent worthiness than
can be expected from those (how wise soever) who act but the parts of politic
men, in the habits of obedient and moderate aduisers, where it is like no man
will be ouerforward to benefit any private man two much, seeing the
commendation of whatsoever is well done must of necessity be equally divided
amongst many; neither has virtue (how well soever deserving) in all
kingdoms, found always that equal favor at virtuous men's hands, which both
she might have expected and in reason was due unto her, because a timorous
disposition in all, makes every man fear, that nothing can be added to another
man's greatness, which must needs serve at the length, to make his seem less,
because of less use; Now the greatest burden upon earth ( Gracious and right
Honorable) (next the burden of a troubled conscience) lies (as ye well know)
upon his shoulders who governs a Nation, rich, wise, valiant and by reason of
all these peradventure proud, surely howsoever wisemen have thought all
authority a care (because many must of necessity want many helps) both to
relieve things past, to satisfy things present, and to prevent things to come;
(which no man without care can do, and few with it,) yet surely over those who
are either simple, or poor, or servile, or cowardly, the government cannot be
troublesome, seeing he commands those over whom a little reason is much, and
weakness and fear have denied the^ liberty to examine what is well or ill
done; this alone made that easy passage of the Portingales and the Spaniards
into the Indiaes, which against a nation of less wealth, or circuit, furnished
with more understanding, had doubtless been impossible, if the forces of both
kingdoms had been united; such is the willingness to resist in the defense of
ancient liberty, where the reason of man by civil education, has power to
discern the quality of that which it does defend. But in those who are of a
contrary nature, and will dare to do much because they would seem not to
understand little, there to take a Crown, is to take a heavy burden, and to
govern is to rule men, where every particular danger of moment must have a
remedy, unless they will hazard by the contempt of some few, the ruin of the
whole state; this consideration made Dioclesian, (who was neither the best nor
the happiest that ever gouernd) think truly, that there was nothing harder
than to rule well. For if they shall either commit all to others (which no King
whose Nation was happy ever did) or take all upon themselves, in both they
shall find (if not equal) yet the like, certain, and irresistable danger,
therefore well said Saturninus to those that put on his kingly ornaments;
friends, ye know not what an evil it is to rule, many dangers hang over our
heads; for where in other cases fear makes me^ watch, in this men usually
fear those that watch over them. I know not a better security in this for the
kingdom (God make us all thankful that it has been our happiness) than a
good Prince, nor for the Prince than a good Counsel, nor for all, than
profitable and religious laws. These only are left upon earth from men to be
the strength and supporters to those that Rule over great Kingedomes. It is
true which Tacitus says, that the most weighty labors of a Prince stand in
need of the greatest helps; therefore as tyra^ts in all ages have loathed
nothing so much as good counsel, Lib. 12. Annal.
bestowing the greatest honors and riches (the just recompense of virtue) upon
the worst persons (whose vices served only to make them forget themselves and
to ruinate the kingdom over which they gouernd (so the best and wisest, have
ever made choice of such, as were fit to be eyes, and ears, nay tongues and
hands, all to be employed for the common good; for seldom (says one) shall we
see great men, Raro eminentes viros non magnis adiutoribus ad gubernandam
fortunam suam vsos inuenies. Velleius paters.
not to have the assistance of great Counsel; to govern a great fortune; nay
there cannot be in a Prince, a greater argument of wisdom nor a greater
safety to the Church and the commonwealth, than in making his choice of a wise
Council; some are of opinion that the chiefest reason why Rome flourished so
long, was principally this, because they that gouernd her followed not their
own, but the Counsel of the whole Senate. Neither says Augustus, could any
of these things (meaning the troubles of his house that break out) have
happened unto me, Dionis. Halycar. lib. 2.
if Agrippa, or Maecenas (two wise Counselors) had now lived; Senec. de
Benef. lib. 16. cap. 32.
for doubtless there is not a better instrument of a happy kingdom than a wise
and virtuous Counselor, who not unfitly may be termed (as Tacitus calls
him) the ornament of peace. Surely no less necessary to a state that would
flourish, than the soul to a body that would live. T^tit. lib 4: Hist. Dec^^
pasis.
The consideration of this happiness at this time makes both the Church and the
Commonwealth (dread Sovereign and right honorable Lords) to cast themselves at
your feet, and to lay open before your eyes, the dangers which they fear
(without your gracious assistance) may fall upon them. And howsoever many other
things of use and moment, are like wheels in this kingdom, to stir at your
Honors motion, yet Religion it self, in the habit of the Church, Religion that
has infinitely blessed you, and this kingdom, does earnestly entreat that
against all her enemies, public, or private, she may rest, flourish and be
fruitful, by your means; and howsoever the Commonwealth may now be an humble
supplia^t for redress of those grieuances that offend her, yet above all other
the Church had most cause to fear, that the time of a second consultation,
either through violence importunity and slight, might have been fatal to
her, or that the contempt of his voice in the days of peace, might have in
justice, procured a scourge from the almighty to cause her to remember whom
she had despised; the several times for all states (either to use or to know
their strength) are peace, and war, and the two professions that are the
safety of both are the military and the gown: It is no small care, nor
wisdom for a Realm, to know when and with whom to fight, and to think not
only upon defense (which were enough had it as much honor as safety) but upon
victory; surely in a kingdom careless of these men, the King may oftener
fight than overcome; and in his best success peradventure be more beholding to
fortune, than to his good Counsel; who surely of all other howsoever the
war be ended, is most innocent, and furthest from all blame, yet it is
strange to see how all men lay the faults of their inconsiderate folly, rather
upon any thing than upon themselves. So that ignorance of true causes, giving
the name to fortune, men are willing to hide that with obscuring the cause
(calling it chance) which only proceeded from their want of Counsel, which
wheresoever it is, it leaves no power either in peace or war, unto that
which they call Fortune; I confess sometimes there is a higher cause ( that
Justice which our sins awake) which takes strength from the best means, and
makes the errors of Princes and their Counsel, the foundation of public
calamities; but our purpose is not at this time to plead for any other saving
only for this Church; for the happiness whereof it seems that good laws
heretofore have not been so much wanting to us, as we to them. In penal
laws surely there is the greatest wisdom, of those that make them, and the
greatest presumption, of those that break them; so that for the safety of all
states, but especially of the Church, there are few things of greater advantage
tha^ the severity of Justice in the strict execution of penal laws; for it
is strange that some inconveniences should first cause them seem fit to be
made, and no disorder make them seem necessary to be observed; I think no
other reason can be given but this, that those laws do hire men with half
the allowance to be informers, which makes that good service to the
commonwealth, only in that respect odious, as being not the effect of justice,
and zeal, but the unconscionable desire of some covetous promoter, the best
remedy in this, will be to refer the benefit of these, to some public use
(for it is meet that virtue be maintained from the penalty of vice) and that
such be servants to the state in the execution of these laws, as are furthest
from partiality and pity, and yet least to be suspected for insatiable
desiring of their own gain. But there is a greater defect in most kingdoms,
(wherein this Church is an humble suter to your Highness) that it would please
your Grace (a thing absolutely hoped for at your Majesty's hands) as well to
reward those that deserve well, as to punish those that are dangerous to the
Church or the commonwealth; doubtless there is no politic consideration of
greater use, in a kingdom, that all parts of it may flourish, than the just
bestowing of these two, reward and punishment; seeing they are the spur and
the bridle, absolutely requisite for the right commanding of a whole Realm. And
surely it is a great question, whether to the happiness of a state it be safer
to want punishment for the evil, or rewards for the virtuous; But seeing all
kingdoms have greater feeling, and can better judge of what is evil than well
done, therefore punishments are by the law due to the one, whereas the other
is many times a matter of great suit, favor, and sometimes of infinite
corruption, which the best and most worthy observing, they are in all likelihood
furthest from being preferred, because least subject to such corruption. It was
an Honorable farewell the last Deanery that was given by Queen Elizabeth:
Honorab^e to him that procured it freely (as I heard) of his own motion;
Honorable to him that had it without al corruption (neither in acquitting of
him do I conde^n al others) and most Honorable to her, who no sooner heard of a
man worthy but was most willing to prefer him: There are few things of a
greater advantage to the Church, than to have the eyes of the Prince (if
sometimes his occasions divert him otherwise) drawn to look at men of very
special and singular deserte: who peradventure are neither so corrupt, so
fortunate, so seasonable, so well frended, nor indeed so any thing (saving only
worthy) that they can obtain that, which men of far meaner deserts (if not
easily) yet commonly do. And surely for us of the Church there is not out of
the University (excepting the Kings Chapel) a better stand for the
nobility, to take ^ew of such, than the Sermons at Paul's Cross: this being
sincerely looked at, virtue shall have incouragment to take pains, because
virtuous pains shall be sure to have recompense: a thing, where it wants
that want must of necessity fill all places with the worst, and the worst
disposed. So shall men that are worthy, and very excellent, be preferred either
slowly, or not at all, whilst every ignorant, dishonest, unprofitable flatterer,
shall depart laden with the best preferments, (the due recompense that belongs
to virtue:) for redress whereof I dare not take upon me to advise, only I wish
that they (especially the Honorable and reverend Bishops, Fathers of the
Church) who have any stroke, in the disposition of such preferments, as
appertain unto learned men, would be think themselves, what it is to respect
any thing, either above or besides merit, considering (as one well notes) how
hardly the world takes it, Master Hooker
when to men of commendable note and quality, there is so little respect had,
or so great unto them whose deserts are very mean, that nothing does seem
more strange, than the one sort because they are not accounpted of, and the
other because they are; It being every man's hope, and expectation that the only
purchase of greater rewards should be always greater deserts, and that nothing
should ever be able to pla^t a thorn, where a vine ought to grow, or to
commit that to a Fox, or an Ass, which requires the strength and the toil of
the painful Ox: the careful observation of this, (which the Church humbly
entreats at your Graces hands) shall root out all Idolatours from your lands;
banish all Heretics from Christ's fold, which steal in like ravenous wolves;
discover those Anabaptists who stir up contentions to hinder Religion, labor
to have magistrates contemned, inueying against the lawful ordination of our
Clergy, accounting them to be but Scribes and Pharisees, Idle, have too great
livings: flatterers of the Civil Magistrate, saying the reformation of the
Church, is not spiritual enough and perfect, and their unhallowed and private
conuenticles are more holy, making their pretense of all, the purity of the
Gospel; these pretend gravity, reprehend severity, speak gloriously, and
all in Hypocrisy: these daily invent new opinions, and run from error, to
error: their wilfulnes they account constancy, their deserved punishment
persecution; their mouths are ever open to speak evil, they give neither
reverence, nor titles, to any in place above them; in one word the Church
cannot fear a more dangerous and fatal enemy to her peace and happiness, a
greater cloud to the light of the Gospel, a stronger hand to pull in
Barbarism, and poverty, into all our La^d, a more furious monster, to breed
contempt, and disobedience in all states; a more fretting Cankar to the very
marrowes and sinews of this Church, and kingdom, than the Anabaptist; who is
proud without learning, presumptuous without authority, Zealous without
knowledge, holy without Religion; in one word a dangerous and malicious
Hypocrite. Sundry of these m^nifest and violent disturbers of the peace of
this Church and the Commonwealth, were banished from amongst us in the days
of out late Sovereign, we hear they are returned; they make petitions, they
hope for favor. Consided (great and mighty Prince) (right Honorable Lords and
all ye whom it may concern to defend this state) that now is the time to make
and execute laws against them: for these are more dangerous than other
Heretics, because they are transformed into the shapes of some amongst us; The
Church of England, which lies prostrate at your Graces feet, desires not to
be favored in her errors, not to have her corruptions warranted by authority,
to have stains not washed, because she has had them long: to have idolatry
and superstition harbored in her bosom: to be loade^ in her Religion with the
inventions of man and unhallowed Ceremonies, to be supported with a profane
Hierarchy, an usurping dominion: to be poisoned with humane learning, to be
murdered with Idle, and unpreaching Ministers; but she humbly entreats,
(showing her wounds, with tears in her eyes, sights in her heart, humility in
her whole behavior) that she may be defended, protected, and armed in that
truth, which Christ and his Apostles have taught her; which Queen Elizabeth
has Cherished and maintained in her: which the earth has wondered at, and
heavens have blessed; that her beauty may not be defaced under pretense of
washing: that she may not be left naked of her comely, decent, and Religious
ceremonies: that the government of her Bishops, (ancient, warrantable, and
safe,) may not be taken from her; that her schools may flourish with all
sacred, and Heathen learning: that her Ministers may be painful and liberally
maintained; and last of all, that the Liturgy, so virtuous, so holy, for which
so many Martyrs of hers have dyed, restored in the days of King Edward,
continued in the gracious and happy days of Queen Elizabeth, may by your
Princely authority (seeing all the learned of your kingdom are ready in the
defense of it) be strongly and irresistably maintained against her enemies; so
shall we account it a second birth day to our country: Ps. 83.3.
a day of grace and salvation wherein God has sworn by his holiness that he
will not fail you: and therefore to this end has prevented you with the
blessings of goodness and set a crown of pure gold upon your head, Ps. 21.3.
a day wherein the Nations that are round about us, shall say as Hyram when he
heard the words of Solomon; blessed be the Lord this day, which has given unto
David a wise Son over this mighty people; 1. King. 5.7,
Unto Queen Elizabeth an Heir of her own house and lineage, full of Religion,
wisdom and understanding; so that we may truly say (as they did) doubtless
we have seen straung things this day; strange to our country, to ourselves,
to our enemies, to have neighbors, Luke. 5.26.
to our prosteritie; for which our hearts burn within us (and shall for ever
with feruencie of devotion for your highness safety) our mouths are filled
with laughter, and our tongues with joy; and we must needs confess with the
Prophet David, The Lord has done great things for us already whereof we
rejoice; for which we entreat the heavens to rejoice with us; the earth to be
glad, and the Sea to make a noise, and all that therein is, the compass of the
round World and they that dwell therein; for by this means innumerable benefits
are common unto them; to the Heaven a multitude of Saints, to the earth peace,
to the Sea Treasure, to the fields plenty, for God has broken the rod of the
wicked, and the whole land is at rest: and surely if ever Nation of the world
had cause either to hope for happiness to this Church and Commonwealth, or to
give thanks unto the Lord, and to that end to fall low upon our knees before
his footestoole, it is we; to have a King, but which is greater happiness, of
the same blood: nay more than that, of the same Religion: but most of all,
without bloodshed, and especially ( Then) when all the politikes of the world,
had set our period, and rung our passing Bell: even the^ by your Highness
means the Lord himself (for we must al acknowledge that it was his work)
delivered our soul from death, our eyes from tears and our feet from falling:
our soul from bodily, and spiritual death, our eyes from tears, arising from
our danger, (nay from our holy tears for our late Sovereign:) and our feet
from falling into troubles, which then were present: into sin, which then was
likely; into blindness which then we feared: into shame, which we all
deserved: into misery, which many hoped: but we say again the Lord has done
great things for us already: and greater, and far greater shall do, if we be
not unthankful: and therefore howsoever thou art, either Jesuit, or Priest,
Anabaptist, Protestant, or Atheist, which say in thy heart, let us make
havoc of them altogether, thou shall so dianly consume and perish, and come
to a fearful end: and the Church shall continually entreat, at the hands of
the Lord of heaven, and humbly before the Throne of your gracious Majesty, for
protection against her, and all your adversaries, saying, O deliver not the
soul of the Turtle Dove unto the multitude of the enemies, and forget not the
congregation of the poor for ever; Ps. 75.
look upon the covenant, for all the earth is full of darkness and cruel
habitations; O let not the simple go away ashamed, but let the poor and needy
give praise unto thy name: A rise (O God) maintain thy own cause, remember how
the foolish man blasphemeth thee daily: forget not the voice of thy enemy, the
presumption of them that hate thee, increases ever more and more. Amen.

FINIS.
This Epistle following is here annexed, and thought fit to be Printed because
the Dedication of this book was first intended unto the late right Honorable
and right Reverend Father the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace.

To the most Reverend Father in God, my very good Lord, the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury his Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all England.
WHat benefit (Right Reverend) this Church has received by your Graces means,
(God bessing your Counsel under the government of two great Princes) as this
age present does sensibly perceive, so the memory thereof shall be honorable in
the time to come. For when the vertuons Government of our late Sovereign, had
banished from all parts of her Kingdom the Tyranny and superstition of the
Church of Rome, some men (fit instruments to disturb the peaceful happiness
of this Land) fearful as it seemed of the dangers that might follow, and
impatient of that form of government which mercy and wisdom had planted for
the Churches safety, labored by means, over violent, and unholy, to bring in
(perhaps from the partial love to the orders of those Churches which
comfortably refresht them in the time of banishment) a presbiteriall
Discipline; both of them (notwithstanding) following a diverse shape of the
Ecclesiastical state in diverse times; the one in peace, the other in
persecution, neither of them both, doubtless, (circumstances being weighed)
either warranted by truth or answerable to these times; The one laboring, to
ouerload us, with an intolerable burden of humane traditions (polliticke
inventions to make an outward greatness whilst inwardly Religion must needs
^aile) the other to strippe her, as naked as the day wherein she was first
borne; discouraging her teachers, by robbing them of honor and maintenance;
traducing that learning, wherein many of our Reverend Fathers were equal to
any in any part of the world besides, and in stead of these, making the Church
to do Penance for her wontonnesse in the days of superstition, being left
unpitied, desolate, ignorant, and without honor; all their purposes tending to
this end, to make us had in dirision of all those that were round about us;
Thus these two enemies in our own bosom, looking both of them with envy at
your happiness, and with Ielosie at that favor, which we might be suspected
to bear toward either of them; their discentions were not so violent to each
other, as they both were cruel and dangerous to our peace; as if Ephraim, and
Manasses, had made a truce, and both of them concluded to devour Judah; At this
time your Lordship (for laws and authority had restrained the one) undertook
the defense of this Church Government, against the other; wherein doubtless if
your great wisdom and moderation, had not like another Athanasius, endured
the fury and rage of this unbridled multitude, We might ^^stly have feared,
that disorder and barbarism would have tyrannously possessed long since, the
worthiest and most beautiful parts of our whole land. And as doubtless it was
happy for the Church that you undertook by writing, the defense of this
cause, (seeing no man could have done it either better, or with less
exception) so the day of your admission to the Sea of Canterbury, is, and was
(in all likelihood) (next unto our late Sovereign) the forciblest means, and
the best security, this Church then could hope for to procure her peace;
neither can the Clergy of this land, but in duty and thankfulness, offer up
continually, their Zealous and devout prayers, for all blessings to come down,
and light, and rest upon his sacred Majesty, and upon his Royal posterity to
many thousand generations, for those Princely favors, which his Highness
extending to you, gives, as undoubted assurance to all us, of the peace,
prosperity and happiness, of this Church; I have often with my self thought,
that the greatest riches and most to be valued, which our late Sovereign left
unto his Princely Majesty with the lawful inheritance of this kingdom, was a
learned and devout Clergy; A wise and Religious Counsel; An Honorable, and
Ancient Nobility; Valiant and discreet leaders; rich and loving Citizens;
painful and diligent husbandmen; In one word, a people not in any Virtue
Inferour to any Nation of the earth; and for Loyalty, and obedience (be it
spoken without envy) above them all; yet in the happiness of all this, there
have not been since wanting, which earnestly have sought to overthrow the
state of this Church; We know not their Intentions, the world sees they are
cunning to do, and to speak evil; and whatsoever may seem available to
further their cause, wants not the best advantage, that any opportunity can
give unto them; in which respect it is all our duties, who desire the peace of
this Church, and prosperity of the Commonwealth, no way to be wanting, to the
reasonable, Just, and honest defense of a good cause; In regard whereof, though
by many degrees I am the unworthiest of a great number, who have, and are
ready, to write in the defense of this Church (the adversaries in this cause
having received the first and greatest Wounds from your pen) yet my care
amongst the rest was, to employ my labor, according to that ability which God
has given me, in the modest defense, of the Government of this Church. Which
having been handled so often, and so learnedly heretofore, it ought not to
seem strange to any, and I hope, will be pardoned at your hand, if we gather
but the gleanings after those, that plentifully have sown, and have reaped
before us. Whatsoever my labor, and travel has been in this, it is due unto
your Grace, whose manifold, continued, and undeserved favors, together with my
private duty, challenges me and my whole service, by a greater nearenesse,
Leu. 23.11.
than that Law; ye shall bring a sheafe of the first fruits of your harvest
unto the Priest. Thus heartily desiring your Lordships Favorable acceptance of
this pains, how small soever, with my continual prayers, for the long
preservation of your Graces health, and Honor, to the comfort of a great
number, and the singular blessing of this Church, even through the mercies of
him, in whom we all live, move, and have our being, I humbly take my leave.

Your Graces in all Duty. WILLIAM COVELL.

Faults Escaped.
In Epist. Didte. Line the 1. for the Word Read the World. Page 4 Line. ^1 for
blould(...) boldnesses p: 5 l. 2: for Vsull r. Usual p. 6 l. ^^. for to ^amer
to the same p 7. (...) 2. for A^henian r. Athenians. p 8. l. 8 for outward r.
Outwardly. l. (...) for W^res r wars. l. ^7 for these word r. the sword. p.
9. l. 9. for as 1 is. l 22. for inhabit r. enable, l. ^3 for to r. of l. 38.
for nor least r nor of least p 13. l. 2. for putrified r. purified p. 15. l.
vlt for but time r. but in time. p. 16 l ^. for per^aps. r. perhaps. l. 9 for
g^eauent geauen l. 26. for Cod r. God p. 18. l. Vlt. for to the rest r. to reft
p. 20 l. 1. for Eternal r. External. l. 30. for a little r. so little. p. 11.
l. 21. in ma^g for Pennies r. Penries p. 26. l 12. for cerefull r. careful l.
14 for continue. r. convince. p. 27. l. 5. for were 1. we are l. 31 for with r
which p. 50 l. 7 for only r. one. l 24 for receive. r rcuiue. l. 25. for
dwiseome r. wisdom p. 51. l. 3. fercentention r. contention. p. 52. l. 6. for
Propanenes r. Prophanenes. l 9. for Redemption r. repetition p. 53. l. ^1 for
fruction r, function l. 13. for their r her p 56 l. 18. for them r t^en. p. 59.
l. 2. for her r. their p 6^. l. 17. for continued, r. contemned. p 62. l 27.
for of r and p. 67. l. 27. for vscan r. us ^ ca^. p. 82. l. 28. for Grayer r.
Gray. p. 83. l. 15. for they that r. that they p. 85 l. 37. for given r.
giving. p. 124 l. 5. for mediation r. meditation. p. 125. l. 11 for disuict. r.
distinct. p. 16 l 9. for vluen r. when.p. 127. l. 29. for exart. r. exhort. p.
129. l. 34 for were r. we are. p. 134. l. 34. for both. r loath p. 137. l. 34.
in marg. for par^re r parere. p. 143. l. 22. for person r. persons. l. 26. for
being r^ bring p. 144 l 6, for either the other r either, the other. l. 33. for
occafion r. occasion. P. 145. l. 8. for us r. as. p. 146, l. 34. for thought r.
though. p. l. 147. 19. for reverent. r. reverence l. 29 for others r. either p.
162. l 2. for Pulralities r Plural; p. 164. l. 26. for Extragaua^ts r.
Extrauagants p. 165. l. 19. in marg. for co^mumis r. communis l 29. in marg,
for quam vis r. quamuis. p 189 l 13. for Codly r Godly, l. 17, for disented r.
dissented l, vult for Ghurches r. Churches, p. 186. l. 27. for Vgre r. ^rge p,
187. l. 23. in marg. for Cominis r. Communis p. 190 l. 7. for Mamerces r.
M^merc^s, p. 191. l, 17. for the the first r. the fifth, p. 192, l. 33 in ma^g.
for Disperandi r. desiderandi, p, 194, l. 27, for abased, r, abu^ed. p. 196, l.
14, for patience r. patience. l, 15, for council r, counsel p. 197. l, 14.
for chieffly r, chiefly,


