A TREATISE AGAINST TRAITORS. Meet for all faithful Subjects in these
dangerous days. Taken out of the 40. Chapter of Ieremye, the 13, 14, 15, 16.
verses, and the 41. 1, 2, 3, 4. Made and published for the benefit of the
Church and common wealth of England: by Samuel Cottesford Minister and
public Preacher of the word of God.

Proverb. 17. 14. The beginning of strife is as one that opens the waters:
therefore ere the contention be meddled with, leave off.

AT LONDON Printed by E. A. for William Holme.

To the most Reverend Father in God, John by the divine providence, Archbishop
of Caunterbury, Metrapolitane of England his grace, and one of her Majesty's
most honorable privy Counsel, Samuel Cottesford, wishes everlasting
felicity.
I Am not ignorant (most Reverend Father in God) how dangerous a matter it is
to publish anything to the common view of the world, more dangerous by far
then all the aduenterous traffiques made by Sea, into the Indian coasts for
gold, for if therein God give success and prosperity, their adventures once
made and travails safelye ended, their great perrilles and dangers they have
been in: after nine days wonder (as we say) shall be scarce spoken off. But the
case stands otherwise with them that shall put themselves upon the multitude,
whom if they either by their public preaching or writing shall not affect,
they shall be sure to bear the skarre of their reprochefull tungs to their
graves, and hardly be thought off all their life after, let them in the setting
down of the truth bear themselves never so uprightly: Such is the misery of
our days, so great are the discretions of minds, the diversities of
judgments, and the over speedy taking of matters to hurt, without weighing
before hand, or advised counsel taking before resolution, contrary to Solomon
his judgment: who says, Stablish thoughts by counsel. The consideration
whereof, partelye has long stayed me from attempting anything, as also mine
own insufficiencye in comparison of many others more fit for this work: yet
by the matter which in this tretise I have handled, wherein I have had some good
times deliberation, at length thus far J have been drawn, not in vanitye of
mind, as delighted to hear my self, as perhaps some will not stick to
judge, whose misiudging affections as of many others of our time I not
weighing, being men heady and preposterous, some of them being carried by a
proud conceit of themselves: others led in respect of persons, according to
favor, not weighing the truth for it self sake, which causes that many of
them in stead of light, have taken hold of darkness and walk therein: and in
stead of the simple truth, have waded over head and ears into foul and
abominable errors. The reason therefore as I suppose is this, because he that
pleases to run, before he can well go, nay scarce creep, such as are our
multitude: shall stumble dangerouslye and that most unrecoverably, I speak it
J say, in regard of the people of our days, and those also who pretend
conscience of religion before others, who, how offensiuelye so ever themselves
walk before men, it matters not in their own judgment, so they can find but
one dart to cast at the minister, and have never so little skill to comptroll
their teachers, whom though we are not to separate from being but weak in
faith, yet when a case of controversies disputable shall be, they are to be put
aside. Romans 14. 1. Eum vero quifide est infirmes assumite non tamen ad
certamina disceptationu^, etc. Him that is weak in faith take unto you, but
not for controversies of disputations: such are they that speak evil of those
things which they know not, and in the things they know naturallye, as
beasts without reason they corrupt themselves: as says Jude. Such they are as
no kind of teachers can long satisfy, whose affections therefore in laying
forth the truth to follow as concerning pleasing of them is mere folly:

But if we will stand upon pleasing of men, (and men pleasers, ministers in any
wise may not be) except it be in matters tending to edification, according to
the rule of Th'appostle Romans 15. 2. We shall not please God, of which people I
may say again as a certain heathen Poet spoke of the people of his time.

(...)
Haud cunctis rector Olympi.
Sieve pluat, seu non Jupiter ipse placet.
That Jove himself in heavenly Sky,
that rules the world in earth over all:
Whuher rain he gives, or none, thereby
all for to please, displease he shall.
Some such there be, who having snatched here a piece and catched there
another, in holes and corners are (it is wonderful to hear) become great
teachers amongst them selves, utterly despising the assemblyes of God in our
Church, and have desired to be famous: but I fear me according to the fame of
him that got a name by burning Dianaes Temple even Herostratus, these do not
seek to get themselves a name by so tolerable a matter as the burning the
temple of Diana of the Ephesians, the vanity of the Gentiles, but by laying
waste of the whole Church of God in a land, crying against it with the Papists:
no church, no church in England say they, no true church: Besides men they be
proud, arogant, malicious, and of railing spirits against the pastors and
teachers of the land, especially, whose amendment in the Lord J wish,
admonishing them out of Th'appostle Paul to Titus 3. 2. That they blaspheme
and rail upon no man, knowing this to be true, that the same Apostle. 1. Cor.
6. 10. affirms of them, that neither thieves, neither covetous persons,
neither Drunkards, nor raylers shall inherit the kingdom of heaven: concerning
the which argument, J refer the reader over to the Sermon your grace made at
Paul's Cross, extant yet and open to the view of them that desire to walk in
a peaceable obedience to God and his Maiestrates: as for the rest unto whom
Gods peace is a burden, I leave them to the Lords time, wherein he shall in his
mercy humble them to see their errors: before whom to teach, and to whose
view to publish ought, I may say, or at the least the whole ministry of our
Land with Cassidorus upon the 39. Psalm. ver. 1. Quis est hominum sic tantus vt
si inter aemilos loquatur: nullum eius verbu^ incurrat aliquam quaestionem?
What man is he so warye, that speaking amongst envious persons and contentious,
some one word or other of his shall not be drawn into some question? Of these
questionaries and genealogy men, a matter in respect of circumstance, rather
then of substance or age is full whom I would to wit, that I neither do
improve honest and godly conference upon the Scripture touching faith, neither
yet the profitable use of the genealogies so far as they do edify: but all
curious and needless questions, which while some do seek egerly after, they
loose the substance of the Gospel, the doctrine of faith in Christ, of
regeneration and new birth, the effect of the spirit of God by the word,
against whom may be justified even against the curious questionaries of our
age, the saying of Grigor. Lib. 8. Moral. Nonnulli dum plus exquirunt
contemplando quam capiunt vsque ad peruersa dogmata erumpunt, and dum veritatis
discipuli esse negligunt humiliter magistri erroris fiunt. Many (says he)
whilste they ouerbusie their heads to seek out more then they do either well
conceive or understand: they break out into perverse opinions, and in humility
they neglecting to be disciples unto truth, they become great Clerks and
master teachers of errors: of whom whilst amongst many of their points they
stand in this one: of calling, choosing and ordeining Ministers: they omit in
the mean time all teachers and teaching, especially all other that are not of
their own choosing, and so with Aesops Dog, whilste they snatche (not that I
speak it in contempt of the Church ordinance concerning that point) after
shadows, in comparison J may say, they leese the substance, by whom J could
wish, that this one thing were considered, spoken though by a Heathen. Aliud
estaliquid suadere quod faciun dum sit aliud far quod recte mutari non
potest. It is one thing to persuade a matter to be done, and an other thing to
tolerate that which rightly or conveniently cannot be changed: Other people
there are, whom our days do breed, whose eyes the God of this world has
blinded, unto whom the ministry of the word is but vile, being in their eyes
as dung, which yet if we were as the fat dung is to the barren ground, it were
well and profitable for them, and we could be contented so to be accounted,
conditionallye that our doctrine might make their barren hearts more fruitful:
these are they that can make some reckoning of the truth, so long as their
profit be not spoken against. Near they be of alliance to Lisander the
Lacedimonian, who affirmed by mouth that truth was to be preferred before
lies, but in the valuing of them together according to their worthiness, he made
reckoning of them more or less, according as they brought gain to the cofers:
unto these of so many sorts, so diversely minded, if a man should seek to
frame himself in every respect, in attempting any thing that might make either
to the glory of God, or the benefit of his Church it would cause him to give
over his travail even in the very mid way: To omit therefore the consideration
of all sorts of people, with whom your grace in experience is better
acquainted then my self, I having already borne the burden of their reproaches,
and to leave them (if so be they will vouchsafe it) to the Treatise it self,
which I to this end in a loving affection to all (if it may be so accepted)
have presumed to publish that all degrees of persons, might thence learn how to
bear themselves toward their Soueraign especially: as also toward all other
inferior powers: and then how every one is likewise to wa^k^ to the help and
mutual comfort each of other: which work of mine in this vocation of my
ministry not so publicly profitable, being the first fruits of my labors,
if not untimely (I hope) I have referred over to the protection of your graces
name, and honorable credit, presuming thereupon in regard of the greatness of
your late honorable kindenes offered for my good.

To omit to speak of other your virtues of learning, knowledge and wisdom,
together with your great care, love and affection toward the learned in all
arts, especially in the ministrye of the word of God, approving themselves
painful in their callings, and studious of the good and peace of the Church:
Of these I spare to speak, least J be affirmed to flatter, wherein J wish not
Dionisius his medicine provided for Democles that notable flatterer, in his
Court: but also with David as it is in the 12. Psalm, 3. ver. The Lord cut of
all flattering lips, and the tungs that speak proud things. The which in most
humble manner I crave at your graces hand, to accept according to a true
meaning, and as a testimony of my thankful heart: the argument is of the
discovery of treason, the manner of it is historical, in the which, wherein I
have failed, I refer my self over to your graces censure, not doubting but
whatsoever oversight either in the matter or manner has passed me, it will
please you to make thereof a charitable construction.

Thus desiring God (who has unto the principal place of our Church in respect
of government advanced you by and under her highness, upon her special favor
(whom God long continue) that according to the riches of his grace, you may
bestow all your knowledge, wisdom, power, and authority, in setting up the
kingdom of Christ Jesus, by the preferring of the ministrye of the word,
amongst his people: to the beating down of the kingdom of Satan, by
supplanting all errors and corruptions yet remaining in the church, to the
uttermost of your power, that therein God being glorified, the church being
bettered, corruptions reformed, ecclesiastical censures rightlye and uprightly
executed, all controversies in causes of the church through Satan's malice
first begun and yet continued amongst us: by your grace, as the chief means
thereof and the rest of the reverend Fathers of our church, if it might please
God in his mercy so to woork it, being at the last yet determined: and then
your own conscience before God and men freely discharged.

Finally, that name, honor, credit, glory, and beauty of this world being so
ended: you may reap increase of true glory, and that everlasting, in the
salvation of your Soul, to your endless felicity in the world to come.
Woodgrange in Westham in Essex, the 6. of November. 1591.

Your graces most humble to command in the Lord, Samuel Cottesford Preacher.

To the right honorable W. Web. L. Mayor of the City of London: the right
worshipful Sir Richard Martin Knight, and to all the rest of the Aldermen of
the said City: Samuel Cottesforde wishes increase of all spiritual and
temporal blessings in this life, and ever lasting happiness in the world to
come.
RIght honorable and beloved in the Lord, having had the greatest part of my
maintenance or my studies in that your houourable City, as also spent some
time of my public ministry there: in carrying therefore some loving
affection thereunto, could not otherwise satisfy my self, being held in
conscience, bound in some duty to some of the same place of government in
your City, but show forth in outward appearance, some token of thankfulness,
thereby to remove that common blot of ingratitude, which to be guilty off, I
account it with him that said: Omnia dixeris, stingratu dixeris. The cause
that moved me to this, from whence in no wise I could be removed, was the
matter in this treatise, which concerns most those places where greatest
assemblies are, such as is your honorable City, and besides it none like in
the Land. May it please your honor therefore in a word, the matter of this
treatise is, of the duty of every subject for the discovery of treasons and
traitors, set forth under an example in the holy Scripture, whence this
treatise is drawn, as in the treatise itself may appear: And truly as I
consider the perilous estate of our Church and commonwealth, by reason of some
factions people both in the one and the other, whereof your City is not
utterly void I fear: I cannot but humblye admonish you (if ever) now as you
will approve your selves good watchmen and Shepheardes, to take heed and as
Solomon Pro. 27. 23. says: Be diligent to know the state of the Flock, and
take heed to the heardes: Which howsoever it is to be referred to us the
watchme^ and Shepherds over your souls, yet is it an instruction not
impertinent unto you that are governors: and if it concernal governors (as it
does) so most of all you my Lord and the rest of your brethren, because your
City waxes every day more populous (and shall I say more vicious the^ other)
if I do so affirm, I think your selves will join with me in the same: for
the multitudes, flocks, companies within that your City, if a man do but
view your theaters and public places of resort for vanity, idleness,
pilferye, adultery, cousonage: what flocks in the feeldes? what thronges in
your streets? what resort to your Tauerns, Tabling houses, places of dicing,
carding and gaming? what matches in bowling allies? to consideral these
together it is a wonder to see, what companies of poor lying in every street,
it will make a Christian heart bleed to see it: besides, what crying out of the
poor that are honestly minded in every corner of your City for want of
work, utterly void of any stock thereby to maintain the necessities of
themselves and their families, and very few or none at all that regard to
provide in speed for it. Thither also (because your City is the place of the
largest receipt, where the whole cause of the Church and Commonwealth, in cases
of justice is handled: according to the Terms thereunto appointed) under
color hereof, men of no business, of no calling, idle, unprofitable, wicked and
utterly godles, thither do they fly making it their refuge, coming thither
in flocks and swarms, not as p infull Bees by their honest labor to bring
honye into the Hiue, but as idle drones, seeking to destroy that which others
have in the sweat of their brows most painfully gotten. Thither also the
companies of recusants when they cannot find harborough elsewhere, do they
repair, assuring themselves there to find birds of a feather, amongst whom
all the treasons h ue hitherto been hatched. Take heed therefore take heed,
seeing your charge is so weighty and your burden so great: have an eye to your
City, look well to your wards, watch and ward over it, never more need,
restrain wickedness in all without respect of persons. For alas your city
swarms wtth Atheistes, papists, sectuaries: look diligently for Gods glorious
sake, for her majesty's sake, for the safetye of your honorable City and
people therein: let not any English Seminary, Italianated or rather Hispaniated
as I may say, let not any such rest there in any peace: as you have been
faithful and careful, as the days grow more dangerous, be you so much the
more watchful: take heed, for in your City do hide themselves the most
wicked of the Land, such bellygods, eatmeales, drunkards, whoremaisters,
dicers, carders, ruffians, pickethankes, quarrellers, cousiners, thieves, busy
bodies, malecontentes, harkeners after news, news tellers, forgerers, waiters
for other days, dislikers of the time present, neither liking the Church, nor
favoring the Common wealth, neither loving God, nor caring either for prince
or Country: factious, seditious, vicious, and what not? The unfaithfulness of
your servants, the unthriftiness of your sons in all prodigalitye and
lasciuiousnes, drawn on by brazen faced companions for the purpose, may teach
you what unclean birds are concealed and kept close within your City,
gaping after the pray thereof. These things being laid together, the
populousnes of your City on the one side, and the wickedness of the most of
these on the other: as you love God, tender his Gospel, honor her Majesty,
regard her life (wherein your care has not been inferior to any Subjects
in her Majesty's Dominions) so go one: as you regard the souls and bodies of
your selves and your sons and daughters, your menseruantes and maideseruants:
and as good fathers of the Common wealth, respecting the peace and prosperitye
of your Citizens: take heed, keep watch diligently, have your eyes in
every place, and over every person, and as your selves will not favor any of
these enemies to the state, the decay of the Church, the bane of the Common
wealth: so show not any favorable countenance to any that within your
precinctes shall be abetters of them.

Thus referring your honor and the rest of you the worshipful of the City,
to the charitable view of the treatise it self, I commend you over to the
protection of the almighty, who so direct you in your government to the glory
of God, the prosperity of her highness, and the safetye of your Commonwealth:
that finally after the long enjoying of your earthly temporalties here in this
woe lde you may finallye attain to the blessings of everlasting life with
your good God through Christ in heaven for ever. Westham, in Essex, this 6. of
November. 1591.

Your L. in the Lord to command, Samuel Cottesford Preacher.

A TREATISE AGAINST TRAITORS.
Taken out of the 40. Chapter of Ieremyes Prophecy, the 13, 14, 15, 16.
verses, and the 41. 1, 2, 3, 4.



scattered, and the remnant in Judah perish.



And the. 41. 1, 2, 3, 4. etc.



the men of war.

4 Now the second day that he had slain Gedaliah, and no man knew it.


SO infinite is the word of GOD according to David's praise of it, in the 19.
Psalm, as that no evil or good in the world, can hide or conceal themselves
from the light thereof, but that it manifests them in the holy Scriptures,
being by the holy men of God indicted, and to that end and purpose by the
Church from age to age retained. Yea there are no vices of any kind, how
abominable soever committed by the evil: nor christian virtues how
commendable soever done and practiced by the good, which the holy Scriptures
touch not, and the servants of God, in them, in one place or other teach not:
whereof amongst the rest, this place of Jeremiahs Prophecy is a manifest
witness, wherein the Prophet led by the spirit of God most learnedlye, both for
the matter, and compendiouslye for the manner does lay down and leave to all
ages unto the worlds end to be recorded, memorable historye, and a divine
canonized for the benefit of his church concerning Princes and people: teaching
Princes first, what care they are to have of their own safetye, and then how
to demean themselves toward their Cuntry and people: likewise laying forth of
people two sorts one gody, good and careful, for Prince, church, and Country:
the other, wicked and rebollious. The sum of which Historye is this.

Jerusalem with the King Zedekiah Princes and people thereof (it being
forewarned, the Jews insundrye of the Prophet Jeremiah his prophesies) is
taken captive by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel. Zedekiah his own eyes put out,
his nobles some slain, and other some carried as bondslaues into Babel. Yet
according to Gods promise, a remnant must escape, it escapes: The means of
their preservation and more security, is a Jew named Gedaliah by
Nebuchadnezzer, according to Gods providence for his people, in the time of
their woeful distress, made a Lord Deputy or Lieutenant, by which means some
time of breathing is had: But (lo) what ease breeds. Ease (says Solomon)
slays the foolish, certain busy bodies, or busy heads, rather become
Malcontents with the state, not bearing the yoke, though otherwise light and
easy in comparison of their other brethren: they set their heads on
mischief, one especial amongst them a Jew, becomes a Traitor, the text calls
him Ishmaell, he conspires Gedaliahs death, and to that purpose becomes an
hireling to Baalis King of the Ammonites. Now then Gedaliah is envied, treason
against him conspired: yet lo, God of a special love forewarnes Gedaliah by a
certain trusty hearted Subject, one above the rest named Johanan he reueales
it. But where God will punish, what warning will serve? The Prince Gedaliah
believes it not, the Danger he stands in foretold, he preuents not, for his
own safety he prouides not, and execution of justice upon this Traitor
demanded, he in any wise wills not: and what then befalles? contempt of Gods
warninges, immediately go before his judgments: Gedaliah the Prince is
forewarned, Johanan the trusty subject is not believed, Ishmael the traitor
thereby is hartened: Ishmael upon Gedaliah his security makes his advantage, he
looses no time, opportunity is watched, when the Prince in the midst of his
security may be taken: The good governor, he eats, he drinks, he is
merrilye feasting with this Archtraitor, and ten other Leaguers his associates:
Gedaliah the Prince in the midst of the feast being careless, Ishmael
kills: his captains and other of the Jews his servants at bourde he
butchereth: and four score other men zealous after Gods service, coming to
Gedaliah, he massacreth: and finallye himself being extremely pursued by
Johanan, flying unto the King of the Ammonites, escapes. This is the sum,
the parts are these three that follow.

1 The faithfulness of Johanan and his associates in discovering the treasons of
Ishmael: and his zeal in prosecuting him to death, and the causes thereof.

2 The incredulity of Gedaliah in not believing his faithful servant Johanan,
and the carelesnes over his own safety.

3 The execution of Ishmaels treason and the manner of it, etc.

The first part which is the faithfulness of Johanan, and those that were with
him in discovering the treason of Ishmael, is set down in these words of the
text.



and again.



Moreover Johanan, etc. First then the manner of Jonanan his disclosing of the
treason of Ishmaell is to be observed: Who (notwithstanding by Gedaliah he be
unjustly repelled, as though he had been a known flatterer, and a clawbacke,
not respecting whom nor how he slanders any, so he might insinuate himself
into favor by curry-fauouring of the Prince: of which sorts of persons,
Kings and Princes Courts are over fraught many times: yet Johanan his
conscience clearing him, and it being truth that he uttered, and hie time
that it were uttered: he therefore proceeds in prosecuting the discouerye with
a zeal, and therewith becomes an humble suter for speedye execution of justice
against the traitor. Wherein all sorts of men, whether of hye or low place, the
time especially and the glory of God, the good of the Church, the preservation
of the Prince requiring: What nippes, taunts, checks, and bitter reproves
soever are given thee, be it by Princes themselves, whose good the discovery
concerns: yet constancy in a known truth, by law of God, by law of nature,
and law of nations, requisite to be revealed, must firmelye be held: and in
that which may make for the preservation of the Church, Prince and Country,
thou must proceed, although it be with hazard of thy self, or of thine.
Heereunto may encourage thee, the boldness of Jacobs sons after their first
return out of Egypt, having left Simeon dearly beloved unto Jacob their
father, behind them, when necessity being imposed upon them, that so it must
be, that either Benjamin the youngest and the darling of all, must be taken
from Jacob their father, or else Simeon could not be recovered again, neither
durst they any more show their faces in Egypt, whose suit also was such to
their father, as that it had been as easy to have obtained a member of his
body, as the words of the text make mention Genesis 42. 6.
in the 42. chapter of Genesis. 36. Then Jacob their father said to them, ye
have robbed me of my children: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will
take Benjamin: all these things are against me. And although Reuben offered the
pawn of his two sons, even to the sword conditionally, yet Jacob replied,
saying: My son shall not go down with you, for his brother is dead, and he
is left alone: if death come to him by the way which ye go, then ye shall
bring my gray head with sorrow unto the grave: whose sharp words of a
father, and a Prince too (as he may be called in respect of the Church then)
had bin enough to have discouraged any, had he not been bold spirited, and
to have caused the suite to fall unto the ground: but the wayghtines of the
matter being such, and the preservation of Gods Church in Jacobs house now
requiring it, Judah also steps forth, who in renewing his brothers suit,
received some further checkes at Jacobs hand, as Ruben before had done: and
yet the extremity of the dangers wherein Jacob and his whole house stood,
being by him in the end thoroughly wayghed, the suit with much a do at length
was obtained.

Unto the which zealous and strict manner of proceeding in this, or such a like
discovery, wherein thou have not thy liberty, the perils and dangers
whereinto the safety of the Church, Prince and Country, by thy too remiss
dealing in so serious a matter, may be an argument of sufficient wayght to
draw thee.

But to leave the manner of this earnest prosecuting the cause of so great a
villainy (which yet may teach this age, which in bad things and concerning
private pleasure or profit, is bold enough, but concerning public affairs
tending to the benefit of Prince and Country, are soon snybbed) to be therein
more bold: and to proceed in the matter.

Moreover Iohanan and all the Captains of the host, came unto Gedaliah unto
Mizpah and said unto him: Know thou not, etc.

In the second place is to be weighed the phrayse of speech, Know thou not?
and the rather because herein he seems to be rude, uncivil, homely, and
preposterous, as though he knew not how to bear himself in Court in the
presence of a Prince. Know thou not? whereas in deed it is a speech very
forcible sent forth from a vehemence of spirit, studious both of the welfare
and preservation of the Prince, and zealous of the Princes not being
sufficiently careful for his own safety: as though he should say, it is a
rumor common, and in all men's mouths, concerning Ishmael his conspiracy, and
is it hid from thee whom it most concerns? is he so treacherous, so villainous,
and of so murdering a spirit, and do thou as yet harbor in thy bosom the
serpent that will sting thee to death? Know thou not, says he? art thou so
blinded in him? art thou so deceived by his dissembling? can thou not at any
time, either by face or countenance, or by his behavior or private conference
discry him? for to say the truth, it belongs to Kings and Princes, although
they according to Gods ordinance are by noble, wise, grave and learned
Counselors to be advised, yet themselves are to carry knowledge and wisdom
in their own breasts, whereby they may be able to discern spirits, and judge
causes, and discrie countenaunces if it were possible.

In deed good Counselors are the special props and pillars of Kings and
Princes thrones, and the only preservative of Countries, according to Solomon
Prou. 11. 14.
his speech in the 11. of his Proverbs. Where many Counselors are, there is
health. And again in the 15. Prou. Prou. 15. 22.
In the multitude of Counselors there is steadfastness. In the which most
divine sentences, the holy Ghost in his servant Solomon opposes himself to a
most devilish conclusion of Machiauill (to whom our age I fear, is overmuch
addicted) wherein yet he would seem to color out the matter with some show
of truth within his book entitled, Machiauilli princeps, he thus sets
down, Principi qui per se non sapit, recte ei consilia dari non facile posse,
unto a Prince not sufficiently wise of himself, it is no easy matter rightly
to give counsel or advise: his first reason is this. Perhaps it may be (says
he) that a Prince may well be governed that shall resign himself fouer to
some one of trust for that purpose: But he were like to be but a while quiet
in the same, because that protector of him will not stick forthwith by
violence to thrust him out of that his seat of government: Likewise he
improueth a Prince that shall suffer himself to be counseled of many, for
(says he) if an unwise Prince shall admit into the counsel of his affairs
more then one, they will seeldome agree in counsel, and he himself will be
far unmeet to reconcile them: and again (says he) they will be too
studious of their own commodities, as though a Prince, having some evil, as
amongst many, some such often fall out to be: must therefore abandon all others,
how good, wise and faithful soever, and so in the end he necessarily
concludes, that good counsayles must proceed from the Princes own wisdom,
and in any wise not the wisdom of the Prince to be derived from good
counsel: which conclusions of his, though they seem to be somewhat, yet are
they of no weight, for alas what Machiauels policies are, who that reads may
find even co^clusions abandoning all christian religion (which consists in
truth without dissimulation) they serving to no other end but to puff up
Princes with pride, and self love, and self lyking of their own wisdoms,
though they do turn in the end to the ruin of themselves, and of the state of
their whole Country. Indeed as Solomon Pro. 25. 2.
says in the 25. Pro. The Kings honor is to search out a thing, wherein his
meaning is not, as Machiauell in another of his speculatiue contemplations for
th'auoiding of flatterers says: that Princes shall proclaim by public
Edict, that no one of his friends or counselors shall persuade him to any
thing, neither confer with him of any matter, unless it be of that whereof
he himself shall offer voluntarilye to speak. Which opinion of his had his
first original in the very sink of Hell: and is contrary to the doctrine of
Solomon before mentioned, to the examples of all godly Kings, in the time of
the Law, and Christian Princes* since the gospel, who have always retained
about them wise, learned, and good counselors, but rather Solomon meant that a
King or sole governor should not so far adict themselves unto their vanities
and sensual delights, as not at all to examine the dealings yea of their
Judges and other inferior powers toward their people: but herein to spare
some time wherein both diligently and seriouslye they ought to see into both the
causes and persons, and so to hear and see into them, as that they might be
able to discearne between matter and matter, counsel and counsel,
judgment and judgment: and accordinglye to know what to leave, and what to
take, so farre-foorth (not as pleases themselves) but as they shall see serve
for the glory of God, the prosperity and safety of their own person, Church
and Country: to the fitting of them whereunto Moses in the 17. Deuteronomy. 18, 19.
ver. teaches what Deuteronomy. 17. 18 19.
ought to be the exercise of Kings and Princes continually for the increase of
their knowledge in all matters. So that to some purpose serves this plain and
blunt speech of- Jonathan, that thereby Gedaliah being warned, might take
knowledge of that which might keep him from capital danger, and his people
from utter overthrow: concerning whose faithfulness in discovery of this high
treason, we are taught especially the discharge of the duty of subjects to
their prince and sole governors, as also to all inferior magistrates: very
necessary to be laid forth in these dangerous days, wherein Satan seeks by
this most foul sin and abominable of treasons and disloyalties, without
remorse in every nation practiced and committed most villanously, to send many
thousands of souls to the devil. This then is the doctrine that we must every
one of us learn and lay up in our hearts, that is, that it is not sufficient to
abstain our hands from blood, but our hearts also from the consent of any
matter tending thereunto: the reasons to enforce this doctrine, may be first,
that the law of nature abhors it, whereby they that never knew God aright,
are made inexcusable, notwithstanding before him being led by the instinct
thereof only into a feeling and knowledge of the same: how much more then does
that sin become more sinful to us, who^ the law of nature not only directs,
but the written law of God also as a sound reason to draw us to an execrable
detestatio^ thereof, does by the ministry of the word, and by the power of the
spirit teach us, and the same God has included this sin amongst many others,
within the second table of those great and ten commandments, whereof the
negative precepts forbidding whatsoever vice, does infer the commanding
whatsoever contrary virtues: and again, whatsoever people amongst them
affirmative teaching and commanding any holy or christian virtue does thereupon
infer a flat forbidding of the vice contrary thereunto, as in one among the
rest, the 6. in number, being a negative precept, and aiming at the matter now
in hand) Thou shall not kill) wherein this point generally taught, that not
only he that lays violent hands upon a man, but he also that stops not
bloodshed when he may. Nay he that by negligence does omit the dutiful care
of preserving his neighours life, is a mankiller before God, and is by the law
of God so to be deputed and reckoned before men: to this purpose speaks
Solomon. Eripe raptos ad mortem, etc. Deliver the^ that are drawn to death,
and wilt not thou preserve them that are led to be slain? wherein the holy
Ghost censureth not only princes, Judges, and Magistrates, for suffering
(which falls out many times) the innocent to be punished unworthily: But all
sorts of men who not laying violent hands upon their neighbors to kill them,
but who seeing their neighbors in any sort distressed unto death, and for want
of comfort like to perish under their noses, when as they have not only a
sufficiency, but a superfluity rather, or outward blessings for their
relief, yea and not denying the same, but neglecting only and deferring to
help the^: of these it may well be said, though thou have not murdered with thy
hand, yet Tot occidisti quot Succurrere quum potuisses neglexeris, ofso many
have thou bin a cruel murderer, being distressed thou did meerlye neglect to
relieve them, when thou had sufficient thereunto: a very necessary thing
against the unmercifulness of these our days, and the hard har tednes of the
richer sort of people amongst us, who neither one way nor other can be brought
to that charitable consideration of their poor miserable and distressed
neighbors, ready to perrish even at their doors, either by the superfluitye of
their meats, drinks or cloth, to comfort them, or otherwise by withdrawing from
their own store some good portion of their gold and silver toward the setting
on work the swarms of men, women and children: that neither have meat,
drink, nor cloth in any good measure to feed and clothe themselves, neither
yet any thing to employ their labors upon, that thereby yet though they will not
freely give the^ to their releef, yet they might provide that by their means
at the least the poor by the sweat of their brows, under them might more
honestly and competently True then they do, whereunto each man is not only in
conscience bound by the law of God, and the law of our land by statute
provided, though by default of them who should see the execution of it, this
charitable duty be to the dishonor of God, in not providing against idleness
utterly omitted. Is this true in general between man and man, and is it not
more true against them, when not in outrage as too many of that sort our late
years have yielded forth (a fruit untimely) to pass over the acts done by
the like villainous minded in other nations, and to speak of those that at home
proudlye and presumptuouslye have attempted the same against the life of our
natural and most merciful Soueraign? is the not releeuing the distressed; the
oppressing of the widow and fatherless, the cruel withholding the hire from
the poor labourer, is the taking of thy neighbors pledge, the taking of Usury
of the decayed, and the labor of thy neighbor without wages, is this murder
with God? nay, as it is indeed to take pleasure at other men's miseries, is it
cruelty* and is not this then murder in the highest kind, to conseale a
pretended mischeef against a Prince, whose life is thy life, my life, or the
life (by Gods providence he will so have it) of all men within this and her
territory? Nay, shall the prince be culpable before God for not releeuing thee
with justice in any cause of thy distress, and will thou hold it to be
cruelty in a magistrate? when as it may be thou alone shall but suffer, or
some one house or family with thee: and shall not thou be reckoned in the
highest degree of murderers, who when it is in thy power by disclosing some
pretended mischief, against the state of a prince thou concealest it
altogether, or else disclosest it when it is too late. When as upon the safety
of a prince relieth the prosperity, peace, and security, of not an house, not
a Town, not a province, not a shire, not a land, but of many Lands and
Countries, Shires, and provinces, Towns and Cities, most populous. So that
you see the point to be observed, wherein those especially to whom especial
trust is committed in regard of their honorable places, in the name of God
are to be remembered in all humble and submisse duetye, that they for the
preservation of the prince, are to watch over the known enemies to the state,
Church, and country: such as usually have opposed themselves to Kings and
princes through all Christendom, being specially sworn Papists for the Popes
own side, such as have made it a special poi^t of their faith, the ground of
which their heresy rests upon that cursed counsel of Trent, which is, that
they may lawfully depose and any way overthrow by secret and open practices,
the state of any Christian prince professing the Gospel, of whom to speak
much, only by the way to their honnors is not needful, being already a
matter for the most part known, and laws against the same provided, to the
abating of their presumption and pretensed practices against the state present:
But also diligent watch by their honors, and all inferior Magistrates under
them must be kept, over that heretical sect of Anabaptists, who thorough
Satan's malice under a cloak of the Gospel, and a prepostrous zeal, do
wonderfully grow in the land: especially in those Cities and Towns populous,
where the word of God is most diligently preached: and if the question be
asked why there rather then else where, the answer is this:

Because there they do most of all arise and spring up, that the diligence of
the minister in preaching of the word, is no more cause thereof, then the truth
is cause of error. But rather the subtlety of Satan, who there more rages
then in any place else, because his kingdom is more near to the overthrow
then where ignorance reigns, and the kingdom of Christ is not preached at
all. Who although that they have not put forth, nor published that main point
or Maxim of the professed Anabaptists, which is utterly to deny the lawefull
essence or being of a Magistrate, yet have they daungerously sought, and still
do seek to infringe the authority of the supreme Magistrate, making more
reckning of their own meetings in private, and their subtle decrees made (as
we say) under a hedge, in every assembly of their own, then of any public
edict, law, or ordinance, made by public and lawful Princes, Magistrates,
Judges, Ministers, in a public and national assembly lawfully, in the name
of God met and assembled for the redressing of things amiss, either in Church
or common wealth. By who^ also it is to be feared, that that other point of the
Anabaptisticall co^munitie, a most devilish and damnable eliberty will be
retained, if God by the power of his word of the one side, and the Magistrates
sword on the other, do not speedily reclaym the^: who^ when they have given
themselves liberty to rail upon, not only the Church governors, but also
upon the civil Magistrates, in unlawful terms and most reproachful speeches:
what is to be feared they will do if they should grow to a head, if God in his
rich mercy do not vouchsafe them the sight of their gross and pestiferous
errors: and concerning those known, sworn, and purposed adversaries of the
present condition and state. Prouiso always being had that a true difference
be made between the good subject and the bad, and the one not to be taken for
the other, but the gilty person to be culpable of his own fact. That I may come
again to the word in Exodus chap. 21. to the admonishing of them that are
careful and forward, to be more forward. Moses in that place to great
purpose says, If an Ox gore a man or woman that he die, the Ox shall be stoned
to death, and his flesh shall not be eaten, but the owner of the Ox shall go
quitte. 29. If the Ox were wont to push in times past, and it has been
told his master, and he has not kept him, and after he kills a man or
woman, the Ox shall be stoned, and his owner shall die also. So dear unto the
Lord has the life of man in general been. How much more straight will he be
in taking account of the care that every man has had, especially them to whom
more then an ordinary care is committed of the safety of their Prince and sole
governor? But that this Treatise may be according to my purpose general, and
teaching all persons how to bear themselves in this case toward their
Prince: Solomon again in his book of the Preacher called Ecclesiastes,
speaks most excellently in the 10. Eccl. 10. 20.
Chapter, 20. verse. Curse not thy King no not in thy thought, neither curse the
rich in thy bed chamber, for the fowls of heaven shall carry the voice, and
that which has wings shall declare the matter. What say some to this, why
(according to the common proverb) thought is free, though a man dare not use
his weapon unto violence, nor his tongue to ill speeches, yet who shall stay a
man's thought? I answer thee, that the law of God, is made also for a bridle to
thy very thoughts, lusts, and against the very motions of sin, which before
that ever they come into the outward act, are then censured by the Lord, as
guilty of his wrath. When they do but make a proffer through Satan of
assaulting man's heart unto a consenting with them, so that in as much as man's
heart is the lodging place, resting seat and harborough for sin: it stands
with the Lords justice to give a law to the heart for to bridle and restrain
it with. Popery brooks not this doctrine, it holds the heart and affections
of man to be overmuch captiuated unto Gods law says it: yea Popery which is
wholly conversant in exalting the corrupt nature of man above measure, does
think this doctrine to be an over great abacement of so glorious a creature as
man is, and to set down a principle of theirs in a word and their reason
flat opposite to the 10. precept, which they never thoroughly understood,
this is their principle: Concupiscentia in Baptizat is non est peccatum, That
is concupiscence in the^ that are baptized is no sin, their reason is: Quia
stimulus est ad exercendam virtutem, because (say they) it is a spur to the
exercysing of virtue. Paul is utterly against them, For they that Gal. 5. 24.
are Christ's (says he) have crucified the flesh, with the affections and
Iustes thereof, to omit what he says concerning the same at large, proouing
it from himself in the 7. chap. to the Romans.

The thing then, that Solomon the pen man of the holy Ghost teaches, is that
so far must any person be from doing or speaking ill of the state of a Prince,
as that the very thought should be brought under the obedience of God, and
herein held captives unto his commandments. To this doctrine so many as
(having not the fear of God in their tongues only, but fearing him in their
hearts) will willinglye yield. To stand too much upon the thoughts of men,
to be brought under no further then it shall concern the matter in hand, I
hold it here needelesse. A little to examine the reason of the wise man who
affirms that the fowls of the heaven will disclayme thee, and thy thoughts
shall be discovered by them. A reason of great weight to move men to take heed
of treasons and concealements of them, making especially against the life of
the Lords anointed, wherein if men do but considerately mark the way that
God has taken of disclosing blood and bloody purposes, in causing (against
order of nature) dum and senseless creatures to rise up as proclaymers of
these villainies how closely soever don, and how privily so ever attempted, one
or all: the earth it self shall disclose Cains murder upon his brother,
rather then righteous Abels blood shall go unpunished, as is to see Genesis 4.
10. And the rather if we do consider the excellency and the high prerogative
that God has given to Princes above other me^, who herein do go far
beyond all others, in that together with others, they do not only bear the
image of God, but that more is, they do bear upon them the very glorious image
of his Majesty here on earth, yea this may be said of very Tyrants, that are
and possess the Psalm. 82. 6.
throne of Justice, as is Psalm. 82. 6. Dixi Dii quidem est is and filii excelsi
vos omnes, I have say de ye are Gods, and the sons of the most high: that is, I
have put upon you my sacred person, which you are to resemble upon earth
whilst ye rule amongst the sons of men. If this be so that a man has not
freedom of thought against a ruler of the people, how much then are they guilty
of capital crime before God and men, who do proceed not to disclosing, but to
counsel giving: not to opening co^spiracies, but to open practicing of them:
not to stopping a monstrous course of the shedding of the blood, and that of a
Prince: but to consenting, agreeing, plats laying, and joining hand in hand
with the ringleaders in such an evil, saying as Solomon, chap. 1. describing
sinners: Come with us we will lay Prou. 1. 10. 11.
weight for blood, etc. This is not with Iohanan to discover betimes the
treason of false hearted Jshmaell. But yet to make this matter more plain by
examples out of holy Scriptures. First then let us consider how God himself,
who could myraculously, and upon the instant have delivered Joseph: yet he
that has ordained means for the preservation of his servants, would not
without the means of discovery the danger of Joseph by the hands of his
Angel, as it is in the second Chapter of S. Mathewes gospel:

Mat. 2. 13.
Behold, the Angel of the Lord appears to Joseph in a dream, saying: arise
and take the Babe and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be there till I
bring thee word, for Herod will seek the Babe to destroy him. Wherein we see
the Lord preuenteth (by foretelling Joseph the danger he stood in) the
cruelty of Herod the King, that notwithstanding his rage exceeded to the
destruction of so many innocents, being babes and children, yet God in dispight
of him against whom, neither counsel, nor wisdom, nor strength prevails:
provided that the Messiah promised could not possibly by him be found out, but
was mightily preserved, to the glory of God; and the redemption of all Gods
chosen by his blood.

And as God used the ministry of a heavenly minister, even his Angel: whom
to this end God had ordained to the service of his son, in the discovery of
Herod's pretended evil to stop it: so likewise he says by the means of his
Prophets in former times, discovered evil pretended, and platformes laid for
the overthrow of his people, that his glory and power might be seen in their
deliverance. That I may remember unto you, first, the entire love of Jonathan
to David, when Saul oftentimes pretended his death. Sed Jonathan 1. Sam. 19. 1.
filius Saulis delectabatur Dauide valde, 1. But Jonathan the son of Saul
had a great favor to David. 2. And Jonathan told David, saying, Saul my
father goes about to slay thee: Now therefore J pray thee, take heed unto
thy self, unto the morning, and abide in a secret place and hide thy self. 3.
And I will go out and stand by my father in the field where thou art, and will
commune with my father of thee, and J will see what he says, 1. Sam. 20. 38.
and J will tell thee. And again in the 20. Chap. the discovery of Saules
mind being too ill toward David, was made by. Jonathan, by the shooting of
three arrows beyond David, where he warned him to stand to receive the
intelligence which afterward fell out, as in the 38. ver. of that chapter is
mentioned.

Now by the way, if it should be objected against Jonathan, that he did ill in
bewraying his father and his Princes secrets, neither did he therein show
any loyalty: it may be answered, that there was no want of duty on Jonathans
part to Saul, in the Lord, because the obedience of children to parents,
has his limitation, Ephesians. 6. 1.
as Paul Fphes. 6. 1. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is
right. And this act of Saul, Jonathan knew was against the law of GOD, and
could not be warranted by the law of man: Besides he did not commit any
disloyalty to Saul as he was King, for the discovery of the act to David,
because it neither was prejudicial to the state of the King, nor Country any
way. And again Jonathan knew that David sought the good of Saul his father
and not the evil: and again Jonathan knew that Saul was led with a
spirit of malice and envy, and not with any regard of justice in pursuing
David as a malefactor: finally, the Lord was between Jonathan and David in
the league of friendship couenaunted between them: and GOD it was who raised
up Jonathan a special instrument for David's deliverance from Saules
frenticke fury. Nay, had he not stayed Saules rage, and discovered it to
David, he had doubtless exceedingly sinned against the Lord and his Church.
But to proceed, we read in the holy History in the second of the Kings
the 6. Chapter, how 2. k. 6. 8. 9.
it pleased GOD to deal mercifully with his people Israel, when the King of
Aram warred against it: There could not be taken any counsel against Israel
by the King of Syria, but the Lord made it known to his Prophet Elisha, to
the overthrow of the King of Arams purposes, as the text makes it plain. 8.
verse. Then the King of Aram warred against Jsraell, and took counsel with
his servants, and said: in such and such a place shall be my Camp. 9.
Therefore the man of God sent unto the King of Jsraell, saying: Beware thou go
not over to such a place, for there the Aramytes are come down. These means
of the discovery of practices against Prince or Country, God has ratified
and ordained as presidentes for all people to lay up in their hearts, and to
follow when and as soon as they may attain to the notice of any such matter.
That I may speak of Huzhai, his faithfulness to David, in overthrowing
Achitophels counsel, and in disclosing the purpose of Absalon to Zadok and
Abiather the Priests, to the end they might speedily discover Absalons pretense
to the King, as it is am. 17.
in the second book of Samuel the 17. chap. verse 15.

Then said Huzhai unto Zadok and to Abiathar the Priests, Of this and that
manner did Achitophell and the Elders of Jsraell counsel Absalon: and thus and
thus have I counseled. Now therefore send quickly and show David saying,
Tarry not this night in the fields of the wilderness, but rather get thee
over, least the King be devoured, and all the people that are with him. To
omit many that I may with one other notable example draw to an end of this
first part. In the book of Hester is recorded a worthy example in the second
Chapter, the 21. Hest. 2. 21. 22.
and 22. verses. Jn those days when Mordecai sat in the Kings gate, two of
the Kings Eunuchs, Bighthan, and Teresh, which kept the door were wroth, and
sought to lay hands on the King Ahashuerosh.

And the thing was known to Mordecai, and he toldeit to Queen Hester, and
Hester certified the King of it in Mordecai his name: and Mordecai his act
was Chronicled for a remembrance of his faythfulnesse, as is to see the 6.
Ester 1. 2. And by the way to remember the mercy of God in discovering the
plats laid for the overthrow of Prince, people and country: and how he
approoueth this duty of subjects by the execution which he has brought the
traitor by conspiratours of our time unto, although to the praise of God, and
the glory of our wise Counselors finding them out, and of good subjects
bringing their villainies to light: yet to the everlasting shame and inglorious
reproach to the worlds end to be remembered, to Calender them out for memories
sake, some few of the famous in this action. The Earls of Northumberland and
Westmerland, L. Paget, Charles Paget, Throgmorton, Shelley, a little to refresh
the readers memory with calling to mind the practices of the late Babington,
Jones, Tichborne, and all the confederats of that time with others yet remaining
behind, attending her Majesty's merciful hand over the^, the discovery of whom
have been arguments of Gods infinite mercies to our land, may be arguments to
draw us on, being ready therein, to be more ready, it being a duetye that God
requires at our hands.

But let us return to the speeches of Iohanan, where he says, let me go I
pray thee, and I will slaye Ishmael the son of Nethaniah and no man shall
know it: wherein is further to be observed concerning Iohanan, that although he
was careful for the Prince, and zealous (not without cause) of the Princes
carelesnes of himself, yet would he not do that (alas to few such Captains
these days affordes) which in a matter justice requisite to be done, would
neither without the law, attempt it, neither yet would run before the
Magistrate in doing of it.

A very necessary thing to be observed in our age and time, wherein though
some Johanans are found, that regard to walk in the ways of justice: though
some Corneliusses that fear the Lord with their house, yet these some, are too
too feawe in comparison of those whom so long time of the Gospel might have
bred.

But not only they, but men of great knowledge forsooth so recconing
themselves, of great zeal also (of greater it may be then judgment) who in
seeking after good things, fail in the manner fowly, doing that which
beseemes them not to do, in regard they are but mere private, neither meet
for controversies, nor the deciding of causes, in question, neither armed with
either power or warrant from God himself immediatlye and extraordinarily,
which to look after is mere dotage: neither yet having any calling from men,
nor authority from the Magistrates: for let them know, that to do every good
thing is not lawful for every man: To preach, to minister the sacraments,
offices in the Church. to rule by the Sword, as a Magistrate, these all are
good things, lawful and commanded, but not all persons: To reform
corruptions in the Church being once known and discovered, concerning either
Gods service or manners of men in their conversation, a thing necessary
expedient, and hye time it were done, and yet this no private action, nor by
private persons to be done.

Yet alas what our miserable days have bred, every man and woman will see into
a whole state, and censure Prince, Ministers, Magistrates, and all persons of
each degree, and have exquisite knowledge in reforming others, and in the mean
time stark blind to see their own faults, and as ignorant as beasts in the
knowledge of reforming themselves: this is Satan's malice, this is the
corruption of our own nature.

This thing that Johanan urged, was good, necessary, and a thing most
convenient: namelye, that Jshmael might be executed for high treason, whereof
he certainlye knew he was guilty, but he would not in any wise proceed further
then behooved him, he discovered the villanye and the villain, the trecherye
and the traitor: he discouers it where remedy might and ought to have been had.
Further he proceeds not, God had called him to it: if any shall replye that
concerning the danger the Prince and people stood in, and that the state was
grown into such extremety, he therefore proceeded not so boldly, neither yet
so far as he might have done, and so thereby take occasion to censure his
manhood, as the unbridled hottespurres of our time, with whom there is but a
word and a blow, who it may be will not stick to say if the case had been
theirs, they would have cut off the traitor, and afterward required justice:
these are they who in every private cause persuaded themselves that the
quarrel cannot be euded without bloodshed, they have not learned this point:
first that courage, manhood, strength and valor, are to be bounded and
limited within the compass of the law of God: and as a man's life is not his
own to spill it at his pleasure, so neither is the blood of any other to be
spilt, except (God requiring it) the blood or life of a malefactor be lawfully
taken away by the magistrate, and for that cause he holds his hands referring
the execution of justice, and earnestlye requiring at the supreme magistrates
hands, who might or ought to have authorized him or some other to the taking
away of so vile a malefactor: And where he says (and no man shall know it) his
mening was, that he would so speedily dispatch the matter, as that before he
had done it no intelligence should be had, no interim for begging of pardons,
for it should seem that Iohanan feared that if the matter shouldbe too
publicly known, some stop would be made of justice, and great suit for an
arrant Traitor. The days belike then, were like to these days now, wherein
though a man be known to be a most filthye person, a bloody murderer, a
sorcerer, an idolator, yea a traitor too perhaps: some one or other in a land,
will in this interim of justice not spare, and that to become a most earnest
suter for him, and therefore says Iohanan, give me authority, seal my
commission, let me but go, and I will run to dispatche such a monster. Now
follow the reasons of his zealous demand of justice at Gedaliahs hands,
which are two.

The first, a reason expostulatorye, from the danger the Prince himself, stood
in these words: Wherefore should he kill thee? The second drawn from the
danger of the whole body of the Jews, in these words: That all the Jews
which are gathered to thee should be scattered, and the remnant in Judah perish?

First then mark the speech of Iohanan, who seeing the Arch traitor to be in
such credit, does expostulate the matter with the Prince, and in a chiding
manner does take him up very roundly, still bisseuering his accusation to be
just: Wherefore should he kill thee? how absurd a thing is this that thou so
wilfullye stand in? art thou wearye of thy welfare? art thou wearye of thy
life, and of the lives of thy people? will thou hold thy throat while this
villain cut it? why should he do it? and he will do it, assure thy self of
it, if being in time forewarned thou do not prevent him: A great matter it was
that drew this faithful subject to deal thus earnestlye with the Prince:
wherein men are taught of all sorts, that shall upon the like occasion
concerning the Prince, the church, or common wealth, having access and
conference upon matters in extremety with princes, especially those in good
place: whither of civil or ecclesiastical calling, when they shall see in
them a wilful standing in matters against the state of themselves and their
people, to the danger of both: that they are so much the more boldly to deal
with the^, although thereby they shall draw upon the^ (for the present) the
severe displeasure of the Prince. But some may object against this Solomon Pro.
20. 2.
his words. Pro. 20. 2. The fear of the King is like the roaring of a Lion: he
that provoke him unto anger, sins against his own soul. I say indeed
with Solomon, that regard is to be had, that in any wise at no time ne upon
any occasion, any Subject do grow into terms of collor with the prince,
which to do, is flat against the law of God as I noted before, and by common
reason unlawful: considering that Princes although they fauourablye and of
their own free grace, admit a certain familiarity, between themselves and
some subjects, yet equality within their own territories, they will not with
any person admit: How then may the question still be, may we discharge a good
duty toward them if so be they be rash and furious, not abiding to hear
what is meet to be done? The way is not to use Machiauels policy, as before I
teached, which is to flatter, or else to say nothing how dangerouslye so ever
all softness, meekness, and most reverent submisse manner, knowing this to be
true, that the same wise man in the 25. 15. says, A Prince is pacified by
Prou. 25. 15.
staying of anger, and a soft tongue breaks bones, and indeed we may sooner
obtayn at the hands of Princes though angry, by patience: that thing, which
otherwise by a forceable withstanding ofthem, we should never obtain. And in
this place very fittely may I bring in that I omitted, but as (parenthetically
to insert it by the way) that is, although men must regard in all reverence
and fear, how and what speeches they pass against a Prince, and so to
restrain both speeches and thoughts: yea so as that they may not suffer their
minds to be carried into an ill conceit against the person of their King or
Queen: yet neither is it my meaning, neither then was to restrain the
liberty of Gods ministers in delivering their Messages from God, to the face,
and before Princes: neither yet to give encouragement unto flattery, which God
forbid: for to proceed in the form of this expostulatorie speech. In the like
manner did the Prophet Jsaiah deal with the king Hezekiah, when he in pride
and vanity of mind, did show the riches and strength of his land to the
strange Princes of Babell, Merodach, Baladam, the son of Baladam King of
Babell his servants, who brought but letters and a present from the King to
Hezekiah, wherein the Prophet does in an expostulating manner with him, deal
very roundly, having the King upon an examination, as it were, that thereby he
might make a way for the declaring of Gods judgments against the land for
this act done by the King.

Then came Jsaiah the Prophet unto King Hezekiah and said unto him, what said
these men? and from whence come they? to whom the King disdeyned not to
answer: but Hezekiah said, they are come from a far Country unto me, even
from Babell: Then said he, what have they seen in thine house, etc. Thus
rou^dly dealt Eliah with Achab when he slew Naboth for his vineyard: Have
thou killed and also gotten a possession? etc. For even unto Kings and Princes
has the Lord made his Prophets spokesme^ from him, as is to see in the first
of his Prophecy, For J, behold I this day have made thee a defended Cuie, and
an iron pillar, and walls of brass against the whole land, against the Kings
of Judah, and against the Princes thereof. How much more then lawefull and
easy for Iohanan, and all near unto Princes is it, to be bold, yea sometimes
besides ordinary, to debate with, and to stand against the Prince, being
wilfully set in a matter which they know in their conscience to be quite
contrary to equity and justice, and to make especially against their own
persons. And thus much for the manner of expostulating the matter with L
Deputy.

Now to the second reason drawn from the perils and dangers, whereinto the
people of Jews are like to fall, in these words, And the Jews which are
gathered unto thee, be scattered, and the remnant in Judah perish: Wherein this
especially is taught, that as subjects are to be from all contempt and
treacheries toward their Governors, neither in thought consenting, nor in
act, yet practicing any evil that might be offered to the preiudising of the
state of their persons and kingdoms, but contrariwise as they are in all duty
to honor, which is to love, fear, obey, care and provide for all things meet
for the state of their royalties: so on the other side, Princes are tide and
bound by the equity and justice of this commandment, to do all that may be
for the comfort, peace, and preservation of their subjects: for, for this end
God has placed them in his own room on earth, that they might be the
preseruers of them from perils and dangers, at home and abroad, as concerning
both their lives and livings. To this purpose the holy ghost calls Kings,
Queens, Governors, and all kind of Magistrates, by the name and title of
Pastors, or as we say Shepherds, in the 23. of Jeremy. Woe unto Ier. 23. 1.
the Pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture, says the
Lord: and in this sense the 78. Psalm. speaking of Psalm. 78. 7 71.
David's being called from the base estate of a shepherd over sheep, whence he
called him unto the office of a king: 70. verse. He chose David also his
servant, and took him from the shepfold. Even from behind the ewes with
young, brought he him to feed his people in Jacob, and his inheritance in
Israel. So he fed them according to the simplicity of his heart, and guided
them by the discretion of his hands. The Poet Homer, apud quem as one says of
him, solenne est illud, (...) When he spoke of a King, he would in a solemn
manner call him the shepherd of the people. The office of a shepherd is to
gather together, and not to let the flock run at six and seuens: the nature
of which kind of cattle, of all others, is to peke out of the way, straggle,
wander, and go astray: wherein we see the wisdom of God does in likening his
people to sheep, therein infer necessarily the great need of a shepherd
over them, to guide them, to gather the^ in every hand while: none can better
speak of the wandringes, and out strayinges of man, then every man's heart,
having experience over his own infirmities, whereof David is a most excellent
witness in that most divine Psalm of meditation, plain in words, but hye in
matter the very last verse ^. 119. 176.
thereof. J have gone astray like a lost sheep, oh seek thy servant, for J do
not forget thy commandments. The Prophet Isaiah in the 32. chap. by an
allegory prophesieng what a one Christ shall be in his kingdom, does therein
teach earthly Kings in like manner, how to bear themselves toward their
people. Behold Y. 32. 1. 2.
a King shall reign in justice, and Princes shall rule in judgment. And that
man (speaking of Christ) shall be a hyding place from the wind, and as a
refuge for the tempest: as rivers of waters in dry places: and as the shadow
of a great rock in a weary land. And thus shall Princes be even a refuge for
the oppressed against the oppressor, a hyding place of justice against those
that in any wise shall offer injuries to the people, comfortable and helpful,
like a good shepherd, who will with all care (to follow the speech of
Johanan, for the dispersion of the Jews) rather seek to gather together, then
otherwise suffer them to go wandering, as sheep without a shepherd, as
subjects without a Prince, as a body without a head. Likewise the King or
supreme Magistrate is to provide not only that all the distressed and
afflicted people in general be releiued, according to their several
distresses without delay of justice, but especially amongst the rest that the
martial man, who upon the adventure of his life for Prince or Country,
returning home out of the wars, although with safety of life, yet with the
loss of some of the principal members of his body, and therefore not able by
the labor of his hands, to procure a competent maintenance for the stay of
his life, may therefore be above the rest charitably provided for, and that
those good statutes to that purpose ordained, which for want of due execution,
have not their effect, may be with greater care looked unto. So that the
assembly of high Court of Parliament providing good laws, may not be
frustrated, but that according to the intent and meaning of the Prince and
state, they may be put in practice, to the comfort of the lame, maimed,
impotent, and miserably distressed soldiers: otherwise what avails it the
Prince, for the commonweals behoof, to cause laws and statutes to be
enacted, if there be not as great a regard to see on the other side, the
execution of them by the administers of justice, with as great diligence to be
practiced. Furthermore, in the speeches of Iohanan, why should the Jews be
scattered, and the remnant in Judah perish? it is as though he should have
said, although thou do no more regard thy self, but in a self willingness
wilt thrust thy self upon the danger of Ishmaels treason: why yet should
thou together with thine own peril, hazard the lives of so many people after
thou art gone, being committed unto thee upon special trust? wherein Johanan
would lay down this point: that it was Gedaliah his duty, that not only for
his time of government, he should see the people well and peaceably provided
for, and defended against present perilles and dangers: but further also, that
whatsoever should befall him, yet they might afterward live in some security
for their lives and possessions, and that he might in peace deliver up again
the people of God, that thereby he might not carrye with him to his grave any
reproach or giltinesse of the desolation that afterward might happily ensue
upon them.

Thus ought all Christian Princes to reckon with themselves, that the people
are as their Sheep, and themselves Shepherds, and as all Fathers are to
provide, being led by natural affection, for their sons and daughters, not
only while they are in their nonage, and while they live with the^: but that
after they are laid up in their graves, their care past over their children
might appear, in leaving them in some good and honest state, (which yet I
need the less to speak off, because herein men are careful enough) Such
ought Princes to be, for they are as Fathers over their people, and upon their
wisdom and good government not only the present estate of their people in
peace and piosperitie, but also the contiuance of the same, and that after
their lives does depend. For to say as it is, God therefore has entayled
Princes into a propriety of their Subjects goods, and lives if need so
require (wherein by way of digression,) subjects are not to strain courtesy in
the paime^t of whatsoever is to be imposed upon them, neither in leuying out of
taxes or subsidies: the rich must ease themselves in ouerpressing the poor, as
the wicked manner of many cormorants is, who esteem that penny or noble well
saved, that either is laid upon other men's shoulders, or else by fraudulent
means can be retained, so it closelye be done from the Prince: concerning
whose duties how far they stretch toward the prince. 1. Sam 8. 11. Where he
shows at large what privileges God has given to a king, and what claim and
interest they may have in the estate of their subjects.

1. Sam. 8. 11, 12, 13.
And he said, This shall be the manner of the King that shall reign over you:
he will take your sons and appoint them unto his Chariots, and to be his
horsemen, and some shall run before his chariot. Also he will make them his
Captains over thousands, and Captains over fifties, and to ear his ground,
and to reap his harvest, and to make instruements of war, and the things
that serve for his chariots. He will also take your daughters and make them
Apothecaries, and Cooks and Bakers, etc. And has God then thus provided, that
all persons whatsoever, within a princes territory, shall perform all
services, and do all homage and fealty to them, without any duetye of the
princes parts to be performed on their sides? no verily, you have hard
already, how they likewise are as Shepheardes over their flock, to maintain
them, their lives and libertyes.

Besides which, they are the principal instruementes of Gods mercies toward
his Church, for the planting of the Gospel, for the salvation of the souls of
the people, to which end God has advanced them Isay. 49. 23.
on hie, according to Isaiahs prophecy. 49. 23. And Kings shall be thy noursing
fathers, and Queens thy noursing mothers, they shall worship thee with their
faces toward the earth: and this authority have they over the Church, that
they are to provide that the ministers of God do their duties, in feeding with
the word of God, themselves and their people: the neglect whereof, as also the
incorrigible misdemeanors of all ecclesiastical persons, not to be brought
into order by the Church censure and governors thereof, are to be punished by
the severity of the magistrates sword.

Now to come to the second part, which is the incredulity of Gedaliah in not
believing Iohanan. But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam believed them not. And
again in the 16. ver.

But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, said unto Iohanan the son of Kareah: Thou
shall not do this thing, for thou speak falsely of Ishmael.

In these words follows the answer of this governor to the faithful
captain and the rest with him.

But he believed them not.
The matter being so weighty, as the danger of the princes life, and the
accusation so severe and importunate against Ishmael, it was a wonder to see
that this Gonernour so rashlye and presently, shaped so thwart and contrary an
answer unto Johanan, for it stands as a reason of some consequence between
the Prince and the people, that if it be so needful for subjects upon the
least suspicion that they may iustlye gather of any ill measure pretended
against the state* presentlye (at their perrils otherwise) to discover it, that
on the other side the Prince, magistrate and Governor whosoever, are in all
loving affection to give their ears with diligent attention to hear it, and
to imploye their whole wisdom and labors to search out the truth speedily:
for the doing of the duty of the one, implies in it a necessity of some
duty from the other.

But to remember again that which in th'entrance of this treatise I did but
touch by the way: That where God will judge in displeasure, what way or means
to avoid it; so here it appears true in the sequel of the rash answer of
Gedaliah and his vniustrepelling of so just an accusation by so trustye a
Subject: whence is to be observed how notwithstanding God did deliver Gedaliah
for the good of his people out of death it self, making him to be gracious in
the eyes of Nebuchadnezzer: yet he knowing the stiffeneckednes of his people,
and purposing to prosecute this abuse of his mercy in them with a further
judgment, did cause this unto Gedaliah, to be but rather an evasion or escape
out of one danger, to be reserved to a further: that by taking him (by the
means of an ill person out of this life, he might thereby speedilye execute his
judgments upon this vnrepehtant people, according to the speech of the wise
man in the 28. of the Proverbs z. Pro. 28. 2.
For the transgression of the land there are many Princes thereof: and as the
Prophet Jsaiah in the 3. in laying down the heavy Isay. 3. ^
judgments like to ensue upon Jerusalem and Judah, notes this to be one and a
special, to take away wise, grave and good rulers, etc. If any shall demand
a reason of Gods doings in this, it is that God reserueth unto him self, his
times and seasons of doing his will, either in the full execution of his
judgments, or the performance of his mercies, whereof to be more curious in the
inquirye of that which he will not have known to man, is mere vanity: this
always being carried in remembrance, that although we can render no reason of
Gods judgments either in the manner of executing them, or concerning the time,
yet are they always iustand upright: and further, the purpose of God may
easily be found out concerning this matter, who while he judged these that
remained under Gedaliah his government in a fatherlye manner, in comparison of
the rest of their Countrymen, of whom some were slain, some hardlye entreated
under Nebuchadnezzer, being as living yet half dead: it was to this end by
his patience and long suffering, to draw them to repentance, not minding so to
favor the^ above the rest, as that they continuing still stiffenecked, should
escape scotfree, nay rather the deferring of his wrath was an infallable token
of the more heavy punishments to be inflicted upon them, thereby to make the^ a
monument of his fierce wrath, to the example of all ages for ever: from the
which people we are to make our profit, and to learn, that the longer time of
Gods mercies we do inioye, as hitherto we have, to the admiration of the whole
world, of our great prosperity (in comparison of our neighbors about us) the
more heauilye shall his hand fall, so as he will leave the print of his stripes
behind him upon us: and if lenitye will not amend us, then as Solomon says,
The blewnes of the Pro. 20. 30.
wound serves to purge the evil, and the stripes within the bowels of the
belly. The Lord has in the riches of his mercy concerning our souls, in
calling us by the voice of his ministers, long time visited us: And as
concerning both souls and bodies, under our most happy and renowned Queen
blessed us, that thereby we might become more tractable, techable, and unto
Gods will more pliable.

Now so many years being passed of Gods merciful and loving visitation upon
us, and his expectation being by us and in us deceived (to speak of God who
properlye cannot be deceived) after the manner of men, and to our capacity: let
us take heed that we do not enforce the Lord, who has sung upon us all this
while, a song of mercy as David says, which has been so pleasant in our
ears, in this our long peace, liberty and plenty, in this long time of
pleasure, riches and prosperity, to sing a song of judgment in justice: in
stead of our peace past so pleasant and amiable, take heed that we hear not a
song of war, most doleful and terrible: in stead of the liberty and
freedom of our souls by the Gospel of Christ preached, and of our bodies by
the mercy of god under our most puissant Princess maintained, and yet
continued, that in stead thereof we hear not a strange song of spiritual and
corporal bondage and captivity, for the contempt of the word of God, and the
abuse of his graces, under the enemies of GOD, our Prince and country: whose
teethe are set on edge to be dealing with us, who thirste greatly after our
blood: take heed that in stead of our songs had at our feasts, and our
epicurial banquets full of filthiness and abomination, tickling up the vile
flesh unto sensualitye and carnal lusts: we hear not a song of famine and
hunger, our children crying and howling for the least of these morsels, which
in our fulness they and we and our servants have loathed, though many our
betters in Gods sight wated them, and then we cannot have them. And in this
description of the causes why God though he prolong his judgments, yet in
the end he paieth home, Let us not forget the great care of the flesh that the
whole land has, concerning excess in apparel: take heed once more I say,
that the disguising of our selves in the attire of every land, not for the
stuff whereof the garments are made, as cloth of Gold, silver, embroidered
work, silks, veluets, fine cloth, fine linen, lawnes, and I know not what
use whereof there is for all persons, regard being had to each man's degree, but
not thereby to fulfill the lusts of the flesh to vanity and excess, not to
pride and filthiness, not in such painting of faces, in devising new disguised
fashions, but unto decency and comelynes, every one according to the law of
God, continuallye beating our ears, and the statutes of our own land for
apparel, to the keeping of every degree of persons from breaking out of the
bounds and lymits of their calling: knowing this and remembering it well, to the
cutting of the combs of all degrees of persons, that immediately upon the sin
of Adam came nakedness, and so a providing by the Lord against our shame, even
in apparel and clothing of us, and where we do misiudge of some by their
apparel, according to the statelines of it, to be either in honorable place,
or of high degree (as one says) when we lost our honor in Paradise, then came
we to be first apparrelled, being the sign of our sin, and the badge of our
rebellion and our shame. Take heed we do not here in stead of this song of
our delights, the lamentable song of Iheremiah and of Esayah the Isay. 3. 16.
Prophet, the 3. Chapter, from the 16. verse, against the pride both of men and
women, whose words though they be long, I will not refer you over to them,
but plainelye set them down. The Lord also says, Because the daughters of
Zion are hautie, and walk with stretched out necks, and with wandering eyes,
walking and minsing as they go, and making a tinckling with their feet. 17.
Therefore the Lord shall make the heads of the Daughters of Zion balde, and the
Lord shall discover their secret parts. 18. Jn that day shall the Lord take
away the ornament of the slippers, and the calls, and the round tires. 19.
The sweet balls and the bracelets and the bonnets. 20. The tyres of the head,
and the sloppes, and the head bands, and the tablets, and the ear ringes. 21.
The ringes and mufflers. 22. The costly apparel and the vailes, and the
wimples, and the crasping pinnes. 23. And the glasses, and the fine linen, and
the hoodes, and the launes. In stead of this song (which in as great pride and
vanity, we have sung to our flesh) what shall be the song of judgment? 24. And
in stead of sweet savor (says he) there shall be stink, and in stead of a
girdle a rent, and in stead of dressing the hair, baldenes: and in stead of a
stomacher, a girding of sackecloth, and burning in stead of beautye.

This song have the Jews in Jerusalem the glory of the world already sung, a
people dearly beloved of the Lord, and shall we upon whom the Lord has
looked with so amiable and fatherly a face, shall we (remaining in our sins
and vanities escape scotfree? Nay, take heed our own toungs do not also
testify against our selves, as concerning the deliverance from the Spanish
enemies of late, that would in the pride of their hearts, have bourded us at
home, the victory over who^e we begun with songs of praise and thanks giving
to the Lord, to celebrate. Take heed that our praising of God for that day,
and the memory of it being laid in water as we say, that God do not cause us
to sing a dolfull dittie, of some ruinous overthrow, which God in his mercy
keep back from us: and he contrariwise that at one Jonas his preaching to the
Ninevites, wrought their conversion: grant to our Prince so merciful, to our
nobles so honorable, to our Bishops and ministers in their preaching of the
word of God so comfortable, and to our people so innumerable, that so many
sermons of so sundry Ionasses I hope, do not return back again unto the Lord
in vain, without our repentance: but contrariwise, may as it has begun faith
in our Prince, nobles, and people, make it effectual to Gods glory, and the
continuance of his mercy toward us, in preserui^g not Gedaliah a deputye, but
our Elizabeth the only monarch and princes of the world (as thanks be to God
he has) from many of Ishmaels crew, traitors of our time, and the people may
dwell in peace and safetye under her, in all godlynes and prosperity, during
her happy reign.

But to leave off to speak concerning the will, end and purpose of God, in
blinding the eyes of Gedaliah, in not believing Iohanans report: and let us
return to speak of Gedaliah himself, concerning his incredulitye in these
words, And he believed them not.

In whom this is to be observed, that he being a man as it seemed, of a mild
spirit, and charitably affected toward Ishmaell, whom he had very familiarly
conuersed with, would not beledde with any suspicion of evil against him,
following the rule of the Apostle Paul, concerning the several offices of
charity or love, as is to see, Cor. 13. 5.
1. Cor. 13. 5. Love thinks not evil, or is not suspicious of evil: and
besides, he had no great delight to hear il reports against any, least thereby
he might give liberty to himself oftentimes in stead of truth, to hear of
falshoode and lies wherein his commendation stands just. For all Kings and
Princes especially above all other persons, are not in any wise to maintain
flatterers, slaunderers, backbyters, nor tale-bearers, neither yet always to
give too easy credit to every tale brought them, though by persons otherwise
of good credit, as Ishmael was with Gedaliah. For those people, especially the
last, do great hurt in Princes Courts: of whom, Solomon speaks, 16. Prou.
Prou. 16. 28
28. And a talebearer makes division among Princes, And in the 29. Prou. 12.
Prou.
verse. Of a Prince that hearkdneth to lies, all his servants are evil. For
such things as the ears of Princes are delighted to hear, such things do the
slaunderers, flatterers, and most wicked backbyters, bring unto them: for upon
the behavior of the Princes, as upon examples propounded them to follow, do
the subjects cast their eyes, and them, as nearly as may be, do they follow,
according to a verse commonly known.

Regis ad exemplar totus componitur orbis,
In English thus:

The whole world does cast his eyes upon
each Keisar, and each King:
To frame themselves in pattern wise,
to him in every thing.
Such a relation was there between the lew de servants of Saul and Saul
himself: Doeg the Edomite from one 1. Sam. 22. 18.
amongst the rest, as is, 1. Sam. 22. who maliciously complained of David, and
of Ahimelech the priest, who thereuppon in Saules fury and malice, became an
instrument of Saules for the bloody murdering of 85. Priests that did wear
a lynnen Ephod. Such an other Psalm. 7.
was Cush, against whose false accusation David compiled that 7. Psalm, as a
defense of his innocence before God and men. Such a one was that Haman, that
false person and accuser of Mordecai the faithful subject, and of the Jews
unto Ahashuriosh as is to see Hest. 3. 8. 9. Hest. 3. 8 9.


These things considered, in respect Gedaliah did well in not soddenly
admitting the accusation of Iohanan, for as well he in hearing, as Johanan in
bringing false reports, might have openly transgressed the ninth commandment
of God, wherein is taught, that love to our neighbor stands in having regard
to the credit, name, estimation, or good report of him, in the breach of which
commandment, as well the hearers, as the bearers of false reports, tales, and
slanders, are condemned, especially such as carry false tales, to the
sheading of the blood of the innocent: according to that reproof which
Ezechiell the Prophet has against the people of Iersalem, Ezekiel. 22. 9.

Ezekiel. 22. 5
Jn thee are men that carry tales to shed blood: to this purpose (that I may
end to speak of that which appeared to be good in Gedaliah) Hierom: ad
Nepotianum: affirms that as he that speaks evil, has the devil in his
tongue, so he that hears evil, has the devil in his ear.

But notwithstanding all this in Gedaliah, which is approved in him to be
good. Lo these virtues they are not without their defectes: wherein we learn
that great, wise, and grave persons may be deceived, when they do over much
rest upon their own wisdom.

It was a good thing in Gedaliah, if that were his purpose, as it seems it
was, to cut off the backbyting and malicious slanders, as he supposed of
Iohanan against Ishmaell, that the cutting off Iohanan might be an example to
others: but yet it had been meet, that as he would not receive any tale
soddenly against him, he should yet have first wisely and thoroughly examined
the causes brought by Iohanan and the rest, before that he had so definitiuely
proceeded, either clearing or justifying Ishmaell, or in over rashly condemning
Johanan.

For how can it otherwise be, but that the Lord must needs be heavily
displeased, when he in mercy, for the delivering of his servants from the great
perilles and dangers whereunto otherwise they should have fallen, giving them
fatherly warning before hand, he shall find his servants to be foully
entreated, and for their pains returned back with the lie. It is a matter
condemned by Solomon, as is to see, Prou. 24. 24. He that says to the wicked,
Thou Pro. 24. 24.
art righteous, him shall the people curse, and the multitude shall abhor
him. And on the other side: Woe is pronounced by the Prophet Esaias. 5. 23.
verse. against I say. 5. 23.
them that take away the righteousness of the righteous, both which are foul and
filthy vices, the same wise man in the 17. chapter of the Prou. 15. verse,
shuts up in one, saying: He that just ifieth the wicked, and he that
condemns the just, even these both are abomination unto the Lord.

So that these places do teach, especially Magistrates, in whom it is the
greater sin, because of their places wherein they are set, for the punishment
of all such backbyters and slanderous persons, like unto David, who would not
in any wise permit to abide in his house any such persons: wherein they are
admonished to do up rightly in judgment, not respecting persons, but to hear
the small, as well as the great, not suffering themselves to be led by
affection any way. For unto such as will be drawn by respect of persons in
judgment, Solomon has given this dome, That man (says he) will transgress
for a piece of bread, and thereby they shall become maintayners of the wicked,
who will soon be encouraged to speak in the defense of an evil cause, and of
ill persons, and also to accuse most falsely and maliciously by all slanderous
reports, the godly and innocent, for such are the common idle persons of the
world, who not being at leisure to hear that which is good, neither yet
having skill to bestow their tongues to the glory of God, and the good of
their neighbors More for voluptuousnes, then any necessity.
in their eating and drinking in houses of liberty and licentiousness, do
feed, upon (as one says) the very flesh of men: by the not punishing of whom,
or to remiss dealing with the^, they spare not to speak evil (on their ale
bench it may be, if they were narnowly watched) of Princes, or at the least, to
rail, reproach, and slanderously to speak against the Magistrates themselves:
whom to fear, reverence, and obey as they ought, and against whom, not so much
as to note any evil, the rude people of our time have not yet learned. And
therefore the way for a Magistrate to deal up rightly in judgment, is not
lightly to hear the slanderous person, but to set both his ears on work
indifferently, the one to hear the accuser, and accusation brought, and the
other to hear the accused, and the defense that he can make for himself:
otherwise to be too speedy in judgment upon the first tale heard, is many
times rashly and falsely to be drawn to speak for the bad, and uncharitably
to give sentence against the just and upright, and so the way to deal
uprightly in causes is, to cut off the liar and false accuser, of whom Hierom
in one of his Epistles says: Sicut sagitta si mittatur contra duram materiam
nonnunquam in mittentem reuertitur, and vulnerat vulnerantem: ita detractor
quum tristem faciem, viderit audientis, immo non audientis, sed obturantis
aures suas: ne audiat sanguinem, illico conticestit, pallet vultus, haerent
labia, salina siccatur: A very excellent sentence to teach Magistrates what
benefit they return to themselves and the common wealth, when they shall
wisely, cut off slanderers: Even as an arrowe, if it be shot against a hard
matter or mark, many times it recoyles upon him that shot it, and wounds
him that would have wounded: so the backbyter or false accuser, when he shall
see but the sour face, and grimme look of him that hears, or rather not
hears, but stops his ears, least perhaps he might hear a matter of
blood: forth with the slaunderer holds his peace, his countenance chaunges,
his lips cleave together, and his spittle is dried up: meaning that he sees
that his market is marred, his comb is cut, and not a word more that he has
to speak: herein failed Iosephes Master, as in the 39. Genes. 20. in giving
too Genesis 39. 20.
light credit to his wife, against chaste and innocent Joseph his known and
approved faithful servant. Herein appeared his lightness, that having heard
his wife, being too much addicted to her words, thereupon he cast Joseph into
prison, and never heard his cause, wherein he she wed himself over credulous.
On the other side, how many have we with Gedaliah, that run themselves into
danger, being forewarned, and not giving credit thereunto, and so received a
worthy punishment of their incrudelitie?

We read of Ahab how he scorned Michaiah the Lords Prophet, whom he sent for,
as many send for and call to their companies the ministers, either to scorn
them to their faces, or at the least with Ahab not to believe what they say: or
if they do, not with any purpose to follow their counsel: who when he came,
foretold him of his overthrow, but he believed him not, being seduced by the
lying spirits of his false Prophets, as it is said in the 1. kin. 22. 18.
1. Kings. 22. 18. And the King of Israel said unto Iehosaphat the King of
Judah: Did I not tell thee, that he would prophecy no good unto me but evil?
As though that Michaiah having received his charge and commission from God,
should have necessarilye spoken to the lyking or pleasing of the wicked kings
humor.

Such a like example of incredulity we find to have been in a prince, on
whose hand as the text says, the king of Israel leaned.

The prophet Elisha foretells of great plentye of victalles to fall in
Samaria ere the morrow at that time, and how it shall be wonderfully cheap: The
Prince would not believe it, but replied upon the prophet: though the Lord
would make windows from heaven, could this thing come to pass? and he said,
behold thou shall see it with thine eyes, but thou shall not eat thereof.

Many are the examples in scripture concerning the incredulity of men, but
Gedaliah sinned so much the more against the Lord, in that he was not
foretold only of this villainous pretense by Iohanan alone, but all the
captains of the host with him, so that had he only cast off Johanan, the
matter had not been so weighty, but refusing so many witnesses whom he would
not vouchsafe to call to their trial, he did as it were pull the wrath of God
upon the people, and was (as we say) accessory to his own death. But some man
will say, it was very hard to have found out such a serious thing: it is not
so, for this was plain and easy enough to have been proved by witnesses,
had not Gedaliah been led with a self will as concerning the diligent
searching of it out, which indeed was the will of God for the blinding of him
in so manifest a matter: but say it had bin so hard, the remedy had been as in
the book of Ecclesiastes 10. 10. the Eccles. 10. 10
wise man says, If the iron be blunt, and a man has not whet the edge, he must
put to more strength, the excellency to direct a thing is wisdom. But yet God
does in the finding out of things very hard, and of great difficulty, give
unto man wisdom, especially when it concerns equity and upright dealing
between man and man, if they seek for it, and therefore Gedaliah should have
bestowed the more labor in the examination of the matter, according as is to
see in that wonderful boulting out of the truth of the child, according to the
holy history, that was dead, that was challenged by two harlottes, whose it
was, Solomon to judge the controversy between them being a matter very
intricate: but because Solomon asked above all things an understanding heart,
refusing to make demand of honor and riches, the Lord granted his request,
and so he found out the true mother of the child, according to the speech of
the Apostle James. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God which
gives to all men liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him.
Thus much concerning Gedaliah his incredulity.

Now follows the third part which is the execution of Ishmaels treason, and
the manner of it in these words:

Chap. 41. ver. 1. But in the seventh month came Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah, the son of Elishama of the seed royal, and the Princes of the
King, and ten men with him, unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah, and
there they did eat bread together in Mizpah.

2 Then arose Ishmaell the son of Nethaniah with these ten men that were with
him, and smote Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan with the sword,
and slew him, whom the king of Babell had made governor over the land.

3 Ishmaell also slew all the Jews that were with Gedaliah in Mizpah, and all the Caldeans that were found there, and the men of war.

This third part concerns Jshmaell the Traitor, the execution of his treason,
and the manner of it: wherein first we are to learn these principal heads or
maxims: that is, how this wickedness was not committed by Jshmaell, but that
the will of God did concur and go together with his will: wherein, if it be
asked how this could be, the act being ill and wicked in Jshmaell, but that
the Lord must needs be guilty also of sin: the answer is, that the sin
of the wicked is unto God, as an other creature, in respect not that he
created it, for it is a thing proceeding from man's own vile nature: but as
concerning his power over it, to rule it, that it shall no further go or
pass, then he has and does limit it: and that by it, as by the creature that
works it, being evil and wicked: notwithstanding he works and effects
his own will being good, being himself guiltless of any evil: for in this
matter the solution or loosing of the point, stands in the diversity of the
ends: of the end of God his working, and of the end of man his working: the
meaning, end, and purpose of God being good: the meaning, end, and purpose of
the wicked being ill, which makes them without excuse, whereas Gods purpose
and end in the wicked, and by them is either to be glorified in them to their
confusion, or to make trial of his children by them in raising them up as his
punishments for sin: the end of the wicked being an utter contempt of God him
self, and the hurt of his creatures, which yet could never further proceed,
then by the handie work of God, they were led against their wills, to do his
will contrary to their purposes, and to glorify his name in despite of
themselves: the which matter is notably set forth in the 3. Acts. 23. Him I
say (says Peter, speaking Act. 2. 23.
of Christ) have ye taken by the hands of the wicked, being delivered up by
the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, and have crucified and
slain: etc. But to speak of this further I will not: But to Jshmaell
himself, of whom first before in the words of the discovery is to be
remembered, what Iohanan said of him, namely that Baalis the king of the
Ammonites had sent him to slaye Gedaliah, wherein we may see his base mind,
who would not with his country men bear in the courage of a patient heart
according to Gods will, the bondage of Nebuchadnezzer, but would make himself
servile and overmuch* thral to another stra^g king, and that against his own
countrymen, so that in a word, he every way sold himself as a bo^dslaue to
sin. Not unlike to him are our runagats and have been, that have fled, not to
Baalish king of the Ammonites, but to that Baalish Priest, that man of sin
Antichrist of Rome, whom to follow as their Pilot, whose laws to live after as
Rebels they have not spared, chosing rather to be his thrals and bondmen, so
their treacherous hearts in having their will being naught, might be relieved,
then otherwise according to the laws of God, of nature, and of all nations, to
be subjects at home in their own country, to their own liege, natural, and
merciful Princes. And so they whose hyrelinges and bondmen they be, though
they use them for their purpose a while, yet hardly will they commit any great
trust to the^, and some reason they have for it: but if they do commit any at
all, it shall be no further then they play in sight above the board as we say,
and in the end, if they send them not home, or make no sale of them, as it may
be they will when they have once worn them out to the stumps, or otherwise
they be not brought home by some other means, that in the justice of God, they
may be made public spectacles to the whole world, continuing still
unrepentant, they are like to perish both in soul and body, most damnably for
ever.

Now where it is said of him that he was of the seed Royal, the holy ghost
does it not but to some purpose, wherein he showed forth his disdain over
Gedaliah, the which seemed to be the very foundation of all his outrage:
Indeed to be noblye borne, and to come of a princes stock, is a matter to be
respected: but when God will either by his own punishment upon the line and race
of a Prince, either for some secret in the Lord himself, or otherwise pull
down the kings themselves, for some notable sin, as he for pride did abace
Nabuchadnezzer: what a vanity is it for men to stand upon these terms, I am
a prince, or a Princes Son, or near kinseman, or of his race, I am a noble
man, and can fetch my line and pedigree from (as we say) the conquest, what of
all this? thou should for these causes the better approve thy self in
holiness, not in prophanes before God and before men, not in thy high parentage,
to think that in all righteousness and just dealing, thou may live
vncomptrollable, though otherwise it may be: take away thy great birth, thou
shall show thy self a very monster in life, as Ishmael did. This could stand
for no plea, for Ishmael in Mizpah, though it were in the land of Judah, seeing
Nebuchadnezzer had brought it under, being as concerning birth of the familye
of the Kings of Judah, that needs he must therefore become a Governor: God
had otherwise provided. The King Zedekiah himself, reprochefully handled, as is
39. Chapter before to see, his eyes put out, himself bound in chains, all his
nobles for the most partslaine, his sons put to the sword, and God had
already advanced under Nebuchadnezzer, Gedaliah.

But some men that were noblye borne, cannot in any wise live subjects in a
land, although there want neither favor of Prince, nor Lands, nor pleasure,
nor credit, nor honor, except they may be Monarchs, all that will not
satisfy them. No marvel then though Ishmael who wanted the hundredth penny of
the maintenance that some have had, and might still have enjoyed amongst us, if
their present state could have served them: but well, let conscience of
religion be a color for their treasons, I am not to meddle in it: only this, a
bad conscience, and a bad religion, it is in my conscience, which can give
liberty to the spilling of the blood of the Lords anointed: But alas Ishmael
his horns were cut being of no such abilitye in a strange land, and yet he
stands upon his birth: in whom we see this point that men having been hie and
alofte, it is a hard matter for them to stoop and become subjects: for Ishmael
had smally profited concerning the good will and pleasure of God upon his
creatures, therein to refer himself to his maker. Who 1. Sam. 2. 7.
as Annah in the 1. Sam. 2. 7. The Lord makes poor and makes rich: brings
low, and exalts: 8. He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up
the beggar from the dung hill: (as it may be Gedaliah was but base in
comparison) to set him amongst Princes, and to make the^ inherit the seat of
glory. etc.

Well, art thou hye borne? art thou of a noble house and family? as thou art,
so will thou be honored? then do the things that are worthy honor. For as one
says (Osorius de gloria) Non enim diuitijs abundare nec tenniores affligere
neque in Rep. dominari sed animi bonis affluere vniuersis charum esse Reipub
salutarem existimari est laudabile gloriosum et summus honoribus illustratum.
For not to be rich, nor to afflict the poorer sort, neither to be a governor
in the common wealth: but to have a mind enriched with good virtues, to be
beloved of al, to be reckoned a good and profitable commonwealths man: this is
laudable, glorious, and worthy to be honored: again says he, Est enim honor
diuinum quoddam praemium virtuti et honestati constitutum omnem turpitudinis
consortim repellens, and it a fit vt quianimum flagito et turpitudine,
contaminatum gerunt nullo pacto honorem, sed inane fortasse nomen honoris
adepti, in summam ignomia versentur. For honor is a certain divine reward
appointed for virtue and honesty, chasing away all filthy company, and by that
means they who bear a filthy and vicious mind, having got to themselves no
true honor, but a vain name thereof, do in the mean time remain in great
dishonor and reproach: these speeches of his are true, being referred to faith
in Christ, without which whatsoever is, is sin: and therefore will thou be
honored in regard thou art honorably borne? then follow the counsel of
Solomon, who teaches thee where true Pro. 4, 7.
honor is to be had. Pro. 4. 7. Wisdom is the beginning: get wisdom
therefore: above all thy possession, get understanding: Exalte her, and she
shall exalte thee: she shall bring thee to honor if thou embrace her. Otherwise,
if thou with Absolon a Kings Son of the seed royal, and practice the like
trecherye, shall abandon from thee all duetye to God, to Prince, to Father:
setting thy delights only upon bravery, treachery, villainy, and all manner of
impietye (like to this Ishmaell who was notable in his wickedness) delighting
thy self in thy self, and thy curled locks (a most monstrous thing in these
our days) but of late in comparison (by the way to speak in a word) being
grown into custom even with those of religion: Whereof hear not me, but
th'appostle Paul. 1. Cor. 11. 14. who says: Does not nature it self teach
you, that if a man have 1. Cor. 11. 14
long hair, it is a shame unto him? And if the spirit of God call a thing
evil, shall we plead against it and say it is good? I tell thee, God will make
thee though thou be never so fair, proper, and comely with Absolon: vile,
ignominious, and reproachful to alages after: of which like traitorous Absolons
amongst us, God has of late years discovered some, and made them an example
of his judgments, to all posterities to come after us.

And thus much of that he is said to be of the seed royal, whom nobility of
birth nothing auailed unto honesty and true honor: who rather showed himself
a bastard from Israel, yea an enemy to it, as it were some Canaanite or
Amorit, for indeed by co^uersing with Baalish in stead of being a true Jew
borne, he became a changeling in tra^sforming himself into an Ammonite, as
appears by his monstrous impiety, and that in a very short time, as the
text says, In the seventh month, which was no long time after the taking of
the City, and burning of the Temple, murdering of the Nobles, and butchering
up the people, all this misery with the dishonor of his King, and the
shameful handling of his Sons, had this unnatural beast and merciles tirant
forgot, setting his mind upon no other matter but blood, and how to do some
cheat to be advanced by having utterly forgotten the Law of his God in so
short space.

Further, when it is said, that 10. men came with him, such as were principal
persons about King Zedekiah that had conveyed themselves out of the way, with
this archtraitor, until they might find a fit time for the compassing of
their treachery: he the principal of the faction, having once madeaway Gedaliah
(the plot being so laid before) was to be made governor, the other ten of
his retinue that came with him, were also to do their exploits upon other, and
they having every one as young princes, appointed themselves to the best
offices under him: such factious heads lightlye go not alone: such as Solomon
speaks of. Pro. 1. 11. Come say they with us, we will lay weight for blood,
Pro. 1* 11.
and lay priuilye for the innocent without a cause. 12. we will swallowe them up
quick like a grave, even whole as those that go down to the pit. 13. We shall
find all precious riches, and fill our houses with spoil. 14. Cast thy lot
amongst us, we will al have one pursse.

For indeed, such is the disposition of wickedness and wicked men, that they
do desire all other to be like to themselves: a thief desires a companion in
his theft, a brazen faced whore desires that all women were of her disposition,
so indeed might the devil carrye away both the one and the other, and truly we
had need pray against the corruption of our nature, for even as dry chippes
do easilye take fire: so our nature is by provocation easilye drawn into
wickedness, and if we do not yield to the sins of the most vile, as unto
open whordome, open theft, open villainy, open papistry, open treason, whence is
it that we are so restreined, being of the same nature with the most wicked?
Let us not rejoice over th'impieties of other men, and thence take occasion to
be proud in our selves: but rather let us with the Apostle learn and bear
away this lesson. Let him that stands, take heed he fall not. It is God by
his power that has kept us, otherwise had we bin lost to our selves: we had,
and have a nature, as prone to the most vile sin as any whatsoever, and
truly this age of Libertines affoords too too many eggers and entisers unto
wickedness of all kinds, and especially of factious and seditious persons,
which are grown into companies, cloking and covering their wickedness as
Ishmael did, as it is to see in the 6. verse following: with a vehement whotte
zeal in religion, busy heads of diverse sorts, there are some buzie headed
papists, some busy headed protestants, some busy headed Atheists, never in
any age so full of busy heads: some busy themselves in matters of state, some
in matters of the Church, (though such are to be had,) whom properly it
concerns in church and commonwealth, in the Church, the Bishops, ministers,
and Church governors: in Common wealth, the Magistrates and civil Officers:
and in both Church and Common wealth as the head over the body, Princes and
sole Governors, as is before said of them: as for other men more private,
called to no one office but by intrusion it may be said, Ne suitor vltra
crepidam. Every man let him walk in that care of life wherein he lives, and
not being calde to preach Christ, but to profess him, let him hold his
profession in all singlenes of heart, and in all love toward men.

But the busy heads that are plodding every way for worldly commoditye,
laying plots, making shifts, casting a thousand ways to maintain this life
wretched though it be: how many of this sort of busy headed persons, a good
Arithmetitian to find out the number shalgreatly be troubled: and of al these
sorts of busiheads, al in general are too too busy in reforming others, but
where is the head that is busied sufficiently as it should be in reforming
himself? I may not use too long a digression in speaking of these Ishmael his
companions in evil: it follows they came to Gedahah and there they did eat
bread together in Mizpah, where who will say to the contrary, but that these
jolly fellows coming to Court it out in their brauerye, to show their
fidelity to Gedaliah forsooth, but that they meant all good to him their
Governor: Besides by the way, mark the difference between these ill disposed
persons and Gedaliah: he notwithstanding he were but of a base and mean
condition, no otherwise esteemed off then before this his advancement: yet he
knows how to bear himself toward all degrees, as princes fellows, he
receives them, intertaines them, and admits them to his own table: a mean
borne man so sodainelye advanced, and of so rare virtues, so full of courtesy
and clemencye: and the other coming of a Princes stock, and therefore
consequentlye not without singular education, so degenerate, so wicked, so
base, so cruel and merciles a mind, it is strange to see: but that God gives
his graces, not according to the greatness of birth, ne yet the good quallities
of a godly Father, must needs by right of inheritance as it were, be
appropriated unto the Son: because God reserues the gifts of all goodness to
himself, who accordingly, where he will have mercy, has mercy: and where he
has mercy, there he adorns with graces meet for every man according to his
calling.

Well, They did eat bread together in Gedalias Court or Palace house at
Mizpah. Where is to be further observed the vileness of this monster, whose heart
because of his disdain, ambition and covetousness, being hardened therein, did
nothing melt or a whit relent at the courteous and familiar entertainment of
Gedaliah: but no marvel though this fellow walked as a friend, when indeed
he was an enemy: and worse then that, for an enemy he was, under a cloak of
amity and great freendlines: as one says, Simulat a aequitas, non est
aequitas, sed duplex iniquitas, quia iniquitas est et simulatio. Fained equity
is no equity, but a double iniquity: because it is iniquity and
dissimulation: such a one was this viperous varlet, in this outward show so
demure, as I remember an old speech, Intus Nero, foris Cato: In heart a very
Nero a most bloudye bloudsucker, and without in show as grave as Cato a wise
and prudent Senator, even as a beast compacted of many beasts: Secundum illud
poeticum Leo pars prima, draco media, ipsa chymera. According to the Poets
saying: The principal and foreparte, a Lion, the middle part a Dragon, a very
chymera it self: this fellow as Solomon says of him that inuites a man to his
table in show of courtesy, and means him no good at all, and he that offers
himself in renewing of freendship to eat and drink with thee, and as though
he said in his heart Pro. 23. 7.
says Solomon Pro. 23. 7. eat and drink, but his heart is not with thee.

Such an other was Judas, who accompanying Christ as his Disciple, eating and
drinking with him, with a Judas kiss betrayed him: as the holy Evangelist
Matthew 26. 48. Now he that betrayed him had given the^ a token saying:
whomsoever J shall kiss, that is he, lay hold on him, etc. So that we see
that there is no perfection in man as concerning this life, but all are full of
blemishes and defects: neither could the degree of an Appostle in respect of it
self keep it self, no not from falling as Peter did: whereof all are guilty,
what holiness soever is tied unto Peter's chair at Rome, as his supposed
successors do give out: but from falling also unrecoverably, which may teach
us in whatsoever place God has set us in Church or commonwealth, to be humbled
in Gods sight, and not to rest overmuch upon our own wisdom, knowledge or
calling, but still to have our refuge by prayer unto God for the continuance of
his spirit upon us, and for the increace of faith, so full of flawes are the
hearts of men: such like friends ^sal. 41. 9.
had David as he records in the 41. Psalm. 9. Yea, my familiar friend, whom J
trusted, which did eat of my bread, has lifted up the heel against me. And
although David spoke of some such friends that haunted his house, fawning upon
him, yet covertly as he was a figure of Christ, he prophecieth of Judas as the
Evangelist John records 13. 18. And as Christ had one false hearted John. 13.
18.
Apostle amongst twelve, so unto Christ's members it may be referred not
altogether without some such friends, who under a color of a fair
countenance showed, became false dissemblers: many such Judas kisses, many
wonderful shakings by the hand, greetings and salutation with such cap and
courtesy, and so amiable embrasings in these days as it is wonderful to see,
and yet in some I fear, Solomon sets down their property to the full. Pro.
26. 24. He that hates will counterfeite Pro. 26. 24.
with his lips, but in his heart he lays up deceit. And yet time discouers
all dissemblers, as follows, 26. verse. Hatred may be covered by deceit, but
the malice thereof shall be discovered in the congregation.

Jshmaell he pretends friendship in coming to Gedaliah, for as the text
says, they did eat bread together: this phrase of speech concerning the
eating of bread together, is in the Acts of the Act. 2. 46.
Apostles, 2. chap. 46. verse. And they continued daily with one accord in the
temple (as an argument of love) and breaking bread at home, did eat their meat
together with gladness. To note this, that as the Church increased, and the
Apostles gained people unto the Lord, by the Gospel: so they showed their
fruits in this one point of communicating the blessings of God, as meats and
drinks, and in receiving them together in common, in token of amity and true
love to be continued between them.

But alas, what hypocrisy reigns amongst men now a days, who make shows of
that which is not, who can eat, drink, and keep company, laughing in the
faces of them whose hearts (were it not for danger of law, and open shame
before men) they would well aforde to eat (as we say) with salt: such a
notable beast was this, whom we are now handling: whom the text payntes out in
his colors, 2. verse. Then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah with these
ten men that were with him, and smote Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son
of Shaphan with the sword. A great point of manhood in good earnest, of such
men of valor as they were, not the meanest men I warrant you that could be
got, no cowards, nor starters at a dead lift, such as fear no man's face in the
land, men that had metal in them. Ishmaell himself a tough piece of flesh,
and a valiant cutter, a cutthrote I should say. All the rest like to him,
birds of a feather: as concerning courage and valor, boldness and strength,
like quallified in every respect. Nymble at throtes cutting, and especially
when men's hands and feet are fast bound, make them safe from resisting, and
these be they that will be ashamed to fly an ynch till they have got the
field, in calm seas, and fair weather, men that will stand to their
tackling, who but they, and where no show of danger is, they will never give
it over. To conclude of the^, men every ynch, and see you not their manhood
what a wonderful piece of service they did? Then arose Ishmaell and ten men
with him: Soddenly according to the appointment (fast bind, fast find) on the
backs of them they come, they set on them, and where is the place of meeting?
and what weapons has each part appointed to try it out? Gedaliah with his
people, not provided at all, nor purposing any quarrel: they I warrant you
made sure work, every man had his tool ready: at the board they take them,
no man stirs his foot, no flying ground, no giving way, the one company of
Traitors with their swords provided for the turn, the other their meat in
their mouths, and the cups in their hands, without any suspicion of evil:
eating, drinking, and making merry, bidding welcome to these far travelers
out of the coast of the king of the Ammonites, where and with whom they had
laid their plot for the executing of this treason.

But such a like manner of proceeding do all Traitors take, with whom if a man
should but enter parle a while concerning magnanimity and cowardice, oh, you
should find them in their own conceits the odd men in the world, like to
the worthies of David, of whom as the holy Ghost reports, 1. Chron. 12. 14.
speaking of the sons 1. Chr. 12. 14.
of Gad, of whom one of the least could resist an hundredth, and the greatest a
thousand. But bring their manhood to the touch, and you shall find all their
bragging to be nothing but mere words and cowardlinesse, white-liuered
gentlemen, such as in the revenge of a quarrel hold it the best way by
treachery, and behind the back of their adversary to make the onset, and not
the worst point of their manhood to end the matter with a sure stab without
fighting a blow, and after for them the best defense is, four legs are better
then twain, a most horrible thing that the blood of man is so little regarded
in these days of the Gospel, and that there should be any escape or pardon of
life granted to any one of so bloody minds, for whom the law of God has
provided no refuge, who in their own hearts carry the guiltines of the blood
of them to their grave. Prou. 28. 17.
Solomon, Prou. 28. 17. describes them. A man that does violence against the
blood of a person, shall flee unto the grave, and no man shall stay him: that
is, let no man pity him, nor once take compassion Exodus 21. 14.
on him. Exodus 21. 14. But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbor to
slay him with guile (says Moses) thou shall take him from mine alter, that he
may die.

Examples of such villainies committed we have in the holy history, some ^.
king. 16. 9.
in the 16. chap. 1. Kings 9. we read of Elah the son of Baasha, who being
King over Israel, was by Zimri his servant Captain of half his Chariotes,
conspired against him, as he was in Tirzah drinking, till he was drunken in
the house of Arza steward of his house. And Zimri came and smote him and killed
him, and what the end of Zimri was as follows, 18. verse. And when Zimri saw
that the City was taken, he went into the palace of the kings house and burnt
himself, and the kings house with him. These kinds of cruel murdering men
at unawares, the holy scripture condemns of most impious cruelty, in the 2.
Sam. 20. 9. 2. Sam. 20. 9.
It is recorded that Ioab the Captain of the host, the cause being as it
seemed in that David had given the promise of his place to Amasa, as appears,
2. Sam. 19. 13. therefore Ioab pretending peace, came to him and said: Art thou
in health 2. Sam. 19. 13
my brother? And Joab took Amasa by the beard with the right hand to kiss
him. But Amasa took no heed to the sword that was in Joabs hand, for
therewith he smote him in the fifth ribbe and shed out his bowels to the
ground, and smote him not the second time so he died. In the like bloody
manner dealt Joab with Abner, pretending to speak peaceably with him in the
gate. 2. Sam. 3. 27. Concerning 2. Sam. 3. 27.
which treacherous manner, David left order with Solomon his son, as is to 1.
king. 2. 5.
see, 1. Kings 2. 5. to the which order Solomon agreed, and caused Benaiah to
smite Joab, having caught hold on the horns of the Alter: and there he died.

In the like treacherous sort dealt 2. Sam. 13. 28
Absolon with Amnon, 2. Sam. 13. making a great feast at a sheep-shearing,
whither as they, his brethren the sons of David were invited by him, and
Absolon had given charge concerning Amnon to his servants, that when they saw
Amnons heart merry with wine, they should smite him, and so they did. In which
act, although Amnon had done wickedly in defiling Thamar his sister: who gave
Absolon any such commission, in steed of public justice to be passed on him,
that he should so bloudily revenge it, as his own private quarrel?

Some like feasts such hipocrites make, and in the midst of their cups their
hearts are most bloody. To omit the butchery of Abimilech, upon his brethren,
for the placing of himself in the kingdom, Judge. 9. 5. verse. To omit Judge.
9. 5.
(only glauncing wise to speak of the^) the poisoning of King John King of
England, by a Munke of Swinsthead Abbey: the murder fresh in memory done by a
Friar most bloudely, upon Henry, the late King of France: the villainous attempt
upon the Prince of Orange. To pass over the abominable cruelty of the
Guizians, bathing themselves in blood, in the time of the Massacer, and that
practice against the Lord Chastillon, the high Admiral of France: And finally
to omit to speak of Bothwell his villainy, not a whit behind any of the rest
in savage cruelty for his treson against the late King of Scots. And to draw
to an end of this treatise, wherein you have seen laid forth the duties of
faithful subjects toward their Princes, especially concerning their outward
estate, and toward all other Magistrates: as also the parts and duties of
Princes on the other side, toward their subjects and people. And finally, the
manner and form of Traitors in the execution of their villanyes, whence I am
first to crave humbly of so many as this treatise shall come into their hands to
be seen and read, that they will especially consider the excellency of the
history, and how it agrees with the present estate of this age universally
thorough out all the parts of Christendom, requiring all of every condition in
the fear of God, that according as they find the truth set down before their
eyes, they will lay it to their hearts, and make profit thereof, and with
greater care of practice to proceed unto a more full purpose of obedience unto
our Prince, Counselors and Magistrates: in not only bridling their own tongs
from speaking, or hearts from conceiving ill against the Prince, being
expressly against the law of God proved: but also they will care, not to
give their ears to hear ought from others, (especially those runagates about
the land, the Seminary men) that either tends, or may tend to the
impeachment of the glory, credit and estimation of her Majesty, and of her
royal Crown and dignity: But with all their care and diligent endeavor, they
would hence learn to discry these Seminaries and seeds men of high treasons,
that by discovering them, (and that in all convenient time) thereby they may
stop the cause of any ill concerning reports or other mischiefs pretended
against the present state of her Majesty and people, not giving themselves
liberty to hear the licentious communications which in the houses of liberty
of many in their ignorance, not against the supreme Magistrate in plain terms,
which so openly they dare not, but against the inferior Governors, also whom
not to think evil of only, but in broad terms to speak against (such is the
looseness of these days) as hardly as may be, is their common custom.

Secondly upon the care and regard that subjects have over and toward their
Princes, and so consequently toward her Majesty our Sovereign, who^ herein
we are to praise God for, from our very hearts, vprysing and down lying,
humbly upon our knees Evening and Morning, considering how she has showed and
approved her self, hitherto the only Prince and Pastor most careful and
loving, most tender and merciful, for mainteyning us her people, for shedding
the sheep from the goats, for providing for us, that we have lived, and do
yet, in all peace and prosperity: for preventing the woluish and deceitful
troublers of our peace, for gathering us together when we were like to be
scattered, for preserving us under God, when we were like to perish, had not
the Lord been on her side, had not the Lord been on her side, as David in
the 124. Psalm, for the guiding, safely conducting and preserving us, when
men rose up against us, they had then swallowed us up quick, when their wrath
was kindled against us. To the praise of the which God, let us say as in the
same Psalm, Praised be the Lord, which has not given us a pray unto their
teeth, our soul is escaped, etc. And this deliverance through Gods mercy has
befallen us under her highness, she having been the only Pastor of all the
Princes upon the earth, for many years: whose watchings and carefulnes God
has blessed, of whom I hope, I may without flattery say that with David, She
has fed us her people and sheep of her fold, according to the simplicity
of her heart, and guided us by the discretion of her hands: For whose
continuance we are further to pray to God, that her Majesty as she has now
many years honorably ruled us, so she may in Gods fear proceed to play the
part of a good Princess over us still, to maintain us by the law of God, and
the wholesome laws of our Country in all peace and godliness during Gods will
and pleasure. And finally, that all other, to whose view this shall come, not
aunswering perhaps their judgments being contrarily minded, as Papists,
Recusants, from whose profession have proceeded, especially, the Arch-traytors
of this land (some one or few odd and frenticke spirits possessed with an
unclean spirit of railing upon Magistrates of late days, excepted) that the
rest remaining, unto whom in matters of faith and conscience, that Counsel of
Trent is approved, although it may be in that one point of rebelling against
the lawful and natural Prince they differ some few of them: yet all of them
will consider in uprightness between God and their own hearts, what mercy
they have received from her Majesty in stead of cruelty by them contrariwise
offered unto her again: what freedom? what liberty? what privileges and
annuities they do enjoy, in comparison of the hard measure offered to our
brethren in the late days of Queen Mary, and yet might enjoy what they would
more* with greater freedom, were not their wilfulness such, that yet even
they also will learn not only themselves to restrain unnatural and disloyal
words and thoughts: but all concealementes of evil against Prince, Magistrate
and the common state of the land. And thus desiring God that the glorious
Gospel of Christ Jesus his son, and his kingdom by the preaching thereof
may be continued, and more and more enlarged upon our land, we our Prince and
Country may live in the fellowshipe of one says agreeable to the holy
Scriptures, thereby the higher powers learning to rule according to godliness
and we the people may live in all obedience to our Princes and Governors
according to the phrase of the immortal, invisible, and only wise God, three
distinct persons, the father, son, and the holy Ghost, all one in the unity
of the Godhead: to whom be all honor, praise and glory now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

