A very short and pithie Catechism: very profitable for all that will come
prepared to the Supper of the Lord: With a form of confession, prayer and
thanks giving, Very necessary and comfortable for all Christian Families.

Made by Bartimeus Andrews, Preacher of the word of God at great Yarmouth:
Published at the request of the worshipful and godly Magistrates there.

Deute. 6.6.7.8. 6 And these words which I command thee this day shall be in
thy heart.

7 Thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy Children, and shall talk of
them when thou tarriest in thy house, and as thou walk by the way, and when
thou lie down, and when thou rysest up.

8 And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as
frontlets between thine eyes. etc.

1. Peter. 3.15. 15 But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready
always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope
that is in you, with meekenes and reverence.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. Charlewood. 1586.

To the right worshipful and my deerelye beloved in the Lord, M. Baileifes of
great Yarmouth, with the residue of the worshipful Brethren, and the whole
congregation there, B. A. wysheth increase of all true joy, and peace, with the
multiplying of all spiritual graces upon your souls, to the fulfilling of
your salvation in Christ Jesus. Amen.
Having drawn a very brief and small Catechism (worshipful M. Baileifes,
and the residue of my dear Brethren) for the private instruction of the
petites and families of this great congregation, for the better preparing of
them to the reverent use of the holy Supper of the Lord, and being required by
your godly Pastor, and diverse other, to have it published for the more easy
help of the simple and ignorant. I, your unworthy Teacher, being ready to
do what duty I can, for the furtheraunce of your salvation generally, which
I wish and long for, from my very heart root in Christ Jesus: have thought
good to prefixe these few words in way of dedication of this small thing, to
your worship, and the residue: presuming upon your Christian allowance of my
well meaning, having added hereunto a certain form of confession, prayer,
and thanksgiving, though plain, yet I hope necessary, and comfortable for the
use of the Christian Families of your congregation. And since God has by his
own hand, set your worships in the place of civil government, in this your
corporation, granted by the noble progenitors of her Majesty, and continued
still, and vpholden by her gracious bounty. Let me be so bold with you, as in
a word to put you in mind, and the residue of your worshipful company
eligible to that office, what things are most necessary for you to look unto
in that charge. God has given you a benefit and privilege of liberty, not
common to all her Majesty's people, that you might the better be fortified
with means to further Gods glory in your charge: and because I persuade my
self of the readiness of you, and the residue of your Brethren, to set your
hands and help to each lawful thing, tending to Gods glory, agreeable to his
word, which you all solemnly promised at my first entry amongst you, and have
somewhat approved the same, by your electing both of faithful and helpful
ministers of the word, as also of so wise and godly a Steward among you, I
resolve my self of the good success of my labors, and of your willing
obeisance to the Lords will propounded in his word. You must know that the
burden of this people lies upon your shoulders, and that their eyes look at
you, as those by whose example the people either perish and fall, or are
preserved and stayed up, for the fall and vprysing of many depends upon
public persons. Therefore in a Magistrate, first is required a religious
mind, acquainted with Gods counsel in his word, that he exercising himself
therein day and night, Psalm, 1 2,
might grow wise in the Lords causes: for this charge is laid upon you from
the Lord, to apply your selves to the word of God, for so it is said of the
Magistrate, Deu. 17. Deu. 17 19,
The word shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his
life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words
of this Law to do them. etc. Iosu. 1.8,
Also Joshua is straightly charged: Let not this book of the Law depart out
of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night, that thou may do according
to all that is written therein, then shall thou make thy way prosperous etc. So
Iethro commands Moses, to choose men fearing God. Exo. 18. Exo, 18, 21
Provide you among all the people men of good courage, fearing God, men dealing
truly, hating covetousness, and appoint them to be Rulers, etc. So as you see
that Magistrates must be religious, and also men of courage, Iosu. 2, 7, Exo,
18 21,
to execute justice in all causes, not corrupt with gifts, nor accepting the
faces of men, without foolish pity, or faint-harted fear, and without
cruelty or revenging affections, but of al meeknes and lenity. They must
perform all faythfulnes and truth with equity, as those that are members of
the same body, appointed to see distributive and equal justice to be
administered to each man accordingly, for so Moses requires, that they shall be
men dealing truly, Exo, 18, 21,
so as they must not look to men, but to the causes, taking heed of that
caveat that Moses gives. Exo. 23. Exo, 23 12,
Thou shall not receive a false tale, thou shall not follow a multitude to do
evil, neither agree in a controversy to decline after many, and overthrow the
truth, etc. Neither must such neglect the execution of justice against the
offenders, either for fear of reproach or rebuke, least they countenance
sin thereby, and bear the guylt of other men's falls. Eccl. 8, 11
For because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedely, therefore
the heart of the Children of men is fully set in them to do evil. Exo. 18 21.
In all these things Covetousness must be shunned, the stepmother and
ouerthrower of all justice and truth, which throws out the hearts even of the
wise to many noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition: 1, Tim, 6, 9, 10
very dangerous to men of wealth or authority, and ever weighting upon that
degree of men. Wherefore I beseech you, good my worshipful Brethren,
vouchsafe the accepting of these instructions written in have, with a mind
vnfeynedlie wishing you all good. Be you presidents in godly and sober example
to this great people, ouersee your own households first, that they may be
patterns and lights of godly discipline to others. Remember Joshua his
protestation, Iosu. 2.4
I and my household will serve the Lord. Remember Nehemiah, Nehe. 5.
who enforced his own example and his servants, to persuade his brethren to
justice and love. Act. 10.
Remember how Cornelius and his household feared God. Now then beloved, as you
love the Lord, as you tender your own souls, and your charges, as you bear
natural affection to your common safety, and happiness, I beseech you in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, endeavor to these things, both small and great, that
you may profit in the work of your salvation, so shall you be famous in the
church of God and common weal, you shall glad the souls of us, that labor
amongst you in the word, you shall bring glory to God, and eternal happiness to
your selus in the day of Christ Jesus. Let Gods book be orderly read with
reverence, daily in your families, let prayer be exercised in your housholdes
and vouchsafe to help them in this small Catechism, that they may be fit
for further instruction. Give diligence to harken to the word of life, and to
put in ure these few prayers in this little book or other, with humility,
reverence, a lively sense and feeling of your misery, faith, thankfulness,
hope, and with unfeigned desire of profiting in all duties, of faith and love
toward God and your brethren. For I live if you stand in the faith: and since
God has vouchsafed the blessed tidinges of salvation upon you in the
ministry of his word, embrace it with thankfulness, and study for all
christian peace and unity among your selves, fearing God, furthering his holy
religion, and all duties of love among men, that so our Town may flourishe
and prosper in all things, otherwise we can hope of no blessing at the hand
of God. There is great cause why care should be had herein. Your Town
bordering upon the sea, is in perrill to foreign invasions, and to be steyned
with the corrupt manners of other Countries, to drink in iniquity even as
water, therefore the more care to be had over it. Christ saw such Towns
bordering on the Seas to be in most danger sundry ways, and therefore
freque^ted them most, and vouchsafed his presence and doctrine chiefliest
amongst them. This is my suit to your worshippes, this is my suit to the whole
company, to the whole congregation, yea to every soul amongst you, Phil, 2, 1,
If ye ever received comfort in Christ, if ever you had love to the brethren,
if ever any fellowship of the spirit, if any compassion and mercy, that you
fulfill my joy, Even in this, to be of one mind in doctrine, of one consent in
a godly and christian life, to apply all duties of Gods worship, to have care
of your families, instructing, teaching, and calling upon them to be
catechized, to read and hear the word, be your selves forward therein,
exercisyng prayer, reading and hearing of the word, in faith and good
conscience, that so by christian exercises, your faith and obedience may be
increased, your families reformed, your Town happily governed, that others may
take example by you, God may be glorified, all spiritual blessings may be
heaped upon you, and continued to your posterity after you, unto many
generations, your selves may in the end receive the possession of everlasting
life, with Christ Jesus in the kingdom of God: to whose blessed tuition I
commend you, and yours, praying the Lord to multiplye all his graces, and
mercies upon you, and the whole people, to keep you in safety from the
danger of enemies, to sanctify you in his truth, to bless you in your
government, the people in obeying, and to make you perfitte in all good works,
to do his will, working in you that which is pleasant in his sight, thorough
Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father and the holy spirit be all praise and
honor for ever and ever. Amen.

Your worships to use in in the Lord, heartily desirous of your good and
salvation in Christ Jesus. B. Andrews.

An order of prayer, or a preparation to the reading of the word in your
families. Let us prepare and stir up our minds by prayer, that we may
read the word of God with profit.
O Lord our God, who in thy wisdom and mercy have appointed thy holy word
as the wholesome nourishment of our souls, that by reading, hearing, and
musing thereon, we might grow up unto salvation: We beseech thee to pardon
all our sins, for Jesus Christ his sake, take away the corruption of our
nature, purge and sanctify our hearts, that we may read thy word at all times
with reverent minds, so as we may daily be borne again, confyrmed in faith,
reformed in our manners, furthered in knowledge and obedience, strengthened
against all temptations, furnished with patience against all trials, and
finally be made fruitful in all good works, resembling thy Image, and growing
up into full holiness and righteousness in thy sight, til we are perfited in
the heavens with Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.

Let us harken with reverence to the holy word of the Lord our God written in
such or such a Chapter and Book. etc.

A brief and short Catechism, made for the use of housholdes, and to be
learned of all those that will be admitted to the Lords Supper. By B. A.
Minister.

TO what end did God make you?

Answer.

That I might serve him according to his word, Lu, 1, 74 Ephesians, 4, 24
by doing his will, in righteousness and true holiness all my life.

Minister.

Where shall you learn what is this will of God?

Answer.

In his word and Law.

Minister.

Rehearse that Law of God.

Answer.

God spoke and said, Exo. 20,
I am the Lord thy God. etc.

Answer.

What cheefely does this law require of you?

Answer.

First, that I should acknowledge Deuteronomy, 6 4,
one only God, and serve him in all pureness, De. 6.5, et 10, 12 Luk, 10 27 Ma,
22, 37,
with all my heart, soul, mind, strength, will, and thoughts, in all things
according to his word. Secondly, that I should walk in Mat 22, 39 To. 13 8,
7, 10
love, faithfulness, and truth with all men, doing duties of conscience in my
calling, and Le. 19, 8,
loving my neighbor as my self.

Minister.

Are you able of your self to do his will, and keep this his Law?

Answer.

Nothing less.

Minister.

Why so.

Answer.

Because of my corrupt nature, which To. 5, 18
with Adam is fallen from the state of innocence, To, 8, 7
and so is not obedient to the law of GOD.

Minister.

What are you by nature then?

Answer.

The Ephesians, 2, 3
child of wrath and To, 6, 20
a sinner.

Minister.

What is sin.

Answer.

Every 1, Ioh. 3, 4
breaking or Neh, 9, 34 Heb, 2, 3,
neglecting of any commandment of God, and Neh, 1, 7 Gal, 3.10
the not doing of every duty commanded is sin.

Minister.

What is the reward of sin.

Answer.

The Gal. 3, 10
curse of God, To. 6, 23
and death with Mar, 9 48 Mat, 25 46 2, These. 1, 9, Eze, 18, 20
everlasting woe and perdition, of soul and body.

Minister.

Then by every breaking of the Law, you daily deserve death, and procure Gods
curse.

Answer.

It is very true.

Minister.

How shall you be freed from this curse

Answer.

Ga, 3, 13
By Jesus Christ my Savior and redeemer.

Minister.

What did he for you.

Answer.

He was both To, 9, 5 Col, 2 9 He, 1, 3,
perfect God that he might be able He, 2, 14,
to overcome death for me, and also he was perfect Mat 1, 25, Ga, 4, 4
man, that he might Heb 2, 11, Col, 1 22,
suffer death and Gods wrath for my sins, and so in both these natures
together, he fully satisfied the justice of God for me, and purchased my
salvation.

Minister

What moved God thus to save you.

Answer.

His own mere love, favor and mercy, without any respect of my worthiness.

Minister.

How are you assured of this mercy of GOD.

Answer.

By a true faith in Christ.

Minister

Rehearse the sum of your faith.

Answer.

I believe in God the father almighty. etc.

Minister.

What breefely do you gather out of these articles.

Answer.

My faith is assured herein, that God the father Ioh. 3.1
of his own good will, Rom, 8, 3 Ephesians. 5, 2 Tit, 2, 14,
gave his son Jesus Christ, very God and man to redeem me from sin by his
death and passion, and Romans 8, 9 2, Cor, 5, 5, 1, Ioh. 4, 13,
sending out his holy spirit into me, to cause Christ his Rom, 8, 10.
death and life to be effectual to renew me et 6, 4.
into a new life, he has made me of his Church and company of believers,
sanctified to do his will here, and to glorify him in everlasting life in the
world to come.

Minister.

Wherefore did Christ thus suffer and dye.

Answer.

To. 4, 25
For my sins.

Minister.

what profit have you by his death.

Answer.

I have Ephesi, 1.7,
forgiveness of sins, To. 6, 6,
the mortification of my flesh, and the Col 1, 20,
appeasing of Gods wrath.

Minister.

what mean you by his descending into hell.

Answer.

Not that Christ went into the place of torments with his soul or body, but
that for a time he Esa. 53, 4, 5,
felt his Fathers wrath, and the Act 2, 24.
dolers of eternal death in his Mat 26, 38, 42 Luke 22, 43 Hebr, 5 7
soul and conscience here on earth for us, that he might be a redeemer as
well of the soul as of the body.

Minister.

what profit have you by his resurrection?

Answer.

I have To. 4, 15
righteousness a gage 1, Cor, 15, 20.
of my immortality, and Rom, 6 4
newnes of life.

Minister.

what use make you of the article concerning the holy Ghost.

Answer.

I learn therein, yt it is God the holy Ioh, 6, 63, et 14, 26
ghost only which makes Christ his death and life profitable to me Ioh, 3, 6
by renewing my heart to the obedience of Gods will, and working faith in me to
apply the merits of Christ to my self, and by the same spirit, God gathers
a Church to himself in all Ioh, 10.16
the world by his word.

Minister.

How does Gods spirit work faith in you?

Answer.

By the word of God preached. To, 10, 14


Minister.

what are the means to increase, nourish, and uphold your faith.

Answer.

Romans 10 17
The hearing of the word of God preached, the use of the Sacraments and of
prayer.

Minister.

will you then be dilligent to hear the word, to use the Sacraments, and to
frequent prayer, that your faith may be increased.

Answer.

Yea by Gods grace.

Minister.

what is a Sacrament?

Answer.

A Sacrament is an outward Gen 17.11, Rom, 4, 11.
seal joined unto ye word, which visibly represents unto us spiritual
things, and assures our faith of Gods promises declared in his word.

Minister.

How many Sacraments has God ordained?

Answer.

Two, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.

Minister.

How does Baptism profit your faith?

Answer.

First, by assuring me that I am Rom, 6, 3, 5. 1, Cor, 12, 13,
one with Christ, Secondlye, that I am John. 3, 3.5
begotten again, Col, 2, 11
from sin into a new life. Thirdly, by being a pledge of (d) the forgiveness
of my sins, Mat, 3, 6, Act, 2, 38,
for as the water cleanses the body, so our souls by Heb. 9, 12. 1. Pet. 3 22
1. Ioh. 1.7. Apo. 1.5
the blood of Christ are purged from sin.

Minister.

what profit has your faith by the Lords Supper.

Answer.

Even this: that as outwardly I receive the bread and wine to nourish my
body, so 1, Col. 10, 16, and 12, 13,
inwardly I receive Christ by faith, even as mine own, whose body Cor, 1,
14.22
and blood cleanses me from sin, and nourishes me to eternal life.

Minister.

Do you receive the very body and blood of Christ really in the bread?

Answer.

Ioh, 6 63,
Nothinglesse, but only spirituallie by faith.

Minister.

How shall you come worthily to the Lords supper?

Answer.

When I come with faith and repentance.

Minister.

How shall you know when you come to the communion with faith?

Answer.

First, if I acknowledge mine own poverty and wants, confess the mercies of
God Ps. 103, 1, 2, 1, Cor, 11, 24
with thanksgiving, Secondly, when I assure my self of the Mat, 26 28
forgiveness of my sins, by the death and sacrifice of Christ only.

Minister.

How shall you know when you come with repentance.

Answer.

First, if I 1. Cor 11, 28
examine and prove my heart, and am truly 2. Cor, 7, 10
grieved for my sins, Pro, 28. 13, Mat, 3, 6
confessing them before God, and forsaking them, Secondly, if I unfeignedly
purpose to walk Mat, 3, 8
in a new life, that is, in holiness to GOD, and true love to my neighbor,
Mat, 5, 23, 24.
reconciling my self to them that I offend, and Mat, 6, 14, 15, Col, 3, 13,
forgiving others that I may be forgiven.

Minister.

what does the bread broken signify.

Answer.

It signifies the body of Christ broken for my sins.

Minister.

what does the wine signify.

Answer.

The blood of Christ shed for my sins.

Minister.

what differs baptism from the Lords supper, since they both betoken the
remyssion of sins.

Answer.

Baptism, grafteth us into Christ by regeneration in hope of remission of
sins. The Supper nourishes us being grafted to feel the power of death, 1,
Cor 22, 13
and resurrection of Christ, daily strengthening our Faith into a new life.

Minister.

why receive you Baptism but once in all your life, and the supper of the
Lord often times.

Answer.

Because that as we need but once to be borne, so we need but once to be
baptized, but as we need often to be fed to nourish our bodies in life, 1,
Cor, 11, 24 25,
so must we often receive the Lords supper, to confirm our faith, and to
testify our thankful remembrance of Christ's death.

Minister.

It seems then that you must needs have your heart touched for your sins
when you come to the communion and repenting your former life, and you must
come with hope of forgiveness.

Answer.

It is very true, else can I have no comfort or benefit by it, therefore I pray
God to touch my heart aright for my sins, and to pardon them, that I may come
worthelie thereunto.

Minister.

Do you take this Sacrament then as a pledge of Gods love in forgiving your
sins, and do you purpose and profess unfeignedly amendment of life, and to
live with your brethren in christian love?

Answer.

Yea indeed, and I make this an utter renouncing of my former life, that by
Gods grace I may hereafter lead a new life, which grace God grant me. Amen.

Minister.

So doing I (as the minister of God) receive you to the comunity of the saints
of God, and seal unto you the mercies of God by the authority of his word, to
your everlasting comfort in Christ Jesus.

Answer

The Lord give me grace to walk worthy of his calling in his fear all my
life, yt I may be acceptable to him in Jesus Christ. Amen.

Minister

will you exercise your faith in praying for these things daily.

Answer.

Yea by Gods grace.

Minister.

what is prayer.

Answer.

It is to ask all good things at the hand of God, and to give him thanks for
all things received.

Minister.

To whom will you make your prayers?

Answer.

To God alone.

Minister.

who directs your affections in prayer?

Answer.

Rom, 8, 27
The spirit of God, which makes (a) request according to the will of God in
his Saints.

Minister.

How are your prayers acceptable. Heb, 15 15, 1, Pet, 2 5.


Answer.

By Jesus Christ.

Minister.

By what rule will you frame your prayers?

Answer.

By that order of Christ, Mat. 6 9.
set down to his Disciples, which we call the Lords prayer.

Minister

Repeat it.

Answer.

Our Father which art in heaven. etc.

Minister.

what is the sum of this prayer?

Answer.

First, we pray here for all things that may make to the glory of God, and
aduauncing of his name, for the enlarging of his kingdom, and the performance
of his will in all things. Secondly, we pray for all things needful for our
selves, both for our bodies and souls, that so by the direction of his grace
and spirit, we being freed from sin, may serve him freely, in righteousness
and holiness all our life, which grace, God grant me and all his people. Amen.

Finis quod B. Andrews.

A form of confession.
O Lord our God, most loving, gracious, and merciful Father, to whom
belongs righteousness, and mercy, compassyon and forgiveness, to us belongs
shame and confusion of faces, because we have transgressed, in not obeying thy
voice, and in breaking all thy holy commandments: for we acknowledge (O
Lord) that even in our conception we were enfolden in the gylt of condemnation,
being conceived in sin, and borne the children of wrath, and from thencefoorth
have wandered in ungodly paths, and in the ways of destruction: sin having
entered upon all the parts of our whole man, has wholly corrupted both our
will and understanding: our thoughts are profane, our imaginations worldly,
our desires carnal and unclean, our judgments corrupt, whereby we have been
disobedient to thy heavenly will, ignorant, stubborn, malicious, impacient,
envious, full of self-love, full of hypocrisy, finallye, fraught with all
evil concupiscences, and void of grace, till thou dyddest touch our hearts by
thy Spyrite and word, and calledst us to sanctification. Yea, and since thou
haste called us by the preaching of thy Gospel, O Lord what sins and
corruptions have cloven unto us still, so as the works of thy grace begun in
us, do so scarcely appear, as that thou may justly withdraw from us
those graces which thou have trusted us with For we confess we have abused thy
grace received, neglecting the means of our salvation: Our zeal is cold, our
faith is weak, our hope languisheth, our repentance is maimed and barren, not
yielding such fruit as may plainly approve our sanctification: We are
forgetful of thy goodness, and unthankful for thy mercies.

Alas LORD all the cost that thou haste bestowed, and charge that thou haste
been at, in gyuinge thy son Christ Jesus to shed his dear heart blood for
our sins, has not gaged our bowelles with godly sorrow unto repentance,
nor affected us with love of thee again. Even this (Lord) is enough to
condemn us, if we had nothing else to witness against us, that we so
slenderly account of the death of thy Son, and so retchleslye and
forgetfullye think of it.

If thou should forget all our sins past, the vanities of our former
days, and frailty of our youth, that none of these should be thought upon,
yet our present sins and slippings since our calling, would condemn us
down to hell. Yea, if our present sins should be passed over, yet our
readiness to slide, and transgress in time to come, would argue us guilty of
death. Yea, and more then this (Lord) in that we have not rightly sorrowed,
nor repented us vnfeynedlie of these evils, we stand guilty before thee, as
also in that the sins of our forefathers, whereunto we stand intiteled,
remain vnsorrowed for by us, the stain whereof, has set a purple ^^e upon
us, so deep as we can never wash off, except thy free pardon: all these
things call for judgments not only upon us, but also upon our posterity.
Oh how have we despised thy Laws? how have we neglected the preachinge of
thy word, the instrument of our salvation? how have we waited on our own
lusts, serving as apprentices unto sin? How have we refused thy counsel,
and set instruction at naught: we have set more by the world then by thy
word, we have spent as prodigal children, the strength of our young years in
vanity, and have drunk in iniquity as water: our cares have been for the
world, and our own pleasures and profits, not for thy glory, we have
murmured and grudged when thou have crossed us with any affliction or trouble,
we have forgotten thee in our prosperity, and grown wanton and unthankful.
Our conscience in trayning up our families and children in thy fear, O Lord
how small has it been, our selves have been ill presidents to them, in
loosenes of behavior, in idle talks and iestes that are not comely. We have
been impacient and unequal in our government, to austere in smaller offenses
against our selves, and sometime to remiss, in slender passing over of greater
offenses concerning thy glory, we have sought our selves and our own
commodities, and not thee, we have disobeyed our parents and betters, and so
have left our selves small hope of obedience at the hands of those that are
under us. And as for our brethren and neighbors, to whom we should approve
our love by all christian duties, here Lord we stand deeply charged of
much guiltines, how undutiful to our parents, Princes, Governors, Teachers,
pastors, and all our betters, not carefully praying for them, nor procuring
them what honor and good that we can in our callinges, nor carrying humble
minds toward our equalles or inferiors. We have been impacient, full of
unnatural affections, malicious, contentious, yea, how uncharitable have we
been in judging others, in taking unkindness at every occasion, not forgiving
nor forbearing when quarrels have risen, but are too ready to give occasion
and to provoke to displeasure: we have not labored for peace as it became us.
How unstayed, unchaste, and intemperate have our words and affections been,
how unjust have we been in our thoughts and meaninges, not studying for
truth and equity in love, but through covetous affections have sometimes
intruded into the commodities of others. How have we not spared the name of our
brethren, not touched with the tender regard of their credit, sometime
hearing, believing, and publyshing of slanders, and untruths against our
neighbors, or else by revealing the uttermost against them, have russhed
against their good name. Yea (Lord) we have hurt many by our example, and
have not done that good which we might have done to our brethren, nor made
conscience of offenses against them.

All these things (O dear Father) argue us guilty, and press us, by
increasing the evidence of our accusation: but if we should (O lord) stand to
rippe up our wants in thy service, we should not know where to begin, nor
where to end, they are so infinite. In a word (Lord) we have broken the holy
league of our obedience, neglected thy worship, not fearing, loving, nor
trusting in thee as we ought: we have not sought to thee in our needs, nor
harkened to thy word in the ministry thereof, we have dishallowed thy name,
transgressed al thy laws, and made havoc of thy heavenly statuts, all our
life has been a dishonor unto thee: and now O Lord even our God, what
remains for us in thy justice, if thou should measure us by our selves,
but even thy fearful curse, and banishment from thy presence, so as thou
might throw us down to hell, and show the power of thy wrath upon us, by
heaping on us all thy fearful plagues and curses, written in the law against
transgressors. If we should look to the heavens, they can not help us, if
we looked down to the earth, no comfort can be found: if we seek for men to
be our advocates, they all stand condemned with the sons of Adam: if we sue to
Angels, it booteth not, for thou have found folly in them: if we should
plead Law with thee, lo, the sentence of death already is passed against
us, if we resort to thy divine majesty, there terror dismayeth us, thou art
just and can not away with iniquity, and we Lord, what are we to stand in
thy sight, whether then shall we fly from thy presence, and where shall we be
reskued from the terror and guilt of our sins, and the fear of thy
judgments: Behold Lord thy dear son Christ Jesus, that immaculate Lamb,
he is our redeemer and savior, our iustifier, our advocate, who as a loving
Samaritane has salued our wounds, satisfied thy Law, borne thy curse for us,
and stepping out between us and thee, has paid the ransom of all our
trespasses: in him we know thou can not be displeased with us. O Lord
heavenly father, we therefore most humbly pray thee for his sake to be
merciful unto us, in pardoning all our sins, and turning all these
judgments from us, which we confess we have deserved to be executed upon our
souls and bodies, for we acknowledge thou might justly plague us, for
that we have not used the faculties and powers of our souls and minds to thy
glory, our wits and wisdom have warred against thee, and we have spent our
counsels in vain things, so as thou might deprive us of our wits, and
possess us with folly and madness, or throw us up to errors and strong
illusions, because we have not believed thy truth, thou might also with
draw from us the use of our members, which we have too long let out to
Satan and uncleanness, and have not served thee in our senses and members as
we ought. And whereas thou have heaped benefits infinitely upon us, haste
trusted us with life, health, wealth, prosperity and peace, we have been
unthankful for them, and abused them, so as thou might Lord turn our life
into death, our wealth into woe, our health into dangerous sickness, and
diseases, our prosperity into adversity, our peace into war, our plenty
into scarcity and dearth, and so punish the earth for our sins as thou have by
some petty judgments begun often to call us to repentance, but we have not
regarded, neither been fittes nor scourges can move us to humble and tame us,
except thou O Lord put to thine hand.

O dear Father, suffer us not to sin in hardness of heart, and in unkindness
toward thy majesty, or against the means and offers of grace but touch us,
we pray thee with a true remorse of conscience for our sins, which we here
vnfaynedlie confess before thee, frame our hearts to true repentance, accept
this Sacrifice of our confession and sorrow for our iniquities, pardon all our
sins, bury them in the grave of thy Son, forget and forgive them and cause
us to turn unto thee, for we are ashamed of our selves, and abhor our
selves, repenting us of all our sins from our hearts: wherefore (Lord) hear, O
Lord forgive, O Lord consider and show mercy, and receive us unto favor, for
with thee only is mercy and compassyon: thou only forgiuest sins, we
renounce our selves wholly, and all our own worthiness, we appeal from all
others to thee alone, therefore accept of us in thy beloved son Christ Jesus,
renew us by thy spirit, guide us in thy ways, sanctify us in thy truth,
keep us in awe, that we may spend all our time in thy service, doing duties
to thee and our brethren in our callings, all our life, that so we feeling of
thy grace, working in us unto sanctification, and a new life, may gather
assurance of the full forgiveness of all our sins, and so with comfort and
joy, finish our christian course, giving good example to our brethren, and
glorifying thy name upon the earth, and finally may praise thee in the
heavens, without all corruption, in perfect holiness, and so be glorified with
all thy saints, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A form of prayer.
O Lord our most gracious, good, and merciful Father, we thy servants, and
the work manshyp of thy hands, fall down before thy high majesty, humblye
acknowledging our manifold and heinous sins, whereby we have broken thy
holy Laws, and justly deserved even eternal death and condemnation at thy
hands. We do here most instantly upon the knees of our hearts, sue unto thy
fatherlye clemency, for pardon and forgiveness of all our sins whatsoever,
and for the remoouing and keeping back of all thy judgments from us, which we
by our sins have justly deserved and accept of us and our prayers, wherewith
we present thy majesty, in the name and mediation of thy son Christ Jesus,
preparing our hearts with reverence and faith to call upon thee. And whereas we
were borne in sin and iniquity, whereby we are altogether corrupt, and are
more rightly entitled to death and condemnation then to life, we pray thee
(most merciful father) to renew us by thy holy spirit, and to root out of us
all those evil roots of our concupiscence, clensing us from all that which
sauoureth of our selves, and of uncleanness. Purge our evil thoughts, our
profane imaginations, and carnal lusts. Yea Lord, we humblye pray thee,
scour our hearts from all hypocrisy, from all contempt of thee and of thy
holy word, from all ignorance of thee, false worship, incredulity and
distrust of thy fatherly providence, and from murmuring at thy hand in
affliction. Let us not profane thy most holy name, either in word, deed, or
thought, nor dishallow thy Sabbaothes, but cleave to al thy ordinances

Throw out of us (O Lord) all self-love, contempt against others, pride,
wrath, impaciencie, uncharitableness, all unnatural affections, unmercifulness,
desire of revenge, hatred and envy, all fornications, unorderly and wanton
lusts, intemperancie and unchaste behavior, al worldly mindednes,
covetousness, deceit and injury, all slanderous words and surmises against
our brethren. All these things we pray thee to remove out of us, and to
sanctify our hearts, to the obedience of all thy holy commandments, that we
may daily be reformed to thy Image, in true holiness and righteousness,
expressing duties to thee and our brethren, with a careful conscience. Take
up our thoughts and affections (O lord) that they may affect and long after
thee day and night, and that the counsels of our hearts may muse on thee and thy
holy will: and dwell thou wholly in our souls and bodies, directing our wyls,
our judgments and understanding, our speeches and all our actions, that in our
whole manne we may serve thee. Good Lord plant in us, we pray thee, the true
love and fear of thy name, increase the knowledge of thy word in us, with
faith, zeal, and judgment, that we may reverence and obey it in our souls,
studying to show the fruit thereof in our lives. Work and increase a true
and lively faith in us, whereby we may cleave to thee, and thine everlasting
promises in Christ Jesus, and may depend upon thy providence in all estates of
this mortal life, without murmuring or repyning at thy hand, in sickness,
poverty, imprisonment, persecution, or in any affliction either of body or
mind, patiently bearing all crosses, knowing that thereby thou correctest our
sins, as a father, seeking our ame^dment. On the otherside, let us not be
remiss, careless and forgetful in our prosperitye, but may in wealth and woe
acknowledge thy hand with thankfulness and reverence, rejoicing that howsoever
thou dealest with us in outward things, yet thou art so our father in Christ,
that thou can not deny us any thing, that may be to the benefit of our
souls, or to our safety in the life to come, since that we have interest even
unto thy self in Christ our savior. And since thou have trusted us with thine
own name and glory, which in thy gospel shines unto us. O give us grace to
seek the enlarging of thy kingdom, by furthering thy Gospel in the ministry
thereof, to our power, being ielious over thy name, that our speeches,
thoughts, or doings, may not savor of contempt against thee, nor suffer thee
to be dishonored of others, if we may any way hinder it: neither let our
life be so loose, as occasion should be taken there from by men to blaspheme
thy name. But Lord guide us so by thy grace, that our godly and sober life
amongste men, may be a comelines, a glory, and an honor unto thee, to bring
credit to our professyon.

(For alas Lord) herein we have been traitors unto thee, to betray thy glory
into the reprochefull tongues of godless men for want of watchfulnes and
guidaunce in our ways. Direct us therefore O Lord, in thy whole worship, in
spirit and truth, and stir us up, that we may approve our faith by careful
and continual hearing, reading, and musing of thy word, by exercising prayer,
both publicly with the assembly of people, and privately by our selves and
with our families, that we may acknowledge thee to be our God, in seeking unto
thee for all things, and returning thanks unto thee, as from whom comes
every good thing.

Give us faith and repentance in the use of thy Sacraments, that we rightly
frequenting all holy exercises of thy worship, may sanctify thy Sabbaothes,
and increase our faith, fear, and love toward thee. Furthermore we pray thee
O LORD, teach us to put on al affections of love toward our brethren, being
endued with meeknes, humblenes of mind, patience, forbearing and forgiving one
another, when there are quarrels, even as Christ has forgiven us, so as we may
live in all christian manner amongst men, without wars, and contentions, in
all courteous, true, and just dealing, in our affairs and business, not using
any unlawful arts or practices, for the increase of our commodities and
pleasures, but faith fully laboring in our callings, may depend upon thy
promises, approving our faith. Let the name and credit of our brethren and
neighbors be precious unto us, that by no mutteringes, surmisings, reports, or
light credence, we impair their good name, and when we meet with sla^ders or
reproaches, give us grace to bear our selves lowly and humble, seeking redress
without bitterness of spirit, knowing how Christ in the like cases has
suffered. And because we can not always enjoy peace and liberty, under the
profession of thy Gospel. O Lord our God, we pray thee let us not only
now in these days of our safetye, allow and cleave unto thy truth, whilst
others do accompanye us in professyon, whilst Princes bear us out, friends
do countenance us, whilst our wives, children, lands and possessyon abide by
us, and all things smyle upon us: but O dear Father, if ever our sins
should procure persecution for thy truth, so as companions should leave us,
friends fail us, the cruel looks of Princes, and their bloodye hands should
be turned upon us, when merciless imprisonment, the glittering sword, the
shaking spear, or fiery flame should with terror threaten death, when
banishment and exile shall be for native soil, when our dear wives and tender
babes, with woeful cries and wringing of hands, on the one side shall move the
bowels of pity, the raging fire or other fearful tortures of death on the
otherside, shall move terror and dyscouragement, Oh, even then Lord, we poor
wretches and worms unable of our selves to abide the heeresaie of death, do
beseech thee to fortify our faith, giving us patience, confidence and hope
unto the end, that as thou haste given us a desire to hold out, which is a
pledge of our continuance, so thou may still uphold us with the taste of the
joys to come, that in Christ we may abide unto the end, so as nothing may
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

O Lord therefore give us grace in our prosperity, to mortify our affections
both from sin and the world, that it make us not unfit for the yoke, and
unruly. Thou know Lord the desire of our souls, O perform these things
unto us for Jesus Christ his sake. We further pray thee (O Lord) to be
president and governor of us and our families, directing us sincerely in all
thy ways, that we give not evil example either in word or deed, not raging
in our affections, ruling by them; but moderate thou our affections and
speeches in all our domestical government, that we may rule over them in thy
name, being neither too severe nor too remiss, that so man and wife, with
their families, may live together religiously, soberlie, and peaceably, with
freer use of prayer, and other holy exercises.

O LORD, bless our Servants and children with obedient and duetifull hearts
to thy majesty, and unto us for thee, being without murmuring, unfaithfulness,
replying or stubborn answers, but peaceable, lowly, and tractable, Bannish
from them all swearing, lying, pride, cursed speaking, slaundering, riot, and
all intemperancie. And though by our sins thou might take advantage to
throw out our children to thy curse, and to with hold thy grace from them,
yet pardon thou our sins for thy mercies sake, and continue thy graces to us,
and to our posterity after us, to many generations. O Lord, because also
nothing can prosper without thy blessinge (though we care and toil) bless
thou therefore and prosper all the affairs of our lawful callinges, this day
and ever hereafter, that we may see daily a comfortable issue of our labors,
for we resign up all our affairs, and the success thereof unto thee,
laboring in them under thy providence. And now Lord, we pray thee for our
neighbors round about us, and for the congregation, where we enjoy the
fellowship of this life, with other rich graces of thine, O Lord bless them
all, and each family and person, both old and young, husbands and wives,
parents and children, masters and servants, governors and people, that each
of these in their callinges being furnished with meet graces from thee, may
discharge a good conscience therein in thy fear. Bless O LORD the Magistrates
of our town, endue them with wisdom, courage, faithfulness, and the fear of
thy name, and all graces necessary, that they executing judgment and justice,
thy glory may be advanced, the people may of conscience obey, sin may be
supplanted, and godliness with truth may happilye flourish among us. Bless (O
lord) we pray thee, our ministers of thy word, that they may abound with all
necessary graces, fit for that weighty calling: let us embrace them in our
hearts, as messengers sent by thee for our salvation. Give unto them strength,
faithfulness, gravity, wisdom, judgment, patience, and courage in doing thy
will, that they may wade comfortablie, and with a good conscience, through all
dangers: make their labors fruitful, in the hearts of the people, convert or
confound all that rise up against wholesome doctrine, reform the disobedient,
keep them in thy truth that are called, increasinge their faith and
obedience, and gather home daielie some souls into thy fold, that the people
being turned unto thee, thou may have praise. Preserve O Lord, this our
Town from inward perrills of the soul, and outward of the body, be thou our
watchman, and tower of defense from al enemies, that our sins betray not our
peace: keep us by sea and by land in blessed safety, and let us not forget to
praise thee for it: continue thine holy ordinance of teaching o Lord among us
evermore, let us never want that blessed and sovereign means of our salvation,
and give us grace heartily, reverently, and faithfully to regard thy servants
and thy heavenly doctrine brought by the^ so as both they and we may in our
lives expres the fruit of thy word, feeling effectually the power thereof
converted into our souls, to the through reforming of the whole man that we may
stand assured of thy mercy and pardon of our sins through faith, may be
multiplied with all spiritual graces, directed, kept and continued to the end
in all happy ways, so as our own souls may reap perfect comfort, others may be
edified, and turned unto thee, thy self may receive glory, honor and eternal
praise in Christ Jesus: and now lord, we most earnestly entreat thee for our
whole land, and principallye, for our most gracious Queen Elizabeth, o lord
give her a long, a prosperous, a godly, and a happy reign over us, co^founding
all her enemies, safegarding her royal person, enritching her soul with all
heavenly graces unto salvation, that she governing happily on earth, may
reign everlastingly in heaven with thee. Bless her right honorable
Counselors, and all inferior Magistrates, directing their counsels,
consultations and governments, to the aduauncing of thy glory, and the good of
thy Church. Bless all the Ministers of thy holy word, that they may
sincerely discharg a good conscience in their places, to the edifying of thy
church through love. Yea we pray thee for all our whole land, and people of all
degrees, pardon their sins, lead them in thy truth, that they may in peace
and godliness serve thee all their life. Finally, Lord we pray thee for all
nations, kindreds, and tongues, where thy name is professed, for all christian
Magistrates and Rulers, that thou wylt bless and defend them, and keep them
in thy truth from all their ennimies, cause the light of thy holy Gospel to
shine to all nations, that they being turned to thee, thou may have praise,
comfort the comfortles, help the helples, be a father to the fatherles, and a
husband to the wyddowes, end the misery of the afflicted, confound al
enemies of thy church, and give to thy people everlasting peace in Christ
Jesus. These graces with all other else necessary for us, and thy whole Church,
we humbly crave at thy majesty's hand, in such manner as he has taught us,
saying: Our Father which art in Heaven. etc.

A form of thanksgiuinge.
WE render most humble and hearty thanks in Jesus Christ unto thy divine
majesty, o lord our God, for thy great mercies and ancient loving kindness
toward us and thy whole church always expressed, namely lord for thy
inestimable and everlasting love, whereby thou have chosen us freely in Christ
Jesus unto salvation, before the foundations of the world w^^e laid, as also
for thy goodness whereby thou have created us to the likeness of thine own
Image, and whereas we and the whole race of mankind, through sin and
transgression were fallen from thee, into a desperate and hellish condition of
condemnation, thou have again redeemed us by the precious death and
bloodshedding of thy Son, freed us from bondage, pardoned all our sins, and
restored us into favor, even with thy self, invested us into all thy riches,
and heavenly treasures, have called us by the ministry of thy word into a
new life, justified us freely through faith, sanctified us by thy grace and
holy spirit, and so made us of vile and miserable cayteifes and bondmen of
Satan, chayned unto everlasting darkness and judgment, the freemen of Christ
Jesus, set at liberty unto everlasting life, and have given us the earnest of
our salvation and thy spirit, whereby thou have in some measure furnished us
with faith, knowledge and zeal, working in us unto repentance and a nevve
life.

O Lord, thou might have left us in darkness, and in the shadow of death, in
error and ignorance with other nations that know the not, thou myghtest have
deteyned thy grace from us, and given us up to our own hearts lust, into a
reprobate mind, with the ungodly of the world, that shall never taste of thy
goodness, that we might fill up the cup of thy wrath, thou might have
broken in upon us with thy plagues and punishments, as thou have done upon
some who have not exeeded the measure of our iniquities, and might have
executed fearful judgments against us, in the midest of the days of our
ignorance and contempt against thee, when we ever without remorse of
conscience, not knowing like poor wretches our desperate estate, but yet Lord
blessed be thy name, who has spared us hitherto, and touched our hearts unto
some measure of repentance, have opened our eyes to see thy truth, have freed
us from darkness and death, caused us to taste of thy word, made sin loathsome
unto us, ioyed our hearts with the tydinges of our salvation, renewed our hearts,
given us hope of a better life, and framed our hearts to some love of thy
children, and to some measure of holiness in thy sight.

O Lord, what moved thee to all this but thine own free mercy? for which we
render all praise unto thee, grant us grace to walk worthy of these thy
mercies, with thankful hearts all our life. We bless thy name o Lord our
God, for thy fatherly care and divine providence, whereby thou haste always
watched over us, and protected us graciously from our cradle, delivering us
from many plagues, punishments, and dangers, which our sins had justly
deserved to have brought upon us, and heaping many undeserved benefits upon
us, thou haste trusted us with health, wealth, liberty, prosperity, freendship
and peace, which all we have abused, yet haste thou spared us. Thou have set us
in a calling amongst men, haste blessed our affairs, prospered the works of
our hands, nothing has wanted unto us that might express thy love, either
appartayning to our souls or our bodies, the graces of thy spirit thou haste
in some measure shed upon us, the sovereign means of our salvation, thy
word, and Sacraments, thou have ritchly offered unto us, have given us interest
into al thy riches and treasures, yea, even into thy self, so as we may with
boldness resort unto thee in all necessities in the name of thy son. O lord this
is a happy benefitt, that we may confer with thy majesty by prayer, in all our
distresses and affairs, and may power out our complaints into thy bosom and
be regarded, oh stir up our faith Lord, to put in ure this comfortable
exercise of our faith, even prayer in all pure manner.

We praise thy high majesty O Lord for all means of our salvation, for the
comfortable ministry of thy servants the Preachers, and for thy graces upon
them, praying thee to increase both the number of them, and thy graces and
gifts in them, that their labors being blessed, thy Church may flourish.

Like thanks, praise, and honor be given unto thee for all Christian Princes
and Magistrates, whom thou have stirred up in any place, to have a care of thy
church and Gospel, and for thy mercy, to all countries that have embraced thy
word, that blessed message of health and salvation, and in this above all
other, we think our selves beholding to thee o Lord, that thou haste been
gracious to our Land, to place us there where thy Gospel flourishes, and for
that thou have suffered us to live in this age, and in such a place wherein we
see thy goodness and truth in thy word, when other nations, yea some other
places of this our own land perrish in ignorance. We can not forget O lord
thy loving kindness showed to us, in bestowing upon us so gracious a Princess
as our sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, as also such christian, wise, grave
and honorable counselors, nobles and magistrates, loving thy truth and
gospel, for preserving and protecting so miraculouslie her royal person, our
country and all estates watching over us, revealing and confounding the
conspiracies and treasons both of foreign and domestical ennimies from time
to time, having heretofore delivered us from the captivity and thraldom of
the man of sin, even the Pope, restored to us, peace, liberty, true religion,
christian government, the preaching of thy gospel, the safety of our life,
finally all blessings, necessary for soul and body, thou have richly
bestowed upon us, for which we can never sufficiently praise thee. We thank
thee O Lord for the safety of this our town and corporation where we dwell,
in preserving us from all foreign invasion, and incursion of enemies, as also
for our selves, our families, and charges in providing for us, who have
continually been merciful unto us, haste preserved us in the day time, and
watched over us in the night season, for all these things O God, and
whatsoever else that we have received at thy hands, either for our souls or
bodies, and for all thy graces, upon thy whole Church, and upon all nations,
we offer up unto thee this our poor Sacrifice of thanksgiving and praise,
most humbly praying the, in the name and mediation of thy son Christ Jesus,
to pardon al our sins, and the imperfections of our prayers and
thanksgiuings, and to accept of them for his sake, in whose name only we are
bold to present thy majesty with our suites. Lastly, we most entirely
beseech thee to stir us up effectually unto all thankfulness and obedience in
the whole course of our life, quickening our faith, inflaming our love, that we
may with all cheerefulnes do duties to thee and our brethren in our callinges,
that we and all thy servants whatsoever, being furthered and holden out by thy
grace, may grow up unto full holiness in thy fear, till we all are fully
perfited in the heavens, to receive the full measure of our salvation, in that
blessed inheritance of the Saints with Christ Jesus, in the day of his
glorious appearaunce, to who^ with thee and the holy spirit, be all praise,
honor, glory, power, might and dominion, for euer-more. Amen.

A prayer for the Mariners, to be used at the Sea.
O Lord, thou most mighty God of all power and sovereignty, who have made the
heavens and the earth, the sea and all deep places, we thy poor servants do
humbly throw down our selves before thy high majesty, acknowledging all our
manifold and heinous sins, craving entirely pardon and forgiveness of them all
for thy son Christ Jesus his sake, and namely, our vnpreparednesse to this
so holy a duetye of Prayer: entreating thy good Majesty to behold us in thy
favor, and to receive us into thy blessed protection, that since we are by
thee assigned our labors in the mighty deepes, that in the sweat of our
brows, with danger of our lives, we should therein travel for our lawful
maintenance, it may please thy good majesty to prosper the work of our
hands, and to guide us in all our actions, to defend us from all dangers,
either of ennemies seeking our life or goods, or of the merciles songs and
swallowing sands, or of stormy wyndes, and raging tempests, or of any other
distress whatsoever, that betydeth such as travel therein. Thou might o
Lord we confess, take advantage to make our voyages and fishings
unprosperous, to spoil our goods, to betray us unto enemies, to swallow us
up in the bottomless Gulf of the Seas, because we have not feared thee
with reverence, have not obeyed thy word, have been careless of thy service,
unthankful for our former deliueraunces and success, distrustful of thy
providence, repyning at thy hand in our losses, forgetful of thy great and
maruailous works, we have gathered iniquity, and have been stained with the
corrupt manners of other natyons, have blasphemed thy name, passed our days in
ryotte, forgotten thee upon the shore, though lately come out of fearful
dangers, we have been wanton, stubborn, and unruly, so as we have freighted
our Vessels more with sin, vanity, and ungodliness, then with goods or lading,
so as it is marvel we have not suncken in the rolling seas, and descended
down to hell, but that thy mercy has kept us. But o Lord even our God, thou
that tamest Leuiathan, and smitest the heads of the dragons of the deep, smite
our stony hearts with the lively sense of our sins, humble us unto
repentance, turn thy displeasure from us, deal not with us according to our
transgressions, but according to thy mercies, we appeal to the throne of thy
grace, wash us in the blood of thy son from all our sins, renew our hearts
daily to thy will, and to the obedience of thy word, that we may make
conscience to hear it with reverence when we may, for o Lord in this one
thing, thou have abridged those that far travail on the Seas, and into
diverse countries, of the daily use of the ministrye of thy word and
sacraments, which other enjoy tarrying at home, which is some petty judgment
of thine, to humble us, and make us more careful. O lord stir us up therefore
to the reading of thy word in our traveling, and to such other exercises
carefully and faithfully, that we may be zealous of thy glory, thankful for
thy mercies and daily benefits, confident to trust in thy providence in all
estates, patient in troubles, without murmuring, watchful over our selus that
we be not defiled with the corruptions of other places, yea Lord, teach us to
avoid all swearing, dronkennes, riot, exces, fornication idolatry, contempt,
injury, deceit, lying, quarrelling, and all uncleanness, that both when we are on
the seas and on the shore we may fear, glorify, and praise thy most holy
name, govern us o lord in our deeds, words and in our government, as also our
company that they may obey and be subject to al christian discipline, that so
thou might prosper us in all our affairs increasing the fruit of our labors,
defending us from our enemies, from robberies, losses and al dangers, and
finally bring us safely to the port and Haven of our desire: o lord make us
truly thankful unto thee for our former deliverances and benefits, and if
ever thou shall cross us by any los, hindrance or affliction for our sins,
humble us therein, let us acknowledge thy hand therein with thankfulness and
patience, that we may thereby be spurred forward to the reforming of our lives.
Be thou with us on the boystrous o Lord in thy name we hoyse our sails, and
launche forth into the deep, be present with us in our troubles and dangers,
hear us and deliver us when we call upon thee, for great are the dangers that
we sail in every way, but thou art our God, we trust in thee, oh save us,
guide us, protect us, deliver us, that we may still live to praise thee. We
commit Lord our selves, our shyps, our goods and lives into thy hand, both this
day or night, and ever hereafter to be preserved at thy pleasure, and let us
never forget all thy maruailous works. O Lord we pray thee bless all our
friends and kyndred on the land, our wives, parents children, masters,
families, or whomsoever, that are tied to us by any band of freendship or
nature in the Lord. Finally, Lord we pray thee frame our souls to all duties
of holiness toward thy majesty, increasing all true faith, fear and love in us
toward thee, inflaming our hearts with all christian love to our brethren for
thy sake. These things if thou shall perform unto us O Lord our God, we shall
never forget to praise and magnify thy holy name therefore. These things o
lord with all other graces necessary for us, for thy whole church, for all
nations, people, and for all our brethren, and for all degrees, we humbly
crave the same at thy majesty's hand, in the name and mediation of thy son
Christ Jesus, saying as he has taught us. Our father which art in heaven,
hallowed he thy name. etc.

O Lord increase our faith and obedience toward thee and thy word. Amen.

